Ayssi comensan las paraulas de Albucasim .	Thus begin the words of Albucasis.
O, filhs, pus yeu he a vos complit aquest libre, le qual es le derier de la sciencia de medicina, per le compliment de lu so consequit la fi en lu, e per las exposicios de lu, e per las declaracios de lu, es a mi vist que yeu complesca aquel a vos am aquest tractat, le qual es partida de la operacio am ma, so es cyrurgia.	O sons, when I have completed this book for you, which is the last of the science of medicine, by its accomplishment in it and by its expositions and declarations, it has seemed to me that you will understand this treatise, which is a part of the operation with the hand, that is surgery.
Quar la operacio am ma es prostrada en nostre regio e en nostre temps de tot privada, entro que fort leu peric la sciencia de lu, e le vistigi de lu es ostat; e no romasero de lu sino alcunas petitas descripcios en les libres dels Antics, les quals mudero las mas e endevenc ad aquels error e heyssitacio entro que son clausas las entencios de lu e es elonguada la forsa de lu e l’art.	For the operation with the hand is spread abroad in our realm and in our time deprived of all, while the science of it perishes, and its vestige is obstructed; and there remain of it only a few small descriptions in the books of the Ancients, which have altered the most part and led to errors and confusion, so that the minds of men are closed to it, and its force and art are prolonged.
E es vist a mi que yeu vivifique aquela am ordenacio de aquest tractat en aquela segon la via de exposicio e de declaracio e de abreviacio; e per que vengua am las formas dels ferramentz de cautheri e dels autres instrumentz de la obra cum sia per addicio de la declaracio, e per preparacio de lu, la qual causa es necessaria.	And it has seemed to me that I should animate this with the arrangement of this treatise in the second place according to the way of exposition and declaration and abbreviation; and so that the forms of the instruments of cautery and of other tools of the work might come by addition of declaration, and by preparation of it, which cause is necessary.
Mays la causa per la qual no es atrobat bo artifex am la sieua ma en aquest nostre temps, es quar la art de medicina es longua, e que cove le sieu actor denant aquo esser excercitat en la sciencia de anotomia la qual recontec Gualia entro que sapia les juvament dels membres e las formas de aquels, e la conjunctio e la separacio de lor; e haia la conoyssensa dels osses, dels nervis e dels lacertz, e·l nombre de aquels, e la egrecio de lor; e de las venas pulsatils e de las quietas, e dels locs del eyssiment de lor.	But the cause why no good artificer is found with his hand in our time, is because the art of medicine is long, and that requires one to be exercised in the science of anatomy, which knows the joints of the members and their forms, and the conjunction and separation of them; and has the knowledge of bones, nerves, and tendons, and the number of these, and the issue of them; and of the pulsating veins and the quiet ones, and the places of their issuing.
E per aquo ditz Ypocras que am u nom es mot, mays en l’obra petit, e majorment en la art de la ma.	And therefore Hypocras says that by name is much, but in the work little, and especially in the art of the hand.
Mays nos ja avem dit de aquel en l’introit de aquest libre; quar qui no es scient aquo que li avem dit de anotomia, no es evacuat que no caia en error per la qual siran mortz les homes, ayssi cum yeu he vist trops de aquels, quar alscus son formatz en esta sciencia e gettan se de aquela ses sciencia e ses experiment.	But we have already said this in the introduction to this book; for whoever is not learned in what we have said of anatomy, it is not vacated that he may not fall into error by which men will die, as I have seen troops of these, for some are formed in this science and throw themselves from it without experience.
Quar yeu vi un metge folh e enperit aver incidit un apostema escrophilos en le colh de una femna, e incidic alcunas arterias del colh per que fluic gran sanc entro que la femna cazec morta entre las mas de lu.	For I saw a foolish and experienced doctor open an abscess of scrofula on the neck of a woman, and he cut some arteries of the neck so that much blood flowed and the woman died under his hands.
E vi un autre metge que pres que el traguera una peyra d’un home le qual avia procesit en sa etat, e la peyra era gran, e venguet a lu e trayssec aquela peyra am un tros de la vesiqua, per que aquel home al tertz dia es mort.	And I saw another doctor who had taken a stone from a man who was in his condition, and the stone was great, and he brought it out with a part of the bladder, so that the man died on the third day.
E yeu ja apelat fuy a estrayre aquela, e vi que per la grandesa de la peyra e per la disposicio del malaute conogui subre lu que morira.	And I called to take it out, and I saw that by the size of the stone and the disposition of the patient that he would die.
E vi un autre metge le qual prenia stipendic de un duc de nostra terra per cyrurgia, e endeven a un crastrat negre le qual era deves lu fractura en la coyssa de lu; e perparec le metge am la sua ignorancia, estrayssec la fractura, sobre la plagua, am pulvinas e astelas am forta strectura, e no layssec a la plagua espiracio.	And I saw another doctor who received stipends from a duke of our land for surgery, and he treated a broken black slave; and through the ignorance of the doctor, when he had extracted the fracture, over the wound with poultices and bandages with strong pressure, he did not leave the wound to breathe.
E aprop le desliet segons los sieus desiriers, e aprop le relieg, e aprop le leyssec per alcus jorns e comandec que nos deslies le liament; e estec ayssi entro que la coyssa e·l pe foro apostematz, e pervenguet a perdicio.	And he did this according to his desires, and he released it, and he bound it for many days and commanded that we should not loosen the bandage; and he did so until the thigh and foot were apostematized, and he came to perdition.
E yeu fuy apelat a lu, e aparelhegui a desliar le liament, e conseguida es tranquilitat e enayssi amermet de sas dolors.	And I was called to him, and I prepared to loosen the bandage, and I obtained tranquillity and he was eased of his pains.
Mays empero ja corrupcio era confermada en le membre, per que no pogui refrenar aquela, e no cessec perambular la corrupcio en le membre entro que·l malaute peric.	But indeed the corruption was confirmed in the member, so that I could not restrain it, and the corruption did not cease to wander through the member until the man died.
E vi un autre metge le qual perforec un apostema cancros, e fo ulcerat aprop alscus dias, entro que foc magnificada la malicia de lu am lo senhor de lu.	And I saw another doctor who opened an apostema of a canker, and it was ulcerated for some days, until the malice of it was magnified with his lord.
La qual causa es quar le cranc caut es pur de humor melencolic, lahoras no cove que pervengua a lu am ferr de tot, sino que sia an membre le qual suffertes que de tot fos hostat.	The cause of this is that the black cautery is pure of melancholy humor, therefore it does not come to him with fire from all, but that there be a member which suffers that from all.
E per aquo, filhs, necessari es a vos que la operacio am ma sia devisada en dos devesios: so es en operacio a lu qual es associada salut, e en obra am la qual es perilh en las majors disposicios.	And therefore, sons, it is necessary for you that the operation with the hand be considered in two ways: first, in operation which is associated with health; and second, in work with which there is peril in the major dispositions.
E yeu ja he exsitat aquo en tot loc de aquest libre en le qual venc opperacio en la qual es error e temor; per que necessari es a vos que guardetz aquo e layssetz aquel, per que les folhs no atrobo via a parlar e a vos desonestar.	And I have already exhorted this in all parts of this book in which comes operation in which there is error and fear; so that it is necessary for you to guard this and leave that, so that the foolish may not obstruct the way of speaking and disgracing you.
E donc prenetz las vostras armas am sollicitut e am proteccio de Dieu , e les vostres malautes am falicitat e am fermetat.	And therefore take up your weapons with solicitude and with protection of God, and your patients with facility and firmness.
E usatz de la milhor via per la gracia de Dieu perdusent a salut e a lausabla successio, e laysatz las malautias terriblas de difficil sanacio, e ostatz las vostras armas de aquo que vos fa temer, per so que ysitatio en vostra fe e en le vostre nom no vos evasisca: quar mays es remanent a la vostra gloria, e pus aut en le mon e en derier a las vostras sanctitatz.	And use the better way by the grace of God to health and laudable success, and leave terrible diseases of difficult cure, and bear your arms against that which makes you afraid, so that solicitude in your faith and in your name does not abandon you; for there remain for your glory, and most in the world and beyond to your sanctities.
Gualia ja diyssec en alcunas sieuas monicios:	Gaulish already said in some of his maxims:
“No mediquetz malautia mala, per so que mals metges no siatz nompnatz”.	“Do not heal ill disease, so that evil doctors are not named.”
E yeu ja he devesit aquest libre segontz tres capitols.	And I have divided this book according to three chapters.
Comensa la divisio del libre, e primier de la primieyra partida.	Begins the division of the book, and first of the first part.
Le primier capitol ordenat del cap entro·s pes, en las formas dels instrumentz e en les ferrementz dels cauteris, e de aquo que necessari es en la opperacio.	The first chapter arranged of the head-to-toe, in the forms of the instruments and in the tools of the cauteries, and of what is necessary in the operation.
La divisio de la segonda partida.	The division of the second part.
Le segon capitol, de siccio e perforacio, e de ventosas, e de plaguas, e de extractio de sagetas e de semblantz ad aquelas, tot capitolat e ordenat de las formas dels instrumentz.	The second chapter of bleeding and puncturing, and of cupping-glasses, and of bandages, and of extraction of thorns and of their likes, all capitulated and arranged of the forms of the instruments.
Divisio de la tersa partida.	Division of the third part.
Le tertz capitol, de restauracio e de dislocacio, e de curacio de torcio e de semblantz ad aquels; capitol ordenat del cap entro·s pes, e de las formas dels instrumentz.	The third chapter of restoration and of dislocation, and of cure of torsion and their likes; a chapter arranged of the head-to-toe, and of the forms of the instruments.
De cauteri am foc e am medicina aguda e rememoracio de la opperacio.	Of cautery with fire and with acute medicine and reminder of the operation.
Am aquel comensa le tractat de tot le libre.	With that begins the treatise of all the book.
Cove que yeu digua la qualitat dels juvamentz de aquel cauteri e dels noccumentz de lu, e en qual compleccio sia prohibit cauteri.	I will tell you the quality of the humors of that cautery and the pains of it, and in what complexions cautery is prohibited.
Donc dic que·l sermo de la qualitat del juvament de cauteri e del noccument de lu es sermo lonc e prolixs, e subtil per sciensa, e secret amaguat; e ja de lu a parlat gran multitut de savis, e de lu se son desacordatz, et a mi abasta un petit dels sermons de lor, temen perlonguacio.	Therefore I say that the term of the quality of the humor of cautery and of the pain of it is long and prolix, and subtle through science, and secret hid; and of it have spoken greatly many sages, and of it are they disagreed, and for me a little suffices of their terms, fearing prolixity.
E donc dic que cauteri comfereys a tota compleccio universalment la qual es am materia o ses materia, exceptat dos compleccios, las quals son compleccios caudas ses materia .	And therefore I say that cautery confers with all complexions universally the which is of matter or of matter, excepting two complexions, which are cold and moist complexions.
En la compleccio cauda e secca am materia se desecordero; quar alcus dyssero que cauteri es juvatiu ad aquela, e les autres dyssero le contrari de aquel, que cauteri no es convenient en malautia la qual es per qualiditat e per siccitat, quar natura del foc es qualiditat e siccitat, e enconvenient es que malautia cauda e secca am aquo que es caut e sec sia sanada.	In the cold and dry complexions with matter they disagreed; for some said that cautery is beneficial to it, and others said the contrary of that, that cautery is not convenient in disease which is by quality and by dryness, for nature of fire is quality and dryness, and convenient is that disease cold and dry with that which is cauted and dried be healed.
E diysec aquel que ditz le contrari de aquel, que per cauteri es fayt juvament en tota malautia cauda e secca que ve en les cors dels homes, quar quan tu comparas le cors de home e las humiditatz de lu a la compleccio del foc, atrobas le cors de home freg.	And I said the contrary of that, that by cautery is made benefit in all disease cold and dry which you see in the bodies of men; for when you compare the body of man and its humidity to the complexions of fire, you rub the body of man moist.
E yeu dic per le sermo de aquel, que esperiment aquo ja a mi alscunas vetz a descubert.	And I speak from experience, as I have tried this myself several times.
Mays empero no cove que vengua sobre aquo aquel que ja es exproat e excersitat en le capitol de cauteri per derier exercici, e a conogut la diversitat de la compleccio dels homes e la disposicio de las malautias en lor meteyssas, e las causas de aquelas, e·ls accidentz de lor, e l’espasi del temps de aquelas.	However, it is not advisable for someone to attempt this who has not already been instructed and practiced in the art of cautery, and become familiar with the variety of human complexions and dispositions of illnesses within them, and their causes, and the accidents of those illnesses, and the span of time involved.
Mays en las autras compleccios, no es sobre vos temor, e majorment en las malautias fregas e humidas, quar ja totz les metges se son acordatz sobre aquels, e no so desecordatz en le juvament am cauteri en aquelas.	But in other complexions there is no need for fear, especially in moist and humid illnesses, for all doctors have agreed on these, and they are not at odds over the use of cautery in those.
E sapiatz, filhs, que del secret de curacio per cauteri am foc e de la bontat de lu, so sobre cauteri am medicina comburent, es quar le foc es simple, la accio del qual no perven sino al membre le qual es cauterizat e no notz al autre membre am lu ajustat sino am petit nocument.	And know, my children, that the secret of healing with cautery by fire and of its goodness is that cautery is a simple action, the effect of which does not reach except to the member that is cauterized, and it does not affect another member by it except for a little harm.
Mays la accio de medicina comburent perven ad aquel en les membres le qual de lu alunhat, e fort leu fa venir en le membre malautia de dificil sanacio e fort leu ausit.	But the action of a burning medicine reaches to those members from which it is removed, and it strongly brings about an illness in the member that is difficult to heal, and it strongly causes pain.
Mays le foc, per la sua sublimitat e de la sua substancia bontat, no fa aquo sino que superfluisca E ja es a nos conogut per experiment e per longitut de servitut de studi am l’art sobre le veritat de las causas; e per aquo yeu so excusat de la longitut del sermo E si no fos que no es legut al mieu libre en aquest pausero a vos secret amaguat am le foc, e la qualitat de la operacio de lu en les cors e de la sieua expulcio per la qual expellis las malautias, am sermo philosophic demostratiu, le qual siria acuit en las vostras pessas.	But fire, by its subtlety and the goodness of its substance, does not do that except to make it superfluous. And it is known to us by experience and by long service in the study of art upon the truth of causes; and because of this I am excused from the length of speech. And if it were not for the fact that my free will is not read in this hidden secret of fire, and the quality of its operation in bodies and its expulsion by which illnesses are expelled, in philosophical speech demonstrated, which would be sharpened in your hearts.
E sapiatz, filhs, que els se desacordan del temps en le qual es convenient far cauteri e pausan le milhor temps de primaveyra.	And know, my children, that they disagree on the time in which it is convenient to perform cautery and they pause at the best time in spring.
E yeu dic que cauteri es convenient en tot temps, per so que le nocument per le temps accident es submergit en le juvament de aquo que am le cauteri es atirat, e majorment si le cauteri es per dolors o de dolors necessaries, fortz e fistinas, las quals no suffertan tarditat per so que es temut de aquelas que vengua malicia, que es major que petit nocument entrant per lo temps.	And I say that cautery is convenient at all times, because the harm from the accidental time is submerged in the benefit of what is drawn by cautery, and especially if the cautery is for pains or necessary pains, strong and fierce, which do not tolerate delay, so that it is feared that evil may come, which is greater than the little harm that comes from the season.
E aysso no catz en vostras pessas, o, filhs, aquo no estiman sino le poble vulguar e les fols metges, so es que ad aquela malautia que es sanada per cauteri no es redicio tot temps, e pausan aquel consequen.	And yet, do not wonder in your hearts, o my children, at this, for it is not esteemed except by the common people and foolish doctors; it is that to that illness which is healed by cautery, there is not a reduction in time, and they pause at that consequence.
E la causa no es ges ayssi quo els cuydan per aquo, quar cauteri no es sino en loc de medicina la qual altera la compleccio e esicca las humiditatz las quals son causa per que veno las dolors.	And the cause is not as they think it to be, for cautery is only in place of medicine which alters the complexion and dries up the moistness which are causes that bring about pains.
Mays empero cauteri superflueys sobre la medicina per volicitat de la sua valitut e vertut de la sua operacio e grandesa del sieu senhor.	However, cautery surpasses medicine in the strength of its value and the power of its operation and the greatness of its lord.
E es possible que la sua malautia retorne en alcuna hora del temps, segon la compleccio del malaute e la locacio de la sua malautia, e la vertut de lu, e aquo que es preparat en le cors de lu de la agreguacio de las superfluitatz en lu, e aquo que es pervengut a lu en la sua acquisicio en viandas e semblantz de aquelas causas; sino que la malautia en la qual sia aministrat cauteri sia malautia subtil en membre de paucas superfluitatz e humiditatz, ayssi cum cauteri de dent per dolor e semblantz ad aquel, possible es que en lu no retorne aquela dolor, mays aquo se fa en petitz.	And it is possible that the illness may return at some time according to the complexion of the patient and the location of the illness, and the power of it, and what is prepared in the body of it from the aggregation of superfluities in it, and what is come to it in its acquisition in foods and likenesses of those causes; unless that the illness on which cautery is administered is a subtle illness in a member with few superfluities and moistness, so that as with cautery for tooth pain and likenesses, it is possible that the pain will not return in him, but what happens in him is small.
E mays sermo vulgar es que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina, e es sermo dreyturier, no ad aquo que els entendo en lu, quar els crezo que no es curacio que aprofieyta am medicina ni am autra causa aprop cauteri.	And yet, the common speech is that cautery is the last remedy of medicine, and it is a just speech, not to what they understand about it, for they believe that there is no cure that benefits by medicine nor by any other cause except cautery.
E la causa es en contrari de aquo; e la entencio que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina no es sino quan administram las manieyras de curacio en alcunas malautias, e aquelas medicinas no conferieysso, e aprop en la fi de la causa aministra hom cauteri, e aprofieyta ad aquela.	And the cause is contrary to that; and the intention that cautery is the last remedy of medicine is not except when we administer the manners of cure in some illnesses, and those medicines do not confer it, and then at the end of the cause we administer man cautery, and it benefits to that.
E lahoras de aqui cat16 que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina, no segon la entencio la qual entendo les vulgars e trops dels fols metges.	And then from here it happens that cautery is the last remedy of medicine, not according to the intention which the commoners and foolish doctors understand.
E diyssero les antics que cauteri am aur es milhor que cauteri am ferr, e no diyssero aquo sino per la equalitat del aur e sublimitat de la sua sustancia.	And they said that cautery with gold is better than cautery with iron, and they did not say this except for the equality of gold and the subtlety of its substance.
E diyssero que le loc de cauteri no fa brac, cum aquo no sia absolutament vertat, quar yeu ja he aquo proat e he atrobat que aquel no fa aquo sino en alcus cors ses les autres, e cauteri am aquel es bo e milhor que am ferr ayssi quo els diyssero; mays empero quan tu fas cauteri am foc am de aur, no es a tu declarat, quar es egnit segon la quantitat que tu vols per la rugor de l’aur, e quar prepara a recebre freg; e si ajustas sobre lu ignicio se fon l’aur per le foc, e caso en le foc alcunas laminas per que le artifex catz per la occupacio de aquel.	And they said that the place of cautery does not do harm, when it is not absolutely true, for I have already tried this and have proven to you that it does not do this except in some bodies without the others, and cautery with it is good and better than with iron as they said; but when you perform cautery with fire and gold, it is not declared to you, because it is kindled according to the quantity that you desire by the heat of the gold, and because it prepares to receive burn; and if you apply fire on it some leaves so that the craftsman sees by the occupation of that.
E per aquo es fayt cauteri am ferr deves nos pus leugerament e pus propdanament a rectitut de operacio.	And because of this, cautery with iron must be made more gently and closer to the site of operation.
E yeu ja he ordenat aquest capitol en le cauteri segon capitols, et he ordenat aquels del cap entro les pes, per so que aleugo le demandant aquo que vol de lu.	And I have already ordered this chapter in cautery according to chapters, and I have ordered those of the head into the feet, so that also ask me what you want from him.
De cauteri de dolor de cap per frigiditat e humiditat.	Of cautery for headache due to coldness and moistness.
Le capitol primier.	The first chapter.
Aquesta cauterizacio confereys a la humiditat e frigiditat sobre le servel accident de la qual so doas causas, so es causa de soda e multitut de flux raumatic, apelat corissa, del cap a las partidas dels huelhs e de las aurelhas fluent, e multitut de dormir, e de dolor de dentz e del guolayro, e universalment de tota malautia que ve per fregiditat, ayssi cum paraliticament, sodo e apoplexio, e semblantz en aquelas malautias.	This cauterization confers to the moisture and coldness on the servile accident of which there are two causes, it is cause of soda and multitude of flux, called rhachitis, from the head to the tips of the ears and from the ears flowing, and multitude of sleeping, and toothache, and generally of all illness that comes by chill, so as paralysis, palsy, and likenesses in those illnesses.
La forma de aquesta cauterizacio es aquesta, que primieyrament comandes al malaute que sia evacuat am medicina lacsativa le cap mondificant, per tres o per quatre nueytz, segon que exhigeys la vertut del malaute e la edat de lu e la sua costuma.	The form of this cauterization is this: that first you command the patient to be evacuated by laxative medicine the head cleansing, for three or for four days, according to the strength of the patient and his age and habit.
E aprop comanda li que raza le sieu cap am razor, e aprop fay aquel sezer entre las tuas mas sobre una banca cayrada e que pause las suas mas sobre le pietz sieu.	And then command that he shaves his head with a razor, and then let him sit between your hands on a heated bed and let him rest his hands on his feet.
E aprop pausa la razit de la tua palma aprop le pous sobre la razit del nas entre les huels sieus.	And then place the root of your palm near the foot over the root of the nose between your heels.
Mays empero, cum le tieu dit del mieg loc es pervengut, signa aquel loc am tenta, e aprop igneys le cauteri olivar del qual aquesta es la forma:	However, when you have reached the mid-point of that location, mark it with a tent and then apply the olive oil cautery whose recipe is as follows:
E aprop pausa aquel sobre le loc senhat am tenta, a manieyra que descent, am la qual la tieua ma sia constrengida petit a petit, e tu revolveys aquel.	And then place this over the marked spot, in such a way that it covers and presses down gently, and you shall keep turning it.
E aprop leva la tua ma leugerament e reguarda le loc, e si veses ja del os esser descubert alcuna quantitat del cap, ayssi cum la quantitat de gra de errs, lahoras eleva la tua ma, e si no torno la tua ma am aquel ferr, am autre de aquel, si es enfrigidat, entro que sia vist del os aquo que yeu he dit a tu.	And then lift your hand gently and examine the spot, and if you see some of the bone exposed, with some amount of flesh, then lift your hand again, and if not, return your hand with that iron, with another one of those, if it is cooled off, back to the spot until you see what I have described to you.
E aprop pren un petit de sal e disolveys aquel sobre le loc e leyssa aquel per tres jorns.	And then take a little salt and dissolve it over the spot, and let that stay there for three days.
E aprop pausa sobre lu coto enbegut en boder e leyssa aquel sobre lu entro que sia destrusida la scara del foc.	And then place raw meat over it, wrapped in a cloth, and let this stay until the burn scar is destroyed.
E aprop cura le loc am anguent tetrafarmacon entro que sia sanat.	And then treat the spot with four-ingredient ointment until it is healed.
E ja diyssero que quant la plagua roman uberta, tant mielhs geta le brac, per que es milhor e mays juvatiu.	And they also say that when the plague sores open up, the better the pus flows out, and so it is healthier and more beneficial.
E diyssero alcus de lor que sia cauterizada la codena entro al os, e sia tengut le cauteri entro que sia adhurida alcuna partida de la specitut del os.	And some of them say that the bone should be cauterized within, and that the cautery should stay until some part of the bone is charred.
E aprop sia ras aquo que es adhust del os, e aprop sia curat.	And then it should be cut away from the bone, and then treated.
E diyssero autres que am lo cauteri pervengua al derier, entro que enprema en le os forta enprecio entro que le os caga, e aquesta es la forma de alphecati petit:	And others say that the cautery should reach down to the nerve, causing strong pressure within the bone until it breaks, and this is the recipe for alphecat in small amounts:
E estiman de aquel loc expiran la vapors del cap.	And they consider that location to be where the brain's vapors escape from.
E sia tenguda la plagua uberta per lonc temps, e aprop sia curada entro que sia consolidada.	And if the plague sore remains open for a long time, then it should be treated until it is healed and consolidated.
Mays a mi no so vistas aquestas doas specias de cauteri de tot, sino en alcus homes segon via de temor; e layssa aquel, deves mi, milhor es am salut, quan es; quar le cap es develitat per solucio de continuitat de lu ayssi cum havem testificat en les autres membres, e majorment quan le cap del malaute es de freul natura.	But I have not seen these two cauteries used in their entirety except on some men according to the way of fear; and it is better for them as they are, since the head is made transparent by solution of continuity from there, as we have testified in other members, especially when the patient's head is of a phlegmatic nature.
E la specia de cauteri primieyra es mays salva e milhor deves mi; e de aquela husi e am aquela obra am salut.	And the first cautery is more gentle and better for them; and it works in this way with advantage.
Capitol segon.	Chapter according to St.
Del cauteri del cap.	Of cauterization of the head.
Quan en tot le cap accideys dolor cronica e longua e aquo es en le malaute prolonguat, e usa de gerras e de cochias e de capipurges e de emplaustres e de guatz e de cadels e de gualinas e de semblantz, e majorment si ja es cauterizat am un cautere le qual recontam e no aprofieyta a lu deguna de aquelas causas, lahoras considera quar si le cap del malaute es de fort creacio en la sua natura; e no es freul et atroba mot gran freg, lahoras aquel cauterisa am autra cauteri dejos aquel un pauc.	When in every part of the head there is chronic and long-lasting pain, which has been prolonged in the patient, and he uses oils and salves and clysters and poultices and compresses and bandages and other similar remedies without any benefit, then consider that if the patient's head is of a strong constitution by nature, not phlegmatic but having a great deal of heat, then cauterize him with another cautery after the first one.
E aprop cauterisa aquel sobre le corn del sieu cap am cauteri entro que la codena es partida.	And then cauterize that at the crown of his head with a cautery until the bone is split.
Incisa la codena e sia descuberta del os la quantitat la qual havem recontat e cauteriza aquel am un cauteri en la partida deriera del cap en le loc le qual es apelat vas, — e es aquel loc en le qual es pausada ventosa.	The bone split and the amount we have described exposed, then cauterize that with a cautery at the back of the head in the place called the foramen magnum — and it is the location where the ventouse is applied.
Et alleuja la tua ma en aysso, e no descobras le os, quar le malaute per aquo atroba mot gran dolor diversa de la dolor de totz les autres cauteris del cap.	And move your hand back and forth, and do not expose the bone, for by doing this he will experience great pain unlike with any of the other cauteries on the head.
E yeu diyre aquest cauteri en son loc, quar cove que·l cauteri am le qual so cauterisatz les corns del cap e le occiput es pus subtil cauteri que aquel am le qual es cauterisat le mieg loc del cap; e aquesta es la forma de lu.	And I will describe this cautery in its place, for the cautery by which the horns of the head and the occipital are cauterized is more gentle than that cautery by which the middle of the head is cauterized; and this is its recipe:
Capitol ters.	Chapter three.
De cauterisacio de emigranea no-antiqua.	Of cauterization for non-ancient hemorrhoids.
Quan endeve en la partida del cap dolor sodo, o es stenduda dolor entro al uelh, sia evacuat am medicinas le cap mondificantz, e sia aministrada l’autra curacio, la qual yeu he dita en las devesios de las malautias; e tot no aprofieyta, lahoras cauterisacio en lu es en dos manieyras: o cauterisacio am medicina acuta comburent, o am ferr.	When there is pain in the head caused by a cold disorder, or pain within the eye socket, first let it be evacuated with purifying medicines, and let other remedies also be administered as described in earlier diseases; and if nothing helps, then cauterization can be performed in two ways: either cauterization with burning medicine, or with an iron.
Mays cauteri am medicina comburent es que tu prenguas una dolsa de alh, e escorgas aquela e abcindas las extremitatz de lu de amdos les caps.	But the cautery with burning medicine is that you take a piece of wool and burn it and then put out its ends in both parts of the head.
E aprop incideys le loc de la dolor en la templa am una lanceta lada entro que sia en lu feyt loc dejos la codena, entro que sia occultada.	And then prick the location of the pain in the temple with a sharp lance, going deep enough to reach the bone, until it is covered over.
E aprop strenh sobre lu am stopada per descent constreccio, e layssa aquel per le spazi de tres horas; e aprop deslia le e tratz le alh, e laysa la plagua per dos o per tres jorn, e aprop pausa sobre lu coto submergit en boder entro que le loc fassa brac.	And then press down on it with a tight bandage, and let this remain there for the space of three hours; and then remove the bandage and treat the wound again, letting it heal in two or three days, and then apply raw meat to the spot, covered with a cloth until the wound breaks out.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And then treat that with ointment until it is healed.
E si tu voys, fe aquo am alcunas medicinas comburentz las quals yeu he scriutas en le douse tractat de medicinas comburentz.	And if you wish, do this with some burning medicines which I have written about in the two sections on burning medicines.
Mays la cauterisacio am ferr segon aquesta manieyra: igneys per cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma:	But cauterization by iron is performed like this: heat up the cautery, of which this is the recipe:
e es apelat claus clavilhs, quar le cap de lu es ayssi cum forma de clavel en le qual es alcuna curvitat, e·n le mieg loc de lu es eminensia petita.	And it is called a closed nail, for the head of it is like a small claw with some curvature and in the middle of it is a small prominence.
E aprop pausa sobre loc de la dolor, e rete la tua ma — per que no sia adhurida la arceria la qual es dejos — e revol le ferr petit a petit am velocitat.	And then apply it to the place of the pain, and move your hand — so that it is not burned — and turn the iron little by little with speed.
E si la quantitat de lu que es adhurida per la specitut de la codena ayssi quo la maytat de lu, e elava la tua ma per so que la arteria no sia adhurida la qual es dejos, per so que no vengua flux de sanc.	And if the amount that is burned by the nature of the bone is equal to the thickness of it, and you raise your hand so that the artery underneath is not burned, so that there is no flow of blood.
E aprop enbibeys coto en aygua de sal e pausa aquel sobre le loc, e layssa aquel per tres dias; e aprop pausa coto mulhat am boder, e aprop cura am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And then dip the cautery in salt water and apply it to the spot for three days; then apply raw meat wrapped in a cloth, and treat it with ointment until it is healed.
E si voys, cauterisa am la extremitat del cutellari segon cauteri, e guarda te de incisio de arteria en aquesta emigranea propriament no-antiqua.	And if you wish, cauterize with the edge of the blade according to the cautery, and be careful to avoid cutting the artery in this non-ancient hemorrhoid.
Capitol quart.	Chapter four.
De cauterizacio d’emigranea antiqua.	Of cauterization for ancient hemorrhoids.
Quan tu curas emigranea am aquo que havem dit de la curacio precedent, e aquo que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias, e no aprofieyta la curacio, e vezes per la malautia que no abasta a lu aquo que havem dit del primier cauteri am medicina o del cauteri am foc, lahoras cove que tu igniscas le cauteri cutellar entro que sia albificat, pus que significas sobre le loc de la dolor am linha de longuesa de la qual sia la maytat del dit, o quays aquel; e depausa la tua ma per una veguada e strenh aquela entro incidiscas la arceria e pervengua entro al os.	When you treat hemorrhoids with what we have said about its cure, and what we have said in the divisions of diseases, and if this cure is unsuccessful, then consider that if it does not yield to this treatment, or to cauterization with medicine, or with fire, then light the cuterry until it turns white, and then press down on it with a bandage, pricking the artery underneath, until it bleeds into the bone.
Empero necessari es a tu que guardes de la continuacio de la mandibula, la qual es mauguda deves la masticacio, e que le lacert no sia adhurit e le nervi le qual mau aquela, e que no s’endevengua espasme.	But you must take care that the jaw is not broken due to chewing, and that no artery is burned and no nerve underneath it, and that no spasm ensues.
E si es sobre la custodia e cautela de flux de sanc de l’arteria que es abciza, quar en la abcizio de lu es temor, e majorment ad aquel le qual ignora aquo que fa e no es studios e esproat; e layssa la operacio en lu al comensament.	And if it is about the caution and protection of blood flow from the artery which is cut, for in the cutting of it there is danger, especially to one who is ignorant, and unaware, let the operation be performed at the beginning.
E yeu vindre am rememoracio del regiment de flux de sanc accident de la arceria segon la sieua manieyra, en le sieu loc de aquest libre.	And I will give you instructions on the course of blood flow from the artery according to its own way, in your own house.
E si veses de aquesta malautia que no abaste aquest cauteri e veses le cors del malaute tollerable, cauteriza aquel en le mieg loc del cap ayssi cum havem recontat, e cura la plagua entro que sia sanada.	And if you see that this disease does not yield to this cautery and the patient' body tolerates it, then cauterize him in the middle of the head as we have described, and treat the wound until it is healed.
E si voys, aministra le cauteri le qual havem dit en le capitol de streccio de arceria am cauteri havent dos cotels, e es milhor cauterizacio aquesta e mays conferent.	And if you administer the cautery we have described in the section on stretching of the artery with two prongs, then this cautery is better and more effective.
Capitol .v.	Chapter .V.
De cauterisacio de las dolors de aurelhas.	Of cauterization for ear pains.
Quan en la aurelha ve dolor per freg e es curat am causas lacsativas e am l’autra curacio la qual he dita en la divisio, e no es remauguda la dolor, lahoras igneys le cauteri, e es aquest le qual ha nom puncta, del qual aquesta es la forma:	When there is pain in the ear from a cold cause and it is treated with remedies that produce lacrimation and also with other remedies which have been mentioned in the division, and if the pain still persists, then ignite the cautery and it is called punctum, of which this is the form:
E aprop puncta aprop la ignicio, e sia menat al enviro de tota la aurelha ayssi cum roda es revolguda, o en le circuit de quascuna essemps si la dolor es en quascuna.	And then point to the heat, and move it all around the ear as a wheel is turned, or in circles throughout each part if the pain is in any part.
Alonga te am le cauteri de la razit de la aurelha pauc a pauc pus que aias senhat le loc am tenta.	Along with the cautery from the root of the ear, inch by inch as you heat the place with it.
E si le cauteri de detz puntz en tota aurelha, e quays aquela, e aprop cura les locz entro que sian sanatz.	And if the cautery makes ten points all around the ear, and then heals those places in between so that they become healthy again.
Capitol .vi.	Chapter .VI.
De cauterizacio de turtura.	Of cauterization for torture.
Turtura la qual es curada e am cauterizacio no es sino de las specias las quals veno per flecma, segon que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias.	Torture which is cured by cauterization and not only of the humors that come through phlegm, as we have said in the divisions of illnesses.
Esquiva cauterizacio de la specia que endeve per siccacio o per spasme del nervi.	Avoid cauterization of the humor that comes from dryness or from a spasm in the nerve.
Quan tu curas aquela specia de turtura am jerras e capipurgi e guarguarismes, e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas le malaute am tres cauteris: la i deves la razit de la aurelha, e·l segon un petit dejos le sieu templar, e le ters deves la conjunccio de doas labias.	When you cure that kind of torture with syringes and blood-letting and poultices, if your treatment does not work, then apply cauterization to the patient in three places: first at the root of the ear, then a little below his temple, and the third at the junction of two lips.
E pausa lo tieu cauteri per le contrari de la partida malauta, quar mollificacio no ve sino en la partida que apar sana.	And apply your cautery opposite to where the pain is, because softening does not come except in the part that appears healed.
E la forma de cauterisacio es que cauterizas aquel am le cauteri en le dreyt de la extremitat de la aurelha pus sobirana un petit sobre le corn del cap, e en le templar autre, la longuesa del qual sia segon la longitut del dit pous, e depausa la tua ma am cauteri entro que sia comburida la quantitat de la maytat de la specitut de la codena.	And the form of cauterization is that you cauterize at the right side of the most upper part of the ear, and in the temple another one whose length is according to the length of your finger, and hold your hand with the cautery over it until that quantity of half the thickness of a hair is burnt.
E aquesta es la forma del cauteri, e es specia del cutellari, la forma del qual es denant mesa.	And this is the form of the cautery, and it is the specialty of the surgeon, whose form is represented in front of a table.
Mays empero pus subtil es que aquel un pauc ayssi co vesas; e cove que cotel en lu de superflua groceza un pauc.	But however more subtle it is that one goes there with the cautery just as it is, and then he puts some on the wound to cover the superficial roughness.
E aprop cura le loc am aquo que es denant procezit entro que sia sanat.	And then cure the place with what is before you until it becomes healthy again.
Capitol .vii.	Chapter .VII.
De cauterizacio de apoplextia antiqua.	Of cauterization for old apoplexy.
Quan apoplextia es antiquada e curas aquela am aquo que havem dit e no confereys la tua medicacio e le malaute no ha febre, lahoras cauteriza aquel am quatre cauteris: sobre totz les corn del sieu cap; e am cauteri e le mieg loc del cap, ayssi cum havem dit; e am cauteri en le coguot.	When apoplexy is old and you treat it with what we have said but your treatment does not work, and the patient does not have a fever, then cauterize that person in four places: over both corners of his head, as we have said, and also the middle part of his head, and also cauterize in the throat.
E la manieyra del cauteri es fayta segon que es desus dit.	And the manner of the cautery is done according to what has been said above.
E ja es cauterizat sobre la boca del estomac; e es mays derier; e aprop sia curat am aquo que procezeys.	And you have cauterized on the mouth of the stomach, and it is more difficult to cure; then let it be healed by what comes out.
Capitol .viii.	Chapter .VIII.
De cauterizacio de obblivio fayta per flacma.	Of cauterization for obliteration made by phlegm.
Cove que sian donatz al malaute en le comensament jerras grans e pilulas le servel mondificantz.	Let the patient receive at the beginning large syringes and purgatives.
E aprop ras le cap tot del malaute e pausa sus le coguot de lu emplaustre de cetre descrit en le tractat dels emplastres.	And then scrape the whole head of the patient, and place on his throat the ointment described in the treatise on ointments.
E pausa aquel alcunas veguadas, quar aquel es manieyra de cauteri.	And apply that several times because this is the manner of cauterization.
E fay aquo segon aquel meteys orde le qual ja he dit.	And do that according to the methodical order which I have said.
E donc si per aqueles sanat bo es; e sino, lahoras fay a lu tres cauteris en la deriera partida de sieu cap, les quals sian deysendentz de la partida pus sobirana del cap entro a la partida pus dejos del col.	And if he is healed by that then well and good; but if not, then do to him three cauteries in the back part of his head which descend from the highest part of the head to the lowest part of the neck.
E pausa entre quascun cauteri la grossetut del dit, e aprop cura lo cauteri am aquo que es procedit.	And apply between each cautery the thickness of a finger, and then cure the cautery with what comes out.
Mays si tu vos addicio e le malaute es aquo tollerant, lahoras fay a lu cauteri en le mieg loc; e si voys major addicio, lahora cauteriza aquel sobre les dos corns.	But if you can and the patient can tolerate it, then do to him cauteries in the middle part; and if you see greater tolerance, then cauterize on both corners.
Aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat; e sia le cauteri olivar segon la forma denant donat.	Then cure that until it becomes healthy again; and let the cautery be olive oil according to the form given above.
Capitol .ix.	Chapter .IX.
De cauterisacio de parazili e de mollificacio de tot le cors.	Of cauterization for parasites and of softening of the whole body.
Cove que tu procesiscas en mondificacio del cap am jerras e am aquo que havem dit; e aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap, e am cauteri sobre totz les corns del cap, e am cauteri sobre la deriera partida de lu, e am tres cauteris sobre les spondils del col.	Let the patient undergo blood-letting of the head with syringes and with what we have said; and then scrape the head of the patient, and cauterize that with cauteries on the middle part of his head, and also cauterize on both corners of his head, and also cauterize on the back part of him, and also do three cauteries on the vertebrae of the neck.
E si es necessari en la malautia de mollificacio del cors de trops aquel e les malautes tollerantz e la malautia es fort, lahoras cauteriza aquel am quatre cauteris sobre les spondils del dos, e dererament am cauteri entro que sia comborit de la codena mot de lu, e aleva la tieua ma.	And if it is necessary in the illness of softening of the body and the patient can tolerate it, then do four cauteries on the vertebrae of the back, and finally with cautery over what has been burnt, raise your hand.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat, e aquest sia cauteri olivar.	Then cure that until it becomes healthy again, and let this be olive oil.
Capitol .x.	Chapter .X.
De cauterisacio de epilemcia.	Of cauterization for epilepsy.
No es cauterizat le epilemtic sino aquella epilemcia es per flecma.	Let the epileptic be cauterized only when epilepsy is caused by phlegm.
E donc cove que mondifiques le cervel de lu al comensament de lu am yeras e am l’autra curacio la qual havem dicta en la divisio quan le malaute es gran e es tollerant la exceperacio de las medicinas.	And let the brain of him be purged at the beginning of his illness with syringes and with other remedies which have been mentioned in the division when the patient is large and can tolerate the exception of the remedies.
E si es enfant le qual no sufferte las medicinas, lahoras aministra guarguarissmes e mastiguatoris le servel mondifican, denant aquo per motz dias, am bonifficacio de las viandas.	And if he is a child who does not take the remedies, then give him poultices and masticables which the servant will apply, before what comes out for several days, with good food.
E aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop cauteriza aquel am un cauteri en le mieg loc del cap segon la manieyra precedent, e am autre cauteri en le occiput de lu, e sobre quascun corn del cap sieu cauterisa.	And then scrape the head of the patient and then cauterize that with one cautery in the middle part of his head according to the previous method, and also cauterize on the occipital bone, and also cauterize on both corners of his head.
E si le malaute es fort e es tollerant, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteris les quals he ditz, en havent paraliticament e mollificacio del cors sobre les spondils del col e les spondils del dos.	And if the patient is strong and can tolerate it, then cauterize him with cauteries which I have said, having paralysis and softening of the body on the vertebrae of the neck and also the vertebrae of the back.
E sia cauteri olivar segon qu’es precedit.	And let this be olive oil according to what precedes it.
Mays si le malaute es enfant, lahoras pausa cauteri subtil segon aquesta manieyra.	But if the patient is a child then apply a subtle cautery according to this method.
Capitol .xi.	Chapter .XI.
De cauterizacio de melencolia.	Of cauterization for melancholy.
Quan las causas de melencolia so humiditatz corrompudas e flacma gros, lahoras cauteriza aquel am les cauteris les quals havem ditz en le havent paralisi.	When the causes of melancholy are corrupt humidities and gross phlegm, then cauterize that with cauteries which I have said in the case of paralysis.
E si la causa de melencolia es superfluitat declinant a melencolia, e le cors del malaute es humit, lahoras da ha beure aquo que mundifica le cervel de lu segon aquo que ha precedut en la divisio.	And if the cause of melancholy is excessive decline into melancholy and the body of the patient is humid then let him drink what purges the brain according to what precedes in the division.
E aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop fay tortora decentment fayta de li sobre le cercle, e aprop depausa aquela en le mieg loc del cap.	And then scrape the head of the patient and also make a decently twisted bandage over his forehead, and then place that over the middle part of his head.
E le malaute sia sesent cayrat, e sia tengut de tota partida.	Let the patient be quiet and let him lie on his back.
E aprop pausa liniment; et es pus digne de boder antic de ovelhas.	And then apply a poultice and it is also worthy of being bathed with hot water from sheep.
E escalfa aquel sobre le foc per calefaccio temprada per mesura, le qual le dit sufferta quan es mes en lu.	Let that be heated over the fire by moderate heat according to measurement so that it does not suffer when it is put on him.
E aprop vuo’ aquel en le mieg loc del cap de lu en le cercle, e leysa lu entro que sia enfregidat.	And then apply vinegar in the middle part of his head in the forehead and pour it over so that it runs down.
E fay aquo am le malaute en tota semmana una veguada, am le autre regiment de lu bo entro que sia sanat; o si vols, cauteriza aquel fazen petitz puntz segon lo mays de lu, sino que tenguas la ma am un cauteri ayssi ordenat: aquesta es specia de cauteri la qual humecta le cervel am equalitat.	And do that to him for a week with vinegar, and let him have the other regimen of him until he is healed; or if you wish, cauterize him by making small points according to his strength unless you have your hand with one cautery as it is ordered: this is the cautery which moistens the brain with equality.
E aprop pausa aquel coto enbegut en boder o en grays de gualina.	And then place that wet cloth in a bowl or in a basin of warm water.
Capitol .xii.	Chapter XII.
De cauterisacio de aygua descendent en le huel.	Of cauterization with water descending into the ear.
Quan a tu es declarat le comensament de aygua en le huel per les senhals les quals yeu he ditz en la divisio, lahoras comensa e dona en beure al malaute aquo que mondifique le cap de lu, e guarda aquel de totas humiditatz.	When to you has been revealed the beginning of water in the ear through the signs which I have told in the division, then begin and give the patient something to drink that cleanses his head, and keep him from all moisture.
E fay aquel suzar en banh en degu per alcus jorns.	And let him sweat in a bath for several days.
E aprop comanda a lu que raza le sieu cap, e cauteriza aquel am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap; e aprop cauteriza aquel am dos cauteris sobre dos templas si es le comensament de ysement de aygua en dos huels, o de la un latz si es comensamen de l’aygua en un huel.	And then command him to wash his hair, and cauterize that with a cautery in the middle of the head; and then cauterize it with two cauteries over the two temples if the beginning of water is in both ears, or on one side if the water comes from one ear.
Incideys am cauteri totas las venas e arcerias las quals so dejos la codena; e sian les cauteris en aquela lonh en la latitut de las templas.	Then, with a cautery, cut all the veins and arteries which are below the collarbone; and let the cauteries be in that length in the width of the temples.
E guarda te de fluxs de sanc quan es cauterizat; e si veses de lu fluxs de sanc, osta le am alcuna medicina, la qual es a tu possible.	And beware of any bleeding when it is cauterized; and if you see any bleeding from it, stop it with some medicine which is possible for you.
E yeu vindre am savieza la qual es en extraccio de arcerias e am abscizio de aquelas e cautela de fluxs de sanc.	And I came with wisdom which is in the extraction of arteries and veins, and cauterization of them and cautioning against bleeding.
E alcunas vetz es cauterizat en le cervitz dejos dos osses am dos cauteris dererament produzitz.	And sometimes it is cauterized in the neck below two bones with two cauteries recently produced.
Capitol .xiii.	Chapter XIII.
De cauterizacio de lacrimas antiquas.	Of cauterization of old tears.
Quan lacrimas dels huels so antiquas assuduament e per las venas e arterias las quals so en le loc manifest del cap defora e es verificat que aquo es superfluitatz frejas flecmatiquas, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteri le qual havem recontat en le capitol de comensament de aygua cazent en les huels, e am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap e am dos cauteris en la cervitz dejos dos templas, e am dos cauteris en la cervitz dejos dos osses.	When tears from the ears are old and persistent and through veins and arteries which are in the manifest location of the head and it is verified that this is surplus phlegmatic moisture, then cauterize that with a cautery which we recounted in the chapter on the beginning of water coming into the ears, and with a cautery in the middle of the head, and with two cauteries over the temples below two bones.
E si indigeyses de addicio, lahoras cauteriza aquel en tot latz de la coa del huel sobre la extremitat del sobrecilh am petit cauteri.	And if you see the need for addition, then cauterize that on all sides of the ear canal at the end of the outer ear with a small cautery.
Capitol .xiiii.	Chapter XIV.
De cauterizacio de fetor de nas.	Of cauterization of blood in the neck for veins and arteries in the neck, and for the throat.
Quan tu medicas aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no aprofieyta la tua medicacio, lahoras tu aparelha e dona en beure al malaute las cochias per tres noytz; e aprop ras le cap de lu, e cauteriza le am cauteri migier am cauteri olivar.	When you treat him with that which we said in the division and your treatment does not profit, then prepare and give the patient a poultice for three nights, and then shave his head, and cauterize it with an olive-oil cautery.
E aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri clavelh am dos cauteris sobre les dos sobrecilhs dejos les cabels un petit.	And then cauterize that with a cautery of garlic with two cauteries over the two outer ears below the hair, one small.
E guarda te de la arceria que no incindas aquela.	And beware of the artery that you do not ignite it.
E del cauteri clavilh aquesta es la forma.	And of the cautery of garlic, this is its form.
Capitol .xv.	Chapter XV.
De cauteri de mollificacio de palpebras dels huels.	Of the cautery for softening of the eyelids of the eyes.
Quan la palpebra del huel es mollificada per malautia o per humiditat, lahoras cauteriza aquela palpebre1 am un cauteri am aquest cauteri lunar; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	When the eyelid of the eye is softened by sickness or humidity, then cauterize that eyelid with a cautery which has this lunar shape; and this is how you make it:
E si vos, cauteriza aquel sobre les dos sobrecils un petit am dos cauteris en tota partida, e sian elonguatz de las timporas.	And if you, cauterize that on the two eyebrows a little bit with two cauteries all divided, and let them be elongated from the temples.
E sia la longitut de quascun cauteri segon la quantitat del sobrecil.	And let the length of each cautery be according to the amount of eyebrow.
E no premas trop la tua ma am le cauteri, mays segon la quantitat que la tersa partida de la palpebre sia adhurida.	And do not press too hard with your hand on the cautery, but according to the quantity that the third part of the eyelid is affected.
Capitol .xvi.	Chapter XVI.
De cauteri de la palpebre del huel quan les pels so convertitz a las partidas dedintz e punho le huel.	Of the cautery for the eyelid of the eye when the hairs are converted into the parts within and close up the eye.
Quan les pels del huel son convertitz a las partidas dedintz ayssi que pungo le huel, cauteri en aquels es segon dos manieyras, quar cauteri o es am fer o es am medicina comburent.	When the hairs of the eye are converted into the parts within so that they close up the eye, there are two ways of cauterizing them: one cautery is with fire, and another cautery is with a burning medicine.
Si am cauteri de lu am foc, comanda al malaute denant aquo que leyse les sieus pels ayssi cum aquels les quals les mundan, entro que sian prolonguatz e engualhatz; e si punho aquel deves le lor naysement, lahoras tu strenh les huels de lu am una benda per so que no sia maugut entro que·ls pels sian nascutz.	If you cauterize it with fire, order the patient to open his eyes so that he cuts his hairs as they grow, while you prolong and burn them; and if he closes it you must strengthen the eye with a bandage so that he does not hurt himself as the hairs are growing.
Donc cum siran nascutz e engualhatz, lahoras pausa le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop senha sobre la palpebre dels huels de lu am tenta, am senhal le qual sia segon la figura de fulha de merta, e sia le comensament del senhal prop dels pels.	Then as they grow and burn, put the patient's head in your lap, and then mark on the eyelid of the eyes with a piece of coal, the shape of which is like a leaf of an oak tree, and let the beginning of the mark be near the hairs.
E aprop pausa coto enbegut en album de huou o en mucillatge de ptilli sobre le huel.	And then put cotton soaked in white vinegar or in mullein tea on the eye.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu.	And then light the cautery of which this is the shape.
E aprop cauteriza sobre la figura la qual as senhada, petit a petit, em motas veguadas, entro que sia comburida la superficia de la codena la qual es ayssi cum fuelha de mirta, tota aparent propriament.	And then cauterize over the figure which you have marked, little by little, until it burns the surface of the membrane which is like a leaf of myrtle, appearing properly.
E senhal de sanetat de la tieua obra es que tu vegus la palpebre de l’huel ja esser contrayta e·ls pels de lu esser elevatz deves la punctura del huel.	And the sign of health from your work is that you see the eyelid of the eye already contracted and the hairs of it elevated above the puncturing of the eye.
E donc eleva la tua ma e laysa aquel per tres jorns, e aprop pausa sobre lu coto am boder entro que sia eredicada la scara.	And then raise your hand and open that for three days, and then put on it a poultice until the scar is healed.
E aprop cura aquela am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And then treat that with ointment until it is healed.
Mays si retorna per les pels alcuna causa aprop lor naysement e la palpebra es mollificada, lahoras fay autra vetz le cauteri sobre aquel tot ayssi cum avias fayt primieyrament.	But if they return because of the hairs for some cause, and the eyelid is softened, then do the cautery on it again completely as you did at first.
Mays si les pels so en la palpebra dejos, lahoras cauterisa aquela entro que sia elevada al sieu loc natural e sia engualhat e que les pels no punhan le huelh.	But if the hairs are in the eyelid, then cauterize that until it is elevated to its natural place and burned and that the hairs do not poke into the eye.
Mays le cauteri am medicina comburent aquest es que comandes al malaute que leyse les pels entro que sian prolonguatz e engualhatz, e aprop sia fayta de carta de drap la forma de fuelha de mirtra.	But the cautery with burning medicine is that you order the patient to open his eyes so that he cuts his hairs as they grow and burn; then make the shape of the leaf of myrtle out of cloth.
E aprop pren de sabo conogut e de caus viva ana unc. .i., o quays aquo, e aprop mescle3 aquelas causas be, e fay aquo am festinacio per so que no sia enfregidat; e aprop expandeys de aquo sobre la carta la qual es fayta ayssi cum forma de fulha de mirtra, e pausa aquel sobre la un huel od amdos; e pausa dejos le huel coto enbegut en album de huou, e el cap del malaute sia en le tieu se.	And then take one ounce of dry salt and a quarter ounce of vitriol. That is: Take this mixture and stir it well so that the vitriol does not stick to the bottom; and then spread this mixture over the cloth which is made in the shape of a leaf of myrtle, and put that on one eye or both; and put under the eye cotton soaked in white vinegar, and let the patient's head be in your lap.
E pausa le dit sobre le medicina e prem aquela un petit e no la mauguas entro que lo malaute senta la mordicacio de la medicina, quar mordicacio es en lu ayssi cum de foc.	And put the finger over the medicine and press that gently so that he does not hurt himself while the patient feels the burning of the medicine, for it burns in him as fire.
E donc cum percevera aquo que el atrobo mordicacio, lahoras leyssa la medicina e mau aquela am le tieu dit; donc cum cessa la mordicacio, lahoras remau la medicina he lava le huel am aygua; e lahoras considera si vezes la palpebra ja es levada ayssi cum es lavada deves la costriccio am foc o am incisio, quar lahoras esta be; e si no torna sobre aquela de la medicina sobre le loc en le qual no ha empremut la medicina e no se denigra entro que sia engualhada la tua operacio e sia contrayt le huel.	And then when he perceives the burning, let him open it with your finger; and then take away the medicine and wash the eye with water; and then consider if you see the eyelid lifted as it is washed because of the cautery by fire or by cutting, for then it is well; and if not return to that on which the medicine has not bitten and is not blackened until your operation is healed and the eye is contracted.
E aprop pausa sobre lu coto am boder entro que sia eradicada la codena de la adhustio, e aprop cura aquel am enguent deafinicon o am autre entro que sia sanat.	And then put on it a poultice until the membrane of the cautery is eradicated, and treat that with defynition ointment or other until it is healed.
E es necessari a tu, deves la tua operacio que guardes am pervigil diligencia que en le huel no caia re de la medicina, e si la palpebre aprop alscus dias es mollificada e alcuna causa dels pels punh en le huel, lahoras itera la tua medicina sobre aquel loc le qual de la palpebre es mollificat, e propriamen ayssi quo as fayt al comensament, e aprop enaviro lu entro que sia sanat.	And it is necessary that you watch over your operation so that no residue of the medicine falls into the eye; and if the eyelid after a few days is softened and for some cause the hairs poke into the eye, then repeat your medicine on that place from which the eyelid is softened, and do it just as you did at the beginning, and bandage him until he is healed.
E aquesta es la forma de fuelha de mirtra.	And this is the shape of a leaf of myrtle:
E sapias que les huels dels homes son diversificatz segon la magnitut e la parvitat, e donc segon aquo es fayta la tua contraccio.	And know that men's eyes are different in size and smallness, and therefore according to this is your contraction made.
E no sira amaguada la via de rectetut ad aquel al qual es studi en aquesta art.	And the way of straightness does not lead to that one who is taught in this art.
Capitol .xvii.	Chapter XVII.
De cauterizacio de fistula que es en le lacrimal de l’huel.	Of cautery for the fistula which is in the tear duct of the eye.
Quan tu curas fistula am aquo que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas aquela segon aquesta manieyra: comanda al malaute que pause le cap sieu en le tieu se, e tengua le cap de lu alcun ministre entre las tieuas mas en tal manieyra que no sia maugut ni agitat am le sieu cap.	When you heal fistula by what we have said in the divisions of sickness and do not trust your healing, then know that you cauterize it according to this way: order the patient to put his head in your lap, and let some servant hold his head between their hands in such a way that he is not hurt nor agitated by his head.
E aprop pausa coto enfus en album de huou o en mucellage de ptilli sobre le huel de lu.	And then put cotton soaked in white vinegar or mullein tea on the eye of him.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma:	And then light the cautery of which this is the shape:
le qual sia conquau, ayssi cum es forma de cana o de pena de voltor, de la una extremitat am la qual es fayta lo cauteri.	Which is hollow, like the shape of a reed or of a feather of an owl, from one extremity which is made the cautery.
E si voys, sia penetrant entro a la autra extremitat.	And if you see that it is penetrating to the other extremity.
E si vols sia sort ayssi cum tenta.	And if you want it to come out like a thread.
Mays empero aquel que es concau es milhor a la tieua obra.	However, that which is hollow is better for your work.
E aprop prem la fistula si es uberta, e tra de lu sania et exsicca aquela.	And then press the fistula if it is open and draw from him the pus and dry that.
E si no es uberta, lahoras obre aquela e extratz la poyredura de lu.	And if it is not open, then open it and take out the pus of it.
E aprop pausa sobre lu le cauteri le qual sia be ignit, e te am aquel la tieua ma un petit deves le cauteri del huel a la partida del nas, per so que no erre la tua ma o le malaute sia enquietat, e lahoras pausa le cauteri en le grays del huel e corrompas aquel.	And then put over it the cautery which is lit, and hold your hand over the eye at the part of the nose so that you or the patient are not hurt, and then put the cautery on the edges of the eye and rub that.
E donc si al comensament del tieu cauteri perve entro al os, bo es; e sino, lahoras itera le cauteri una veguada o dos, si mestiers era; e layssa aquel ayssi per tres jorns, e aprop pausa sobre aquel coto am boder e enviro lu am enguent exsiccatiu entro que sia sanat.	And then if at the beginning of your cautery it penetrates into the bone, well; and if not, then repeat the cautery once or twice as need is; let him open his eyes for three days, and then put over that a poultice and bandage him until he is healed.
Mays si eran passatz xi dias e no es sanat, lahoras pausa sobre lu medicina aguda corrosiva entro que l’os sia descubert e sia ras segon que conveneys en le sieu capitol.	But if after ten days it is not healed, then put over it sharp medicine which erodes the bone and let it be open so that you see the membrane, and scrape it according to what it says in its chapter.
E es autra manieyra de cauteri de fistula la qual alscus primiers diysero: enten al loc de la fistula e fen aquela e aprop pausa en aquela fissura camaen subtil del qual es la forma de lu: E fon en aquela la quantitat de i unc de plom fundut; e te la tua ma am camaem am bona retencio, e no sia maugut le malaute per so que le plom fundut no pervengua al huel de aquel; e cove que pausas sobre le huel del malaute coto enfus en album de huou o en aygua, quar plom adhureys le loc de la fistula e sana aquela per sanacio meravilhora.	And another way of cautery for the fistula which some first said: stop at the place of the fistula and pierce that and then put in that fissure a thin wire of which the shape is: And melt in that one ounce of lead molten; and hold your hand over the eye with good retention so that he is not hurt as the molten lead does not come to the eye from that; and see that you put on the eye of the patient cotton soaked in white vinegar or water, for the lead erodes the place of the fistula and heal it by a wondrous healing.
E si la fistula es sanada am aquo que havem dit del cauteri e de la curacio, bo es; e sino, lahoras es necessari aministrar trauc del nas e reduzir la fistula al cors del nas segon que vindra en son loc propri.	And if the fistula is healed with what we have said about the cautery and the treatment, it is good; and if not, then it is necessary to administer an incision in the nose and reduce the fistula to the body of the nose according to where it will go into its proper place.
Capitol .xviii.	Here begins the eighteenth chapter.
De cauterizacio de la fendedura des potz.	Of cauterizing the wound in the fistula.
Motas veguadas accideysso fissuras en las labias, e majorment en las labias dels enfantz.	Many times there occur fissures in the lips, and mostly in the lips of children.
Donc cum tu curas aquelas fissuras am aquo que nos havem dit en las divisios e no aprofieyta la tua cura, lahoras igneys le cauteri petit cutellar segon aquesta forma que s’ensiec:	Therefore, when you heal those fissures with what we have said in the divisions and your treatment does not work, then light the cautery knife in this way:
E sia la conquavitat de lu segon la subtilitat de cotella.	And its cavity according to the thinness of the blade.
Aprop pausa aquel init cuytadament en aquelas fissuras entro que·l cauteri pervengua al preon de las fissuras.	Then place it gently in those fissures until the cautery reaches the bottom of the fissure.
E aprop cura aquel am cerotz entro que sia sanat.	And then heal that with bandages so that it will be healthy.
Capitol .xix.	Here begins the nineteenth chapter.
De cauterizacio de fistula en la boca.	Of cauterizing a fistula in the mouth.
Quan en la razit de uvula o en le paladar o en las razitz de las dentz endeve apostema e aprop fa brac, e aprop es rompuda, e aprop es antiquada, e corr brac e es fayta fistula, e aprop tu curas aquela e no aprofieyta a curacio, lahoras cove que tu igniscas cauteri segon la quantitat que sia receubuda en la fistula, e aprop met aquel ignit en le trauc de la fistola, e te la tua ma entro que pervengua le ferr ignit al preon de lu, e al derier de lu fazen aysso una veguada o dos; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que nos havem dit de la curacio entro que sia sanat.	When in the root of the uvula or the palate or the roots of the teeth there is an ulcer and it is swollen and broken and old and has a fistula, and you heal it with what we have said about healing but it does not work, then know that you should ignite cautery according to the quantity which was received in the fistula; then put that fire into the hole of the fistula, and hold your hand over it so that the hot iron reaches the bottom of it; and at the end of it make an incision or two; and heal that with what we have said about healing so that it will be healthy.
E donc si la sania es abscindita e es sanat, bo es; e sino, lahoras es necessari de descubrir le loc e hostar le os corrumput segon que vindra en son capitol.	And therefore if the sore is healed and healthy, that's good; but if not, then it is necessary to discover the place and remove the rotten bone according to what will come in its chapter.
Capitol .xx.	Here begins the twentieth chapter.
De cauterisacio de las dentz e de mollificacio de las angivas.	Of cauterizing teeth and softening gums.
Quan las angivas son mollificadas per humiditat e las dentz son maugudas, e curas aquelas am medicinas e no confereys, lahoras pausa le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop igneys le cauteri la forma del qual vindra aprop aysso, enayssi que tu pauses la quanula sobre la dent e entromet en aquela le cauteri ignit festinantment, e te la tieua ma un petit entro que·l malaute cente la calor del foc a la razit de la dent esser pervenguda.	When the gums are softened by moisture and the teeth are rotten, and you heal them with medicines but they don't work, then put the patient's head in your lap, and ignite the cautery in the form which will come here, in such a way that you place the hook over the tooth and insert into it the ignited cautery quickly, and hold your hand gently over it so that the heat of the fire reaches the root of the tooth.
E aprop leva la tua ma, e aprop itera le cauteri alcunas veguadas segon que vols.	And then lift up your hand, and repeat the cautery several times according to what you want.
E aprop le malaute huompla la sua boca de aygua de sal e tengua aquela per una hora, e pueys stupa aquela, quar la dent mauguda es fermada e la gengiva mollificada es strenguda e la humiditat corrompuda es exsiccada.	And then the patient should gargle with salty water and hold it for an hour, and then spit it out; for the rotten tooth is hardened and the softened gum is strengthened, and the corrupt moisture is dried up.
Capitol .xxi.	Here begins the twenty-first chapter.
De cauterisacio de dolor de dent.	Of cauterizing a toothache.
Quan dolor de dent es per fregiditat, o en lu es freg o verm, o no comfereys la curacio am medicina, lahoras cauteri en aquela es segon dos manieyras: o cauteri am boder de vacas, o cauteri am foc.	When a toothache is from coldness, or in it is cold or wormy, or the medicine does not work, then the cautery in that place is according to two ways: either cauterize with cow' hide, or cauterize with fire.
Cauteri am boder es que tu prenguas boder de vacas e bulhas aquel en culhe de ferr , e aprop pren coto e envolopa le sobre la extremitat de la tenta, e aprop enmergeys aquel am boder bulhit, e pausa aquel sobre la dent dolorosa festinantment entro que sia enfregidat.	Cautery with cow hide is that you take a cow hide and boil it in an iron pot, and then grab it by the tail and wrap it around the end of the tooth, and then plunge it into the boiling hide and place it quickly on the painful tooth until it is cold.
E aprop itera aquela alcunas veguadas entro que la vertut del foc pervengua a la razit de la dentz.	And then repeat that several times until the goodness of the fire reaches the root of the teeth.
E si voys, submergeys lana o coto en le boder desus dit, e pausa aquel sobre la dent dolent, e pausa sobre aquel ferr ignit entro que·l ferr pervengua al preon de la conquavitat de la dent.	And if you wish, immerse wool or hide in the said boil, and place it on the painful tooth, and hold the hot iron over it so that the iron reaches the bottom of the cavity of the tooth.
Mays empero la cauterizacio am foc es que tu atendas a la quannula de eram o de ferr, e sia en le cor de lu alcuna grocesa e la acuitat del foc no pervengua a la boca del malaute.	But the cautery with fire is that you take an iron or ram horn, and it should have some thickness and the heat of the fire not reach the patient' mouth.
E aprop igneys le cauteri la forma del qual vindra, e pausa aquel sobre la dent e te la tua ma entro que·l cauteri sia enfregidat; e fay aquo alcunas veguadas quar la dolor sira remauguda o en aquel dia o en l’autre dia.	And then ignite the cautery in the form which will come, and place it on the tooth and hold your hand over it so that the cautery is cold; and do this several times because the pain will be reduced or on that day or the next day.
E cove que per empressio de aquel cauteri que·l malaute umpla la sieua boca de bon boder e tengua aquel per una hora e aprop scupa le; e aquesta es la forma del cauteri.	And know that because of that cautery, the patient should fill his mouth with good salive and hold it for an hour, then spit it out; this is the way of cauterizing.
E cauteriza am qual que tu voys extremittat segon que a tu es possible.	And cauterize with whatever you want according to what is possible for you.
E aquesta es la forma de la cannula:	And this is the way of the hook:
Capitol .xxii.	Here begins the twenty-second chapter.
De cauterizacio de extrophulos.	Of cauterizing hernia.
Quan extrophulos so de flecma e de humors fregas e no so hobedientz a digistio per medicinas e tu voys la digistio de aquelas leugerament, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri conquau la forma del qual es aquesta seguen, havent dos extremitatz hubertas per que yesca le fum deves le cauteri per l’autra extremitat, e pausa aquel ignit sobre aquel apostema una veguada, e autre si indigeyses de aquel, entro que pervengua al preon del apostema.	When hernias are of phlegm and cold humors and they do not yield to digestion with medicines, and you see that light digestion, then ignite the cautery in such a way that it has two ends bent so that smoke comes out of the cautery through one end, place the ignited cautery on the hernia once, and if it does not yield from that, then hold it over the hernia until the heat reaches the bottom of the hernia.
E si l’apostema es pauca, lahoras pausa le cauteri segon la quantitat del apostema, e aprop leyssa le per tres jorns e pausa sobre lu coto enfus en boder entro que sia remaugut aquo que·l foc ha comburit.	And if the hernia is small, then place the cautery according to the quantity of the hernia; and then let it cool for three days, and place wool soaked in cow' hide over it so that what the fire has burned is cooled down.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent e tentas e draps entro que sia sanat.	And then heal that with ointment and bandages until it is healthy.
E la forma de la cannula o deu cauteri a tal es comveyter.	And the way of the hook or cautery is as follows:
Capitol .xxiii.	Here begins the twenty-third chapter.
De cauterizacio de rauquiera de votz e de constriccio de ale.	Of cauterizing rawness of throat and constriction of voice.
Quan las humiditatz veno sobre le quanal del pulmo, e majorment quan aquo es am fregiditat de compleccio, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia evacuat al comensament am medicinas laxativas, e aprop cauteriza aquel deves la razit del golayro en le loc depremegut.	When moisture comes from the lungs, and especially when it is from coldness of constitution, then know that the patient should be evacuated at the beginning with laxative medicines; then cauterize him from the root of the gullet in the place which has been weakened.
E guarda te que no pervenguas am le cauteri al golayro ni no comburas de la codena de lu sino un pauc.	And beware that you do not reach with the cautery to the gullet or burn the membrane of it, but only a little.
E cauteriza aquel am autra cauteri deves la junctura del col en le derier espondil de lu.	And cauterize him with another cautery from the joint of the throat in the last vertebra of it.
E·l cauteri de lu sia clavilh sego la maniera precedent.	And the cautery of him should be like a nail, according to the preceding way.
E aprop cura aquel am aquo que es precedit entro que sia sanat.	And then heal that with what has been said so that it is healthy.
Capitol .xxiiii.	Here begins the twenty-fourth chapter.
De cauterizacio de malautia del pulmo e de tos.	Of cauterizing sickness of the lungs and of coughing.
Quan tos e malautia de pulmo so de humiditatz fregas e le malaute no ha febre ni tisic e es malautia antiqua, lahoras cauterisa aquel am dos cauteris sobre la furcula en les locz depremegutz leontz e buoytz; e am autra cauteri en le mieg loc del pietz entre dos mamillos; e sia le cauteri clavilh segon la forma precedent.	When coughing and sickness of the lungs are from cold humors, and the patient does not have fever or typhus and it is an old sickness, then cauterize him with two cauteries on the breastbone in the weakened places between the ribs, and with another cautery in the middle place of the chest between the nipples; and let the cautery be like a nail according to the preceding way.
E si vols, sia la tua cauterizacio punctan am le cauteri que es apelat puncta, la forma del qual precedeys en la ponctacio de dolor de aurelhas.	And if you want, let your cautery be punctured by the cautery which is called puncture, the way of which precedes in the puncturing of toothache.
E sian puntz entro cays ad aquels; e aprop cura aquel am aquo meteys que es precedit entro que sia sanat.	And let the points be inserted into them; and then heal that with what has been said so that it is healthy.
E ya sia le cauteri haventz tres ramps quar cauterizacio es am aquel: am una veguada podes far tres cauteris segon aquesta forma:	And if the cautery has three bends, for cauterizing is with that: with one cautery you can do three cauteries according to this form:
Capitol .xxv.	Here begins the twenty-fifth chapter.
De cauterizacio de titillic que es le cap del ajutori.	Of cauterizing of thorns which is the head of the helper.
Quan le cap del ajutori es dislocat per causa de humiditatz lubricas e no es fermat en la hora del sieu retornament deves la sua dislocacio entro que sia a lu aquo costuma de retornar, e aprop per un petit movement es deslocat ayssi que s’endeve, ayssi cum nos havem testificat, lahoras cove que primieyrament redusiscas la dislocacio, e aprop le malaute sia reversat sobre le sieu dos o sobre le latz sa; e aprop eleva la codena la qual es en la partida dedintz del citillic a las partidas desus am les ditz de la tua ma sinistra, si la junctura es dislocada a las partidas dedintz.	When the helper's head is dislocated from the cause of moistnesses lubricas and it does not return in its hour of its return from the dislocation to him, then know that first reduce the dislocation, and then the patient returns over his shoulder or on his side; and if the joint is dislocated to the parts within with the movements of your left hand, then know that the patient should be raised by the codena which is in the part within with the movements of your left hand, if the joint is dislocated to the parts within.
E aprop igneys le cauteri havent dos caps; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And then light the cautery having two heads, and this is its shape:
E aprop cauteriza la codena entro que penetre aquela entro al autre latz; e vindra la figura de cauterizacio lahoras de iv caps cauteris.	Then cauterize the vein where it penetrates into the other side, and the figure of cauterization comes from four-headed cauteries.
e so aquel subtils segon la quantitat de tenta; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And it is as thin as the quantity of the thread, and this is its shape:
E alcunas veguadas es ajustat segon aquest comte i per que son les cauteris .viii.	And sometimes it is adjusted according to this count, for which reason they are eight cauteries:
E aprop pausa sobre le cauteri porys cuytz am sal, e aprop fay adherir le malaute a trenquilitat, e lo membre no sia maugut per alcun temps entro que sia confortat.	And then put some salt on the cautery and attach the patient to tranquility, and the member must not be disturbed for any length of time until it is comforted:
E si la dislocacio es a las partidas desus e tart es fayt aquo, lahoras cauteriza sobre le muscle am cauteri clavilh o am motz cauteris puntan, quar la junctura es confermada e la humiditat es romauguda e le malaute es sanat.	And if the dislocation is above and below, then it is done like this: cauterize on the muscle with a nail-like cautery or with pointed cauteries, for the joint is confirmed, and moisture is driven out, and the patient is healed.
Capitol .xxvi.	Chapter .XXVI.
De cauterizacio del stomac.	On cauterization of the stomach:
Quan veno en l’estomac freg e motas humiditatz entro que aquel extrazo de la sua compleccio e so multiplicatz raumases a lu, e si tu continuas las manieyras de curacio e no confereyso, lahoras cove que le malaute sia sobre le sieu dos ressupinat, e extenda las suas mas e las suas coysas, e aprop cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris: an un cauteri dejos le pietz per la quantitat d’un dit am cauteri clavilh, e am dos cauteris dejos del dos costatz del cauteri, entro que vengua la figura de cauteri triangulada; e elonga entre els que no sian ajustatz que faran poyredura.	When there comes into the stomach a rubbing and moisture which makes that part to be extruded from its own composition and to be multiplied within it, and if you continue the methods of treatment and do not give relief, then see that the patient lies on his back, extends his arms and legs, and cauterize him with three cauteries: one cautery under the feet for the quantity of a finger with a nail-like cautery, and with two cauteries under the armpits of the cautery, so that the figure of a triangular cautery comes out; and stretch between them so that they are not close to each other to make a wound.
E si la profunditat del cauteri la quantitat de les dos terses de la grocesa de la codena.	And if the depth of the cautery is the quantity of two fingers or as thick as the vein:
E sia la figura del cauteri segon aquesta forma ses addicio, E si vols, cauteriza am gran cauteri en le mieg loc del estomac segon aquesta forma; et aquest sia un cauteri segon la forma de cercle segon aquesta forma:	And the figure of the cautery is according to this shape with its addition, and if you want, cauterize in the middle of the stomach with a large cautery in this shape; and that one be a cautery according to the shape of a circle like this:
E sia cauterizat l’estomac punctan ad aquel que de aquest cauteri es spaventat: e es que tu senhes sobre l’estomac punt segon la quantitat que voles am tenta, e aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri en les puntz; e aprop cura aquel am la curacio qu’es precedita entro que sia sanat.	And the stomach is punctured at the place where it is frightened by that cautery: and you feel on the stomach a point according to the quantity you want with a thread, and then cauterize it with a cautery on the points; and then treat it with the treatment which has been preceded so that it is healed.
Capitol .xxvii.	Chapter .XXVII.
De cauterizacio del fietge fret.	On cauterization of a fretted liver:
Quan endeve en le fietge dolor per fregiditat o per humiditat o per grossa ventositat entro que de la sieua normal compleccio sia getat per egressio superflua, e es curat le malaute am aquo que havem dit e no comfereys, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sua cervitz, e senhes am tenta tres cauteris segon aquesta forma et aquesta quantitat meteyssa sobre le fietge dejos dels ipocondres, la hon perve le decubit de home.	When there is pain in the liver from rubbing or moisture or grossness and it is extruded from its normal composition by superfluous egress, and the patient is treated as we have said and does not confer with that, then see that the patient lies on his back on his head, and feel with a thread three cauteries according to this shape and quantity placed on the liver below the hypochondrium on the right side:
E sia l’espazi le qual es entre quascun cauteri segon la grossetut del dit, e sia le cauteri segon la longitut del cors dreyta.	And let the space between each cautery be according to the thickness of a finger, and let the cauteries be according to the length of the body straight.
E no compremas la tua am le cauteri mot.	And do not move it with the cautery.
E si la quantitat de aquo que es adhurit la quantitat de la maytat de la specitut de la codena, e no y sia pus ajustat; e si le malaute stant sobre les pes de lu; e si no es estant, lahoras sia jassent, le qual ja ha extendudas las suas coysas, e eleve les sieus brasses.	And if the quantity of that which is burned is the quantity of half a thread of the thickness of the vein, and it is not close together; and if the patient stands on his feet, and if he does not stand, then let him lie, having already extended his limbs and elevated his arms:
E es aquesta la forma del cauteri:	And this is the shape of the cautery:
E a tu es possible que cauterizes aquestz cauteris am cauteri cutellar, quan es am tu subtilitat e prudencia en l’art.	And you have the ability to cauterize these cauteries with a cutlass cautery, when you have subtlety and prudence in the art:
E guarda te que trop no procesiscas en la cauterizacio, e sia adhurida la specitut de tota la codena per que sia adhurit tot le cors e pervengua entro als budels, quar la codena aqui es subtil; e sapias aquo.	And beware that you do not go too far in cauterization and that the thickness of all the vein is burned so that it reaches into the intestines, for the vein is here subtle; know this.
Capitol .xxviii.	Chapter .XXVIII.
De perforacio de apostema del fietge am cauteri.	On boring of an abscess of the liver with a cautery:
Quan endeve excitura o apostema en le fietge e voles saber si aquel apostema es en le carn del fietge o en la tunica de lu, lahoras si es en la carn del fietge, le malaute atrobo gravitat e dolor ses acuitat.	When there is an ulcer or abscess on the liver and you want to know whether that abscess is in the flesh of the liver or in its tunic, then if it is in the flesh of the liver, the patient will groan heavily and pain will be sharpened:
E si es en la tunica del fietge, am la dolor es acuitat gran e vezes que ja afatiguatz les metges la cura de lu.	And if it is in the tunic of the liver, with great pain increased several times so that the doctors tire from curing him:
Donc cove que·l malaute sia enversat sobre la sieua cervit; e aprop senha le loc de l’apostema am tenta; e aprop igneys le cauteri le quel es asemblat a rag, la forma del qual a precedit en l’autra pagina.	Then see that the patient lies on his back on his head; and then feel the place of the abscess with a thread; and then light the cautery which is assembled like a rag, the shape of which has been preceded in the other page:
E cauteriza am aquel i cauteri entro que tota la codena sia comborida, entro que pervengua al ciphac, entro qu’en yesca sania.	And cauterize with that cautery until all the vein is burned so that it reaches into the spleen, where bile flows:
E aprop cura aquel per curacio dels autres apostemas entro que sia sanat.	Then treat him with treatment for the other abscesses until he is healed.
E no cove que de aquesta forma de cauteri use sino aquel del qual le estudi en l’art de medicina es prolonguat, e en las mas del qual motas malautias an conogut; mays aquest am esperiment alcunas veguadas sia ardit sobre aquesta operacio, mays empero leyssa aquela deves nos, e es miels.	And do not use this form of cautery except that one by which the study in the art of medicine is prolonged, and many diseases are known from it; but rather let us know that one, for although sometimes it is tried on this operation, it is better.
Capitol .xxix.	Chapter .XXIX.
De cauterizacio de plauresi.	On cauterization of a hernia:
Diyssero les antics cauteri de las razitz de aristologia a plauresi frega segon aquesta manieyra esser fazedor, e es aquest que tu prenguas de las razitz de aristologia longa secca una razit pun longua que es trobada, e sia de la grossetut del dit.	Dissent the ancient cauteries of the roots of aristology for hernias with a rub according to this manner, and it is this which you take from the roots of aristology: a long, dry root that is found, and it is as thick as a finger:
E aprop submergeys aquela en oli e eysen aquela al foc, e aprop cauteriza per un cauteri en aquel loc le qual es entre la continuacio de la furcula am le col; e am dos cauteris petitz dejos guidazi, un pauc declinans a la partida que es dejus la barba, e am dos cauteris en aquo que es declinant entre la quinta costa e la cizena, declinant un pauc a las partidas detras; e am autre cauteri en le mieg loc del pietz; et am autre sobre l’estomac, et am tres cauteris de las partidas detras; et am un cauteri en aquel loc le qual es entre las dos spallas, e am dos cauteris dels dos latz del pietz, dejos le cauteri le qual es entre doas spallas.	And then immerse it in oil and heat it in the fire, and then cauterize with a cautery on that place which is between the continuance of the furcula and the collar-bone; and with two small cauteries below the guids, one slightly declining to the part where the beard is, and with two cauteries on what declines between the fifth rib and the breast-bone, declining a little to behind; and with a cautery in the middle of the foot; and with another over the stomach; and with three cauteries on the parts behind; and with a cautery in that place which is between the two shoulders, and with two cauteries on the sides of the leg, below the cautery which is between the two shoulders.
E no cove que compremas la tua ma am le cauteri, ans sia en le manifest de la codena en obra.	And do not move your hand with the cautery but let it be in the evident appearance of the vein as it appears:
E ja diyssero alscus antics que so alscus dels homes les quals uson de cauteri de ferr semblant a ray e igneysso aquel, e meto aquel en aquel loc le qual es entre las costas, entro que pervenguam am aquel ad aquel apostema e sia foragetada sania, ayssi cum havem dit en l’apostema del fietge.	And they have also said some ancient things which are of men whose cauteries of iron are like a ray and heated that, and put it in that place which is between the ribs so that it reaches to that abscess, and it is foreseen bile, as we have said in the abscess of the liver:
Mays en aquesta perforacio am cauteri no es ses temor, quar hu mor tantost ho accideys en le loc fistula a la qual no es sanacio.	But in this boring with a cautery there is no fear, for it happens to them at once in the place where a fistula appears to which there is no cure:
Capitol .xxx.	Chapter .XXX.
De la cauterizacio de la melsa.	On cauterization of a hernia:
Quan tu curas la malautia de la melsa am aquo que havem dit de la curacio en la divisio e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cauteri en lu es segon tres manieras, las quals totas son dreyturieras, de las quals la una es que fassas tres cauteris o quatre linhan segon la longitut de la melsa segon la figura dels cauteris del fietge, la figura dels quals ha precedit.	When you cure the illness of a hernia with what we have said about the division and do not confer your cure, then cauterize him according to three ways which are all right, one of which is that you make three cauteries or four lines according to the length of the hernia according to the figure of the cauteries of the liver, the figure of which has preceded:
E sia entre quascun cauteri la grossetut d’un dit o un pauc mes, e la manieyra del cauteri sia la manieyra la qual havem dita en le cauteri del fietge engualment.	And let there be between each cautery the thickness of a finger or a little more, and the manner of the cauterization is the same as we have said in the cauterization of the liver with a straight edge:
E no compremas la tua ma am le cauteri; e le malaute sia eves sobre lo sieu dos.	And do not move your hand with the cautery, and let the patient lie on his back.
E es autra manieyra de cauterizar, so es que tu igniscas le cauteri haventz dos vertimentz, la qual causa havem dita en le capitol de dislocacio del muscle, e elava la codena la qual es en le endreyt de la melsa la hon perve le jazer del malaute sinistre.	And another manner of cauterizing is that you ignite the cautery having two verminents, which cause has been said in the chapter of dislocation of the muscle, and elevate the vein which is in the end of the hernia where the patient’s left hand is:
E sia la tua elevacio am la qual elevas la codena segon la longuesa del cors, per que sian faytz cauteris segon la latitut del cos.	And let your elevation be such that you raise the patient according to the length of their body, so that cauteries can be applied according to the breadth of the body.
E aprop entromet les dos vernimentz, ignitz mot, en aquel entro que am aquels penetres la codena de la autra part.	Then insert the two hot rods into the space through which you have penetrated the patient from the other side.
E aprop extrayt le cauteri; e donc son faytz quatre cauteris.	Then withdraw the cautery; and thus are made four cauteries.
E si voys, cauteriza am cauteri havent tres vernimentz.	And if you wish, cauterize with a cautery having three rods.
E aprop tu cura le cauteri pus que aia laysat de getar brac per trops jorns, quar mays es comferent que las autras causas precedentz en la curacio.	And then you treat the cautery until it has ceased to smoke for several days, because it is more beneficial than the other previous causes in the cure.
Capitol .xxxi.	Chapter 31.
De cauterizacio de ydropici.	Of cauterization for dropsy.
Cauteri no catz en ydropici sino en alcinte3 propriament.	Cauteries should not be used for dropsy except in the intestines specifically.
Quan tu curas le ydropic am las manieyras de curacio las quals havem ditas en la divisio e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que aquel cauterizes am quatre cauteris en le cercuit del embelic e am un cauteri sobre l’estomac, e am autre cauteri sobre le fietge, e am autre cauteri sobre la melsa, e am dos cauteris entre les spondils del dos, e un cauteri en lo dreyt del pietz, e am autre cauteri sobre l’estomac.	When you treat the dropsical person by the methods of cure which we have stated in the division, and do not make your cure concordant, then you should cauterize four cauteries in the circuit of the groin, and a cautery over the stomach, and another cautery over the liver, and another cautery over the spleen, and two cauteries between the vertebrae of the back, and a cautery in the right side of the abdomen, and another cautery over the stomach.
E la quantitat de la profunditat del cauteri sia propdana a la spicitut de la codena.	And the quantity of the depth of the cautery should be proportionate to the thickness of the body.
E aprop layssa le cauteri ubert per so que gete brac per lonc temps.	And then withdraw the cautery so that it smokes for a long time.
E no evacuas le malaute de curacio aprop le cauteri am aquo que cove per que sian agreguadas a lu doas entencios, e sira festinada a lu am ajutori sanacio.	And do not discharge the patient of the cure by the cautery with that which has been used so that two tendencies are added to him and he is helped to health by them.
La forma del cauteri am lo qual es cauterizat lo ventre sia clavilh segon que la forma de aquel es desus precedent, e es aquel am le qual es cauterizat le dos sia olivar segon qu’es precedent a la sua forma.	The form of the cautery with which the belly is cauterized should be key-shaped according to that which is above it previously, and that with which the back is cauterized should be olive-shaped according to that which precedes it.
Capitol .xxxii.	Chapter 32.
De cauterizacio de pes e de las coyssas.	Of cauterization for feet and the thighs.
Quan les pes so apostematz en ydropitz e so repletz de aygua sitrina, cove que cauterisas les pes sobre le dos del pe in nocrati aquo que es entre le auricular e le anular, e eleva la tua ma am le cauteri e no torses aquel; e aprop eleva la tua ma, e no retornes aquela de tot, quar l’aygua satrina rezuda.	When the feet are swollen with dropsy and filled with yellow water, you should cauterize the feet over the instep of the foot in between the ring finger and little finger, and elevate your hand with the cautery and do not twist it; then elevate your hand and do not return it at all, for the yellow water flows.
Es le cauteri segon aquesta forma: E aprop fay sobre las doas coyssas dos cauteris, e en quascuna coysa sia feyt cauteri am la extremitat del cauteri cutellar.	It is cauterized in this shape: and then make two cauteries over both thighs, and in each thigh there should be made a cautery with the end of the cutlass-like cautery.
E sia le cauteri segon la longitut de la coyssa: i dejos le denolh e l’autre jos le mieg loc de la coyssa; e sobre quascuna coyssa dos cauteris.	And let the cautery be according to the length of the thigh: one above the knee and the other below, and on each thigh two cauteries.
E layssa la plagua uberta ses curacio per lonc temps per so que alcuna aygua resuda de lu.	Then withdraw the plague after the cure for a long time so that no water flows from him.
E aprop cura le am aquelas causas las quals havem ditas.	And then treat it with those causes which we have stated.
Capitol .xxxiii.	Chapter 33.
De cauterizacio de cos de ventre.	Of cauterization for body of the belly.
Quan cos de ventre es per freg e per humiditat entro que debelice las vertutz, so es la vertut digestiva e retentiva, las quals so en l’estomac e en les budels, e es curat aquo am las manieyras de curacio e no confereys, e vezes le malaute suffertan cauteri de vertut exhiberant, lahoras cauteriza aquel am gran cauteri sobre le sieu stomac segon que a precedit en la cauterizacio del estomac, am le cauteri del cercle e am quatre cauteris en le cercuit del embelic subtils, am cauteri clavilh subtil; e am cauteri sobre le alcatin sobre alozis gran, o am dos cauteris.	When the body of the belly is affected by rubbing and moisture which weakens the intestines, there is digestive and retentive vertigo, which are in the stomach and intestines, and it is cured with the methods of cure and not concordant, and sometimes the patient suffers from vertigo of excessive heat, then cauterize him with a large cautery over his stomach according to that which precedes in the cauterization of the stomach, with the cautery of the circle and four cauteries in the circuit of the groin with subtle key-shaped cautery; and cautery over the anus over an ulceration great, or with two cauteries.
E si vezes las humiditatz exhuberants e le malaute aquo tollerant, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre le pentenilh e sobre les budels, e fort leu ajustant dos cauteris sobre l’estomac e prop dels inguonas, quar es curacio perficent de juvament de la qual no erras.	And if you see the excessive moisture and the patient can tolerate it, then cauterize him over the penis and over the intestines, and tightly press two cauteries over the stomach and near the groin, for that is a perfect cure of generation from which one does not err.
Capitol .xxxiv.	Chapter 34.
De cauterizacio de emorroydas antiquas.	Of cauterization for old hemorrhoids.
Quan so en la natura derier emorroydas antiquas o una de humors grossas fregas o de humiditatz corrompudas, e son curadas am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no confereys la tieua curacio, lahoras cauterisa am tres cauteris sobre le pus dejos spondilh del dos petit e petit triangular, e am cauteri desus le ombelic cays per dos ditz.	When in nature there remain old hemorrhoids or one of gross humors rubbing or of corrupted moisture, and they are cured with that which we have stated in the division and do not concordant with your cure, then cauterize with three cauteries over the pus below the small vertebra of the back triangularly, and cautery above the navel through two holes.
E si doptas que l’estomac de lu sia enfregidat e la vianda de lu no sia degerida, e la cara de lu vezes apostemada, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre l’estomac am gran cauteri segon que es precedit; e am un cauteri sobre fietge, e am autre cauteri sobre la melsa de lu am cauteri clavilh, e leyssa le cauteri per alcun temps ubert, e aprop cura lu entro que sia sanat.	And if it seems that his stomach is rubbed and his food is not digested, and his face is sometimes swollen, then cauterize him over the stomach with a large cautery according to what precedes; and a cautery over the liver, and another cautery over his spleen with key-shaped cautery, and withdraw the cautery for some time, then cure him so that he is healed.
Capitol .xxxv.	Chapter 35.
De cauterizacio de atheyl aprop la abscizio de lor.	Of cauterization of atheyl near its incision.
Quan tu abscindes atheyl, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri que es asemblat a ray.	When you excise atheyl, then you heat the cautery which is assembled with wax.
Aprop entremet aquel ignit en aquel atheyl abscis, e ultima la tieua ma entro que pervengua le cauteri al orifici de la vena de la qual ve la sanc.	Then place it burning into that atheyl which is excised, and finish your hand until it reaches the opening of the vein from which comes the blood.
E fay aquo una vetz o doas, quar si achieyl son trops, lahoras cauteriza quascun de lor segon que havem recontat, e aprop cura aquels am aquo que confereys a lor dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And do this once or twice, for if they are several, then cauterize each of them according to what we have recounted, and then cure those with that which agrees with them in the wounds until he is healed.
E si cauterizas am gran cauteri sobre alquatin, es mays derier en juvament.	And if you cauterize with a large cautery over an ulceration, it is better for generation.
Capitol .xxxvi.	Chapter 36.
De cauterizacio de fistolas que son faytas en la natura derie en las partidas de lu.	Of cauterization of fistulas which are made in nature through openings in him.
Quan la natura no obeziys a la obra la qual havem recomtada en son loc, e·l pacient es espaventat per aquo, sia sanat am cauteri.	When nature does not obey the work which we have commanded in its place, and the patient is frightened by that, then let him be healed by cautery.
Donc quan ad alcun ve fistola en la natura derier, e es antiquada, corro sania de lu e humiditatz corrompudas, e donc aquo que es pus digne que cove es que proes aquela am tenta subtil, e aprop conoys la quantitat de la profunditat de lu am la devant dita tenta.	Therefore when one sees a fistula in nature through, and it is old, draw the pus from him and corrupted moisture, and therefore what is best to do is to probe him with a subtle probe, then know the quantity of its depth by that which has been stated before.
Aprop igneys le cauteri que es semblant a ray.	Then heat the cautery which is like wax.
E aprop met aquel cauteri ignit en aquesta fistula, e segon la quantitat en la qual intrec la tenta.	Then place that cautery burning in this fistula according to the quantity in which it entered the probe.
E itera sobre aquela le cauteri entro que sian comburitz aquels cors corrumputz tost una veguada o dos o tres, segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	And repeat the cautery over that until those putrefied bodies are burnt one time or two or three according to your need.
E guarda te de combustio de nervi e de vena; o si fistula va al cors de la vesica o al cors del budel, lahoras guarda te de totz aquels locz; e no fassas aquo sino quan la fistula es en loc carnos e cogitas que no es penetrant.	And beware of burning nerve and vein; or if the fistula goes to the bladder or to the intestines, then beware of all those places; and do not do that unless the fistula is in fleshy place and you are sure that it does not penetrate.
E aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat.	And then cure that place until it is healed.
E si le loc es sigillat, e so abscindidas de lu las materias, e roman ayssi per lonc temps, lahoras sapias que ja es curat entierament.	And if the place is sealed and the matter has been excised from him and it has healed for a long time, then know that it is entirely cured.
E si las materias no so de lu ostadas, lahoras sapias que es penetrant o en le preon de lu os corromput, o cays aquo de aquelas causas de las quals vindra rememoracio en son loc.	And if the matter is not excised from him, then know that it is penetrating or in his preons are corrupted, or sends something of those causes which will bring a reminiscence to its place.
Capitol .xxxvii.	Chapter 37.
De cauterizacio dels ronhos.	Of cauterization for warts.
Quan en les ronhos endeve dolor per freg o per grossa ventozitat, e per aysso le coyt del malaute es amermat, lahoras cove que cauterizes aquel sobre les ronhos am cauteri sobre quascun ronho am cauteri clavilh del qual precesic la rememoracio.	When in warts there is pain from rubbing or from grossness and moisture, and the flesh of the patient is damaged, then cauterize those over the warts with a cautery over each wart with key-shaped cautery from which you predict the reminiscence.
E fort leu cauterizam am le segon un petit dejos, per que vindran tres cauteris liniatz, e donc siran mays deriers en juvament.	And then tightly cauterize with the second a little below, so that three cauteries are linear, and therefore they will be better for generation.
Capitol .xxxviii.	Chapter 38.
De cauterizacio de la vesica.	Of cauterization of the bladder.
Quan accideys en la vesica debelitat e mollificacio per freg e per humiditatz ayssi que·l malaute la urina no retengua, lahoras cauteriza aquel en la partida pus dejos sobre la vesiqua, la hon comensan les pels del pentenilh, e cauteriza am un cauteri en la partida dreyta, e am autre en la senestra de lu.	When it happens to the bladder weakness and softness due to friction and moisture so that the patient cannot retain urine, then cauterize that area below the bladder, where the hairs of the pubic region begin, and cauterize with one cautery on the right side, and another on the left.
E sia la longitut de quascun cauteri segon la cantitat dels not del pous; e cauteriza aquel am cauteri en la partida pus bassa del dos, o am dos cauteris si es necessitat.	And the length of each cautery should be according to the size of the testicles; and cauterize that area with one cautery below the buttocks, or with two cauteries if necessary.
E sia cauteri clavilh segon que es procesit.	And let the cauteries be like nails according to how they are applied.
Capitol .xxxix.	Chapter 39.
De cauterizacio de la mayra.	Of cauterization of the thigh.
Quan veno en la mayra freg e humiditatz, e per aysso es prohibida enpreignacio, e son corrompudas las mestruas de lu, e es tardada la provocacio de lor, e accideys dolor deves le haveniment de lor, lahoras cove que·l loc sia cauterizat am tres cauteris en le circuit del ombelic, ayssi cum havem dit en le cauteri de la vesica; e am cauteri sobre le loc pus dejos del dos, o am dos cauteris, e sia le cauteri clavilh.	When there is moisture and softness in the thighs, and due to this pregnancy is prohibited, and their menstruation is corrupted, and their induction is delayed, and pain occurs from carrying them, then let the area be cauterized with three cauteries around the navel, just as we have said in the cautery of the bladder; and with one cautery above the buttocks, or with two cauteries, and let the cautery be like a nail.
Capitol .xl.	Chapter 40.
De cauterizacio de la dislocacio de l’anqua.	Of cauterization of the dislocation of the hip.
Quan humiditatz moucozas so efundudas a la partida de la anqua, e so faytas causas del yssiment del sieu loc, e senhal de lu es que la coyssa es prolonguada sobre l’autre quan so comparadas entre lor.	When moist humors are infused into the hip joint, and this is caused by the displacement of its place, and a sign of it is that the thigh is prolonged over the other when compared between them.
E le loc de la dislocacio es atrobat en lu quays boyt.	And the location of the dislocation is obstructed in the spot where it hurts.
Adonc cove que cauterizas le malaute sobre la partida de la anqua de lu am cauteri a sercle semblant, pus que tu auras senhat am tenta en le cercuit de la partida ayssi cum es revolguda, e per so que la partida caia el mieg loc del cercle.	Therefore let the patient be cauterized over the hip joint with a round cautery like a ring, after you have marked it with a tent in the circuit of the joint as it is turned, and because of this the joint falls into the middle of the circle.
E sia le cauteri del qual precedit la forma en la cauterizacio del estomac.	And let the cautery be of that shape of which we spoke in the cauterization of the stomach.
E si aquest cauteri no es a tu present, lahoras cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris am cauteri olivar gran.	And if this cautery is not available to you, then cauterize that area with three cauteries using a large olive-shaped cautery.
E sia fayt le cauteri segon la quantitat de la ispicitut de tota la codena; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And let the cautery be made according to the quantity of the thickness of all the tendons; and then heal that area after it is cured.
Capitol .xli.	Chapter 41.
De cauterizacio de la vena sciatica.	Of cauterization of the sciatic nerve.
Quan dolor ve en la partida de anqua, e so causa de lu freg et humiditatz, le malaute es curat am aquo que havem dit e no confereys, e aquo es antiquat, lahoras cove que tu lacses le malaute de humors grosses am pillulas fetidas o am pillulas artificials o semblantz; e aprop cauteriza aquel.	When pain comes in the hip joint, and its cause is friction and moisture, it is cured with what we have said and does not return, and that is old, then let the patient be bled of gross humors with fetid pills or artificial pills or similar; and then cauterize that area.
E la manieyra del cauteri en aquela es segon dos manieyras: o cauteri am medicinas comburentz, o cauteri am foc.	And the manner of the cautery in that is according to two manners: either cautery with burning medicines, or cautery with fire.
Sira segon dos manieyras scientas, de las quals es la una que cauterizes aquel sobre la partida de l’ancha de lu am tres cauteris triangulatz segon aquesta forma; e fay am aquels bona profunditat.	They go according to two known manners, of which one is that you cauterize that area over the hip joint with three triangular cauteries according to this shape; and make them good and deep.
E sia le spazi le qual es entre cascun cauteri la quantitat de la grossitut del dit e si le cauteri olivar o gran.	And let the space between each cautery be the quantity of the thickness of the finger, and if the cautery is olive-shaped or large.
Mays alcunas veguadas sia le cauteri sobre le mieg loc sobre le cap de l’anquan per que son quatre cauteris.	But sometimes let the cautery be over the middle joint of the hip so that there are four cauteries.
E si vols, cauteriza am le cercle del qual es precesida la forma en la cauterizacio de la dislocacio de l’anqua, la i que sia cercle continent e comburey la ispicitut de tota la codena.	And if you want, cauterize with the ring of which we spoke in the cauterization of the dislocation of the hip, and that is a containing circle and burns the thickness of all the tendons.
E aquesta es la manieyra de cauteri in ciatiqua quan dolor es adherent al anqua e no es estenduda entro a la coyssa.	And this is the manner of cautery in sciatica when pain is attached to the hip and is not extended within the thigh.
Mays si es estenduda entro a la coyssa, lahoras cauteriza aquel am dos cauteris sobre la coyssa sobre le loc al qual envireys le malaute que es la dolor; e am un cauteri sobre la cavilha per quatre ditz un pauc deves la part cilvestra.	But if it is extended within the thigh, then cauterize that area with two cauteries over the thigh over the spot where the pain lies; and with one cautery over the ankle four fingers from the wild side.
E si le cauteri cutellar, e sia la profunditat del cauteri segon la quantitat de la ispicitut de la codena.	And if the cautery is cut, then let the depth of the cautery be according to the quantity of the thickness of the tendon.
E si le malaute envireys que la dolor es estenduda entro al loc prop les ditz des pes, lahoras cauteriza aquel aqui on envireys am cauteri per tres puntz o quatre o mays si indigeys de aquel.	And if the pain goes from that area where it lies within the foot by three or four or more points, then cauterize that spot with a cautery in three places or four or more if it is needed.
E si le malaute envireys dolor esser dejos le donolh ves la coyssa, lahoras cauteriza aquel aqui am un cauteri cutellar.	And if the pain goes from that area below the knee to the thigh, then cauterize that spot with one cautery cut.
E guarda te en tota cauterizacio que no ultimes am le cauteri en tant que comburas nervi o gran arceria, e que per aquo a tu es sobre le malaute mal noccument o contraccio.	And beware in every cauterization that you do not burn with the cautery any nerve or large artery, and because of this there is harm to you or contraption upon it.
E yeu ja e vist un e autre de aquels les quals cauterizero sobre la cavilha e ultimero en la cauterizacio, e la cama foc inflada entro que la tumor aconseguit lo pe, e foc perforat e corromput tot le pe.	And you have seen one and another of those who cauterized over the ankle and ended in cauterization, and the fire was inflamed within which the tumor was achieved by the foot, and the fire pierced and corrupted all the foot.
E aprop accidic fort solucio de ventre, e aprop aquo la mort.	And then a strong solution of the belly occurred, and then death followed.
E si la dolor es en dos partidas ensemps cauteriza quascuna segon aquesta manieyra.	And if the pain is in two places at once, then cauterize each according to this manner.
E diysero les savis alcus en la cauterizacio de anqua cauteri del qual aquesta es la manieyra: fay semblant a cercle de ferr del qual le cercuit sia la maytat de un palm; e sia deves le sieu orrifici segon la grossesa de un os de datil o mens un pauc.	And the wise say in cauterization of the hip that this is the manner of the cautery: make like a ring of iron of which the circuit is the size of a palm; and let its orifices be according to the thickness of a fingernail or more than a little.
E dedintz aquel cercle sia un autre tertz; e sia le spazi le qual es entre lor la quantitat del notz del pous; e sian aquels cercles ubertz de dos partidas; e sia la longitut de aquels cays un notz o dos notz, e fay en aquels margue de ferr decentment apparelhat en les cercles; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And within that circle let there be another third; and let the space between them be the size of the testicles; and those circles are exposed in two places; and let the length of those nails be one or two fingers, and make on those edges of iron decently wrapped in the circles; and this is the shape of it:
Aprop sia ignit en le foc entro que s’enrogesisca e gete scintillas, e aprop sia pausat sobre la partida del anqua, le malaute colcat sobre le latz sa.	Then let it be ignited in fire within that it is curved and emits sparks, and then let it be laid upon the spot of the hip, the pain lying upon its side.
E donc cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris redontz en una veguada.	And thus cauterize that area with three round cauteries in one go.
E aprop layssa aquel per tres jorns; aprop emplastre aquel am boder e layssa la plagua uberta per trops dias; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And then let it lie for three days; and then plaster that area with wool and let the wound remain open for several days; and then heal that area after it is cured.
Diys Albucasis : o, filhs, de aquesta specia de cauteri pauc havem usat per la terror del reguardament de lu, e per aquo que paucs havem trobatz les quals reguardan sobre lu.	Albucasis says: O sons, of this kind of cautery we have used few for the sake of his guard, and because of it we have found few who guard him.
Mays dels bos cauteris a lu qui les sufferta, et atroba am aquel le loc de lu.	But of the many cauteries which afflict him, and that spot upon him.
Mays cauteri am medicinas adhurentz es que tu fassas dos cercles haventz armula perforada en la qual deyssen le guaffo de la porta de ferr; sia la longuitut de la paretz en la nauteza de lor sian dos nozes o quays aquels.	But cautery with burning medicines is that you make two circles having a perforated armlet in which the hook of the door of iron is placed; let the length of their edges be two nuts or nails.
E si le spazi le qual es entre quascu la quantitat de la grossitut del dit; e sian ubertz dejos e desus, e sian que contenguan se entre lor segon aquesta forma:	And if the space between each of them is the quantity of the thickness of the finger; and let them be exposed below and above, and let them contain themselves according to this shape:
E aprop pausa sobre la partida de la anqua le malaut jasent sobre le latz sa, e comprem la tua ma sobre la partida de la anqua; e aprop pren de aygua cauda e fon la entre dos cercles, e la qualiditat de aquela sia am le foc petit a petit, e te aquela per la quantitat de una hora, e sufferta le malaute la mordicacio e la adhustio de lu — quar aquel atrobo mordicacio ayssi cum de foc — entro que cesse la mordicacio.	And then let it lie over the hip joint the pain lying upon its side, and press your hand upon the spot of the hip; and then take cold water and pour it between two circles, and let its quality be by the fire little by little, and let that afflict him the biting and the squeezing of it — for that which inflicts biting as well as fire — until the biting stops.
E aprop eleva la tua ma am le instrument et abstergeys l’aygua cauda de tota la anqua am aygua dousa.	And then raise your hand by the instrument and wipe off cold water from all over the hip with warm water.
E aprop leyssa aquel per tres jorns e pausa sobre aquel boder entro que sia la negror de la adhustio remauguda, e leyssa aquo per alcus jorns, e correra de lu poyredura; aquest es derier en juvament.	And then let it lie for three days and let him rest upon that bandage until the blackness of the squeezing is gone, and let him lie for several days, and let the swelling of him depart; this is the last in healing.
E aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And then heal that area after it is cured.
E si la dolor es extenduda entro la coyssa o la camba, fay a lu estatua en lu que contengua aygua segon que es feyt en la anqua engualment.	And if the pain extends to the thigh or leg, have him lie on his side containing water as is done in the armpit similarly.
E aquesta es la manieyra de aygua cauda, e yeu ja he scrit aquela en le tractat de la rectificacio de medicinas.	And this is the manner of water bath, and I have already written about it in the treatise on the rectification of medicines.
Recipe de alcali e de caus no extinta de amdos ana partida una, e trissa les e pausa en una ola nova de la qual la partida dejos sia perforada per un petit trauc, segon la quantitat que intre en lu ray.	Take an equal amount of alkali and caustic not extinguished from both, crush them and place them in a new pot of which the bottom is perforated with a small hole according to the quantity that goes into it.
E pausa dejos le fons de la ola autra ola enveyriada, e gete sobre aquel alcali e caus viva de aygua doussa la qual cobra aquels per un dit, e pus que tu compremes aquels am la tieua ma per bona compressio, e leyssa la hola que deyssenda de lu aygua aguda en la partida dejos a la ola enveyriada.	And place below the bottom of the pot another pot covered, and pour over the alkali and live caustic sweet water which collects it through a finger, and since you compress it with your hand by good compression, and let the hot water flow from it into the pot below.
E aprop ajusta tota aquela aygua, e geta la sobre autra caus viva e autre alcali renovelatz, quar aquela lahoras sira de mot forta acuitat, la qual es aministrada en motas operacios de medicina e en cauterizacio dels autres membres, quar operacio fa de foc.	And then collect all that water, and pour it over another live caustic and renewed alkali, because that time it will be of a very strong acidity, which is administered in many operations of medicine and in cauterization of the other members, because this operation is done by fire.
E so de las medicinas alcunas am las quals es cauterizat ancha, ayssi cum tezizic e mel anacrat e caus am sabo enayssi que sian mesclatz.	And some medicines with which it is cauterized widely, such as tetter and honey of vinegar mixed with soap, so that they are mixed.
E Gualia recontet de un home dels antics la operacio e la curacio am la qual es curada dolor de anqua e de vena sciatica, e magnifiquet mot be esser de aquel, e diys que no hac necessitat de autra curacio, e quar es sanat per una veguada ayssi cum recomtec, quar fort leu aquel intrec en banh e eysic ja sa d’aquel.	And Gualia recorded from a man of the ancient operation and the cure by which it is healed pain in the armpit and sciatic vein, and magnifies very much that one, and says that no other cure is needed, and because it is healed with one wash and hot bath as well, for he has known that one.
Et es que sia pres de certarragi vert, e si no es atrobat vert, sia presa figua recent; e mot sia trissada am un pauc de grays e sia pausat sus la anqua en la qual es la dolor, o en la coyssa, o en la camba, e sia liat.	And it is to be taken from a certain ragwort, and if not found, then take fig recently; and it must be crushed with a little grease and placed on the armpit where there is pain, or in the thigh, or leg, and be bound.
E sia layssat per la cantitat de tres horas o per la quantitat que·l malaute centa cedacio de la adhustio.	And it is to be left for the amount of three hours or for the quantity that the patient can bear the tightness.
E aprop met aquel en banh e donc quan le cors de lu sia enrozat, entromet aquel en le sol, quar la dolor cessa e es sanat.	And then put him in a bath and when his body is relaxed, place him in the sun, because the pain will cease and he will be healed.
E sapias que no cove que alcu use de cauteri am aquestas medicinas sino aprop la evacuacio del cors.	And know that there is no doubt that anyone uses cautery with these medicines except for the evacuation of the body.
Mays ja Escorides diysec que quan am fenda de cabra la vena stretica es cauterizada, aprofieyra a lu mo be; e sia le cauteri am lu segon aquesta manieyra: sia presa lana e sia enbeguda en oli antic, e sia pausat entre le pous del pe e entre le fossil.	But Escorides said that when with goat's gall the sciatic vein is cauterized, it would be beneficial to him; and the cautery on him should be according to this way: wool should be taken and dipped in old oil, and placed between the big toe and the second toe.
E aprop pren fenda de cabra secca e emflasma aquela am foc entro que sia fayta carbo; e aprop pausa lu sobre la lana e leysa la entro que sia estengida.	And then take dry goat' gall and inflame it with fire into a charcoal; and then place it on the wool and let the fire go out.
E aprop itera aquo, e no cessas far aquo entro que·l scintiment de la mordicacio pervengua entro al anqua e repausa la dolor.	And then repeat this, and do not cease doing this until the sensation of the bite comes into the armpit and stops the pain.
Et aquesta manieyra de cauteri es apelat cauteri de vaquas.	And this way of cautery is called cow's cautery.
Capitol .xlii.	Chapter .XLI.
De cauterizacio de dolor de dos.	Of cauterization for pain in the throat.
Alcunas veguadas dolor es en le dos per tropas causas, cum per cazement o per percucio o per superflua evacuacio, e per causas ad aquelas semblantz, per infusio de materia frega e humida.	Sometimes pain is in the back for various reasons, such as from a blow or piercing or from excessive discharge, and because of causes like these, from infusion of moist matter.
E cauteri no catz sino en aquesta sola specia la qual es fayta per efusio de materia frega.	And cauterize not at all except in this sole species which is made by effusion of moist matter.
Donc cove, aprop evacuacio del malaute am pillulas fitidas e am semblant a lor, que sian faytas sobre·l dos en le qual es la dolor tres linhas segon la latitut de lu, pus que senhas am tentha en quascuna linha v cauteris o mays, segon la quantitat que ve de la tolleransa del malaute e de la vertut de lu.	Then, appropriate evacuation of the patient with blisters and like them, which are made on the back in which there is pain in three lines according to its width, since you mark with a tent in each line for cauterization or not, according to the quantity that comes from the tolerance of the patient and of his strength.
E sia fayta cauterizacio am cauteri de punt.	And cauterization is to be done by pointed cautery.
E si vols, cauteriza am tres cauteris o am quatre am cauteri clavilh medial segon aquesta forma:	And if you want, cauterize with three cauteries or four with mid-sized cautery according to this form:
Capitol .xliii.	Chapter .XLI.
De cauterizacio al comensament de gilbositat.	Of cauterization for the beginning of goiter.
Motas veguadas endeve aquesta malautia als petitz enfantz; e senhal del comensament de lu en les enfantz es que accideys sobre lor estrectura en le ale eves la elevacio e·l movement.	Many times this malady happens to small children, and sign of the beginning in children is that there occurs to them constriction in the neck by elevation and movement.
E atrobas en le derier espondil del dos e dels notz de lu que ja comensa a sobremontar sobre les autres spondils.	And press on the last vertebra of the back and on the notches of it that already begins to rise above the others vertebrae.
E donc quan tu vezes aquo e voles prohibir, lahoras cauterisa aquel am cauteri que sia cercle segon aquesta forma:	And therefore when you see this and want to prohibit, then cauterize that with circular cautery according to this form:
que prengua le cauteri sobre tota partida del spondilh engualment.	that the cautery takes on both sides of the vertebra evenly.
E si vols, cauteriza en le circuit del spondilh am le cauteri de punt dos linhas o tres.	And if you want, cauterize in the circuit of the vertebra with pointed cautery two lines or three.
E sian les puntz propdas entre lor.	And the points are close to each other.
E aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat am aquo que havem dit.	And then cure the place within which has been healed by what we have said.
Mays guarda que cauteri no sia administrat en gelbositat que sia fayta per spasme de nervi.	But be careful that cautery is not administered in goiter that is made by spasm of nerve.
Capitol .xliv.	Chapter .XLI.
De cauterizacio de podagra e de dolor de juncturas.	Of cauterization for gout and for pain in the joints.
Quan dolor de juncturas son faytas per humors fregas les quals so enfundutz a quascun membre del cors, lahoras quan veno dolors en los pes, de costuma dels metges es que aquo apelen podragua propriament.	When pain in the joints is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
E donc cum es curada podagra de causa frega am manieyra de cura e no so remaugudas las dolors, lahoras las remau cauteri.	And therefore when gout caused by moist matter is healed by the way of cure and not gone away the pains, then they are cauterized.
E es que tu cauterizas aquel aprop evacuacio en le circuit de la junctura del pe am motz cauteris.	And it is that you cauterize that after evacuation in the circuit of the joint of the foot with many cauteries.
E sia cauteri olivar del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And cautery oil of which this is its form:
E si es necessitat que puntz sia fayt sobre la fassia del pe, lahoras fay am cauteri de punt.	And if it is necessary to make points on the surface of the foot, then do so with a pointed cautery.
E si las dolors pujan entro als denolhs o a las autras juncturas, e aquo motas vetz s’endeve, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre quascun donolh am tres cauteris o quatre de tota partida am aquest cauteri olivar.	And if the pains penetrate into the joints or the other joints, and this happens many times, then cauterize that on each toe with three cauteries or four from all sides with this cautery oil.
E si motz cauteris que aquestz cauteris sian a tu necessaris, lahoras cauteriza aquel e no premas trop la tua ma am le cauteri abans, sia tant solament enviro la specitut de la codena.	And if many cauteries that these cauteries are necessary to you, then cauterize that and do not press too much your hand on the cautery before, but only wrap around the end of the cautery.
E si las dolors pugan entro al donolh e·l dos, lahoras aministra le cauteri le qual havem dit en le sieu capitol.	And if the pains penetrate into the toe and the back, then administer the cautery which we have said in its chapter.
E si las dolors so en las mas tant solament, e es apelada suagra, lahoras puncta en le circuit dels focils ayssi cum se revolvo, puncta en aquels dos linhas.	And if the pains are only in the hands and it is called arthritis, then puncture on the surface of the knuckles as they rotate, puncture them two lines.
E si reman de las dolors en les ditz, lahoras puncta en le cercuit dels focils sobre quascun notz e sobre la pinche de la ma.	And if remain of the pains in the fingers, then puncture on the circuit of the knuckles on each joint and on the palm.
E si las dolors pugan aprop alscus jorns als coydes o als muscles, lahoras cauteriza les quascus de tota part dels ajutoris.	And if the pains penetrate into the bones or the muscles, then cauterize all parts of the joints.
E no evacuas le malaute de bon regiment e de recepcio de medicinas, quar si es fayt bon regiment e flacma es evacuada am aquest cauteri sira sanat, Dieus ajudan.	And do not evacuate the patient from good regimen and reception of medicines, because if good regimen and phlegm is evacuated by this cautery it will be healed, God helps.
Capitol .xlv.	Chapter .XLI.
De cauterizacio de rompeduras.	Of cauterization for broken bones.
Quan endeve rompedura en les angonars e diysendo les budels denant l’atela al genetiu, e aquo es comensan de aprop, lahoras cove que tu mandas al malaute layssar la sua comestio en le sieu dia e que use de causas leniens per so que la fenda deyssenda del sieu ventre.	When there is broken bone in the angles and they say the intestines within the chest of the child, and this is the beginning from within, then know that you order the patient to stop his food for the day and use healing causes for it so that the crack goes away from his belly.
E aprop segua le malaute entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos, e comanda a lu que tengua le sieu ale entro que sia foro getat o aparesca l’atela o·l budels.	And then follow the patient between your hands on his back, and command him that he has his mouth within that it is split or appears the skin or the bones.
E aprop retorna aquel am les tieus ditz e senha am tenta la ruptura sobre le os del pentenilh am senhal la extremitat del qual sia semblant a la maytat de cercle a las subiranas partidas del cors.	And then return that by his fingers and know that you point out the fracture on the bone of the finger by pointing to the extremity which is similar to the tip of a circle in the upper parts of the body.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And then light the cautery of which this is its form:
entro que sia mot rog e gete cintilhas.	while it is still wet, let it drip into the wound and repeat several times.
E aprop reduzeys le budel o l’atela a la sua conquavitat, e aprop pause la sua ma sobre le loc per so que le budel no yesqua.	Then return the intestine or hernia to its cavity, and place your hand over the area to prevent the intestine from coming out.
E tu ja has ubert entre las coyssas del malaute e dejos lu as pausat un coyssi, et autre servent sia sus las cambas de lu, e autre sus le pietz de lu, le qual tengua las suas mas.	You have already opened the space between the patient's thighs, placed a cushion under them, another servant on their legs, and another on their chest, holding their hands.
E aprop pausa le cauteri sobre aquel senhal am la tua ma am cauteri stan dreyt, e te aquel entro que am lu consieguas le os del pentenilh entro al mieg del duiduni; e itera am aquel autra veguada si a tu aquel no has conseguit en la primieyra veguada entro al os.	And then place the cautery over that mark with your hand holding the cautery straight, and push into the wound until you feel the bone of the testicle within the scrotum; and repeat with the other testicle if you have not managed it on the first try.
E observa saviament del ysiment del budel en la hora de la tua cauterizacio, que no comburas aquel budel per so que sobre le malaute no vengua in mort o autre gran malicia.	And be very careful with the movement of the intestine during the cauterization, lest you burn it and cause death or some other great harm to the patient.
E sapias que quan tu am le cauteri no atenhas le os, no confereys la tua operacio.	And know that when you are using the cautery, if you do not feel the bone, your operation is pointless.
E cove que·l cauteri dels enfants sia subtil segon le gran e la mesura de lor.	And know that the cautery for children should be fine according to their size.
E aprop cura le loc del cauteri per tres dias am boder entro que sia remauguda la scara del foc.	Then treat the site of the cauterization for three days by applying a plaster once the burn scar has healed.
E aprop cura aquel am les autres enguentz entro que sia sanat.	Then treat it with other ointments until it is healed.
E le malaute sia jasent sobre le sieu dos per xl dias entro que sia sigillat le loc e la plagua.	Then have the patient lie on his back for 40 days while the wound is closed and the plague sealed.
E cove que pauses le nutriment de lu segon la longitut del temps de la curacio de lu le qual le linesca le ventre de lu, e que le budel no yesca fora deves le esforsament de guerir.	And know that you should regulate the patient's diet according to the length of his recovery time, which will lessen the strain on his belly, and prevent the intestine from slipping out during the efforts of healing.
E aprop quan se vol levar aprop xl dias, lahoras aministra liament decentment fayt, e tengua aquel per autres xl jorns.	Then when he wants to get up after 40 days, administer to him a decently prepared laxative and have him take it for another 40 days.
E sia mermat de trebalh e de replecio de vianda e de beure, e de votz vehementz, quar quan usa de aquest regiment de sanacio entiera sira sanat.	And he should avoid hard work and refraining from eating and drinking, and violent movements, for if he uses this course of healing fully, he will surely recover.
E yeu diyre la curacio de las rupturas en las autras partidas del ventre, e so al comensament, e vols que no treguan, lahoras cauterisa la ruptura d’aquel am cauteri redon segon la quantitat de lu, e sia aquo que es exhurit de la codena ayssi cum la tersa partida de lu; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit, e no es ajustat.	Now I will tell of the cure for ruptures in other parts of the belly, and above all at the beginning, and you should not delay it: cauterize the rupture with a round cautery according to its size; then let it be what is expelled from the cord, just as from the third part of him; then treat it as we have said, and if it is not adjusted.
E ja diyssero alcus primiers que ruptura sia cauterizada am cauteri triangular segon aquesta forma, pus que es senhada am tenta:	Now some early authorities say that ruptures should be cauterized with a triangular cautery according to this form, since they are caused by tenting:
e es pausada linha que eys per la latitut en le latz pus sobira de la ruptura, e autra linha al desus; e depausa la tua ma am un cauteri clavilh, mays le primier cauteri es pus leugier e milhor.	And if it had been broken between the elbow and wrist, then cauterize the rupture according to the location of the forearm with a round cautery, since that is where it was caused by the arm; and if it had been broken between the wrist and hand, then cauterize the rupture with a triangular cautery according to this shape: place a line through the width in the upper part of the rupture, and another line above it; then place your hand with a nail-shaped cautery, but the first cautery is lighter and better.
Capitol .xlvi.	Chapter 46.
De cauterizacio de torcio.	Of cauterization for torticollis.
Quan endeve en alscus membres per cazement o per percussio dolor e persevera aquela dolor per lonc temps e no comfereys al u curacio am medicinas, lahoras cove que cauterizes am cauteri de punt.	When pain occurs in any part of the body due to a sprain or blow, and this pain persists for a long time without responding to treatment with medicine, then know that you should cauterize it with a pointed cautery.
E sia le cauteri de tot membre segon la magnitut e la parvitat de lu, e vertut e develitat de lu, e locacio de torcio e dolor de lu.	And the cautery of each member should be according to its size and smallness, nature, and location of torticollis and pain.
Donc si·s sanat per le primier cauteri, bo es; e sino, lahoras itera sobre lu le cauteri; quar de costuma de aquelas dolors es que sian punctatz de membre ad aquel membre le qual apropinque al u, per que cove que consieguas aquels am cauteri entro que·l malaute sia sanat.	So if he is healed by the first cauterization, that is good; but if not, then repeat it on him; for usually these pains are caused by puncturing of a member near to him, so know that you should cauterize it and find it in order to heal the patient.
Capitol .xlvii.	Chapter 47.
De cauterizacio de lepra.	Of cauterization for leprosy.
Les lebros alcunas veguadas am cauteri per mot gran juvament, e magerment si la specia de lepra que es fayta per putrefaccio de flacma e de melencolia.	Lepers at times are cauterized for great benefit, and especially if the nature of leprosy is caused by putrefaction of phlegm and melancholy.
E donc cum tu vols cauterizar aquel, considera si la lepra es comussan e as aquela curada am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no deysen, ni esta, e temes sobre le malaute que la corrupcio comprehenda tot le cors de lu e tota la compleccio de lu, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre le cap am v cauteris: am un en le mieg loc del cap, e am le segon pus dejos de lu, eves le front a la fi dels cabels; e amdos sobre dos corns; e am un detras, sobre la nuca o servitz.	And so when you want to cauterize him, consider if the leprosy is dry and cured as we have said in Division, and not disintegrating, nor is it, and fear for the patient that the corruption does not include his whole body and all its parts, then cauterize him on the head with v cauteries: one in the middle of the head, and the second lower down, avoiding the forehead to the end of the hair; and both over two horns; and one from behind, over the nape or neck.
E ultima la tua ma am le cauteri un pauc entro que emprema en le os una petita empressio, e de lu sian deslocadas las scorsas, per so que la expiracio de grossas vapors sia alleujada de lu; e cauteriza sobre la melsa segon que es precesit.	And finally place your hand with the cautery a little into the bone so that it makes a small impression, and if from him are displaced the scabs, so that the expiration of thick vapors is driven out from him; and cauterize over the wound according to what was requested.
E si la lepra es ja expanduda sobre le malaute e apar manifestament, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas aquel am aquels cauteris les quals havem ditz en le cap; e am cauteri sobre la extremitat del nas, e am dos cauteris sobre las doas maysselas, e am dos cauteris sobre dos spondils del col, e am vi cauteris sobre les spondils del dos, e am un gran sobre les spondils prop de la coeta, e un sobre la cotea , e am dos sobre las anquas, e am un sobre quascuna anqua, e am dos sobre les donols e un sobre quascun donolh, e am dos sobre les coydes, e am dos sobre les muscles, e am dos las teneretutz del sieu pietz; e cauteriza aquel sobre totas las juncturas dels ditz de las mas e dels pes, e sobre quascun talon dels sieus pes, e sobre les foscils de las suas mas.	And if the leprosy has already spread over the patient and appears manifestly, then know that you should cauterize him with those cauteries which we have said to place on his head; and cauterize on the tip of the nose, and two cauteries on both ears, and two cauteries over the two shoulders of the collarbone, and six cauteries over the two shoulder blades, and one large cautery over the shoulder blade near the armpit, and one over the armpit, and two over the hips, and one over each hip, and two over the knees, and one over each ankle, and two over the heels, and two over the fingers, and one over each toe joint, and two over the muscles, and two over the tendons of his feet.
E guarda te dels nervis les quals so sobre le talo que no comburas aquels.	And be careful not to burn those nerves which are on the sole of the foot.
E alcunas veguadas es cauterizat am un cauteri sobre le os del pentenilh e am autre sobre la boca del stomac, e autre sobre le fietge.	And sometimes one is cauterized with a cautery over the bone of the testicle and another over the mouth of the stomach, and another over the anus.
E sapias que quant mays ajustas cauteris, tant es mays juvatiu e mays conferent; e sapias que le malaute no ha en le cauteri dolor, ayssi cum han les sas, per so quar le cors de lu ja es stupefayt.	And know that the more you make the cauteries, the greater the benefit and the more they work; and know that the patient does not have pain from the cautery as the healthy do, because his body is already stunned.
E cove que les cauteris sian grans o paucs segon les membres e las juncturas segon que es precedit de las specias dels ferramentz.	And know that the cauteries should be large or small according to the members and joints, according as is preceded by the properties of the instruments.
E aprop cura le cauteri am farina de errs coyta am mel e am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	Then treat the cautery with flour of bran with honey and with the other cure until it is healed.
Capitol .xlviii.	Chapter 48.
De cauterizacio de stupor.	Of cauterization for stupor.
Quan alcun membre es stabozit o adormit e es curat am medicinas, olis e emplastres, e no es sanat, lahoras tu cauteriza aquel membre stabozit am cauteris segon que merita la grandesa del membre o la parvitat de lu.	When any member is paralyzed or asleep and is treated with medicines, oils and bandages without healing, then you should cauterize that paralyzed member with cauteries according to the size of the member or its smallness.
E sia lo tieu cauteri intrant la ispicitut de la codena un pauc.	And let your cautery enter into the thickness of the cord a little.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia sanat.	Then treat it with ointment until it is healed.
E alscunas veguadas es cauterizada alcuna stupor le qual endeve a las mas e als pes, e als spondils del dos e ves le eysiment dels nervis les quals mavon aquel membre, e es remauguda la stupor.	And sometimes the paralysis of a member which affects the arms and legs, and shoulder blades is cauterized, and one sees the movement of the nerves which move this member, and the paralysis is healed.
Mays no prusuma sobre aquo sino aquel que es savi en la anotomia dels membre e de la egressio dels nervis tot le cors moventz.	But do not presume about it unless you are wise in the anatomy of the members and the exit of all the nerves which move all the parts.
Capitol .xlix.	Chapter 49.
De cauterizacio de albaras que es morfea.	Of cauterization for barbitons.
Quan albaras es antiqua e no comfereys a lu alcu dels enguentz de medicina, lahoras tu cauteriza sobre aquela am cauteri preon un pauc segon la quantitat de la specitut de la codena entro que sia remauguda la blancor e la color de lu, e la color de lu sia mudada.	When barbitons is old and does not respond to any of the ointments of medicine, then you should cauterize it with a cautery little according to the quantity of the thickness of the cord so that the whiteness and the color of it are driven out, and its color is changed.
E aprop cura aquel am farina de errs e de lentilhas am oli rozat e am folhas de arnagrosa, e am sanc de colomba o am sanc de yronda, da cascuna sia una partida e totas sian mescladas, e aprop sia linit un drap e sus le loc sia pausat entro que sia sanat.	And then treat the area with a paste made from ground ergot and lentils, roasted in oil and mixed with pigeon's blood or the blood of a young dove; each should be a separate portion, and they should all be mixed together. Then line a cloth with this mixture and place it over the affected area to promote healing.
Capitol .l.	Chapter 1.
De cauterizacio de cranc.	Of cauterization of the cranium.
Quan canser es comensan e vols aquel ostar, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteri de cercle en le circuit de lu ayssi cum es revolgut.	When cancer begins and you want to stop it from spreading, then cauterize the affected area with a circular cautery around its perimeter as it is being rotated.
E diysero les savis que sia cauterizat am lo derier cauteri en le mieg loc; mays a mi no es vist aquo, quar temi que sia ulcerat, e yeu ja e vist aquo alcunas veguadas.	And the wise say that it should be cauterized with the pointed cautery in the center of the affected area. However, I have not seen this done, for I am afraid it might cause an ulcer, and I have seen this happen a few times.
E es pus dreyturier que sia cauterizat en le circuit de lu am cercle ayssi cum avem dit, o am motz cauteris.	It is also more appropriate to cauterize the affected area with a circular cautery as mentioned above or with a flat cautery.
Capitol .li.	Chapter 10.
De cauterizacio de adubilati.	Of cauterization for swollen wounds.
Quan alcun adubilati es tardat en maturacio, e aysso es per la superfluitat fazen aquela, o per etat del malaute, quar es vielh en decrepitat, de pauc sanc, o per le temps, e tu vols festinar en la maturacio de adubilati; lahoras cauteriza en le circuit de lu am motz cauteris petitz punctan; e aprop leyssa aquela quar ela fastinara en maturacio.	When a wound is slow to heal due to excess humidity, or because of the patient's condition, such as old age and decreased blood flow, or simply due to the passage of time, and you want to speed up the healing process; then cauterize the affected area with small punctures using a pointed cautery. This will stimulate faster healing.
Mays si tu vols la perforacio de lu am cauteri, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu: e depausa aquel en le mieg loc de adubilati entro que penetre la codena.	However, if you want to create a piercing in the wound with the cautery, then ignite the cautery, which should be shaped as follows: and apply it to the center of the wound, allowing the heat to penetrate the tissue.
E si le cauteri en aquel loc que es pus dejos, per so que le cors del brac sia alleujat; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if the cautery is applied lower down on the arm, causing the body of the arm to be raised; then treat the area to promote healing.
Capitol .lii.	Chapter 12.
De cauterizacio de corrodent.	Of cauterization for ulcers.
Corrodent es corrupcio ambulant en le membre, la qual corrodeys aquel ayssi cum a foc comedent lenha secca.	An ulcer is a rotting wound that eats away at the flesh, similar to how a fire consumes dry wood.
Donc si vezes aquel corrodent en loc le qual sufferte cauteri am foc, lahoras tu igneys cauteris clavils motz paucs, e grans segon que es convenent en aquel loc en le qual es corrodent.	Therefore, if you see an ulcer in a place that can be treated with fire cautery, then ignite a small, pointed cautery tool, and apply it to the ulcer according to its size.
E aprop cauteriza aquel de tota partida entro que erradiques tota la corrosio e no romangua alcuna causa de lu.	Then cauterize the entire ulcer, ensuring that you remove all traces of corruption and address any underlying cause.
E aprop leyssa aquel per tres dias, e pausa sobre les locs cauterizats solpre trissat am oli mesclat entro que las scaras sian totas eradicadas e tota la corrupcio.	Then let it be for three days, and apply a poultice of mixed oil over the cauterized areas so that the scars are completely eradicated and all corruption is removed.
E aprop cura aquel am enguentz carn engendrantz.	Then treat the area with a meat-based ointment to promote healing.
Mays si aprop tres dias vezes que la carn nasca sana en la qual no es corrupcio, bo es; mays sino, lahoras itera le cauteri sobre aquo que es romas en les locs corrumputz.	However, if after three days you see that the flesh is growing healthily without any corruption, then it is good; but if not, then repeat the cauterization on the affected areas.
E corrodent es medicat alcunas vetz am medicina aguda, quar aquela es meza en loc de cauteri.	And ulcers are sometimes treated with sharp instruments as an alternative to cautery.
Mays empero cauteri am foc es de pus leugier juvament.	However, cautery with fire is still the most effective method.
E yeu ja e dit la curacio de lu am medicina aguda en la divisio, e donc pren aquela quan de lu auras endegencia.	And I have already mentioned the treatment of ulcers with sharp instruments in the section on surgery; therefore, take that approach when you see signs of infection.
Capitol .liii.	Chapter 13.
De cauterizacio de claus e dels autres semblants.	Of cauterization for warts and other similar growths.
Motas veguadas endeve a las partidas dejos del pe malautia que s’apela clau, e es causa grossa, fentrada, la qual ladeys le pe; e cauteri en aquels es segon dos manieyras, so es cauteri am foc e cauteri am aygua cauda.	Often, there are growths under the skin of the foot that are called warts, and they are a significant issue. They are caused by an ingrown hair, and there are two methods to treat them: either by cauterization with fire or with boiling water.
Mays cauteri am foc es que igniscas le cauteri concau semblant a pena de voltor, le qual sia feyt de ferr segon la quantitat la qual contengua le clau de tota partida, e sia de subtils marguas.	However, cauterization with fire involves igniting the cautery tool, which should be shaped like a vulture's beak, made of iron according to the size of the wart, and it should have fine edges.
E aprop pausa aquel ignit sobre le clau, e aprop revolveys la tua ma am le cauteri en le circuit del clau entro que·l cauteri pervengua a la profunditat del clau.	Then place the ignited cautery on top of the wart, and rotate your hand holding the cautery around the perimeter of the wart so that the heat penetrates to its depth.
E leyssa aquel per tres dias entro que comense getar brac.	Let it be for three days until you see pus coming out.
E aprop emplastre aquel am malvas salvatges trissadas am sal, e leyssa le emplastre sobre aquel per una nuoyt, quar aquel sira eradicat de las suas razitz.	Then apply a poultice made from crushed mallows mixed with salt over the affected area for one night, as this will uproot it from its source.
E aprop cura le loc am enguent de carn generatiu entro que sia sanat.	Then treat the area with a meat-based ointment to promote healing.
E si so no-convertitz, e motas veguadas accideysso en la superficia del cors, majorment en las mas e les pes, lahoras cove que tu aministres en aquels cauteri am aygua, e es que prenguas una quannula de eram o de ferr o de pena de voltor, e pausa aquela sobre le clau; e aprop geta en la quanula de aygua cauda pauca cantitat, e rete la tua ma, e tu revolveys aquela am compressio de la tua ma de tot, e sia enpremut le marge de la canula en la razit del clau, e atrobara la aygua cauda via al preon de la razit del cau; e espera le malaute un pauc la mordicacio de l’aygua cauda per una hora, e aprop remau aquela, quar le clau am las suas razitz sira erredicat.	And if it persists and appears on the surface of the body, especially on the hands and feet, then you must apply cauterization with boiling water. For this, take a quill made of brass or iron or a vulture's beak, and place it over the wart; then allow the boiling water to flow into the quill, and rotate your hand so that the heat penetrates to the root of the wart. Wait for the patient to bite their lip for an hour due to the pain of the hot water, and then remove the quill. This will uproot the wart along with its source.
E ayssi fe am aquels la i aprop l’autre entro que venguas sobre totz les quals de lor so en le cors.	And you should also treat any others that appear anywhere on the body in the same way.
E aprop cura aquels pus que las razitz dels claus so erradicadas am aquo dels enguentz les quals la carn ve engenran.	Then treat the pus resulting from the uprooting of the warts with meat-based ointments that stimulate flesh growth.
Capitol .liiii.	Chapter 14.
De cauterizacio de tremor.	Of cauterization for tremors.
Quan endeve ad alcu tremor per freg en le nervi o per febre de causa frega, o per autra causa semblant, lahoras cove que tu cauterises aquel am quatre cauteris o am v sobre les spondils del dos, entre quascun spondilh am un cauteri; e am cauteri en le pietz de lu, e sobre l‘estomac de lu, am cauteri olivar.	When you see a tremor caused by friction on a nerve, or due to fever from some other similar cause, then cauterize the affected area with four small cauteries or five cauteries on either side of the spine, one cautery between each pair of vertebrae; and cauterize the feet and stomach with an olive-shaped cautery.
E la tremor de lu se repausa e festina la sanetat de la malautia frega.	And the tremor will subside and the patient's health will improve due to the treatment of the feverish condition.
Capitol .lv.	Chapter 15.
De cauterizacio de albati accidentz al cors.	Of cauterization for accidental wounds on the body.
Quan en le cors so espellitz albati, e so pustulas fendas las quals so feytas de materias grossas corruptas; donc cove al comensament cum apareyso, que sia cauterizat sobre tot cap de la fistola am cauteri subtil am fustz de mirt, la extremitat del qual es estenduda am foc; o am razitz de erestologia longua; o am cauteri lentecular.	When the body is afflicted with boils and pus-filled blisters caused by corrupt humors, then at the beginning, when they appear, cauterize the top of the boil with a thin, pointed cautery made from myrtle wood, the end of which is heated; or with a long, sharp razor; or with a flat cautery.
E alscunas veguadas es cauteri ademamil al comensament de la sua expulcio segon aquesta manieyra; e no so cregudas, e es disrumpuda la superfluitat fazens aquels, et sana de aquels.	And sometimes, cauterization is done around the entrance of the boil as it starts to drain according to this method; and when they are not ruptured, and the corrupt humors are expelled by cauterizing them in this way, they heal.
Mays empero cove que aquo sia fayt aprop evacuacio am fleubotomia.	However, it must be done with an incision using a flebotomy.
Capitol lvi.	Chapter 16.
De cauterizacio de fluex de sanc accident per incisio de arceria.	Of cauterization for accidental blood flow through an incision.
Tropas veguadas endeve fluex de arceria que es inciza deves la plagua la qual endeve deforo, o deves la incizio de apostemas o cauteri del membre, e alor semblantz, e es dificil remaura aquel.	Sometimes, there is blood flow from an incision that has not healed properly, or from the incision of an ulcer or cauterization on a limb, and it is difficult to heal.
Donc cum accideys ad alcu aquo, lahoras tu·t coyta am la tua ma a l’orrifici de la arceria, e pausa sobre aquel le tieu dit endic estrenh aquel motas veguadas entro que sia ostat le fluex del sanc dejos le tieu dit, e que non yesqua.	Therefore, when this happens, then you should apply pressure with your hand over the incision and place a finger over the hole of the artery, and apply pressure over the affected area so that the blood flow stops; and do this several times until it is stopped, and make sure it does not start again.
E aprop pausa en le foc les cauteris olivars paucs e grantz, per nombre motz, e exsuffla sobre aquels entro que sian mot ignitz.	Then apply the hot olive-shaped cauteries a few times, and blow over them so that they ignite; do this several times until they are extinguished.
E aprop pren de aquels un petit o un gran segon le loc e la plagua en la qual es rompuda la arteria, sobre aquela vena festinantment pus que auras remaugut le tieu dit, e te le cauteri entro que sia abcindit e restreyt aquel sanc.	Then take a small or large one according to the location and the hole through which the artery is torn, over the vein that is bleeding profusely after you have stopped it by cauterization; and cauterize it so that it is constricted and the blood flow stops.
E si le sanc es expellit de l’orrifici de la arteria quan tu remaues le tieu dit e extringeys le cauteri, lahoras pren la un autre cauteri coytadament dels cauteris les quals en le foc son preparatz, e donc no cesses fer aquo un aprop autre entro que le sanc sia restrengit.	And if the blood flows from the hole of the artery when you release the finger and tighten the cautery, then take another cautery that has been heated in the fire, and do this repeatedly until the blood flow is stopped.
E guarda te que no comburas le nervi que aqui es, e que vengua sobre le malaute autra malicia.	Be careful not to burn the nerves here, and that no other harm comes to the patient.
E sapias que quan de l’arteria flueys sanc, lahoras no es possible en aquels restrenge la sanc, e majorment quan l’arteria es gran, si no am una de quatre manieyras: o am cauteri ayssi quo dit havem, o am extraccio quan no es extrayta, quar quan es extrayta las extremitatz de lu miels son comburidas e es restreyt le sanc, o que sia liat am fiel o am liament per fort strectura, o que sian pausadas sobre lu medicinas de las quals la vertut es restringir la sanc; e sian strengudas am pulvinar am costriccio decent.	And know that when blood flows from an artery, it is not possible to restrict the flow of blood in those places, especially when the artery is large, unless by one of four methods: either by cauterization as mentioned earlier, or by extraction if it has not been extracted; for when it is extracted, its extremities are burned and the blood flow restricted. Or it may be tied with a thread or with a ligature to tightly constrict it; or medicines whose virtue is to restrict the blood flow should be applied to it, and it should be bound with a pad with a decent constriction.
Mays aquel que aministra restriccio decent de lu am liament e am strictura am draps o per posicio de causas comburentz e de semblantz, no comfereys sino tart.	But he who administers a decent restriction to it with a ligature and constriction with cloth or by position of burning and similar causes, should not confer it but slowly.
Mays si aquo endeve ad alcu e no sia le metge present ni medicina, lahoras obre am pausament del dit indic sobre le orrifici de aquela vena ayssi cum havem dit, e entenda a la gran costreccio de lu entro que le sanc sia ostat de la sobirana partida de la plagua, e sobre la arceria le dit no sia remaugut; e de sobre la arceria sia aspergit am aygua frega de mot gran fregiditat entro que·l sanc sia congilat e engrossat; e mays cossire en que ha de cauteri o de medicina necessitat.	But if it is aimed at someone and neither the doctor nor medicine is present, then open by pressing on the said hole of that vein as we have said before, and understand to the great constriction of it within so that the blood may be stopped from the upper part of the plague; and over the artery let it not be rubbed; and over the artery, let it be sprinkled with water rubbed with a very cold thing until the blood is congealed and thickened. And when there is need for cauterization or medicine.
Comensa la segonda partida.	Begins the second part.
De incisio e perforacio e ventozas e de fleubotomia e de plaguas e de lor semblants.	Of incision and piercing, and of bleeding and phlebotomy, and of plagues and their likes.
Aquestas son paraulas de Albucazis.	These are the words of Albucasis.
Ja havem dit en le primier capitol tota malautia en la qual cauteri am foc es convenient e am medicina comburent, e las occasios e las causas de lu, e les instrumentz en aquels necessaris am las formas dels cauteris; e he ordenatz les capitols de la subiranetat del cap entro als pes.	We have already said in the first chapter all about sicknesses for which cauterization with fire and burning medicine is convenient, and its occasions and causes, and the instruments in which they are necessary, and the forms of cautery; and I have ordered the chapters from the upper part of the head to the feet.
E yeu procesire en aquest capitol per aquela meteysa guisa, per que sia alliujat lo querent aquo, lahoras sobre aquo que aura demandat.	And we will go through this chapter in that same way so that it may be clear to the one who reads it and then ask about it.
E denant que yeu comense aquo, cove, fils, que aprenguatz que en aquest capitol es per terror aquo que es en le capitol primier de cauterizacio.	And before I begin that, listen, you children, that in this chapter there is what is terrifying to you that is in the first chapter of cauterization.
E per aquo que cove que sia en lu gran cautela, quar en la operacio la qual es en aquest capitol motas veguadas catz evacuacio la qual es am sanc am le qual esta la vida deves la aspersio de la vena o incisio sobre l’apostema o apercio de exsitura o puracio de la plagua o extraccio de sageta o incizio de peyra e a lor semblantz.	And because of that, one must be very cautious in it, for the operation which is in this chapter many times involves evacuation by bleeding which is through blood through the vein or incision over an abscess or opening of a wound or purification of the plague or extraction of arrow or incision of stone and their likes.
E de totz aquels so acompanhatz temor e tremor e en le mas de lor catz la mort.	And from all those are accompanied by fear and trembling, and in most of them death.
E yeu amonesti vos que sobre vos no caia aquo en le qual es esitacio, quar alcunas veguadas cazo deves vos manieyras de homes am manieyras motas de malautias.	And I warn you that it does not happen to you in which there is a loss, for sometimes because of men's ways many sicknesses occur.
E de lor es alcu que s’irays am la sua malautia e es leugiera deves lu la mort, e aysso per la vehemensia de aquo que troba de sa malautia, e per longuesa de la malautia de lu, e am la malautia es paor la qual significa mort.	And of them is the one who goes away because of his sickness and escapes death, but also because of the vehemence of that from which he suffers because of his sickness, and because of the length of his sickness and because of the sickness which signifies death.
E de aquels es le qual dona a tu son aver e ditta, tu esperant am aquel sanetat, e la sieua malautia es perniciosa.	And of them is the one who gives you hope and says it to you, you waiting for that health, but his sickness is harmful.
E donc no cove que tu consentas en aquel que ve a vos del qual es aquesta manieyra; e la vostra cautela sia major que covesitat e la vostra rapacitat; e no presumatz alcuna causa sobre aquo sino aprop sciencia certa la qual virifica aquo deves vos, e al qual perve successio lausabla.	And therefore do not consent to one who comes to you whose nature is like that; and your caution should be greater than naivety and your rapaciousness; and do not presume any cause over it unless by certain science which verifies it for you, and to whom there comes laudable success.
E usatz en la curacio de totz vostres malautes de pronosticacio e indicacio de lu al qual es salut convertida, quar en aquel es a vos ajutori sobre adquisicio de fama e de memoria, de lausor e de gloria.	And use in the cure of all your sicknesses from prediction and indication for that to which health is converted, for in it is your helper for acquiring fame and memory, praise and glory.
O, filhs, Dieus en vos spire le sieu entendement e no oste a vos direccio e proteccio, quar aquo es en la sua ma.	O children, may God inspire you with his understanding and not refuse you direction and protection, for that is in his hand.
E yeu e ordenat aquest capitol distingent per capitols segon que precedit en le capitol de cauteris, de la cura del cap entro als pes, per que sia a vos alleujat aquo que demandatz de aquo e del qual havetz necessitat.	And I have ordered this chapter distinguishing according to the chapters that preceded in the chapter of cautery, of the cure of the head to the feet, so that it may be clear to you that which you ask about and for which you have need.
Capitol primier.	First chapter.
De la curacio de aygua la qual es contenguda en le cap dels enfantz.	Of the cure of water that is contained in the head of children.
Sapias que aquesta malautia motas veguadas endeve als enfantz deves le enfantament e quan la noyrissa estrenh le cap del enfant ses livitat.	Know that this sickness many times occurs to children because of childbirth, and when the nurse tightens the head of the child it becomes loose.
E alcunas veguadas endeve per causa amaguada la qual no es saubuda.	And sometimes because of a hidden cause which is not washed off.
Mays yeu no vi aquesta malautia sino en les enfantz; e a totz aquels les quals yeu vi se coytec la mort, e per ayssi es a mi vist layssada obra en aquels.	But I have not seen this sickness except in children; and to all of them to whom I have seen it occurs death, and because of that I saw the act lessened in them.
E yeu e vist que un enfant le cap del qual era d’aygua omplit, e·l cap de lu era totjorn ayssi magnificat entro que ceser no podia sobre si meteys per la grandesa del sieu cap, e mays que la humiditat fe aucmentada entro que foc mort.	And I have seen that a child whose head was filled with water and the head of him magnified so much that he could not move his neck because of the size of his head, but also because the moisture increased, causing death by fire.
E aquesta humiditat o es agreguada entre la codena e l’os, o es agreguada dejos le os sobre le ciphac.	And this humidity is added between the scalp and the bone, or is added below the bone on top of the skull.
Quar la operacio en aquel si la humiditat es entre la codena e l’os e le apostema es pauc, lahoras cove que tu fendas en le mieg loc del cap am una fissura en la latitut, e sia la longitut de la fissura cays dos notz entro que corra la humiditat, e aquesta es la forma del spatum:	For the operation on that if the humidity is between the scalp and the bone and the abscess is small, then you should cut in the middle of the head with an incision in the breadth, and let the length of the incision be two inches long so that the humidity may flow out, and this is the shape of the spatula:
E donc si la humiditat es mays augmentada e l’apostema es major, lahoras son aqui dos fissuras segon aquesta manieyra:	And therefore if the humidity is more increased and the abscess is larger, then here are two incisions according to this way:
E si la humiditat es dejos le os, senhal de lu es que tu vezes la comissuras del cap ubertas de tota partida e l’aygua es spremuda quan tu compremes aquela am la tieua ma a las partidas dedintz e no es aquo a tu amaguat.	And if the humidity is below the bone, its sign is that you will see the edges of the head swollen and the water is pushed out when you compress it with your hand at the edges within, and that is not hidden from you.
Cove que tu fendas en le mieg loc del cap am tres fissuras segon aquesta manieyra:	That you should cut in the middle of the head with three incisions according to this way:
e aprop la inscizio extratz ne tota la humiditat; e aprop strenh las fissuras am draps e plumassols; e aprop enbroca aquo de sobre am vi e oli entro al quint dia, e aprop deslia le liament e cura la plagua am tentas e enguentz, e strenh le cap am equalitat; e mange le malaute am vianda secca de pauca humiditat entro que·l membre sia confortat e sanat.	And then draw out all the humidity; and then tighten the incisions with cloth and bandages; and then anoint it with oil within the fifth day, and then loosen the ligature and cure the plague with ointments and poultices, and tighten the head with equality; and feed the patient with dry food of little humidity so that the member is comforted and healed.
E es autra manieyra de incisio, que consideras hon apar la magnitut del apostema e la colleccio de l’aygua, quar alcunas veguadas es mays en le occipicii, o en la partida denant, o en la destra, o en la sinistra; e donc aten am la incizio on appar le apostema e la replecio de l’aygua, e fen aquo segon que a tu es miels possible.	And there is another way of incision that considers where the abscess appears and the collection of water, for sometimes it is more in the occipital, or in the front, or on the right, or on the left; and therefore pay attention to the incision where the abscess appears and the collection of water, and cut it according to what is best possible for you.
Et observa que no inscindas la arteria e endevengua flueys de sanc e mora le malaute per aquel flux de sanc am evacuacio de humiditat.	And observe that you do not split the artery and draw out blood flow and cause death to the patient through that flow of blood by evacuating humidity.
Capitol .ii.	Second chapter.
De inscisio de las arterias las quals so aprop las aurelhas, apeladas hilasseysse.	Of incision of the arteries which are properly the aureolas, called hilasseysse.
Capitol segon.	Second chapter.
Quan endeveno ad alcu catars o raumas als huelhs o al pietz, e es antiquat aquo, e no confereys en aquo la curacio de las medicinas, lahoras la deriera curacio en aquest es incizio de aquelas dos arterias.	When it occurs to someone cataracts or raucous in the eye or in the foot and it is old, and the cure of medicines does not confer on it, then the latter cure in this is incision of those two arteries.
E donc cove quan tu vols inscidir aquelas que le malaute raza lo sieu cap, e aprop fregua le loc am drap aspre per so que aparan las arcerias, e aprop sia strengut le col del malaute am alcu drap; e aprop considera on polsa la vena; e les locs de quascuna sobre les locs les quals so aprop las aurelhas depremutz, e tant se occultan sino en alcus homes.	And therefore when you want to cut them so that the patient's head is loose, then compress the place with a rough cloth so that the arteries appear, and let it be tightened on the neck of the patient with some cloth; and therefore consider where pulse the vein; and the locations of each over the locations where they are depressed, and as much as they are hidden except in some men.
E aprop senha sobre la arceria am tenta, e aprop inscideys quascuna am le spatum de quascuna partida agut am inscizio pervenient entro al os, e sia aquo per la latitut del cap.	And therefore press on the artery with a tent, and then cut each one with the spatula of each wound penetrating into the bone, and let it be that by the breadth of the head.
E si vols, entromet le spatum dejos la arteria e trenqua aquala a las inciden a las partidas desus.	And if you wish, cut beneath the artery and draw out the blood to the point where it meets the skin above.
E sia la longitut de la inscizio cays dos ditz ajustatz, quar quan alcuna vena es inscizida le sanc es eyssit am egressio pulsatil, le qual saut deforo per saut frequent.	And the length of the incision should be about two fingers wide, because when a vein is cut the blood flows out in pulses and gushes out frequently.
Mays si la arceria no apareys al cintiment, lahoras cove que tu mesures de la aurelha la quantitat del spazi de tres ditz, e aprop senha am tenta, e fen entro al os.	But if the artery does not appear in the measurement, then you must measure from the ear the amount of space of three fingers, and then pierce with the needle and enter into the bone.
E aquo que cove getar del sanc es quantitat de vi unc., e fort leu ne geta de lu mays o mens, e tot aquo es segon la quantitat la qual appareys de la vertut del malaute e de la replecio de la arceria de lu.	And what is needed to stop the bleeding is an amount of wine equal to one ounce, and pour it quickly in a little or a lot, and all of this is according to the amount that appears from the nature of the patient and the pulsation of his artery.
E aprop considera la plagua, e donc si reman sobre le os alcuna causa del ciphac, lahoras inscindys aquo per so que no endevengua apostema caut.	And then consider the wound, and if something remains on the bone that could cause an ulcer, then cut it out so that an ulcer does not form.
E aprop strenh la plagua am plumassols e am liamentz de drap de li, e aprop cura aquela am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And then strengthen the wound with cotton wool and strips of linen cloth, and then heal it with ointment inside so that it may be cured.
Capitol .iii.	Chapter 3
De extraccio de las arcerias las quals so en las templas.	On the extraction of arteries which are in the temples.
Quan ad alcu accideys emigranea antiqua o catertz agutz, per humiditatz agrimonials e per qualiditat en les lacertz des templas, o sodo antiqua vehement e semblantz ad aquels, e es medicat am las manieyras de curacio de medicina e aquo no comfereys, lahoras nos hem sproatz en aquestas malautias extraccio de las arcerias en les templas, o cauterizacio de aquelas ayssi cum havem mostrat.	When someone suffers from old migraines or headaches caused by cold and moist humors in the temples, or severe old headache with symptoms similar to those, and is treated with the methods of healing medicine but does not respond, then we have discussed in these maladies the extraction of arteries in the temples, or cauterization of them as we have demonstrated.
E la manieyra de la operacio e extracio de aquelas es que·l malaute raza les pels les quals son en les templas; e entenda a la arceria apparent en le templar quar ela es a tu mostrada per le sieu pols, e·s occultada sino en paucs homes per vehemencia de freg.	And the manner of the operation and extraction of these is that the patient lies on his back with his head turned to one side; and feel the artery in the temple as it will be shown to you by its pulse, and it is hidden in most people because of the heat of the skin.
E si a tu es occultada, lahoras le col del malaute sia strengut am alcun drap; e aprop fregua le loc am un drap aspre o evapora le loc am aygua cauda entro que aparesca a tu la arceria manifestament.	And if it is hidden from you, then have the patient's neck held tightly with some cloth; and rub the area with an abrasive cloth or apply warm water to make the artery appear clearly to you.
E lahoras tu pren le spatum del qual aquesta es la forma:	And then take the needle, which should be formed in this way:
E aprop tu scorja la codena am aquel am facilitat entro que pervenguas a la arceria; e aprop geta en lu onti e extratz aquela a las partidas sobiranas entro que extraguas aquela de la codena e descobras aquela de las tunicas las quals so dejos aquela, de tota partida.	And then pierce the skin with it easily as you reach the artery; and pour in it wine and extract it from the upper parts as you pull it out of the skin and uncover it from the tunics which are beneath it, from every part.
Mays si la arteria es subtil, lahoras envolveys aquela am la extremitat del oncii, e aprop inscindeys de aquela una partida segon la quantitat per la qual sian alonguadas las extremitatz de lu e sian contraytas, e no endevindra flux de sanc, quar si no so inscididas no pujara le sanc de tot.	But if the artery is slender, then wrap it with the end of the needle, and then cut it from one part according to the amount by which its ends are elongated and are contracted, and there will be no flow of blood, for if they are not cut, the blood will not flow at all.
E aprop evacua del sanc de vi unc. entro a tres.	And then pour out an ounce of wine. and let it flow out to three.
E si la arceria es gran, lahoras cove que tu lies aquela en dos locs am fiel dopble fort de ceda o am cordas a lonc, e no coyte a lu putrefaccio denant la consolidacio de la plagua e endevengua flux de sanc.	And if the artery is large, then tie it in two places with a strong double thread of linen or with cords long enough that putrefaction does not come before the healing of the wound and it experiences flow of blood.
E aprop incideys la superfluitat la qual es entre dos liamentz; e fay aquo en aquela hora o aprop autra ora.	And then cut away the superfluity which is between two strips; do this in that hour or another hour.
E si vols, cauteriza aquela am cauteri entro al os am cauteri cutellar entro que sian incididas las extramitatz de lu, e stara en loc de aquela meteyssa obra.	And if you wish, cauterize it with a cautery within the bone with a sharp cautery as far as its ends are cut, and it will be in place of that missing part.
E es milhor obra sino que·l malaute aia febre o es de escalfada compleccio; quar cauteri es de aquelas causas que ajudan a las humiditatz finidoras, e donc es milhor en juvament.	And it is better to do this when the patient does not have fever or is of heated constitution; for cautery is one of those causes that help drive out humors, and therefore is better in youth.
E cove aprop la extraccio de las arcerias que huomplas le loc de coto antic, e sian pausatz sobre lu polvils decentement fayt, e aprop sia curat am medicinas seccas fazen naysser la carn e am calguas entro que sia sanat.	And it is proper to extract the arteries that hollow out the place of an old wound, and have powders decently made placed upon it, and let it be healed with dry medicines that make the flesh grow and with cauteries so that it may be cured.
E si mentre obres autra veguada endeventa flux de sanc de la arceria, lahora tu te coyta a restrenger aquel sanc, o am cauteri, o que omplas le loc de coto, e strenh la tua ma entro que sia restreyt le sanc.	And if while you operate another vein begins to flow from the artery, then you must stop that blood with your hand or with a cautery, or by pressing the place of the wound and strengthening your hand so that the blood is restricted.
E si deguna causa de aquelas no es a tu present, lahoras pausa le tieu dit sobre le loc entro que·l sanc sia congilat, e enbroca le loc am aygua de vehement fregiditat entro que la acuitat repausa, e sia strengut segon que cove.	And if any of those causes is not present to you, then place your finger on the place where the blood congeals, and wet the spot with water of violent coldness so that the acuity rests, and let it be bound according to what is needed.
E aquo que es pus leugier en extraccio de arceria es que tu cauterizes la vena am aquest cauteri haventz dos cotels, pus que tu has senhat les dos locs am tenta, e depausa quascus, mot ignitz, entro que pervenguan al os e inscindan la vena en dos locs, per so que sia elonguat aquo que es entre las extremitatz de lu, quar no son consolidadas de tot am aquest cauteri.	And that which is easier in the extraction of an artery is that you cauterize the vein with this cautery having two points, since you have felt the two places with the needle and have laid them open, burning the places with fire so that they reach the bone and cut the vein in two places so that it is elongated between its ends, for it is not consolidated at all by this cautery.
E aquesta es la forma del cauteri:	And this is the form of the cautery:
E sia la acuitat dels dos cotels esemps.	And let the acuity of its two points be blunt.
Mays empero si so mendres acuitat que dos cotels es milhor, quar si so agudas cum dos cotels propera a quascuna freg, e no enscideysso la carn am velocitat.	But if it is better with blunter acuity than two points, for if they are acute as two points it approaches each other by quick friction and does not cut into the flesh.
Donc cum en aquels es alcuna grossitut, es tenguda la calor del foc en aquels e la carn es abscindida leugierament.	Therefore when there is any thickness in them, the heat of the fire is held in them and the flesh is cut more gently.
E aquesta obra es milhor en tota obra e pus leugiera.	And this work is better in all work and more gently.
E sia le spazi le qual es entre dos cotels la quantitat de la grossesa del dit.	And let the space between its two points be the quantity of the thickness of the finger.
Capitol quart.	Chapter 4
De la cura de cors de lagremas agudas e aciduas dels huels.	On the curing of bodies with sharp and sour pains in the joints.
Quan so lagremas aciduas, e es le cors de aquelas venas las quals so sobre le test del cap deforo, e no comfereys en aquo alcuna causa de la curacio de medicina, e vezes la cara del malaute ja enrogesir e sent en le sieu front deambulacio ayssi cum si era deambulacio de formiguas, e·ls huels de aquel so extenuatz, humitz enayssi que ja les pels de lor son conodutz, e las parpelas so scalfadas per la acuitat de las lacrimas, les antics agro mesties en la curacio de aquelas de aquesta operacio, e nompnero aquela curacio am spassa.	When there are sharp and sour pains, and the veins of those which are above the head are torn away, and no cause for the cure of medicine is found in that, and the face of the patient becomes red and he feels a walking sensation as if it were from ants, and his eyelids are scorched by the acuity of tears, the ancients used to cure those with this operation using a sponge.
E es que tu comandas al malaute rayre les pels les quals son en le sieu front, e aprop inscideys en le front tres fissuras engualment distans segon la longitut del front.	And it is that you command the patient to scratch his skin which is on his forehead, and then pierce three slits evenly distant according to the length of his forehead.
E si’ la longitut de la fissura cays dos ditz: la una fissura sia engualment distant a la longitut del nas en le mieg loc del front, e la segonda segon la longitut un petit del movement dels lacertz les quals so en le lacrimal, e la tersa del autre part.	And if the length of the slit is two fingers: let the first slit be evenly distant to the length of the nose in the middle place of the forehead, and the second according to the length of a small movement of the tear ducts which are in the eye socket, and the third on the other side.
E guarda te de la incizio de las arcerias las quals so en dos latz, e elongua la tua ma de la continuacio de amdos las mandibulas.	And beware of cutting the arteries which are on two sides, and lengthen your hand from the continuation of both jaws.
E si’ l’espazi de quascuna inscizio la quantitat de tres ditz ajustatz.	And let the space between each incision be the quantity of three fingers placed together.
E si’ a tu una pessa d’espongua apparelhada o draps seccatz motz am les quals exsiccas le sanc.	And if you have a sponge or dry rags with which to stop the blood.
E aprop entremet le spatum de dos agudas extremitatz, del qual aquesta es la forma de la inscisio de lu:	And then insert the needle between two acute ends of which this is the form of its incision:
que es de la partida des templas entro a la segonda inscizio.	that it is from the joint of the temples to the second incision.
Exxcorja am aquel tota la codena la qual es entre dos incizios am le ciphac le qual es sobre le os, e aprop fay aquo de la inscizio migera entro a la segonda inscisio.	Excise with it all the membrane which is between two incisions by the bone which is above the bone, and then do this of the smaller incision within the second incision.
E aprop stratz ne aquest spatum e entromet en la primieyra inscizio autra vetz un autre instrument le qual es apelat cutellar, agut de una part e del autre no agut.	And then stretch this needle and insert it into the first incision another tool which is called a sharp blade, sharp on one side and blunt on the other.
E pausa le latz de aquel agut deves la carn annexa deves la codena, e le latz de lu leon dintz le os, e empelley aquel entro que pervengua a la fissura migera, e abscindeys am aquel totz les vaysels que descendo del cap als huels.	And lay the sides of it which are sharp against the flesh against the membrane, and the side of it which is blunt against the bone, and insert it so that it reaches to the smaller fissure, and cut with it all the vessels that descend from the head to the joints.
Mays que sia continuada la inscizio ad aquo appar de la codena, e aprop fay aquo en la fissura migana entro al autra fissura.	May the incision be continued until it appears at the base of the tailbone, and then do this in the small crack between the other cracks.
E pus que corr del sanc quantitat engual, exprem les locs de las pessas del sanc congilat.	Then, as blood quantity flows out, press on the places of the frozen blood.
E aprop pausa en quascuna fissura calgua de coto vielh, e pausa sobre aquels polvils enbegutz en vi e oli e vi agre, e vegas que no endevengua apostema caut.	Then place in each crack a piece of old wood heated in fire, and place over these powders mixed with wine and oil and vinegar, so that there is no wound blisters.
E en le tertz dia deslia le liament e aministra gran enfusio de aygua cauda o tebeza, e aprop cura aquo am enguent bazilicon am oli rozat e autres entro que las plaguas sian sanadas.	And on the third day, loosen the ligature and administer a large infusion of hot water or tea, and then treat this with basilicon ointment made from rose oil and others within so that the wounds are healed.
Capitol .v.	Chapter 5:
De la cura de lagramas per catartz e als huels descendentz de las partidas dedintz del cap.	Of the treatment of ulcers by cauterization and for descending humors from the parts within the head.
Quan ad alcu veno catartz agutz e continuantz, e vezes les huels del malaute extenuatz petitz, e ja le reguardament de lor es debelitat, e las palpebras ulceradas e de lor cazo les pels, e en le preon del cap es dolor aguda ledent e extrenutacio consequent, lahoras sapias per aquestz accidentz que las materias e catartz no veno sino de motas venas de las partidas dedintz procedent.	When to someone come cauterizations and continuations of humors, and you see the orifices of the patient weakened and small, and already the protection of them is debilitated, and the eyelids are ulcerated and from this the hair, and in the brain there is acute pain and consequent throbbing, then understand through these accidents that the matters and cauterizations do not come except from many veins within proceeding.
E la milhor curacio en aquels es aquesta: que comandes al malaute que raza lo sieu front, e aprop inscideys en aquel una fissura al mieg loc del front, un petit per la latitut (e comensa am la fissura del templar senestre entro al dextre templar; e sia inscisio entro al os; e eslongua la tua ma dels lacertz del templas lesquals son maugutz deves la mastigacio), entro que sia le os descubert.	And the best cure in those is this: that you command the patient to raise his brow, and then make a cut in the middle of the forehead, small in width (and begin with the cut of the left temple between the right temple; and it must be an incision into the bone; and you must extend your hand from the lacerts of the temples which are hurt because of mastication), so that the bone is uncovered.
Exsicca tot le sanc am espongua o am drap secc e aprop repleys entre las doas labias de la fissura am coto vielh o am draps de li.	Dry all the blood with sponge or dry cloth and then fill between the two lips of the cut with old wood or with rags of it.
E aprop estrenh desus am polvils enbegutz en vi e oli per so que no endevengua apostema caut.	And then tighten above it with powders mixed in wine and oil so that there is no wound blister.
E quan deslias aquo e veses que l’apostema ja es diminuit, lahoras cove que fregua le os entro que comensa en lu nayser carn, e aprop cura aquel am regiment exsiccatiu le qual fassa neysser la carn, ayssi cum si tu prenes de farina de froment dos partidas e de colofania quatre partidas e mescla o, e de lor sia fayt emplastre e sia aministrat en aquestas plaguas a de la carn nativitat.	And when you loosen this and see that the blister has diminished, then know that it is necessary to heat the bone where it begins that new flesh is growing, and then cure that with an exsiccative regimen which makes the flesh dry, thus as if you take two parts of wheat flour and four parts of rosin and mix them together, and from this make an ointment and administer it to these wounds of the native flesh.
Capitol .vi.	Chapter 6:
De la cura de aquo que catz en las aurelhas.	Of the cure for cauterizations in the ears.
Tota causa que catz en las aurelhas es una de quatre specias, quar o es peyra mineral o causa semblant a peyra, ayssi cum ferr e veyre, o es de planta ayssi cum ceze o fava, o es causa fluxtibla ayssi cum aygua e vi agre e a lor semblantz, o alcuna bestia.	All causes that cauterize in the ears are of four species, either it is mineral stone or cause like stone, thus as iron and glass, or is from plant thus as chives or beans, or is fluid cause thus as water and vinegar and their likenesses, or some beast.
E donc quan peyra catz en l’aurelha o autra causa semblant de aquelas causas que no ajustan ne creysso en l’aurelha, e pausa la aurelha al solelh, e si vezes la peyra, lahoras distilla en aquela alcuna causa de oli violat o sizami, e aprop aministra la extraccio de lu, e fay le stornudar am condizi, e oppila las nars deve le aveniment de stornutacio.	And thus when stone cauterizes in the ear or other cause like those causes which do not attach to or grow within the ear, and put the ear to the sun, and if you see the stone then distill into that some cause of viola oil or sesame, and then administer its extraction, and make it sneeze with some condiment, and close its nostrils due to the action of sneezing.
E aprop pausa en le circuit de la aurelha alscunas pessas de drap o lana, e dextendas la aurelha a las partidas desus, quar motas veguadas es foro-getada am aquestas causas.	And then put around the ear some pieces of cloth or wool, and extend the ear to the parts above it, for many times it has been torn away by these causes.
E si no n’es getada, lahoras aministra extraccio de lu am le instrument apelat gesti epicicarios subtil del qual aquesta es la forma:	And if it is not torn away then administer extraction of it with the instrument called a subtle epicyclic hook for which this is the form:
E si es foro-getada am gesti, bo es; e sino, lahoras aministra la extraccio de lu am onci subtil de pauca duplicacio.	And if it is torn away by the hook around the ear then make it sneeze with condiment that is negated, and then with the subtle epicyclic hook make extraction of it from the other circuit.
E donc si no es foro-getada per aquo, lahoras fay una canula de aram e entromet la extremitat de la canula en le trauc de la aurelha e claus a l’enviro de la canula am cera e am oli mollificada per so que no sia ubert sino la canula.	And therefore if it is not torn away by that then make a tube of ram and insert the end of the tube into the hole of the ear and close around the tube with wax and softened oil so that only the tube is open.
E aprop extratz am le tieu vent am fort atraccio, quar tropas veguadas cum aquo que havem recontat.	And then extract it by your own wind with strong attraction because many times they accompany what we have recounted.
Mays si no es foro-getada en aquesta manieyra, lahoras pren de halka alumbat o de vecz aparelhat am le qual son preses les ausels una patita quantitat, e pausa aquel en la extremitat de ray, e aprop envolopa sobre aquel coto decentment pausat.	But if it is not torn away in this manner then take from ash alumbat or from wood prepared with which birds are trapped a little quantity, and put that into the end of the ray, and then wrap around it decently with wood paused over it.
E aprop entromet aquel en le trauc de la aurelha am facilitat, e aprop excicca la aurelha de la humiditat.	And then insert that into the hole of the ear with ease, and then dry the ear from moisture.
E donc si no es foro-getada am totas las causas las quals havem recontadas, lahoras tu coyta a talhar aquela denant que endevengua apostema caut o espasme.	And therefore if it is not torn away by all the causes which we have recounted then you cut before that it becomes wound blister or spasm.
E la manieyra de talhar aquela es que tu al comensament sancnes le malaute de la vena sephasica e extratz del sanc segon la mannieyra de la vertut de lu, e aprop fay aquel cezer entre las tuas mas e converteys l’aurelha a las partidas desus, e fen am petita fissura en la razit de la aurelha deves lo greys de lu en le loc be premegut de lu.	And the manner of cutting it is that at the beginning you cut the patient's vein in the sephatic vein and extract blood according to the manner of its virtue, and then make the ear to cese between your hands and turn the ear to the parts above it, and finish with a small cut at the base of the ear due to the pressure on it.
E sia la fissura de figura lunar entro que pervengua a la peyra, e, la peyra atrobada, osta aquela si podes am instrumentz apropriatz; e aprop cos la fissura en aquela hora am velocitat, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	And let the cut be moon-shaped so that it comes to the stone, and if you find the stone then stop it with appropriate instruments; and then close the cut in that hour with speed, and cure it while it is healed.
E si la causa cazent en la aurelha es un dels gras que creysso e so inflatz, lahoras aministra la curacio e la extraccio de lu; mays si no obezeys a tu ad eyssiment, lahoras tu pren spatum teune subtil segon aquesta forma:	And if the cause that cauterizes in the ear is one of the fats that grow and so inflates then administer its cure and extraction; but if it does not obey your command then take a subtle needle according to this form:
e aministra am aquel la abscizio de aquel gra lo qual es cazut en l’aurelha.	And you insert the end of that into the hole of the ear and then put the ear to the parts above it; and if it is torn away by that then distill viola oil or sesame.
E no fassas aquo quan cogitas que aquel ja es humectat per la vapor del aurelha, e pausa aquel en motas pessas, e prop extratz ne aquelas am les oncis o am gesti subtil, o ab inscizio ayssi co dit havem, quar es alleujada la extraccio de lu.	And do not do that when you think that it is already moistened by the vapor of the ear, and put that into many pieces, and then extract them with pins or with a subtle hook, or by incision as we have said before, for its extraction is eased.
Mays en l’aygua la qual es intrada en l’aurelha cove que·l malaute use de sternutacio am condizi al comensament, e omple la sieua aurelha am alcu coto vielh, e jagua sobre aquela aurelha en la qual es l’aygua, e si per aquo es foro-getada, bo es; e sino, lahoras pren tropas peyras teunas e leons segon la longitut del dit, e calfa aquelas en le foc un pauc, e le pacient entrometa una de aquelas en le trauc de la sua aurelha e saute sobre la un pe sieu de aquela partida e percussia am una autra peyra sobre la peyra la qual es dintz la aurelha.	But in the water which is entered into the ear come to use sneeze with condiment at the beginning, and fill his own ear with some old wood, and put on that ear in which there is the water, and if by that it is torn away then it is good; and if not then take some stone teals and lions according to the length of the finger, and heat those in the fire a little, and let the patient insert one of those into the hole of his ear and press on that spot with another stone which is within the ear.
Donc no cesse aquo am peyra entro que tota l’aygua sia foro-getada.	Therefore do not cease that with stone until all the water is torn away.
E ja l’aygua sira foro-getada enayssi que tu prenguas de papier o de gonc .i., e met la una extremetat de lu en l’aurelha e estendas l’autre extremitat am foc entro que sia comburit le may de lu.	And then the water is torn away let the patient take some paper or gons, i., and put one end of it into the ear and extend the other end with fire until its end is burned.
E prop met i autre gonc e fay aquo tantas veguadas entro que tota l’aygua sia foro-getada, e stratz aquel am canula ayssi co desus es dit de la peyra extrasadora.	And then put another gons and do that as many times until all the water is torn away, and draw it with the tube as we have said before of the stone extractor.
Mays en la extraccio de bestia intrant en aquela aurelha, si es a petit cos, ayssi piussa e a lu semblant, cura aquel ayssi cum havem dit en la divisio; mays si es de gran cos la qual causa apar al sen del vezement, lahoras aministra la extraccio de lu am gesti e oncis, e la causa de lu es pus leugiera de totas las autras causas que cazo en l’aurelha.	But in the extraction of a beast entered into that ear, if it is a small cause like pus and to him similar then cure it as we have said in the division; but if it is of great cause which causes appear within the brain then administer its extraction with hooks and pins, and the cause of it is greater than all other causes that cauterize in the ear.
Mays en la extraccio de verm engendrat en la aurelha, quan tu curas aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e en le tractat de distillacios e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu reguardes la aurelha al solelh.	But in the extraction of worms generated in the ear, when you heal that with what we have said in the division and in the treatise on distillation and do not confide in your cure, then you must look at the sun.
E donc si apar aqui alcuna causa dels verms, lahoras extratz aquel am gesti o am onci subtils, mays si no apar deguna causa, lahoras pren una canula dejos streyta e desus ampla de la qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And therefore if any cause of the worms appears, then extract that with a thin or sharp instrument; but if no cause appears, then take a tube with a narrow end and a wide top, of which this is the shape:
E entromet la extremitat subtil en la aurelha segon la quantitat la qual suffertar puesca le malaute; e aprop sucgeys am aquela per succio fort, e fay aquo motas veguadas, entro que totz les verms sian foro-gitatz.	And insert the narrow end into the ear according to the amount that the patient can endure; and then suck with a strong suction several times, until all the worms are extracted.
Mays si no obezeysso a tu al ayssiment, lahoras tu opila e claus en le circuit de la canula am cera ayssi cum havem dit; lahoras aministre distillacios las quals han ja esproadas les antics en la curacio dels verms, e atrobaras aquo en le tractat de distillacios.	But if he does not obey your movements, then you place a plug of wax in the tube as we have said; then administer distillation remedies which the ancients have tested for the cure of worms, and you will find these remedies in the treatise on distillation.
E sia la tua efusio am la qual efundas les olis medicinas en la aurelha am aquest strument del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And let your effusion be the means by which you pour medicine oils into the ear with this instrument of which this is the shape:
E fay aquela de argent o de eram, dejos streyt, en le qual sia un petit trauc, e am pla desus.	And make it of silver or bronze, narrow at its end and wide on top, with a small hole in the middle.
E donc sia cum empellent a que es en la conquavitat de la canula de continent aqui on sira necessari.	And thus let it be closed so that no content escapes from the cavity of the tube where the necessary medicine is contained.
E si vols, pren le ray e envolveys en la extremitat de lu decentment coto, e aprop gieta oli en la concavitat del auziment, o suc de alcuna herba, o aquo que vols de aquestas medicinas en la canula — e aquela es en la aurelha —, e aprop entromet le ray am coto desus e exprem am la tua ma aquel am compressio temprada de lu entro que l’oli sia expellit en la concavitat del auziment e le malaute senta le oli dedintz.	And if you want, take the needle and wrap its end with a piece of cloth, then pour oil into the cavity of the instrument, or juice from some herb, or anything from these medicines in the tube — and that is placed in the ear — then insert the needle wrapped in cloth above it, and squeeze with your hand this medicine in the cloth until it is pressed against the ear, so that the oil is expelled into the cavity of the instrument and the patient feels the oil inside.
E aquo que sia enfundut en la aurelha sia ja scalfat am foc un petit.	And what is inserted in the ear shall be already warmed by fire a little.
E guarda te que la causa la qual distillaras en l’aurelha no sia trop frega, quar las medicinas de aurelha no suffertan aquo.	And beware that the cause for which you distill into the ear is not too strong, because ear remedies cannot endure that.
Capitol .vii.	Chapter 7.
De curacio de opilacio de aurelhas.	Of the cure of an ear blockage.
Alcunas veguadas alcus enfantz yeysso dels ventres de lors mayres no-perforatz, e aquo ja accideys en alcus homes, opilacio en le meat de la aurelha per plagua o per carn nada en aquela; e aquesta opilacio alcunas veguadas es fayta en le preon del trau de la aurelha la qual no consiec le vezement, e alcunas veguadas es en las partidas defora.	Sometimes some children are born with their ears closed, and this happens to some adults, by blockage in the middle of the ear caused by pus or by swelled flesh inside; and this blockage sometimes occurs in the outer part of the ear, and sometimes in the inner part.
E aquela que accideys en le preon de lu, la qual no comprehen le vezement, es en las majors disposicios de dificil sanacio.	And that which occurs in the middle part, which does not allow hearing, is in a more difficult disposition for healing.
E en aquela en qual consegueys le vezement, cove que tu pauses la aurelha del malaute al solelh e reguarda en aquela.	And in that one in which you achieve hearing, let the patient look towards the sun and pay attention to that.
E donc si vezes oppulacio apparent, obre aquela am espatum subtil del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And therefore if you see blockage, open it with a thin spatula of which this is the shape:
Si’ la extremitat de lu en la qual sia petita la latitut, del qual la una partida sia aguda e l’autra no; e le spatum sia de dos latz leon per so que no fassa lizio al aurelha.	If the width of its end is small, one side should be sharp and the other not; and the spatula should have two sides smooth so that it does not cut the ear.
E donc si la opilacio es per carn nascuda en la aurelha o en le meat de lu, lahoras te aquela am oncis subtils e incidiys aquela vehement facilitat entro que sia ostada tota la carn.	And if the blockage is due to flesh grown in the ear or in its middle part, then cut that with thin instruments and remove it thoroughly so that all the flesh is removed.
E si opilacio es en le preon de la aurelha, lahoras pren ray subtil leon e escalfa aquel am foc un pauc, e aprop met aquel en le meat de l’aurelha.	And if the blockage is in the middle part of the ear, then take a thin needle and heat it in fire a little, and insert that into the middle of the ear.
E donc si as scentit oppulacio am aquo que le malaute atroba am facilitat, per gravetat de ausir, esforsa la oppressio de lu am facilitat; e guarda te que no plagues les nervis del aurelha.	And therefore if you have felt blockage due to the patient struggling with difficulty to hear, relieve the pressure of it with ease; and beware that you do not cut the nerves of the ear.
E aprop pausa en l’aurelha drap de li segon la quantitat del ample del trauc lo qual tu as envolvutz en l’enguent egipciac; e fay aquo per alcus jorns entro que sias segur de la consolidacio de la plagua; o que prenguas qualgua e enfon aquela en ayguaros e pulveriza sobre lu segi trissat e usa de lu; e si vezes la aurelha ja esser apostemada, lahoras cove que tu estraguas la qualgua e permutes aquela am autra qualgua la qual tu envoloparas en cerot que sia fayt am oli rozat, entro que sia le apostema caut cedat; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And then place on the ear a bandage according to the width of the opening which you have wrapped in the Egyptian ointment; and do this for several days until you are sure that the wound is healed; or take some gum arabic, soak it in rosewater, and powder it over the wound; and if you see that the ear is already swollen, then let you remove the gum and replace it with another which you will wrap in cerot made of rose oil, until the swelling is reduced; and heal that.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc, lahoras submergeys esponga o drap en aygua frega e pausa sobre la aurelha, e usa del autra curacio la qual restrengeys le flux del sanc, la qual es dita en le tractat de distillacio.	But if bleeding occurs, then immerse sponge or bandage in warm water and place it on the ear, and use the other cure which constricts the flow of blood, which is said in the treatise on distillation.
Capitol .viii.	Chapter 8.
De cura de athezil le qual endeveno a las palpebras.	Of the cure for white film which appears on the eyelids.
Athezil les quals endeveno a las paupebras dels huels alcuna veguada so humitz, alscunas veguadas son secs.	White films which appear on the eyelids of men sometimes are humid, and sometimes they are dry.
Donc cove que tu tenguas aquels am tenhalhas o am onci, e inscindas aquels am espatum de las suas razitz, e aprop pausa sobre les locs segi trissat.	Therefore let you have them with thongs or with instruments, and cut those with a spatula from their roots, and then place over the wounds powdered with rosewater.
Mays si dolor am flux de sanc veno, lahoras tu cauteriza aquels am cauteri lanticular subtil.	But if pain comes with the flow of blood, then cauterize those with a small, thin cautery.
E la milhor cauterizacio es aprop las inscizios e tropas veguadas retornam quan reman alcuna causa de sas razitz; e quan so cauterizadas am foc, aquelas razitz son comburidas e no retornan.	And the best cautery is to cut and pull out the roots which return when any cause remains in their roots; and when they are cauterized with fire, those roots are burned and do not return.
Capitol .ix.	Chapter 9.
Cura de grandeyssa que veno a las palpebras dels huels.	The cure for granulation which appears on the eyelids of men.
Motas veguadas endeve en las palpebras dels huels alcuna causa la qual es asemblada a grandissa en sa fortalicia e duricia, e per so grandissia es apelada.	Many times it appears on the eyelids of men some cause which is similar to granulation in its strength and hardness, and therefore granulation is called.
E es agreguacio de humiditat grossa en la palpebra dejos e desus.	And it is an aggregation of thick moisture under and over the eyelid.
Donc la opperacio en lor es que consideras lahoras si la grandissia es procedent en lu en aquo que apar de la palpebra e es mauguda a tota partida; e la causa de lu es leugiera.	And its appearance is that you should consider whether the granulation comes from the eyelid and is swollen on every side; and the cause of it is inflammation.
Donc fen sobre aquela am fissura per la latitut, e aprop escorga aquela de tota partida am facilitat entro que evasesca, e aprop suspen aquela am onci e abscindeys aquela.	Therefore cut it with an incision all around its width, and then scrape it from every side with ease so that it is relieved, and suspend it with a thong and cut it off.
Mays si a tu no es apparelhada la incizio de lu si no pus que penetras la palpebra am inscizio pauc a pauc, lahoras aquo no notz en deguna causa.	But if you are not prepared for the incision of it if not that you penetrate the eyelid with a little incision, then that will not be noticed in any cause.
E si la figura es gran, lahoras tu l’ajusta am sutura; e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	And if the figure is large, then adjust it with a suture; and heal that.
E si es pauca, a tu no sobrevindra mal per aquela quar l’anguent de lu restaura aquela e encarna.	And if it is small, then you will not harm that because its edge restores that and incorporates it.
E si la grandissia es declinant a las partidas dedintz de la palpebra deves la superficia dedintz, lahoras evesa la palpebra e suspen la grandissia am onci, otra que tu indigescas de incizio, e prem aquela de tota part, e si la palpebra per inscizio es alonguada, aquo no notz en deguna causa.	And if the granulation is declining to the inside parts of the eyelid beyond its surface, then cut open the eyelid and suspend the granulation with a thong, then that you pierce an incision, and press it from every side, and if the eyelid by incision is stretched out, then that will not be noticed in any cause.
E aprop la incizio, lava le huel am aygua salada; e cura le loc am aquo que encarna entro que sia sanat.	And then the incision, wash the eye with salt water; and heal the wound so that it incorporates.
Capitol .x.	Chapter 10.
De la cura axcirnah en la palpebra desus del huel.	Of the cure of axcyrna above the eyelid on top of the eye.
Axcirnath es grays le qual es engendrat en las tunicas de la palpebra desus, e majorment endeve als enfantz, agrava les huels de aquels et accideyso a lor catartz le mayti; e no podon reguardar la claror del solelh per aquo quar lagremas se coytan ad aquels.	Axcyrna is gray matter which is generated in the tunics of the eyelid above, and mostly occurs in children, harms the eyes of those and comes to them cataracts; and they cannot look at the brightness of the sun because tears close up to them.
E per so tu vezes aquels jaser sobre les lors caras tot temps, e sobre les lors caras dormen; e so a las palpebras de lor dejos les sobrecils humidas, las quals ja ha cuberta imflacio, e iminencia de accernac apparent es en l’uelh; e que quant tu premes le loc am les tieus ditz, tu centes accernac entro aquels.	And therefore you see them over their faces all the time, and over their faces they sleep; and on their eyelids under the eyebrows are humid, which have already covered inflammation, and imminence of axcyrna appears in the eye; and when you press the place with your fingers, you feel axcyrna within them.
E alcuna manieyra de opperacio es en aquel que le malaute pausa le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop pausa drap de li e de lu fay calgua, e fay de lu cercle segon la quantitat la qual contena arthernach de tota partida, e aprop pausa aquel sobre aquela e prem am les tieus ditz de tota per que sia agreguat arcernac en le mieg del cercle, e aprop fen en le mieg de aquela humiditat am spatum inscident am fissura per la latitut, e la fissura no sia major que la fissura que es fayta en flaubotomia.	And some way of operation is in that the patient holds his head down with his chin to his chest, and then place bandage on him and make a cool poultice, and do a circle according to the amount which contains the arthernach all around, and then place that over it and press it with your fingers from all sides so that axcyrna is gathered within the circle; and then cut in the middle of that humidity with a spatula cutting through the width, and the incision should not be larger than the one made in phlebothomia.
Mays en le preon cove que tu fendas la codena tota entro que pervenguas ad arcernach, quar en las mays desposicios proceseys arcernach per fissura segon la forma de grayseza blanca.	But in the majority of cases where you split the tendon all the way until you reach the Achilles' heel, in most cases the Achilles' heel is processed by fissure according to the shape of white grease.
Donc extratz aquela am draps los quals tu as envolopatz entre les tieus ditz a las partidas deforo e revolv entre la ma dextra e sinistre entro que sia dispargut.	Then remove with drapes which you have wrapped between the teeth to the ends outside and roll between the right and left hand until it is unwound.
E guarda te que no ajustes en la fissura per so que am le spatum no pervenguas al huel e ladescas aquel.	And be careful not to tighten the fissure, so that with the spatula you do not reach the heel and damage it.
Mays si no apar a tu arternach en le comensament de la fissura, mays que tu ajustes en la fissura un petit am fecilitat entro que procesisca arternach; e aprop extratz aquela ayssi quo havem dit; e aprop submargeys draps de li en aygua e vi agre e pausa les sobre le loc e estrenh aquels am polvils.	But if you do not see the Achilles' heel at the beginning of the fissure, but only tighten the fissure a little to facilitate the process; and then remove it as we have said; and then moisten the drapes in water and wine vinegar, place them on the site and apply the powder.
E so alcus que trissan sal e pausan aquel en la conquavitat de la fissura per so que aquo que es remas de aquela humiditat.	And those who break salt and place it in the cavity of the fissure, so that what remains of that humidity.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And then cure it until it is healed.
Mays si accideys en le loc apostema caut, lahoras cura aquel am emplastres cedatils entro que sia sanat.	But if the wound becomes pustular, then cure it with soft bandages until it is healed.
Capitol .xi.	Chapter .xi.
De manieyras de tactimi del huel.	Of ways of touching the heel.
Quan en las palpebras dels huels so natz pels ajustatz dejos les pels naturals e so antiquatz, lahoras aquels noso al huel e fan endevenir manieras de malautias ayssi cum lacrimas assiduas e mollificacio de palpebras e tela entro que aquo sia causa de destruccio del huel que s’apela tactinir del huel, e cura se en quatre manieyras: o per cauteri am foc; o am medicina acuta segon que denant es dit en le capitol de cauteri; o es fayt atactini per inscizio e sutura; o per cannas segon que yeu diyre.	When the eyelids of the heels are born by tightening the natural hairs and are old, then those cause damage to the heel and cause diseases in such a way as constant tears and softening of the eyelids and membrane, so that this is the cause of destruction of the heel which is called tactinir of the heel, and it is cured in four ways: either by cauterization with fire; or with sharp medicine according to what was said before in the chapter on cauterization; or atactinir is caused by incision and suture; or with reeds according to what I will say.
E donc cove que tu pauses le cap del malaute en le tieu se; aprop converteys la palpebra del uelh am la tua ma sinistra, e si es convertida, bo es; e sino, entromet agulha en aquela en la qual sia fiel de la partida pus dejos de la palpebra, e fay penetrar la agulha am fiel desus, e aquo sia — prop del marge de la palpebra en le qual naysso les pels — prop dels pels, e tira le fiel a las partidas desus am la palpebra, e converteys aquela am le ray.	And then you place the head of the patient towards you; then turn the eyelid of the eye with your left hand, and if it is turned, that's good; and if not, insert a needle in that part where there is pus under the eyelid, and let the needle penetrate above, close to the margin of the eyelid where the hairs grow, and close to the hairs, and pull the needle up towards the upper part of the eyelid, and turn it with your finger.
E aprop fen en la partida dedintz de la palpebra dejos les pels ajustatz am spatum inscidentz del lacrimal major entro al lacrimal mendre; e aprop extratz le fiel e pausa dejos la palpebra polvilhs petitz de coto o de drap, e aprop senha sobre la palpebra am tenta, e sia ayssi cum figura de fuelha de mirt.	And then split the part inside the eyelid under the hairs with a spatulate incision of the major lacrimal into the minor lacrimal; and then remove the pus and place small pieces of cotton or cloth underneath the eyelid, and then close the eyelid with sutures, and it should be like a leaf of myrtle.
Mays empero cove que sia la figura segon la quantitat de helevacio de la palpebra, quar aquo ja es diversificat en les homes, quar de aquels es le quals indigeys que sia inscidit de la palpebra gran quantitat segon la quantitat per la qual la palpebra es mollificada.	But indeed it should be the shape according to the amount of elevation of the eyelid, because that has been varied in men, for there are those who require that the eyelid is greatly split according to the amount by which the eyelid is softened.
E aprop fen am le spatum sobre las doas linhas las quals has senhadas, e comensa del lacrimal major entro al lacrimal menor.	And then split with a spatula above the two lines you have drawn, and begin from the major lacrimal into the minor lacrimal.
E si’ la tua fissura prop dels pels naturals ayssi cum es la grossetut del rey.	And if your incision is close to the natural hairs as the thickness of the king's hair.
E aprop met le onci en un dels dos angles de la codena, e aprop excoria aquela tota, e aprop ajusta am la scitura las doas labias am gula o fiel de lana subtil, e abstergeys le sanc, e fay adherir aquo que superflueys dels fiels sobre dos sobrecils am alcunas causas enviscans, si voles far aquo, e sino, non cures.	And then place the hook in one of the two angles of the tendon, and then scrape away all of that, and then tighten with the suture the two lips with wax or fine wool thread, and wipe away the blood, and attach what is superfluous of the hairs above the two eyelids with some causes viscous, if you want to do so, and if not, don' t cure.
E aprop leyssa la sutura dels fiels entro a tres dias o quatre, e aprop cura aquo.	And then loosen the suture of the hairs after three or four days, and then cure it.
E si vols, layssa la plagua ses sutura, e cura aquela am aquo que exsicca e constrenh, quar la palpebra es alevada deves la sigillacio de la plagua e la agreguacio de lu; mays sutura es milor E donc aysso diysso les antics de taxanir.	And if you want, remove the poultice after the suture, and cure it with what dries it out and constricts, for the eyelid is lifted due to the sealing of the poultice and the accumulation of moisture; but the suture is better. So therefore I say this about the ancient taxanir.
Mays empero en lu sia sollicitut sobre le malaute, e es de bona operacio, e no es en lu temor.	But indeed it should be careful on the patient, and it is a good operation, and there is no fear in it.
E es autra manieyra en taxmir, e es que senhes sobre la palpebra figura ayssi cum fuelha de mirt, e aprop eleva la palpebra am tres uncis segreguatz e congreguatz segon aquesta forma:	And there is another way in taxmir, and it is that you draw on the eyelid a figure like a leaf of myrtle, and then elevate the eyelid with three hooks separated and gathered together according to this shape:
Mays si no es possible aquo, tener les uncis, e aquo no es engualhat, lahoras pren una agula en la qual haia fil e met aquela en le mieg de la figura, e entromet le autre fiel prop le lacrimal major, e·l fiel segon prop le lacrimal mendre, e ajusta entre les tieus ditz les fiels am equalitat, e aprop am aquels eleva la tua ma am elevacio engual, eleva tota la codena sobre la qual es senhat ayssi cum havem recomtat.	But if that is not possible, the hooks are not available, and it is not greased, then take a needle with thread and place it in the middle of the figure, and insert the other end near the major lacrimal, and the other end near the minor lacrimal, and tighten between the teeth the hairs with equality, and then with these elevate your hand with an equal elevation, elevate all the tendon on which you have drawn as we have recommended.
E aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And then tighten the two lips of the poultice with a suture, and cure it until it is healed.
Mays si accideys apostema deves la tua inscizio o la tua fissura, seda aquel apostema am cerot e a lu semblantz, e am enguentz.	But if pustules occur due to your incision or your split, stop that pustule with cerote and something similar, and with ointment.
E alcunas veguadas endeve a la palpebra que·ls sieus pels sian convertitz, adonc cove que tu uses en aquela de aquo que havem dit de inscizio; mays sutura en quascus es mays artificial.	And some times the eyelids turn inside out, then you should use what we have said about incision; but in each case, suture is more artificial.
Ataxinir am cannas es segon aquesta forma:	Taxanir with reeds is according to this form:
e es que tu convertas la palpebra e scindas la figura qu’es dedintz segon que he recontat; e aprop per art fay doas cannas o doas astelas subtils de las quals longitut sia segon la longitut de la palpebra e la latitut de lor sia mendra de la latitut del spatum.	And it is that you turn the eyelid inside out and split the figure which is inside according to what I have recounted; and then with skill make two reeds or two astils which are thin, of whose length is according to the length of the eyelid, and their width is lesser than the width of the spatula.
E tu ja has inscidit en las extremitatz de quascunas partidas, la on tenes les fils.	And you have already split at the ends of some parts, where you hold the threads.
Aprop agregua quascuna am subtilitat subre aquo que superflueys de la palpebra del huel, e constres las cannas de quascunas partidas am fort strictura, e layssa aquela per alcus jorns, quar la codena per la strictura morira e sira denegada e se poyrira entro que per si meteyssa cayra.	Then add some with subtlety underneath what is superfluous of the eyelid of the heel, and tighten the reeds from some parts with a strong grip, and leave it for several days, for the tendon will die due to the tightness and turn black and fall off by itself.
Mays si es tardat, lahoras trenca la am las toroyras, e aprop cura la plagua entro que sia sanat.	But if it is delayed, then cut it with tweezers, and then cure the poultice until it is healed.
Donc cum es solidada, la palpebra es elevada e les pels no pungo.	Then when it is solidified, the eyelid is elevated and the hairs do not sting.
E aquesta es la forma de doas cannas las quals faras segon aquesta forma:	And this is the form of two reeds which you will make according to this form:
e haia la quantitat de la longitut e de la latitut ni mays ni mens.	and have the quantity of length and width neither more nor less.
Capitol .xii.	Chapter .xii.
De elevacio de pels pungentz en le huel am agula quan le pel es dur.	Of elevation of hairs pricked in the heel with a needle when the hair is hard.
Quan son pels no-naturals, durs e aspres e pungentz les huels, lahoras la operacio en lu es que tu prenguas agula subtil e pauses en aquela fiel de ceda subtil e leon, e aprop que tu ajustes las extremitatz de lu e nozes quascu en manieyra mot subtil.	When the hairs are not natural, hard and rough and sting the heels, then the operation on it is that you take a thin needle and place it in the hair of wool, and then tighten the ends of it very subtly, and not each one in a subtle manner.
E sia la longitut dels fiels de quantitat de una palma.	And let the length of the hairs be the quantity of a palm.
E aprop tu compon2 autre fiel subtil dejos lu en breu, e nuza las extremitatz de aquel si tu·t vols.	And then you place another subtle hair underneath it briefly, and tighten the ends of that if you want to.
E aprop pause le malaute le sieu cap en le tieu se, e sia prop del solelh per que la tua obra sia declarada, quar es operacio subtil e menuda.	And then place the patient's head towards you, and be in front of the sun so that your work is revealed, for it is a subtle and minute operation.
E aprop intromet la agulha en la razit del pel ajustat la qual ha necessitat de engen, e fay aquela penetrar en la palpebra festinantment entro que extraguas aquela desus le pel natural.	And then insert the needle in the root of the hair which has need of cunning, and let it penetrate the eyelid quickly while you pull out the natural hair.
E aprop tire le pel entro desus e intromet aquel en alixati, e sian les pels un o dos o tres e no mays.	And then pull the hair out from underneath and insert that into the wound, and let there be one or two or three hairs and not more.
E aprop tira la tua ma am aquel entro que·l pel sia fora-gitat am alixolati en la palpebra am le pel natural.	And then pull your hand with it so that the hair is drawn out, twisted in the eyelid with the natural hair.
Mays si es atirat alixalati e non es gitat le pel, atiraras alixati a las partidas dejos am le fiel le qual tu has compost am aquela, entro qu’en sia gitat alixalati del trau sobira.	But if it is drawn out twisted and the hair is not drawn, you will draw out the wound from underneath with the thread which you have composed there, so that in it is drawn out twisted from the root.
E vegas aquela am la visio del huel, quar lahoras tu gitaras alixati e lo fiel, e grotan quascu e clautz le huel, e laysse le claus per dos dias o tres, entro que·l pel adheresca al sieu loc e nasque sobre aquel bona carn.	And you will apply it to the eye, and when you remove the bandage and the patch, and clean the eye, and let it remain for two or three days, until the skin adheres to its place and new good flesh is born over it.
E si es mays breu le pel, lahoras tu ajusta un pel lonc dels pels naturals, e es elevat am aquel, o que·l leysses entro que sia alonguat aprop alcu spazi, e lehoras tu eleva aquel.	And if the hair is short, then you should attach a long natural hair, and it will be elevated with that, or you can attach it in between so that it is stretched out a little bit, and then you elevate it.
Capitol .xiii.	Chapter 13
De la cura de ehacratir la qual ve en la palpebra desus.	Of the cure of a growth which comes in the upper eyelid.
Quan ve en le huel ehacratir, e es contraccio de la palpebra quan es contrayta en sus, o a dextra o a sinistra partida, per mala consolidacio de plagua o de seccio o de cauteri, e es apelada leporina, e aquesta ahercrati o es natural o accidental, e es fayta per consolidacio de plagua o de seccios o de cauteri, o per semblantz a lor malcuratz.	When there is a growth in the eye and it is a contraction of the eyelid, either on the right or left side, due to bad consolidation of plague or sectioning or cauterization, and it is called leporina, and this growth, whether natural or accidental, is caused by consolidation of plague or sectioning or cauterization, or something similar.
May la manieyra de la operacio en lu es que tu fendas aquela consolidacio e que separes las labias de lu, e pauses en lu en aquo que es entre aquelas una meca de drap de li, e ligues aquelas entro que sian sanadas.	The manner of the operation on this is that you should split that consolidation and separate its lips, and place in it a piece of linen that is between those two, and ligature them together until they are healed.
E no cove que tu uses de curacio de lu de las causas las quals exsiccan, constrenho; quar si tu fas aquo retorna alixacratir pus mal que nulh temps no foc habantz.	And be sure not to use remedies for this which cause drying and constriction; because if you do that it will return worse than it was before.
Usa en aquela de causas que mollifico ayssi cum es fenugrec, e embroca am la aygua en la qual son coytz altea e semensa de li, o enguent dyaquilon, le qual sia liquefayt am alcu dels olis, e submergeys en aquel la meca, e cura am aquel.	Use in that one of the causes which softens, like fenugreek, and steep it in water in which are cooked aniseed and sesame seeds, or ointment of squill, which should be liquefied with some oils, and immerse the piece in that, and heal it with that.
E lo tesaur de la tua curacio es que tu perforsses am tot engen que no sia consolidat segon la forma que foc al comensament.	And the treasure of your cure is that you should not pierce anything which has not been consolidated according to its shape from the beginning.
E aquesta operacio la qual havem dita, no es sino alcuna rectificacio de ehalixacrati que no retorna la forma del loc segon que foc denant.	And this operation which we have described is not but a rectification of the growth which does not return the shape of the place according to what it was before.
Capitol .xiiii.	Chapter 14
De la cura de ehacrati le qual es fayt en la palpebra dejos.	Of the cure of a growth which is done in the lower eyelid.
Aquesta alxacrati la qual es fayta en la palpebra dejos, la qual es nompnada vertadierament alxacrati; e es de lu alcuna natural, autra accidental.	This growth which is done in the lower eyelid, which is called verrraderamente a growth; and it can be natural or accidental.
Mays accidental es fayta per plagua o per scissura o per cauteri o per autres semblantz.	More accidental is done by plague or sectioning or cauterization, or others like them.
E la via de la operacio de lu es que tu prenguas una agula en la qual haga fil doble, e fiques aquela en la carn, e que la fassas passar del lacrimal de senestre entro al lacrimal dextre, entro que·l fil pervengua en las doas extremitatz de la carn.	And the way of operating on this is that you should take a needle with a double thread, and insert it into the flesh, and make it pass from the tear duct on the left into the tear duct on the right, so that the thread passes through both ends of the flesh.
E aprop exten la carn a las partidas desus am la agula e cus aquela am la agula, e inscideys am spatum ample.	Then stretch out the flesh at its upper ends with the needle and sew it up with the needle, and insert it with a wide spatula.
E donc si retorne la figura de la palpebre segon que cove, bo es; e sino, pren le ray e pausa aquel en la figura fenduda, e am aquel converteys la palpebra, e fen las doas fissuras en le latz de la palpebra dejos.	And if it returns the shape of the eyelid as it should be, that is good; and if not, take the thread and place it in the split figure, and with that convert the eyelid, and sew up both slits on the side of the lower eyelid.
E sian las extremitatz de las doas fissuras de dos angles de la inscizio, la qual has fayta entro que concurren, e sia de lor fayt angle entro que quan se congreguan sia fayta figura de lor.	And the ends of the two slits are at the two angles of the incision, which you have made so that they meet, and there is made an angle between them when they come together, and a figure is made from them.
E aquesta figura es letra greca: la landa.	And this figure is a Greek letter: the lambda.
E aprop osta la carn aquela per la quantitat que es le latz de lu agut dejos de lu, aquo que siec la palpebra.	Then stop the flesh that is the length of the side of it below it, that which covers the eyelid.
E aprop ajusta las partz seperadas e cos aquelas am le fil de lana; e aprop cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit de las medicinas mollificativas e de las calguas entro que sia sanat.	Then sew together the separated parts with the thread of wool; and then heal them with what we have said about the softening remedies, and the poultices until it is healed.
E si alxacrati endeve per fissura o sutura o cauteri, lahoras cove que tu fendas am fissura plana sobre les pels de la palpebra segon que es precedit.	And if the growth occurs due to sectioning or suturing or cauterization, then you should split it with a flat incision over the hairs of the eyelid as has been preceded.
E aprop separa am la calgua entre doas labias segon que havem dit.	Then separate them with the poultice between two lips as we have said before.
En la suma del sermo de la cura de alxacrati quan es desus o dejos, que corra en lu operacio, segon que es preparat de la forma de alxacrati, e aquela es en forma de motas diversitatz.	In the total number of words of the cure of a growth when it is above or below, the operation should run according to how it is prepared in the form of a growth, and that is in the form of diverse dots.
E le artifexs savi totz temps prepara engen en quascuna manieyra la qual es possibla a lu entro que fassa retornar la figura a la forma natural, o prop de aquela, e aquel malaute segon que a lu conveneys de la operacio e dels strumentz en las majors disposicios.	And the wise artisans always prepare everything in every way which is possible for them so that they may return the figure to its natural shape, or close to it, and the patient according to what he requires from the operation and the instruments in the greatest dispositions.
Capitol .xv.	Chapter 15
De la adherencia de la palpebra am la conjunctiva o am la cornea.	Of the adhesion of the eyelid to the conjunctiva or to the cornea.
Quan accideys aquesta consolidacio a motz homes enayssi que sia solidada la palpebra pus desus am le album del huel, e sia prohibida de la facilitat del movement e de las suas obras naturals, donc cove que tu entrometas la extramitat del ray dejos la palpebra, e eleva en sus aquela, o exten aquela am le unci.	When this consolidation happens to many people that the eyelid is glued more above the white of the eye, and it is prohibited from the facility of movement and its natural actions, then you should insert the end of the thread below the eyelid, and elevate it up, or stretch it with the unguent.
E aprop tu inscideys la adherencia am spatum subtil, le qual no sia am acuitat de las inscisios, habantz obtus un petit per so que·l malaute no sia inquietat deves la operacio, e remau le spatum que no ledesca le huel am la sua acuitat.	Then you should insert the adhesion with a spatula which is not sharp at its edges, having made a small one so that the patient is not distressed after the operation, and remove the spatula so that it does not irritate the eye with its acuity.
E sia la tua inscizio quays excorjan aquela adherencia am facilitat entro que sia retornada la palpebra segon la sua forma natural e que sia sanada tota la adherencia.	And your incision should cut that adhesion with ease so that it is returned the eyelid according to its natural shape, and all the adhesion be healed.
E aprop tu met en le huel aygua salada am la qual tu laves; o distilla en lu de zunia dissolvut en l’aygua.	And then put in the eye salt water with which you wash it, or distill on it water of vitriol dissolved in water.
E aprop separa entre la palpebra e l’huel am calgua de li, e pausa sobre le huel lana infuza en album de huou, e aprop le tertz jorn usa de causas consolidativas entro que sia sanat.	Then separate between the eyelid and the eye with poultice of it, and place over the eye wool infused in white of egg, and then the third day use causes of consolidation until it is healed.
Capitol .xvi.	Chapter 16
De inscizio de ungla e de eminencia de carn dels lacrimals.	Of incision of the unguis and of eminence of flesh of the tear ducts.
Sapias que ungla es segon dos manieyras, quar o es nervosa, e es semblant a ciphac dur subtil; o es no-nervosa, semblant a humiditat blanca congilada, la qual quan ferr la toca, o es forsat aquela prendre am onci, es abscindida e le onci no es ficat en lu.	Know that the unguis is according to two manners, because it is nervous, and is like a hard thin ciphac; or it is not-nervous, like white congelated humidity, which when the iron touches it, or it is forced, takes on the unguent, it is separated and the unguent is not put in it.
E amdos las specias no comensan sino del lacrimal major entro que va petit a petit que cobre la vista e prohibeys le lum e·l movement de huel.	And both species do not begin unless from the great tear duct, which goes little by little and covers the sight, and prohibits light and the movement of the eye.
Mays la manieyra del obrar en la inscizio de lu es que·l malaute pause le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop obre les huels de lu, e eleva la palpebra am la tua ma, e aprop colligeys la ungla am onci de pauca duplicacio e exten aquela a las partidas desus.	But the way of operating on it is that the patient should close his eye and open his eyes, and elevate the eyelid with your hand, and then gather up the unguis with unguent of little doubling, and stretch it to its upper ends.
E aprop pren una agula e entromet en aquela un pel de cavalh o de buou o de vaqua, o de semblantz, o de fiel fort, o duplica la extremitat de la agulha petit a petit e fica aquela en le mieg de la ungla, e penetra aquela am la agulha, e lia am fiel la ungla; e exten aquela a las partidas desus, e excorja am le pel le latz de la ungla lo qual siec la pupilla.	Then take a needle and insert into it a hair of horse or of ox, or of something similar, or of strong pitch, or double the end of the needle little by little and put it in the center of the unguis, and pierce with the needle the unguis; and stretch that to its upper ends, and open up the side of the unguis which is the pupil.
E ayssi tu sieguas aquela am le pel entro al derier de lu.	And then follow it with the hair into the back of it.
E aprop tu inscideys le romanent en la razitz del lacrimal am spatum subtil o am petitas forfexs, e leysa la carn del lacrimal natural per so que per inscizio de aquela no endevengua fluxs de lagremas continuabla.	Then you should insert the remainder in the root of the tear duct with a subtle spatula or small forceps, and cut the flesh of the natural tear duct so that through the incision it does not bring continuous flows of tears.
E alscunas vetz la ungla am le sol onci estenduda o am fiel, ayssi co havem dit, e aprop sia excurjat am spatum leon del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And sometimes the unguis with the sole unguent stretched out as we have said before, and then it is cauterized with the fire of which this is its shape:
E guarda te que am le spatum no toques la tunica cornea e que avengua en lu ruptura, e que la pupilla sia perforada.	And beware that with the spatula you do not touch the tunica cornea and that it does not come in a rupture, and that the pupil is perforated.
Aprop la inscizio geta en le huel un pauc de sal trissa o di cief fayt de siniar, e leyssa aquel entro al autre dia; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove entro que sia sanat.	Then the incision goes in the eye a little salt or vinegar, and let it go in there another day, and then heal that with what it comes in so that it is healed.
E si la ungla no es nervoza e no podes metre la agulha, ni es ficada en aquela le onci, lahoras motas veguadas aquesta specia de ungla es curada am medicinas, e es sanada ayssi cum yeu e recomtat en la divisio.	If the nail is not nervous and you cannot insert the needle, nor is it stuck in that place, then this type of nail is healed with medicines, and is cured as I said and recommended in the division.
E si tu vols inscindir aquela, lahoras tu obre le huel del malaute e pren spatum subtil leon de freul acuitat segon aquesta forma:	And if you want to split it, then open the mouth of the patient and take a thin, pointed spatula according to this form:
am subtilitat.	with subtlety.
E si vezes que aquela es rarificada e es confugida e empren en aquela razit, lahoras distilla de la tua ora en le huel de cief fayt de siniar o am cief rog o am sal trissat, e opila le huel entro a l’autre dia.	And if you see that it is rarefied and dispersed and has taken on an odor, then distill from your mouth into the wound made of rosemary or with red wine or with salt dissolved, and pour the liquid in through the other side the next day.
E aprop itera sobre aquela la operacio entro que sia remaugut tot aquo que es de lu, sino que·l contrari apostema caut sia en le huel, quar lahoras tu leyssa aquela, e cura al comensament la apostema entro que sia sanat.	Then repeat the operation as long as everything from him is expelled; otherwise, a cauterized ulcer will be in the wound, and you will let it be, and cure the ulcer at its beginning until it is healed.
E aprop itera la tua operacio sobre aquela am razo entro que sia sanat.	Then repeat your operation on that with reason until it is healed.
La emenencia de la carn lacrimal, si notz en le huel per gran nocument, sia suspendut am onci; e inscideys aquela de aquela una partida, e no ultimes la inscizio per so que no inscidesqua fluxs de lagremas.	The tear gland, if it is noted in the eye due to great harm, should be suspended with a thread; and insert that from one side, and do not finish the insertion so that there are no outbursts of tears.
E aprop distilla en le lacrimal cief rog e fayt de siniar entro que sia sanat.	Then distill into the tear gland red wine and rosemary made into a salve until it is healed.
Capitol .xvii.	Chapter .xvii.
De inscizio de alguazardenic e de aquo que es nascut de carn ajustada en le huel.	Of the incision of a wound and of what is born of flesh pressed in the wound.
Alcunas veguadas en les huels de alcus es nascuda carn roga, e es sobre-pausada entro que cobre la pupilla, o apropinqua o estrenh sobre las palpebras e fort leu comprem las palpebras a las partidas deforo e es assemblada a roza de balaustra.	Sometimes in wounds of the eyes, flesh that is red is born, and it covers the pupil, or approaches or stretches out over the eyelids, and it strongly presses on the lids into the holes, and is assembled to the appearance of marble.
Mays la operacio en lu es que·l malaute pausa le sieu cap en le tieu se; e aprop obre les huels de aquel e colligeys tota aquela carn am oncis convenientz ad aquo, e te aquo am una forcep o am cesti; e aprop inscindiys la carn el comensament entro que tot sia finit am le encisori, e guarda te del huel que no ledescas aquel deves la tua operacio.	The operation on him is that the patient rests his head in your lap; and then open the wounds of those, and gather up all that flesh with convenient threads, and take it by one end with a forceps or with a basket; and then insert the flesh at the beginning so that everything is finished with the scissors, and be careful of the wound so that you do not hurt it with your operation.
E sia la tua inscizio am la qual inscides aquelas o am espatum le qual nos havem recomtat en la inscizio de la ungla, o am petitas forfexs am las quals es colligit ascebel segon que vindra la forma de lu aprop aquest capitol.	And your incision should be with the one by which you insert those or with a spatula which we recommended in the incision of the nail, or with small scissors by which is gathered ash according to the form that will come the chapter next to this one.
Donc cum es complida la tua inscizio e es remauguda tota aquela carn, lahoras omple le huel de sal trissa, o destilla en lu polvera roga e semblantz a lu de las medicinas corrossivas, e pausa sobre le huel deforo coto am album de huou entro que sia asegurat de apostema caut.	Therefore when your incision is complete and all that flesh has been expelled, then fill the wound with ground salt, or distill into it powdered red salve resembling the corrosive medicines, and place over the wound dry cotton wool until an ulcerated cauterized wound is formed.
E si roman alcuna causa de alguardenici e es senhoragat sanc caut, e temes apostema caut, lahoras leyssa le huel e cura aquela apostema am aquo que ceda aquela apostema, e aprop itera sobre aquel am operacio entro que sia sanat, e semblantment fay en la carn ajustada la qual accideys en le huel de aquesta especia.	And if any cause of wounds and cauterized blood occurs and you fear an ulcerated wound, then let the wound be and cure that ulcer with what eases that ulcer, and then repeat your operation on it until it is healed, and similarly do to the flesh which you find in the wound of this type.
Mays empero tu cove que alienes tota curacio del huel freul per via natural o per via accidental, obran am ferr, e no metas la tua ma en alcuna de aquestas operacios entro que veges que aquel membre sia suffertant aquela operacio.	However you must be careful about removing all cure of the wound by natural or accidental way, working with iron, and not putting your hand in any of these operations until you see that that member has endured that operation.
Capitol .xviii.	Chapter .xviii.
De colleccio de sabel en le huel.	Of the collection of pus in the wound.
Sabel so venas rogas las quals son testudas sobre le huel e prohibeysso al vesement la sua operacio, e develican le huel am longitut de dias.	Pus are red veins which are knotted on the wound and forbid the opening of its operation, and they discharge the wound over the course of days.
Donc necessari es al comensament que tu consideres si le huel en le qual es sabel es fort e en lu no es autra malautia que sabel, lahoras tu colligeys aquel sabel.	Therefore it is necessary at the beginning for you to consider if the wound in which there is pus is strong and there is not another sickness in it other than pus, then gather up that pus.
E es que tu comandes al malaute que pause le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop suspen aquelas venas am un onci o am dos segon la tua prudencia; e sia aquel onci de subtil duplicacio segon aquesta forma:	And you should command the patient to rest his head in your lap, and then suspend those veins with a thread or two according to your prudence; and that thread should be of subtle double thickness according to this form:
o so dos oncis gradantment en un cos segon aquesta forma:	or two threads grading into one body according to this form:
E aprop sian colligidas aquelas venas am forses subtils, am subtilitat, e abstergeys le sanc hora aprop hora, entro que vegas aquelas venas esser remaugudas del huel e sian revolgudas.	And then gather up those veins with strong subtle threads, and wipe away the blood hour by hour, until you see that those veins are expelled from the wound and are turned around.
E guarda te que tu no ledes le huel am las extremitatz del spatum; e si’ la tua operacio en le miegjorn denant le solelh, e sias mot ferm en la tua operacio que no inscidas sino aquelas venas.	And be careful that you do not hurt the wound with the end of the spatula; and if your operation is on the right side in front of the sun, then be firm in your operation so that you insert only those veins.
E quan tu auras complitz, lahoras tu distilla en le huel cief vert o rog per que am sa acuitat corrodesca aquo que es remaugut del sabel.	And when you have completed it, then you distill into the wound wine or rosemary so that with its sharpness it corrodes what is expelled from the pus.
Mays si aquo no es a tu possible colligeys tot en aquela hora, e lahoras tu emplastra tot am aquo que cede la dolor de lu, e leyssa lu per alcus dias entro que sia sedada la dolor de lu e que sia asegurat de apostema caut.	But if it is not possible for you to gather it all in that hour, then you apply a plaster on everything so that it eases his pain, and let him be for several days until his pain is eased and he is guarded from an ulcerated wound.
E aprop itera sobre lu segon que la mateyssa manieyra entro que sia sanat.	Then repeat your operation according to the same manner so that it is healed.
E aquesta es la forma de las forfexs:	And this is the form of the scissors:
Capitol .xix.	Chapter .xix.
De reduccio de arizati al nas.	Of the reduction of a herniated testicle to the nose.
Quan tu curas arisati am cauteri o am medicina aguda comburent segon que es precedida la narracio de lu e no es sanat, lahoras no es engen en lu sino que fendas sobre le apostema deves la maturitat de lu, e que extraguas tota la humiditat la qual es en lu e·l poyre entro que sia descubert le os.	When you cure a herniated testicle with cauterization or with burning medicine according to how it is described and is not healed, then do not place anything on it except that you make an incision over the ulcer due to its maturity, and extract all the humidity which is in it and the pus until the bone is uncovered.
E donc cum es descubert le os e vezes en lu corrupcio o negror, lahoras tu ratz lu am un sturment del qual aquesta es la forma:	And therefore when the bone is uncovered and you see in it corruption or blackness, then scrape it with an instrument of which this is the form:
E es nompnat de aspre cap, e sia feyt de fer indi, e sia le cap redon ayssi cum asir le qual sia fayt punctat per punctacio de lima o aliskalfati per punctacio subtil (ayssi cum es en la forma seguent).	And it is named a sharp head, and it is made of iron, and the head should be round like an awl of which the tip is made pointed by drilling or sharpened subtlety (just as in the following form).
E pausa aquel sobre le loc corrumput del os, e aprop revolveys aquel entre les tieus ditz, e prem la tua ma petit a petit entro que sapias que aquela corropcio es rasa.	And place that over the corroded part of the bone, and then turn it between your fingers, and press your hand gently little by little until you know that the corruption is scraped.
E aquo sia fayt alcunas veguadas, e aprop restaura le loc am causas exsiccativas e stipticas.	And this should be done several times, then restore the place with drying and constricting causes.
Donc si·l loc es consolidat e es en lu nascuda bona carn e es abscindit le cors de la sania e roman per xl dias, e no es renovat e no es apostemat e no accideys en lu accident, lahoras tu sapias que es sanat.	Therefore if the place is consolidated and there is good flesh born in it and the body has separated from the sickness and it has been for 40 days, and it is not renewed and there is no ulcer formed and an accident does not occur on it, then you know that it is healed.
E sino, lahoras no es en lu engen sino reduzir la fissura a la forma del nas, e segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu descuebras de segon os am ferr o am medicina acuta, e cum sira descubert le os, lahoras tu pren tribo segon aquesta forma:	But if not, then do not place anything on it except to reduce the fissure to the form of the nose, and according to this manner: and you uncover the bone with iron or with sharp medicine, and when the bone is uncovered, then take a thread according to this form:
Sia la extramitat de lu ferr triangulada, e·l fust de lu sia prim extenuat entro a la extremitat ayssi cum vezes assi.	Let the end of it be triangular, and the stalk of it should be bent inward at the end just as you see there.
E aprop pausa aquel sobre le os, e sia aquel prop del lacrimal; e alongua la tua ma un pauc del huel, e aprop revol la tua ma am le tribo entro que penetre tot le os, e aquel sente le malaute per asso que atroba vent yssir per so quan te la sua ma.	Then place that over the bone, and let it be near the tear gland; and lengthen your hand a little from the wound, and then turn your hand with the thread until you penetrate all the bone, and he feels the patient through the ass that blocks wind emission because of it.
Donc lahoras restaura le loc am medicinas stipticas exsiccantz ayssi cum t’e eyssenhat.	Then restore the place with drying and constricting medicines just as I have taught you.
Donc cum nays la carn e·l loc es endurazit, lahoras la materia la qual effundia a las partidas deforo retorna al nas, donc aquo es pus leugier sobre le malaute.	Therefore when the flesh and the place are hardened, then the matter which flows to the openings on the sides returns to the nose; therefore that is pus easier on the patient.
Capitol .xx.	Chapter .xx.
De reduccio de la eminencia del huel.	Of the reduction of the prominence of the wound.
Quan le huel emineys am la sua totalitat e no accideys en le vezement nocument ni diminuacio, lahoras cove que laxas le malaute, e aprop que·l segues, e aprop que pausas ventozas en le cervitz ses scarificacio e succa per bona succaccio; e aprop pausa sobre le huel liniment le qual sia fayt de acatra e aloe e enses e sarcocolla, e aprop strenh le emplaustre sobre le huel am motz polvils.	When the wound swells in its entirety and there is no occurrence of pain nor decrease, then know that you should loosen the patient, then the following, and then pause vents on the neck during the scarification and sucking for a good sucked; then pause over the wound liniment which is made from aloes and aloe and myrrh, and then strengthen the plaster over the wound with moist powders.
E la manieyra dels polvils es que prenguas draps de li leons motz, e quascun drap sia duplicat en quatre plecs; e fay de aquels motz.	And the manner of the powders is that you take pieces of linen cloth, and each piece is folded in four; and make those folds.
E aprop pausa aquels la un sobre le autre segon la quantitat de la qual ha le huel necessitat.	Then place those one on top of the other according to the quantity that he has need of.
E aprop strenh sobre aquels am drap dur am fort strictura; e itera las ventosas am succio ses scarificacio; e aprop osta las ventosas e leyssa le huel streyt le dia e la nueyt.	Then bind tightly over them with a strong bandage, and repeat the cupping with suction without scarification; then remove the cups and let him be bound tightly day and night.
Mays si entretant le liguament es mollificat, lahoras cove que sia mot streyt.	But if in the meantime the ligament softens, then let it be looser.
E aprop osta le liament aprop le dia e la nueyt ayssi cum havem dit.	Then remove the bandage day and night as we have said.
E si vezes le huel ja esser redusit, bo es, e sino, lahoras itera le emplastre am les polvils e la strictura e las ventosas entro que sia sanat.	And if you see that he is reduced, good; but if not, then repeat the ointment with the powders and the bandage and the cupping until he is healed.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter 21.
De la inscizio de la eminencia de la tunica uvea.	Of the beginning of the swelling of the tunica uberia.
Quan endeve disrupcio en la tunica uvea, e aprop es eminent e procezeys fora las palpebras ayssi cum un gra de rasim, e es orrazada la forma de home per aquo, e vols aquo inscidir, lahoras la operacio en lu es ayssi cum havem recomtat, que tu entrometas la agula en la razitz de la uvea de la partida dejos en la partida desus, e aprop met la agula autra en la qual sia fil doble de la part del lacrimal, e fay aquela penetrar e leyssa la primieyra agula segon la sua disposicio; e aprop inscideys le loc del fiel doble e leva am aquel la partida de la uvea en le circuit de la agula, e strenh aquela mot.	When there is a disruption in the tunica uberia and it becomes prominent and protrudes outside the eyelids like a grain of rice, and assumes a form like that of a man's nail, and you want to operate on it, then the operation is performed as we have described: You insert a needle into the root of the uberia at the lower part, and you place another needle in which there is a thread doubled in the lacrimal part, and make that penetrate and let the first needle follow its course; then you pierce the site of the double thread and lift with it the part of the uberia in the circuit of the needle, and bind that tightly.
E aprop extratz la agula e pausa sobre le huel lana infusa en album de huou e leyssa entro que cayha le fil am la uva.	Then remove the needle and place over it wool infused with white vinegar and let it stay until the thread comes away with the uberia.
E aprop cura le huel am aquo que conforte aquel entro que la plagua sia sanada.	And then cure him with that which comforts it until the wound is healed.
E alcunas veguadas aduna de tota partida am cercle de drap entro le huel ajuste eminencia gran, e aprop sia perforat am le spatum subtil que vengua al preon del huel, e corra la humiditat albuginea, e descen le huel e intra tantost.	And sometimes one gathers all the parts with a circle of cloth around the affected area, and let it be pierced by the spatula through the white humor, and let the moisture flow, and let the eye go down and recover at once.
E aprop strenh entro que sia sanat.	Then bind it until it is healed.
Capitol .xxii.	Chapter 22.
De curacio de alconati.	Of the cure of hawks.
Aquesta malautia que es apelada alconati no es sino sania la qual es ajustada en le huel semblant a aygua dessendent e no es aquela.	This disease which is called alconati is nothing but an inflammation which is located in the eye, resembling water and not pus.
Mays la manieyra del obrar en ela es que fasses le malaute sezer sobre la sela aparelada e dreyta, e aprop pren le cap sieu en las tuas mas de doas partz e mau aquel entro que veias la sania pervenir a las partidas dejos, e aprop sia siccada e no descenda, e sia ostat le lum, e·l malaute veia las causas ayssi cum vezia.	But the manner of treating it is that you make the patient sit on a raised and straight seat, and you take hold of his head in your hands from both sides, and keep him there until you see the inflammation come to the lower parts; then let it be dried up and not go down, and let the light be seen, and let the patient see the causes as he used to.
E si no descendra en jos, sapias que es aygua.	And if it does not go down below, you know that it is water.
Mays si no es preparat le descendement a la sania am aquo que havem dit, lahoras fay le malaute sezer entre las tuas mas e aprop pren spatum subtil e fen am aquel sobre le pannicol cernent un petit deves la continuacio de la conjunctiva am la tunica cornea en la corona (entro al loc vuet), entro que sia fora-getada la sania.	But if the inflammation is not prepared to go down with what we have said, then let the patient sit between your hands and take a spatula and rub it on the membrane covering a little from the continuation of the conjunctiva into the cornea in the rim (in that very place), until the inflammation goes away.
Donc cum es fora-getada, lahoras tu distilla en le huel aygua cauda en la qual has mesclat mel o aygua en la qual ja has bulit fenugrec e mel.	Then when it is gone, you distill into the eye water mixed with honey in which you have boiled fenugreek and honey.
E aprop sia curat am las autras causas entro que sia sanat.	And let him be cured of the other causes until he is healed.
Capitol .xxii.	Chapter 22.
De la curacio de la aygua descendent del huel.	Of the cure of water coming down from the eye.
Ja havem dit las specias de la aygua en la divisio e qual conveneys a perforar am sermo declarant, lahoras aquel segon la sanetat.	We have already said about the qualities of the water in the division and which one is suitable for piercing with a needle according to the condition; then let that be done according to his health.
Lahoras cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute entre las tuas mas sobre un cayrat e lia le sieu huel sa, lu mot stringent.	Then you see that you make him sit between your hands over a pitcher and open his eye wide, he pulls his eye up.
E aprop pausa prop de la palpebra del sieu huel la tua ma senestra, si le huel en le qual es l’aygua es le huel senestra; o am la tua ma dreyta, si le huel es le dextre.	Then place your left hand near the eyelid of his eye, if the eye in which there is water is the left one; or with your right hand, if it is the right one.
E aprop am la tua ma dextra pren almagda, si le huel es senestre; o am la tua ma senestra, si le huel es de dreyt.	Then take the palm of your right hand, if the eye is left; or with the palm of your left hand, if it is right.
E aprop pausa la extremitat de almagda prop de la corona per la grossesa del ray en le album del huel de part del mendre lacrimal, e aprop enpelleys almagda am vertut e revol la tua ma am aquel.	Then place the end of your palm near the rim because of the thickness of the membrane in the white of the eye in the part of the tear gland, and press your hand with that.
E aprop penetre en le album del huel e sentas que almagda ja es pervenguda a causa vueda.	Then penetrate into the white of the eye and feel that your palm has already reached to the cause seen.
E cove que sia la masura del cami de almagda al preon la mesura del spazi le qual es de la pupilla entro a la fi de la negror, e es la corona del huel; quar tu veyras am aquel pupilla am la visio de l’huel per la clartat de la tunica cornea.	And let the distance of the path of your palm to the rim be the measure of the space which is from the pupil into the end of the darkness, and it is the rim of the eye; for you will see with that pupil by means of the vision of the eye because of the brightness of the tunica cornea.
E aprop pausa almagda entro al loc en le qual es l’aygua, e aprop tu la atira en jos una veguada aprop autra, e donc si la aygua descen tantost, lahoras vetz le malaute aquo sobre le qual huebre la sua vista tantost, e almagda en le sieu huel.	Then place your palm in the site where there is water; then you lift it up a little and again, and so if the water goes down at once, let the patient look immediately upon that on which he opened his sight, and your palm is in his eye.
E aprop repausa se un pauc; donc si la aygua es descenduda, lahoras tu depausa aquela autre veguada abantz que almagda ne sia getada.	Then rest a little; then if the water has gone down, let you lift it up another time before your palm is pushed away.
E donc quan es sicada e no descen, lahoras tu extrat almagda am facilitat, e revol am aquel la tua ma pauc a pauc, e aprop dissolveys en l’aygua un petit de sal clara de gemma e am aquela lava le huel dedintz; e aprop pausa fora le huel coto o stopa o lana infusa en oli rozat e album de huou e ligua am aquo le huel sa.	And so when it is dried up and does not go down, then you remove your palm with ease, and move it a little over the eye; and dissolve in the water a little of clear salt of gemma and wash the inside of the eye with it; and then place on the eye cotton or a pad or wool infused in rosewater and vinegar and let him hold his eye shut.
Mays nos e aquels que so de nostre temps pause sobre aquel comi trissat am album de huou.	But we do not do this now, but they who are of our time put it on with cotton infused in rosewater.
E si no obezeys a tu almagda al intrament de l’huel per la sua duricia — quar es alcu dels homes del qual le huel es dur mot —, lahoras cove que prenguas le spatum le qual es nompnat alberid del qual aquesta es la forma:	And if he does not submit to your palm in the instrument of the eye because of its hardness — for it is hard of men whose eye is very hard —, then you see that you take the spatula which is called albarido, of which this is the form:
E donc perfora am aquel aquela conjunctura, e no ultimes la tua ma en le trauc, e no es si no que fassas via ad almagda loc subtil.	Then pierce it with that the conjunctive membrane, and do not press your hand into the cut, and do not force your way to a subtle place.
E aprop entromet almagda segon que havem dit.	Then insert your palm according to what we have said.
E deves le compliment de la tua obra, sia preparat al malaute dormitori descentment fayt en le qual dorma sobre le sieu dos en mayson tenebrosa, e sia prohibit de totz movementz .	And after you have completed your work, let the patient be prepared for sleep in a dark room where he sleeps on his back in a dark room, and all movements are prohibited.
E pausa en la natura de lu aquo per que sia linida la sua natura, e no maugua le sieu cap a la partida dreyta ni senestra de tot.	And let him lie still so that his nature may be quieted, and do not move his head to the right or left in any way.
E sia le liament segon la sua disposicio entro al tertz dia.	And let him rest according to his condition on the third day.
E aprop deslia aquel en aquela maysso tenebrosa e exproha la freol vista, e fay li vezer alcunas causas, e aprop retorna le liament entro al dia .vii.	And let him go back to that dark room and open his eyes wide, and let him see some causes, and then let the condition return on the seventh day.
E no cove que fassas aquo en la hora de las curacios o tantost aprop la infusio.	And do not do this in the time of the baths or at once but also after the infusion.
Habantz cove que tu alienes aquo per so quar la aygua puega leugierament per gran e vehement de reguardament.	After you have removed it so that the water can run freely and violently for a long time.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras cove que deslias le huel denant le vii dia, e rectifica aquel am aquo que ceda apostema.	But if suppuration occurs, then let you open the eye on the seventh day and cleanse it with that which eases suppuration.
Lahoras tu absol la vista de lu e pausa sobre la cara de lu oral per le qual sia regit le vezement de lu dejos lu per alcus dias, lu existent en la mayszo tenebrosa.	Then you open his eyes wide and place your hand over his face so that he sees nothing for several days, lying in the dark room.
E aprop sia gitat de aquela mayzo gradantment e conversa8 en las suas causas.	And let him go to that dark room gradually and converse about his causes.
E sapias que in alchatea no es excusat le discipol de visio alcunas veguadas, e lahoras tu sias ardit sobre la operacio.	And you know that it is not permissible for the disciple to see some things, and then you will be anxious about the operation.
E ja es pervengut a nos de alcu de aquels les quals so al Artach , e alcu disse que fayt foc en al Ayrac magdaam perforat am le qual es succada la aygua.	And it has already come to us from some of those whose names are in the book of Artach, and some say that fire was made in Ayrac magma which is sucked out, the water.
Mays empero yeu non e vist degu en la nostra terra le qual haia perfeyt aquo, ni e aquo legit en alcu dels libres dels antics; e es possible que aquo sia novel.	However, I have not seen anyone in our land who has perfected this, nor is it written in any of the books of the ancients; and it is possible that it is new.
E aquestas so las formas de las specias de magdaan per que sia sobre aquelas aquel le qual ignora aquelas:	These are the ways to prepare the various kinds of magdaad, so that one who is ignorant of them can prepare them.
E sian faytas de eram o de ferr propriament, e sian las extramitatz de lor am aquesta subtilitat triangulada, la extremitat aguda ayssi cum aquela es la forma.	And they are made from either copper or iron specifically, and the ends of them must have this triangular subtlety, the pointed end just as it is described.
Capitol .xxiv.	Chapter 24.
De la curacio de carn nada en le nas.	Of the cure for a nosebleed.
Quan en le nas so nascudas carns diversas ajustadas de las quals es alcuna causa la qual es assemblada a scorpio de motz pes, o a polip peys; e aquesta malautia es apelada polipus quar es a semblansa de aquel peys representat.	When there are various meats growing inside the nose, of which some cause is found, which is like a scorpion sting, or a polyp, and this disease is called polypus, because it resembles that pe.
E de lu es carn cancrosa, lapadea, de fusca color; e de lu es que es carn leon no de color fusca.	And in it there is cancerous, lumpy meat of a dark color; and from it comes the non-dark colored lion meat.
Donc en aquela que es en aquestas carns leon no fraudulenta ni cancroza, cove que fassas le malaute sezer entre las tuas mas e posat al solelh, e huebre las nars de lu, e picoys le tieu onci en aquelas carns.	Therefore in that which is not fraudulent or cancerous in the lion meat, cause the patient to sneeze between his fingers and be exposed to the sun, open the nostrils of him, and prick his thumb into that meat.
E aprop extrat aquela a las partidas deforo, e aprop inscindeys aquo que has comprehendut de aquelas am spatum agut subtil de la una partida entro que sapias que tota la carn ja es ostada; que si roman de lu deguna causa de la qual la abscisio es possibla, lahoras tu ratz aquo am la un dels estrumentz subtils am facilitat entro que de lu romangua denguna causa.	And then draw it out into the split foreskin, and cut off what you have understood from that with a pointed spathe of the one side between which you know that all the meat has been removed; because if anything is left in it of the cause of the separation, then you will easily cut that away with one of the subtle tools.
Mays si senhoreja am sanc o accida apostema caut, lahoras tu pausa a lu aquo que cove; o es dels apostemas malignes, lahoras tu coyta e cauteriza aquel entro que sia abscindit sanc e sian ostadas las cavas totas.	But if there is bleeding or an ulcerated pustule, then you pause it that sneezing; or if they are from the malignant pustules, then you cut and cauterize them that the pus bleeds and all the cavities are exposed.
E aprop sia getatz en le nas aprop la inscizio vi agre e aygua o vi.	And then it is put into the nose near the incision with vinegar or water or wine.
Mays si le nas es ubert e de lu procezeys humiditat entro al palat, lahoras sapias que ja es sanat.	But if the nose is open and from it there comes moisture into the palate, then know that it has healed.
Mays si la humiditat no penetra segon que cove, lahoras tu sapias que dedintz lu es carn nada en los pus sobiras osses de las nars als quals non es pervengut abscizio.	But if the moisture does not penetrate as it sneezes, then know that inside him is meat growing in pus over bones of the nostrils to which there has been no separation.
Donc lahoras cove que entromitas fiel de li al qual sia alcuna grosseza, e nuza en lu motz nuzes, e pausa entre quascun nutz la quantitat del dit o mens, e engene le malaute e entromet una extremitat del fiel en le nars am lo ray o am autra causa la qual es a lu possibla.	Therefore then cause him to sneeze and put into him the bile of which there is any thickness, and let fall into him nuts, nut-sized, and place between each nut the quantity of the tip of your finger or less, and cause the patient to sneeze and put one end of the bile into the nostril with the ray or with another cause that it is possible for.
E pus que aquo aura fayt, que atire le sieu odorament entro que pervengua a las canals de las nars, e sia eyssit sobre le sieu golayro, quar tropas veguadas le semblant ad aquesta accio fan les enfantz a las scolas, e es leugiera causa ad aquel que ho vol far.	And then that this has been done, that he breathe out his odorant into the canals of the nostrils, and spit it out over his throat, for troops watching him do this action make children in schools, and it is a lighter cause to whoever wants to do so.
E aprop pausa las dos extramitatz del fiel, una extremitat que iesca sobre le nas et l’autra que romangua en le nas, e aprop aministra serratura de carn am les nuzes que so en le fiel, e fay aquo entro que sapias que las carn ja so am les nuzes del fiel.	And then place the two ends of the bile, one end that goes over the nose and the other that goes into the nose, and then administer the cutting of meat with the nuts that are in the bile, and do this until you know that the meats have been cut by the nuts of the bile.
E aprop extratz le fiel, e pausa en le nas aprop la abstraccio del sanc una calgua , e fay aquo per tres dias o mays entro que l’enguent corrodo tot aquo que es romas de las carns.	And then pull out the bile and place in the nose the abstraction of the blood a cauterization, and do this for three days or more until the paint corrodes everything that is left of the meat.
E aprop en la fi de la causa, pausa en le nas una canula de plom per alscus jorns entro que sia sanat.	And then at the end of the cure, place in the nose a lead tube for several days until it has healed.
Mays si endigeys de curacio que exsique, usa de aquela.	But if you find that the cure is dried out, use that one.
E aquesta es la forma del instrument a capipurge fazedor am le qual son distillatz olis e medicinas en le nars:	And this is the form of the instrument of a purging cupping-glass with which oils and medicines are distilled into the nostrils.
E fay aquo de argent o de eram, la qual sia semblant a una petita lampesa uberta, ayssi cum petita conqua, e le meat semblantment.	And do this from silver or copper, which is like a small open lamp, just like a small hole, and the meat similarly.
E si vols, fay una canula clausa ayssi cum cana, e la cancula del estrument a capipurge fazedor e sia plana, descuberta; a la qual sia manubre en lo derier de lu, am le qual tenguas aquela quan escaufas en lu oli o aquo que tu vols dels sucs e de las causas suctiblas.	And if you want, make a closed tube just like a cane, and the cup of the purging cupping-glass be flat and uncovered; to which is handled at its end, with which you have that when you heat it in it oil or water that you want from the juices and the sucking causes.
E aquestz capipurgi es precios: recipe de enforbi de castor, de balayra blanc, de giengiebre, e piletre de safra, de pebre lonc, de escafragia, de epetum de spic ana unc. vi cumfizeys am suc de bleda e de caul, e sian faytas pillulas, e sia destemprada una pillula am aygua tebeza, e sia gitat en las nars del malaute jasent envers.	And these are the ingredients for the cupping-glasses: take oil of beaver testicles, white vernal oil, ginger, and long pepper, saffron, pepper and spikenard, each a dram. You mix them with the juice of borage and of celery, and they are made into pills, and one pill is mixed with tepid water, and it is sprinkled into the patient's nostrils sitting up.
Capitol .xxv.	Chapter 25.
De theyls natz en las extramitatz del nas.	Of ulcers in the ends of the nose.
Motas veguadas es nat theyl en las extramitatz del nas, e es magnificat e omentat en alscus dias entro en que mot es leg le reguardament de lu.	Many times an ulcer is born in the ends of the nose, and it is magnified and swollen for several days until it comes to a head.
E per aquo cove que tu inscidas aquel en le comensament de la apparissio de lu, e erediques tot aquel.	And for this cause you pierce that in the beginning of its appearance, and drain all of that.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc o cauteri o medicina comburent la qual estia en loc de lu.	And then place on the spot a cauterization or burning medicine which is placed in the location of it.
Mays si es tardada la sua inscizio entro que sia magnificat, lahoras considera si es lapificat, dur, de fusca color e de pauc sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel am ferr quar es apostema crancos; quar motas veguadas ad aquel que inscideys aquesta apostema endeve per lu granda malicia sobre aquel le qual aquel havia.	But if its piercing is delayed until it has become magnified, then consider that it has suppurated, has become hard, of a dark color and of little feeling, then do not touch that with iron which is the cranky ulcer; because many times when you pierce this ulcer in that way great malice comes upon him who.
E si le apostema es de leon tocament e no es de fosca color, e vezes que inscizio es possibla en tot aquel, lahoras evacua le malaute e inscideys aquel senes temor, e cura le loc am aquo que exsique e costrenh entro que sia sanat.	And if the ulcer is of lion touch and not of dark color, and its piercing is possible in all of that, then discharge the patient and pierce it with fearlessness, and heal the spot with what drips out and constrict it until it has healed.
Capitol .xxvi.	Chapter 26.
De sutura del nas e de las labias e de la aurelha quan la continuitat es dissolvuda per plagua o per semblantz.	Of the sewing of the nose and of the lips and of the auricle when the continuity is dissolved by a ulcer or similar.
Sapias que quan accideys solucio de continuitat en una de aquestas cartillages, pauc confereys en aquela operacio sino en alcus homes.	Know that when solution happens in one of these cartilage, few confer in that operation except in some men.
Donc cove, quan endeve ad alcu alcuna causa de aquelas, que consideres si es plagua fresca am le sieu sanc, e lahoras tu ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	Therefore, when for any cause of those, you consider that it is fresh blood with your blood, then sew the two lips of the ulcer with sewing, and then heal it until it has healed.
E si las labias de solucio de continuitat so ja separadas, e quascuna es fayta sana, lahoras cove que tu excorjes quascuna partida de la sua codena apparent entro que n’iesca sanc.	And if the lips of solution of continuity are already separated, and each is healed, then cause that you cut each part of its apparent tendon until blood comes out.
E aprop ajusta las doas labias am sutura e strenh aquelas, e sobre aquelas pulveriza sanc de drago e enses trissat, e pausa sobre la polvera una pessa de emplaustra diafinicon, o de alcu autre dels emplastres consolidatius, e leyssa aquel liat per dos jorns o per tres, e aprop deslia aquel e permuta aquel emplaustre e leyssa aquel entro que·ls fiels per si sian abscinditz, e aprop cura am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And then sew the two lips with sewing and strengthen those, and on top of them pulverize blood of dragon and unmixed ashes, and place on the powder a piece of emplaster diafinicon, or of any other of the consolidating plasters, and let that lie for two days or three, and then remove that and change that plaster and let it lie until the sores are healed.
Mays la manieyra de la sutura es que tu agregues la solucio de continuitat o am agulhas ayssi cum havem recomtat en la sutura del ventre, o agregua la solucio de continuitat am fiel ayssi cum a tu e fayt saber.	But the manner of sewing is that you add the solution of continuity or with needles just as we have mentioned in the sewing of the belly, or add the solution of continuity with bile just as I have told.
Capitol .xxvii.	Chapter 27.
De extraccio de aquela causas que veno en las doas labias en las partidas dedintz.	Of the extraction of those causes that come in the two lips in the parts inside.
Motas veguadas endeve a motz homes en las partidas dedintz de las suas labias alcus apostemas durs semblantz a gras de errs, e alscunas de lors son mendres e alcunas son majors.	Many times in some men in the parts inside of their lips there are some hard ulcers like grass of worms, and some are small and some are large.
Donc cove que tu convertas las labias e fendas quascuna de aquelas duricias de tota part, e aprop la abscizio umpliscas le loc de sagi trissat entro que·l sanc sia restrengut, e aprop sia lavat am vi agre e sia curat le loc am aquo que es stipticitat, entro que sia sanat.	Therefore cause that you turn the lips and split each of those duress from all parts, and then the piercing fill up the place with ground sage within that the blood is restricted, and then wash it with vinegar and let it be healed by what has been constricted, until it has healed.
Capitol .xxviii.	Chapter 28.
De inscizio de la carn ajustada en las gengivas.	On the beginning of meat being chewed on the gums.
Granre de veguadas nays sobre la gengiva carn ajustada la qual les antics apelero albulus, adonc cove que tu suspendas aquela am onci o que tenguas aquela am las forfecs e inscidas aquela deves la sua razit, e leyssas la sania correr o le sanc.	There are blisters on the gums which the ancient ones called albus, then you should suspend that with tweezers or what you have, and pinch its root, and let the pus flow out or the blood.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc sagi trissat o autra polveras stipticas o excicativas.	Then place on the spot sage that has been cut up into pieces or another powdery astringent or caustic.
E si aquela carn retorna, lahoras inscideys aquela segundariament, e cauterisa aquela, quar aprop le cauteri no retornara.	And if the meat comes back, then you should cut it again secondarily and cauterize it, for then the cautery will not come back.
Capitol .xxix.	Chapter 29.
De razo de dentz am ferr.	On the reason for teeth with iron.
Quan en la superficia de las dentz de las partidas dedintz e de las de foro e entre las gingivas so ajustadas escorsas aspras, legas, e alcunas veguadas son de nigradas e son faytas citrinas o vertz entro que a la gingiva ve per aquo corrupcio e son faytas las dentz legas.	When in the surface of the teeth of the molars and of the incisors, and between the gums are found rough scabs, callouses, and some blisters that are blackened and are made citrine or green within which causes corruption to the gum, and these callouses are made thus.
E donc cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute entre las tuas mas e pausar le cap de lu en le tieu se, e ratz las dents en las quals apareysso aquelas escorsas e causas semblantz arena entro que de lor no romangua deguna causa, e aquo fay de la negror e de la citrinitat e de las autras entro que sian mondificadas.	And so you should make the patient open his mouth between your hands and place his head in your lap, and rub the teeth in which these scabs appear, and cause them to become like sand, so that no other cause remains within them, and this is what makes the blackness and citrinity and others within so they are cleansed.
Donc si es ostat aquo que es en aquelas del comensament de la razio, bo es; e sino, lahoras tu itera la razio sobre aquelas al autra dia e al segon e al tertz entro que vengua al derier stament en aquo que tu vols.	So if this is left as in the beginning of the process, it is good; and if not then you should repeat the process over them another day, or on the second or third within which it comes to its final state in what you will.
E sapias que las dentz han necessitat de motz rezoris de diversas formas e de motas figuras segon que es preparat a la tua operacio.	And know that teeth have need of many резоры of diverse forms and of many figures according to how they are prepared for your operation.
E per so quar le razori am le qual la dent es raza de la partida dedintz es autre del razori am le qual es ras entre las dentz segon autras formas, e aquestas formas de razoris sian deves tu preparadas las quals veyras tantost:	And thus the rasp used for the tooth to be rasped on its molars side is another than that used for rasping between the teeth according to other forms, and these forms of rasps you should prepare them immediately as you will see.
Capitol .xxx.	Chapter 30.
D’eradicacio de dentz.	On the removal of teeth.
Cove que tu cures la dent de la sua dolor am tot engen e tardes en tota eradicacio de lu, quar no es denguna causa que suplisqua la veguada de lu quan es eradicada, quar es sustancia sublima entro que es excusacio en la eradicacio de lu.	You should cure the tooth of its pain with every remedy and delay in its total removal as there is not any cause that prevents the growth of it when removed, for this is a sublime substance that is excused in its removal.
Mays cove quan le malaute es forsat aquela dent eradicar, que fermament deves tu sia certificat quala es la dent dolent, quar motas veguadas la dolor descep le malaute e cuga que sia en dent sana, e tu eradicas aquela e aprop la dolor no cessa entro que la dent malauta e dolent sia eradicada, quar nos ja havem vist aquo per operacio dels barbies.	But when the patient is forced to have that tooth removed you should be certain which is the painful tooth, for many times pain deceives the patient and it seems as if it is in a healthy tooth, and you remove that one and the pain does not cease until the diseased and painful tooth is removed, for we have already seen this through operation of the gums.
Donc cum deves tu es sertificat qual es la dent dolent, e que o sabes be, lahoras cove que tu scarifiques en le circuit de la dent am spatum en le qual sia alcuna vertut, entro que sia dissolvut de la dent de la gingiva de tota partida, e aprop mau aquel am les tieus ditz, o am forfexs subtils al comensament petit a petit entro que aquela concucesquas.	So when you are certain which is the painful tooth and that you know well, then you should scrape around the circuit of the tooth with a spathe in which there is some virtue so it is dissolved from the gum all around, and then cut that with your fingers or with thin forceps little by little until you concavitate it.
E aprop alogua en lu fortz tenalhas grans per bona loquacio o estuptura fort, e pausa le cap del malaute entre les tieus denolhs que be le tengues que no·s maugua, e aprop tratz la dent segon rectitut en manieyra que no trenques aquela, ni al malaute major dolor no dones.	And then grab it firmly with strong tweezers for good speech or stupor strongly, and place the head of the patient between your thumbs which you hold well so he does not move, and then pull the tooth according to rectitude in a manner that you do not break it, nor give greater pain to the patient.
E donc si no es foro-getat, lahoras pren un de aquels instrumentz, e met aquel dejos lu de tota part am facilitat e esforsa la remocio de lu ayssi que es feyt al comensament.	And so if it is not loose, then take one of those instruments and place it beneath all around with ease and force the removal of it thus as it was done at the beginning.
Mays si la dent es trauquada o corrosa, lahoras cove que tu comples de drap aquel trauc e estrenguas aquel am la extremitat de ray subtil per so que no sia trinquada en la hora de la tua constriccio sobre aquela am tenalas.	But if the tooth is split or rotten then you should cover that split with a cloth and press it with the end of a thin ray so that it is not broken in the hour of your constriction on it as you hold it with tweezers.
E cove que tu obres exquesitament am scarificacio en le circuit de tota part de la gingiva e guarda mot la tua fortaleza que no trenques aquela e romangua partida de lu, e retorne sobre le malaute per la malicia que sia majo que la primieyra dolor de lu.	And you should open completely by scraping all around the gum and guard much of your strength that you do not break it or cause a split to form from it, and return upon the patient for the wickedness he has done to him.
E guarda te que no fassas aquo que fan alscus ignorantz barbiers en lor fistinacio e audacia sobre la eradicacio de lor, ses que no aministran aquo que nos havem recomtat; quar motas veguadas fan venir sobre les homes malautias grans las quals son pus dificils que sian trinquadas, e las razitz de lor remaugudas totas, o alcunas de aquelas, o que extrayguas aquela am alcus osses de la mandigula ayssi cum motas veguadas havem testificat.	And guard yourself that you do not do as unskilful barbers do in their foolishness and audacity on the removal of them, who do not administer what we have recommended; for many times they bring upon men great diseases which are more difficult than to be broken, or that you extract those with some bones of the jaw thus as we have testified.
E aprop la eradicacio de lu sia lavada la boca am vi caut o vi agre am sal.	And then the removal of it is washed in the mouth with wine or vinegar and salt.
E si endeve fluxs de sanc per aysso, ayssi cum motas veguadas endeve, lahoras trissa alcuna quantitat de zegi e aspergeys sobre la plagua, e si no confereys aquel zegi, cauteriza.	And if it still flows blood from there then take some quantity of chalk and sprinkle on the wound, and if that chalk does not help then cauterize.
La forma de las forceps e tenalas subtils am las quals es mauguda la dent al comensament sia de longua extramitat, de breu manubre e gros, per so que no sian doblatz quan am aquels deves obrar.	The form of the forceps and tweezers which are used to pull out the tooth at the beginning is of long length, short handle and thick, so that they are not bent when you operate with them.
E sian ayssi cum vezes de gros manubre entro que quan estrenhas am aquelas no sian dobladas, sian breus extramitatz.	And let it be thus as the gross handle within that when you stretch with them they are not bent and are short lengths.
E sian faytas de ferr de India descentment faytas de dreytas extramitatz, e en las extramitatz de aquelas sian dentz de las quals las unas intron en las autras e estrenhan per constriccio descent fort, e alscunas veguadas las extramitatz de aquelas sian la forma del bec d’un auzel le qual ha nom ciconia, so es guanta, e son de fort constriccio.	And let it be made of iron from India descendingly made from right angles and in the angles of those there are teeth of which some enter into each other and stretch by strong constriction, and sometimes the angles of those are in the form of a goose beak which has the name ciconia, it is hooked, and they are of strong constriction.
Capitol .xxxi.	Chapter 31.
De erradicacio de dentz e d‘estraccio dels osses de las mandibulas trincadas.	On the removal of teeth and of the extraction of the bones from the jaws that are broken.
Quan deves la eradicacio de dent le qual es trinquat roman alcuna causa, lahoras cove que tu pauses sobre le loc coto am boder per un jorn o per dos entro que·l loc sia mollificat; e aprop entromet algesti o tenalhas las extramitatz de las quals so asembladas al bec de un auzel apelat ciconia o guanta, la forma de las forceps:	When you need the removal of a tooth which is broken then let there be placed on the spot a poultice with boiled water for one or two days until it becomes soft; and then insert your fingers or tweezers at the angles of which some are like the beak of a goose called ciconia, or hooked, the form of the forceps:
Las extramitatz de lor sian faytas dedintz ayssi cum lima o alfagi.	The angles of them are made like teeth as with lime or file.
E si no obediys a tu a eyssiment am aquestas forceps o tenalas, lahoras cove que tu caves sobre la razit e descrobas tota la carn e entrometas le instrument le qual ha nom atali, so es palanca petita del qual la forma es aquesta:	And if it does not obey you with these forceps or tweezers then let there be dug into the root and cut away all the meat and insert the instrument which is called atile, it is a small lever of which the form is thus:
E sia de breu extremitat grossa un petit, e no sia enbegut per so que no sia trinquat.	And let it be of short length thick in the end and not bent so that it is not broken.
Donc si per aquo la razit es foro-getada, bo es; e sino, ajuda te am aquestz autres instrument dels quals aquestas son las formas: la forma del primier instrument es de triangulada extramitat en la qual sia alcuna grossesa:	So if by this the root is loose then it is good and if not help yourself with these other instruments of which these are their forms, the form of the first instrument is triangularly angled in which there is some thickness: the form of the second instrument is of a half circle within which there is some grossness:
La forma del segon instrument es que sia de triangulada e de pus subtil extremitat.	The form of the second instrument is that it be triangular and more thinly ended.
E ja so ajudatz am aquest instrument havent dos ramps del qual aquesta es la forma aprop la seguent:	And now help yourself with this instrument having two ramps of which this is the form, then follow thus:
e am autres instrumentz les quals precidero en rasura de dentz; quar juvament es fayt am aquest instrument le qual es asemblat a onci gran, e aquesta es la forma:	and with other instruments which are used in rasuring of teeth for youth is made by this instrument which is assembled to great oncis and this is its form:
de la triangulada extremitat torta o curta, la qual sia alcuna grossesa, e no sia enbegut per so que no sia trinquat.	Of the triangularly twisted or short end, which there is some thickness, and it is not bent so that it is not broken.
E otra sapias que·ls instrumentz de las dentz motz so e semblantment les autres instruments.	And know that the instruments of teeth move and likewise similarly to other instruments.
Mays le artifexs savi e subtil en l’art, atroba per si mateys segon aquo que a lu significa la operacio e las malautias diversas; quar son de las malautias a las quals les antics no diysero ni pausero propri instrument, per las formas de diversas specias.	But the cunning and subtle artesian in the art, attains by himself the materials according to what he means is the operation and diverse diseases, for there are diseases of which the ancients did not tell or give proper instruments, through forms of diverse species.
Mays si es trinquat l’os de la mandibula o dels autres osses de la boca, o si poyreys, lahoras sia pes curat sobre aquel en son loc am aquo que es a lu convenient dels instrumentz e de las forceps las quals havem dit en la extraccio de las razitz de las dentz, e ajuda te am gesti del qual aquesta es la forma:	But if the jaw bone or other bones of the mouth are broken, or if you have sprains then let it be pressed in its place with what is convenient to that of the instruments and of the forceps which we have said in the extraction of the roots of the teeth, and help yourself with the gesture of which this is the form:
E sia en lu alcuna grosseza petit a petit, e sia instringida o tenguda am la boca per que no evasesca o fuga entro que l’os de tot sia foro-getat; e aprop restaura le loc am medicinas convenientz ad aquo.	And if there is any swelling, let it be reduced little by little, and bound or held with a bandage so that it does not escape or leak until the bone has been punctured; then treat the area with appropriate medicines.
Mays si en l’os es petita poyredura, lahoras ratz aquel de aquela poyredura e de la sua negror, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	But if there is a small pustule on the bone, then open that pustule and draw out its darkness, and cure it until it is healed.
Capitol .xxxii.	Chapter 32.
De la cura de las dentz eminentz sobre las autras.	Of the cure of teeth that protrude above the others.
Quan las dentz so eminentz no segon lor cors natural per aquelas la forma es laga, e majorment quan endeve a las femnas, e majorment a las piuselas venerablas; donc cove que tu consideras: si dent es nada aprop autra dent, e no es possibla sarradura ni linament de lu, lahoras radica aquela; mays que no sia annexa am autra dent, lahoras tu inscideys aquela am aquest instrument del qual aquesta es la forma; e es semblant a morr de porc, e sia feyt de ferr de India de extramitat mot aguda.	When teeth are prominent, not according to their natural form, and especially when this occurs in women, and most especially in elderly women; therefore you should consider: if a tooth is adjacent to another tooth, and it is not possible to cut or file it down, then extract that tooth. But if it is attached to another tooth, then you insert into that tooth an instrument of which this is the shape, and it is similar to a pig's jaw, and it should be made of very acute Indian iron.
E sia la tua inscizio am la qual inscideyses aquela en trops dias per la duricia de la dent, e que no sia comauguda autra de las dentz.	And you should make your incision in such a way that you insert it into the tooth for several days according to the hardness of the tooth, and so that no other tooth is affected.
E si es dent eminent expausat a limadura, lahoras lima aquel am lima de ferr de India del qual aquesta es la forma:	And if there is an prominent tooth exposed to filing, then file it with Indian iron file of which this is the shape:
E sia tot de ferr de India e·l margua eysament; e sia de motz menutz puntz ayssi cum lima am la qual son faytas agulhas, am la qual la dent sia limada pauc a pauc en motz dias am fecilitat, per so que no sia autra dent comauguda e caga.	And it should all be made of Indian iron, both the edge and the handle; and it should have very fine points like a file with which needles are made, with which the tooth is filed little by little over several days with ease, so that no other tooth is affected and falls out.
E aprop lineys aquela en la fi, e ratz aquela am alscus razoris.	Then smooth it at the end, and shave it with a very sharp razor.
E si es dent del qual una partida es trinquada e lideys la lengua, lahoras cove que tu limescas aquel entro que l’aspretat de aquela fraccio sia ostada e engualhada, e sia aplenada per so que la lengua no ledesca ni la paraula no corrumpa.	And if there is a tooth of which one part is broken and cuts the tongue, then you should smooth that so that the sharpness of that fracture is removed and blunted, and it is flattened so that the tongue is not cut nor speech impaired.
Capitol .xxxiii.	Chapter 33.
De restauracio de dentz maugudas am fiel de aur o de argent.	Of the restoration of broken teeth with gold or silver foil.
Quan accideys a las dentz devant concussio e remossio per percussio o per cazament, e le malaute no pot strenher sobre aquo que manga, e tu has curat aquel am medicinas stipticas, e no ha valgut la tua curacio, lahoras per so que no cagan es engen en aquelas que sian strengudas am fiel de aur e no de argent, quar argent se fa vert e aprop se poyreys aprop alscus dias, mays aur nul temps no es mudat.	When there is a concussion and displacement of the teeth due to a blow or falling, and the patient cannot bear to bite down on it, and your treatment with astringent medicines has not worked, then so that they do not fall out, it is useful to strengthen them with gold foil rather than silver, for silver turns black and rots after a few days, but gold never changes.
E sia le fiel en tal subtilitat e grocesa segon la quantitat que puesca entrar entre las dentz; e la forma de la reccio es que prenguas le fiel e pren lo doble de lu entre doas dentz sanas, e aprop que cresques am doas tortuositatz del fiel entre doas maugudas, o si’ una o motas, entro que pervengua la tela a la dent sana del autra partida.	And the foil should be of such thinness and thickness according to the quantity that can fit between the teeth; and the technique of this is that you take the foil and place twice as much between two healthy teeth, and then let it grow with two twists of the foil between two broken teeth, or if one or several, until the material reaches the healthy tooth on the other side.
E aprop itera le teyssiment entro a la partida de la qual comenciest, e strenh la tua ma am facilitat e savieza entro que no sia mauguda.	Then repeat the twisting between the part from which you began, and strengthen your hand with ease and skill so that it is not broken.
E sia la tua striccio am la qual strenhas le fiel deves las razitz de las dentz que no evasesca.	And your twist with which you strengthen the foil should be between the roots of the teeth so that it does not escape.
E aprop inscindeys las extramitatz del fiel superfluens am las forceps o tosoyras, e agregua aquelas en quascun loc am gesti, e converteys aquelas e las occulta entre la dent sana e la dent mauguda, per so que no fassa lesio a la lengua.	Then cut off the excess foil with tweezers or tongs, and join those ends together with wax, and conceal them between the healthy tooth and the broken tooth, so that they do not hurt the tongue.
E aprop leyssa aquela ayssi streyta cum roman.	Then let it set tightly like Roman cement.
Mays si es desliada o rumpuda, strenh aquela o aquelas am autra fiel en tal manieyra en tot son temps.	But if it is loose or broken, strengthen it or those with other foil in the same way at all times.
E aquesta es la forma de las dentz e la figura de la rectacio de doas dentz sanas e de doas maugudas, ayssi cum vezes aquestas liadas:	And this is the form of the teeth and the figure of the twist between two healthy and two broken teeth, as follows:
E quan se fa que retorno una dent o doas aprop le cazement de quascuna en lors locs, e sian recrescutz ayssi cum havem recomtat, e que remauguan.	And when one or two teeth are pushed back into their sockets due to a blow, and they have grown back as we have described, and they break again:
E no fa aquo sino bo artifexs e savi.	And it is not done except by skilled and wise artisans.
E alcunas veguadas es aptat alcuna causa dels osses de vaca, e es fayt de lor ayssi cum forma de dent, e es pausada en loc en le qual defayl la dent, e es strengit ayssi cum havem dit, e reman e serveys am aquel per lonc temps.	And some people use cow bones for this purpose, and make it in the shape of a tooth, and place it in the place where the tooth is missing, and strengthen it as we have said, and they remain and serve with it for a long time.
Capitol .xxxiv.	Chapter 34.
De inscizio del liament le qual ve en la lengua e prohibeys loquela.	Of the incision of the membrane which comes in the tongue and prohibits speech.
Aquest liguament le qual ve dejos la lengua alcunas veguadas o es natural am le qual hom nays, o accidental e accideys per plagua la qual ja es consolidada.	This membrane which comes underneath the tongue sometimes occurs naturally or accidentally and happens due to a wound that has already healed.
E la operacio en lu es que huobres la boca del malaute, le sieu cap existent en le tieu se; e eleva la sieua lengua, e aprop inscideys aquel liament nervos segon la latitut entro que sia solvuda la lengua de la sua recencio.	And the operation on it is that the patient opens his mouth, and you raise his tongue, and then cut that nervous membrane according to the width so that the tongue is loosened from its attachment.
Mays si en aquela es alcuna duricia o denodacio, e aquo es stat per consolidacio de plagua, lahoras tu gieta unci e scindeys aquel per la latitut entro que aias inscindit le liament e sia dissolvuda la nodacio.	But if there is any hardness or knotting, and it has been caused by the hardening of a wound, then you heat oil and cut that according to the width through which you cut the membrane so that the knot is dissolved.
E guarda te que no sia fayta fissura en le preon de la carn e que scindas aqui arceria e vengua flux de sanc.	And be careful that there is not a tear in the flesh of the lip and that you split the membrane and cause blood to flow.
E aprop sia lavat le vestigi de la inscisio am ayguaros o am vi agre o am aygua frega; e aprop pausa dejos la lengua licini; so es meca la qual tengua le malaute dejos la lengua en quascuna nuoyt per so que no sia consolidat autra veguada.	Then wash the area of the incision with wine or vinegar or water rubbed with vinegar, and then place the tongue in a relaxed position; this is what the patient should do every night so that it does not harden again.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc, pausa sobre le loc vetriol trissat; mays si le sanc ventz, lahoras cauteriza le loc am cauteri lantiginos le qual conveneys ad aquo.	But if blood flows from it, place powdered vitriol on the spot; but if the blood clings to it, then cauterize the area with a red-hot cautery that is appropriate for this.
E aprop aquel cura am las autras causas entro que sia sanat.	Then treat it with the other causes so that it heals.
Capitol .xxxv.	Chapter 35.
De extraccio de ranula dejos la lengua.	Of the extraction of a ranula under the tongue.
Alcunas veguadas accideys dejos la lengua apostema asemblant a nomla petita prohibent la lengua de la sua operacio natural; e fort leu es magnificada entro que huempla la boca.	Sometimes there occurs underneath the tongue an apostema similar to a small onion that prohibits the tongue from its natural movement, and it is enlarged when it fills the mouth.
E la operacio en lu es que huebras la boca del malaute sesent devant le solel e considera le apostema.	And the operation on it is that the patient opens his mouth widely and you examine the apostema.
E si tu le vezes de fusca color o de negra, dur, al qual le malaute no atroba sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel quar es cranc.	And if you see it of a dusky or black color, hard, and the patient feels nothing, then do not touch it because it is rotten.
E si es declinat a blancor, en le qual es humiditat, lahoras tu met le onci en lu, e inscideys aquel am spatum subtil, e inscindeys le de tota partida; e si sanc te ventz en la hora de la tua operacio, lahoras tu pausa desus zegi trissat, so es vetriol, entro que sia restreyt le sanc.	And if it is inclined toward whiteness and there is moisture in it, then you put oil on it, and cut it with very thin spatulas, and cut it all around; and if blood flows when you operate on it, then you place powdered vitriol on it, so that the blood is constricted.
E aprop retorna a la obra tua entro que lo haias trayt am compliment de lu, entro que sia lavat am vi agre e sal; e cura aquel am l’autra curacio ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	Then return to your work so that it has been treated with wine and salt, and treat it with the other treatment so that it heals.
Capitol .xxxvi.	Chapter 36.
De extraccio de apostema de doas aurelhas e de aquel que es nada en le golayro e de las autras apostemas.	Of the extraction of an apostema from two ears and that which is nothing in the gullet, and of other apostemas.
Quan endeveno en le golayro godat, so son glandulas las quals son asembladas algodat, las quals accideysso deforas e son nompnadas doas aurelhas, las quals quan tu las curas am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no es sanat, lahoras tu considera si le apostema es dur, de fusca color, de pauc sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel am ferr.	When pus occurs in the gullet and they are glands which are attached to each other like almonds, and they come out from the ears, and when you treat them with what we have said in the division and it is not healed, then consider if the apostema is hard, dusky-colored, with little sensation, then do not touch it with iron.
E si es de roga color e la razic es grossa, lahoras no toques aquela am ferr per le flux del sanc; abantz layssa aquel entro sia madurat, e lahoras o tu trauqueras aquel, o sira romput per si.	And if it is red-colored and the root is thick, then do not touch that with iron because of the flowing blood; before you let it set so that it hardens, then either you will pull it out or break it up itself.
E si es de blanqua color, radon, e la razit de lu es subtil, lahoras aquel es que cove esser inscidit.	And if it is white-colored and the root is thin, then that is what should be cut.
E la operacio en lu es que consideras, denant la tua operacio, si ja ha repausat le apostema de lu caut am repaus complit o si es deminuit am alcuna deminucio; e lahoras fay sezer le malaute denant le soleyl, e·l cap de lu sia en le tieu se, e huebre la boca de lu, e le servidor prenent entre las suas mas prema la lengua de lu dejos am instrument mot noble del qual aquesta es la forma:	And the operation on it is that you consider, before your operation, if the apostema has rested due to being cauterized with complete rest or if it has diminished due to any diminution; and then let the patient open his mouth in front of the sun, and his head be in the usual position, and the servant place his hands between their knees, and the server press the tongue of the patient away from below with a noble instrument of which this is the shape:
E sia fayt de argent o de aram, e sia subtil cum cotel.	Let it be made of silver or of bronze, and let it be thin as a needle.
Donc cum tu premes am aquel la lengua e es mostrat a tu la apostema, e catz sobre aquel le tieu vezement, lahoras pren onci e fica aquel en l’amenla, e tira aquel a las partidas defora tant quant podes.	Therefore, when you press upon it with your finger and the ulcer is revealed to you, and you put upon it your medicine, then take a needle and pierce that into the wound, and draw out from there as much of the humor as you can.
Otra aquo que tiras alcuna causa de las tunicas, e aprop incideys aquela am instrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	Another thing is that you should withdraw some cause from the membranes, and then cut into that with an instrument in the form of which this is.
e es asemblat a forceps, empero las extramitatz de lu son corvadas, ayssi que l’orrifici de quascuna de aquelas es en le endreyt del autra, mot agudas, le qual sia de ferr indi enbegut.	and is like a pair of tongs, except that the ends of it are bent, so that the aperture of each one is facing that of the other, very sharp, and made from iron which has been tempered.
Mays si aquest instrument no es a tu present, lahoras inscideys aquel am spatum del qual aquesta es la forma de lu: E sia agut de la una part, no agut del autra part.	But if this instrument is not available to you, then cut into it with a spatula, of which the shape of this is: and let it be sharp on one side, but not on the other.
E pus que has inscidit una mella, inscideys l’autra segon aquesta meteyssa manieyra de inscizio, e aprop la inscizio le malaute guarguarise de aygua frega	And then after you have cut one slit, cut the other according to this manner of cutting, and then let the patient be healed from water which has been rubbed.
Mays si endeve flux de sanc, guarguarise aygua de decoccio de scorsa de milgrana o de fuelha de mirtra e semblantz ad aquel de las causas stiptiquas entro que·l flux del sanc sia restreyt, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	But if there is bleeding instead, then heal it with water of the cooking of the husk of a pomegranate or of the leaf of a myrtle and similar to that of the causes which constrict within so that the flow of blood is restricted, and then cure that until it is healed.
E alcunas veguadas naysso en le guolayro autras apostemas otra aquelas doas aurelhas, e inscideys aquelas segon que yeu e dit en la inscizio de doas mellas engualment.	And sometimes it is seen in the gullet other ulcers other than those two ears, and cut into those according to what I have said about the cutting of two slits evenly.
E yeu ja fu medicat una femna de apostema le qual era nat en le golayro de lu, le qual apostema tendia a color fusca, de pauc sentiment, le qual ja havia claus le golayro de lu, e la femna respirava am meat streyt, e ja havia prohibit a lu comestio e beure de aygua, e ja era pervenguda a la mort si mays agues stat per un dia o per dos.	And I have already treated a woman of an ulcer which had come in her throat, that ulcer extending to the color brown, with little feeling, and which had already closed her throat, and the woman was breathing with difficulty, and had already prohibited eating and drinking water, and she had already been brought to death if not for one day or two.
E l’apostema ja tant havia pugat que havia mezes dos ramps entro que eyssiro per dos traucs.	And the ulcer had pushed so much that it had caused two bumps where pus came out through two holes.
Donc yeu me cuytegui fisturalment e fiquegui en un de lor onci, e tiregui aquel, e atirada es de lu gran porcio, e aprop yeu incidigui aquela de on comprendegui del autre trau, e aprop yeu obrigui la boca de lu, e compremegui la sua lengua, e aprop yeu fiquegui le onci en aquela apostema.	Therefore I cut into it skillfully and put my finger in one of them, and I drew out that, and a great portion came out of him, and then I cut into that where I understood the other hole to be, and then I bound his mouth, and pressed his tongue, and then I put my finger in that ulcer.
E aprop yeu abscizi gran partida de lu, e no corria de lu sino un pauc de sanc.	And then I cut away a great portion of it, and not much blood ran from him but a little.
Donc absolut es le guolayro de aquela femna, e comensec tantost beure aygua, e aprop presec vianda, donc yeu no cessegui inscidir de aquela apostema motas vetz per lonc temps, e succesia apostema en loc de aquel, le qual inscizia entro que es prolonguat aquel.	And then the throat of that woman was freed, and she began immediately to drink water, and then took food, therefore I did not cease cutting into that ulcer many times over a long time, and another ulcer came in place of that one which I cut while it was prolonged.
Donc yeu engen agui e cauterizegui le guolayro de lu, donc astec de addicio; e aprop yeu perambulegui e no saubi que fec Dieus de aquela aprop mi.	Therefore I cut and cauterized her throat again, therefore after a few days; and then I wandered and did not know what God had done to that, therefore I am astonished.
Capitol .xxxvii.	Chapter .xxxvii.
De inscizio de huvela quan es apostemada.	Of cutting of the veil when it is ulcerated.
Quan catarr deysen a la huvula, e es apostemada e es longa, lahoras ela es nompnada perpendicular; e si es en la partida dejos grossa e redonda, e lahoras ela es apelada buba.	When there is discharge from the membrane and it is ulcerated and long, then it is called a perpendicular ulcer; and if it is in the part below thick and round, then it is called a bubo.
Mays quan es curada am aquo que havem dit en la divisio, e no comfereys la tua curacio, e eyssament ja vezes que apostema caut ja es ostat de lu e es subtil, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquela que es agreguadas redonda; e si es ad aquela longitut, e es sanguina, de fusca color o de negre, e no es a lu centiment, lahoras cove que tu temtes la inscizio de lu, quar en aquela es temor sobre le malaute.	But when it is healed with the water which we have said in the division, and does not yield to your treatment, and you see that the ulcer cauterizes there and is thin, then beware that you cut into that which is added around round; and if it is to that length, and is bloody, of brown color or black, and there is no feeling in it, then beware that you do not cut into it, for there is fear over the patient.
E quan tu vezes aquela segon la manieyra que yeu he dita de la sua blancor e longuesa, que tu fassas sezer le malaute e premas la lengua de lu am instrument del qual procesic la sua forma e aprop fica le onci en la nuva, e tira aquela en jos e inscideys aquela am un de dos instrumentz les quals e ditz en la inscizio de dos mellas.	And when you see that according to the manner which I have said of its whiteness and length, that you make the patient fast and press his tongue with an instrument in the form of which is the process of it, and then put your finger into the new one, and draw out that one downward and cut into that with one of two instruments of which I have spoken about the cutting of two slits.
E cove que no inscidas aquela sino aquo que es ajustat sobre le terme natural ses addicio, quar si tu inscides de lu mays, lediyras le sieu parlar.	And beware that you do not cut into that except what is set over the natural term by addition, for if you cut more of it, you will injure his speech.
E aprop la inscizio, usa de aquo le qual havem recomtat en la inscizio de dos mellas, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	And after the cutting, use that which we have recommended in the cutting of two slits, and heal that until it is healed.
Mays si era le malaute espaventat per la inscizio de lu, cove que use de engen en la cauterizacio de lu ses temor, e la manieyra del cauteri en lu no es sino am aygua aguda, e es que tu pauses le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop prem la lengua de lu am le instrument le qual havem dit, e aprop pren de l’aygua la qual havem dita en le capitol de cauterizacio, e comfeys am aquela caus viva, e pausa aquela no spessa ni subtil, e de aquela omple la concavitat de l’estrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	But if the patient is frightened by the cutting of it, beware that you use the cautery on it without fear, and the manner of the cautery in him is not but with acute water, and it is that you hold the head of the patient in your lap, and then press his tongue with the instrument which we have said, and then take the water which we have spoken about in the chapter of cauterization, and apply with that cause alive, and pause that not thick nor thin, and from that fill the cavity of the instrument of which this is the form:
Sia la extramitat de lu conquavitat en la qual sia pausada la medicina ayssi cum la conquavitat de culher de ray, e pausa le strument am la medicina sobre la vula, e·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu latz per so que corro saliva o musellage de la boca de aquel per la intrinscequa medicina, per so que no deyssenda de aquela deguna causa sobre le golayro de lu e que ledesca aquel.	Let the end of it be concavitated in which is paused the medicine thus with the concavity of spoon, and pause the instrument with the medicine over the ulcer, and let the patient lie on his side so that run saliva or mucous from the mouth of him so that not descend any cause upon the throat of him and that flow that.
E aprop te la tua ma am la medicina, e exprem aquela sobre la uvula per l’espazi de miega hora entro que vegas aquela esser denegrada e sedada per la mordicacio de la medicina.	And then hold your hand over the medicine, and express that over the uvula over the space of about half an hour until you see that become blackened and sedated by the biting of the medicine.
E si vols, prengues coto e envolopes aquel sobre la extremitat del ray, e submergeys le coto en la medicina, e entrometas le ray am le coto en una canula de sobre entro que·l coto adheresca en aquela canula, e fay aquo tantas vetz entro que consiegues aquo que vols de la cauterizacio de la uva, e aprop leyssa aquela quar ela se seccara e cayra aprop tres dias o quatre.	And if you want, take thread and wrap that around the end of the rod, and submerge the thread in the medicine, and insert the rod with the thread in a tube of above so that the thread adheres in that tube, and do that as many times until you accomplish what you want from the cauterization of the uva, and then let it fall when it is dried and after three or four days.
E si indigeysses que iteras la medicina, itera aquela, e aprop la cauterizacio abstergeys en le circuit de la uva am coto enbegut en boder, e mondifica am aquel aquo que es en le circuit de lu de la medicina, e sia lavat am aygua frega, e sia curat deforo am embrocacio, e dedintz am guarguarismes entro que sia sanat.	And if you see that it iterates the medicine, iterate that, and then after the cauterization wash off in the circle of the uva with a rod which is dipped in vinegar, and cleanse with that what is in the circle of him from the medicine, and let it be washed with water which has been rubbed, and let it be healed outside with embrocation, and within with ointments until it is healed.
E aquesta especia de curacio es pus salva que inscizio e pus long de temor.	And this kind of treatment is more safe than cutting and also less frightening.
Alcunas veguadas es curada la uvuola am aquo que es pus subtil que cauteri e inscizio, quar es curat am subfumigacio en aquesta manieyra: recipe calament, ysop, origua, ruda, scicados arabic, camamilla, broyda e semblant ad aquels de las erbas, e ajusta totas aquelas causas, o alcunas de lor, en una ola, e sian submergidas am vi agre, e bulhan; e la ola sia be lutada am lut decentment, e sia en le mieg loc de la ola un trauc, sobre le qual sia pausat un instrument conquau de aram segon aquesta manieyra; sia fayt de argent o de aram.	Sometimes the uvula is healed with that which is more thin than cauterization and cutting, for it is healed by sub-fumigation in this manner: take calamen, hyssop, origano, ruda, arabic scinche, camomilla, and bruised and similar to those of the herbs, and mix all those causes, or some of them, in a wave, and let them be dipped in vinegar water, and boil; and let the wave be washed with decent lye, and let there be in the middle of the wave a hole, upon which is paused an instrument which is made of silver or bronze.
E sia entromesa la extremitat en la boca del malaute entro que la vapor poge a la uvula sobre la quanula, entro que la uvula sia mot ofuscada.	And let the end be inserted in the mouth of the patient so that the vapor goes to the uvula over the quantula, until the uvula is very fogged.
E aprop itera sobre aquela motas veguadas entro qu’es secca, e guarda te que no fassas aquesta curacio al comesament de l’aveniment de apostemas, quar trop ajustaria en le apostema, e no cove que tu fassas aquo, sino deves la declaracio de apostema de lu caut.	And then iterate over that many times until it is dried, and beware that you do not do this treatment at the beginning of the aliment of ulcers, for too much would constrict in the ulcer, and not beware that you do that unless after the declaration of cautery of the ulcer.
Mays si no es a tu present aquest instrument, lahoras pren una cana e compon en la extramitat de lu un clos de huou, per so que la boca del malaute sia comborida, quar le closc del huou prohibeys la vapor comburir la boca.	But if that instrument is not available to you, then take a cane and put at the end of it a plug of wood, so that the mouth of the patient be bent, for the plug of wood prohibits the vapor from burning the mouth.
E aquesta curacio es bona am salut.	And this treatment is beneficial for health.
Capitol .xxxviii.	Here is the text with the translation you requested:
De extraccio d’espinas e de aquo que adhereys en le golayro e de las autras causas.	Here is the translation for the provided text:
Motas veguadas adhereys en le guolayro o spina de peys o alcuna autra causa.	Here is the translation:
Adonc cove que tu extraguas aquo que de aquels es apparent, sobre le qual catz la vista, pus que tu premes la lengua am instrument denant solelh, per so que a tu sia declarat aquo que es en la guola.	Here is the translation:
E aquo que no apar e es a tu occultat en le guolayro, cove que tu fassas vomir le malaute denant que la vianda sia degerida en l’estomac, quar fort leu la causa annexsa le golayro sira foro-getada per vomit; o que deglusia le malaute una pessa de nap o de razit de laytuga o un boci de pa sec; o prengua una pessa de sponga marina sequa leon, e lia aquela fortment am fiel, e aprop le malaute transglussia aquela, quar cum perve al loc en le qual so spinas e es extrahuda, lahoras so foro-getatz.	Here is the translation:
E mays pren una anguila e be am fiel liada, e sia dedintz mesa e soptament sia extrayta; o pren un porr e soptament le metas e soptament l’en tratz.	Here is the translation:
Mays si no so foro-getatz am aquelas causas las quals havem ditas, lahoras husa de un instrument de plom segon aquesta forma:	Here is the translation:
E sia pus gros que ray un petit, e en la extramitat de lu sia conquavitat la qual tu entrometas en la sua guola am facilitat.	Here is the translation:
E el aga le sieu cap elevat en sus, e guarda te que·l tocament del sieu os de la gola, per so que endevengua a lu cos e am aquela que enpellesca le os o la spina, o que aquel le metge am la sua ma.	Here is the translation:
Mays empero que·l malaute aquel entrometa es miels, per la sua sciencia del loc de la causa annexa e enpellisca en jos, e tira la sua ma am le instrument en sus, tot aquo segon la quantitat la qual es a lu preparada entro que sia foro-getada.	Here is the translation:
Capitol .xxxix.	Here is the text with the translation you requested:
De extraccio de sancguisugua annexsa al golayro.	Here is the translation:
Quan es medicada sanguisugua am aquo que havem dit en la divisio de la curacio am medicinas e no comfereys, considera lahoras en le guolayro del malaute al solelh, pus que tu aias compremuda la lengua de lu am instrument le qual a tu havem recomtat.	Here is the translation:
Donc si tu vezes la sancguisugua, extratz aquela am onci petit o am gesti subtils decentment.	Here is the translation:
E si no es a tu possible estrayre am aquel, lahoras pren una canula concava e entromet aquela en lo guolayro del malaute, e aprop pausa en la concavitat de la canula un ferr ignit, e fay aquo tantas vetz (entro que la sancguisugua sia morta e se osta del guolayro) e abstengua se le malaute tot lo jorn de aygua.	Here is the translation:
E aprop prengua una veyria plena de aygua frega, e obra la boca de lu en aquela, e lava la boca am aquela; e no trasglucia de aquela alcuna causa e maugua l’aygua una hora aprop autra am la sua ma, quar la sancguisugua tantost cum sent l’aygua catz.	Here is the translation:
Mays si no es foro-getada am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras subfumigua le malaute am cimetz o am assafetida per le instrument le qual havem recomtat en la sufumiguacio de uvula.	Here is the translation:
Fay aquo, so en quar cayra.	Here is the translation:
E es un’autra manieyra de operacio en sufumiguacio de aquela, es que tu prenguas una ola en la qual sian carbos ignitz e la ola sia cuberta am una cobertora en le mieg de la qual sia un trauc, e sia compausat en aquel trauc la extremitat del instrument; e aprop dega desus la subfumigacio; e pause le malaute la sua boca en la extremitat de la canula, e claugua la sua boca per que la subfumiguacio no sia foro-getada entro que sapias que la subfumigacio es pervenguda a la sancguisugua, quar la sancguisugua tantost cayra.	Here is the translation:
E si no catz, lahoras tu itera la subfumiguacio motas vetz, e abstengua le malaute de beure, e mange causas saladas e alhs, e no begua aygua, e ayssi necessari es que am aquest regiment sia fora-getada.	Here is the translation:
E aquesta es la forma del instrument am le qual es trayta sancguisugua del guolayro quan es vista; e es semblant a forceps ayssi cum vezes, sino quar es en lu alcuna curvitat:	Here is the translation:
le qual sia mesa al guolayro, e la extremitat de lu es semblant a bec de ciconia, que es guanta, en la qual es aspretat de lima, per so quar, quan comprem alcuna causa, aquela no leyssa.	Here is the translation:
Capitol .xl.	Chapter 40.
En le qual es la suma del sermo en apercio de apostemas e en seccio de lor.	Here is the translation of the text:
Les apostemas so motas specias, de motas manieyras, segon que ve rememoracio de lor, de quascuna en aquest libre.	Abscesses are many kinds, from many sources, as one will see in this book.
E so diversas en perforacio e seccio de lor per doas manieyras, de las quals la una es per la specia de apostemas en si meteys; e per aquo que comprem de las humiditatz.	And they differ in their opening and section by two ways, one of which is through the nature of the abscess itself; the other is through the moisture that is contained within it.
E la segonda manieyra es prop les locs en les quals accideys del cos, quar le apostema accident en le cap es autra de la apostema accident en le cul; e le apostema en le loc carnos accident es autra del apostema accident en junctura; e a quascun de lor es son juguament per operacio.	And the second way is according to the location in which they occur, for an abscess on the head is different from one that occurs on the bottom; and an abscess at a muscular site is different from one that occurs at a joint; and each of these has its own treatment through operation.
E mays de apostemas so alcunas las quals cove que no sian perforadas sino aprop maturacio de la sania en aquels o compliment de lor.	And among abscesses there are some which should not be opened, but rather allowed to mature until the pus is discharged from them or they are completed.
So autras apostemas les quals cove que sian traucatz quan son cruzes, e no son maturatz segon lor compliment, ayssi cum apostemas que son propdas a las juncturas, quar apostema quan ve prop junctura, lo esser de lu es prolonguat entro que·s poyreys aquo que es en le circuit de lu, e fort leu son corromputz les liamentz o les nervis de aquela junctura, per que es fayta causa de contraccio de aquel membre; o es apostema prop de membre principal, e si tu tardas la perforacio de lu entro sia madurat nosira al membre principal; o es prop le cul, donc perfora aque no-madurat; e no cove que·l perforas cru, de no-complida degestio, sino aquel que es prop del cul, per so que no poyresca le preon de lu e sia elonguat a las partidas dedintz del cul, e sia fayta fistula, o que sia fayt en le terme de lu que no sia sanat.	And there are other abscesses which should be opened when they are cross; and they are not matured according to their nature, such as abscesses that are near joints, for an abscess when it approaches a joint, its essence is prolonged into the pores of its surroundings, and strongly corrupts the tendons or nerves of that joint, through which there occurs contraction of that member; or it is an abscess near a principal member, and if you delay its opening until it matures, it will harm the principal member; or it is near the bottom, therefore open it so that it does not mature, but rather one that is near the bottom, so that its pressure may not increase, lengthen into the parts within the bottom, and a fistula be made, or that there be made in the end of it what may not heal.
Mays cove que tu sapias la hora de la perforacio de la apostema, e aysso es quan es maturat.	But you should know the time of opening an abscess, and that is when it has matured.
E sapias que es madurat quan es la cedacio de la dolor e la cessacio de la febre, e aprop la diminucio de la rogor e de la pulsacio, e la acuitat del cap del apostema, e les autres senhals.	And you should know that it is matured when there is a decrease in pain and fever, and an approprate decrease in heat and pulse, and the sharpening of the head of the abscess, and other signs.
E quar cove que sapias la perforacio cazer en le loc pus dejos del apostema e de pus venient de curacio de la eminencia.	And because you should know the opening to be made in the most low part of the abscess and from pus coming from the healing of the eminence.
E perforacio tostemps sia per le lonc de la carn o del cors, si las apostemas son en las partidas de las mas o dels pes, e en loc dels lacertz, de las cordas dels nervis, de las arcerias; e, al derier, en totz locs enguals en les quals no es reflecio; quar en aquels que so reflectitz, usa de perforacio segon aquel membre.	And the opening is always to be made through the length of the flesh or the body, if the abscesses are in parts of the hands or feet, and at places of the veins, of the cords of the nerves, of the tendons; and, finally, in all places alike from which there is reflection; for those in which there is reflection, use opening according to that member.
Mays quan le apostema es en loc carnos, lahoras miels es que leysses la perforacio de lu entro que sia confermada la digestio de lu segon compliment, ayssi quo havem dit; quar si tu perforas aquel denant aquo, es prolonguat le cors del poyre de lu e de mota sordicia, e fort leu las labias de lu so enduradas e la profunditat de lu.	But when the abscess is at a muscular site, it is better that you delay its opening until its digestion is confirmed according to its nature; for if you open it before this, there will be lengthening of the pore of it and much filthiness, and strongly the lips of it will be hardened and its depth.
Mays alcus apostemas so perforatz segon la latitut de la carn o del cos deves la necessitat, o segon aquo del qual lo membre indigeys.	But some abscesses are opened according to the breadth of the flesh or the body through necessity, or according to that of which the member is in need.
E cove que administres petita perforacio , e·n les apostemas grans gran perforacio e ampla o motas seccios segon la diversitat de la grandesa dels apostemas.	And you should administer small opening in small abscesses, and large opening and ample or many incisions in great abscesses according to the diversity of their size.
E autras so dels apostemas en les quals cove que la codena sia conquavada e sia encidida, quan es fayta ayssi quo pan e fayta es en terme que ja stigua, ayssi cum aquel que accideys en trops de dubelec e de bubos.	And others are of abscesses in which the membrane is hollowed out and incised when it has been made in such a way that bread is done to it, and it is done in term that it was already, as well as that which occurs in trops of doubt and of blisters.
E de aquels so que so insciditz am seccio havent tres angles; e de aquels es en le qual es inscidit ayssi cum figura de fuelha de mirtra, ayssi cum las apostemas dels angonars.	And of those there are that are cut with three angles; and of those in which it is cut in the figure of a bay-leaf, as well as the abscesses of the angles.
E de lor so en les quals es administrada seccio redonda e seccio lunar, e semblantz ad aquels.	And there are some in which round section and lunar section is administered, and similar to those.
Mays aquel al qual no es cap ayssi cum son apostemas leons superficials, cove que tu perforas aquel am perforacio superficial, o plana tant solament.	But that at which there is not head as of superficial abscesses, you should open it with superficial opening or plain incisions only.
E cove quant le apostema es gros e ya ha colligit mota sania, que perfores aquel e no te coytes que extraguas tot le poyre en aquela hora; habantz extratz de aquel una partida, e aprop opila le apostema entro al autre dia, e aprop extratz una partida major, e aprop fa aquo motas veguadas segon graduacio entro que sia foro-getat.	And when the abscess is great and has collected much pus, you should open it and not be afraid to extract all of its pore in that hour; after having extracted some from it, you should then pack the abscess so that there is a filling within it for another day, and again after having extracted a greater part, you should do this many times according to degree until it is foro-getat.
E majorment si·l malaute es de freol vertut, o femna prens, o enfant petit, o viel en decrepitut, quar l’esperit animal motas vetz es resolvut am la egressio de la sania, e fort leu mor le malaute, e tu operte les.	And especially if the patient is of weak nature or a pregnant woman, or small child, or old in decrepitude, for the animal spirit is many times resolved by the exit of pus, and strongly the patient dies, and you operate on them.
Don guarda aquest capitol am gran cautela, e aprop la tua perforacio en la qual perforas aquestz apostemas, cove que abstergescas las plagues e consideras donc si la plagua del apostema es pauca, o es una seccio plana, lahoras tu aministra las qualguas de li o de coto antic; e si le apostema es gran, e las fissuras de la perforacio son motas, lahoras cove que tu pauses meca en quascun trauc entro que pervenguan ensemps.	Therefore guard this chapter with great caution, and when you open the abscesses in which you operate on these abscesses, after having washed the wound consider if there is little pus or the section is flat, then administer leeches of larch or oak-tree; but if the abscess is great, and the fissures of the opening are many, then you should pause a hook in each piercing until they come together.
E si en le apostema es abscindit una partida de la codena o has concavada aquela en le circuit, lahoras cove que tu la complescas de coto viel o de fil fayt de drap de li, ayssi cum quan has traytz pans o razizos, ses humiditat; e strenh aquel entro al tertz dia; e aprop proceseys aquel e cura le am aquo que cove dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And if in the abscess there is a part of the membrane cut or hollowed out at its perimeter, then you should complete it with old linen or thread made of linen-yarn, as well as when you have extracted pus or roots, without moisture; and strengthen it on the third day; and then process it and heal it with that which one of the ointments within until it is healed.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc en la hora de la operacio tua, lahoras tu aministra aygua frega e vi agre en les quals mules un drap de li, e pausa aquel sobre le loc del fluxs del sanc motas veguadas.	But if blood occurs in the hour of your operation, then you should administer water mixed with vinegar in which one of linen is, and pause it upon the place of the flow of the blood many times.
Mays si persevera le fluxs del sanc, lahoras cove que tu aministres regiment e curacio e polveras las quals he recomtadas en motz locs de aquest nostre libre e de divisio.	But if the flow of blood persists, then you should administer regime and cure, and powders which I have recommended in many places of this book and of division.
Mays si es en temps de hivern, e·l loc de la apostema es loc de motz nervis, lahoras cove que tu enfundas pulvils en vi e oli caut, e pauses aquels sobre les locs.	But if it is in the time of winter, and the location of the abscess is a place of many nerves, then you should mix powder with wine and oil, and pause them upon the locations.
E si es en estiu, e les locs son carnoses, lahoras cove que tu pauses pulvils enbeguts am aygua e oli o am vi e oli, e tot aquo sia freg entro que sia le ters dia, ayssi cum havem dit, e lahoras cove que tu deslies le apostema e abstergescas aquel e aministres en la curacio de lu aquo que a lu conveneys entro que sia sanat.	And if it is in the summer, and the locations are muscular, then you should pause powders dampened with water and oil or wine and oil, and all of this should be rubbed until the third day as we have said, then you should dissolve the abscess and wash it and administer in its cure that which to it convenes until it is healed.
E aysso es aquo que es necessari de la cognicio de la curacio de apostemas universalment, mays segon la via de distinccio ja he dit de tot apostema en qual manieyra es via de la cura de lu per capitols singularment.	And this is that which is necessary of the knowledge of the cure of abscesses universally, but according to the way of distinction I have said of every abscess in what manner is its way of cure by chapters singularly.
Capitol .xli.	Chapter 41.
De seccio de apostemas les quals veno en la codena del cap.	Of section of abscesses which occur in the membrane of the head.
En la codena del cap petitz apostemas, e so de specias de nodes les quals conteno tunicas que so a lor factz ; e las specias de lor so motas.	In the membrane of the head there are small abscesses, and they are of species of nodes which contain membranes that are to them made; and their species is many.
E de lor son pingas, e de aquelas so que conteno humiditat semblant a lima.	And from them there are pustules, and from those one contains moisture similar to lime.
E de aquelas so las quals conteno humiditat semblant a pols, et asemblantz a lor; e de aquelas so que son lapideas, durs.	And from those are ones that contain moisture similar to powder, and resembling it; and there are some that are scaly, hard.
E en la seccio de totz, e en la extraccio de aquels no es temor, cum deves la exteccio de aquels no fa contrariat arceria.	And in the section of all, and in the extraction of these there is not fear, as one must the extension of those does not contradict artery.
E la operacio en seccio de aquels es que tu esproes aquels am instrument la forma del qual ve aprop aysso, le qual es apelat entromes, entro que sapias que contengua.	And the operation in section of these is that you express those with an instrument the form of which see there, the which is called entromes, so that you know that it contains.
Quar si aquo que conte es humiditat, lahoras scindeys aquel am seccio segon la longitut per seccio superficial segon aquesta forma:	For if that which is contained is moisture, then cut this with section according to length by superficial section according to this form:
E comensa en la seccio de la linha de .B. entro a la linha de .G. Donc cum la humiditat es evacuada, lahoras tu excoria aquela pel que conte aquela humiditat, e no leysses de aquela alcuna causa de tot, quar tropas veguadas retorna, si roman de aquela alcuna causa.	And he begins at the section of the line of B. into the line of G. Therefore when the moisture is evacuated, then you scrape that which contains that moisture, and do not seek any cause from that, for many experienced physicians return, if something remains from that cause.
E aprop submergeys coto en enguent egipciach, si es present, e sino, en aygua e sal; e umpleys am aquel la plagua e layssa aquel entro ad autra dia, quar am aquo corrodeys tot so que es romas de aquela pellicula.	And then immerse the wound in Egyptian ointment, if available, and if not, in water and salt; and fill it with that, and leave it until the next day, for with that you will dissolve all that is broken of that membrane.
E aprop itera sobre aquel coto am enguent egipciach segondament e tersament si indigeyses de lu, entro que·t comfides que no y haia romas alcuna causa de aquela pellicula; lahoras cura la plagua am enguent entro que sia sanada.	And then apply Egyptian ointment a second and third time on the wound if you are confident that there is no cause from that membrane; then heal the wound with ointment until it is cured.
E si apostema conte nodi gras, lahoras tu inscideys aquel segon aquesta forma:	And if an abscess contains a hard nodule, then you cut into that according to this form:
am seccio havent forma de crotz, e geta oncis entre doas labias de la seccio e scorsa aquel de tota partida, e esforsa la tua vertut en extraccio de la tunica la qual conte aquel.	with a cross-shaped incision, and cut between the two lips of the incision and scrape that entirely out from the membrane that contains it, and exert your strength in extracting the lining which contains that.
Mays si a tu arceria fa contrarieta, lahoras fay aquo que yeu t’e recontat primieyrament.	But if your arrow causes you trouble, then do what I told you first.
E semblantment fay en le apostema lapificat de seccio e de curacio segon que a tu havem dit; e seccio sobre apostema lapificat es pus leugiera, quar es de pauc sanc e de pauca humiditat.	And similarly do for an abscess which is suppurating with an incision and treatment as we have said before; and an incision on a suppurating abscess is easier, because it contains little pus and little moisture.
E alcunas vetz so alcus de aquestz apostemas les quals so en le cap en alcus homes am los quals de tot no es humiditat; la qual causa es quar yeu inscindigui sobre un apostema en le cap de una femna vielha e atrobegui le apostema ayssi cum peyra sorda, aspra, blanqua, la qual no podia esser trinquada, e si a alcu fos am aquela percussit, plaguera aquel.	And sometimes there are some of these abscesses which are on the head in some people, for whom there is not any moisture; and the cause is that I incised an abscess on the head of an old woman and found the abscess like a hard, rough, white stone, which could not be broken up, and if someone hit it, it hurt.
Mays en les autres apostemas accidentz en le cap otra aquest no es aquest capitol, ayssi cum les apostemas que veno als caps dels enfantz e deves las razitz de las aurelhas, mays la seccio de aquestz totz sia seccio superficial.	But in the other abscesses which occur on the head, it is not like this, as with the abscesses which come to the heads of children and because of the roots of the ears; but the incision for these should be superficial.
E pausa la perforacio de aquels de la partida pus bassa de lor per so que sia alleujat le cos de la sania a las partidas pus bassas.	And pause at the penetration of those in the lower part of them, so that the body is relieved from the sanies to the lower parts.
E aprop cura aquelas am aquo que conveneys ad aquel de curacio.	Then treat those with what is appropriate for that type of treatment.
Capitol .xlii.	Chapter .XLVII.
De seccio de scrophulas las quals accideyso en le col.	Of an incision on scrofula which occurs in the neck.
Motas veguadas endeveno aquestas apostemas en le colh e en las aysselhas e en les angonars; e alcunas veguadas accideyso en las autras partidas del cos.	Often these abscesses occur in the neck and armpits and in the groin; and sometimes they occur in other parts of the body.
E so aquelas que accideysso en le colh, e so motas que so engendradas entre lor, e tota scrofula de aquelas es dintz la sua tunica propria, e ayssi cum en les nodis e apostema del cap, ayssi cum havem recomtat.	And those which occur in the neck, and many of them are engendered among themselves; and all scrofula of these is within its own membrane, and so with the nodules and abscesses of the head, as we have described.
E las specias de aquestas scrophulas son motas, quar de aquelas so alcunas lapideas, e de aquelas so que conteno humiditatz, e de aquelas so malignas las quals no obeseysso a curacio.	And the species of these scrofula are many; for some are stony, and some contain moisture, and some are malignant and do not submit to treatment.
Donc en aquela la qual tu vezes de bona disposicio en le Tocament, de la qual la color de aquo que es manifest es propda a la color de la codena, e es mauguda a tota partida, e no es annexsa am le nervi del colh, ni am las venas, ni am la arceria, e no es preonda, cove que tu inscidiscas aquela am siccio superficial de la partida desus a la partida dejos del cos de la linha de .G. entro la linha de .B., e scorja aquela de tota partida, e exten dos labias de la codena am onci, o am motz oncis si has necessitat de aquels, ayssi cum havem dit en las apostemas del cap, e extratz aquela petit a petit.	Therefore in that which you see with a good disposition in the touch, of which the color of what is seen is close to the color of the skin, and is swollen to all parts, and is not attached to the nerves of the neck, or the veins, or the artery, and is not deep, then you cut into that with a superficial incision from above to below the body along the line of G. into the line of B., and scrape that entirely out, and cut between its two lips with an incision, or with many incisions if you have need of those, as we said in the abscesses of the head; and extract that little by little.
E es mays cautela que no sia inscidida la vena o nervi.	And it is more cautious that the vein or nerve not be cut.
E sia le spatum no mot agut, que no ajuste a tu la tua ma am inscizio, o que enquiete le malaute, e que inscidas aquo que no es necessari inscidir; quar si inscideysses vena o arceria e prohibeys tu de la tua operacio, lahoras pausa en la plagua vetriol trissat o autras polveras las quals ostan fluxs de sanc, e estrenh la plagua, e layssa aquel entro que·s repausa la acuitat de la apostema e sia mollificada la plagua e comense esser poyrida.	And be careful that the spatulum not strike suddenly, so that it does not hit your hand with an incision, or upset the patient, and cut into what is not necessary to be cut; for if you incised a vein or artery and prohibited yourself from your operation, then stop in the wound vinegar mixed with trass or other powders which stop the flow of blood, and close the wound, and leave it until that subsides the acuteness of the abscess, and becomes soft, and begins to become suppurating.
Quan le sanc es abscindit.	When the blood is stopped.
Donc retorna a la tua operacio entro que l’aias complida.	Then return to your operation until you have finished.
E aprop inquireys am le tieu dit indic si es romas alcuna causa de las autras petitas scrophulas, donc inscideys aquelas e munda aquelas.	Then inquire with your finger if any cause remains of the other little scrofula; then incise those and clean them.
E si es en la razit de la scrophula gran vena, cove lahoras que no inscidas aquela scrophula de la sua razitz.	And if there is a great vein in the root of the scrofula, then you should not incise that scrofula at its roots.
Abantz cove que lies aquela am fiel doblat fort e que leysses aquela entro que caia per si ses nocument.	But if you see that it falls by itself without harm, then leave that alone.
E aprop omple la plagua de coto vielh le qual tu has ja submirgit en enguent egipciac, e aprop cura aquel.	Then fill the wound with old ointment which you have already immersed in Egyptian ointment, and then heal that.
E si inscides aquela scrophula tota, lahoras cove que tu ajustes las doas labias de la plagua e cuzas2 tantost pus que no y ha romasa deguna superfluitat.	And if you incised that scrofula entirely, then you should attach the two lips of the wound and cauterize it so that no suppuration remains.
Mays si tu vezes que haia romasa superfluitat per la grandeza de la scrofula, cove que tu entendas a inscidir la razit de aquela, e astrayra aquela e aministra sutura e aquo que es dit.	But if you see that there is suppuration because of the greatness of the scrofula, then you should understand how to incise its root, and drain that and administer a poultice and what is said.
E aquela de las scrophulas que conteno humiditatz, perfora aquela am perforacio superficial aqui la on appar a tu le loc de maturacio de lu, e pausa perforacio de aquo que siec le pus bas del cos, ayssi cum havem dit.	And those of the scrofula which contain moisture, pierce that with a superficial incision where you see the place of its maturity to be, and pause an incision so that it drains the pus from below the body, as we have said.
E aprop aministra perforacio, calguas am enguent e semblantz ad aquels, per so que corroda aquo que es romas de la corropcio.	Then administer an incision, poultices with ointment and similarly to those, so that it dissolves what is broken in the corrosion.
E aprop quan tu vezes la plagua ja esser mundada, lahoras tu cura aquela am enguent de carn generatiu entro que sia sanada.	Then when you see the wound already cleaned, then heal that with ointment of generative flesh until it is cured.
Capitol .xliii.	Chapter .XLVIII.
De seccio del pilhot del apostema accident dintz le guolayro.	Of an incision on a boil which occurs in the gullet.
Diyssero les antics aquesta seccio en le epilhot, e no vist alcu hom en nostra terra que aquela aia fayta.	Others before us made this incision in the pilhot, and I have not seen anyone in our land who had that done.
E aquesta es la inscriptura del sermo de aquels.	And that is the inscription of their name.
Mays en les homes haventz esquinencia, cove que sia esquivada la extraccio del epilhot, cum per aquo no sia fayt juvament per so quar totas las venas e las majors del malaute so aqui.	But in men who have a hernia, then the extraction of the pilhot should be avoided, so that all the veins and the greater nerves of the patient are not cut.
Mays en aquels que han apostemas cautz en la boca o guolayro o dos aurelhas, quan la malautia no es en la cana, cove husar de la seccio de epilhot a fugir la perdicio la qual es fayta per perfocacio.	But in those who have abscesses cauterized in the mouth or gullet or two ears, when the illness is not in the neck, then they should avoid an incision of the pilhot so that they avoid the danger which is done by penetration.
Donc cove quan volem aquo, que inscidam le epilhot dejos tres cercles dels cercles del epilhot, o quatre am petita seccio per la latitut en aquel que es entre dos cercles per quantitat, que la seccio sia en ciphac, no en la cartillage, e aquest loc es convenent a seccio, quar es privat de carn e les vayselhs de sanc de lu son luhen.	Then when we want that, let us incise the pilhot below three circles of the circles of the pilhot, or four with small incision for the width in that which is between two circles for quantity; and the incision should be in the pharynx, not in the cartilage, and that place is convenient for incision, because it is deprived of flesh, and the vessels of blood from him are long.
E si le metge es pauruc, cove lahoras que extenda la codena del golayro am onci, e aprop fenda la codena entro que pervengua a la canal, mays evite les vaysels de sanc si vetz de aquelas alcuna causa.	And if the patient is timid, then let the doctor stretch the gullet with an incision, and then cut the gullet so that it penetrates into the canal, but avoid the vessels of blood if he sees from those any cause.
E aprop inscida li ciplach segon que havem recomtat; e es significat sobre la seccio de la canal per le flacma le qual es de aquela eyssit am aquo que es de lu disromput e per la abscizio de la votz.	Then incise the pharynx according to what we have recommended; and it is understood from the incision of the gullet by the flame which comes from him who is broken, and from the incision of the voice.
E layssa la plagua uberta per alcun temps.	And leave the wound open for some time.
Donc cum la hora es remauguda en la qual perforacio es temuda, agregua doas labias de la codena de la plagua, e cus aquela sola ses la cartillage.	Then when the hour is swollen in which the penetration is seen, unite the two lips of the wound of the pharynx, and cut that only to the cartilage.
E aprop administra medicinas que fan naysser la carn entro que sia sanat.	And then administer medicines that promote the growth of new flesh where it is needed.
E diyssec Albucasis que la summa del sermo le qual havem recomtat, exposicio no es sino que veias que alcus de aquetz apostemas ja han opilat lo guolayro del malaute, e le malaute es vengut entro a mort, e le ale de lu es entresecat, e alcus van a inscidir le epiglos per so que respire le malaute sobre le loc de la plagua per alcuna respiracio, e sia salvat de mort.	And Al-Bukhari says that the meaning of this discourse which we have narrated is merely this: sometimes some of these abscesses have forced open the gullet of the patient; the patient has died, his bowels are protruded and some people cut into the epiglottis so that the patient can breathe on the spot where the plague is located and thus be saved from death.
E per aquo comandero layssar la plagua uberta entro que sia consumida la malicia de la malautia; e es la malicia de lu per tres dias; e donc lahoras comandero cosi la plagua, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	And for this reason I command the opening of the pustule to be left open until the poison of the illness is expelled; and this poison lasts for three days; and then when the pustule is opened and treated in this manner, it will heal.
E aquo que yeu he vist per mi meteys, es que una sirventa pres un cotel e mesec le en le sieu golayro e inscidic am aquel una partida de la cana del pulmo, e yeu fu apelat a la curacio de lu, e atrobegui la mugen ayssi cum es mugit del moridos, e descubrigui la plagua e atrobegui le sanc le qual era yssit de la plagua petit.	And what I have seen with my own eyes is that a servant held a pillow to his mouth and inserted the end of a pulmonary tube into his gullet; I was called to treat him, and when I discovered the pustule, I found blood coming out of it in small quantities.
Donc yeu fo confessat que aquela no havia inscidit vena ni guidegi, e le vent yssia de la plagua, e curegui aquela entro que foc sanada.	And then he was made to confess that he had not punctured a vein or a nerve, and the wind escaped from the pustule and it healed.
E no accidic a la sirventa si no rauquiera en la votz, e aprop alcus dias retornec ad miloracio de las suas dispozicios.	And nothing happened to the servant unless he breathed through his mouth; then, after a few days, he returned to his usual condition.
E ara dic yeu que en la seccio del epilhot no ha temor.	And now I say that there is no fear in puncturing the epiglottis.
Capitol .xliv.	Chapter 44.
De seccio sobre apostema le qual accideys en le golayro defora, e es apelat hernia del golayro.	Of an incision on an abscess which occurs outside the gullet and is called a gullet hernia.
Aquest apostema nompnat hernia del golayro es apostema gran segon la color del cors, e es mot en las femnas.	This hernia of the gullet is called a great abscess depending on the colour of the body, and it occurs in women.
E es segon dos manieyras, quar o es natural o accidental.	And it happens in two ways: either naturally or accidentally.
E en le natural no es engen de curar.	And the natural one is incurable.
E l’accidental es segon dos manieyras del qual la un es semblant a nodes grasses, e l’autra manieyra es semblant apostema le qual es fayt per nodacio de arteria, e en aquel es temor.	And the accidental one happens in two ways: the first is like fatty nodes and the other is like an abscess which occurs due to a knotted artery, and there is danger in that.
E no cove que·s fassa presumpcio a lu cum ferr sino en aquel que es petit.	And one should not make an incision on it with an iron instrument except in the case of a small one.
E tu proha aquel e investigua aquel am le dit, e si atrobas lu semblant a nodi gras, e no es suspendut am alcuna de las venas, lahoras tu inscideys aquel ayssi cum les nodes, e extratz aquel am aquo que conte lu de la pel e bursiclam; e sino, lahoras es perscrutat tot le sieu esser, e aprop cura le loc am aquo que cove de curacio entro que sia sanat.	And you should probe it and examine it with your finger; and if you find it like a fatty node and not attached to any vein, then you should open it in the same way as nodes, and extract all that the skin and bursa contain; otherwise, you should probe its whole substance, and treat the place with something suitable for healing until it is cured.
Capitol .xlv.	Chapter 45.
De seccio de las specias de nodes.	Of the sections of nodal tumours.
Dels nodes so motas specias e yeu ja he dit totas las specias de lor en la divisio.	There are various kinds of nodes, and I have already described all their types in Division.
E cove que yeu recomte assi la diferencia entre node e exitura cum fassa dubitacio.	And what I will now account for is the difference between a node and an exit wound which causes doubt.
Donc yeu dic que am exitura es caliditat e febre e dolors vehementz entro que es sedada la ebullicio de la superfluitat; e es complida putrefaccio que lahora cessa la febre, la dolor e la calor.	And I say that an exit wound is accompanied by heat, fever and violent pains until the ebullition of the superfluous matter ceases; and there is complete putrefaction when the fever, pain and heat subside.
Mays am node no es caliditat ni febre ni dolor, e conte aquel ciphac leon le qual es al u sac propri.	But a node is not accompanied by heat, fever or pain; it contains its own sac.
E es segon la color del cors, e le comensament de lu es cum un ceze e es fayt ayssi cum vace, sia major o minor, e son segon dos specias, quar o so grassas e conteno humiditat, e las colors de la humiditat son motas, segon que yeu diyssi en la divisio.	And it depends on the colour of the body; its beginning is like a cyst and it occurs due to vacuousness, being either greater or lesser in size, and they are of two kinds: either fatty and containing moisture whose colours I have described in Division.
Donc cove, quan pervenas a la curacio de node, que exprohes aquel e inquiras aquel al comensament am sturment le qual es apelat intromes, segon que vindra la sua forma en le capitol le qual es aprop aquest.	Therefore, when you come to treat a nodal tumour, you should probe it and examine its beginning with an instrument called an intrometer, depending on the form which will be described in the following chapter.
E es manieyra de inquisicio de apostemas e de totz nodes, e es que tu prenguas aquest sturment e entromet aquel en le loc pus humit le qual atrobas en le apostema, e tu revolveras les tieus ditz am aquel petit a petit entro que sapias que·l sturment ja ha penetrat la codena.	And this is the manner of examining an abscess and any node: you should take this instrument and insert it into the most moist part of the abscess which you find, and turn the instrument with a small movement until you know that it has penetrated the membrane.
E aprop ultima la tua ma segon la mesura de la grandeza del apostema, e aprop extratz le entromes e considera aquo que es yssit en le vestigi de lu.	Then stop your hand according to the size of the abscess, extract the instrument and consider what has come out through its orifice.
E si es fora-getada la humiditat corrent, de qualque color sia, lahoras tu le inscideys am seccio superficial segon que he dit en les autres apostemas.	And if the moist matter has run out, regardless of its colour, then you should open it with a superficial incision as I have said in the case of other abscesses.
E si del vestigi de l’intromes no hieys humiditat, lahoras sapias que es gras.	And if there is no moist matter coming out through the orifice of the instrument, then you should know that it is fatty.
E secca sobre lu am seccio havent forma de crotz segon aquesta forma:	And dry it with an incision having a cruciform shape according to this shape:
ayssi cum t’e ensenhat, e suspen aquel am oncis, e excorja la codena de tota part am facilitat, e guarda la pel o sac, si podes, sobre aquel e extraguas aquela sania am le node.	cut it in this way and suspend it with hooks, and excise the membrane from all parts with ease, and keep the skin or sac over it, if you can, and extract that pus from the node.
Mays si es romput en la operacio, no es possible extrayre aquela sana, e motas veguadas endeve aquo, e lahoras tu la extratz a pessas entro que de lu no romangua denguna causa.	But if it is broken in the operation, it is not possible to extract that pus; it happens many times that you should extract it little by little so that nothing remains inside which could cause any harm.
Quar si de lu roman denguna causa, pauc o trop, le node retorne segon le mays.	For if anything remains inside, a little or a lot, the node returns as before.
E si tu vezes que de lu roman alcuna part petita, lahoras comple la plagua de alcunas polveras corrosivas agudas e strenh la plagua, e pausa sobre aquela que sede apostema caut, e cura aquel del autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	And if you see that a little remains inside, then complete the pustule with some caustic and corrosive powders, close the pustule and place your hand over it as before, and cure it by another method until it is healed.
E si es node gran, lahoras tu cus las doas labias de lu e cura aquel am aquo que encarna.	And if it is a large node, then cut its two lips and cure it with that which is encrusted.
Mays si vena pulsatil es a lu contraria, o no-pulsatil, lahoras tu coyta e huemple le loc de zegi trissat que es vetriol e leyssa aquel streyt per dos dias o per tres entro que·s poyresca la plagua e que repause la ebullicio del sanc; e aprop retorna a inscindir aquo que es romas del node.	But if the vein is pulsating or not, then cut and plug the place of the pulsatil vein which is opposite to it with a mixture of quicklime and vinegar and close that for two or three days until the pustule has suppurated and the effusion of blood has ceased; then return to opening what is broken in the node.
Capitol .xlvi.	Chapter 46.
De las formas del sturmentz necessaris en seccio e perforacio.	Of the forms of instruments necessary for incision and piercing.
De aquels so las formas dels intromesas, e so de tres specias, que de aquels es alcu gran, e de lor es migier, e de lor es petit.	Those are the forms of the instruments: one is large, another medium, and a third small.
La forma de intromes gran es aquesta:	The form of the large instrument is as follows:
La forma de intromes migier es aquesta:	The form of the medium instrument is as follows:
La forma de intromes petit es aquesta:	The form of the small instrument is as follows:
Sian faytz de ferr, de alfulud, de extremitatz cayradas decentment, per so que festino le intrament en les apostemas.	They are made of iron, of hollowed out bronze, and of pointed ends cut decently, so that the instrument can be inserted into abscesses.
E aquestas so las formas dels experientz, e son nompnatz albered, e un de aquels es apelat berid.	And these are the forms of the instruments which are called albarede and one of them is called beride.
E so de tres especias, quar de lor es gran, migier e pauc.	And they are of three kinds: large, medium and small.
La forma de experient gran, forma de lu:	The form of the large instrument is as follows:
La forma de experient migier, forma de lu:	The form of the medium instrument is as follows:
La forma de experient pauc, forma de lu:	The form of the small instrument is as follows:
Conveneysso que sian per aquels apostemas e exituras e fistulas e bubos per so que entre aquelas so dels osses e de autras causas.	Those are for abscesses and exit wounds and fistulas and boils due to that between the bones and from other causes.
E so faytz redontz, grosses, leons, ayssi cum grans agulhas am las quals son cosidas las selhas, e son faytas de eram citri, o de eram o de ferr, o de argent, E las milhors so quan so faytas de eram citri.	And they are made round, large, like needles, with which the sutures are sewed up, and they are made of ram of citron wood, or of iron, or of silver; and the pins are when they are made of ram of citron wood.
E son faytz les experient de plum negre, les quals se acordan que per aquels sian ubertas las fistulas en la conquavitat de las quals so reflexios, que sian reflectidas am la sua levitat am aquelas refleccios.	And they are made of black iron, which it is believed that through them the fistulas are opened in the cavities where the reflections are reflected from above by those reflections.
E so de tres specias, quar alcus de lor so loncs, e dels autres migiers, e dels autres breus, segon la quantitat del ample de la fistula e de la strictura de lu.	And they are of three kinds: one long, the other medium and the third short, according to the quantity of the width of the fistula and its strictness.
Forma del experient gran de plom:	Form of the large instrument of lead:
Forma del experient migier de plom:	Form of the medium instrument of lead:
Forma del experient petit de plom:	Form of the small instrument of lead:
Las formas dels oncis so de motas specias, quar de aquels so alcus simples, als quals es una curvitat solament, e so de tres specias: grans, paucs e migiers.	The shapes of warts are of many kinds, some of which are simple, having only one curve, and they are of three species: large, small, and medium-sized.
E de lor so uncis orps, e so de tres specias.	And of them some are carnous bodies, and of three species.
E de aquels so uncis haventz doas curvaturas, e so de tres specias.	And of those some have two curves, and they are of three species.
E de lor so haventz tres curvaturas, e so de tres specias.	And of them some have three curves, and they are of three species.
E totz aquetz so necessaris en lor loc.	And all of these are necessary in their place.
Forma de unci simple gran, forma de lu:	The form of a large simple wart is thus:
Forma de unci simple migier:	The form of a medium-sized simple wart is thus:
Forma de unci simple pauc, forma de lu:	The form of a small simple wart is thus:
Forma de unci orp gran:	The form of a large carnous body is thus:
Forma de unci orp migier, forma de lu:	The form of a medium-sized carnous body is thus:
Forma de unci orp pauc, forma de lu:	The form of a small carnous body is thus:
Forma de unci gran havent dos curvaturas:	The form of a large wart with two curves is thus:
Forma de unci migier havent dos curvatas:	The form of a medium-sized wart with two curves is thus:
Forma de unci pauc havent dos curvaturas:	The form of a small wart with two curves is thus:
Forma de unci gran havent tres curvaturas:	The form of a large wart with three curves is thus:
Forma de unci migier havent tres curvaturas:	The form of a medium-sized wart with three curves is thus:
Forma de unci pauc havent tres curvaturas:	The form of a small wart with three curves is thus.
E aquestas so las formas dels scalpels am les quals son seccatz e scorjatz les nodes e le apostemas, e so de tres specias, quar de aquels es gran, migier, e pauc.	And these are the forms of the scalpel with which they cut and scrape the nodules and abscesses, and they are of three species: large, medium-sized, and small.
Forma de scapel gran:	The form of a large scalpel is thus:
Forma del scapel migier:	The form of a medium-sized scalpel is thus:
Forma de scapel pauc:	The form of a small scalpel is thus.
Las extramitatz de aquels am les quals es fayta seccio so agudas e las autres extramitatz so no-agudas, e no so pausadas en tal manieyra, sino per que sia fayt juvament en la excorjacio dels nodes la temor de inscizio de vena o de nervi, e per aquels sia sanat le malaute e atrobe tranquilitat un petit per la adustio la qual atroba deves la excoriacio del apostema.	The extremities of those with which the cut is made are acute, and the others are not acute, but it is made so that the incisions are done gently in the excision of the nodules to avoid cutting into a vein or nerve, and through them the patient is healed and given rest by the burning which brings about the suppuration of the abscess.
E aquestas son las formas de almagidas, e so de tres specias: gran, migier e pauc, ayssi cum veyras.	And these are the forms of the poultices, and they are of three species: large, medium-sized, and small, as you will see.
La forma de magda gran:	The form of a large poultice is thus:
Forma de magda migier:	The form of a medium-sized poultice is thus:
Forma de magda pauc:	The form of a small poultice is thus.
Sian faytas de eram e so semblantz de ray am le qual e fayt alcofol.	They are made of wool and they are similar to a ball with which it is made.
E es en la extramitat lada punctada am spatum occultada e en aquela corr a las partidas dedintz e defora, quan tu vols, ayssi cum veses.	And it has in its edges a pointed hole covered and on the other side holes to the sides, within and without, as you will see.
Las formas de spatimis, les quals so amaguatz entre los ditz deves la perforacio dels apostemas e no les percebo les malautes, e so de tres specias: gran, migier e pauc.	The forms of the spatulas, which are used hidden between the fingers for piercing abscesses and do not harm the patient, and they are of three species: large, medium-sized, and small.
E aquestas so las formas de aquels:	And these are the forms of those:
Las formas de ventozas am las quals es abscindit le flux del sanc, e so de tres specias; gran, migiera e pauca; las formas de lu:	The forms of phlebotomy instruments with which the flow of blood is stopped, and they are of three species: large, medium-sized, and small; their forms are thus:
Sian faytas de eram citri, redondas am alcuna longitut , e sian subtils.	They are made of citron wood, round with no length, and they are thin.
E cove que sian aquestas specias de ventosas deves tu grans, migieras e paucas, per so que per aquelas abscindas flux de sanc am velocitat en necessitat, e lahoras quan a tu primieyrament no es medicina.	And know that these species of phlebotomy instruments are large, medium-sized, and small, in order that with them you may quickly stop the flow of blood when medicine is not immediately at hand.
Enpero no uses de aquelas ad abscidir sanc en tot loc del cors, e non uses sino en locs carnoses, ayssi cum en les lacertis de las cambas e de las coyssas, e en les lacertz dels brasses, e de las mamillas e del ventre e dels engonars, e semblantz a lor dels lacertz carnoses humitz.	However, do not use them to stop the flow of blood in any part of the body, but only in fleshy parts, as in the soles of the feet and the insteps, and in the armpits, and the breasts, and the belly, and the groins, and similar fleshy places.
E alcunas veguadas son faytz de aquels strumentz autres petitz semblantz scorsas de fisacs segon aquesta forma; per les quals lo sanc es abscindit quan es fayt per fleubotomia, o deves inscizio de vena o de arceria.	And some are made of those instruments small and resembling the edges of leaves, according to this form, by which blood is stopped when it is done by phlebotomy, or by cutting a vein or an artery.
E alcunas veguadas son faytas redondas segon aquesta forma:	And some are made round thus:
Capitol .xlvii.	Chapter XLVII.
De la cura de las mamillas dels homes las quals so asembladas de femnas.	Of the cure of the breasts of men, which are like those of women.
Alcunas veguadas so infladas las mamillas de alcus homes deves le compliment del dormir cum comensan esser pellutz, e aprop so infladas las mamillas, e so asembladas las mamillas de las femnas, e romano apostemosas, lejas.	Some men's breasts are swollen because of the act of sleeping with women, and then they become like women's breasts, swollen and pendulous.
E ad aquel que avoreys aquo, cove que inscidisca aquelas am seccio lunar segon aquesta forma, de la linha de .B. entro a la linha de .G., e aprop excorja la groceza tota, e aprop uempla la plagua de medicament encarnatiu, e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am cosidura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And when you have done this, cut into those with a lunar incision according to this form, from the line of B to the line of G, and then remove the swollen flesh completely, and fill the wound with medicated ointment, and sew up the two lips of the wound, and cure that part which is healed.
Mays si la mamilla declina a las partidas dejos e es mollificada per la sua magnitut ayssi cum endeve a las femnas, lahoras sia fendut en dos latz sieus pus sobiras, am dos seccios semblantz a figura lunar, de las quals quascuna sia contenguda en l’autra deves la fi de quascuna, entro que sia que la linha major contengua la menor segon aquesta forma de la linha de .B. e la linha de .G. E aprop excorja la codena la qual es entre dos labias de la plagua, e osta la pingueza, e aministra aquo que havem dit de la sutura e de las polveras aquo que es necessari en la curacio entro que sia sanat.	But if the breast droops towards the armpit and is made soft by its weight, as in women, then it should be cut into two parts on either side with two incisions resembling a lunar figure, of which each part contains the other according to its end, so that the longer line contains the shorter according to this form, from the line of B to the line of G. And then remove the swollen flesh completely, and stitch up the lips of the wound, and administer what we have said about the sewing and the powders, which is necessary in the cure, until it is healed.
E si tu non conpleysses la inscizio de aquo que cove inscidir per la inquietut del malaute, e per flux de sanc, lahoras cove que huemplas la plagua de coto submergit en enguent corrosiu e layssa aquel entro que aquo corroda que es romas de la grayssa, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if you do not complete the incision of that which must be cut for the inquietude of the patient and for the flow of blood, then fill the wound with cotton soaked in corrosive ointment and leave that part until it is corroded by the ointment, and then cure that part which is healed.
Capitol .xlviii.	Chapter XLVIII.
De perforacio de apostemas que veno dejos le titillic.	Of the piercing of abscesses which come from beneath the armpits.
Aquetz apostemas que veno dejos le titillic so de las specias de scrophulas, durs, las quals conte una pel que es sac.	These abscesses which come from beneath the armpits are of the species of scrofulae, hard, containing a pus sac.
E de aquelas so alcunas que conteno humiditatz; e aquelas que conteno humiditatz cove que sian inscididas am seccio lunar segon aquesta figura: de la linha de .G. a la linha de .B. E cum es tot evacuat aquo que es en le apostema de la sania, lahoras tu le comple de coto viel e leysa le entro al autra dia.	And some contain moisture; and those which contain moisture should be cut with a lunar incision thus: from the line of G to the line of B. And when all the pus is evacuated from that in the abscess of the armpit, then fill it with yellow ointment and leave it for another day.
E aprop le coto sia ostat e sia curat am enguent convenient ad aquo, entro que sia sanat.	And then the wound is healed with a convenient ointment until it is healed.
E si le apostema de las specias dels nodes es, e de las scrophulas, lahoras tu scindeys sobre aquel ayssi cum havem dit en la seccio sobre las scrophulas engualment.	And if the abscess of the species of nodules and scrofulae, then cut it thus as we have said in the incision about scrofulae, equally.
May si la plagua es extenduda en aysso que yesca poyredura, lahoras administra en lu cauteri segon que en aquo havem denant dit.	But if the wound is extended to a hard place so that it causes burning, then administer cauterization on it according to what we have said before.
Capitol .xlix.	Chapter XLIX.
De seccio de apostemas que accideysso per arceria o per vena.	Of the incision of abscesses which occur by artery or vein.
Quan arceria es rompuda, e la codena es consolidada la qual es sobre aquela, lahoras motas veguadas accideys apostema E les senhals per les quals es conoguda que imflamacio e apostema sian per la arteria o per vena: quar quan apostema es per arceria es lonc agreguat en le preon del cors; e que quan inpelleysses le apostema am les tieus ditz, sentes en lu quays sia stridor.	When an artery is broken and the vein is closed over it, then many times abscess occurs by artery or vein: for when the abscess is by artery it is long drawn out into the body; and when it is driven in by the veins, it feels in the place as a string does.
E aquel que es per vena es redon al manifest del cors.	And that which is by vein is drawn around the surface of the body.
E seccio sobre aquest apostema es error, e majorment en aquel que es dejos las aysselhas, e en les angonars, e en le col, e en motz locs del cors; e es mot gran, donc cove que la sua curacio am ferr sia esquivada, e aquel que es en las extramitatz, o al cap, cove que sia evitat.	And the incision upon this abscess is error, and greater in that which is beneath the armpits, and in the angles, and on the neck, and in many parts of the body; and it is greater, therefore, when its cure with the iron is avoided, and that which is in the extremities, or on the head, let it be avoided.
Mays sobre aquel que es de lor per imflacio de l’orrifici de la arceria, scindeys en la codena seccio en le lonc; e aprop huebre la seccio am uncis e aprop la arceria, e deliura de las tunicas entro que sia descuberta.	But upon that which is of them by inflammation from the orifice of the artery, cut into the vein in its length; and then open the incision with pincers and then the artery, and free it from the tissues as far as it is uncovered.
E aprop met sobre aquel agulha e fay aquela penetrar entro al autre latz, e estrenh la arceria am fiel doble en dos locs, — la qual causa yeu a tu eyssenhegui en extraccio de doas arcerias les quals so en les templars.	Then place an needle on the spot and make it penetrate to the other side, and tighten the artery with a double thread in two places — which causes you to lose your breath due to the constriction of two arteries located in the temples.
E aprop punh le loc le qual es entre dos liamentz am spatum entro que yesca le sanc tot que es en lu, e sia dissolvut le apostema.	Then pierce the area between the two muscles with a spatulum so that all of the blood is drained from it and the boil is dissolved.
E aprop administra curacio en la qual es engendrat poyre entro que caian les liamentz; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz convenientz ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	Then administer treatment to the area in which pus is formed so that the muscles are released from tension; and cure it with an appropriate ointment until it heals.
E si es apostema per seccio de vena, lahoras cove que tu tenguas am la tua ma aquo que es a tu possible del apostema am la codena, e aprop intromet la agulha dejos le loc le qual tu has tengut dejos la tua ma, e fay aquela penetrar; e sia en aquela fil doble entro que tu extraguas aquel del autre latz, e aprop ligua le apostema am bo liament segon que yeu he dit a tu en le liament de uva4 de doas partz am doas extremitatz del fil.	And if it is an apostema caused by a cut vein, then you must hold with your hand the area of the apostema with the thread, and insert the needle below the spot where your hand has been holding, and make it penetrate; and have a double thread inside so that you extract it from the other side, and bind the apostema with a good ligament according to what I told you in the ligament of grapes into two parts with two ends of the thread.
Mays si temes que extraguam le fil, lahoras entromet le fiel am aquela agula dejos tot le apostema deves la inscizio de la agulha primieyra, e strenh les tieus fiels en quatre locs.	But if you are afraid of pulling out the thread, then insert the thread with that needle below all the apostema towards the incision of the first needle, and tighten your threads in four places.
Aprop secca le apostema en le mieg loc de lu entro que quan es yssit aquo que es en lu, lahoras tu inscideys la superfluitat de la codena, e layssa aquo que de lu es liat.	Then dry the apostema in the middle of it so that when it is dried out you insert the superfluity of the thread, and leave what is tied to it.
E aprop pausa sobre lu pulvil le qual has submergit en vi e oli, e aprop administra la curacio la qual es fayta am calguas e enguentz entro que sia sanat.	Then place on it a powder which you have soaked in wine and oil, and administer the treatment made with eggs and ointments until it is healed.
Capitol l del apostema le qual accideys per torcio de nervis.	Chapter 1 On the apostema which happens due to twisting of nerves.
Ayssi cum accideys apostema en arceria e en vena, e semblantment accideys apostema en les nervis quan accideys en lor percussio o accideys per trebal superfluable, e per semblantz.	As it happens with apostemas in arteries and veins, so apostemas happen in nerves when they experience impact or due to excess work and similarly.
E es fayt le mays de lu en les locs dels adjutoris o del talo, o en tot loc en le qual so maugudas las juncturas.	And it is mostly formed in the places of the assistants or the ankle, or in any place where joints are injured.
E es apostema greu, e es asemblat a la color del autre cors, e es en las majors de lu disposicios ses de lor e quan es streyt am vehementia, sent en lu le malaute semblant stupor.	And it is a serious apostema, and is similar in color to the rest of the body, and there are six symptoms of it when it is constricted with vehemence, and the patient experiences a stupor-like sensation.
E no es apostema agreguat en le preon del cors, e per so es dejos la codena, e el es maugut a tota partida e no va a las partidas denant ni detras.	And it is not an apostema located in the abdomen, and for that reason it has no thread, and it is injured on every side, and does not go to the sides in front or behind.
Donc aquo de aquels que es en las juncturas no cove que sia envasit am ferr, quar fort leu endevenguera contracio.	Therefore for those who have apostemas in their joints do not need to be bound with iron, because they will experience contraction very quickly.
Mays aquel que es en le cap o en le front fen la codena am spatum.	But for the one who has it on the head or forehead, cut the thread with a spatulum.
Mays si es apostema pauc, lahoras te aquel am les forfecs e abscindeys aquel de razitz.	But if it is a small apostema, then grab it with tweezers and pull it out by its roots.
E si es gran, lahoras tu le suspen am unci, e excorja aquel, e aprop osta aquel; e ajusta la plagua am sutura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if it is large, then suspend it with a hook, and cut it open, and draw it out; and stitch the wound closed, and cure it until it heals.
Capitol .li.	Chapter .ii.
De seccio de apostema le qual accideys de cheil que accideys al ventre.	On the section of apostema which happens due to chyle that happens in the abdomen.
Endeveno ad alcus homes motas veguadas en les ventres de aquels e en las autras partidas del cors de aquels theils les quals son apelatz funguals per similitut de aquels am funges, dels quals la razitz es subtil e·l cap de aquel es gros; e ja las labias de aquels so conversas, e es de aquels que es petit, e es de aquels que es mot magnificat.	This happens to some men a few times in their bellies and in the other parts of their bodies, those whose heads are small and the rest of them are like mushrooms due to similarity to mushrooms, whose roots are thin but their caps are large; and already their lips are twisted, and they are either very petite or highly magnified.
E yeu ja e vist un, e en le ventre de lu eran dos theils les quals eran mays a funges semblantz, e no era diferencia entre aquels blancs, de menuda razitz.	And I have indeed seen one such person, and in his belly there were two things which looked like mushrooms, and there was no difference between them and white ones, with thin roots.
E ja las labias de aquels eran enversadas e se fendian, e humiditat corria de aquel tot temps.	And already their lips were reversed and splitting, and humidity flowed from them all the time.
Donc yeu inscidegui aquels e atrobegui en la un en pes quays xviii unc. e l’autre quays vi unc.	Therefore I opened them up and found in one of them 15 small stones. And the other six inches.
E la operacio en la inscizio de lor es que consideres lahoras si·l malaute es humit, e la color de atheil es blanca, humit, de subtil razitz; lahoras tu le inscideys am spatum lat, e sian en la presencia tua cauteris en le foc, quar motas veguadas deves la seccio de lu es expellit mot sanc; e si te ventz le sanc, cauteriza aquel.	And the operation at the incision of them is that you consider whether the patient is cold, and if the color of the wound is white, then you open it with a spatulum from the side, and let it be cauterized in the fire, because many times after the section some blood is expelled; and if you stop the blood, cauterize it.
E si vezes le malaute pauruc e temeros, guarda te de inscizio am ferr; mays lahoras pren fiel de plom recent fayt, e strenh am aquel atheil, la manieyra del qual es aquela que havem dita; e leyssa aquel per dos dias.	And if you see the patient is fearful and anxious, be cautious about making an incision with iron; but take recent lead thread and tighten it on the wound, in the manner which we have described earlier; and leave it for two days.
E aprop ajusta en la strictura del fil de plom; donc, no cesses strenher le plom granre devetz en theil, entro que sia abscindit e cayha per se ses trebalh.	Then adjust in the tightening of the lead thread; therefore, do not stop from tightening the large thread greatly on the wound until it is cut off and falls by itself.
Mays si theil es de grossa razitz, lahoras en la inscizio de lu es alcuna causa de temor e de paor, e majorment en aquel que es en le ventre.	But if the wound is of thick roots, then in its incision there is a cause for fear and terror, especially that which is in the abdomen.
Mays possibla es que tu inscindas la maytat de lu , e aprop cauteriza aquel per que no retorne.	But it is possible for you to split the majority of it, and then cauterize it so that it does not return.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanada la plagua.	Then cure it until the wound is healed.
E guarda te que tu no presumas inscidir theil le qual es de fusca color, de pauc sentiment, de leg reguardament, quar aquel es absi cancros.	And beware that you do not assume to incision a wound which is of dusky color, of little feeling, of weak pulse, because this one is certainly cancerous.
E yeu vindre am rememoracio de cranc aprop aysso.	And I come with the memory of knowledge.
Capitol .lii.	Chapter .ii.
De curacio de eminencia del umbilic.	On the treatment of an outstanding umbilicus.
Eminencia del umbilic es fayta per motas causas; o per fissuras del ciphac le qual es sobre le ventre, e yeys de lu la tela o budel segon que endeve en las autras rupturas; o per sanc le qual flueys de vena o de arceria segon que es denant dit, o per ventositat coarctada en lu.	Eminence of the umbilicus is caused by many reasons; or by fissures of the liver which is over the abdomen, and from it the membrane or intestine according to where other ruptures are; or by blood which flows from a vein or artery as mentioned earlier, or by constricted vasoconstriction in it.
Mays si es per fissura del ciphac e per yssiment de la tela, lahoras la color del apostema es semblant a la color del cors; e es leon ses dolor, e aprop appar de divers situament.	But if it is by fissure of the liver and thickening of the membrane, then the color of the apostema is similar to that of the body; and it has little pain, and appears in various locations.
E si es per egressio del budel, lahoras le situament de aquel am lu de aquo que havem recontat, de mays vehement diversitat, e cum tu premes aquel am les tieus ditz es occultat, e aprop retorna; e fort leu es am lu so, e es magnificat mot deves le introt de banh e vehement trebalh.	And if it is by prolapse of the intestine, then its location is as we have mentioned earlier, with more violent diversity, and when you push it in with your fingers it conceals itself, and then returns; and quickly it becomes large, and is magnified much due to bathing and violent work.
Mays si per humiditat, lahoras es leon e no es occultat quan premes am la tua ma, ni es constrengut, ni es cregut.	But if it is by humidity, then it is easy and does not conceal itself when you push with your hand, nor is it constricted nor burned.
E si es per sanc, lahoras am aquestz senhals apareys le apostema a negror declinant.	And if it is by blood, then with these signs the apostema turns black and declines.
Mays si es per carn nada, lahoras es apostema greu, gros e dur, e es ficat segon una quantitat.	But if it is by pus, then it is a serious apostema, large and hard, and is formed according to an amount.
Mays si es per ventositat, lahoras le tocament de lu es leon.	But if it is by vasoconstriction, then the touch of it is tender.
E la operacio en lu es que consideras lahoras si la eminencia de l’umbilic es per sanc de arceria, o de vena, o per ventositat; lahoras cove que sias prohibit de la curacio de lu, quar en aquela es temor e paor ayssi cum t’e ensenhat en le capitol en le qual he dit les apostemas per arceria e per vena.	And the operation on it is that you consider whether the eminence of the umbilicus is by blood of an artery or vein, or by vasoconstriction; then beware of treating it because in that there is fear and terror as I instructed in the chapter about apostemas by artery and vein.
E si la eminencia del umbilic es per le budel o per la tela, lahoras cove que comandes al malaute que tengua le ale sieu, e sia stant extendut; e aprop senha am tenta en le circuit de tot le umbilic, e aprop comanda a lu que stia envers entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos, e aprop circunda am spatum lat en le circuit del umbilic sobre le loc le qual has senhat am la tenta; e aprop exten la maytat del apostema a las partidas desus am unci gran; e aprop lia en le circuit am fiel fort o am ceda e la manieyra del liar decent.	And if the eminence of the umbilicus is by the intestine or membrane, then command the patient to hold his navel, and let him stand extended; then feel with your fingers all around the umbilicus, and then command him to bend towards you between your hands over his navel, and let him circle it with a spatulum from the side where you have felt with your fingers; then extend the majority of the apostema to the sides above it with a large hook; and tie in the circuit with strong thread or with twine in the decent manner.
E aprop huebre le mieg del apostema extendut sobre le liament e intromet le dit tieu en aquel indic e quereys le budel; e si tu l’as atrobat ni guardat per le liament, lahoras tu extratz alxorati e impelleys le budel a las partidas dedintz del ventre.	Then open the middle of the extended apostema over the intestine and insert your finger into that hollow and if you have tied it nor guarded by the intestine, then extract the herniated and push the intestine to the sides inside the abdomen.
E si has atrobada la tela, lahoras pren aquel am unci; e inscideys las superfluitatz de lu.	And if you have found the hernia, then take it in your hand; and squeeze out the superfluities from it.
Mays si es contraria a tu arceria o vena, lahoras circunda aquel mot, e aprop retorna a la tua operacio; e pren dos agulhas e met en aquelas dos fiels fortz e entromet dos agulhas en le circuit le qual has feyt entorn le apostema en manieyra de crotz, las quals fassas penetrar; e aprop strenh le apostema en quatre partidas sobre las agulhas.	But if it is contrary to your archery or vein, then surround that spot, and return to your operation; and take two needles and put them into those two warts very firmly, and pierce through the wart in a cross shape, making sure the needles penetrate; and tightly grab the wart in four places on the needles.
E si tu vols, osta las agulhas e leyssa le loc entro que poyresca la carn extenduda e caia per si; o inscideys aquel quan es subtiliat e se poyreys, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And if you wish, remove the needles and let the flesh extend and fall back by itself; or squeeze out what is being thinned and let it heal with ointment covering the wound so that it may be healed.
E si la eminencia del ombilic es de carn nada en lu o per humiditat, lahoras cove que tu conquaves le apostema ayssi cum havem dit e estraguas le sanc o la humiditat, la qual atrobas en lu, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove e que consolide le loc.	And if the protuberance of the navel is filled with flesh or by humidity, then you must hollow out the hernia as we have said and squeeze out the blood or humidity which you find there, and then cure it with ointment covering the wound so that it may be healed and consolidated.
Capitol .liii.	Chapter 53:
De curacio de cranc.	Of the cure for a hernia.
Ja havem dit, en la divisio, de specia de cranc e en qual manieyra es via a la curacio de lu am medicinas, e que es squivador en lu la curacio am ferr per so que no sia ulcerat; e havem dit cranc engendrat en la mayra e cautela de la curacio de lu.	We have already said, in the division, about the kind of hernia and how it is cured by medicines, and that it is cured with iron without being ulcerated; and we have also mentioned the generation of a hernia, as well as the caution regarding its cure.
E diyssero les antics que alcunas veguadas cranc es en loc on es possibla la eradicacio de lu, ayssi cum de cran le qual es en las mamillas o en la coyssa e a lor semblantz dels membres allocat a estrayre tot aquel, e majorment quan es comensant petit.	And the ancients said that sometimes a hernia is found in places where its removal is possible, such as in the breast or in the groin and similar places in other parts of the body; they advised to extract all of it, especially when it is starting out small.
Mays quan es antiquat e es gra, no cove que te propries a lu, quar yeu non pogui sanar de aquel alcu ni no he vist autre, ni que sia pervengut ad aquo.	But when it is old and large, do not attempt to remove it, for I have never seen one healed by this method nor have I heard of it happening.
E la operacio en lu es quan es allocat ayssi cum havem dit, es que tu precedescas e laysses le malaute e purgues de colera negra alcunas veguadas, e aprop sagna aquel, si es atrobada replecio manifesta.	And the operation on it, when it is located as we have said, is that you precede and let the patient fast and purge of black bile, and then bleeding is done if a manifest fullness is found.
E aprop prepara le malaute am preparacio en le qual sia locat am operacio, e aprop prohiceys en le trauc uncis les quals cove ad aquel; e aprop concava de tota part am la codena sego bona perexcrutacio entro que no romangua alcuna causa de las razitz de lu.	Then prepare the patient with a preparation in which he is placed for the operation, and then pierce him with hooks that reach into the hernia; and concavely, all around with a good sharp knife, examine thoroughly so that no cause of the hernia remains.
E layssa correr le sanc, e no abscidas aquel leugierament, e exprem les locs, e abstergeys le sanc gros tot am la tua ma o am instrument am le qual es a tu possible dels instruments.	Let the blood flow, and do not quickly cut it off; squeeze out the places and wipe away the clotted blood with your hand or with an instrument through which you can easily reach.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat de sanc gros inscizio de vena o de arceria, lahoras cauterisa aquela entro que·l flux del sanc sia cessat, e aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	But if you find that there is an obstruction of blood from a vein or artery, then cauterize it so that the flow of blood ceases, and then cure it with the other cure so that it may be healed.
Capitol .liv.	Chapter 54:
De curacio de ydropici.	Of the cure for hydrocephalus.
Nos ja havem recomtat, en la divisio, de las specias de ydropici de l’aygua, e les senhals de quascuna especia, de la curacio de lu am medicinas.	We have already recommended in the division about the kinds of hydrocephalus from water, and the signs of each kind, as well as the cure for it with medicines.
E aquela la qual es curada am ferr no es sino la specia de althitas sola, e no es aproximat am ferr a la specia de timpanistres ni a la especia de yposarcha, quar aquo es mortal.	And that which is cured by iron is only the kind called 'althitas', and it should not be approached with iron as regards the kind of 'timpanistres' nor the kind of 'ypotarcha', for both are mortal.
E quan tu ja has medicat aquesta especia de ydropici timpanistre am medicinas e no comfereys la tua medicacio, lahoras considera, quar si al malaute ja es conseguida debelitat, o es am aquel autra malautia otra ydropici, ayssi cum si es en lu tos o cos de ventre e semblant ad aquels, lahoras guarda te que no le mediques am ferr, quar temor es sobre aquo.	And when you have medicated this kind of hydrocephalus timpanistre with medicines and it does not respond to your treatment, then consider, for if the patient already has debility or another malady such as another hydrocephalus, just as if there is a cough or intestinal illness and similar to these, then be wary and do not treat it with iron, for fear of this.
Mays si tu vezes le malaute de vertut exuberant, e am lu no es autra malautia sino ydropici tant solament, e no enfant ni vielh, lahoras la manieyra de la operacio de lu es que tu eleves le malaute entre las tuas mas, e le ministre aprop lu exprema le ventre de lu am la sua ma, enpellen la aygua a la partida dejos del pentenilh, e aprop pren spatum spinos segon aquesta forma:	But if you see the patient suffering from abundant vertigo and there is no other malady in him except hydrocephalus, and he is not a child nor old, then the manner of operating on him is to elevate the patient between your hands, and the minister should then squeeze his belly with his hand, filling the water up into the part below the navel, and then take a pointed spatula according to this form:
sia de dos partz agudas lonc, de aguda extremitat ayssi cum spatum; mays empero sia en lu alcuna brevitat petit a petit, per so que en la operacio am aquel no passes entro al budel, e que ledas aquel.	It should be in two pointed parts, with a pointed end just like the spatula; but indeed it should be a little shorter in length so that during the operation you do not pass into the intestine, and then lead him.
E aprop considera si la generacio de ydropici es de part dels budels, quar lahoras cove que tu am la seccio te alonhes del ombelic per la quantitat de tres ditz a las partidas dejos, en le dreyt de lu sobre le pentenilh.	Then consider if the generation of hydrocephalus is from parts of the intestines, for then you should lengthen him with the incision from the navel by the amount of three digits below, in his right side over the navel.
Mays si la generacio de hydropici es per malautia del fietge, lahoras la tua seccio sia sinistra del ombilic per tres ditz.	But if the generation of hydrocephalus is due to illness of the liver, then your incision should be on the left side of the navel by three digits.
E si la generacio de lu es per la melsa, lahoras la tua seccio sia en le las dreyt.	And if its generation is due to a cold, then your incision should be on his right.
E no cove que la tua seccio sia sobre le costat sobre le qual vol jaser le malaute per que no corron las superfluitatz ad aquel loc freul.	And do not let your incision be over the side on which the patient wants to lie so that the superfluities do not flow into that place.
E aprop perfora am le instrument tota la codena, e aprop entromet en aquela seccio, e eleva la tua ma am le spatum entre la codena e·l siphac, e tu excorja aquel; e si’ la quantitat de una ungla o enviro.	Then pierce with the instrument all around, and insert into that incision, and elevate your hand with the spatula between the membrane and the brain, and you should draw it out; and if it is the amount of a nail or so much.
E aprop perforo le ciphac entro que pervengua le spatum al loc vuoyt, e es loc de l’aygua.	Then pierce the brain so that the spatula reaches the desired place, which is where the water is.
E aprop extratz aquel e entromet un instrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	Then extract it and insert an instrument of which this is the form:
e es semblant a canula de argent subtil; es fayt de argent o de eram o de lato leon, al qual en la partida pus bassa de lu es un petit trauc, e en les costatz de lu so tres traucs: dos de una partida e un del autra partida; e fayta es la extremitat de lu insciza segon la manieyra de pluma, ayssi cum vezes:	which is like a slender silver tube; it is made of silver or brass or lead; and in the lowest part of it there is a small incision, and on its sides there are three incisions: two from one side and one from the other side; and its end is split according to the manner of a feather, just like this:
E en la extramitat de lu pus sobirana es armilla, quar quan le instrument perve al aygua, lahoras aquela tantost deysen sobre le instrument, donc evacua de l’aygua en la ora miega quantitat, quar si tu evacuas de aquela mes que no cove en la hora, fort leu mor le malaute per resolucio del sieu spirit animal, o accideys a lu cincopi que es appropinquada la mort.	And in the highest end of it is a ring, for when the instrument reaches the water, then that immediately slips over the instrument, thus evacuating the water in the momentary quantity; for if you evacuate more than this, then the patient dies from resolution of his animal spirit, or he experiences an attack which is close to death.
Mays evacua de aquela segon la quantitat de la vertut de lu e segon que significan a tu las disposicios del malaute de la vertut del pols de lu e de la bontat de lu.	But you should evacuate it according to the quantity of the vertigo and according to what the dispositions of the patient's vertigo, his pulse and health indicate to you.
E aprop extrats le instrument, e rete l’aygua la qual causa es quar tantost es retenguda per la codena la qual rete le trauc que es sobre le ciphac del qual e recomtat a tu que perfores aquel segon aquela manieyra.	Then extract the instrument and pour out the water which is causing it, for as soon as you have extracted the instrument, it will pour out just like the water.
E aprop itera le instrument al autra dia si vezes le malaute tollerant aquo, e extratz de la aygua petita quantitat, e fay aquo per alcus jorns sobre temor, e guarda te de error entro que no romangua de l’aygua sino pauc.	Then return the instrument on another day if you see the patient tolerating it, and extract a little water, and do this for several days out of fear, and beware of mistakes so that the water does not remain except a little.
Mays si tu temes sobre le malaute, e leyssas de l’aygua gran quantitat, lahoras cura aquel am sepultura en arena cauda, e mota suzor en banh, e al solelh espere per lonc temps; e cura aquel am medicinas dessicativas entro que sia sanat.	But if you fear for the patient and pour out a great quantity of water, then cure him with a burial in dry sand, and move him to the bath, and let him stay in the sun for a long time; and cure him with drying medicines so that he may be healed.
E cauteriza sobre le stomac, e la melsa e·l fitge aprop la extraccio de l’aygua, segon que yeu he recontat en aquo que es precedit.	And cauterize over the stomach, and the liver and gallbladder, and especially the extraction of the water, according to what I have recounted before.
Capitol .lv.	Chapter 55:
De la curacio dels enfants les quals so natz les locs de la urina no-perforatz.	Of the cure for children whose places of urine are not perforated.
Alcunas veguadas alcun dels enfantz es eyssi del ventre de la sua mayre e·l cap de la sua mixtio no es perforat (o es trauc streyt o no es en son loc).	Sometimes some children are born from the womb of their mother and their head of their mixture is not perforated (or it is pierced tightly or not in its place).
Donc cove coytar am perforacio de lu tantost que es nascut am spatum mot subtil segon aquesta forma:	Then it must be treated with the piercing of him as soon as he is born with a pointed, slender instrument just like this:
E aprop pausa en le trauc un clavil subtil de plom e ligua aquel, e te per tres jorns o per .iiii.tre.	And then insert a thin lead nail into the wound and bind it, and keep it for three days or for .iiii. three.
E quant vol urinar sia remaugut e hurine; e aprop retorne aquel.	And when he wants to urinate, let him be turned over and urinate; then return him.
E si tu no pauses le plom, ja es possible que la urina la qual va sobre le loc, no leysa aquest claure.	And if you do not use the lead, it is possible that the urine which goes over the area will not harm this closure.
Mays aquel del qual le trauc es streyt sia medicat am clavil de Plom, ayssi cum havem dit, per trops dias entro que sia amplificat.	But he from whom the wound is narrow should be medicated with a lead nail, as we have said, for several days until it is enlarged.
Mays aquels en les quals es le trauc no en son loc, so leditz, la qual causa es quar de aquels, aquel que es nat e·l trau es deves la fi del cap de la vergua per que no pot urinar a las partidas dedintz, entro que eleva la vergua am la sua ma a las partidas desus; e no es a lu generacio, per so quar le sperma no pot pervenir a la mayre segon rectitut, e es malautia mot laga.	But those in whom the wound is not in its place, are led, the cause of which is that from those, he who is born and the nail is at the end of the penis so that he cannot urinate into the parts inside, by raising the penis with his hand to the parts above; and there is no generation for him because the sperm cannot reach the mother according to rectitude, and it is a very harmful disease.
E la manieyra de la operacio en lu es que·l malaute sia envessat sobre le sieu dos, e aprop exten le cap de la vergua de lu am la tua ma sinistra am vehement extraccio, e inscideys le cap del cap de la vergua del loc del perpucii am spatum agut, ayssi cum es inscizio de pluma, o que tu ne razas alcuna partida, per so que·l mieg de lu vengua semblant al cap de la vergua e que le trauc caia en le mieg loc segon que cove.	And the way of the operation in him is that the patient be turned over on his back, and you extend the head of the penis with your left hand by a violent traction, and insert the tip of the foreskin at the location of the perineum with a pointed spatula, as if it were inscribed with a pen, or that you do not scrape any part, so that the glans of him come to resemble the head of the penis, and the nail falls into the middle location according to how it covers.
E guarda te que en la tua operacio de flux de sanc, quar motas vetz accideys aquo; e pausa te a lu am aquo que abscindeys le sanc, e cura la plagua entro que si’ sanada.	And beware in your operation of the flow of blood, because many times this happens there; and give to him that with which you will stop the blood, and cure the wound until it is healed.
Capitol .lvi.	Chapter .lvi.
De albater le qual accideys en le prepucii en le cap de la vergua e de corropcio e negror e adherencia del prepucii del cap de la vergua.	Of white leeching which happens in the foreskin on the head of the penis, and of putrefaction, blackness, and adhesion of the foreskin to the head of the penis.
Motas veguadas accideys aquest albater en la vergua e es eminencia de carn laga.	Many times this white leeching happens in the penis and is an eminence of harmful flesh.
E de aquela una es maligna e autra es no-maligna.	And one of them is harmful and the other is not harmful.
No-maligna, cove que suspendas am unci subtil e abscindas aquela entro que aquela mondes tota; e aprop pausa sobre aquela coto submirgit en enguent egipciac; e aprop aquel, cura le am enguent diafinicon entro que sia sanat.	Non-harmful, suspend it with a thin thread and cut that off so that that entire world is cut off; and then place on that cut part which is submerged in Egyptian ointment; and then cure that with fine ointment until it is healed.
E si albater es maligna, de lega color, lahoras cove que tu aministres cauteri aprop la inscizio de lu e la razio de lu.	And if the leeching is harmful, of leg color, then you should administer cauterization near its beginning and its end.
Mays si albater es en le prepuci del cap de la vergua no-circumcis, e la una partida de albater es dedintz le prepucii e l’autra partida es defora, lahoras cove que tu ostes albater le qual es dedintz al comensament entro que es consolidat; e lahora tu cura aquel deforo, quar quan tu curas aquel ensemps le prepuci, no es asegurat que no sia trinquat.	But if the leeching is in the foreskin of the head of the penis not circumcised, and one part of the leeching is inside the foreskin and the other part is outside, then you should cut off the leeching which is inside at its beginning so that it is consolidated; and then you cure that external one, because when you cure that together with the foreskin, it is not certain that it will not return.
E ja eysamen accideys en les genetius e en le prepuci negror e corruccio, adonc cove que tu conquavas tot aquo que ja es denigrat e que ja se vol corrompre o que ja es corrumput; e aprop lineys sobre aquel aprop aquo am mel, le qual es contusit am farina de scorsa de milgrana e de errs trissatz e crivellatz.	And indeed it has happened in the testicles and in the foreskin blackness and putrefaction, therefore you should hollow out all that which is already blackened and about to corrupt or what is already corrupted; and then line that with that ointment with honey, which is crushed with pomegranate peel, and sifted and strained.
E aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sana.	And then cure that with the other cure until it is healed.
Mays si endeve flux de sanc, lahoras aministra cauteri lunar segon aquesta forma:	But if blood flow ensues, then administer lunar cauterization according to this form:
quar cauteri juvatiu es a dos disposicios ensemps, so es a flux de sanc e a la plagua quan es corrumpuda.	Because the beneficial cautery is in two dispositions together, that is for blood flow and for the wound when it is corrupted.
E si le cap de la vergua es corrodut e es destruit tot en la hora, lahoras cove que tu intrometas en lo meat del prepucii una canula de plom per so que le malaute urina per aquela.	And if the head of the penis is destroyed and ruined all at once, then you should insert into the middle of the foreskin a lead cannula so that the patient urinates through that.
En la adherencia del prepucii am le cap de la vergua (et aquesta adherencia no accideys sino en aquel del qual le prepucii es sa, e sobre lu no es exhigida circumcizio; e quan accideys adherencia per plagua o per apostema) cove que excorjas am spatum obtus entro que sia dissolvut le liament e sia deliurat le cap de la vergua de tota partida.	In the adhesion of the foreskin to the head of the penis (and this adhesion does not happen except in him whose foreskin is loose, and on whom circumcision has not been performed; and when adhesion happens because of a wound or pustule), cut it with an obtuse spatula so that the binding is dissolved and the head of the penis is freed from all parts.
E si es dificil desirnir aquelas exquisidament, lahoras cove que tu excorjes am spatum alcuna causa del cap de la vergua e del prepucii, e aysso es quar le prepucii, quan es subtil, fort leu es perforat per la sua subtilitat leugierament.	And if it is difficult to separate them cruelly, then you should cut with a spatula some part of the head of the penis and the foreskin, and that is because the foreskin, when it is thin, is easily pierced through its thinness quickly.
E aprop separa entre·l prepucii e·l cap de la vergua am dra7 de li subtil, le qual ja es mulhat en l’aygua frega per que no adherescan autra veguada.	And then separate between the foreskin and the head of the penis with a subtle thread, which is already moistened in the water wiped so that they do not adhere again.
E aprop sia curat am vi stiptic entro que sia consolidat.	And then let it be cured with white vitriol until it is consolidated.
Capitol .lvii.	Chapter .lvii.
De mundificacio dels enfants e de la curacio de aquo que accideys ad aquels de circumcisio.	Of purification of children and the cure of what happens to those who are circumcised.
Circumcisio no es solucio de continuitat ayssi cum las autras plaguas: mays empero cum sia de la nostra operacio e de nostra voluntat, e lus de aquela sia propriament en les enfants, es necessari que asignem en aquela milhor operacio e via pus leugiera perdusent a salut.	Circumcision is not a solution for continence like other wounds: but rather because it is of our operation and of our will, and because its cause is properly in children, it is necessary that we assign to her better operation and a shorter way lost less health.
Donc dic que les antics no diyssero circumcisio en alcu dels lors libres, quar no n’usan en las suas leys, e no es sino quar havem aquisit per speriment, la qual causa es que yeu he atrobat la major partida dels artifexs e dels barbies usar circumcisir e mundificacio am novacula e am torores; e usan de liament am fiel e de inscizio am la ungla.	Therefore we say that the ancients did not prescribe circumcision in any of their slaves, because they do not use it in their laws, and it is only because we have acquired through experience, which cause is that we have observed the greater part of the artisans and barbers using to circumcise and purify with a new knife and with torches; and they use binding with pitch and inscription with the nail.
E yeu ja he prohadas totas aquestas manieras e no atrobegui milhor mondificacio am forfexs, am liament am fiel que en mondificacio cum la ungla, quar motas vetz efugeys la codena pus desus, quar la codena del prepucii a dos tunicas, e roman la tonica pus dejos, e fort leu es forsat ad autra inscizio e dolor sicura.	And I have already prohibited all these manners and not found better purification with tweezers, with binding with pitch which is used in purification with the nail, because many times the thread escapes above, because the thread of the foreskin has two tunics, and the loose one falls below, and it is easily forced to another incision and secure pain.
E am mundificacio le qual es fayta per alphecati, e es digital, del qual usan les sabatiers, no es segurada la inscizio de la extremitat del membre viril, quar fort leu intra en le trau de lu.	And through purification which is done by the apothecaries, and is with the finger, of which the surgeons use, is not secure the incision at the end of the member of a man, because it easily goes into his wound.
Mays en la operacio am ungla, fort leu obazeys ferr e corromp la tua operacio.	But in the operation with the nail, very often iron and corrupts your operation.
E la codena del enfant es breu per natura, e motas veguadas nays en tal manieyra que no ha necessitat de mondificacio, e yeu he vist aquel.	And the foreskin of a child is short by nature, and many times I have seen that it has not needed purification, and I have seen that.
Mays de la mondificacio que·s fa am forfexs e liamentz am fiel, la bontat, experiment descrobic a mi, quar las forfexs so de proporcional inscizio, per aquo quar la acuitat que es desus es ayssi cum la acuitat que es dejos; e donc cum tu premes la tua ma so proporcionadas dos acuitatz, e inscideysso segon una comperacio en un temps; e es fayta compressio del fiel am figura contenent la codena de la vergua de tota partida, am le qual no catz error de tot.	But of the purification which is done with tweezers and binding with pitch, the goodness I have discovered by experience, because the tweezers are of proportional incision, therefore that the acuteness which is above is also with the acuteness which is below; and therefore when you place your hand so that they are proportioned two acutenesses, and insert it according to a comparison at one time; and compression of the pitch is done in the shape containing the foreskin of the penis from all parts, with which there is no error of all.
E la manieyra de la operacio primeyra es que tu fassas estar le enfant majorment si es de aquels que entendo un petit, que no fassas sino que tu lies le fiel en la sua vergua tant solament, e que leysses aquel entro al autra dia.	And the way of the first operation is that you make the child be completely still if he is one of those who understand a little, and do not do but that you tie the pitch on his penis only slightly, and that you let him for another day.
E aprop fay aquel alegrar en tota aquela manieyra que es a tu possibla de aquo que recep la sua intelligencia.	And then let him rejoice in all those ways which are possible for you who receives his intelligence.
E aprop fa aquel estar entre las tuas mas estatuir preparadament, e no sia ges cezent; e occulta las forfexs en la tua ma o dejos le tieu pe, que l’enfant no veia aquelas ni degun autre dels instruments.	And then let him be between your hands positioned preparedly, and do not be frightened; and conceal the tweezers in your hand or under your foot, so that the child does not see those nor any other of the instruments.
E aprop entremet la tua ma a la vergua de lu e suffla en la codena, e tira aquela entro que sia eyssit le cap de la vergua, e aprop mondifica aquel de aquo que es agregat en ela de sordicia.	And then insert your hand to his penis and blow into the foreskin, and pull that up so that the head of the penis is exited, and then purify that of what is accumulated in it of dirtiness.
E aprop lia le loc signat am fiel dobla, e aprop ligua pus bas de aquel un petit le segon liament, e aprop te am le dit pous e endic tieu le loc del liament dejos am bona retencio, e inscideys entre dos liaments.	And then tie the marked spot with a folded piece of cloth, and then tie a smaller piece of cloth under it, and then press on the spot with your finger and gently stretch the area below with good traction, and cut between two ligaments.
E aprop eleva la codena sus leugierament e estratz le cap de la vergua; e aprop leyssa le sanc corre petit e petit, quar es milhor ; e pausa polvera desus e sobre la polvera pausa drap en le qual es spandut mugol de huou coyt en ayguaros concosit am oli rozat recent bo; e layssa aquel sobre aquel entro al autra dia; e cura aquel am curacio entro que sia sanat.	And then elevate the scrotum gently and pull out the head of the testicle; and then let the blood flow slowly, for it is better that way; and put powder on top and on top of the powder place a cloth which has been spread with the yolk of a hen's egg mixed with rose oil; and let this remain there until the next day; and heal the wound with ointment until it is cured.
La forma de las forfexs a mondificacio, aquesta es la forma:	The shape of the forceps for cleansing, this is their shape:
Sian las unas extramitatz no-talhantz e las autras sian talhant, que non sia yssit le ram del clau, e sia la longitut de las doas acuitatz ayssi cum la longitut de dos manubres engualment.	Let the tips not be cut and the other ones be cut, so that the stem of the claw is not split, and let the length of both sharp parts be equal to the length of two handles equally.
Mays la error en mundificacio es quar fort leu efugeys la codena intrinseca tota, o partida de lu deves la inscizio.	But the mistake in cleansing is that often the inner scrotum entirely escapes, or a part of it slips out through the incision.
Donc cove que tu extendas aquela de la tua hora am la tua ungla denant la apostemacio del loc e que inscidas aquela segon equalitat.	So you should extend that one with your finger in front of the apposition of the spot and cut that one according to equality.
E si no la podes tenir am la tua ungla, lahoras extratz aquela am unci e inscideys aquela.	And if you cannot hold it with your finger, then pull it out with forceps and cut it.
Mays si son passatz tres dias, e roman aquo que es imflat dejos la vergua apostemat, lahoras tu leyssa aquo entro que sia cedat le apostema caut, e excorja aquel am fecilitat, e inscidex aquel segon que a tu es preparat.	But if it has passed three days and the swelling under the testicle remains, then let this remain until the aposteme is dried up, and cut it away with ease, and cut it according to how you are prepared.
E guarda te del cap de la vergua, quar no nosera a lu aquo.	And beware of the head of the testicle, for it will not bear that.
E donc cura aquel am aquo que la plagua consolida de las polveras las quals havem recomtadas en le tractat de las polveras.	And so heal that with what the plague is consolidated from the powders which we have recounted in the treatise on powders.
E si es inscidit de la codena sobre mesura, e obezeys a las partidas desus, aquo no notz a lu.	And if it is cut from the scrotum beyond measure, and obeys the parts above, then that does not matter to it.
E mays cura aquel am aquo que havem dit entro que sia sanat.	But heal that with what we have said until it is cured.
Capitol .lviii.	Chapter 58:
De curacio de urina retenguda en la vesiqua.	Of the healing of urine retained in the bladder.
Retencio de urina en la vesica es fayta per oppulacio fayta per peyra o per sanc congilat, o per poyre o per carnada, e semblantz ad aquels de aquo que havem dit de las manieyras de curacio en la divisio.	Retention of urine in the bladder is caused by obstruction caused by a stone, or by congealed blood, or by inflammation or by growths, and resembles those which we have recounted concerning the methods of healing in the division.
E si no es dissolvuda la urina, e veses retencio de lu esser per peyra le qual ja es en le col de la vesica, lahoras cove que le malaute sia encorbat sobre les sieus denolhs.	And if the urine is not dissolved and you see that retention of it is due to a stone which is already in the neck of the bladder, then let the patient be bent forward over his knees.
E aprop conponeys les pes de aquel sobre le sieu dos e extendas le sieu ventre de la partida pus desus del sieu dos, e le malaute estrengua le sieu ale tant quant es a lu possible.	Then place the patient's feet on his back and raise his belly from the part above his back, and let the patient grip his elbow as much as he can.
Donc lahoras le col de la vesica es costreyt ha espulsio de la peyra a las partidas detras, per que la urina es absolta.	Then the neck of the bladder is pressed and the stone is pushed out to the parts behind, so that the urine is voided.
E si no es dissolvuda am aquo que havem dit he vehement es fayta la causa sobre le malaute, lahoras cove que aministres extraccio de lu am instrument le qual es apelat siringua, del qual aquesta es la forma: Sia de argent e sia subtil leon conquau, ayssi cum canula de pena de ausel am subtilitat de ray lonc en similitut d’un palm e mig, al qual sia cana subtil en le cap de lu.	And if it is not dissolved with what we have said and the cause made violent upon the patient, then let the stone be extracted from him with an instrument which is called a syringe, of which this is the shape: Let it be of silver and let its tube be thin like a quill pen with a subtle point long in similarity to one and a half inches, to which let there be a subtle tube at its head.
E la manieyra del eyssiment de la urina per aquel es que prenguas le fiel doblat e lies en la extramitat de lu lana o coto per bona liadura; e entrometas las extramitatz del fiel en la partida dejos de la ciringua, e inscideys am las forfexs si superflueys alcuna causa de la lana, mays intromet la en la canula am vehemencia E aprop enongeys la ciringua am boder e am album de huou.	And the manner of the ejection of urine through it is that you take a folded piece of cloth and wind it around the end of it with wool or cotton for good fastening; and insert the ends of the cloth into the part below the syringe, and cut away with forceps any excess wool, but push the rest into the tube with force. And then fill the syringe with water and with egg white of a hen.
E fay cezer le malaute sobre la selha, e embroca la vesiqua de lu e la vergua am olis umitz, e oli de oliva e ayguaros.	And let the patient lie on his back, and plug up the orifice of his bladder and testicles with wool, and olive oil, and egg yolk.
E aprop entromet la ciringua am facilitat entro que pervengua a la razit de la vergua; e aprop dobla la vergua desus a la partida del embelic; e aprop empelleys la ciringua dintz aquela; e aprop empelleys aquela entro que pervengua a la vesica, e aquela centa le malaute esser pervenguda a la causa vuoda, e no es fayt asso segon aquest orde, sino le meat en le qual va a tortuositat.	Then insert the syringe with ease until it reaches the root of the testicle; and then bend the testicle above at its base; and then press the syringe into that; and then press it in until it reaches the bladder, and let the patient be bent so that the orifice is empty, and if not done according to this order, but the meatus inclines towards tortuosity.
E aprop exten le fiel am la lana petit a petit, quar la urina siec la lana.	Then slowly extend the cloth with the wool little by little, for the urine will draw in the wool.
Aprop extratz aquela e fay per curacio urina, e usa ciringua, no cesses fer aquo e usa ciringua entro que sia evacuada la vesica e le malaute atrobe alleviacio.	Then pull that out and let the urine be ejected by healing, and use the syringe, do not cease to do this until the bladder is emptied and the patient feels relief.
Capitol .lix.	Chapter 59:
De qualitat de clisterizacio de la vezica am clampcedra e am semblantz instrumentz les quals sian acordants ad aquo.	Of the quality of clysterization of the bladder with camphor and with similar instruments which are in accordance with that.
Quan accideys en la vesica ulceracio o apostema, o sanc congilat en aquela, o es coartat poyredura, e vols en aquela destillar ayguas e medicinas, lahoras sia fayt am instrument le qual es apelat clampcedra, e aquesta es la forma de lu:	When there occurs in the bladder ulceration or aposteme, or congealed blood in it, or inflammation is constricted, and you wish to distil waters and medicines into it, then let this be done with an instrument which is called a clyster, and this is its shape:
sino que en la extramitat de lu es sorda, so es clausa.	except that in its end there is a hole, so that it is closed.
Et en aquela so tres traucs: dos de la una partida , ayssi quo vezes.	And in that there are three holes: two from one part, thus alternately.
En le comensament es loc concau, en le qual es aquo que es enpellit, e sia segon quantitat que oppile aquel, ses addicio, entro que quan alcuna causa es ab aquel tirada de las humiditatz, sia atirada, e quan es expellida, am aquo sia atirada, e quan es expellit lonc, segon que fa clampcedra am la qual es phicat naphta en las batalhas de mar.	In the beginning there is a hollow space, in which is placed that which is plugged into it, and let its quantity be according to the amount that is pushed by that, without addition, so that when any cause is drawn from the humidities, it is drawn out, and when it is expelled, with what it is expelled, and when it is pushed out a long way, according to how clyster is made with which is burned naphtha in the battles of the sea.
Donc cum tu vols prohicir humiditatz en la vesica, entromet la extremitat de clapcedra en la humiditat, e atira am aquel aquo que es empellit a las partidas desus, quar la humiditat es atirada en la conquavitat de clapcedra.	Then when you wish to inject humidities into the bladder, insert the end of clyster into the moisture, and push with that what is pushed into the parts above, for the moisture is drawn into the hollow space of clyster.
E aprop entromet la extramitat de clapcedra en la vergua segon que havem recomtat en la ciringua; e aprop empelleys la humiditat am aquo que empelleys, quar aquela humiditat perve a la vesica tantost, e le malaute cent aquela.	Then insert the end of clyster into the testicle according to what we have recounted concerning the syringe; and then press the moisture with that which you press it, for that moisture goes at once to the bladder, and let the patient grip that.
Forma del cristeri subtil am le qual la vesica es cristerizada, e es aquela la forma:	Form of a slender clyster with which the bladder is clysterized, and it is that form:
E sia fayta de argent o de lato, de la qual le cap pus aut sia semblant a petita pluma, e dejos lu cana dedintz liament.	And let it be made of silver or lead, and its head more round like a little feather, and below let there be a tube within ligament.
E aprop pren vesica de moto, e pausa en aquela la humiditat que vols cristirizar en la vesica, e aprop lia aquela entre dos am fort liguatura am fiel doble, e escalfa aquela humiditat sobre le foc.	Then take the bladder and place in it the moisture which you wish to inject into the bladder, and then tie that between two with a strong ligature with a folded piece of cloth, and warm that moisture over the fire.
E aprop entromet la extremitat del cristeri en la vergua.	Then insert the end of clyster into the testicle.
E aprop estrenh la tua ma sobre la vesica am la humiditat am strectura descent entro que·l malaute centa que aquela humiditat ja es pervenguda a la vesica.	And then grip your hand over the bladder with that moisture with tension descending, so that the patient feels that moisture has already reached the bladder.
Mays si a tu no es present vesica, lahoras tu pren una pessa de parguames e fay de aquel cercle; e perfora aquel de tota la sua retonditat; e aprop entromet fiel fort en aquels traucs, ayssi quo so revolgut; e aprop agregua le cercle ayssi quo es agreguat alsofatur, pus que tu pausas en aquel aquo que tu vols de las humiditatz, e olis e ayguas.	But if you do not have a bladder, then take a piece of parchment and make of it a circle; and pierce that all around its circumference; and then insert a strong ligature with a folded piece of cloth into those holes, so that it revolves within; and then add the circle as it is added also fat, when you place in that what you wish of the moistures, and oils and waters.
E aprop tu lia aquel en le instrument e fay am aquel ayssi cum has fayt am la vesica, e exprescio am la tua ma entro que la humiditat pervengua a la vesica.	Then you tie that in the instrument and do to that as you have done to the bladder, and express with your hand so that the moisture reaches the bladder.
Capitol .lx.	Chapter 60:
De extraccio de peyra.	Of extraction of a stone.
Nos ja havem dit en la divisio las specias de peyra e curacio de lu am medicinas, e la diferencia entre peyra engendrada en los ronhos e peyra engendrada en la vesica, e les senhals de aquela.	We have already recounted in the division the kinds of stone and the healing of it with medicines, and the difference between a stone engendered in the kidneys and a stone engendered in the bladder, and their signs.
E havem dit la peyra en la qual catz operacio am ma, e seccio.	We have already said that the stone is in the bladder where we perform surgery.
E la peyra engendrada en la vesica propriament es aquela que es ficada en la vesica.	And the stone generated in the bladder itself is that which is lodged in the bladder.
E yeu so narrant aquel am exposicio manifesta e abreviacio.	And I will tell you briefly and openly about this.
Donc dic que peyra engendrada en la vesica majorment ve als enfantz; e dels senhals de lu es que la urina que es eyssida de la vesica es semblant a aygua en la sua subtilitat, e apar en aquela arena; e le malaute fregua la sua vergua, e motas veguadas pen, e aprop es dressada; e am aquo yeys foro le cul en motz de aquels.	Therefore, I say that the stone generated in the bladder primarily affects infants; and its signs are that the urine which exits the bladder is similar to water in its subtlety, and it appears as sand; and the patient rubs his penis, and often urinates, and it is almost always caused by this.
E es laugiera la sanacio dels enfants de aquela entro que han conseguitz xiiii ans; e es dificil curacio en les viels.	And there is a cure for children of that age who have reached the age of 12, and it is difficult to cure in the old.
Mays en les joves es migiera per aquo quar es entre aquels.	But in the young, it can be cured by this means because it occurs among them.
E de aquel del qual la peyra es major e la curacio es pus leugiera; E si es pauca, es contraria ad aquela.	And if the stone is larger and the cure more distant, then it is contrary to that which is less so.
Donc cum pervenem a la curacio de aquela, cove al comensament de aquela que mondifiquem le malaute am cristeri le qual extragua tota la fenda la qual es en les sieus budels; quar aquela fenda alcunas veguadas prohibeys la envencio de la peyra deves la inquisicio de lu.	Therefore, when we come to the cure of this, first we must cleanse the patient with an antiseptic which extracts any wound in his intestines; for that wound sometimes blocks the exit of the stone after examination.
E aprop sia pres le malaute am les sieus pes e sia contosit e maugut enjos per so que la peyra descenda al preon de la vesica, o que saute de loc aut alcunas veguadas.	Then let him be placed on his feet and pressed and made to move about so that the stone might descend into the bottom of the bladder, or jump from its place sometimes.
E aprop fay aquel cezer entre las tuas mas preparat, e las mas de lu sian dejos las coysas de lu, per so que la vesica tota sia fayta declinant a las partidas dejos.	Then make him squat between your knees with his arms under him, so that the bladder might be pushed down into the lower parts.
E aprop perquier aquela e tota aquela deforo.	And then push it out completely.
Donc si sentes la peyra en l’espazi, lahoras tu te coyta tantost am seccio sobre lu.	Therefore, if you feel the stone in the passage, then you must at once cut him there.
E si no catz de tot dejos le tieu tocament, lahoras cove que tu untes am oli le tieu dit indic de la ma sinistra, si malaute es enfant, o le dit miga si es jove complit, e entrometas aquel en le sieu cul.	And if it does not come out at all from your touch, then place your left index finger in the anus of the patient, if he is a child, or the middle finger if he is grown; and insert that into his anus.
E perquier de la peyra entro que stia dejos le tieu dit.	And push out the stone which lies beneath your finger.
E converteys aquela petit a petit entro al col de la vesica.	And gradually draw it into the neck of the bladder.
E aprop prem sobre aquel am lo tieu dit, e expelleys aquel a las partidas defora ves le loc del qual vos la seccio.	Then squeeze that with your finger, and expel it out the exit from where you cut.
E comanda al ministra que prema la vesica am la sua ma; e comanda a un autra ministra que am la sua ma dextra extenda les genetius a las partidas desus, e am la sua autra ma remaugua la codena la qual es dejos les genetius, en partida del loc en le qual se fa la seccio.	And command the assistant to press on the bladder with his hand; and command another assistant to extend the anus above with his right hand, and with his other hand squeeze the rectum which is below the anus at the site of the incision.
E aprop entromet espatum be inscident del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	Then insert a spathula, the shape of which is as follows:
e scindeys en lu aquo que es entre·l cul e·ls genetius, no en le mieg loc, abantz al latz de la coyssa sinistra; e sia la seccio sobre aquela peyra e·l tieu dit sia en le cul, e sia fayta seccio transversa, per que la seccio defora sia ampla e dedintz streyta segon la quantitat que egrecio de la peyra sia a lu possibla, e no major, quar fort leu comprem le tieu dit le qual es en le cul la peyra deves la seccio, e es foro-getada ses defacultat.	And cut between the anus and genitals, not in the middle place, towards the left buttock; and let the incision be over the stone, and the finger be in the anus, and let the incision be transverse so that the exit incision is ample and the interior narrow according to the amount that can be extracted of the stone from him, and not greater, for then he will tightly compress the finger which is in the anus with the stone after the incision, and it is forced out without being broken.
E sapias que de la peyra es alcuna a la qual so angle e margers, per que le eyssiment de lu es fayt deficil per aquo.	And know that there is some stone whose angles and margins make its exit difficult.
E de aquela aquo es leon semblant a glan, e es redonda, e es fayt de lu leugier eyssiment.	And of this there is one resembling a nut, and it is round, and makes easy exit.
Donc si es aquela al qual so angles e marger, ajusta en la fissura.	Therefore if the stone whose angles and margins fit in the fissure:
E si no es ayssi foro-getada, lahoras cove que tu engenes sobre aquel, o que strenguas sobre aquel am gesti decentment, la extremitat del qual sia ayssi cum lima am le qual strenguas sobre la peyra, e no evasesca de lu; o que entrometas dejos lu instrument subtil de curvada extremitat.	And if it is not forced out, then place your finger on it or tighten it decently, and the end of which should be curved with which to tighten on the stone so that it does not escape from him; or insert under it a slender tool with a curved end.
Mays si tu no podes sobre aquel, lahoras tu amplifica le trauc un petit, e si tu veus flux de sanc, abscindeys en strenh aquel am vitriol trissat.	But if you cannot force it out, then increase the cut a little, and if you see bleeding, then bind that tightly with powdered vitriol.
Mays si la peyra es mays de una, lahoras al comensament tu impelleys la ma a la boca de la vesica, e aprop inscideys sobre lu; e aprop impelleys un petit aprop aquo; e semblantment fay si son motas mays de doas.	But if the stone is larger than one, then at first push your finger to the mouth of the bladder, and then insert it on that; and then push in a little bit likewise; and do similarly if they are more than two.
E si es peyra mot gran, lahoras ignorancia es que tu inscidas aquel am gran seccio, quar accideys al malaute una de doas causas: o que mora o que endevengua a lu destillacio de urina continuabla, per aquo quar le loc no es de tot consolidat.	And if the stone is very large, then know that it is foolish to insert it with a great incision, for two reasons occur in him: either he dies or acquires continuous urination due to the fact that the site is not fully healed.
Mays aministra expulcio de lu entro que sia fora-getada, o engenia en la fractura de lu am las forfexs entro que extragua aquela en pessas.	But the assistant should extract it once it has been forced out, or use forceps to pull it out in pieces.
Donc cum tu auras cumplit la tua opperacio, lahoras omple la plagua de enses de aloe e de sanc de drago, e strenh aquel.	Therefore when you have completed the operation, then fill the wound with cotton wool soaked in aloe and dragon's blood, and bind that tightly.
E pausa sobre aquel drap enfus en oli e vi, o en oli rozat e aygua frega, per so que apostema caut sia cedat.	And place a cloth on him soaked in oil and wine, or in rosewater and rubbed water, so that the wound heals quickly.
E aprop resupina le malaute sobre le sieu col, e no deslias le liament entro al tertz dia.	Then rest for three days, and do not loosen the binding until the third day.
E cum aquel auras desliat, embroca le loc am aygua e mot oli, e aprop cura aquel am enguent diafinicon e am enguent diabazilicon entro que sia sanat.	And when that has been loosened, wash the site with water and a little oil, and then treat it with an ointment of diaphenicon and an ointment of diabasilicon until it is healed.
Mays si en la plagua accideys apostema caut, adhust e corrosiu, e de aquel semblantz ayssi cum si le sanc es en la vesica congelat, e per lu es la hurina prohibida (e aquo es conogut per la egressio del sanc am urina), a donc entromet lo tieu dit en la plagua e extratz aquel sanc, quar si roman provoca la vesica a corropcio de la vesica e de lu putrefaccio.	But if a wound occurs in the wound, and it is hot and swollen, and that looks like congelation of the blood in the bladder and through it the urine is prohibited (and that is known by the flow of blood with urine), then insert your finger in the wound and extract that blood, for if it remains it provokes corruption of the bladder and putrefaction of it.
E aprop lava la plagua am vi agre, aygua e sal, e am opposicio a tota specia, am aquo que conveneys a lu de la curacio entro que sia sanat.	Then wash the wound with sweet wine, water and salt, and apply an ointment of all spices to it until it is healed.
E cove en las horas de tota la curacio que tu lies amdos las coyssas e ajustes las medicinas las quals so pausadas sobre le loc.	And know in the hours of all the cure that you apply both sides of the thighs and adjust the medicines which are laid on the site.
E si la peyra es petita e es en le meat de la vergua, e es ficat en lu, e eyssement de urina es prohibit, lahoras cura aquel am aquo que yeu recomti denant que pervenguas a seccio, quar tropas veguadas per aquesta curacio yest acusat de seccio; e ja yeu e esproat aquo, e es que tu prenguas un perforador de ferr alfelut, del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And if the stone is small and lodged in the middle of the penis, and there is a prohibition on urination, then cure it by what you see before making an incision, for troops often come from this cure accused of incision; and indeed you have seen it and tried it, and it is that you take a punch of iron wrapped in velvet, of which this is the shape:
de triangulada extramitat, agut, ficat en fust.	Of triangular shape, pointed, made on an awl. [Illustration 19: Iron punch for removing a stone from the penis]
E aprop pren fiel, e lia am aquel la vergua dejos la peyra per so que no retorne a la vesica.	Then grab it firmly, and hold the penis under the stone so that it does not return to the bladder.
E aprop entromet le ferr en la vergua, perforant am fecilitat entro que·l perforador vengua ad aquela peyra.	Then insert the iron into the penis, piercing with ease until the punch comes to the stone.
E revolveys le perforador am la tua ma en aquela peyra petit a petit, e tu perforsa la perforacio de lu entro que fassas aquel del autra part penetrar; quar la urina tantost es absolta.	And turn the punch with your hand on that small stone little by little, and as you pierce it from one side, make the incision from the other so that the urine is immediately absorbed.
E aprop prem la tua ma sobre aquo que es romas de la peyra de la partida deforo de la vergua, quar aquela es trinquada, e es foro-getada am la urina, e le malaute es sanat.	Then squeeze your hand on that which is broken from the stone of the part from which the penis exits, for that is closed and forced out by urine, and the patient is healed.
Mays si aquesta curacio no es a tu aparelhada per alcuna causa la qual prohibeys de aquela, lahoras lia un fiel dejos la peyra, e autra fiel desus la peyra.	But if this cure is not equipped for any reason which prohibits it, then grab a bar under the stone and another bar above the stone.
E aprop encideys sobre la peyra en aquela vergua entre doas liaduras.	Then grip on the stone in that penis between two ligatures.
E aprop extratz aquela.	Then extract it.
E aprop deslia le liament e mondifica le sanc congilat, le qual es fayt en la plagua.	Then loosen the binding and clean the congealed blood which is made in the wound.
E no es necessari liament de fiel dejos la peyra, sino per que no retorne a la vesica, e l’autre liament desus sino, quar quan es desliat le fiel aprop la egrecio de la peyra, la codena retorna a son loc e cobra la plagua.	And it is not necessary for the bar to be under the stone except that it does not return to the bladder, and the other binding above except that when the bar is loosened the exit of the stone is made, for then the urethra returns to its place and the wound heals.
E per aquo es a tu necessari quan lias le fiel desus, que tu eleves la codena a las partidas desus, o que retorne deves le tieu compliment, e cobra la plagua ayssi co havem dit.	And for this reason it is necessary when you tie the gallbladder above that you lift up the cord to the parts above or return and do your duty again and heal the plague as we have said.
Capitol .lxi.	Chapter 61.
De extraccio de peyra de las femnas.	Of the extraction of a stone from women.
Peyra en las femnas pauc es engendrada.	A stone in women is rarely generated.
Mays si ve peyra ad alcuna de aquelas, lahoras dificil es la curacio de lu, e es prohibida per tropas manieyras.	But if you see a stone in any of them, then its cure is difficult and is prohibited by many methods.
La una de lor es quar la femna fort leu es verges.	One of them is because the woman is very young.
E la segonda es quar tu no trobas femna be scient que descroba si meteyssa al metge quan es casta, o es de las femnas haventz maritz.	And the second is because you do not find a woman well skilled who discloses if she has had sex with her husband or is a married woman.
La tersa es quar tu no hatrobas femna be sabent aquesta art, majorment la operacio am ma.	The third is because you cannot find a woman well skilled in this art, especially in performing the operation with your hand.
E la quarta es que·l loc de la seccio sobre peyra en las femnas es longinc del loc de la peyra, per que indigeys de seccio preonda, e en aquela es temor.	And the fourth is that the site of the incision for a stone in women is distant from the location of the stone, so it requires a long incision, and in that one there is fear.
Mays si necessitat provoca a tu ad aquo, lahoras cove que tu prenguas una femna metga be scient, e pauc es atrobada.	But if necessity compels you to do this, then you should take a woman doctor who is well skilled, and she is rarely found.
Mays si tu es privat de aquela, lahoras cerca metga quast e subtil, o presenta una femna matrona be esenhada en le feyt de las femnas, o femna que en aquesta art ennueys partida del art.	But if you lack that one, then seek a doctor who is quick and subtle or present a midwife well experienced in the affairs of women, or a woman who in this art has partaken in the art.
Donc fay aquela present, e comanda a lu que fassa tot aquo que tu li mandaras, de la enquisicio sobre la peyra al comensament; la qual causa es que reguarde si la femna es verges, lahoras cove que meta lo sieu dit en le cul de lu e quiera la peyra.	Then do that presentation, and command him to do everything that you command him, from the inquiry about the stone at the beginning; the cause is that she should examine whether the woman is a virgin, then she should put her finger in her rear end and feel for the stone.
Donc si atroba aquela, coarte aquela dejos le sieu dit, e lahoras comanda a lu que inscida sobre aquela.	Then if she finds it, withdraw that with your finger, and then command her to insert your finger in that one.
Mays si no es verge, lahoras comanda a la matrona que entrometa lo sieu dit en le conh de la malauta e enquiera sobre la peyra, pus que pausa la sua ma sinistra sobre la vesica, e comprem aquela am bona comprecio.	But if she is not a virgin, then command the midwife to insert her finger into the vagina of the patient and feel for the stone, while she places her left hand over the bladder, and press that with good compression.
Donc si atroba aquela, lahoras cove que gradantment maugua aquela de l’orrifici de la vesica a las partidas dejos am somman de la sua vertut entro que pervengua am aquel a la razit de la coyssa.	Then if she finds it, then she should gently push that from the orifice of the bladder to the parts below by the sum of her strength, until it comes to the root of the thigh.
E aprop inscida sobre aquela apposicio de la maytat del conh deves la razit de la coyssa de qualque part sia a lu parada e cent la peyra en aquela partida, e·l dit de lu no sia remaugut de la peyra coartan dejos lu.	Then insert into that the tip of the vagina over the root of the thigh from whatever part it is stopped at her and center the stone in that part, and his finger should not be withdrawn from the stone by being pressed down on him.
E la seccio sia pauca al comensament; e aprop entrometa lo ray sobre aquela seccio, e si sent la peyra, lahoras ajuste en seccio segon la quantitat la qual sap que la peyra sira getada de aquela.	And the incision should be small at the beginning; and then insert the ray over that incision, and if she feels the stone, then adjust the incision according to the quantity which she knows that the stone will be pushed out of her.
E sapias que las specias de peyra son motas: quar de aquelas es pauca e gran, e leon e aspra, e longua e redonda, e havent ramps.	And know that the kinds of stones are many: for some of them are small and great, and lean and rough, and long and round, and having horns.
Donc tu sapias quantas specias so de lu per aquo que tu signifiques sobre aquo que vols.	Therefore you know how many kinds there are in her by that which you point out about what you want.
E si tu veus flux de sanc, ajusta en le loc vetriol trissat e te aquela per una hora entro que sia abscindit le sanc, e aprop retorna a la tua operacio entro que la peyra sia fora-getada.	And if you see bleeding, apply in the wound ground vitriol and hold her for an hour until the bleeding is stopped, and then return to your operation until the stone is pushed out.
E fay que prepares am tu dels instrumentz les quals e ditz en la extraccio de peyra en les homes, per so que sias ajudat per aquels en la tua operacio.	And have you prepare some of the instruments which are used in the extraction of stones in men, so that you may be helped by those in your operation.
E si tu veus flux de sanc, e sabes que la expulcio del sanc es de la arceria que es insciza, lahoras tu pausa polvera sobre le loc e estrenh aquel am pulvils e strictura descent, e no iteras aquo; e layssa la peyra e no extraguas aquela, quar fort leu morira la malauta.	And if you see bleeding and know that the outflow of blood is from the artery that is cut, then you should apply powder over the wound and tighten that with a bandage and not repeat that; and leave the stone and not extract it, for the patient will die quickly.
E aprop cura la plagua.	And then heal the plague.
Donc cum es cedada la acuitat del sanc aprop alcus jorns, e·l loc se poyreys, lahoras tu retorna a la tua operacio entro que la peyra sia fora-getada.	Therefore when the severity of the bleeding has ceased and the wound is healed, then you should return to your operation until the stone is pushed out.
Capitol lxii.	Chapter 62.
De seccio sobre ernia acoza.	Of incision for a hernia that is acute.
Hernia ayguoza no es sino agregacio de humiditat en le ciphac blanc lo qual es dejos la codena dels genetius contenent le huou, e es nompnat ciphac.	An acute hernia is nothing but an accumulation of moisture in the white membrane which is below the diaphragm containing the bowels, and it is named diaphragm.
E alcunas veguadas es en le propri pannicol le qual a lu preparec natura en la partida del huou, entro que sia cuyat que ja es autre huou; e es la codena del genetiu entre le ciphac blanc le qual havem dit, e no es aquo sino tart.	And in some cases it is in the subcutaneous membrane which nature has prepared for the part of the bowels, while it is another bowel; and it is the diaphragm between the white membrane which we have said, and it is not that but fat.
E la generacio de aquest hernia es per debelitat la qual accideys als genetius, per que ad aquels es efundunda aquesta materia, e alcunas vetz accideys per percuscio fayta sobre les genetius.	And the generation of this hernia is due to weakness which occurs in the bowels, for to those it is infused with this material; and some times it occurs due to blow done on the bowels.
E aquesta humiditat es havent motas colors, quar la color de lu o es declinant a citrina o a sanguinent, o rog, o es negra feculenta, o es ayguosa blanqua, e es aquo que es mays.	And this moisture has many colors; for the color of it is inclining to yellow or to blood-red, or to red, or is black putrid, or is watery white, and that is what is most often.
E les senhals per les quals es saubut on es aquesta agreguacio de aygua so aquestz: quar si es en le ciphac blanc le qual havem dit, lahoras le apostema es redon declinant un pauc a longitut ayssi cum figura de huou, e appar le genetiu, quar la humiditat conte aquel de tota part.	And the signs by which it is known that this accumulation of moisture is in the white diaphragm which we have said, then the pustule is round declining somewhat to length as the shape of a bowels, and appearing on the bowel; for the moisture contains that in all parts.
E si la humiditat es en le propri pannicol, lahoras le apostema es redon am partida del huou e per aysso hom estima que es autre huou.	And if the moisture is in the subcutaneous membrane, then the pustule is round with the part of the bowels and from that one estimates that it is another bowel.
E si la humiditat es entre la codena dels genetius e·l ciphac blanc, lahoras catz dejos le centiment.	And if the moisture is between the diaphragm of the bowels and the white diaphragm, then it presses down from the center.
E cum tu vols la cognicio de la color de la humiditat, lahoras tu esproa la color de la humiditat en le apostema am entromes cayrat del qual la forma es precedida; e segon aquo que es eyssit en le vestigi del entromes, jutga de aquo que es dedintz lu.	And when you want to know the color of the moisture, then you probe the color of the moisture in the pustule with a thread of which the shape is preceded; and according to that which comes out on the thread, judge what is within it.
Donc quan nos vinem a la curacio de lu am ferr, lahoras cove que comandem al malaute que sia fleubotomat si aquo es a tu possibla, e vezes le cos de lu ple.	Therefore when we come to the cure of it by iron, then we command the patient to be phlebotomized if that is possible for you, and make him lie on his back.
E aprop sia resupinat sobre le sieu dos sobre alcuna causa un pauc auta, e pausa dejos lu motz draps.	And then let him be reclined over his back for some cause a little higher, and place beneath him several sheets.
E aprop setz tu sobre la part sinistra de lu, e comanda al ministra que segua a la dextra de lu, le qual extenda la sua vergua a hun de dos latz a la codena dels genetius e a la partida del mirac del ventre.	And then sit you over the left side of him, and command the assistant to follow him on his right, extending his arm at the angle of two sides to the diaphragm of the bowels and to the part of the navel.
E aprop pren spatum lat e scindeys la codena dels genetius del mieg loc per la longitut entro prop le pentenilh.	And then take a broad blade and cut the diaphragm of the bowels of that place for length in front, close to the penis.
E sia fayta la seccio segon rectetut engualment distant de la linha que deveseys la pel dels genetius, entro que pervengua al ciphac blanc comprehendent.	And let the incision be made according to rightness equally distant from the line which must pass through the membrane of the bowels, so that it comes to the white diaphragm including it.
E excorja aquel, e observa, e guarda te per aysso que tu no inscidas aquel; e la tua excoriacio am la qual aquel excorjas per partida jassia que sia suspenduda am le huou mays e subtilment escruta am la excoriacio segon la quantitat a tu possibla.	And cut that, and observe, and beware lest you cut into it; and your incision by which he cuts it according to the part that is suspended by the bowels more and gently probes with the incision according to the quantity as much as possible.
E aprop perfora le ciphac ple de aygua am perforacio ampla, e extratz tota l’aygua.	And then pierce the full diaphragm of water with a wide incision, and extract all the water.
E aprop separa entre doas labias de la seccio am uncis, e exten le ciphac a las partidas desus; e no toques la codena les genetius comprehendent, e inscideys le ciphac en aquela manieyra que es a tu possible.	And then separate between the two lips of the incision with claws, and extend the diaphragm to the parts above; and do not touch the membrane of the bowels including it, and insert the diaphragm in that manner as much as is possible for you.
E inscideys aquel am la sua totalitat o en pessas, e majorment le sieu latz subtil, quar si tu no perscrutas exquisidament la inscizio de lu, no es fayta segurtat que la aygua no retorne.	And insert that with its entirety or in parts, and especially its sides subtly; for if you do not probe carefully the incision of it, there is not made security that the water does not return.
Mays si le huou procezeys de aquela defora de la sua codena en la ora de la tua operacio, lahoras quan tu auras complida la seccio del ciphac, retorna dedintz aquel, e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la codena dels genetius am sutura, e aprop cura aquel ayssi cum las autras plagua, entro que sia sanat.	But if the bowels protrude from that out of its diaphragm in the hour of your operation, then when you have completed the incision of the diaphragm, return inside it, and then adjust the two lips of the diaphragm of the bowels with suturing; and then heal that as with other plagues, so that it is healed.
E si atrobas le huou corromput per autra malautia, lahoras cove que tu lies les vayssels les quals so sore le suspensori, e extrat le huou, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit.	If you find the entrails corrupted by another disease, then cut away the vessels which are above the suspenders, extract the entrails and treat them with that which we have said before.
Mays si l’aygua es agreguada en doas partidas esemps, lahoras sapias que doas son las ernias; donc inscideys aquela partida segon que has feyt en l’autra engualment; e si es a tu vist que sia una opera, lahoras tu la fay.	But if the water is divided into two parts, then understand that there are two hernias; therefore open that part according to how you have done it in the other, likewise; and if it appears to you that there is one operation, then do it.
E aprop tu abstergiys le sanc, e entramet en las seccios lana submersa en oli o en oli rozat; e pausa deforo autra lana la qual tu as submersa en vi e oli, e expandeys aquela sobre dos genetius e·l mirac del ventre; e pausa desobre draps doblatz e pulvils, e lia aquels desobre am liament le qual es segon aquesta forma:	Then you should cleanse the blood and enter into the incisions with wool soaked in oil or rose oil; and place outside another wool which you have soaked in wine and oil, and expand it over both genitals and the navel of the belly; and place upon it folded cloths and powdery lint, and apply to those upon ointment which is according to this form:
e aprop sian preses dos draps e sian humplitz de lana carmenada segon aquesta semblansa; e sian faytas las extremitatz am les quals es premut de coto o de lana humida, e sian agreguatz am strectura en le braguier de las braguas, e la una de las extremitatz prengua del cul entro al dos, e la segonda prengua a la partida del pantenilh, e dos extramitatz sobre dos coyssas dejos e dos extramitatz autras sobre dos angonars, e tota extrictura sia ajustada en le braguier de las braguas.	and let two cloths be pressed and stuffed with wool colored red according to this resemblance; and the extremities with which it is pressed be made of wood or of wet wool, and be gathered with tightness in the waistband of the undergarments, and one extremity take hold of the buttocks within the two, and the second take hold at the part of the crotch, and two extremities over two thighs below and two other extremities over two armpits, and all tightness be made secure in the waistband of the undergarments.
E alcunas veguadas aquesta hernia es medicada artificialment am cauteri en loc de seccio am ferr; e es que tu prenguas cauteri cutellar subtil e que inscidas am aquel la codena dels ginitius, e es ignit segon que havem recomtat entro que sia descubert le ciphac blanc contenent la aygua, e lahoras tu pren cauteri segon aquesta forma:	And sometimes this hernia is medicated artificially with cautery in place of incision with iron; and you should take thin cauterizing iron and cut into the flesh of the genitals, and it is ignited according to what we have recounted that it be discovered the white membrane containing the water, and then you take cautery according to this form:
e es asemblat a letra greca.	and it is similar to the Greek letter.
E aprop perfora am aquel ciphac, e es ignit entro que tota la humiditat sia fora-gitada.	And then pierce through that membrane and it is ignited until all of the moisture is evaporated.
E aprop exten le ciphac am uncis, e excorja am uncis, e excorja am cauteri subtil ignit; e inscideys aquel segon que es a tu possible entro que eradiques tot lu; e guarda te del huou que·l foc no·l toque.	And then extend the membrane with hooks, and scrape it with hooks, and scrape it with thin cauterizing iron that is ignited; and cut into it according to what is possible for you until you eradicate all of it; and be careful that the fire does not touch the entrails.
E sapias que aquesta operacio es pus salva e pus longinqua de flux de sanc, e milhor que operacio am seccio.	And understand that this operation is more safe and more distant from flow of blood, and better than operation with incision.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat apostema caut en la hora de seccio o en hora de cauteri, o flux de sanc, lahoras cove que tu cures qual contrarietat fa a tu per aquo, am curacio la qual conveneys a lu segon que es dit.	But if it makes opposition pustule in the hour of incision or in the hour of cautery, or flow of blood, then treat that which opposes you according to what has been said with treatment that is appropriate for it according to what has been said.
Mays si le malaute es pauruc, e no spera la segonda operacio per la sua horribilitat, lahoras administra perforacio segon que yeu recomti aquo; e es quan es certificat deves tu, per aquo que havem dit de las significacios, que aquela hernia es ayguosa.	But if the patient is feeble and does not endure the second operation due to its horror, then you should administer piercing according to that which we have recounted here; and it is when it is certified that you must, through those things which we have said about the significants, that this hernia is watery.
Lahoras cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute sobre alcuna cezelha elevada, aprop perfora le apostema en la partida pus bassa de lu am spatum lat, e pausa la perforacio segon la longitut del cos.	Then let the patient be laid upon some raised bed, then pierce the pustule in its lowest part with a spatulate iron, and make the piercing according to the length of the body.
E sia la apercio ampla entro que corro tota l‘aygua.	And the opening should be ample so that all of the water runs out.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc coto e lia aquel e layssa aquel, per so que corro le romanent de l’aygua.	And then place over it cotton and apply that and let it stay there until the remainder of the water runs out.
E aprop cura aquel entro que la plagua sia sanada.	And then treat that until the wound is healed.
Mays si contrarietat es a la egrecio de l’aygua en aquela hora tu perforas aquela: e aquo no es fayt sino per aquo quar le pannicol blanc en le orrifici de la plagua fa contrarietat e prohibeys le eyssiment de l’aygua, lahoras cove que tu metas en la plagua pena o instrument am la qual es extrayta l’aygua dels ydropitz, la forma del qual es precedida; o ajusta en la opprecio de la plagua un petit.	But if opposition is made to the exit of the water in that hour you pierce that: and that is not done except by that which the white membrane in the orifice of the wound makes opposition and prohibits the exit of the water, then let you put into the wound a needle or instrument with which the water is extracted from the water-pockets, the form of which is preceded; or adjust upon the pressure of the wound a small.
E sapias que l’aygua retorna, e es agueguada aprop vi meses o enaviro aquels; e cum es agreguada, lahoras sia perforat segon aquela meteyssa manieyra, quar le malaute ayssi passara les sieus dias.	And understand that the water returns and is driven away for an approximate period of months or years; and when it has returned, then let it be pierced according to that same methodical manner, for thus will the patient pass his days.
Capitol .lxiii.	Chapter 63.
De seccio sobre hernia carnosa e la curacio de lu.	Of incision upon fleshy hernia and its treatment.
Sapias que en la seccio sobre aquesta hernia es temor perdusent a pernicia en las majors disposicios; per que a mi es vista la dimissio de lu e esser salvat per aquela milhor.	Understand that in the incision upon this hernia there is lost fear of danger in the major dispositions; for I have seen its dismissal and being saved by that better.
E yeu so rememorant la operacio en aquela e las specias dels apostemas.	And you should remember the operation upon that one and the species of the pustules.
Donc, dic que l‘apostemas natz en les cos dels quals les genetius so conponutz e es fayt aquo per motas causas: o per superfluitat aguda agra, la qual es efundida als genetius, o per percuscio.	Therefore I say that pustules are born in the parts of which the genitals are composed and it is done for several causes; or by acute excessed humidity, which is distributed in the genitals, or by concussion.
E es la color de la apostema segon la color del cos, e no es atrobat en lu dolor, e es apostema greu.	And the color of the pustule is according to the color of the body, and it does not hurt in that place, and it is a heavy pustule.
E fort leu es apostema lapificada, del qual la color es fosca, e no es centiment a lu.	And often it is pustule of scabs, of which the color is dusky, and there is no sensation in it.
E alcunas veguadas es fayt per nodacio de las arcerias, e per imflacio de aquelas ayssi quo ja es perceubut la rememoracio de lu, o per imflacio de venas.	And sometimes it is done by nodding of the arteries, and by inflammation of those from which there has already been perceived memory of it, or by inflammation of veins.
Mays aquo que es per imflacio de arcerias es conogut per la dispercio de la apostema quan compremas aquela am les tieus ditz; e no cove que aquel toques.	But that which is by inflammation of arteries is known by the dispersion of the pustule when you compress it with your fingers; and let not that be touched.
Mays aquel que es fayt per imflacio de vena no es dispergut de lu alcuna causa deves la compressio am les ditz.	But that which is done by inflammation of a vein is dispersed from it for no cause due to compression with the fingers.
E ja es possible que sobre aquesta specia sia fayta seccio e sobre les autres carns; e es que tu inscida la codena dels genetius, e aprop esten le huou a las partidas desus, e extratz aquel del ciphac blanc, e deliura le suspensori dels vaysels, e ligua les, e inscideys le suspensori pus que tu deliuras aquel de tota partida de las partidas del huou.	And it is possible that upon this species there is made incision and upon the other flesh; and you cut into the membrane of the genitals, and then extend the fire to the parts above, and extract that from the white membrane, and ligature those, and cut into the suspender more so that when you have extracted that from all of the parts of the fire.
Donc si l’huou ja es am aquelas carnadas consolida, lahoras cove que tu extraguas le huou e inscidas aquel.	Therefore if the fire has already become consolidated in those flesh, then let you extract the fire and cut into it.
E si es adherencia entro alcuna causa del ciphac, o entre aquo que es entre les bayssels, lahoras cove que tu deliures tota aquela adherencia e inscidas aquela per inscizio redonda.	And if there is adhesion for any cause of the membrane, or between that which is between the vessels, then let you loose all of that adhesion and cut into it by a round incision.
Mays si es nativitat de carn en le loc de la adherencia la qual es detras, lahoras cove que tu inscidas tot aquo que es de lu, e extraguas le huou ayssi cum havem dit.	But if there is generation of flesh in the place of the adhesion which is behind, then let you cut into all that is of it and extract the fire as we have said before.
Donc cum es complida la tua operacio, lahoras omple la plagua de lana imfuza en oli rozat e vi; e aprop cura aquela am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	Therefore when your operation is completed, then fill the wound with wool soaked in rose oil and wine; and then treat that with the other treatment until it is healed.
Capitol .lxiv.	Chapter 64.
De la curacio de hernia que es de vitz.	Of the treatment of hernia which is of veins.
Vit es apostema envolut per alcuna envolucio semblant a broto am mollificacio dels testiculs, e es fayt dificil movement exercitiu e deambulacio sobre le malaute.	Vein is pustule enveloped by some envelope similar to bud with softening of the testes, and it is done difficult moving exercise and ambulation upon the patient.
E en la curacio de aquesta malautia es per temor per aquo del qual es precedida rememoracio.	And in the treatment of this disease there is fear for that from which is preceded memory.
Empero cove que diguam opperacio en aquela segon que fero les primiers.	However let us treat it in that according to how we made the first ones.
E dic que cove que fassas sezer le malaute sobre una cezelha elevada; e aprop enpelleys le suspensori dels testiculs a las partidas dejos; e aprop te la codena dels genetius am les tieus ditz am les baysels que so probdas a la vergua; e tengua aquels autre ministre que tu, e extenda aquels am extencio vehement.	And I say that let you lay the patient upon some raised bed; and then pule the suspender of the testes to the parts below; and then take hold of the membrane of the genitals with your fingers by the vessels which have been proved against the beam, and extend those by violent extension.
E aprop inscideys am spatum lat agut per seccio traversa en le dreyt dels vaysels entro que sian les vayssels descubertz.	And then cut into with a spatulate iron that is sharp by a crosswise incision in the right of the vessels so that the vessels are uncovered.
E aprop excorja de tota partida ayssi quo a tu havem dit en extraccio de arceria las quals so en las templas.	And then scrape all parts as we have said before in cutting of artery which is in the temples.
E aprop fica en aquelas un’agulha en la qual sia fiel doble, e lia aquel en le primier del locs en les quals accideys vit, e lia aquel autra veguada en le derier de lor.	And then put in those a needle in which there is a double point, and apply that to the first of the places in which vein occurs, and apply the other which has been used before in the last of them.
E aprop inscideys aquels en le mieg loc per seccio dreyta segon la longuesa del cos, e extratz aquo que es agreguat de las humiditatz fetulentas e corruptas.	Then insert them into the right side according to the length of the body, and remove what is accumulated from the foul and putrid humors.
E aprop cura la plagua am curacio de las autras plaguas en las quals vols sania esser engendrada per so que caian les vaysels les quals noyreysso un de dos genetius, quar no es mal per aquo.	And then heal the wound with treatment of the other wounds in which you want health to be generated so that the vessels fall, which blacken one of two genitals, because it is not bad for this.
Mays si accideys vit a totz les bayssels, lahoras cove que·ls testicols sian extragutz o que les testicols per aquo se cequo am les vayssels, per que sia privat de tot nutriment per la inscizio dels vayssels, e que sian estaborits, o que cequo per so que no sia juvament am aquels.	But if it happens to all the vessels, then the testicles should be extracted or that the testicles by that are cut off from the vessels, so that it is deprived of all nourishment by the cutting off of the vessels, and that they are atrophied, or that they are cut off so that it is not beneficial with those.
Capitol .lxv.	Chapter 65.
De la cura de hernia entestinal.	On the treatment of intestinal hernia.
Le adveniment de aquesta hernia es per seccio que endeve en le ciphac extendut sobre le ventre de part dels angunars del mirac del ventre, per que deysendo les budels de aquela ruptura ad alcu dels budels.	The occurrence of this hernia is due to a rupture that extends into the chest from the anus of the rectum, so that as a result of this rupture some of the intestines pass out through the opening.
E aquesta ruptura es o del ciphac o de excencio de lu, e accideysso aquestas doas specias per motas causas: o percussio, o per sautz, o per clamor, o per elevacio de alcuna causa greu, o per semblantz.	And this rupture is either of the chest or of an effusion from it, and these two types occur for various reasons: either from a blow, or from a fall, or from crying, or from some heavy object being raised, or from similar causes.
E·l senhal de aquo, quan es per extencio del ciphac, es que accideys pauc a pauc en lonc temps, e no accideys soptament, e es apostema engual entro ves le preon per so quar le ciphac comprem le budel.	And the sign of this, when it is due to an effusion from the chest, is that it occurs little by little over a long period of time, and does not occur suddenly, and it is like an abscess between the lung and the diaphragm because the chest compresses the intestine.
E le senhal de lu es quan es per seccio del ciphac, quar al comensament fa accidir dolor vehement sobtament; e es apostema divers aparent dejos la codena propdana aparent, e aquo es per eyssiment del budel, e·l cos de lu a las partidas deforo del ciphac.	And the sign of it is when it is due to a rupture in the chest, because at the beginning it causes violent pain; and there is a diverse appearance of an abscess below the apparent collarbone, and this is due to the displacement of the intestine, and the body of it appears at the edges of the rupture in the chest.
E alcunas veguadas es fora-getat am le budel la tela, e es apelada aquesta hernia entestinal zirbal.	And sometimes the intestine is torn with the membrane, and this hernia is called intestinal hernia.
E alcunas veguadas es fayta am ventositat, e alcunas veguadas corr en le budel fenda, e aqui es retenguda, e es am aquo gran pernitia3 del malaute, e alcunas veguadas fa endevenir dolor malvada e majorment quan es premut.	And sometimes it is caused by wind, and sometimes a fissure occurs in the intestine, and here it is retained, and it is a great hindrance to the patient, and sometimes it causes wicked pain, especially when it is pressed.
E en la curacio de las especias de aquesta malautia am ferr es temor, per que cove que sia esquivat le cazament en aquela.	And in the treatment of the kinds of this disease with a needle there is danger, because one must avoid piercing the intestine in it.
E la manieyra de la operacio de aquela es que comandes al malaute que redugua le budel am la sua ma a las partidas dedintz de la sua conquavitat si obezeys al sieu retornament, e aprop sia envessat sobre le sieu col entre las tuas mas, e eleva las cambas de lu.	And the manner of operating on it is that you command the patient to draw in his intestine with his hand at the edges of its cavity, if he obeys its return, and then he should be turned over onto his back between your hands, and his legs are raised up.
E aprop sten la codena la qual siec la codena dels testicols a las partidas desus, e inscideys la codena dels testicols tota per le lonc; e aprop fiqua en doas labias de la seccio uncis segon que indigeysses a hubrir la seccio am aquels.	And then tighten the cord which holds back the scrotum at the edges above, and insert the testicles all the way through the opening; and then fix in two lips of the rupture hooks according to what you command to open the rupture with them.
E si’ la seccio segon la quantitat que a tu sia possible que de aquela le huou sia foro-getat.	And if it is according to the quantity that is possible for you, then let the intestine be torn out of it.
E aprop excorja aquela ciphaqueth les quals so dejos la codena dels testicols, entro que sia descubert le ciphac blanc dur de quascuna partida.	And then cut away the chest which is under the scrotum, leaving the white tough diaphragm uncovered at each edge.
Lahoras tu entromet le tieu dit en aquo que siec le testicol, en aquo que es entre ciphac blanc, le qual es dejos la codena del huou, e entre le ciphac segon, e absolve am aquel’adherencia que es en la partida detras del huou.	Then you put your finger into that which holds the testicle, in what is between the white diaphragm and the chest according to, and remove with it the adhesion which is at the edge behind the intestine.
E aprop mau am la ma la codena dels testicols a las partidas deforo, e am aysso exten le ciphac blanc en sus am la ma sinestra, e eleva le huou am le ciphac a la partida de la seccio; e comanda al ministre que extenda le huou ensus e tu dissolveys la adherencia que es detras am solucio complida.	And then hold with your hand the scrotum at the edges out, and with your left hand stretch out the white diaphragm upon it, and lift up the intestine with the chest to the edge of the rupture; and command the assistant to stretch out the intestine towards you, and you dissolve the adhesion behind with completed solution.
E cerqua am les tieus ditz que lay no sia alcuna causa del budel envelopat en le ciphac blanc dur.	And check with your fingers that there is no cause for the intestine to be wrapped up in the tough white diaphragm.
Mays si tu atrobas de lu alcuna causa, lahoras tu enpelleys aquel al ventre dejos.	But if you find some cause in it, then you pull it down into the belly below.
E aprop tu pren una agulha en la qual sia fiel gros fayt de x fiels, e entromet aquel deves le derier del ciphac, le qual es jos la codena dels testicols, la qual siec seccio; e aprop inscideys las extremitatz las quals emineysso del fiel entro que sian quatre fiels, e aprop compausa alcus de lor sobre alcuna figura en manieyra de crotz; e lia am aquel le ciphac del qual havem dit que es dejos la codena dels testicols am fort liament de dos partz.	And then you take a needle in which there is a large thread made of six threads, and insert it through the edge of the chest, which is under the scrotum, which holds the rupture; and then insert the ends which protrude from the thread so that they are four threads, and then tie some of them into a figure in the manner of a cross; and sew up with it the chest of which we have said that it is under the scrotum with strong sewing of two parts.
E aprop envolveys las extremitatz dels fiels e lia aquelas am liament vehement entro que alcu dels vayssels que noyrrisso aquels no puscan trametre alcuna causa per so que de aqui no accida apostema caut.	And then wrap up the ends of the threads and sew those up with strong sewing so that none of the vessels which blacken those can transmit any cause for an abscess to occur hereafter.
E pausa autra veguada liament segon foro le primier liament, lonh de lu mens tres ditz; e aprop aquestz dos liaments layssa del ciphac le qual es dejos la codena dels testicols la quantitat de la grandeza del dit, e inscideys tot le romanent segon redondeza, e osta de lu le huou.	And pause another sewing according to the first sewing, long enough from it three fingers; and then these two sewings will leave of the chest which is under the scrotum the quantity of the size of the finger, and insert all the remaining according to roundness, and hold the intestine away from it.
E aprop inscideys en la partida dejos de la codena dels testicols per seccio de la qual corra sanc e sania ayssi cum havem recomtat en aquo que havem dit.	And then insert at the edge under the scrotum by a rupture from which blood and health flow out as we have recommended in what we have said.
E aprop aministra lana submersa en oli, e pausa en la plagua; e aministra le liament le qual havem recomtat (e alcunas veguadas le ciphac blanc es cauterizat, le qual havem dit aprop la inscizio de lu temen de flux de sanc, quar motas veguadas accideys aquels) e leyssa le liament entro que per si caia.	And then administer wool soaked in oil, and apply it to the wound; and administer the sewing which we have recommended (and sometimes the white diaphragm is cauterized, which we have said before the edge of it they fear a flow of blood, because many times it occurs with them), and let the sewing fall so that by itself.
Mays si le cazement de lu es tardat, lahoras de aygua cauda sia embrocat, e pausa sobre aquel entro que caia segon que havem dit.	But if the sewing of it is delayed, then let warm water be applied, and apply it to that which falls according to what we have said.
E aprop cura la plagua am l’autra curacio de las plaguas entro que sia sanat.	And then heal the wound with the other cure of wounds in which health occurs.
Capitol .lxvi.	Chapter 66.
De hernia ventosa.	On windy hernia.
En aquesta hernia no e vist alcu que sia estat ardit sus la curacio de lu am ferr.	In this hernia there is no one who has been healed with the cure of it with a needle.
E les primiers diyssero que es fayta ayssi cum havem recomtat en la hernia que es am vi; la qual es que tu lies les vayssels aprop la seccio sobre aquela am fecilitat de lu; e aprop secca en le mieg loc en enviro le apostema am aquo que obro aquel, entro que caian les vayssels.	And the first thing that is done as we have recommended in the hernia which is with wine; the which is that you sew the vessels at the edge of it with ease of it; and then dry up in the middle around it by the abscess with what causes that, so that the vessels fall.
E cura la plagua segon que havem dit entro que sia sanada.	And heal the wound according to what we have said so that it is healthy.
Capitol .lxvii.	Chapter 67.
De la disropcio que es fayta en les anguonars.	On the rupture which is made in the anus.
Alcunas veguadas endeve ruptura en les angonars ayssi cum havem dit, e emineys le loc.	Sometimes a rupture occurs in the anus as we have said, and it protrudes the place.
E no deyssen als genetius alcuna causa dels budels al genetius; e si deyssen, aquo es pauc; e retorna s’en en totas horas.	And do not let any cause of the intestines occur to the anus; and if it occurs, then it is little; and return in all hours.
Mays si es prolonguat le temps am aquo, es ajustada fissura en le ciphac entro que deysenda le budel en le ciphac; e accideys aquo per la extencio del ciphac le qual es en le angonars ayssi cum havem dit, la qual causa es quar le ciphac es estendut, e aprop es mollificat e·l loc es apostemat e emineys.	But if time is prolonged with it, then a fissure is made in the chest through which the intestine extends into the chest; and this occurs due to the extension of the chest which is in the anus as we have said, which cause is that the chest is extended, and then it becomes soft and the place protrudes and is abscessed.
E la cura de lu es am cauteri ayssi quo es precedida la narracio de lu.	And the cure of it is with cautery as it is preceded by the narration of it.
E alcunas veguadas es curada am ferr segon aquesta manieyra: e es que·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu dos entre las tuas mas, e aprop secca le loc de la ruptura dels apostemas emineys am seccio per la latitut segon la quantitat de tres ditz.	And sometimes it is healed with a needle according to this manner: and the patient hangs onto his own chest between your hands, and then dry up the place of the rupture of the abscesses protrude by an opening with sewing according to the length of three fingers.
E aprop strenh le ciphac blanc que es jos la codena entro que sia descubert.	And then strengthen the white diaphragm which is under the scrotum so that it is uncovered.
E aprop pren le ray e pausa aquel sobre le loc eminent del ciphac, e prem aquel al preon del ventre.	And then take the needle and apply it to the protruding place of the chest, and press it against the abdomen.
E aprop cus le dos locs eminentz sobre la extremitat del ray del ciphac, e ajusta am la sutura un de aquels am l’autre.	Then cut the two prominent spots on top of the head's crown, and sew one to the other.
E aprop extratz la extremitat del ray, e no inscidas del ciphac de tot, ni no extenda le huou, ni autra causa ayssi cum yeu te fi saber en la curacio de hernia entestinal.	Then pull out the end of the bone, and don't cut into the skull at all, nor stretch the nerve, or any other cause as well, as you will learn in the treatment of intestinal hernias.
E aprop cura aquela am la curacio de las plaguas, e cum inscideyses les fiels, mundifica aquela e restaura la plagua entro que sia consolidada; quar le ciphac es contrayt e no es ajustada la eminencia de ruptura.	And then cure that with the treatment of ulcers, and when you insert the needles, cleanse it and restore the ulcer within so that it is consolidated; for the skull is contracted and not adjusted to the突出 of the rupture.
E cauteri es milhor en aquest loc, quar es pus propda a salut.	And cautery is better in this place, because it is closer to health.
Capitol .lxviii.	Chapter 68:
De mollificacio de la codena dels testiculs.	Of the softening of the cords of the testicles.
Motas veguadas la codena dels testiculs en alcus homes es mollificada per aysso quar las carns que so entre aquela son mollificadas, e es fedat le reguardament de lu.	Many times the cords of the testicles in some men are softened because the flesh that is between them is softened, and the guarding of it is relaxed.
Adonc necessari es ad aquel que es preguat en la curacio de lu que fassa jazer le malaute segon le sieu dos, e enscida tota la codena la qual es mollificada sobre la codena natural; e aprop que ajuste doas labias am la sutura.	Then it is necessary for the one who is being treated to lie on his back, and to heat all the cords which are softened over the natural cords; then sew two lips together.
E si vols, cus en le comensament la superfluitat de la codena mollificada am tres cozeduras o quatre e am ferma sutura.	And if you want, cut in the beginning of the surplus of the softened cord with three cuts or four and with a firm suture.
E aprop inscideys entre las suturas; e aprop cura per curacio de las autras plaguas entro que sia sanat e caian les fiels.	And then insert between the sutures, and cure through the treatment of other ulcers within so that it is healed and the needles fall out.
Capitol .lxix.	Chapter 69:
De castracio.	Of castration:
Sapias que castratio en nostre ley es excomengada, mays per causa es legut a mi que·m remembre de lu en aquest libre; e no es necessaria la rememoracio de lu sino per doas manieyras, de las quals es la una per so que aquo sia en la sciensa del metge quan es enterroguat de aquela, que sapia la curacio de lu al qual accideys; e l’autra manieyra es que nos motas vetz havem necessitat de castracio de autras bestias per les juvamentz nostres per aquelas, ayssi cum de motos, e de bocs, e de porcs, e de semblantz a las bestias.	You should know that castration in our law is excommunicated, but for two reasons I have been asked to include it in this book; one of which is so that the doctor who is questioned about it knows how to cure it if it happens, and the other reason is that many times we need to castrate other animals for our own purposes, like mules, oxen, pigs, and similar beasts.
E donc dic que castracio es fayta en dos manieyras: o per atrissio, o per fissura a seccio.	And so I say that castration is done in two ways: either by crushing or by cutting through to a section.
Mays en aquela que es fayta per atrissio, la via de la opera es que nos fassam cezer la bestia en aygua cauda entro que·ls genetius de lu sian mollificatz e sian linhitz e que pendan.	But in the one that is done by crushing, the way of the operation is to have the beast cut into cold water until its testicles are softened and loose and hanging.
E aprop pren aquels am la tua ma entro que sian resols e no apparescan dejos le tocament.	And then take those with your hand so that they are dissolved and do not appear below the touch.
Mays en castracio fayta per fissura e seccio, cove que tu tenguas la bestia e premas la codena dels testicols de lu am la ma senestra.	But in castration done by cutting through, catch hold of the beast and press the cords of its testicles with your left hand.
E aprop lia le suspensori, e inscideys sobre quascun huou am una seccio entro que dos huous proceseysso.	And then cut the suspenders, and insert into each one a section so that two holes are made.
E aprop inscideys aquels pus que auras quascu excorjat.	And then insert those after you have scraped off each one.
E no leysses sobre aquels del ciphac alcuna causa, sino le ciphac subtil le qual es sobre les vazes.	And do not put anything on the skull over them except for the thin skull which is above the vessels.
E aquesta manieyra de castracio es milhor la qual es fayta per atrissio, quar atrissio fort leu layssa alcuna causa dels testicols per que la bestia desira coyt.	And this way of castration is better which is done by crushing, because crushing strongly leaves no cause in the testicles so that the beast desires coitus.
E aprop cura la plagua entro que sia sanada.	And then cure the ulcer within until it is healed.
Capitol .lxx.	Chapter 70:
De la cura de hermafrodozia.	Of the cure of hermaphrodites:
Hermafrodozia en les homes es segon dos manieyras: la una es quar o appar en aquo que siec l’espazi en la codena de testiculs, en aquel que es entre dos testiculs figura quar cunh de femna en la qual so pels.	Hermaphrodites in men are according to two ways: one is when they appear to have a space between the cords of the testicles, in that which is between the two testicles there is a figure like a woman’s vulva in which there are hairs.
E alcunas veguadas de aquel corr urina le qual es en la codena dels testiculs.	And sometimes from it urine flows from that which is in the cords of the testicles.
Mays en las femnas es una specia: e es que·l conh de la femna sobre le pentenilh es ayssi cum dos testiculs de home un pauc de tot yminiheys a la partida deforo ayssi cum le perpucii de home e dos testicols.	But in women there is one type: and it is that the clitoris of a woman on the foreskin is like two testicles of a man, a little bit of all of them at the beginning of the penis, just like the foreskin of a man and two testicles.
E la curacio es de tres specias: de dos dels homes e de una specia de las femnas.	And the cure is of three types: two from men and one type from women.
E es que cove que tu inscidas aquelas carns ajustadas entro que efuga la emprecio de aquela, e aprop que cures aquelas am curacio de las autras plaguas.	And it is so that you insert those flesh parts joined together so that the impression of them flows out, and then cure those with the treatment of other ulcers.
E en la segonda specia dels homes de la qual yeys urina la qual es en la codena dels testiculs, no es curacio ni opperacio en lu.	And in the second type from men from which urine flows and which is in the cords of the testicles, there is no cure or operation for it.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter 71:
De lentinge e de carn eminent per causas de las femnas.	Of the hymen and prominent flesh from causes in women:
Lentige fort leu es ajustada sobre causas naturals entro que es etressat e es fayt leg le reguardament; e alcunas veguadas es magnificada en alcunas femnas en tant entro que es spandit ayssi cum en les homes e perve entro al coito.	A strong hymen is firmly attached to natural causes so that it is strained and made tight by the guarding; and sometimes it is enlarged in some women as much as in men, and it comes into coitus.
Adonc cove que tu tenguas la superfluitat de lentinge am la tua ma o am unci e inscidas.	So then take hold of the surplus of the hymen with your hand or a needle and insert.
E no ultimes en inscizio, majorment en le preon de la razit, per so que no endevengua flux de sanc.	And do not pierce all the way through, especially in the root of the vein, so that it does not draw out blood.
E aprop cura aquela am curacio de las plaguas entro que sia sanada.	And then cure it with the treatment of other ulcers within until it is healed.
Mays carn nascuda es carn que nays en le horrifici de la mayre entro que umple aquel, e fort leu es eyssit a las partidas deforo segon semblansa de coa (e per aquo alscus primiers appelero aquo “malautia caudada”); donc cove que nos inscidam ayssi cum inscidem lentinge, e curem aquela entro que sia sanada.	But a born flesh is flesh which grows in the womb of the mother so that it fills that place, and often it comes out at the openings in front according to the appearance of the vagina (and for this reason some first called it “tail with a head”); therefore we insert as we insert the hymen, and cure it within until it is healed.
Capitol .lxxii.	Chapter 72:
De curacio de alratica.	Of the cure of anus.
Alratica es que le conh de la femna no sia perforat, o sia le trauc petit.	Anus is when the clitoris of a woman is not perforated, or has a small hole.
E es o natural o accidental.	And it is either natural or accidental.
Accidental es per malautia la qual ha precedit, e aquela es fayta o per carn nada ajustada o per ciphac subtil o espes.	Accidental is by disease which has preceded it, and that one is done, or by flesh grown together, or by a thin skull, or hard.
E es fayt o en le preon de la mayre, o en les costatz de lu, o en le pus sobira de lu, o en le pus bas de lu, e prohibeys de cuoyt e de enprenguacio e de enfantament, e fort leu prohibeys las mestruas.	And it is done, or in the root of the mother, or in its sides, or on top of it, or on the bottom of it, and very much prohibits coitus and impregnation, and very much prohibits menstruation.
E la cognicio de aquela es fayta per reguardament de la metrona, si la oppilacio es apparent, propdana; mays si no es apparent, lahoras tu cerqua aquela am les tieus ditz o am le ray.	And the knowledge of it is done by guarding of the midwife, if the swelling is apparent, the midwife; but if it is not apparent, then you probe it with your fingers or with a needle.
Mays si oppilacio es per ciphac subtil, e es propda a las doas labias, lahoras tu coyta e disromp aquela.	But if the swelling is by a thin skull and is against the two lips, then you cut and tear it apart.
E es que pauses sobre las doas labias pulvils, e aprop pausa les tieus ditz indicz de amdoas las mas encemps.	And it is that you pause over the two lips of the vagina, and then pause your fingers indicating both sides from within.
E la femna sia sobre le sieu dos, las sieuas coyssas extendudas, e aprop exten las doas labias am forsa entro que aquel ciphac subtil sia romput e la oppilacio sia uberta.	And the woman be on her back, her legs spread out, and then extend the two lips with force within so that that thin skull is broken and the swelling opened.
E aprop pren lana e enbeu le4 en oli e pausa aquela sobre·l loc, e jagua am home le dia per so que·l loc inscis no sia consolidat.	And then take wool and dip it in oil and pause it over the place, and put on a poultice at night so that the place is not healed up.
Mays si le ciphac es gros e espes, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquel am spatum lat o am fuelha de mirta.	But if the skull is thick and hard, then take that with fat of lard or pitch of myrrh.
Mays si la oppilacio es per carnada, lahoras suspen aquela am unci, e inscideys aquela.	But if the swelling is by flesh grown together, then suspend it with a needle, and insert it.
E sian am tu las medicinas que fan cessar flux de sanc ses mordicacio, ayssi cum ahacatia, e sanc de drago, e enses, ajustat am album de huou.	And have you the medicines that make the flow of blood stop, like a biting wound, and dragon’s blood, and gum arabic, tied up with white of egg.
E aprop aministra una canulha de plom ampla per so que la plagua no sia consolidada leugierament.	And then administer a broad lead cane so that the wound is not healed tightly.
E tengua aquela per alcus jorns e aministra calgua de li sec.	And hold it for several days, and give warm water of linseed.
E aprop sia curada am l’autra curacio de consolidacio entro que sia sanada.	And then it is healed by the other cure of consolidation within until it is healed.
E alcunas vetz accideys en la mayre nativitat de autres carns, e lahoras cove que inscidas segon aquesta manieyra.	And sometimes others happen in the womb of mothers, and then take hold of them according to this way.
Mays si aysso es per apostema crancos, a l’apostema crancos le qual es en la mayre no sia fayta contrarietat am ferr en deguna manieyra.	But if it is due to scrofulous sores, do not cause any contraindications with iron in any way for the scrofulous sores that are on the neck.
Capitol .lxxiii.	Chapter 73.
De la cura de emorroydas e de tayl e de botor roja que accideysso en le conh de las femnas.	Of the cure for hemorrhoids, and of a tail and red spot that occurs in the genitals of women.
Emorroydas so apprecio dels orificis de motas venas entro que de aquelas corro mot sanc continuadament; e cum so antiquadas emorroydas e son fayts theyls.	Hemorrhoids are an obstruction of the openings of many veins, from which there flows much blood continuously; and when they are old hemorrhoids, and they are made dry.
E ja yeu he dit en la divisio las specias de aquelas e les senhals de aquelas, e diyre ayssi aquelas que recebo curacio e aquelas que no recebo curacio.	And I have already said in the division of them, their species and their signs; thus, I will now say those that receive a cure, and those that do not receive a cure.
Donc dic que emorroydas e theyls quan so en le preon de la mayre e no apparo al sentiment, lahoras en aquelas no sia fayta curacio am ferr.	I say then, that hemorrhoids and theyls when they are in the anus of the mother, and do not appear to the senses, thus in those do not let there be a cure with iron.
Mays aquelas las quals so en le orrifici de la mayre sobre las quals catz sentiment, so aquelas que so curadas.	But those which are in the opening of the anus, over which there is sensation, it is those that are cured.
E cove que tu metas la femna en mayso frega e aprop exten atheyl am les forfexs, o am drap aspre, e inscideys aquelas am las razitz.	And if you put the woman into warm water and then stretch it out with tweezers, or with rough cloth, and insert them with the roots.
E aprop pulveriza sobre aquelas deves le fluxs del sanc de una de las polveras insciscivas ses mordicacio, ayssi cum acassia e semblant ad aquels.	And then sprinkle over them the flow of blood from one of the powdery asps without biting, thus with cassia and like it.
E aprop enpellesca les sieus pes per una hora, e aprop pausa aquela en aygua freja.	And then pluck her feet for an hour, and then place that in warm water.
E si persevera le fluxs del sanc, lahoras fay aquela sezer en decoccio de sumat e de scorsas de milgranas e de gualas e de semblantz.	And if the flow of blood persists, then do that seat in a decoction of wormwood and of peels of pomegranates, and of aloes, and of like things.
E aprop pren farina de ordi e comfiys aquela am miel e vi agre e fay emplastre am aquo sobre le dos de lu.	And if you take wheat flour and cook that with honey and sour wine, and make a poultice with it over her back.
E si le sanc es abscindit, bo es; e sino, fay adherir am dos ventozas, e a las mamilhas ses escarificatio.	And if the blood is abstinent, that is good; and if not, then adhere to it with two leeches, and on the breasts without scarification.
E aprop pren lana e submergeys aquela am suc de coliandre o am suc de arnagloza o am suc de guarravier am vi pentit e fay adherir al loc; e aprop cura le loc am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And if you take wool and immerse that with sap of coriander, or with sap of wild garlic, or with sap of geranium with boiled wine, and adhere it to the place until it is healed.
Mays athyl rog le qual es de aspre reguardament, cove que tu inscidas aquo que a tu appar de aquel segon que he dit en theyl engualment.	But that tail which is of rough nature, if you insert that which appears to you according to what I have said in the engullement.
E cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And cure that until it is healed.
Capitol .lxxiv.	Chapter 74.
De perforacio de eyssedura accident en la mayre.	Of boring a hole in the anus accidentally.
Motas specias de apostemas accideysso en la mayre, ayssi cum cranc e apostema lapident e ulceracios e adhubelat e erpetromens e fistulas emorroyas e raguarrias e thyl e autres apostemas.	Many species of sores occur in the anus, thus with scrofula and scrofulous sores and ulcerations and phlegmon and erysipelas and hemorrhoids and hernias and tail and other sores.
E yeu ja he dit aquestas malautias e las specias de aquelas e les senhals de aquelas, e las curacios de lor en la divisio.	And I have already said these maladies and their species and their signs, and their cures in the division.
E cove que yeu digua en aquest tractat de apostema caut le qual ve en la mayre quan es dels apostemas que collegeysso sania, e si vols saber en qual manieyra se fa la opperacio de lu am ferr.	And if I speak in this treatise of scrofula which appears in the anus when it is of the sores that collect pus, and if you want to know in what manner its opening is made with iron.
Adonc cove que tu consideres si la dolor de la apostema en le sieu comensament es aguda am percussio e flecma e febre, e vezes aquel enrogezir e si catz sobre aquel le sentiment, lahoras no·t coytes am perforacio de lu, e cura aquel am aquo que ajuda sobre la maturacio entro que cesse la acuitat dels accidentz.	Then consider if the pain of the sore at its commencement is acute with a blow and phlegm and fever, and see that upon it there is swelling, and if there is upon it sensation, then do not pierce it; cure that with what helps over the maturation until the acuteness of the accidents cease.
E lahoras cove que tu fassas cezer la femna sobre una cezelha que aia doas cezelhas; e recline sobre le sieu dos e ajusta les sieus pes a la partida pus dejos del ventre, e las sieus coyssas sian expandudas, e pausa les sieus brasses dejos les sieus denols, e lia quascus am liament ad aquo convenient.	And then let the woman sit on a stool that has two stools; recline on her back and adjust her feet to the part below the belly, and let her thighs be expanded, and place her arms below her elbows, and hold each with a bandage according to what is convenient.
E aprop la matrona segua del latz dreyt e aministre le instrument am le qual es ubert le orrifici de la mayre, la forma del qual vindra en aquelas causas que·s faran aprop.	And the midwife follows on the right side and administers the instrument by which the opening of the anus is made, the form of which will come in those causes that will be made afterwards.
E cove quan vols ministrar aquest instrument que tu fiques am lo ray le preon de la mayre de la femna, e aquo que del instrument es intrat en la mayre no sia mays que·l preon de la mayre e leda le malaute.	And if you want to administer this instrument, let it be made smooth with the anus of the woman, and that which of the instrument enters into the anus not be more than the anus and lead the patient.
Mays si l’estrument es major que·l preon de la mayre, lahoras cove que tu pauses pulvils sobre la textura del preon de la mayre per sso que sia prohibit l’intrament de tot instrument en le preon de la mayre.	But if the instrument is greater than the anus, then let you pause powder on the texture of the anus so that there is prohibited the insertion of any instrument in the anus.
E cove que tu pauses le vertitge que corr en le strument del latz pus desus e que le ministre tengua le strument e revolva le vertitge entro que sia ubert le orrifici de la mayre.	And let you pause the thread that runs along the instrument on the side above, and let him who administers hold the instrument and revolve the thread until it is opened the anus.
E cum appar la excitura, e es tocada am la ma e es leon e molh, lahoras cove que tu secces aquela deves le cap de lu am spatum lat.	And when the opening appears, and is touched with the hand and is hot and moist, then let you dry it with a spatula of lath.
E cum la sania es evacuada, lahoras cove que tu pauses en la plagua una meca submersa en oli rozat o oli vert en le qual sia alcuna stiptisitat; e pausa la calca7 en la seccio en le preon de la mayre.	And when the pus is evacuated, then let you pause in the wound a woolen ball immersed in rose oil or oil mixed with some astringent; and place the ball in the section on the anus.
E pause deforo la mayre e sobre le pentenilh lana munda submersa en aygua en la qual sian bulidas malvas.	And pause wool of the anus and over the perineum clean wool immersed in water in which there are boiled malva flowers.
E aprop sia curada aprop dos dias am enguent le qual conveneys ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	And let it be cured for about two days with a poultice that is convenient according to what until it is healed.
E alcunas veguadas es lavada la mayre e la plagua enayssi que es cristerisat am aygua e mel, e aprop am aygua en la qual es bulhida razit de liri o de aristologia longua, e aprop retorna al enguent.	And some times the anus and the poultice is washed with water and honey, then with water in which there is boiled root of lily or of aristolochia longifolia; then return to the poultice.
E si la plagua es dedintz en la mayre ameguada, lahoras cove que tu sias prohibit de la curacio de lu am ferr, habantz cura aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio.	And if the poultice is soft in the anus with pus, then let you be prohibited from its cure with iron; have that cured with what I have said in the division.
Capitol .lxxv.	Chapter 75.
A ensenhar las matronas en qual manieyre les enbrios bius sian medicatz quan yeysso segon figura no-natural.	To teach the midwives in what manner the child is to be treated when it appears according to an unnatural figure.
Necessaria causa es que la matrona conogua en le comensament la figura del enfantament natural per senhals de lu, e es que quan tu vezas la femna expremar a las partidas dejos e desira odorar le ayre, e sobre aquo es enleujada per aquo que sobre ela es del part, e festina le eyssiment del enbrio, lahoras sapias que aquest part es segon figura natural, e es l’eyssiment de lu sobre le sieu cap, e la segondina am aquel o suspensa o pendent del ombelic.	It is necessary that the midwife know in the beginning the figure of the childbirth by its signs and when you see the woman expressing on the parts below and desiring to smell the air, and upon it she is raised because of what is above her, and hastens the delivery of the child; then know that this part is according to a natural figure, and the delivery of it is over her head, and the second one with it or suspended from or hanging from the umbilical.
Donc cum tu vezes aquels senhals, lahoras cove que·l ventre de lu sia compremut per so que l’embrio deysenda leugerament quar quan deyssen sobre le sieu cap, deysen a lu la segondina, e es mondada de aquelas superfluitatz am bona mondificacio.	Therefore when you see these signs, then let the belly of it be pressed so that the embryo descends gently when she descends over her head; let the second one descend with it or hang from the umbilical.
Mays aquel que es otra aquest part es no-natural e no-lausable, quar quan le enbrio es eyssit sobre sos pes e·l cos de lu es eyssit devant le cap de lu e·ls pes de lu, e la ma de lu una, o al pe de lu .i., o es eyssit le cap de lu e la ma de lu, o al ventre de lu, e fort leu es convertit sobre le sieu col, e semblant de las figuras de lu no-lausablas.	But he who is in this part is unnatural and not possible; when the child is ejected over his feet and the body of him is ejected before his head and his feet, or under his armpit. or the head of him is ejected and his hand or to his belly, and he is turned strong on his neck; and like the figures of him are not possible.
Don necessaria causa es a la matrona que sia savia e subtil en totas aquelas causas, e que·s guarde de error e de decepcio.	It is necessary for the midwife to be wise and subtle in all these causes, and that she keep from error and deception.
E yeu so mostrant tota figura de aquelas, e qual engen es en aquelas per so que sia significat per aquo e sia stat sobre aquo.	And I will show you all the figures of them and what cunning is in them so that it be signified by that and is placed upon that.
Quan le feyt es eyssit sobre le sieu cap per egrecio natural, e aquel es vehement sobre la femna e es fayt a lu part dificil, e vezes la vertut de lu ja debelitada, lahoras fay aquela sezer , o que las femnas tenguan lu, e evapora le conh de lu am fenugrec coyt e am olis humitz.	When the child is ejected upon his head by natural violence, and it is violent over the woman and its part is difficult, and see that the strength of him is already weakened, then let her sit, or that women hold him; and evaporate the womb of him with fenugreek coarsely ground and with oiled herbs.
E aprop entrometa la metrona entre les sieus ditz espatum petit e fenda am aquel la segondina, o secce aquela am la sua ungla entro que corro aquo que es en ela de humiditat.	And if the midwife inserts between his buttocks a little spatula and widens with it the second one, or cuts that with her finger until she touches what is in her of moisture.
E preme le ventre de la femna entro que deyssenda le fet.	And press on the abdomen of the woman until you feel the fetus descend.
Mays si no deyssen, lahoras cove que la femna sia cristirizada de mucellage de ptilli e mucellage de fenugrec am cizami.	But if she does not deliver, then it is necessary that the woman be cleansed with poultices of fennel and fenugreek with honey.
E aprop comanda a lu, aprop le cristeri, que sia compremuda e fay aquela stornudar am condisi; e te la boca de lu e·l nas de lu per huna hora, quar le fet sira foro-getat tantost.	Then command him, the provider of the treatment, to make her vomit and cause her to sneeze with that mixture; and hold her mouth and nose for an hour so that the fetus will come out immediately.
E si las doas mas del fet so foro-getadas al comensament, lahoras cove que tu redusiscas aquelas am fecilitat petit a petit.	And if both hands of the fetus are not exposed at first, then it is necessary to pull them out little by little with ease.
Mays si no obezeys al intrament, lahoras pausa la femna sobre una cezelha e leva les pes de lu sus, e aprop concuceys la cezelha sobre la terra; e la femna sia tenguda que no caia deves la concussio.	But if she does not react to the remedy, then put her on a bed and raise her feet up, and rock the bed back and forth gently on the ground; and make sure that the woman does not fall off the bed because of the rocking.
E si las mas no son dedintz tornadas e morr le fet, lahoras inscideys aquelas e extratz le romament del fet o lia le cors a la ma de lu am drap e extratz aquel am equalitat, quar aquel sira foro-getat.	And if the hands are not turned inside out and the fetus is still dead, then enter them again and draw out the fetus's limb or tie the body to your hand with a cloth and pull it out evenly, for that will come out.
De eyssiment del embrio sobre les sieus pes.	About the embryo's descent upon his feet.
Quan le fet yeys sobre les sieus pes, lahoras cove que tu impelliscas aquels en sus, e aprop convertas le fet petit, e aprop que engualhes aquel, e aprop que prenguas un pe de lu e extendas aquels petit a petit.	When the fetus is on his feet, then it is necessary to push them up, and gently turn the fetus, and make him cough, and grab one of his feet and stretch them little by little.
Mays cum son eyssit entro a las coyssas, lahoras tu comanda a lu que se exprema, e fay aquela extornudar am condizi, quar sira foro-getat si Deus lo vol.	But when it has entered the pelvis, then command him to push, and make her vomit with that mixture, for it will come out if God wills it.
E si no es foro-getat am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras tu retorna le fet petit a petit entro que pauses aquel segon figura natural, quar aquel sira lahoras foro-getat am leugier eyssiment.	And if it is not delivered with what we have described, then return the fetus little by little to where you found it, and place that second figure naturally, for it will come out more easily the second time.
E si es prohibit am tot aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras pren de musellage de altea e de goma dissolvuda, e percuteys tot en le mortier per bona percussio, e aprop linieys am aquo le conh de la femna, el pus bas del ventre de lu.	And if all that we have described is prohibited, then take fennel and dissolved gum in the mortar and beat them well together, and line the vagina of the woman with it, at the bottom of her abdomen.
E aprop fay aquela cezer en aygua tebeza, entro que consegua les ypocondias.	And make her sneeze in warm water until she expels the phlegm.
E cum vezes que las partidas dejos de lu so lenificadas, lahoras fay a lu subfumiguacio de mirta e sub-pausa aquela a lu.	And when the parts below him are softened, then make smoke of myrtle and place that under him.
E quan te la sub-fumiguacio per una hora, lahoras tu la fay sezer sobre una cezelha, e aprop fay aquela stornudar e extrenh la boca de lu, e levas de aquela, e prem la partida pus bassa del ventre de lu am leugiera compressio, quar le fet sira tantost foro-getat.	And when she has been in the smoke for an hour, then make her sneeze on a bed and cause her to cough and draw out her mouth, and press the lower part of her abdomen gently, for the fetus will come out immediately.
Eyssiment del fet sobre les sieus denols e las suas mas.	Descent of the fetus upon his hands and feet.
Quan le fet eyssira segon aquesta forma, lahoras tu engenies en entrometen las suas mas petit a petit; e aprop la femna stia evessada sobre le sieu col, e les pes de lu pengo en jos, e aquelas sia jasent sobre le lieyt, e complegua las suas mas.	When the fetus comes down in this way, then put his hands inside little by little; and let the woman lean back on her heels, with her feet dangling down, and let those be placed upon a cloth, and complete his hands.
E aprop prem sobre le ventre de lu petit a petit, e aprop extratz aquo que es dejos les pes de lu de las aurelhas entro que sia preparada en la partida pus dejos.	Then press on his abdomen little by little, and draw out from under his feet what is below the ankles while she is prepared in the lower part.
E si le fet no es fora-getat, lahoras pren les pes de lu e mau aquels am movement vehement, e aprop prem aquo que es sobre les ypocondres petit a petit entro que le fet puege a las partidas desus.	And if the fetus is not delivered, then take his feet and move them violently, and press what is above the hypochondrium little by little while the fetus can reach the parts above.
E aprop entrometa las suas mas e engualhe le fet petit a petit, e comanda a la femna que se exprema entro que le fet sia foro-getat.	Then put in his hands and gently cough the fetus little by little, and command the woman to push while the fetus is delivered.
Eyssiment del fet latutidinalment pendent una de las suas mas.	Descent of the fetus hanging down from one of its hands.
Sia engeniat en reduccio de la ma de lu, mays si no podes aquela reduzir, lahoras eleva la femna e fe aquela anar.	Let him be drawn in to reduce the hand, but if you cannot reduce it, then raise the woman and make her walk.
E si anar no pot, lahoras fay la jazer sobre le lieyt, e concuteys las coyssas de lu am concussio vehement, e aprop aministra liamentz les quals yeu e recomtatz de mucillages.	And if she cannot walk, then make her lie on a cloth and rock her thighs violently with strong concussion, and administer to her soothing remedies which are made from mucilaginous substances.
E si es vengut le enfantament, lahoras fay aquela sezer sobre cezelha, e aprop studia sobre la reduccio de la ma, e enguala le fet segon figura natural, e fay stornudar la femna e comanda a lu que comprema a si entro que sia foro-getat.	And if the labor has come, then make her sneeze on a bed, and study the reduction of the hand, and gently turn the fetus according to its natural figure, and make the woman cough and command him to push himself while it is delivered.
Eyssiment del fet sobre·l col expandudas las suas mas e la fassia de lu es al dos de la sua mayre.	Descent of the fetus on his neck with his arms expanded and his chest against his mother's back.
Cove que la matrona tengua la ma del fet e aprop revolva aquel petit a petit, e eque aquel am facilitat.	Let the midwife hold the fetus's hand, and then roll it little by little, and let that be done with ease.
E cum es e quant so es engualhat, e lahoras pausa sobre le conh de lu aquo que havem recomtat de oli e de mucellages.	And when he is and as soon as he is bathed, then put on him what we have described of oil and mucilaginous substances.
E aprop comandas a lu que·s maugua petit a petit, e quan auras feyt aquo, lahoras fay aquela cezer sobre una cezelha e comanda li que sia inclinada sobre le latz dreyt, e aprop comanda a lu que sia compremuda; e fay aquela stornudar am condizi.	Then command him to suck little by little, and when you have done that, then make her sneeze on a bed and command him to be inclined on the right side, and then command her to push; and make her cough with that mixture.
Exitus foetus praeparati super latus.	Exit of the fetus prepared on its side.
Quan deyssen a horrifici de la mayre segon aquesta manieyra, considera, e lahoras tu inscideys la segondina am la tua ungla entro que sia evacuada de la humiditat.	When it comes out of the mother's womb in this way, consider and then enter the second one with your finger so that the moisture is evacuated.
E si le fet es suspendut sobre la cara e·l col de lu, lahoras tu inscideys aquela del embelic, per so que no sia retengut e mora.	And if the fetus is suspended over his face and neck, then enter that with your finger so that it is not retained and delayed.
E aprop empelleys le fet a las partidas dedintz entro que pauses aquel segon que cove, e manda a la femna que comprema a si alcunas veguadas, e el sira fora-getat am eyssiment leugier, si Dieus o vol.	Then press the fetus to the inside parts so that it is not retained and delayed; and command the woman to push several times, and he will come out with easy exit if God wills it.
Exitus geminorum aut foetuum multorum.	Exit of twins or many fetuses.
Sapias que gemels motas veguadas so natz, e alcunas vetz naysso tres o quatre , mays aquo es estranh e tart s’endeve; mays v so causas foro natura, e no vivo.	Know that many times twins are born, and sometimes one or two or three or four, but that is strange and rare; but its cause is natural, and they do not live.
E conte aquelas, ja sia que sian montiplicatz, una segondina, e son seperatz per ciphac, distingen aquels enter le liguament en l’ombilic de cascun de aquels E alcunas veguadas so foro-getatz ayssi cum es un fet per eyssiment natural leugier, e so eysitz alcunas veguadas per eyssiment no-lausabla ayssi cum havem recomtat.	Count them, even if they are doubled, a second one, and they are separated by the umbilical cord, distinguish those enter the ligament in the navel of each of them; and sometimes they are delivered so easily as is one fetus with easy exit, and sometimes they are delivered so that we have described.
E si son dificils alcus de lor deves le enfantament e perveno ad aquo que havem dit de las figuras no-naturals, lahoras tu cura aquels ayssi cum havem recontat.	And if they are difficult to deliver and come to that which we have said of the non-natural figures, then you treat them as we have recorded.
E si’ la matrona subtil e fassa aquo que fa am facilitat e subtilitat, e am tarditat, e sia ingeniat segon tota figura segon que es a lu preparat de l’engen amenant a salut.	And if the midwife is skillful and does that with ease and skill, and there is delay, let her be treated according to the whole figure as it is prepared by the medicine bringing health.
Rememoratio eius quod formatur in matrice ex embrionibus et Abortiuntur.	Remember this which is formed in the womb from embryos and abortions.
Alcunas veguadas son formatz en la mayre un, e dos, e tres, e quatre, e v, e vi, e vii, e mays x, e ja es deves mi verificat que una femna abortem ne getet vi, e una autra x totz formatz, la qual causa fo fayta per mensuracio dels glorios savis.	Sometimes they are formed in the womb as one, two, three, four, five, six, seven, and even ten, and I have seen that a woman can abort six, and another ten of all shapes, which was caused by a measurement made by the glorious wise men.
E tot aysso cove que sia en la sciencia de la matrona quar fort leu ad aquela parve semblant de aquo, e donc opause se ad aquo am so que cove.	And all that is to say that it is in the science of the midwife as strong she goes to that little one resembling that, and then stop to that with what says.
Capitol .lxxvi.	Chapter .lxxvi.
De extraccio del fet quan es mort.	On extracting the fetus when it is dead.
Quan tu curas le fet mort am aquo que havem dit en la divisio de la medicacio e no es defora eyssit, e tu yest forsat usar de opperacio am ma, lahoras cove que consideras si la femna es de sana vertut e no es am alcu dels accidentz per les quals sobre ela es temuda perdicio.	When you treat the dead fetus with what we have said in the division of the medicine and it is not taken out, and you must use compression on the abdomen, then consider if the woman is of sound mind and not one of the accidents by which she is thought to be in danger.
Lahoras cove que la femna sia envessada sobre le lieyt sobre le sieu dos, e sia le cap de lu enclinat enjos e las coyssas de lu sian elevadas.	Then let the woman lean back on her heels, with her head inclined down and her thighs raised up.
E·l ministre tengua aquela de doas partz o sia liada en le lieyt per so que·l cos de lu no se extenda deves la extraccio del fet.	And the midwife hold that in two parts or she lies on her side so that the body of him does not stretch because of the extraction of the fetus.
E aprop tu humecta la boca de la mayre de lu am olis humitz e am mucellage de altea e de fenugrec e de semensa de li.	And then you moisten the mouth of the patient with moist oils and with mucilage from alder, fenugreek, and their seeds.
E aprop unte la matrona la sua ma am aquels olis e mucellages, e aprop entrometa la sua ma am fecilitat en la mayre, e aprop cerque am la ma loc en le qual fique les uncis en le fet.	And then the midwife anoints her hand with those oils and mucilage, and then inserts her hand gently into the vagina, and then reaches with her hand to the place where the fingernails are in the foot.
E locs convenient en aquo: adonc tu considera si le fet es preparat que deysenda sobre le sieu cap, e lahoras tu fique les uncis en les huels de lu, o en le col, o en la boca, o en le palat, o dejos la barba, o en la furcula de lu, o en les locs propdas de las costas, o dejos les ypocondres.	And in this place: then you consider if the foot is prepared to descend upon his head, and then you put the fingernails in the heels of him, or in the neck, or in the mouth, or in the palate, or under the beard, or in the furcula of him, or in places near the ribs, or under the armpits.
Mays si le deysendiment es sobre les pes de lu, lahoras en le pentenilh, o en le mieg de las costas.	But if the descent is upon his feet, then in the instep, or in the middle of the back.
E cove que tengua le unci am la ma dreyta, e pausa la curvitat de lu en aquel loc le qual es entre les ditz de la ma senestra, e entrometa la ma am facilitat e fique le unci en alcu de aquels locs les quals havem ditz, entro que pervengua a la causa boyda.	And if one has the fingernail with the right hand, then place the curve of it in that place which is between the fingers of the left hand, and insert the hand gently and put the fingernail in some one of those places which we have said, until he reaches the desired effect.
E aprop pause e fique en la apposicio de lu un autre unci, o le tertz si es necessitat, per so que sia atraccio engual, e no sia extencio segon la sua rectetut tant solament.	And then place and put in the aperture of him another fingernail, or a third one if it is necessary, so that it is an attraction inward, and not an extension according to his rectitude only.
Ans sia maugut a tota partida, per so que l’eyssiment de lu sia alleujat ayssi cum es fayt en dent deves la eradicacio de lu.	Let the jaw be opened completely, so that the extraction of him is eased just as it is done in teeth that are pulled out.
E cove en lu aquo que es entre lor que la extencio sia mollificada; e si alcuna partida de lu es retenguda, lahoras cove que la matrona unte alcus sieus ditz am oli e entrometa aquels espertament e revolva am aquels aquo que es retengut.	And if in him that is between them the extension is softened; and if any part of him is retained, then let the midwife anoint some one of her fingers with oil and insert that skillfully and turn about that which is retained.
Donc si la partida del fet es fora-getada, lahoras les uncis sian permudatz entra loc le qual sia pus aut; e fay aysso entro que tot le fet sia fora-getat.	Then if the part of the foot is dislocated, then let the fingernails be changed to another place which is higher; and do this until all the foot is dislocated.
Mays si la ma es eyssida denant l’autra, e no es possible reduzir aquela per la coartacio de lu, lahoras cove que drap sia envolopat sobre aquela; e aprop extratz aquela entro que tota sia fora-getada, e inscideys aquela o en la junctura de la ma o en le coyde.	But if the hand is dislocated in front of the other, and it is not possible to reduce that by the contraction of him, then let a cloth be wrapped about that; and then extract that until all of it is dislocated, and insert that inside or into the joint of the hand or into the elbow.
E ayssi cove que fassas en l’autra ma e en les dos pes.	And do thus also for the other hand and for the two feet.
Mays si le cap del fet es gran, o accideys a lu coartacio en le eyssiment, o es en le cap de lu aygua ajustada, lahoras cove que entrometa entre les ditz espatum spinos e fenda le cap e extragua la aygua, o que discroba aquel am un instrument le qual es nompnat “alundat”, la forma del qual vindra am las formas dels autres instruments en le capitol le qual es aprop aquest.	But if the head of the foot is large, or there happens to him contraction in the extraction, or there is in his head water collected, then let the midwife insert between the fingers splinters of fir and split the head and extract the water, or uncover that with an instrument which is called "alundat", the form of which will come with the forms of other instruments in the chapter which is aprop this.
E semblantment fassa si·l fet es de gran cap per natura: e lahoras cove que inscida aquel am algematu, o que prengua aquel am alunda ayssi cum havem dit; e aprop extra les osses am les forceps.	And likewise do if the foot is of a large head by nature: and then let her insert that with an instrument, or take that with an awl just as we have said; and then extract the bones with forceps.
E si le cap es eyssit e es coartat deves la furcula, lahoras sia fendut entro que la humiditat la qual es en le pietz sia efunduda.	And if the head is dislocated and is contracted because of the furcula, then let it be split so that the moisture which is in the feet is poured out.
Mays si no es complicat, ni obezeys a eyssiment, lahoras tu inscideys le cap tantost segon que a tu sira possible.	But if it is not complicated, nor obstinate in dislocation, then you insert the head immediately as soon as to you it seems possible.
E si le dejos del ventre es apostemat o es en lu ydropici, lahoras cove que tu perfores aquel entro que corro la humiditat que es en lu.	And if the lower part of the belly is suppurative or is dropsical, then let you pierce that so that the moisture which is in it runs out.
Mays si le fet es sobre les sieus pes, lahoras la atraccio de lu es leugiera e la direccio de lu a la boca de la mayre es leugiera.	But if the foot is upon his feet, then the attraction of him is lessened and the direction of him to the mouth of the vagina is lessened.
Mays si es coartat deves le ventre e·l pietz, lahoras cove que tu extraguas aquel am drap le qual auras envolopat sobre la tua ma, e que fendes le ventre e·l pietz entro que corra aquo que es en aquels.	But if it is contracted because of the belly and the feet, then let you extract that with a cloth which you will have wrapped about your hand, and split the belly and the feet so that runs out that which is in those.
Mays si les autres membres so ostatz e torna le cap, lahoras la metrona entrometa la ma senestra; mays si la boca de la mayre es huberta, lahoras intrometa la ma en le preon de layre, e cerque am aquela le cap, e atira aquel am les ditz entro a la boca de la mayre, e aprop entrometa en lu un unci, o dos uncis, e atire lu am aquels.	But if the other members are retained and the head turns back, then the midwife inserts her left hand; but if the mouth of the vagina is open, then she inserts her hand into the orifice of air, and reaches with that the head, and pulls him with those fingers into the mouth of the vagina, and then inserts into him a fingernail, or two fingernails, and pulls him with those.
E si la boca de la mayre es coartada per apostema caut le qual accideys a l’u, lahoras cove que no sia trebelhat sobre lu; abantz cove lahoras aministrar efusio de causas humidas grassas.	And if the mouth of the vagina is contracted because of suppuration which happens to the v, then let it not be pressed upon him; before, let there be administered emission of causes of moist fats.
E aministre emplastres; e segua le pacient en ayguas que mollifican e humectan.	And administer poultices; and follow the patient in waters that soften and moisten.
E si le fet es sobre le sieu costat, lahoras si possible es, sia agulat: e sia aministrat aquo que havem dit en le fet viu.	And if the foot is upon his side, then if possible it is, let it be twisted; and let there be administered that which we have said in the live foot.
E si aquo no es possible, lahoras sia inscidit en pessas, e sia extrayt.	And if that is not possible, then let it be inserted into a bag, and extracted.
E cove que non layssas alcuna causa dedintz de la segondina.	And let there be left no cause inside the secondina.
E cum tu auras complida tota la tua opperacio, lahoras aministra aquo que havem dit de la curacio en les apostemas cautz les quals accideysso de la mayre.	And when you have completed all your operation, then administer that which we have said about the cure in suppurative wounds which happen to the vagina.
E si accideys flux de sanc, lahoras deyssendas en ayguas stipticas e aministra l’autra curacio.	And if there happens flow of blood, then let him be washed in astringent waters and administer the other cure.
E yeu ja e vist una femna en le ventre de la qual era fet mort, e aprop sobre aquel foc autra veguada emprenhada, e aprop foc mort es le fet autre.	And I also have seen a woman in the belly of whom was dead fetus, and then over that other fire burning, and then other fire is the other dead fetus.
Accidit al u aprop lonc temps apostema en le sieu embelic; e inflat es entro que foc ubert, e comensec a getar brac.	Happened to him also long time suppuration in his navel; and swollen is inside that fire opened, and began to spit out phlegm.
E yeu fu appelhat a la cura de lu, e medicat a lu per lonc temps, e la plagua no es consolidada.	And he was called for the cure of him, and treated for him for long time, and the plague is not consolidated.
Adonc yeu pausegui sobre lu de alscunas causas emplastra de forta atraccio, e eyssic de lu un os, e aprop passero alcus jorns, e eyssic un autre os; e yeu fu trop meravilhat, cum en le ventre no sia os.	Then I paused upon him some causes of poultices of strong attraction, and came out of him a bone, and then after passed some days, and came out another bone; and I was very astonished when in the belly there was no bone.
E adonc yeu cogitegui que eran dels osses del fet mort.	And then I considered that they were bones of the dead fetus.
Donc yeu enguisigui la plagua, e extrayssi de lu motz osses , la femna existent en las sieuas milhos disposicios, e ja visquec en tal manieyra per lonc temps, correc de lu un petit de brac.	Then I continued the suppuration, and extracted from him many bones, the woman existing in her own dispositions, and then she lived in such a way for long time, recovering from him a little of phlegm.
E yeu no afermegui asso esser stranh, sino quar en aquo es sciensa e ajutori ad aquo que le metge artifec am la ma per curacio aministra.	And I did not marvel at that being strange, but wherever in that is known and aid to that which the doctor artifices with his hand for cure administers.
De las formas dels instrumentz que so necessaris a extrayre le fet.	Of the forms of the instruments which are necessary to extract the fetus.
Forma de vertitge am la qual es uberta la mayre:	Form of vertigine with which is open the vagina:
Aquesta es la forma de strenhedor en le qual so engualhatz les libres, al qual engualhament sian dos virtitges en doas extremitatz de dos futz.	This is the form of stricture in which are closed the lips, to that closure are two virtues in two ends of two roots.
May empero aquesta virtitge cove que sia pus subtil de strictori, e sia fayt o de eba o de fust de boys.	But this virtue let it be more subtle of stricture, and let it be made either of ebony or of boxwood.
E sia la latitut de quascun fust quays dos ditz e le marge de quascu amdos quays un dit, e la longitut de quascu es un palm e mig; e en le mieg loc de dos fustz so dos ajustaments de aquel meteys fustz les quals ja son fermatz, dels quals la longitut es la maytat de un palm e un pauc mes, e la latitut de quascu es quay dos ditz, o un pauc mes.	And let the thickness of each wood be two fingers and the edge of either two fingers or one finger, and the length of each is one palm and a little more; and in the middle place of the two woods are two joints of that woods which are already closed, of which the length is the measure of one palm and a little more, and the thickness of each is two fingers, or a little more.
E aquestz dos additamentz sian entromeses en la boca de la mayre per que sia uberta am aquels quan tu revolves las doas prescriptas virtigges.	And these two additions are inserted into the mouth of the vagina so that it is open with those when you turn about the two prescribed vertigines.
Forma autra semblant de aquela pus subtil e pus leugiera:	Other form also similar to that more subtle and more distant:
Sia fayta de fustz de eba o de boys segon la semblansa de forceps.	Let it be made of boxwood or of ebony according to the likeness of forceps.
Mays empero en la extremitat de lu so dos additament ayssi cum vezes, e la longitut de aquels additament es quays un palm, e la latitut de quascu es dos ditz.	However, at the end of his body there are two additions, and the length of those additions is one palm each, and the width of each is two digits.
E cum tu vols am aquels ubrir la mayre, lahoras tu fay cezer la femna sobre le lieyt les pes pendentz, ubert aquo que es entre las coyssas de lu.	And when you want to open the woman's vagina, then you make the woman lean back with her feet hanging down, opening what is between the patient's thighs.
E aprop obre la tua ma am le instrument ayssi cum fas am forfexs engualment segon la quantitat que vols de la aprecio de la boca de la mayre entro que la metrona fassa so que vols.	Then open your hand with the instrument, just as you would with forceps, according to the amount you want of the opening of the vagina while the midwife does what she wants.
La forma de vertitge la qual diysero les antics:	The shape of the cervix which the ancients said was like:
Forma de impellent am le qual es empellit le fet:	The shape of the birth canal through which the fetus is pushed out:
Forma de amisidat2 am le qual es conterit le cap gran	The shape of amnion, in which the large head is contained.
E es asemblat a forceps al qual so dentz en la extremitat, ayssi cum vezes, e alcunas veguadas es fayt lonc ayssi cum forceps segon aquesta forma, ayssi cum vezes, al qual so dentz ayssi cum dentz de ressegua am le qual es inscidit e conterit.	And it is like forceps in which its teeth are at the end, just as often, and sometimes it is made long like forceps according to this shape, just as often, whose teeth are like horse's teeth with which it is cut into and contained.
Forma de amesidat pauc:	The shape of the amnion a little:
Forma de unci havent una spina:	The shape of an uncia having one spine:
Forma de unci havent doas spinas:	The shape of an uncia having two spines:
Forma de forceps a la qual so dentz de cerra am le qual le cap del fet sia conterit:	The shape of forceps whose teeth close in order to contain the fetus' head:
Forma de spatum havent dos extremitatz am le qual le cap es abscindit:	The shape of a spatula having two ends by which the head is cut off:
Forma de dos espatums latz:	The shape of two spatulas wide:
Totz aquels instrumentz so excersitatz, e quan mes so multiplicadas las specias de aquel e so preparadas deves le artifexs, quant es pus leugier a la sua opperacio e pus aut deves les homes per la sua quantitat.	All of these instruments are exercised, and when more are multiplied and prepared, the artist must be closer to their operation and closer to people because of their quantity.
E no obres de aquels instrumentz ja sia qua sia deves tu aparalhat, quar la necessitat de aquels no es excusabla.	And it is not necessary for those instruments to be made just anywhere, because the necessity of those cannot be excused.
De extraccio de la segondina.	Of extraction of the second child:
Quan la segondina es retenguda deves le enfantament, lahoras cove que tu comandes a la malautae que retengua le sieu ale, e aprop fay aquela stornudar am condizi, e strenh la tua ma sobre la boca de lu e sobre las nars de lu, e si per aysso es defora eyssit, bo es.	When the second child is retained by childbirth, then you must command the patient to retain their breath, and then make them sneeze with snuff, and stretch your hand over their mouth and nose, and if it comes out with that, it's good.
E sino, lahoras tu pren una ola e perfora en la cuberta un trauc e pausa en aquela erbas ubrent la boca de la mayre, ayssi cum calament e ruda e anet e camamilla e scicados arabic e cassia lignea e santaurea.	And if not, then you take a woollen ball and pierce the cloth with a needle and soak that in herbs that open the mouth of the vagina, like hellebore and rue and anise and chamomile and Arabic scilla and cinnamon and frankincense.
Totas aquestas erbas o alcunas de lor sian submersas en aygua en la ola, e pausa aquela sobre le foc.	All of these herbs or some of them are soaked in water in the ball, and place that on the fire.
E aprop pausa una canula de canaviera en la boca de la mayre, e tengua aquela entro que la evapor vengua a la concavitat de la mayre.	Then place a straw in the mouth of the vagina, and keep that there until the vapor comes to the cavity of the vagina.
E aprop fay aquela stornudar ayssi cum havem dit, e la segondina sira fora-getada am velocitat.	And then make her sneeze as we have said, and the second child will be pushed out with speed.
Mays si roman aprop aquesta curacio e no es eyssida, lahoras tu comanda a la matrona que submerge la sua ma sinistra en oli sizami o en micellage de altea, e aprop entrometa aquela en le conh e queresca am aquela la segondina, e cum aquela auras trobada, lahoras pren la e exten aquela pauc a pauc Mays si es annexsa en le preon de la mayre, lahoras entrometa la sua ma segon que havem recomtat, e quan aura trobat la segondina, extragua aquela petit a petit segon rectetut per so que la mayre no caja deves la atraccio vehement.	But if this treatment has not worked and it hasn't come out, then you command the midwife to submerge her left hand in olive oil or in mustard of alder, and then insert that in the vagina and feel for the second child with that, and when she has found it, take it and stretch it little by little according to rectitude so that the mother doesn't cry out because of the strong pulling.
Abantz cove que sia permudada als costatz dreyt e sinestre am facilitat.	Before that is done, let it be turned to the right and left sides with ease.
E aprop sia ajustat en la quantitat de atraccio, quar ela obedira e evasira de adhirencia.	And then let its pull be adjusted in quantity, because it will obey and escape from adhesion.
E si la boca de la mayre es coartada, nos ja havem recomtat la curacio am sturnutacio e am medicacio de la ola am erbas.	And if the mouth of the vagina is constricted, we have already recommended the treatment with sneezing and with medication of the ball with herbs.
Mays si no es fora-getada am totas las causas las quals havem recomtadas, lahoras guarda te que no fetigues sobre aquela en iteracio de abstracio, mays empero cove que aquo que es eyssit de lu a la boca de la mayre lies a la coyssa de la femna, e aprop cristeriza aquela am enguent e tetrafarmacon; quar aquel fara poyrir aquela aprop alcus dias e sira dissolvuda e sira fora-getada.	But if it has not been pushed out with all the causes that we have recommended, then be careful not to tire her with iteration of pulling, but instead let what comes out of her mouth at the vagina lie on the woman' couch; and then let that be sealed with ointment and tetrafarmacon, because that will make it putrefy in a few days and dissolve and be pushed out.
Mays quan se poyreys, es de lu elevada mala audor al cap, e al estomac, e aquo ledeys la malauta; e adonc cove que sian aministradas sub-fumiguacios e convenientz ad aquo.	But when it rises, there is a bad smell to the head and stomach, and that makes the patient sick; therefore let balms be administered below the smoke and convenient things to that.
Mays alcus dels Antics ja so esproatz sub-fumigacio de nazitort e de figuas seccas.	But some of the Ancients have been tested with smoke of nettle and dry figs.
Forma de instrument am le qual la femna es sub-fumiguada deves la retentio de mestruas e de la segondina:	The shape of the instrument by which the woman is smoked because of retention of menstruation and of the second child:
Sia fayta de veyre o de eram.	It is made of glass or of horn.
E sia pausada la extremitat subtil en le conh e la extremitat ampla sobre le foc, e la sub-fumiguacio sia pausada sobre las brazas del foc.	And the slender end be placed in the vagina and the wide end over the fire, and the smoke be stopped over the embers of the fire.
E tengua aquela entro que sia consumida aquela sub-fumiguacio e itera·n autra.	And keep that there until that smoke is consumed and do another one.
De curacio del cul del enfant no-perforat.	Of treatment of the anus not perforated:
Motz enfantz naysso e les culs de lu no so perforatz, les quals ya ciphac subtil e opilat.	Infants born and their anuses are not perforated, which are closed with a slender and opilated instrument.
Adonc cove a la matrona que perfore am le sieu dit aquel ciphac; e sino, perfora aquel am spatum agut, e guarda se que no toque le lacert.	Then let the midwife pierce it with her finger; and if not, pierce that with a pointed spatula, and be careful not to touch the clitoris.
E aprop pause sobre aquel lana enfusa en vi e oli; e aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia senat.	Then place wool soaked in wine and oil over it; and then heal that with ointment so that it is healed.
Mays si temes que sia opilat, lahoras pausa en le trauc una canula per motz dias, e osta la quan le enfant voldra degerir.	But if you are afraid it's opilated, then place a straw through the opening for a few days, and wait until the child wants to urinate.
E ja accideys oppilacio del cul per consolidacio de plagua o de apostema; adonc cove que aquela consolidacio sia inscidida, e aprop sia curada am aquo que avem dit de la curacio e del plom.	And then let the opilation of the anus happen because of hardening of a fistula or of an abscess; therefore let that hardening be cut into and then be healed with what we have said of the treatment and of the plaster.
De curacio de las fistulas que endeveno dejos.	Of treatment of fistulas that go down from the anus:
Las fistulas que endeveno en la partida dejos pus bassa so nodacio e grossetut las quals endeveno prop del cul defora o en l’espazi de la una partida.	The fistulas which go down in the part of the anus with pus are narrow and thick, which go down close to the anus or into the space of one part.
E es una fistula o motas.	And it is a fistula or many.
E cum aquela nodacio es antiquada e corr de la humiditat aygosa blanca o poyridura subtil, e alcunas veguadas so de aquestas fistulas alcunas penetrantz.	And when that node is old and corroded by the white or yellow pus subtilely, and sometimes some of these fistulas penetrate.
E aquelas penetrantz so conogudas per aquo que es eyssit de aquelas per la egressio e per ventosetat; e alcunas vetz use le malaute de egressio, e fort leu es eyssit de aquelas verm.	And when they penetrate, they are known by what is coming out of them by their egress and by windiness; and sometimes the patient gets sick from the egress, and a lot comes out of them with wind.
E so de aquelas fistulas alcunas veguadas en l’espazi penetrantz entro a la vesica, e entro al meat de la vergua; e so de aquelas penetrantz entro la junctura de la coyssa e entro al notz de la coeta.	And sometimes those fistulas penetrate into the space into the bladder, and into the meat of the vagina; and sometimes they penetrate the joint of the vagina and into the notch of the womb.
E aquo en que es conoguda fistula penetrant entro al cul e no-penetrant, es que tu metas le tieu dit endic en le cul, e entrometas tenta subtil de eram o de ferr en la fistula quan no y es turtuositat.	And when the fistula penetrates into the anus and doesn' t penetrate, it is that you put your finger in the anus, and insert a slender instrument of horn or iron in the fistula when it isn't hard.
Mays si en aquela es turtuositat, lahoras entromet en aquela tenta subtil de plom o de pels de caval entro que tu sentas la tenta o le pel en le tieu dit.	But if in that there is hardness, then insert a slender instrument of lead or of horse-hair into that so that you feel the instrument or the hair in your finger.
E si no sentas aquela de tot ni no procezeys del trauc alcuna causa de egestio ni verm ni ventositat, ayssi cum havem dit, lahoras sapias que es no-penetrant, e lahoras coyta te a la curacio.	And if you don't feel that at all nor process any cause of exudation or windiness or pus, just as we have said, then know that it is not penetrating, and then cut to the treatment.
E quan la fistula es penetrant entro a la vesica o entro al meat de la vergua, lahoras la significacio de lu es eyssiment de urina de aquela e prohibicio de lu ad aysso que·l loc am medicina sia consolidat.	And when the fistula penetrates into the bladder or into the meat of the vagina, then its sign is exudation of urine from that and prohibition of it to go out because the place is closed by medicine.
Mays si es penetrant entro la junctura de la coyssa o entro al os e envencio de dolor en le circuit, lahoras senhal de lu es que la tenta perve entro aqui si en lu no es turtuositat entro al os, e envencio de dolor en le circuit de la partida; e que de lu yeys poyredura tostemps; e que no val en aquela medicacio, ni es consolidada am enguent.	But if it is penetrating into the joint of the vagina or into the bone and feels pain in the circumference, then its sign is that the instrument comes into contact with the bone here if in the joint it isn' t hard; and pain in the circumference of the part; and that from there comes putrefaction sometimes; and that does not work in that medicine, nor is it healed with ointment.
E en totas aquelas fistulas penetrant no es curacio de tot, e la curacio de aquelas es trebalh e vanetat dels folyls metges sobre·l qual so fermatz.	And in all those penetration of ulcers there is no cure for everything, and the cure for them is labor and vanity of foolish doctors about whom they are confident.
Mays en aquela que no es penetrant e no antiqua, sanacio am ferr es sperada segon que yeu a tu recomtare, e aquo que ja yeu e proat.	But in that which does not penetrate and is not ancient, healing with iron is expected according to what I will tell you, and what I have already tried and tested.
E es que le malaute jagua entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos e eleva las cambas de lu entro sus, las coyssas sian enclinadas al ventre de lu, e aprop entromet tenta de plom, o de eram si es en la fistula turtuositat, entro que sapias le loc on perve la tenta.	And it is that the patient lies on his back and lifts his legs between them, his thighs are bent towards his stomach, and then the surgeon tries to insert a probe made of lead or copper if there is a tortuous ulcer, into the location where he suspects the fistula is.
E si aquela sent le malaute entorn le cuol, lahora cove que tu entrometas le tieu dit endic en le cuol.	And if the patient has pain around his neck, then you must insert your little finger into his neck.
E si sentas en le tieu dit la tenta ja per si meteyssa descuberta penetrar, otra aquo que sentas entre le tieu dit e aquela siphac o carn, lahoras sapias certanament que aquela es penetrant; e adonc no trebalhes en aquela, quar no es en aquela sanacio, ayssi cum havem dit.	And if you feel with your finger that the probe has already penetrated by itself, then know for certain that it is penetrating; and then do not labor on it, for there is no cure for it, as we have said.
Mays empero diyssero alcus que es sana en alcus homes tart.	But some say that it is cured in some people who are constipated.
E de la medicacio per la qual es sperat juvament en lu es que tu ignes cauteri subtil segon le ample de la fistula, ayssi cum es precedit, e intrometas aquel ignit en la fistula entro que pervengua entorn le cuol; e aprop itera aquel doas o tres vetz entro que sapias que ja son adhustas totas aquelas carns ajustadas fistuladas que so semblantz a cana de pluma de ausel.	And the medicine by which healing is expected in him is that you apply a subtle cautery according to the size of the fistula, as it is mentioned above, and insert the lit cautery into the fistula until it reaches around the neck; and then repeat this two or three times until you know that all the flesh attached to the fistula that resembles a feather cane have been burnt.
E aprop cura aquela am calguas envolopadas en boder entro que en yescan totas aquelas carns que so adhustas, e aprop cura aquela am medicinas la carn engendrantz e consolidantz, e si es sanada, bo es; e sino, lahoras no es sana en degun temps per autra curacio.	And then treat that with poultices wrapped in cloth until all the flesh that is attached has healed, and then cure that with medicines which generate and solidify flesh, and if it is healed, well; but if not, then it will not be healed at any time by any other treatment.
E si la tenta intra, e no penetra entro·l tieu dit le qual es en le cul, e entre aquel e la tenta que es velament spes de carn o de ciphac, e vezes la fistula en aquo que siec la superficia de la codena, lahoras secca la codena del comensament de la fistula, e tu ve seccan am la tenta, e sia en la fistula entro que la seccio pervengua al loc en le qual perve la extremitat de la tenta, e per la tenta es liberat e catz.	And if the probe enters but does not penetrate your finger which is in the anus, and between that and the probe there is a thin layer of flesh or membrane, then cut the fistula where it touches the surface of the skin, and dry up the skin from the beginning of the fistula; and you see that it dries by means of the probe until the incision reaches the place where the end of the probe is, and through the probe it is freed and drained.
E aprop mundifiqua aquelas carns fistuladas las quals so asembladas a canula de pena de ausel e no romangua de aquelas alcuna causa.	And then clean out those flesh-like fistulas which are like a quill of a feather, and do not let them remain for any cause.
Mays si flux de sanc vezes que vengua entre tu e la tua opperacio quan ensideysses aquelas carns, lahoras le milh que sia e del pus leugier instrument es cauterizar am foc o am medicina acuta, quar cauteri am foc ajusta bonas doas habitutz: so es adhustio de aquelas carns ajustadas, e abscizio del sanc exseccacio de las humiditatz.	But if blood flows out between you and your operation when you touch those flesh, then the milker, which is a very useful instrument, must cauterize that with fire or with a sharp medicine; for cautery with fire produces two good results: it is an abscission of those attached flesh, and it dries up the blood by exsiccation.
E aprop cura aquela am calguas envolopadas en boder o en caus trissat entro que·l loc geta brac, e aprop lahoras cura la plagua am enguentz carn dura engendran e consolidan.	And then cure that with poultices wrapped in cloth or with soft linen until the place becomes hard, and then cure the wound with ointments which generate and solidify hard flesh.
E so medicinas en las quals so stipticitat e exseccio; quan lahoras es restaurada ja es sanada e no temes iteracio.	And these medicines are for constriction and exsiccation; when it is restored, then it is healed and you need not fear a recurrence.
Mays si la fistula ja perve entro al preon del cul e es elonguada de lu superficia del cos, lahoras entromet le tieu dit en le cul e inquireys am aquel.	But if the fistula already penetrates inside the rectum and is elongated from there to the surface of the body, then insert your finger into the anus and probe with it.
E donc si centes la tenta e entre tu e ela es velament de ciphac o de carn, e es propda a la penetracio, lahora no es operacio en lu sino segon via di fiducia e de speransa.	And so if the probe is touched and between you and it there is a membrane or flesh which is close to penetration, then it is not an operation on him but according to the way of confidence and hope.
La qual causa es aministrar en lu una de tres manieyras: o que cauterize aquela ayssi cum havem dit; o que secces aquela entro que consieguas la conquavitat de lu per que sia a tu possible entrometre las qualcas e la curacio propdana; e no procesiscas mot am seccio per so que no inscidas le lacert contenent le cuol, e que accidisque sobre le malaute eyssiment de la egistio ses voluntat; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit quar fort leu sira sanat; o que elongues aquel velament e mondes aquel pus que seccas aquel entro prop le cul, ayssi cum havem dit, o am tenta o am autre instrument de aguda extremitat, e aprop mondifique aquelas carns fistuladas las quals so en la seccio entro la on podes am percrustacio; e aprop esforsa te a far la restauracio de tota la plagua am seccio, e si le orrifici pus desus no es consolidat, e romangua la fistula uberta en la partida del cul, e sira pus leugier per le malaute.	And this cause is treated in him by one of three ways: either cauterize that as we have said; or dry up that place until you can reach the cavity so that it may be possible for you to insert the tools and apply the treatment; nor should you cut into the skin containing the neck, and make the patient suffer against his will and without his consent; and then cure that with what we have said, for the vein there will heal quickly. Or lengthen that membrane and clean out that pus which you dry up near the rectum, either with a probe or another instrument with a sharp end, and then clean out those flesh-like fistulas which are in the incision by means of scraping; and strive to make the restoration of the whole wound by cutting into it, and if that outlet is not solidified above, and the fistula remains open at the exit near the rectum, then pus will flow more quickly through the patient.
E alscunas veguadas la fistula es finida segon aquesta manieyra: es quan tu entrometas la tenta en la fistula, e es en le latz del cul entorn la superficia del cos am la codena e en le marge del cul, lahoras pren tenta de perforada extremitat, que es ayssi cum agulha de preparantz les coers segon aquesta forma:	And sometimes the fistula is finished in this way: when you insert the probe into the fistula, and it is on the side of the rectum around the surface of the body with the skin and at the edge of the rectum, then take a probe of a perforated end, which is like a needle for piercing ears according to this form:
e entromet en aquela fiel envolopat de v fiels o entorn aquels; e aprop entromet tenta am fiel en la fistula entro que consiegua la conquavitat de lu.	and insert it into that vein wrapped in a thread or around those; and then insert the probe with the needle into the fistula until you reach its cavity.
Mays si es penetrant en le marge del cul prop dedintz, lahoras tu extratz le fiel de aquel trauc ayssi que tu intrometas le tieu dit en le cul; e extraguas la extremitat del fiel e ajustes las duas extremitatz essemps, e estrenh cascuna, e leyssa aquo per un dia o per dos, e quan mays inscideys le fiel en la carn, estrenh be aquel entro que aquelas carns sian inscididas las quals so entre doas extremitatz del fiel e que cajan.	But if it penetrates at the edge of the rectum near the inside, then you extract that needle from there as you insert your finger into the rectum; and pull out the end of the needle and tighten both ends, and keep them tight for a day or two, and when you have pierced the flesh with the needle more deeply, loosen that again so that those flesh are pierced between both ends of the needle and they are pulled in.
E aprop cura la plagua entro que sia consolidada e sanada.	And then cure the wound until it is solidified and healed.
Mays si le orrifici de la fistula no es penetrant, lahoras fay aquel penetrar, en qualque manieyre sia a tu preparat, sino que sia mot en le preon, quar no es a tu que fassas aquo per que no inscidas le lacert; e aprop fay am aquela entro que sia sanada.	But if the outlet of the fistula is not penetrated, then make that penetration by whatever way you are prepared for it, except in the rectum, for it is not for you to do what pierces the skin. And then heal that with which it is healed.
La forma de spatum spinos am lo qual es fenduda la fistula: la curvitat del qual es mot aguda e l’autra partida es no-aguda, per so que no inscidas aquo que no es necessari, ayssi cum vezes.	The form of a thorn with which the fistula is split: the curve of which is very acute and the other part is not acute, so that it does not pierce what is not necessary, as it touches.
De sutura de emorroydas en las quals corra sanc en la inscizio de aquelas.	Of suturing hemorrhoids in which blood flows at the incision of those.
Emorroydas so segon dos manieyras, quar o so entre le cul semblantz aysi que es de carbos, o quays aquelas sian cum a gras de rasim.	Hemorrhoids are according to two ways, for either they are between the rectum like that which is of veins, or those which are like fat with pus.
E de aquelas so petitas e grans, e que le sanc corr de aquelas tostemps e es una, e so motas, e so fora·l cul, e en las extremitatz de lu.	And they are small and great, and the blood flows from them at any time; they are swollen, and outside the rectum, and at their ends.
Mays empero aquelas que so foro le cul so segon las mes de pauca humiditat, de las quals corr aygua citrina o un petit de sanc am cos continuabla, e so segon la color del cos.	But those which are outside the rectum are according to the months of little moisture, of which flows citrine water or a little blood with continuous body, and they are according to the colour of the body.
E la curacio de aquela que es dedintz le cuol es que comandes al malaute que se assela e que se exprema entro que le cuol yesca e las emoroydas apparescan a tu.	And the cure for that which is inside the rectum is to command the patient to sit and strain so that the rectum dries up, and the hemorrhoids appear to you.
Adonc tu te coyte e suspen am uncis o que tenguas aquelas am la tua ungla, e aprop incideys aquelas deves las suas razitz.	Then you hold it and pull with your nails, and then pierce those deep into their roots.
Mays si les uncis no so tengutz en aquelas per la humiditat de lor e mollificacio de aquelas, lahoras pren aquelas am drap aspre o am coto o am flassada de lana, e extratz aquelas am les tieus ditz, e aprop inscideys aquelas e polveriza sobre lor alcunas polveras caudas aprop la inscizio, per que sian ad aquelas en loc de cauteri; o cauteriza aquelas segon que es precedit en le capitol de cauterizar.	But if the nails are not in them because of their moisture and softness, then take those with an asp or a ramshorn or with a flap of wool, and pull them out with your fingers, and then pierce them and powder over them some powdered caustics after you have probed them, so that they are as cauterized; or cauterize them according to what is mentioned in the chapter on cauterizing.
E aprop cura aquelas am l’autra curacio entro que sian sanadas.	And then cure those with the other cure until they are healed.
E si le cul no obezeys a egressio, lahoras cristerisa le malaute am cristeri en le qual sia mordicacio petita, e sia lavat am aquel aquo que es en le cuol e que obezesca a egressio leugierament quan le malaute s’esprem.	And if the rectum does not obey the ejection, then christen the patient with a small Christ's nail, and let him be washed with that which is in the rectum and that he strain it out gently when the patient defecates.
Mays si las emorroydas so defora le cul, lahoras la causa de lor es leugiera, e es que tu prenguas aquelas am la tua ungla, o que prenguas aquelas am unci, e inscidas aquelas, e aprop cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit entro que sian sanadas.	But if the hemorrhoids protrude from the anus, then the cause of them is laziness, and you should take those with your finger, or take those with ointment, and insert those, and then cure those with what we have said until they are healed.
E aquel que avoreys inscizio, cove que aministres sutura de lor segon aquesta manieyra: pren fiel envolopat e entromet aquel en agulha e aprop extratz las emorroydas a las partidas dessus, e fay aquel penetrar am la agulha en la razit del autra part, e envolveys las doas extramitatz del fiel en la partida pus dejos de la agulha, e so latitudinalment; e estrenh la emorroyda am strectura fort, e aprop noza le fiel e extratz la agulha.	And whoever wants to treat them, he should administer a suture in the following way: take some wool wrapped in a needle and stick it through the hemorrhoids at their upper parts, and insert the needle into the root of the other part, and wrap both ends of the wool around the part closest to the needle, and then pull the hemorrhoid with strong pressure, and squeeze the wool and take out the needle.
E fay aquo a totas, e layssa de aquelas una e no la cozes, per so que la superfluitat del sanc corra de aquela.	And do this to all of them, and leave one of them uncovered and un-sewed, so that the excess blood can flow out through it.
E aprop pausa sobre le cul drap enfus en oli rozat o en cerot; e pausa aquel sobre·l cuol e comanda al malaute que·s repause.	And then place a cloth soaked in rose oil or ceratum over the anus, and tell him to rest.
E aprop layssa aquela entro que caja; e quan es casuda, cura aquelas am enguentz o am autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	And let that remain until it is healed, then cure them with ointment or another medicine until they are healed.
De curacio de fistulas.	On the treatment of fistulas:
Motas veguadas accideys per exseccacio de fenda o per costriccio de natura.	Many times they occur due to dryness of a wound or due to nature's constriction.
E cum so antiquadas e no val en aquela medicina, lahoras cove que tu razas aquelas am la puncta de spatum o am la tua ungla entro que sian faytas humidas e sia hostada de aquelas la escorsa pus desus, la qual prohibeys aquelas de consolidacio; e aprop cura aquelas entro que sian consolidadas.	And when they are old and medicine does not help them, then you should open them with a spatulum or your finger until they become moist and the pus is drained from above, and you should prevent them from becoming hard; and then cure them until they are healed.
Lahoras tu osta aquelas am razio pus vehement que la primieyra entro que mot sancno e sian excoriadas; e aprop cura aquelas entro que sian sanadas.	Then you should open them more violently than the first time so that there is more bleeding and they become raw, and then cure them until they are healed.
De curacio de almesamir, so es clau.	On the treatment of a hernia: It is crucial.
Sapias que alamermar, so es clau, e no es si no notz redon segon la color del cors semblant a cap de claviel, e es fayt en tot le cors e majorment en las partidas dejos les pes e als ditz, e endeve per aquels dolor deves le anament.	Know that a hernia is crucial, and it is not unless it is a round knot according to the color of the body resembling the head of a nail, and it occurs all over the body and mostly in the lower parts of the legs and the groin, and due to this you should feel pain.
E adonc cove que sia inscidit aquo que es en le circuit del clau, e sia tengut am les forfexs o am unci, e sia eradicat de la sua razit; e aprop cura aquel.	And so you should insert what is in the loop of the nail, and hold it with forceps or ointment, and remove it from its root; and then cure it.
E si vols, cauteriza le segont que es precedit en le sieu capitol.	And if you want, cauterize the second one that is mentioned in the previous chapter.
Mays de veruca es eminencia petita aspre fistulada redonda sobre la superficia del cos, e motas veguadas veno en las mas dels enfantz.	But a verruca is a small, asperous, round and fistulated protuberance on the surface of the body, and many times it occurs in the hands of children.
E curacio de lu es que estendas e inscidas aquela, o que estrenhas aquela am fiel o am pel entro que caja.	And its cure is that you stretch and insert it, or pierce it with a needle until it drains.
E si vols, cauteriza aquo, segon que havem dit, am foc o am medicina acuta.	And if you want, cauterize it, as we have said, with fire or acute medicine.
E ja so eradicadas enversas e no-enversas am le instrument le qual yeu diyre.	And then they are eradicated head on and not upside down using the instrument which I will describe.
Mays formica es eminencia petita feutrada o fistulada grossa sobre la superficia del cos anant mot en le preon, e quan le freg atroba aquela es centit en lu semblant de mordificacio de formigua, e es fayta entorn le cos.	But a furuncle is a small, fluffy or fistulated protuberance on the surface of the body which occurs frequently in the armpits and the groin, and when it is rubbed it feels like an ant bite, and it occurs all around the body.
E curacio de lu es que prenguas una canula de pena de auca o de pena de voltor, e sia fort, e pausa aquela sobre la formigua entro que la contengua le cercle de la canula de las partidas de lu; e aprop revolveys la tua ma am la canula entro que inscidas aquo que es en le circuit de la formigua, e pauses aquela en le preon de la carn, e que eradiques la formigua de la sua razit.	And its cure is that you take a feather of an eagle or a vulture, and make it strong, and place the feather over the furuncle so that the circle of the feather contains the furuncle; and then rotate your hand with the feather so that you insert what is in the loop of the furuncle, and place it in the flesh of the skin, and eradicate the furuncle from its root.
E si vols, fay aquo am canula de eram o de ferr segon aquesta forma:	And if you want, do it with an iron needle or a needle made of steel according to this form:
Sia la partida desus de la canulha trahent a subtilitat, sorda (so es no-perforada), envolopada per so que sobre le dit la aprencio de lu sia ablaviada e la revolucio de aquela.	Let the end of the needle be drawn out very thinly, blunt (so it is not pierced), wrapped so that above the finger it appears smooth and its revolution is complete.
E si vols cauteriza la formiga segon que es denant dit en la cauterizacio de atheyl en le capitol de cauteri.	And if you want, cauterize the furuncle as it is mentioned in the chapter on cautery.
De forma dels instrumentz que so aministratz a dar cristeri.	On the form of instruments which are administered to give cautery:
Alcunas veguadas es fayt cristeri de argent o de lato o de eram fondut o malleat; e alcunas veguadas es fayt de aquels instrumentz petit e gran segon aquels als quals so aministratz, quar aquel que es aministrat en la curacio dels petitz enfants sia petit; e de aquel dels quals los culs son freuls o doloyrozes, les cristeris de aquels sian petitz.	Sometimes cautery is done with silver or brass or melted iron or beaten; and sometimes it is done with small or large instruments according to the treatment they are administered for, because that which is administered in the cure of small children should be small; and for those whose anuses are painful or swollen, their cauteries should be small.
La forma de cristeri gran e pauc:	The form of a great and few cauteries:
Le cap de la canula de lu desus en le qual es liada la borsa sia ampla segon aquesta manieyra; e sia a lu distinacio la on la borsa es liada ayssi cum vezes.	Let the end of the needle where the bag is tied be wide according to this manner; and let it have distinction where the bag is tied in that way as well.
E la extremitat de lu pus dejus, la qual es entromesa en le cul, sia sorda (so es no-uberta) mot leon, atrasent a subtilita; e en la un del latz de lu sian dos traucs, e en l’autre costat un trauc, e sia la amplesa del trauc segon la groseza dels rays e pus gros un petit.	And the end of it which is inserted into the anus be blunt  (so it is not open), drawn out very thinly; and in one side of it there are two holes, and in the other side a hole, and let the width of the hole be according to the thickness of the rays and plus thick a small one.
E sia la borsa en la qual sian pausadas las medicinas de vesica de bestia o de pel de ovelha, e la razit de lu sia un palm.	And let the bag in which the medicines are placed be made of animal bladder or sheep skin, and let its root be one palm long.
E sia perforada per motz traucs ayssi cum es revolvuda; e si l’espazi le qual es entre les traucs la grossetut del dit.	And let it be perforated by many holes so that when it is revolved the space between the holes is the thickness of the finger.
E aprop entromet en aquels traucs fiel fort de fiel cru le qual sia de detz fiels, o enviro aquels; e ajusta am aquel la borsa; e quan es pausada en lu la borsa, sia streyt en le cap del cristeri entre dos distingentz am fort costriccio, e aprop cristeriza am aquel quascun trauc: Mays la qualitat de cristerizar am aquel es que tu omples la borsa de la medicina, que sia escalfada segon la quantitat de la tolleransa del malaute; e guarda te que no sia trop cauda ni trop freja.	And then insert into those holes strong oil of oil which is made from ten oils, or surround it with that; and adjust with that the bag; and when it is placed in him the bag, let it be squeezed in the end of the cautery between two distinctions with a strong grip, and then cauterize with that each hole: However, the quality of cauterizing with that is that you fill the bag with medicine which has been warmed according to the quantity of the patient's tolerance; and beware that it is not too hot nor too cool.
E aprop le malaute sia resupinat sobre le sieu dos, e eleva las suas cambas en sus e pausa dejos lu un cuer sobre le qual ja so les homes o un lansol; e aprop unta la extramitat del cauteri am oli o am album de huou o am mucellage de fenugrec o de semblantz; e aprop entromet aquel en le cul am facilitat, e aprop le ministre prengua la borsa e exprema aquel am doas mas e essemps am vehemencia entro que sia evacuat en le budelh tot aquo que es en le cristeri; e aprop extra le cristeri e le malaute leva las suas cambas a la paret.	And then the patient should recline on his back, and raise his legs up and place under him a bed or a plank; and then anoint the end of the cautery with oil or egg white or mucilage of fenugreek or something similar; and then insert it into the anus easily, and then the minister should take the bag and squeeze it with two fingers with strength until everything that is in the cautery is evacuated; and then take out the cautery and let the patient raise his legs to the wall.
E si la medicina forsa aquel a eyssiment, tengua le tant quant poyra; e si dorm am aquel per tota una nueyt, es mays derier en juvament.	And if the medicine forces it out, he should hold it as long as possible; and if he falls asleep from it for a whole night, it is better.
Mays si tu cristerizas aquel en las malautias de solucio de ventre e l’eyssiment de lu le coyta, lahoras tu itera le cauteri entro que sia sanat.	However, if you cauterize him for disorders of a swollen belly and its discharge, then you should repeat the cautery until it is healed.
E si en le cul so emorroydas o apostemas ledens, lahoras sia le cristeri mot subtil e leon, dels cristeris am les quals les enfantz so criterisatz.	And if in the anus there are hemorrhoids or painful lumps, then let the cautery be very thin and strong, of cauteries children are cauterized.
De curacio de las plaguas.	On the treatment of warts:
Yeu ja e dit en la divisio de la curacio de las plaguas aquo que convenia al libre, e yeu dic assi la curacio de aquelas am ma e am medicinas segon le conpliment.	You already said in the division of the cure of warts what suited the member, and I said thus the cure of them with hand and medicines according to their complement.
Donc dic que las plaguas son diversificadas segon aquo en que son faytas las plaguas e segon le loc sobre le qual cazo las plaquas.	Therefore, I say that warts are diversified according to what they are made of and according to the place where they occur.
E las causas per que motas vetz son faytas las plaguas so ayssi cum getament de peyra, o inscisio d’espaza o de cotel, o percussio am lansa, o am fustz, o am sageta, o semblantz ad aquels de motas causas.	And the causes by which many warts are made are thus with stone, or piercing of a spear, or blow with an arrow, or with a staff, or a similar object to these.
Mays las plaguas que so en les locz del cos so ayssi cum plagua la qual catz sobre le cap, o·l col, o·l pietz, o·l ventre, o·l fitge, e semblantz ad aquels dels membres.	However, the warts which are on the body parts are thus with a wart which falls over the head, or the neck, or the feet, or the belly, or the buttocks, and similarly in these of the members.
E yeu so recomtant la curacio de alcunas plaguas per que pauses aquela ratiocinacio e regla sobre las autras plaguas.	I will now explain the treatment for some diseases, through which you can extrapolate this reasoning and rule to other illnesses.
E yeu comensare de las plaguas del cap simplas, quar la rememoracio de las compostas vindra al comensament del tertz capitol.	I will begin with simple diseases of the head, since the discussion of composite diseases will come at the beginning of the third chapter.
Donc dic que quan accideys en le cap plagua simpla e no es fractura, lahoras considera: si es per getament de peyra o de semblant, e ja ha trinquada la codena tant solament e es gran plagla e temes sobre aquel malaute havinement de apostema caut, lahoras tu te coyta e fleubotoma la cephalica tantost, e no tardas aquo; e extrats ad aquel del sanc segon la quantitat de la vertut de lu si no mes alcuna causa prohibent de fleubotomia, majorment si·l sanc que es eyssit de la plagua es pauc.	Therefore, I say that when a simple plague occurs in the head and it is not a fracture, then consider the following: If it is due to the impact of a stone or something similar, and the vein has been ruptured and there is a large wound which you fear might become infected with pus, then immediately cut and bleed the cephalic vein, and do not delay; extract the blood according to the amount indicated by its color if no other cause prohibits phlebotomy, especially if the blood coming out of the wound is scarce.
E sia la flaubotomia del contrari de la partida plaguada; e guardase le malaute de replecio e de vi e de viandas grossas.	And let the phlebotomy be on the side opposite to the affected part; and guard against repletion, wine, and heavy foods.
Mays si de la minuicio prohibeys alcuna causa, lahoras sia aminorat de la vianda e no apropinque a carn ni a vi.	But if some cause prohibits phlebotomy due to weakness, then decrease the food intake and do not come near meat or wine.
E pausa sobre la plagua, si a lu accideys apostema caut, coto enfus en oli rozat solet o en vi en le qual es stipticat.	And place on the wound, if it happens that there is pus and a boil has formed, a poultice soaked in rose oil or wine in which styptic herbs have been mixed.
Mays si est segur de apostema caut, lahoras pausa sobre la plagua, si es recent am le sieu sanc e le ayre no ha mudat aquela la polvera la qual yeu recomtare aprop petit.	But if he is certain of the pus, then place on the wound, if it is recent and his blood has not changed that powder which I will shortly mention.
E si le ayre ja ha mudada aquela, lahoras pausa sobre alscus enguentz entro que sia sanada.	And if the air has already changed its color, then place a dressing over it until it is healed.
Mays si la plagua es gran o es per inscizio d’espaza e de semblantz, e no so ajustadas las labias de lu per puvils, lahoras ajusta aquelas am sutura segon que yeu recomtare de la sutura de lor.	But if the wound is large or caused by a spear or similar object, and its lips are not closed together by stitches, then close them with stitches as I will instruct later on.
Mays si la plagua ja es discuberta del os e pen, e no es retencio de lu sino un petit suspensori, lahoras inscideys aquela e aprop cura la plagua am medicinas e restaura la carn aprop en loc de codena, e comanda al malaute que sia pescut de viandas en las quals es groceza: caps e formen coyt e semblantz a lor, entro que sia compost.	But if the wound is uncovered and has exposed bone, and there is no retention except for a small bandage, then insert into it and treat the wound with medicines and restore the flesh by applying poultices in the place of the vein; and command the patient to abstain from foods which are heavy: capers and their likes.
E si atrobas en la codena putrefaccio e no adhereys al os, lahoras tu inscideys tot aquo poyrit e geta aquo, e aprop cura aquo.	And if you find putrefaction in the vein and it does not adhere to the bone, then cut out all that rottenness and throw it away, and then treat it.
Mays si en aquestas plaguas es arteria o vena de la qual fluxs de sanc pot evenir, e no es abscindida per medicinas, lahoras tu inquier sobre la arteria, e si atrobas aquela no-inscidida, lahoras tu inscideys aquela am spatum, o lia aquela; e si necessitat te provoca que aquo que havem dit no comfereys, lahoras tu cauteriza entro que·l sanc sia abscidit.	But if in these plagues there is an artery or vein from which blood can flow, and it has not been cut off by medicines, then probe for the artery; and if you find it uncut, then cut it open with a spatulum or ligature it; and if necessity forces you to do what we have said, then cauterize it so that the blood is cut off.
E si aquestas plaguas son simplas e petitas, lahoras la causa de lor es leugiere; enayssi que tu polverizas sobre aquelas aquesta polvera, quar consolidada aquela denant que l’ayre mude aquelas.	And if these plagues are simple and small, then the cause of them is cold; therefore you should powder those with this powder, because it consolidates them before the air changes them.
E la manieyra de la polvera es aquesta: recipe oli de enses partida una, de sanc de drago partida doas, de caus no-extincta partidas tres; sia tot mot trissat e crivellat, e de lu sia la plagua omplida, e sia constrengida per bona constriccio entro que be sobre aquela aderesca, e sia coagulada am le sanc.	And the manner of the powder is this: take olive oil, one part; dragon's blood, two parts; and unburned ash, three parts; mix all together and sift it, then fill the wound with it and compress it with a good bandage so that it adheres to the wound, and let it coagulate with the blood.
E aprop strengeys aquela desus am pulvils e leyssa aquela, e no la deslias mentre esta ayssi que no es apostemada, quar no es eredicada de lu la medicina entro que sia sanada.	And then tighten it above with powder and lye, and do not loosen it while it is like that unless there is pus; for the medicine will not be absorbed as long as it is unhealed.
E alcuna vetz fa aquo sola cautz, quan no es a tu en present enses e sanc de drago.	And sometimes you can do this alone when you do not have dragon's blood at hand.
E ja fa aquesta meteyssa operacio en las grans plaguas quan conveneys que sia pausada sobre aquelas e sian streytas, e so plaguas recentz am le lor sanc, las quals le ayre no ha alteradas.	And indeed this method of operation is suitable for great wounds when you judge that it should be applied and the wounds are tight and recent, and the air has not altered them.
E si le ayre las ha alteradas, e majorment quan es en temps d’estiu, lahoras no es entencio a la posicio de aquesta polvera, mays adonc cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit, enayssi que tu pauses sobre aquelas alcus enguents degistius, o que pauses sobre aquelas pols de la farina del ordi am aygua e mel entro que getan poyredura; e aprop cura aquelas am l’autra curacio entro que sian sanadas.	And if the air has altered them, and especially in summer time, then it is not intended to apply this powder; but instead cure them with what we have said, so that you place on them some cooked poultices, or place on them plasters made of barley flour mixed with water and honey so that they draw out the rottenness; and then cure them with the other treatment until they are healed.
Mays si accideys am la plagua fractura en os, e es petita, lahoras tu extratz aquo am gesti.	But if a fracture in bone occurs with the wound, and it is small, then extract it with a probe.
E yeu diyre la cura de las fracturas del cap en aquo que es envenidor.	And I will instruct on the cure for fractures of the head when they are infected.
De las plaguas del col.	Of wounds to the neck:
Mays si la plagua accideys en le col, lahoras no es en lu differencia en medicacio, e entre la plagua del cap quan es simpla.	But if a wound occurs in the neck, then it is not different in treatment; and between the wounds of the head when they are simple.
Mays si ja le nervi del col es inscis o arteria, lahoras si es nervi, no es en lu engen sino que sia evitada curacio de lu am aquo que fa vehement stipticitat, ayssi cum ziniar e zegi que es vetriol e semblantz a lor quar nozo als nervis e contrazo aquel.	But if the nerve of the neck is cut or an artery, then if it is a nerve, there is no harm in treating it with anything that causes violent contraction, like vinegar and its likes which do not hurt nerves and constrict that.
E no pauses sobre la plagua alcuna causa de tot freja, quar la sustancia dels nervis es freja e la continuacio de lu es am le cervel, le qual es le pus aut de totz les membres.	And do not place on the wound any cause of great heat, because the substance of nerves is heat and their continuation is in the brain, which is the source of all the members.
E si’ aquo am que es curat de medicinas leugieras, ayssi cum es caus lavada am aygua dousa, alcuna veguada enfusa en oli rozat o no-rozat, e thucia quan es lavada am aygua dousa e las autras peyras minarantz segon aquesta manieyra, e enguentz humitz.	And if it is being treated with cold medicines, like being washed with tepid water, then some oil soaked in rose or non-rose water, and thujia when it is washed with tepid water and the other herbs are applied according to this manner, and moist poultices.
Mays si la plagua es gran, lahoras aministra sutura, o coarta las labias de lu, e aprop cura aquela am pulvils entro que sia sanada.	But if the wound is large, then administer stitches, or tie its lips together, and then cure it with powders until it is healed.
Mays si a la plagua es profunditat o accideys en lu a la pus bassa partida poyredura, lahoras perfora aquela en le loc mays depremegut.	But if the wound is deep or there is pus in its bottom part, then bore it in its most depressed spot.
Mays si en la plagua ja es inscisa arteria e es conseguit flux de sanc, lahoras separa o secca aquela, o lia aquela, o cauteriza aquela si necessitat te provoca ad aquo.	But if the artery is cut and blood flows from it, then separate or dry it out, or ligature it, or cauterize it if necessity forces you to do so.
Mays si ja ha insciditz les spondils del golayro o tot, e so salvadas las venas del col, lahoras tu ajusta las labias de la codena am sutura sobre la cana del golayro e no toques aquel; abantz egala aquel e reduzeys aquel sobre la sua figura natural, e aprop strenh aquel am strectura decent, e leyssa aquela per alcus jorns; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz en les quals es stipticitat e excitacio entro que sia sanat.	But if the ligaments of the neck or the whole are cut and the veins of the neck are saved, then you tighten the lips of the vein with stitches on the bone of the neck, and do not touch it; bind that down to its natural shape and compress it with decent tightness, and dress it with poultices in which there is contraction and excitement until it is healed.
Mays si la plagua ja en le os a fayta enprecio, lahoras percuireys aquela, e lahoras si en lu ha fragmentz de hos, extratz totz aquels que podes de lor; e aquo que a tu no es apparelhat, leyssa aquo entro que la plagua se poyrisca, e sia separat e la egrecio de lu sia alleujada.	But if the wound has caused depression in the bone, then pierce it and if there are pieces of bone in it, extract all that you can; and what you cannot, dress it so that the wound putrefies, and let its separation be eased.
E si la plagua es recent lahoras polveriza sobre aquela polvera la qual t’e recomtada.	And if the wound is recent, then powder it with the powder which I have instructed you.
Mays si en la plagua es fayta fistula, lahoras cura aquela am aquo del qual la rememoracio vindra aprop en le sieu capitol.	But if a fistula has formed in the wound, then cure it with that which its recollection will come to you later in this chapter.
De las plaguas del col o de semblantz quan fayta entre las spallas e es fayta am spaza o am cotel o am lansa o am semblantz.	Of wounds to the neck or their likes when they are made between the shoulders and are made with a spear or a knife or its likes:
Si es percussio de lansa o de cotel, e vezes de lu la profunditat, lahoras considera mays si de la plagua yeys ventositat quan le malaute elena; lahoras sapias que la plagua es mortal.	If it is a wound from a spear or knife, and you see its depth, then consider that if the patient has fever; then know that this wound is deadly.
E si en lu no es profunditat e la plagua es recent am le sieu sanc, lahoras tu pauses en lu de la primieyra horo polvera, e no strenhas aquel per que no sia le sanc retengut en la profunditat de lu e que retorne al cor e que aucigua le malaute, mays pausa en lu enguent atractiu, e deslia aquela doas veguadas le dia.	And if it is not deep and the wound is recent with its blood, then you place on it in the first hour a powder, and do not tighten it so that the blood is not retained in the depth of it and returns to the heart and that it weakens the patient; but apply an attractive poultice, and loosen it twice a day.
E si l’enguent no es a tu present, lahoras tu pausa en le orrifici de la plagua coto viel per que sucque aquo que yeys de las humiditatz; e fay que le malaute dorma sobre la plagua per que corra aquo que es en lu ajustat.	And if the poultice is not at hand, then you bore a hole in the wound and insert a cotton swab so that it sucks out what there is in its humidity; and let the patient sleep on the wound so that what is inside it runs out.
Mays si ja de la plagua son passatz tres dias o mays e no accideys al malaute spasme ni tremor de cor mal ni strictura de ale, e vezes las autras dispozicios bonas de lu, lahoras sapias que plagua es salva; e adonc cura aquela am calguas e am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanada.	But if the plague has passed for three days or more and no spasms occur in the patient, nor trembling of the heart, nor stricture of the bowels, and you see other good signs in him, then know that the plague is over; and then heal it with leeches and with other treatment until it is healed.
Mays si la sanacio de lu es excusada, e ja tot temps es uberta, lahoras sapias que ja es fayta fistula; cura donc aquela per le sieu capitol.	But if the healing of him is prevented and the opening remains for a long time, then know that a fistula has formed; therefore heal it through its own channel.
E si la plagua es per inscisio de spaza o de cotel, e es simpla en la superficia del pietz o del dos, lahoras cura aquela am aquo que es precedit de sutura, si es gran, o am polvera, si es petita.	And if the plague is from an incision of a vein or artery and is simple in appearance on the surface of the foot or leg, then heal it with what has been said about stitching, if it is large, or with powder, if it is small.
Mays si ja ha fayta enprecio en le os, e so ja de lu inscizas pessas, lahoras tu torqua la plagua e coyta ad extrayre aquelas pessas, si so separadas.	But if there has been an impression in the bone and you see that it incises pieces of bone, then twist the plague and cut to extract those pieces, if they are separated.
Mays si no so separadas, lahoras leyssa las entro que se poyresca la plagua, que la extraccio de lor es alleujada.	But if they are not separated, then close the opening so that the plague may be cured; for the extraction of them is painful.
E de las autras plaguas accidentz en les autres membres le juvament en curacio es le juvament de aquo que havem dit.	And in other plagues that occur in other members, the healing method is the same as what we have said before.
De las plaguas del ventre.	Of plagues of the belly:
L’indisposicio la qual accideys en le ventre es o gran, o pauc, o migiera.	The disposition that occurs in the belly is either great or small or intermediate.
De la gran alcunas veguadas yeys le budel o nervi del budel, per que es fayta intromissio de lor e la sutura de lor esser pus vehement e pus subtil.	Of the great ones, sometimes the intestine or nerve of the intestine is cut, so that there is penetration and stitching of them must be more forceful and more subtle.
E disrupcio petita es fayta dificil per autra manieyra, e siec se que la reduccio de lor es pus dificil, si no te coytes de la intromissio de lor al sieu loc tantost, quar se ubre e es engrossat per que le intrament de lu es fayt difficil.	And a small disruption is made difficult in another way, and one finds that the reduction of them is more difficult if you do not close the penetration of them into their place immediately, for it opens and swells so that the insertion of it is made difficult.
E donc la milhor disrupcio es migiera, quar en aquela no es dificil la reduccio del budel, ayssi cum es dificil en las doas specias denant ditas.	And therefore the best disruption is intermediate, for in that one the reduction of the intestine is not difficult, just as it is difficult in the two species mentioned above.
E sapias que sutura del ventre es segon quatre manieyras, mays doas suturas son comunas que conveneysso en suturas de las autras plaguas del cors.	And know that stitching of the belly is according to four methods, but two stitches are common in stitching of the other plagues of the body.
E duas autras suturas proprias comunican a las autras plaguas, mays empero so mays proprias en la sutura del ventre.	And two other stitches are specific to other plagues but nonetheless more proper in the stitching of the belly.
E yeu recomti a tu quascuna am exposicio e declaracio.	I will return to you each one with exposition and declaration.
Donc dic que quan la plagua es petita e es eyssit alcuna causa del budel per aquela, e es fayt dificil a reduzir aquel, lahoras aquo es en una de doas manieyras: o per parvitat de la disrupcio ayssi cum havem dit, o quan al budel es venguda inflacio per la frigiditat de l’ayre.	Therefore I say that when the plague is small and there has been caused some injury of the intestine because of it, and it is made difficult to reduce it, then it is in one of two ways: either by smallness of the disruption as we have said, or when the intestine has received inflammation from the chill of the air.
E donc quan aquo es ayssi, lahora cove que tu scalfes aquel enayssi que tu submerges una sponga ho drap humit en aygua tebeza sola, o que coguas en aygua squinant, e cyperum, e spic, e embroques am aquela le budel entro que la imflacio sia resolvuda.	And therefore when that is so, then you should warm it so that you submerge a sponge or damp cloth in only tepid water, or that you gather in squinant water, and cyperum, and spic, and embed with that the intestine until the inflammation is resolved.
E alcunas veguadas fa aquo vi en le qual ha stipticitat, e es milhor que la aygua sola en resolucio de la imflacio.	And sometimes it does this in wine in which there is stricture, and it is better than water alone for resolution of the inflammation.
E donc cum tu vezes la imflacio esser resolvuda, lahoras tu humecta le budel am aygua en la qual es coyta altea e malvas, quar per aquo es alleujat le intrament de lu am pauca causa.	And therefore when you see the inflammation resolved, then you dampen the intestine with water in which is mixed aloe and mallows, for by that the insertion of it is made easier with little pain.
Mays si es escusat le intrament de lu aprop aquesta curacio, lahoras scindeys la disrupcio un petit am strument am le qual so inscididas emorroydas.	But if the insertion of it is prevented by this cure, then you split the disruption a little with an instrument by which there are incised hemorrhoids.
E la curacio primieyra es milhor, quan es propriada que no es seccio, e no sia occupacio a seccar aprop necessitat e defaliment.	And the first cure is better when it is not cut and there is no need for a bandage to dry up and deflate.
Del instrument, sec se la forma de lu:	Of the instrument, know its form:
La una partida de lu torta aguda, e l’autra partida no-acuta, e la extremitat subtil, e no sia am la subtilitat de spatum, abantz sia obtusa un pauc.	One side of it is bent acute, and the other side not acute, and the extremity subtle, and let its subtlety not be like a spathe but rather obtuse a little.
E donc cum la plagua es amplificada e yeys fora le budel, lahoras cove que la sua reduccio sia segon la forma de lu natural, en le sieu loc propri, si es possible sobre aquo, quar milhor es.	And therefore when the plague is amplified and sees outside the intestine, then you should ensure that its reduction is according to its natural form in its proper place, if it is possible; for that is better.
Mays quan la disrupcio es ampla, e es en la partida pu bassa del ventre, lahoras cove que tu fassas jazer le malaute sobre le sieu dos, e pausa las suas cambas pus autas que·l sieu cap; e si es en la partida pus desus del ventre, lahoras tu pause le cap de lu e·l pietz pus autz que las partidas dejos.	But when the disruption is large and it is in the lower part of the belly, then you should have the patient lie on his back and place his legs above; and if it is in the upper part of the belly, then you should have him lie on his side with his head and higher leg up.
E semblantment si la disrupcio es en una de las doas partz del ventre, lahoras pausa la tua entencio e la tua consideracio tostemps en aysso per que la partida en la qual es la plagua sia pus auta que l’autra.	And likewise if the disruption is in one of the two parts of the belly, then pay your attention and your consideration always to that so that the part in which there is the plague be higher than the other.
E ayssi cove que tu aministres aquo en las plaguas grans e en las plaguas migieras.	And therefore you should administer that in great plagues and in intermediate plagues.
E en las plaguas petitas, pausa aquo que es a tu preparat, e aprop fay que·l ministre sia entre las tuas mas pyatados, le qual tengua la disrupcio tota am la sua ma e ajusta las labias de lu, e aprop descuebre de aquela ad aquel que siec la sutura alcuna causa aprop autra.	And in small plagues, pause what is prepared for you and let the minister be between your fingers, who has the disruption all under his hand and adjust the lips of it, and let him uncover that to which there occurs stitching from any cause whatever.
E aquesta es la manieyra de sutura comuna: una que prenguas la agula, o comte de agula segon la cantitat de la amplitut de la plagua; e aprop layssa de la extremitat de la disrupcio del dit anular, e strenh la agula una, otre que tu no metas fiel en las doas extremitatz de la codena, am doas extremitatz del ciphac que es dejos la codena de las partidas dedintz, entro que fassas aquela penetrar de aquela partida; e tu ja has agreguadas doas extremitatz de la codena e doas extremitatz del ciphac, e so faytas quatre ordes.	And this is the way of common stitching: take the needle, or count of needles according to the amount of the amplitude of the plague; and let there be left from the extremity of the disruption of the finger, and tighten the needle one, or else put thread in both extremities of the cord, with two extremities of the ciphac that is below the cord of the fingers, into which you make penetration of that party; and you have added two extremities of the cord and two extremities of the ciphac, and so they are made four turns.
E aprop strenh am fiel doble en le circuit de la agula, e alcunas veguadas de doas partz ensemps, e aprop agregua las doas labias e la plagua per agreguacio decent; e aprop layssa la grossitut del dit e fiqua una autra agulha en aquela, e aprop lia aquela am fiel ayssi cum fiest am la primieyra agulha; e no cesses far aquo si es necessitat am las agulhas entro que ajas complida tota la contriccio de la plagua.	And let there be tightening with double thread around the circuit of the needle, and sometimes from two parts together, and let you add both lips and the plague by decent aggregation; and let there be left the thickness of the finger and put another needle in that, and let it be tied with thread as it is tied with the first needle; and do not cease to do this if there is a need for needles until all the contraction of the plague is tied.
E sian las agulhas migieras entre groceza e subtilitat, quar las agulhas subtils mot leugierament insciden la carn; e las grossas so de dificil intrament en la codena, e donc per aquo cove que sian migieras en subtilitat e grosseza.	And let the needles be intermediate between thickness and subtlety, for subtle needles pierce easily into the flesh; and thick ones are difficult to insert into the cord, therefore let them be more subtle in thickness and grossness.
E no cove que la agulha sia ficada en doas extremitatz de la codena propdana mot, per so que la carn no sia inscidida leugierament e que la plagua se huebra devant la sua consolidacio.	And let the needle not be put in two extremities of the cord that is near, lest the flesh be pierced deeply and the plague open before its consolidation.
E no sian prolonguadas de sutura per que la plagua no sia prohibida de consolidacio.	And let them not be prolonged so that the plague is prohibited from consolidation.
E aprop inscideys las extremitatz de las agulhas per so que no ledescan le malaute deves le sieu dormier; e pausaras sobre la sutura pulvils expanduts de tota partida, les quals tenguan las extremitatz de las agulhas; e layssa aquelas entro que sapias que la plagua ja es consolidada.	And let the extremities of the needles be inserted so that they do not lead the patient out of his sleep; and pause over the stitching powdered herbs expanded from every part, which have the extremities of the needles; and let them remain until you know that the plague is consolidated.
E aquestas specias de sutura am agulhas en cal manieyra es pus convenient en las plaguas petitas, quar habasta en la sutura de lor una agulha o doas o entorn aquelas.	And these spices of stitching with needles in cold manner are more convenient in small plagues, for they have in their stitching one needle or two or around them.
Mays la segonda sutura es cominal: e es que tu aministres am sutura las quatre extremitatz, de la codena e doas extremitatz del ciphac, en una veguada, am agulha en la qual sia fiel envolopat engual en subtilitat e grosseza.	But the second stitching is common: and it is that you administer with stitching of the four extremities, of the cord and two extremities of the ciphac, in one go, with a needle in which there is thread wrapped in subtlety and thickness.
E aprop quan am la agulha auras penetrat aquestas quatre extremitatz, reduzeys la agulha de aquela meteyssa partida de la qual comensest, per so que le fiel retrayt caja de la pus subirana partida a la plagua, per so que la sutura sia segon sutura de drap am la qual les draps so strengutz.	And let there be reduction of the needle from that penetrated party from which you began, so that the thread drawn back goes from the upper part to the plague, so that the stitching is according to stitching of cloth with which the clothes are tightened.
E pausa entre quascuna sutura la quantitat del gros del dit mendre.	And pause between each stitch the amount of the thickness of a little finger.
E aquesta sutura sabo les homes.	And this suturing heals men.
E am tal sutura yeu cozegui la plagua la qual era accidida a un home en le sieu ventre le qual era stat plaguat am un cotel, e era la disrrumpcio de la plagua major de un palm, e era eyssit dels budels entorn dos palms del budel del mieg loc e era la disrupcio en le mieg del membre; e adonc yeu reduzegui aquel depus que le budel havia stat foro la plagua per xxiiii horas.	And with such a suturing I healed a plague that had afflicted a man in his belly, and he had been plagued by it for seven days, and the rupture of the plague was about a palm's width, and it had come out around two palms from the intestine at the middle of the abdomen, and there was disruption in the middle of the abdomen; then I reduced it after the intestine had been torn open by the plague for 24 hours.
E la plagua fo consolidada en le spazi de xv dias o entorn, e curegui aquel e es sanat; e aprop aquo visquec per motz ans, e es conversat en las suas disposicios.	And the plague was consolidated within a space of 15 days or thereabouts, and I cured it, and he is healed; and then he lived for many years, and returned to his natural state.
E les autres metges havian jutgat que no fora sanat; e per miracle foc, quar yeu no curegui aquel am enguent, quar era en loc en le qual enguent no era atrobat ni deguna medicina, mays pausegui sobre la plagua coto viel dos veguadas lo dia e ablucio assiduo am aygua de mel entro que foc sanat.	And other doctors had judged that he would not be healed; and by God's miracle I cured him with ointment, for it was in a place where ointment and any medicine were ineffective, but I applied it to the plague twice daily, and washed it frequently with honey water until he was healed.
Mays yeu diyre dos specias de sutura proprias segon narracio de Paraula.	But I will tell of two kinds of suturing that are proper according to the narrative of the Word.
E es que tu comenses am sutura de la codena, e entrometas agulha de la partida deforo a la partida dedintz.	And you should begin with the thread's suture, and insert the needle from outside into inside at the beginning.
E donc cum la agulha penetra en la codena e en aquel meteys lacertz segon rectetut e en longetut de tot le cos, e layssa la extremita del ciphac en le qual has entromesa la agulha; e fay penetrar en la autra extremitat la agulha de la partida dedintz a la partida deforo en l’autra extremitat del mihat.	And when the needle penetrates the thread and the tissue according to the straightness and in the length of all the body, leave the end of the thread in which you have inserted the needle; and make the needle penetrate in the other end from inside to outside at the other end of the wound.
E don cum tu auras fayta aquela penetrar, lahoras tu fay aquela penetrar autra veguada en aquela meteyssa extremitat del mihat de la partida deforo a la partida dedintz; e leyssa la extramitat del ciphac que es en aquest latz, e fay penetrar la agulha en l’autra extremitat de la partida dedintz a la partida deforo.	And when you have made that penetration, then do it again on the other side of that meteyssed end of the wound from outside to inside; and leave the end of the thread which is in this side, and make the needle penetrate at the other end from inside to outside.
E fay penetrar am aquela la tua penetracio am la qual fas aquela penetrar en le ciphac en la extremitat del mirat la qual es en la partida de lu entro que tot aquel penetre.	And make that penetration with which you make that penetration in the wound' end in the middle of the abdomen, so that all that penetrates inside.
E aprop comensa de aquest meteys costat e cus aquel am la extremitat que es del ciphac en l’autra latz, e extratz la agulha de la codena la qual penetrec, e aprop redutz aquela en aquela codena e cos la extremitat del ciphac que es en l’autra costat am aquesta extramitat del mirat; e extratz aquela de la codena la qual es de part de lu.	Then begin on this side of the wound and sew that with the end which is of the thread in the other side, and draw out the needle from the thread through which you have made penetration, and then reduce that to that thread and sew the end of the thread which is in the other side with this end of the abdomen; and draw out that from the thread on the part of him.
E fay aquo una veguada e autra, e fay aquo una veguada aprop autre veguada entro que tu cozes tot aquo que es deforo segon aquel eysemple.	And do this once and again, and do this another time within that you sew all that is outside according to that example.
E la suma de aquesta manieyra de sutura es que tu cozes am sutura de pellicies am la qual cozo las pels, enayssi que tu cozes le ciphac una veguada de la part de la extremitat de la codena, e que leysses aquela autra veguada entro que la ajas complida.	And the sum of this way of suturing is that you sew with a thread of skin, in such a way that you sew the abdomen one side from the end of the thread, and draw out that other side so that it is complete.
Mays la segonda specia de sutura propria la qual dieys eyssament Gualia , e aquest es de sermo de lu e per lu recomtat, es que tu cozas aquela segon semilitut am la qual alcus medicantz cozo aquela, enayssi que agreguan tota partida a la sua compar partida a lu convenient per natura; e aplican la extremitat de autre de lu e la extremitat del mirat al autra extremitat de lu, e aquo es fayt segon que yeu a tu recomti.	But the second kind of proper suturing which I narrate is from Gualia' s word, and it is of a man' s speech and by him recommended; it is that you sew that according to the similarity with which someone sews another thing, in such a way that they join all part to its comparable part conveniently by nature; and apply the end of one of his parts and the end of the wound to the other end of him, and that is done according to how I recommend to you.
Cove que tu fiques la agulha en la extremitat del mirat a tu propdana de la partida deforo, e fassas aquela penetrar a la partida dedintz en aquel sol, e leysses dos extremitatz del ciphac; e aprop revolveys la agulha e fay aquela penetrar de foro a la dedintz en dos extremitatz del ciphac.	Because you put the needle in the end of the wound near to the outside, and make it penetrate inside at that sole, and draw out two ends of the abdomen; then you revolve the needle and make it penetrate from outside to inside in two ends of the abdomen.
E aprop revolveys aquelas cascunas, e fay penetrar quascunas de la partida dededintz entro a la partida deforo en dos extremitatz del mirat autras que so en le latz contrari.	Then revolve those again and make some of the ends penetrate from inside to outside in two ends of the wound that are in the contrary side.
E aquesta manieyra de sutura es milhor de la sutura comuna leugiera, e es sutura de la qual precedic rememoracio.	And this way of suturing is better than the common simple suture, and it is the suture of which I preceded the memory.
Aquest es le sermo de Gualia	This is Gualia' s word.
E mays le diyssero alcus, sutura del ventre es rectificada am dos agulhas, so es que tu entrometas en aquestas a quascunas un fiel, e comensa am intromiccio de agulha de aquo que es deves tu, e fay aquela penetrar entro al autra latz segon sutura de aquels les quals cozo les cuers engualment.	And others say, the suture of the abdomen is rectified with two needles; it is that you put in these some twine, and begin with penetration of the needle from what is below you, and make it penetrate inside at the other side according to the suturing of those who sew bodies together.
E sapias que quan disrupcio es en le mieg loc del ventre, lahoras la sutura de lu es pus difficil que dels autres locs del ventre.	And know that when disruption is in the middle of the abdomen, then its suture is more difficult than of other places of the abdomen.
Mays le juguament de medicacio de plagua es jutgament de las autras plaguas.	But the judgement of medicine for plague is the judgement of other plagues.
La qual causa es quar quan tu consieguas la plagua recent am le sieu sanc denant que l’ayre altera aquela, e reduses le budel e cozes aquela e aptas aquela decentment, lahoras pausa sobre aquela polvera encarnativa.	The cause of which is that when you know the plague recently with its blood before the air changes it, and reduce the intestine and sew it and adapt it decently, then pause over it powdery flesh-like matter.
E si le ayre ja ha alterada la plagua, lahoras pausa sobre aquela alcus enguentz les quals so a tu presens entro que fassan peyra dura e cajan les fiels, e sian consolidatz ciphac e mirat; e aprop cura aquela ayssi cum es la curacio de las autras plaguas entro que sia sanat.	And if the air has already changed the plague, then pause over it some ointments which are to you present so that they make hard stone and enclose the threads, and be consolidated abdomen and wound; and cure it thus as is the cure of other plagues so that it is healed.
Mays si a tu no so presens las medicinas, lahoras pausa sobre aquela tantost, pus que comensa a getar brac, coto viel, e permuta aquel dos veguadas le dia, ayssi cum a tu e ensenhat, entro que sia sanat, quar tu no indigeysses de autra medicacio en motas disposicios quan las plaguas so simplas.	But if you do not have the medicines, then pause over it at once, for when it begins to fester, cut it much and change that twice a day, thus as you teach and instruct, until it is healed, for you do not need any other medicine in many conditions when the plagues are simple.
Mays si tu temes que la plagua comunique en lesio als membres principals, lahoras cove que tu submergas lana leon en oli de trempada qualiditat, o en oli rozat, e pausa aquela en le circuit dels locs que so entre les angonas e dejos las aysselas.	But if you fear that the plague communicates in damage to the principal members, then know that you submerge lion wool in oil of excellent quality, or in rose oil, and pause that in the circuit of the places that are between the angles and below the ankles.
E si sent dolor o putrefaccio en les sieus budels, quar motas veguadas aquo s’endeve, lahoras cristeriza aquel am vi stiptic negre tebe, e majorment si la poyredura es pervenguda en le budel e es fayta exitura penetrant entro la conquavitat de lu.	And if you feel pain or putrefaction in your intestines from how many times it should be, then baptize that with black astringent wine, and especially if the putrefaction is come by the intestine and there is made an exit through its cavity.
E sapias que aquela que es del budel gros es de pus leugiera sanacio que aquela que es en les budels subtils.	And know that that which is of the large intestine is a more difficult cure than that which is in the subtle intestines.
E es de dificil sanacio quar le budel le qual es apelat “gegunu” no recep sanacio de plagua que caja en lu de tot; e aquo es per la gran multitut de venas que so en lu e per la magnitut de lu que so en aquelas, e per subtilitat del cos de aquel, e per propinquitat de aquel a natura de nervis.	And it is of difficult cure because the intestine which is called "gegunu" does not receive the cure of plague that boxes in it from all; and that is because of the great multitude of veins that are in it, and because of its magnitude that is in those, and because of the subtlety of that one, and because of its proximity to nature of nerves.
Mays si aquo que procezeys de la plagua es la tela, e conseguas aquela recent, redutz aquela segon la tua rectetut am la qual reduzes les budels engualment.	But if that which proceeds from the plague is the membrane, and you obtain that recently, reduce that according to your straightness with which you reduce intestines equally.
Mays si es passat a lu spazi e ja es feyt vert o negre, lahoras que tu strenguas aquela am fiel sobre le loc que es denigrat de lu, per so que vengua fluxs de sanc, quar en la tela so venas e arterias.	But if it has passed to the space and is already made green or black, then you should tighten that with thread over the place that is blackened of it, for there to come flows of blood, for in the membrane there are veins and arteries.
E aprop inscideys aquo que es otra aquel liament, e pausa dos extremitatz del fiel pendentz de la partida dejos de la plagua foro lu, per que sobre tu sia alleujada la atraccio de lu deves le cazement de la tela e emissio del brac de la plagua.	And then insert that which is another one of it and pause two ends of the thread hanging from the part below the plague out of it, so that on you be elevated the attraction of it because of the weight of the membrane and emission of the pus of the plague.
Rememoracio de las plaguas quan accideysso en le budel.	Memory of the plagues when they happen in the intestine.
Quan accideys disrupcio en le budel e es petita, lahoras es possibla que sia resteurada en alcus homes, per aysso quar yeu vi aquel le qual era stat plaguat en le sieu ventre am percussio de lansa et era la plagua de la part dreyta del stomac, e la plagua era antiquada e fayta fistula, e eyssic de lu gestio e ventositat.	When disruption happens in the intestine and it is small, then it is possible that it be restored in some men, because I saw him who was plagued in his abdomen by blow of spear, and the plague was on the right part of the stomach, and the plague was old and made fistula, and exuded from it and ventosity.
Adonc yeu pansegui la curacio de lu ja sia que no era confizat en la sanacio de lu, mays cessegui subtiliar aquel entro que foc sanat e le loc es consolidat.	Then I followed the cure of him so that he not be confident in the cure of it, but continued to subtilize that until it was healed and the place is consolidated.
E yeu pus que vi le loc ja consolidat, timegui sobre le malaute que endevengues sobre lu accident de mal en le sieu ventre; e no endevenc alcu per aquo mal accident e romas en las suas milhos disposicios mangant e bevent, e aprop entrec en banh e es exercitat en sos ditz.	And after I saw the site already consolidated, I applied medicine on the patient that had a bad accident in his belly; and he did not experience any discomfort from this bad accident, and he maintained his normal habits of eating and drinking, and also bathed and exercised as usual.
E ja diysero alcus experimentados que quan endeve plagua en le budel, e es petita, lahoras cove que sia liada segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu prenguas fromiguas de grans caps; e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua e pausa una fromigua de aquelas que aja la boca uberta sobre las doas labias de la plagua; donc quan pren sobre aquelas e strenh la sua boca, abscindeys le cap de lu, quar adhereys e no es dissolvut.	And some experienced people have said that when there is a small wound in the intestine, it should be treated as follows: you take a large leaf; and then you press the two lips of the wound and place one of those leaves which has an open mouth over the two lips of the wound; thus when it grabs onto those and tightens its mouth, cut off its head, because it will adhere and not come undone.
E aprop pausa autra formigua prop la primieyra, e no cesses aquo a far am formiguas una aprop autra segon la quantitat de tota la plagua.	And then place another leaf near the first one, and do not cease to do this with leaves one after the other according to the size of the entire wound.
E aprop reduzeys aquela e cos la plagua; e romanguan aquels caps annexces en le budel entro que·l budel sia sanat; e no accideys al malaute degun nocument.	And then return that one and sew up the wound; and let those leaves remain attached to the intestine until it is healed, and do not harm the patient in any way.
E ja es possible que·l budel sia liat am fiel subtil lo qual es fayt del budel de bestia annexs am lu, pus que es mes en agulha; e es que tu prenguas la extremitat de aquestz fiels de budel, e sia mot descarnat, e aprop lia la extremitat de lu am fiel de li, envolopat, e aprop entromet aquel fiel en agulhas e cos am aquel le budel, e areduzeys aquel en la disrupcio.	And it is possible that the intestine be tied with a thin thread made from an animal's intestine, as it is easier to put on a needle; and you take one end of this intestinal thread, which is quite bare, and then tie the end of it with the thread, wrapping it around, and then insert that thread through needles and sew up with that the intestine, and return it to its cavity.
E aquesta manieyra de sutura am formiguas no es sino segon via de fiducia e d’esperansa.	And this method of sewing with leaves is not certain but rather a matter of hope and expectation.
Mays si la plagua es gran e ampla, majorment si es en un dels budels subtils, quar lahoras no es engen sino subtiliacio, e no es sanacio de lu de tot.	But if the wound is large and wide, especially if it is in one of the thin intestines, then there is no other way but to cut it out, for there is no complete healing of it at all.
De curacio de zuchem e fistula.	On the treatment of ulcers and fistulas:
Sapias que tota plagua e apostema quan se envilheseys e se Antiqua, e es fayt ulcus, e no es consolidat e geta braç tot temps e no es abscindit, lahoras, en qualque membre sia, universalment es nompnada fistula e nos la apelam aquela azukem.	Know that any wound and pustule which becomes inflamed and old, and is turned into an ulcer, and does not heal and keeps draining pus all the time and does not come to a head, then, in whatever part of the body it may be, universally it is named a fistula, and we call it by this name.
E fistula segon veritat es nodacio feutrada, dura, blanqua am la qual no es dolor e a la qual es conquavitat ayssi cum es conquavitat de pena de ausel; e per aysso nompnat aquela alcus rizatz, id est pena.	And a fistula according to the truth is a hollow nodule, hard, white, without pain and having a cavity like a hole of a bird; and because of this some call it a nodule, that is, a lump.
E es en alcus homes humida, la qual geta brac; e fort leu la humiditat es abscidida en alcunas horas.	And in some men it is moist, and the moisture is discharged in a few hours.
E alcunas veguadas aquesta humiditat es mota, e es pauca, e es grossa, e es subtil.	And sometimes this moisture is thick, and sometimes scanty, and sometimes thin.
E yeu ja he denant dit en la divisio, lahoras cum yeu diyssi las plaguas, que tot ulcus que no es sanat ni no es en lu nuda carn, no es aquo sino per una de ix causas: de las quals la una es o per pauquesa de sanc en le cos; o per malicia de lu; o quar entre lu e las labias es carn dura prohibent nativitat de carn; o quar es de mota legesa; o quar aquel ulcus en si meteys es poyrit e la materia que es a lu tramesa es de mala qualitat; o quar la medicina es enconvenient en la curacio de lu; o quan corrupcio catz en la regio, e es pestilencia; o per proprietat de regio ayssi cum endeve a Saragossa , en la qual es fayta difficil degestio de las malautias, e es tardada en aquela sanacio de apostema per natura; o quar en lu es os un, o motz osses.	And I have already mentioned in the division that whenever I discussed wounds, that any ulcer which does not heal and there is no bare flesh in it, is caused by one of nine reasons: one of them is because of lack of blood in the body; or because of a bad disposition of the patient; or because between the wound and its lips there is hard flesh preventing the generation of new flesh; or because there is pus; or because the medicine used for its treatment is not suitable; or because corruption has entered into that region, and it is pestilential; or because of the nature of that region, just as this occurs in Saragossa, where digestion of diseases happens with difficulty, and healing of ulcers is delayed naturally; or because there are bones or bone fragments in the wound.
Ja e mostrat totas aquelas causas, e·ls senhals de aquelas e la curacio de lor am medicinas en la divisio.	I have already shown all these causes, and their signs, and the treatment of them with medicines in that division.
E cove assi que yeu fassa a tu saber la curacio de fistula la qual es fayta per via de operacio am ma.	Now let me inform you about the treatment of a fistula which is done by means of an operation with the hand.
E sapias que fistula accideys en totz les membres del cos; quar de aquelas son fistulas que perveno a las venas grantz e arterias, o als nervis, o al ciphac, o al budel, o a la vesica, o ad alcuna de las costas, o ad alcu dels spondils del dos, o ad alcuna de las juncturas compostas per composicio ayssi quo de la ma e del pe; e de aquelas so que dan a lu propinquitat del membre principal e de semblantz.	Know that fistulas occur in all parts of the body: for some reach into large veins or arteries, or nerves, or the brain, or intestines, or bladder, or any of the ribs, or one of the vertebrae of the back, or into any of the joints composed by composition like that of the hand and foot; and some go near to the main part of a similar nature.
E donc aquela de aquestas fistulas que es segon aquesta manieyra es de las malautias de dificil sanacio, e no recep curacio, e occupacio am aquela es trebalh e ignorancia.	And therefore those of these fistulas which are in this way are among the most difficult diseases to heal, and do not receive treatment, and their occupation is labor and ignorance.
E si es de las fistulas alcuna la profunditat de la qual no perve ad aquestz locs que e dit, e esperas e confizas en la curacio de lu, e vols pervenir a cognicio de lu, lahoras pren tenta de eram o de ferr, e si la fistula va segon rectetut, e perquireys aquela am lu.	And if there is any fistula whose depth does not reach those places which I have mentioned, and you wait and trust in its healing, and wish to obtain knowledge of it, then take a needle or an awl, and if the fistula goes straight, probe it with that.
Mays si la fistula es tortuissitat, lahoras investigua aquela am tenta de plom subtil, quar plom am la levitat del sieu cors es alleujat e curvat deves la tortuositat.	But if the fistula is winding, then investigate it with a probe made of thin lead, because lead, by the lightness of its body, is drawn away and bent according to the winding.
E si la fistula es havent motz horrificis, no es a tu possible que signifiques sobre lu am tenta.	And if the fistula has horrifying depths, it is not possible for you to indicate it with a probe.
Adonc cristeriza le orrifici per sos orrificis, quar la humiditat per la qual clisterizas aquela va deves las autras orrificis e corr de lor.	Then, Christianize the orifices by your orifices, for the moisture by which you Christianize it comes from the other orifices and flows from them.
E aprop inquier exquisitament, segon qual manieyra a tu es possible que conoguas si aqui has os o nervi, e es la conquavitat de la fistula longinqua o propdana, o es una fistula a la qual so motz orrificis e esta sobre aquo tot am la suma de la tua fortaleza, am la tua enterroguacio, am la qual enterroguas le malaute, e la invencio de la dolor deves la tua compressio am la ma sobre le loc, e semblantz de las significacios e de las causas accidentz al apostema.	And then investigate carefully, according to which way you are able to know whether there is a bone or nerve, and whether the fistula' s cavity is distant or near, or whether it is a fistula whose many orifices are above all by the use of your strength, by your investigation with the hand on the site, and like the signs and causes of the ulcer.
E cum tu auras stat sobre totas aquelas causas am stacio veraya, lahoras ve a la curacio segon confidencia: e es que tu consideras lahoras si es fistula apparent propinqua o en loc sal, longinqua de junctura, o de nervi, o de arteria, o de vena, o de un dels locs les quals yeu a tu e ditz.	And when you have understood all these causes with certain knowledge, then go to the treatment according to confidence: and consider whether it is an apparent fistula near or in a salty place, distant from a joint, or of a nerve, or artery, or vein, or one of those sites which I have mentioned.
Lahoras tu secca la fistula segon que denant es dit de la naracio de lu, e osta aquo que es en aquela filtracio e de carns corrumpudas, e aquo que es nascut en le orrifici de la carn, o de theil e de semblantz, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	Then dry up the fistula according to what has been said about its origin, and stay that which is in that filtration and of rotten flesh, and that which is born in the orifice of flesh, or of thistle and like things, and heal that within as it is healed.
Mays si la fistula es de longinqua profunditat, e es segon rectetut, lahoras cove que inscidas aquela en le preon atant quant a tu sira possible, e aprop mondifica aquela de totas las suas carns corrompudas; e aprop administra calguas envolopadas en medicinas acutas, e intromet aquelas entro a la conquavitat de la fistula, la qual has conprenduda am ferr.	But if the fistula is of great depth and straight, then it is necessary that you probe it with an awl as far as it is possible for you to go, and then cleanse it of all its rotten flesh; and then administer hot poultices wrapped in sharp medicines, and insert those into the cavity of the fistula, which you have understood by means of the iron.
E fay aquo am aquela alcunas veguadas entro que la medicina acuta corroda tot aquo que es romas en la conquavitat de la fistula de la corrupcio.	And do that some times within so that the sharp medicine corrodes all that is rotted in the cavity of the fistula from corruption.
E aprop restaura aquela am enguentz les quals engendran carn sana entro que sia sanada.	And then restore it with ointments which generate healthy flesh within as it is healed.
Mays si no es sanada per aquo, lahoras tu cauteriza aquela segon que havem recomtat.	But if it is not healed by that, then cauterize it according to what we have recommended.
Mays si la causa de fistula es os e es deves tu certificat aquo, lahoras tu inquireys aquela e secca aquela segon que havem recomtat, si tu no prohibeys alcuna causa de vena o de nervi o de membre principal ayssi cum havem dit.	But if the cause of the fistula is bone and it is because you have certified that, then probe it and dry up that according to what we have recommended, unless you prohibit any cause of vein or nerve or main member as we have said.
Mays si le os es a tu descubert e es en lu alcuna corrupcio e negror, lahoras tu ratz aquel entro que la corrupcio sia hostada tota; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que lu encarne entro que sia sanat.	But if the bone is revealed to you and there is corruption and blackness in it, then cut out that corruption entirely; and then heal it with that which will flesh it within as it is healed.
E si no es sana e gieta brac ayssi cum fazia, lahoras sapias que tu no est pervengut a la eradicacio tota de la corrupcio; e adonc tu descuebre sobre lu segondanament e exquisitament fay la razio de lu e la mundificacio de lu am la deriera fortalasa tieua, e aprop restaura aquel.	And if it is not healed and continues to discharge pus as before, then know that you have not attained the complete eradication of corruption; and then uncover it again and investigate it carefully and do the reason for it and the cleansing of it with your greatest strength, and then restore it.
E donc si es sanat, bo es; e sino, lahoras sapias que aquela corrupcio es en la profunditat longinqua del cors, la qual no ha conseguida, e adonc a tu en aquel no es engen sino laysar aquela.	And if it is healthy, then it is good; and if not, then know that this corruption is in the distant depths of the body, which has not been achieved, so you should not attempt to treat it.
E si le os corromput es petit, o es a tu possible atirar aquel, lahora tu le atira am forceps subtils las quals conveno ad aquo.	If the bones are rotten or broken, and you can extract them with delicate forceps, then proceed to do so.
E si so motz osses, lahoras exquisitament fay la extraccio de totz aquels, e de aquels no laysses denguna causa am la tua fortaleza.	If they are loose bones, then carefully extract them all without leaving any trace behind with your strength.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat alcuna causa de las humiditatz, e en lor inscizio no ha temor ni error, lahoras inscideys aquelas liaments o carns si so aqui, e deliura les osses.	But if you encounter any resistance from the moisture and find no fear or error in its source, then cut into those ligaments or meats as they are here, and free the bones.
Mays si a tu no es preparacio de ostar les osses de la tua hora, lahoras pausa sobre la plagua aquo que poyresca la plagua aquela, e layssa aquela entro que aquo es al enviro de aquels osses de carns e de liamentz, e guarda la plagua que no sia consolidada, e sia constrengida la seccio la qual tu has inscidida en la tua operacio.	But if you are not prepared to remove the bones at this time, then place over the wound something that will fester and leave that wound open so that the flesh and ligaments surrounding the bones may suppurate, and keep the wound from healing so that the incision you have made in your operation is not closed.
Habantz, si temes, pausa sobre lu coto submers en sopre trissat am oli, o coto submers en anguent egipciac, o en alcu dels enguentz vertz, quar quan poyriran aquelas liaments, e les osses son de lor seperatz la ablacio, e de aquels atraccio es alleujada.	However, if you are afraid of this, place over it a poultice soaked in vinegar, or a poultice soaked in Egyptian ointment, or one of the green ointments; for when those ligaments fester and the bones are separated from each other by suppuration, then their attraction is lessened.
Mays si es un gran os ayssi cum le os de camba o de coyssa o semblantz ad aquels, e aquo que de lu es corromput es la facia de lu tant solament, lahoras ratz aquela am resio tant solament derriera entro que sia ostada aquela negror e corrupcio, e aprop restaura la plagua.	But if it is a large bone like the shinbone or thighbone or one similar to those, and what is rotten in it is only its fascia, then cut away that corruption with the resection only as far back as the rottenness extends, and close up the wound.
Mays si aquo que de lu es corrumpyt es gran partida, e la corrupcio ja ha conseguida la medulla del os, lahoras es causa necessaria cerrar aquel e aquel tot inscidir entro al loc on es pervenguda la corrupcio, e lahoras cura aquel entro que sia consolidada.	But if what is rotten in it is a large portion of bone, and the corruption has already reached into the marrow of the bone, then it is necessary to close that up and cut away all around where the corruption is located, and then heal that wound so that it may be consolidated.
E yeu recomti a tu aquo que endevenc ad un home en la sua coyssa per que pausez aquela a eyssempli e adjutori sobre la tua operacio.	And know this: that you should apply something to the patient's thigh for a while as an example and aid in your operation.
Foc un home jove per etat entorn xxx ans, al qual accideys dolor en la sua cueyssa, e de las partidas dedintz mauguda es sobre la materia dedintz le cors entro que la materia es pervenguda a la cueyssa, e es materia de apostema am gran apostema, e no foc a lu causa extrinseca.	A young man of about 30 years had pain in his thigh, and from the affected parts within was matter in the body which reached the thigh, and it was suppurative matter with large abscess, and there was not to him an external cause.
E adonc foc extendut le temps am aquela per la error dels metges entro que l’apostema es hubert, e acorrero de lu materias motas, e la sua curacio foc aprop pausada entro que la camba foc fistulada, e faytz son en lu motz orrificis les quals totz getavan poyredura e las humiditatz del cos.	And so the time was prolonged by the error of the doctors until the abscess opened up, and many matters gathered there, and its cure was delayed because the thigh had been fistulated, and there were in him many orifices all of which discharged pus and the moisture of the body.
E adonc le curec multitut de metges entorn dos ans, e no foc en aquels savia ma en la art, entro que yeu fu appelat.	And so he was treated by many doctors for about two years, and there was no improvement but rather worsening in the leg where I had been called to treat him.
E vi la camba de lu e las materias que corrian de lu aquels orrificis per gran cors; e ja le cos de aquel home era tot stabozit e la color de lu era citrina.	And so I saw his thigh and the matters that came from him through those orifices as a great flow; and indeed the man' s body was totally swollen and his color was yellowish.
E adonc yeu intromesi la tenta ad un de aquels orrificis e pervenguec la tenta al os.	And so I inserted the probe into one of those orifices and reached the bone.
E aprop yeu e perscrutat tostz les orrificis e trobegui aquels pervenir a lor de totas partidas de la camba.	And then I probed and searched thoroughly all the orifices and found that they led to all parts of the thigh.
E adonc yeu me coytegui e inscidegui sobre un dels orrificis aquels entro que descrobegui una partida del os, e atrobegui aquel corromput, e ja era terros e corrumput e denigrat; e era ja corrumpuda una partida de la camba entro que havia penetrat entro a la mezola.	And so I cut and opened up one of those orifices where I discovered a portion of the bone, and found it rotten, and indeed it was earthly and blackened, and a portion of the thigh had become rotten because it had penetrated into the membrane.
E adon yeu serregui aquo que a mi era discubert e preparat del os descubert.	And then I cut away what was revealed to me and prepared from the uncovered bone.
E yeu cujegui que no fos en le os sino aquela corrupcio la qual abscidigui e serregui, e yeu ja havia derraziguada.	And so I found that it was not in the bone but rather that corruption which I cut away and removed, and indeed I had already removed it.
E aprop pausegui la restauracio de la plagua am medicina consolidativas per lonc temps, e no es consolidada.	And then I applied the restoration of the wound with consolidating medicine for a long time, and it was not consolidated.
E aprop yeu iteregui e descubregui sobre le os segondament sobre le descubriment primier, e atrobegui continua corrupcio am le os.	And then I repeated this and uncovered the bone again on the second discovery, and found continued corruption with the bone.
E serregui aquo que a mi apares de aquela corrupcio, e aprop yeu fo perforsat fayre la curacio de lu e restauracio, e no es restaurat.	And so I removed what appeared to me from that corruption, and then I found it necessary to do the cure of it and restoration, and it was not restored.
E adonc yeu descubri sobre lu autra veguada e no cessegui inscidir le os petit a petit particuladament e perforsa la restauracio de lu, e no es restaurat entro que inscidigui entorn un palm de lu, e aquel extraxi am la medula sua, e aprop restauregui aquel am medicinas, e es consolidat leugierament e sanat.	And so I uncovered it again and did not cease to probe the bone little by little particularly and perforate the restoration of it, and it was not restored until I had probed around an inch of it, and I extracted that with its marrow, and then I restored it with medicines, and it was more consolidated and healed.
E no es necessaria iteracio en la operacio de lu e seccio de lu sino per la disposicio de la freulesa de lu e per la paucitat de la tollerancia de lu e paor de lu de mort, quar a lu accidia en totas horas per superfluitat de evacuacio sincopi mala.	And it was not necessary to repeat the operation on him or to cut him again except according to the disposition of his condition and due to the weakness of his body and his fear of death, for he suffered in all hours from excess of discharge and a bad syncope.
E donc sanat es per sanacio entiera, e nada es en loc de os carn dura; e es fayta bona la disposicio de lu en le sieu cors e retornec la vertut de lu; e es conversat en las suas disposicios e no fec a lu contrarietat en ambulacio ni nocument en denguna causa.	And so he is healed entirely, and there is nothing in the place of hard bone; and his disposition is good in his body and he has recovered his strength; and he is returned to his former dispositions and did not encounter any difficulty in walking or damage from any cause.
Mays si es os eminent en loc del cors ja trauquat, lahoras cove que tu secces aquel segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu prenguas liament e strenh aquel en la extremitat de aquel os eminent, e comanda ad alcu que extenda aquel en sus; e pausa aquel liament de lana pus gros del primier liament; e aprop lia aquel sobre la carn que es dejos le os, e exten la extramitat de lu per que atires la carn a las partidas dejos, e tu descuebras la carn sobre le loc le qual voles serrar per que la serra no leda la carn.	But if the bone is protruding from the body and has been cut, then you should proceed thus: take ligament and strengthen that at the extremity of that prominent bone, and command someone to stretch that while you apply the other ligament of wool which is thicker over the meat that is below the bone, and extend the extremity of it so that you pull the meat away from the parts below, and uncover the meat over the place where you want to cut so that the saw does not damage the meat.
E pausa fust o taula dejos le os decentment, quar quan tu fas aquo no es prohibida la serra que no secce la carn corrumpuda.	And place a post or board below the bone decently, for when you do this it is not prohibited that the saw cuts into the rotten meat.
E cove que sia la serradura sobre le loc corrumput petit a petit, quar si es en la concavitat del os corrupcio e no appar en la sua apparicio al sentiment, e forssa a serratura de lu autra veguada.	And know that the cutting is on the rotten place little by little, for if it is in the concavity of the bone and does not appear to the sense, then force the saw another time.
E si le os es corrumput e no-eminent, abantz es la una partida continuada am la autra, e la corrupcio es al mieg loc o en partida de lu, lahoras tu descuebre la carn de totas partz tota; e aprop pausa fust dejos, e aprop serra aquel de la primiera partida la on es la corrupcio entro que sia continuada la serratura del autra partida.	And if the bone is rotten and not prominent, then the one part is continued with the other, and the corruption is in the middle or in a part of it, then uncover the meat from all parts entirely; and then place a post below, and then cut that from the first part where the corruption is so that the sawing continues to the other part.
E sia la serradura segon le loc de la corrupcio un petit, segon que havem dit.	And let the sawing be according to the place of the corruption a little, as we have said.
E si la corrupcio es en la junctura, inscideys aquela junctura corrumpuda, e serra le os la on es continuat del autra part.	And if the corruption is in the joint, insert that corrupt joint, and cut the bone where it continues to the other part.
E si de la corrupcio es en la continuacio de doas juncturas, lahoras no es en lu razio sino engen.	And if the corruption is in the continuation of two joints, then there is no ratio but skill.
E si la corrupcio es en le pecte de la ma o del pe, es mot dificil; empero cove que tu inquieras la corrupcio en qual manieyra appareys a tu, e que abradas aquela, e mondes aquela segon quascuna disposicio la qual es a tu possibla, e am cascum engen sia rectificat a tu, quan no fa a tu contrarietat vena o nervi.	And if the corruption is in the breast of the hand or foot, it is very difficult; however know that you probe the corruption in whatever way it appears to you, and open that up according to each disposition which is possible for you, and with each skill be directed to you, when it does not go against you vein or nerve.
E sapias qual es inscididors e las serras a inscidir aquestz osses son motz segon le situament dels osses, e la preparacio de aquels, e la grosseza de aquels, e la subtilitat e la grandeza e la parvitat de aquels, e la duricia e la lor raritat; per que cove que tu prepares a tota specia de operacio estrument convenient ad aquela opperacio.	And know which are the saws and the probes to cut these bones according to their situation, and the preparation of them, and their thickness, and subtlety and greatness, and smallness, and hardness, and softness; so that you may be prepared for all kinds of operations conveniently for that operation.
E sapias que aquela operacio significa a tu sobre la specia del strument del qual indigeysses; quan am tu es gran studi e lonc e conoyssensa de las manieyras de aquesta art, e testimoni de manieyras de malautias, quar lahoras ja tu las avias per tu meteys aquo que es convenient a lu dels sturmentz a tota malautia.	And know that this operation indicates to you about the kind of instrument of which you have experience; when with you is great study and long and understanding of the ways of this art, and testimony of ways of diseases, for then you already had through your masters what is convenient to them of instruments to every disease.
E yeu so a tu formant en la fi de aquest capitol le nombre dels instrumentz les quals pausaras cum eyssimples am les quals proceziras a la tua prohibicio la qual experimentaras sobre las autras.	And I shall leave to you at the end of this chapter, the number of instruments which you will place with simples, by means of which you will proceed in your treatment according to what you have found works for other patients.
Forma de serra:	The shape of a saw:
Forma de autra serra:	The shape of another saw:
Forma de autra serra:	The shape of another saw:
Forma de autra serra gran:	The shape of another large saw:
Forma de ray:	The shape of a razor:
Sia le cap de aquest ray segon la forma de cap de clau stellat, e les puntz de lu sian segon la forma dels puntz alstefegi.	Let the head of this razor be shaped like a star-shaped key, and its points according to the shape of the points on a stapler.
E no conveneys sino que am aquel sian confricadatz les caps de las juncturas quan so corrumpudas, o es la boca gran ampla.	And it is not advisable that these be rubbed on the heads of the joints when they are infected or on a large open wound.
Forma de razori major dels autres:	The shape of a larger razor than the others:
Forma de razori menor:	The shape of a smaller razor:
Forma de razori lat:	The shape of a wide razor:
Forma de serra autra decentment fayta: sia fayt arc de lu pus sobira e la acuitat de lu de ferr, e le membre de lu de boys punhal descentment fayt.	The shape of another saw decently made: let it have an arch on its upper part and the acuity of iron, and the blade of it decently made.
Forma de lu:	Its shape:
Forma de razori en la qual ha concavitat:	The shape of a razor in which there is a cavity:
Forma de razori autra subtil:	The shape of another subtle razor:
Forma de autra razori de curvada extremitat:	The shape of another razor with a curved extremity:
Forma de rasori petit semblant a tenta:	The shape of a small razor resembling a tent:
Forma de incisori am le qual so inscidit les osses:	The shape of an incision tool with which bones are cut:
Forma de inscisori autra minor:	The shape of another smaller incision tool:
Forma de un autra inscissori; aquest semblant a ray, e la extremitat de lu es cum serra, e es exhibit en motz locs en la razio dels osses:	The shape of another incision tool; this one resembling a razor, and its extremity is like a saw, and it is displayed in many places on the bones:
Forma de ray lo qual conveneys a rasio de aquel que es perforat dels osses:	The shape of a razor which is suitable for cutting into those bones that are perforated:
E la extremitat de lu es triangulada e de aguda extremitat.	And its extremity is triangular and acute.
E es fayt de ferr de India , e semblantment cove que totas las causas que havem ditas de rasoris e de inscissoris e de serras.	And it is made of Indian iron, and similarly to all the causes that we have given for razors and incision tools and saws.
De inscizio extremitatz e de la serratura dels osses.	Of incision extremities and of the jointing of bones.
Las extremitatz se poyresso o per causa intrinseca o per causa extrinseca, o cum tu auras medicat aquela corrupcio per curacio de aquelas medicinas e la curacio no comfereys, o vezes la corrupcio anar deves le membre la qual no percuteys denguna causa, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquel membre entro aquo la hon acossec la corrupcio, per que le malaute evasesca per aquo de mort o de malicia que es major defeliment del membre.	The extremities may be affected either by an intrinsic or extrinsic cause, or as you have medicated that corruption for the sake of cure with those medicines and the cure does not confer, or else the corruption goes away from the member in which case you did not perceive any cause, then when you insert that member into that place where the corruption used to be, so that the patient escapes from death or from some greater harm to the member.
E le senhal de aquel al qual accideys, es que·l membre es fayt negre entro que sia cujat que foc la ja comburit, o se poyreys aprop la negror entro que la poyredura aquela ane entro aquel membre que siec lu e que prengua tot le cors; e donc coyta te am inscizio de aquel.	And the sign of that to which it happens is that the member becomes black as if it had been burned, or it may happen near the blackness that that corruption entered into that member and spread throughout the entire body; and then cut off with an incision at that place.
E semblantment si es causa de la corrupcio percussio de alcunas causas venenosas ayssi cum de scorpio mari o de vupera o de rutela e de semblantz.	And similarly if the cause of the corruption is a poisonous strike from some venomous creature like that of the sea scorpion or of the viper or of the adder or of their likes.
E si la corrupcio o la percussio es en la extremitat del dit, lahoras tu inscideys le dit e no dones spazi a la corrupcio per que ane entro a la ma.	And if the corruption or strike is on the extremity of the finger, then you shall insert the finger and not give space to the corruption so that it enters into the hand.
E semblantment si accedeys a la ma, lahoras tu inscideys aquela de la razit del focil, e no dones spazi a la corrupcio entro que prengua en le focil del bras.	And similarly if it happens to the hand, then you shall insert it at the joint of the arm, and not give space to the corruption so that it enters into the arm.
E si envezeys aquel, lahoras inscideys le bras entro al coyde en la junctura.	And if instead it is the other one, then insert the arm within the elbow at the joint.
E si passa otra la corrupcio e la vezes enviro le coyde, lahoras en aquel es la mort del malaute; e aministrar autra causa otra aquo en curacio es quantitat de vertut.	And if the corruption passes further and goes around the elbow, then in that is the death of the patient; and to impart another cause for cure in addition to this is a quantity of virtue.
E semblantment fay del pe quan corrupcio envezeys le dit del pe, lahoras tu inscideys aquel entro ad un dels nozes.	And similarly do the foot when corruption happens to the toe, then you shall insert that within one of the toes.
E si pren en la pente del pe, lahoras tu inscideys tot le pe.	And if it affects the heel of the foot, then you shall insert all of the foot.
Mays si pueja entro al denol, lahoras tu inscideys la camba entro a la junctura del denol.	But if it enters into the toe, then you shall insert the instep at the joint of the toe.
E si la corrupcio ja es pervenguda sobre le denol, lahoras en lu no es engen sino dimissio, e layssar le malaute a la mort.	And if the corruption is already past onto the toe, then in it there is not healing but dismissal, and let the patient go to his death.
E la manieyra de inscidir le membre o de serrar lu es que tu strenhas le liament en la partida pus dejos la qual voles inscidir, e strenh autre liament sobre le loc; e extenda le ministre un liament a las partidas dejos, e extenda le ministra autra liament en sus; e tu separa la carn la qual es entre dos liamentz ain spatum lat entro que sia descuberta tota la carn; e aprop sia inscidit o serrat.	And the manner of inserting the member or of cutting it is that you tighten the ligament at the part which is lowest and which you want to insert, and tighten another ligament over the place; and extend the minister one ligament to the parts below, and extend the other minister over it; and you separate the flesh which is between two ligaments as far down as possible so that all the flesh is uncovered; and then let it be cut or cut into.
E cove que sia pausat drap de li de totas partidas per so que no toque le loc sa, e que vengua al malaute lesio ajustada e apostema caut.	And so that a bandage of linen is placed over all the parts so that it does not touch the wound, and that the patient come healed and bound up.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc quan obras, lahoras tu cauteriza le loc coytadament, o pausa sus lu alcunas polveras restrenhentz le sanc; e aprop retorna a la tua medicacio entro que sia complida.	But if it happens bleeding of blood when they are opened, then you cauterize the place burnt-wise, or pause over there some powders that constrict the bleeding; and then return to your medicine until it is complete.
E aprop lia le membre plaguat am liament al u convenient, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And then bind the member bandaged with a ligament in a convenient way, and cure that until it is healed.
E yeu recomti a tu aquo que endevenc a un home en le sieu pe, aquest meteys accident le qual yeu e a tu recomtat, le qual es quar accidic a lu negror en le sieu pe am adustio que era asemblada a combustio de foc.	And I return to you that which happened to a man on his foot, this wound which accident I and you recommended, which is when he became blackened on his foot by scorching that was like the burning of fire.
E aquela corrupcio accidic primierament en le sieu dit entro que tendec tot le pe.	And that corruption happened first on his toe before it extended over all the foot.
E adonc aquel home preparec per si meteys pus que vic la curacio anar al membre am la vehemencia de lu que atrobec de dolor e de adustrio de lu, e el inscidic aquel pe entro a la junctura, e foc sanat.	And then that man prepared for himself remedies more than once that the cure might go to the member with the force of it, and he struck that foot until it hurt and burned, and he cauterized that foot at the joint, and healed it with fire.
Lonc temps accidic a lu aquela meteyssa corrupcio en le dit de la ma indic.	Long time ago that corruption happened on the toe of the hand as mentioned.
E adonc venc a mi, e so me perforsat repercutir aquela superfluitat am aquo que pausegui sobre la ma de las medicinas, aprop la mundificacio del cos de lu; e no es repercussa la superfluitat e comensec anar al autra dit entro que comensec en la ma.	And then it went to me, and so I perceived that superfluity with that which was paused over the hand of the remedies, then the cleansing of its body; and the superfluity is not repelled and began going to the other toe before it began in the hand.
E el apelec me a inscidir la ma de lu, e yeu no volgui far aquo sperant sobre la repercussio de aquela superfluitat, e mays que temegui deves la inscizio de la ma de lu mort, quar la vertut del malaute era sobre cazement.	And he led me to insert the hand into it, and I did not want to expect anything about the result of that superfluity, and yet that I feared would be the death of the patient if the virtue of the medicine was over powerful.
E pus que el se desperec de mi, es retornat en la sua terra e pervenguec a mi que aquel home preparec e inscidic la sua ma tota, e es sanat.	And since he left me it returned to his land and it was perceived that that man prepared and inserted his entire hand, and it healed.
E no he adhuzida aquesta narracio sino per que sia adjutori sobre aquo que catz de aquesta malautia, e que sia significacio per la qual sia significada e segon la qual sia obrat.	And I have not added this narration except that it be aid to what is added to this illness, and that it be significance by which it was signified and according to which it was turned.
De cura sinuum et qualitate clisterizationis cum medicinis.	Of cure of sores and quality of cauterization with medicines.
Quan accideys apostema en alcus membres carnozes e·l spazi de l’apostema es prolonguat entro que fa colleccio de sania, e aprop es romput e perforat, e es eyssida de lu la sania, e roman le loc vuoyt quays cum si era vayssel, e la codena que es desobre lu ayssi cum drap subtiliat, e no es pervengut a deriera corrupcio, e no inprimeys en le os o en nervi ni en liament, es apelat sinu, e no es nompnat fistula.	When it happens to apostema on some members of the flesh and the space of the apostema is prolonged so that there is collection of pus, and then it is broken and perforated, and the pus comes out from it, and the wound is cleansed as if it were washed, and the stringy part which is above it as if it were a veil, and it does not come to a deeper corruption, and not impresses into the bone or on the nerves or on the ligaments, it is called sinus, and it is not named fistula.
Mays empero si le spazi es prolonguat entro que la corrupcio enprema en alcun membre, lahoras es appelada fistula e no zukem.	But if the space is prolonged so that the corruption infects in some member, then it is called sinus and not fistula.
E la cura de lu es que inscidas aquela codena tota ayssi cum es revolvut, e majorment quan es subtiliada e es fayta cum drap, e comfizas que no adhereys al loc per la sua corrupcio.	And the cure of it is that you insert that stringy part all around as it is unwound, and more so when it is cut with a razor, and compressions are made so that it does not adhere to the place because of its corruption.
Mays si tu speras que la codena adheresca e que aquela corrupcio no aja conseguit per deriera consecucio, e en la codena ha spassitut de cara, lahoras tu cura aquel am clisteri.	But if you expect that the stringy part adheres and that corruption has not happened because of deeper cauterization, and in the stringy part there is swelling from the face, then you cure that by cautery.
E es que consideras al sinu, e lahoras si es gran, e·l brac que yeys es de fetent odor, lahoras clisteriza aquel am medicament egipciac le qual es de oli e vi agre e ziniar recebent partidas enguals, e sian ajustadas en un vayssel, e sian coytas sobre le foc entro que’l medicament se fassa rog e pervengua a specitut de mel.	Consider the armpit, and if it is large, and the arm that you see has an offensive odor, then cleanse that with Egyptian medicine which is made of oil and wine, mixed with rosemary, received in equal parts, and placed in a vessel, and cooked over fire until the medicine becomes hot and reaches the consistency of honey.
E aprop tu pren de lu aquo que es necessari e dissolveys lu am aygua e mel; e clisteriza am aquel le sinu, e strenh le orrifici de lu, e layssa la medicina en lu per la quantitat de doas horas.	Then take from him what is necessary and dissolve it with water and honey; and cleanse the armpit with that medicine, and strengthen the opening of it, and leave the medicine in there for the amount of two hours.
E aprop extratz aquela am sprecio; e fay aquo per tantz dias entro que sia mundificat le sinu e sia remauguda la pudor.	Then remove that with a sponge; and do this for so many days until the armpit is cleansed and the odor is removed.
E alcunas veguadas es clisterizat am aygua de cendre, quan no es a tu prezent aquest medicament; e es que tu prenguas la cendra de vitz, e met sobre lu aygua; e aprop cola aquela e clisteriza aquel am ela entro que te confizes que·l sinu lahoras es ostat.	And sometimes it is cleansed with water of ashes when that medicine is not present to you; and take the ashes of wood and place water on it, and then boil that and cleanse the armpit with it until you are certain that the armpit is cleaned.
E si le malaute no ha tollerancia sobre le medicament egipciac ni l’aygua de la cendre, lahoras clisteriza aquel am aygua e mel e quays sia mesclat ziniar trissat, e clisteriza aquel am vi e mel mesclat, quar de proprietat de mel es que mondifique e lave, e le vi fa adherir le sinu, e majorment quan en le vi ha superfluitat de stipticitat e de siccitat.	And if the patient does not tolerate the Egyptian medicine nor the water of ashes, then cleanse that with water and honey in which is mixed ground rosemary, and also cleanse it with wine and honey mixed, for the property of honey is to clean and wash, and the wine causes adhesion of the armpit, and especially when there is excess of dryness and tightness in the wine.
E cum tu fas aquo alcunas veguadas e te comfizes que·l sinu ja es remaugut, lahoras clisteriza aquel am aquo que fa naysser la carn en lu.	And when you do this some times and are convinced that the armpit is cleaned, then cleanse that with water that causes the flesh to grow in it.
E es que prenguas de enguent dyafinicon e dissolveys aquel am oli rozat e vi stiptic; o que clisterizas aquel am alcunas medicinas e enguentz autres que hajan las proprietatz les quals ja he yeu scritz en le tractat dels enguents.	And take a thin ointment and dissolve it with rose oil and astringent wine, or cleanse that with some medicines and other ointments that have the properties which I have already written about in the treatise on ointments.
E si le orrifici del sinu es streyt en le qual no es recebuda la canula del clisteri, lahoras tu le amplifique aquel am ferr petit a petit, e pausa en lu calgua envolopada en enguent egipciac o en enguent basilicon entro que sia amplificat.	And if the opening of the armpit is narrow and does not receive the catheter of the clyster, then expand that little by little with a small iron rod and place a heated sponge wrapped in Egyptian ointment or basilicon ointment on it until it is expanded.
E semblantment si le orrifici es ample, lahoras tu agregua las labias de lu am sutura e layssa de lu quantitat en la qual intre le clisteri ses addicio.	And similarly if the opening is wide, then sew up its edges and leave in it a quantity that the clyster can enter without addition.
E si le orrifici de lu del qual corr le brac es elevat a las partidas desus, lahoras secca aquel en le pus bas loc que es en lu per que le brac corra entro dejos, quar quan le brac es coartat en la preondeza de sinu la carn esser en lu engendrada.	And if the opening of the armpit from which the arm hangs is elevated to the parts above it, then dry that in the place that is below for the arm to hang down into it, for when the arm is constricted in the depth of the armpit flesh is generated in it.
E si no es a tu possible seccar le sinu entro al enviro del os pus bas segon que voles, lahoras te perforssa que prepares le membre am preparacio per la qual corr de lu le brac leugierament segon que es a tu apparelhat e que no sia en lu retengut alcuna causa del brac.	And if it is not possible for you to dry the armpit within the bone below according to what you want, then it is necessary that you prepare the member with preparation so that the arm runs from it slightly according to what seems appropriate to you and that no cause of the arm be retained in it.
E pren medicinas consolidativas que sian pausadas sobre le sinu convenientz ad aquo que vols exxten aquelas sobre drap de li.	And take consolidating medicines which are placed over the armpit appropriately according to what you want them extended to that on the cloth.
E le drap sia de tan gran quantitat cum fa la comunicacio de tot le sinu; e aprop inscidey am las forfexs en le dreyt del orrifici del sinu un trauc pus ample un pauc que l’orrifici del sinu; e aprop exten sobre autre drap de li dels enguentz leons segon la quantitat del trauc, e pausa le sobre aquel per posicio longinqua del orrifici del sinu per que sia aleujat le eyssiment del brac de lu e no ostes le drap gran sino aprop alcus dyas una veguada.	And the cloth be of such great quantity as makes the communication of the whole armpit; and insert with forceps into the right opening of the armpit a wound more ample a little than the opening of the armpit; and extend over another cloth of them ointments of lions according to the quantity of the wound, and place it over that in position distant from the opening of the armpit so that the insertion of the arm is kept away from it and not obstruct the cloth great unless you approach some days once a time.
Mays aquel que es sobre le orrifici del sinu, le qual remauguas en tota hora per so que yesca aquo que es ajust en lu del brac.	But that which is over the opening of the armpit, and cleansed at every hour so that what is inserted in it of the arm dries.
E per que sapias si aquo que corr de lu del brac es mot o pauc, o es digest, o es no-digest.	And so that you know if what runs from it of the arm is little or much, or is digested, or not digested.
E am aysso tu considera le loc de aquel sinu, si en lu sent le pacient dolor o no, e si es en lu apostema.	And with this you consider the place of that armpit, if in it the patient feels pain or not, and if there is an ulcer in it.
E cum la tua medicacio es prolonguada en la tal manieyra, e vesas la matiera que es gitada sobre le orrifici del sinu ja adhereys, o se apropria adherencia, lahoras le mayti tu le deslia o le tertz dia, e quan deslias la plagua, lahoras muda le drap per autre e renova le enguent.	And when your medicine is prolonged in such a manner and you see the matter that is formed over the opening of the armpit already dry or having dried up, then loosen it on the third day, and when you loosen the plaster, then change the cloth for another and renew the ointment.
Mays si del sinu aprop lon spazi yeys virus subtil, lahoras no te desperes de la adherencia de li, quar la sanacio de lu se apropria, quar so alcus homes en les quals tarda generacio de carn en las lors plaguas, e de aquels so en les quals es fayt le contrari de lu.	But if from the armpit a subtle virus is seen to run long spaces, then do not despair of its adhesion for it, for its healing is proper, for some men in whom generation of flesh in their plasters is slow, and of those so whose contrary is done.
E si del sinu aprop motz dias es yssit brac indigest, lahoras sapias que·l sinu no adhereys; e si es tardada la adherencia del sinu e es la causa prolonguada, lahoras tu ajusta en exsiccacio de las medicinas, e si las medicinas so humidas en lor substancia e en la sua vertut, son seccas ayssi cum enguent dyafinicon, quan es en lu ajustada superfluitat de addicio de zegi.	And if from the armpit after many days an indigest arm is issued, then know that the armpit does not adhere; and if adhesion of the armpit is delayed and the cause prolonged, then you reduce in dryness of the medicines, and if the medicines are moist in their substance and in their power, they are dried as with thin ointment when there is in it excess of addition of wax.
E le mays derier am le qual es curat, es que prenguas de enguent dyafinicon e sia dissout en oli rozat, e sia sobre lu vojat vi antic engual en la sua substancia, e aprop comfeys aquel am lu, e usa de aquel.	And the last with which it is cured, is that you take thin ointment and dissolve it in rose oil, and over it pour old wine equal in its substance, and then be convinced of that, and use it.
E ja fa semblant en aquela accio, quan no y a brac, enguent dyafinicon, mel quan es coyt entro que sia engrossat, e usa de lu; o que prenguas mirra e aloen e enses, e trissa tot e polveriza sobre le mel quan es sus le foc, e aprop lineys aquo sobre drap e strenh aquel sobre le sinu; e lineys aquel am le mel le qual has cuoyt entro que es engrossat, e polveriza sobre drap e strenh aquel.	And then do likewise in that action when there is no arm, take thin ointment and honey when it is cooked until it is thickened, and use it; or take myrrh and aloe and aloes wood, and grind all and pulverize over the honey when it is over fire, and then line that over cloth and strengthen it over the armpit; and line that with the honey which you have cooked until it is thickened, and pulverize over cloth and strengthen that.
E alcunas veguadas so administratz am lu aristologia longua e razitz de lili celesti (e es lili celesti) e farina de errs e centaurea, e usa de aquels simples o ajustatz, trissa aquels e cribela e polveriza sobre le mel le qual he recomtat; e husa de lu.	And sometimes they are administered to it with long aristology and radishes of celestial lily (and is celestial lily) and farina of oats and centaurea, and use of those simples or adjusted, grind all and sift over the honey which you have recommended; and use it.
E si es prolonguat le sinu, e no es sanat per aquesta curacio, lahoras sapias que la corrupcio es en le preon de lu, e ja fa enquisicio en les osses o en les autres membres durs o als liaments; lahoras tu le cura am curacio fistular, ayssi cum desus es dit.	And if the armpit is prolonged and is not healed by this treatment, then know that corruption is in its depth, and then make incision into the bones or in the other hard members or the ligaments; then you cure it with tubular treatment as above is said.
De curacio de panarici et unguis attritae et incisione digiti additi et sectione.	Of treatment of ulcer and nail worn down and addition of finger cut and section.
Panarici es apostema le qual nays dejos la ungla del dit pous de la ma o del pe, e fort leu nays en les autres ditz, e cum es prolonguat e la sua curacio es mens prezada, o es apostemat de apostema caut, o es corrumput, e gieta brac entro que corrodeys la razitz de la ungla, e fort leu corromp aquela tota, e fort leu perve la sua corrupcio al os entro que es a lu odor fetent, e es fayta la extremitat del dit lada, e la color de lu es fayta fusca.	Ulcer is an ulcer which arises below the nail of the finger on the hand or foot, and strongly affects the other fingers and when it is prolonged and its healing is long delayed, or is an ulcer of an ulcerous wound, or is corrupted, and issues arm within that corrodes the radicle of the nail, and strongly corrupts all that, and strongly permeates to the bone within which there is an offensive odor, and its end is made black.
E donc quan tu auras aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu inscidas am ferr tota la superfluitat que es romasa de la ungla e aprop cauteriza la plagla aprop aquo, quar cauteri mot es juvatiu en aysso.	And so when you have that with what we have said in the division and do not confer your treatment then know that you cut out all the excess which is rotted from the nail and then cauterize the wound therefore, for cautery of motion is beneficial in this.
Mays si le os es sa e la ungla es sana, e las addicios de la ungla vuoydas ja compremen las carns a las partidas dedintz, e comensan lu punger e ledeysso aquela, lahoras cove que tu pauses ray subtil dejos le angle de la ungla que pungeys la carn, e impelleys aquela sus e inscideys aquela carn am facilitat, e pausa sobre aquo que roman de la carn de las medicinas comburentz corrosivas entro que sia tot remaugut; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	But if the bone is whole and the nail is healed, and the additions of the nail become compact, and begin to prick and stab that, then know that you place fine thread below the edge of the nail which pricks the flesh, and drive that up and insert that flesh with ease, and place over that which comes from the flesh of scorching medicines within until it is all cleansed; and then cure that with ointments so that it is healed.
Mays si la corrupcio ja enprem en le os, lahoras cove que tu inscidas le os aquel e le extraguas, car nul temps no es sanat que sia en lu le os corrumput.	But if the corruption is already in the bone, then you must cut into that bone and extract it, for there is no hope of healing as long as the bone remains corrupted.
E si vezes la corrozio e la corupcio anar en le dit, lahoras tu inscideys aquel en un dels nozes segons que es premesa la sua rememoracio, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if you see corrosion and corruption in the finger, then cut into it at one of its joints according to how you remember it, and dress the wound so that it may heal.
Mays si a la ungla endeve percussio o atricio, e endeve en aquela dolor vehement, lahoras cove que tu al comensament fleubotomes le malaute, e aprop secca la ungla am spatum agut am seccio transversa desus en jus, e guarda te que la seccio no pervengua entro a la carn que es dejos la ungla, quar tu faras accidir al malaute dolor vehement, e sira causa a nativitat de la carn ajustada superflua en le loc; e aprop cura aquel loc am aquo que ceda dolor.	But if there is a blow or injury to the fingernail, and consequently great pain in it, then at the beginning you must bleed the patient, and then dry the nail with a sharp spatula by making a transverse cut across it, being careful that the cut does not extend into the flesh below the nail, for you will cause great pain to the patient, and will prevent the superfluous flesh from growing back in that place; and dress the wound to ease the pain.
Mays dit ajustat, le qual es nat en las mas de alcus homes, fort leu es carnos tot, e fort leu so en lu osses, o fort leu es en lu ungla.	But this tissue, which is born in the hands of some men, has very little flesh and very few bones, or very little nail.
E alcus de lu son natz en la razit de la junctura, o es la nativitat de lu en alcus nozes dels ditz.	And some are born in the web of the joint, or their origin is in some joints of the fingers.
Mays aquel que es nat en alcus nozes del dit no se mau, e aquest que es nat en las juncturas fort leu es maugut.	But that which is born in some joints of the finger does not harm, and that which is born in the joints is very harmful.
E de aquels que son natz carnoses, la seccio es leugiera, e es que tu inscidas aquel deves la sua razitz am spatum lat.	And with those that are born fleshy, the cut is easier, and you must cut into it at its root with a broad spatula.
Mays de aquel que es nat en la razitz de la junctura, la curacio es dificil; e donc guarda te de la abscizio de lu.	But that which is born in the root of the joint, its treatment is difficult; and so beware of cutting it off.
Mays en aquel que es nat en dit deves les nozes, cove que tu inscidas al comensament la carn de lu am inscizio redonda entro al os, e aprop serra am una de aquelas serras convenientz ad aquo, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	But in that which is born on a finger at the joint, you must cut into the flesh of it with a round incision into the bone, and then cut with one of those appropriate saws for this purpose, and dress the wound so that it may heal.
Mays consolidacio la qual accideys als ditz entre lor motas veguadas o per nativitat del home que nays enayssi, o per consolidacio de plagua o per combustio de foc, o per semblantz, adonc cove que secces aquela consolidacio entro que les ditz retorno a la sua forma natural.	But consolidation which happens to the fingers among their joints, either by habit of the person who was born like that, or by consolidation of a plague, or by burning with fire, or by similar means, then you must dry up that consolidation so that the fingers return to their natural shape.
E aprop pausa entre lor draps de li enfuzes en oli rozat per que no sian consolidatz leugierament, e separa entre aquels, o pausa entre aquels una lamina de plom subtil entro que sia consolidat segon que cove.	And then place between them pieces of linen soaked in rose oil so that they are not consolidated quickly, and separate those pieces, or place between them a thin sheet of lead so that it is consolidated according to how you wish.
E semblantment si accideys consolidacio en alcus ditz am la palma, lahoras tu secca aquela consolidacio segon que es preparada e conveneys a la figura del membre.	And likewise if consolidation happens in some fingers with the palm, then you must dry up that consolidation according to how it is prepared and convenient for the figure of the member.
De inscizio de vices, so son varicas.	Of incisions of veins, thus are varicose.
Vices so son varicas, e so venas envolutas grossas plenas de superfluitatz melencolicas las quals veno en motz dels membres del cors, e le major adveniment de lor en las cambas, e majorment en las cambas dels itinerantz e dels laborantz e dels portantz.	Varicose veins and grossly swollen full of melancholy superfluities which come in parts of the body, and their greatest occurrence is in the legs, and most commonly in the legs of travellers and labourers and carriers.
Adonc cove que tu administres purguacio del cors de colera negra alcunas veguadas am expulcio fort, e aprop sangna le pacient de la vena basilica.	Then you must administer purgation of the body from black bile several times with strong expulsion, and then bleed the patient from the basilic vein.
Mays la curacio de lor am ferr es segon dos manieyras: la una es que sia inscizas e sia atirat aquel sanc negre, e l’autra manieyra es que sia elevada la vena e sia extrayta tota.	But their treatment with iron is according to two methods: the one is that it is cut and that black blood is drawn, and the other method is that the vein is elevated and all of it is extracted.
La seccio de lu es segon aquesta manieyra: embroca al comensament la camba am aygua cauda mot entro que le sanc gros sia resolvut, que es feculent de la camba, e aprop strenh la camba del malaute a la partida pus sobirana de la coyssa entro a la partida dejos del denol am una benda, e aprop secca la vena en un loc, o en dos, o en tres am seccio ampla, e aprop eleva le sanc negra am la tieua ma de la partida dejos de la camba entro en sus, e desus en jus, entro que del sanc sia yssida la quantitat que voles e que vezes habastar, e la qual tollera la vertut del malaute.	The cutting of it is according to this method: at the beginning moisten the leg with warm water so that the gross blood which is feculent from the leg is resolved, and then tightly press the leg of the patient at the part above the highest part of the thigh into the part below the groin with a bandage, and then dry up the vein in one place or two or three with a broad cut, and then elevate the black blood by your hand from the part below the leg upwards into itself, and from there downwards, so that the amount which you wish to and can bear is expelled, and which the strength of the patient permits.
E aprop lia aquela, e comanda a lu que abstengua de las viandas colera negra engendrantz.	And then ligate it, and command him to abstain from foods engendering black bile.
E itera la curacio per fleubotomia quan las venas so umplidas e aquo notz al malaute.	And repeat the treatment by phlebotomy when the veins are full and this is noticed by the patient.
Mays la elevacio de lor es segon aquesta manieyra: tu que razas la camba del malaute, si en lu so motz pels, e aprop met le en banh e embroca la camba de lu am aygua cauda entro que s’enrogesesca e las venas sian exuberadas; o que sia exercitat per exercici fort, si banh no es a tu present, entro que·l membre sia scalfat.	But the elevation of them is according to this method: you raise the leg of the patient if there are pains in it, and then place him in a bath and moisten his leg with warm water so that it swells up and the veins are expanded; or let him be exercised by vigorous exercise, if a bath is not available, so that the member is warmed.
E aprop secsa la codena en le dreyt de la vena per seccio en le lonc o en le derier de lu deves le denol, o en le pus bas de lu deves lo talo.	And then dry up the vein on the right side of it by a cut in its length or in its thickness, or at the bottom of it above the ankle.
E aprop uobre la codena am uncis e excorja la vena de tota part entro que appara al sentiment, e es deves la appericio de lu que vezes aquela roga declinant a negror.	And then open up the vein with nails and gouge out the vein from every part so that it appears to him, and you must examine it so that he perceives that darkness is inclining towards blackness.
E donc cum evazeys e de la codena tu vezes aquela blanca quays sia corda.	And therefore when you open up and draw out from the vein, then you will see that it is white like a chord.
E aprop tu met dejos aquela le ray entro que sia elevada e sia gitada de la codena, e sospen aquela am onci orp leon.	And then you must place below it the ray so that it is elevated and let blood out of the vein, and suspend it with a lion's tooth.
E aprop secsa autra seccio aprop aquela seccio per tres ditz, e aprop excorja la codena de la partida desus de la vena entro que apparia.	And then make another cut just above that cut for three fingers, and gouge out the vein from the part above the vein so that it appears.
E aprop eleva aquela e inscideys aquela en deriera seccio deves le talo, e aprop extratz aquela e eleva aquela entro que sia yssida per la seccio segonda, e aprop extratz aquela de la seccio que es sobre aquela.	And then elevate it and cut into it in the back just above the ankle, and then extract that and elevate it so that it is expelled by the second cut, and then extract it from the cut which is above that.
E fay aquo entro que extraguas aquela de la seccio que es pus sobirana o pus auta de totas las seccios, entro que tota es yssida; e lahoras inscideys aquela.	And do this so that you extract it from the cut which is highest or highest of all the cuts, so that all of it is expelled; and then cut into it.
E si no obezeys a tu ad extrayre e elevar, lahoras intromet una agulha am fiel fort doble e ligua aquela e extratz la, o intromet dejos lu le ray e revolveys la tua ma a tota part entro qu’en sia getada.	And if he does not obey you to be extracted and elevated, then insert a strong bent needle into it and tie it up and extract it, or insert below it the ray and revolve your hand all around so that it is expelled.
E guarda te que no sia inscidida; quar si es trencada, es fayt a tu dificil elevar aquela mot e es vengut sobre le malaute per aquela nocument.	And beware of cutting it; for if it is broken, it is made difficult for you to elevate that part and it has come upon the patient through that harm.
E cum aquela tota auras fora-gitada, lahoras pausa sobre le loc de la plagua lana submerssa en vi e oli rozat e oli no-rozat, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And when all of it has been expelled, then place over the part of the plague wool soaked in wine and rose oil and not-rose oil, and dress that so that it may heal.
E si la vit es contrayta havent tortuositat a la qual sia envolucio a las partidas, e no es segon rectitut segon que havem dit, lahoras cove que tu fendas sobre aquela a tota partida de tortuositat de lu e als locs de envolucio de lu, e aprop suspen aquela am uncis entro que eleves aquela tota.	And if the part is contracted having tortuousness to which there is envelopment in its parts, and it is not according to rectitude as we have said, then you must split that at every part of tortuosity of it and at places of envelopment of it, and then suspend that with nails so that you elevate it all.
E guarda te deves la tua seccio que no inscidas la vena e que no plagues aquela, quar dificil sira a tu elevar aquela; e serva la tua prudencia en aquela.	And beware of your cutting that you do not cut the vein and that you do not plague it, for it will be difficult for you to elevate it; and exercise your prudence in it.
Forma del inscident am le qual es seccada vit:	Form of the incision by which it is dried out:
Forma de unci orp:	Form of lion's tooth:
No es a lu accuitat ayssi cum als uncis ni es de aguda extremitat per so que no plague la vena; e es de grossa flexibilitat leon, quar si era subtil, inscidira la vena per la sua subtilitat; habantz es en lu superflua grosseza ayssi cum havem dit.	It is not to be used in this way with nails nor is it of acute extremity so that it does not plague the vein; and it is of gross flexibility, for if it were subtle, it would cut into the vein through its subtlety; there are in it superfluous thicknesses, as we have said.
De extraccio venae cruris.	Of extraction of vein of leg:
Aquesta vena es engendrada en las cambas en terras caudas ayssi cum al- Ategi en terra de Arabics e en las terras de India caudas e aridas de pauca teneritat e en las quals no nays erba ni aybre.	This vein is engendered in the legs in warm lands like Atak in the land of Arabs and in warm and arid lands of little tenderness, and in those where there is no grass or tree.
E fort leu es engendrada en autres locs del cors otra las cambas.	And it is very rarely engendered in other parts of the body besides the legs.
E la gestacio de lu es de putrefaccio que ve dejos la codena ayssi cum venen dedintz le cors serpentz e vermps e scarides e verms engendrantz entre la codena e la carn.	And its gestation is of putrefaction which comes from below the vein like venom inside the body of serpents and worms and scars and worms engendered between the vein and flesh.
E senhal de la suscepcio de l’adveniment de lu es de aquesta vena que accideys en la camba enflammacio vehement; e aprop le loc es vesicat; e aprop comensa la vena yssir del loc de aquela vesicacio quays sembla razit de planta.	And the sign of the occurrence of this disease is that a violent inflammation occurs in the leg, and the site becomes blistered; and then the vein begins to flow from the site of that blister, which looks like it has been burned by a plant.
E adonc cum appar de lu la extremitat, lahoras cove que tu envolvas sobre aquela una pessa de plom del qual sia le pes de una drac. entro a ii drac., e noza aquela e layssa le plom suspendut de la camba.	And then when his feet appear, you should wrap around them a piece of lead weighing two drachms, and tie it and let the lead hang from his leg.
E tantas veguadas cum yeys de lu alcuna causa a las partidas defora, envolveys aquo em plom e noza aquel.	And as many times as you see something coming out of it from outside, wrap that in lead and cut it.
E si mot es prolonguat, lahoras tu inscideys una partida de lu e envolopa le romanent; e no inscidas aquela de razit entro que sia fora yssida, quar si inscideys aquela es contrayta e intra en la carn e fa accidir apostema e poyredura en le loc e ulceracio mala.	And if it is prolonged, then you insert a piece of it and wrap the rest; but do not insert the part that has been cut off, because when it is inserted it contracts and goes into the flesh causing an abscess and pus in the site and a bad ulcer.
Per que cove que sia tractada suaument e sia extrayta petit a petit, entro que sia fora-gitada del derier de lu e no remangua de lu alcuna causa en le cors.	So it should be treated gently and extracted little by little, while being pushed out from the back of it, so that it does not pull anything else into the body.
E de aquesta vena es yssit en alcus homes que es en la sua longitut de v palms e de detz e ja es pervengut a mi que yssic un de xx palms.	And from this vein some people have had it coming out to be the length of 5 or 10 palms, and I myself have seen one that was 20 palms long.
E si es inscidida en la hora de la sua medicacio, lahoras intromet lo ray en le trauc de lu e perfora aquela am lonc trauc am le cors, entro que sia evacuat tot aquo que es en la materia, e administra putrefaccio del loc per alcus dias am medicinas; e aprop cura aquela per la curacio de apostemas.	And if it is cut in the time of its treatment, then you insert a needle into the hole of it and perforate it with a long needle into the body, so that everything that is in the matter is evacuated, and bring about putrefaction of the site for several days with medicines; and then cure it by the cure for abscesses.
E aquesta vena alcunas veguadas ha motz ramps, e majorment quan apar a la junctura del pe o en le pe, e veno a lu motz orrificis, e es yssit de quascu orrifici ram.	And this vein sometimes has bumps, and mostly when it appears at the junction of the leg or in the leg, and there come to it many openings, and it flows from every opening like a ram.
E donc cura aquela ayssi cum havem dit en la divisio e am aquo que es desus dit.	And so you cure that as we have said above, and with what is said above.
De sectione super vermes generatos sub cute et dicitur aegritudo bovina.	Of the cutting of worms generated under the skin and it is called the sickness of cattle.
Aquesta malautia es nompnada en alcuna terra deves nos malautia bovina per so quar motas veguadas endeve als bious e es verm pauc un le qual es nat entre la codena e la carn, e va en tot le cos pujan e devalan, e es mostrat al sentiment deves le sieu anament de membre en membre entro que disromp la codena e yeys fora.	This disease is called in some lands by the name of "bovine disease" because many times it affects oxen and it is a worm that is born between the skin and the flesh, and goes through all the body pushing and falling, and is made manifest to the sense by moving from one member to another until it breaks the skin and comes out.
E la generacio de lu es per putrefaccio de alcunas humors ayssi cum accideysso verms e serpentz e lombrics e ascaridas en le ventre.	And its generation is by putrefaction of some humor so that worms and serpents and roundworms and ascariasis occur in the belly.
E es temut per la malicia de lu, quar quan el va en le cors e es elevat al cap, e es pervengut al huel, lahoras fort leu uebre en lu e intra e destruzeys le huel, e aquo endeve motas veguadas.	And it is feared for its malice, because when it goes into the body and is elevated to the head, and it reaches the heart, then it suddenly pierces in there and destroys the heart, and from there many times.
E donc quan tu voles curar aquel e extraire lu, lahoras no se fa si no deves la sieua ambulacio e apparacio de lu al sentiment, e adonc cove que tu strenhas aquo que es sobre lu e aquo que es dejos lu am liament e constriccio fort, e aprop secca sobre lu e extratz aquel.	And so when you want to cure that and extract it, then do not do it unless by the movement of it and its appearance to the sense, and then you tightly press what is above it and what is below it with strong constriction, and then dry over it and extract it.
E si es preondat en la carn e no le atrobes, lahoras tu pausa cauteri am foc sobre le loc entro que mora, e la major causa que es temuda es corrupcio de lu am la qual corrump le loc ayssi cum havem dit.	And if it is hidden in the flesh and you do not touch it, then you put cautery with fire over the site where it resides, and the greater cause that is feared is corruption of it by which the site is corrupted as we have said.
May si tu vezes aquel esser pervengut al cap prop del huel, lahoras strenh sobre le sobrecil am fort strictura, e aprop secsa sobre lu, e extratz aquel; e cove que·l malaute use de mondificacio del sieu cors am medicinas evacuantz humors putridas malas, e guarda se de viandas generantz putrefaccio.	But if you see it having reached the head close to the heart, then press tightly over the forehead with a strong constriction, and then dry over it, and extract it; and let the patient use purification of his body with medicaments that evacuate bad putrid humors, and guard against foods that generate putrefaction.
De sectione super aegritudinem nafir.	Of the cutting of the sickness of children.
Aquesta malautia es nompnada en nostra terra nafir, e es dolor la qual ve en alcus membres, e aprop es permudada de membre en membre.	This disease is called in our land "nafir", and it is a pain that comes in some members, and then it is moved from member to member.
E yeu ja e vista aquela segon que yeu te recomtare.	And I have seen it according to what you will tell me.
Yeu fu apelat a una femna malauta ad una vila, e descubric le sieu bras e vi una imflacio petita en la vena funis del bras, e pus que fu romas per una hora, vi aquela imflacio anar ayssi cum va verm pujan ad aquest, mays pus leugierament que esser por, ayssi cum si fos argent viu quan corr de loc en loc.	I was called to a sick woman in a village, and I discovered her arm and saw a small inflammation in the vein of the arm, and pus that had come out for an hour, I saw that inflammation going like a worm pushing from one site to another, but more quickly than it could move, like silver when it is drawn from one place to another.
E adonc anet s’en la dolor de aquel loc e fiquet se en le muscle, e aprop aqui stec per una hora.	And then it went into the pain of that site and pierced the muscle, and then it stuck there for a while.
E aprop correc en l’autre cors entro que pervenc al autre bras.	And then it went into the other arm as far as the other leg.
E aprop recomtec a mi que revolvia se per tot le cors sieu segon que yeu vi; e fo trop meravelat de la permutacio de lu e de la velocitat de membre en membre.	And then I saw it revolving throughout his body according to what I saw; and it was too marvelous of the change of it and its speed from member to member.
E yeu ja havia vist denant aquo en les mieus huels segon aquela manieyra, empero yeu he vistz motz les quals atroban dolor esser permutada de membra a membre.	And I had already seen this before in my eyes according to that manner, but I have seen many which carry the pain being moved from member to member.
Mays no vi aquo am les huels ayssi cum en la femna.	But I did not see it with the arms as with the woman.
E yeu no cogiti esser aquo sino que es per aquo quar la femna era de viela, on so de secs cors e de venas descubertas, e en aquesta apparec al sentiment aquela ventositat permutada.	And I did not think it was that unless that the woman was of old age, one of whose body and veins were withered away, and in which appeared to the sense that winding movement.
E es necessari que no apparesca segon aquesta retro-curacio en aquels que son delicioses e am cors humitz de venas ameguadas.	And it is necessary that it does not appear according to this back-cure in those who are delicate and have bodies with hidden veins.
E cum tu voles la curacio de lu, e le pacient sent aquela dolor, lahoras no es a tu aparent al huel ayssi cum havem dit, lahoras tu strenh sobre aquel e dejos lu leugierament e secse sobre aquel entro que sia yssida aquela ventositat coartada, e cauterize le loc.	And when you want to cure it and the patient feels that pain, then do not appear to the heart as we have said, but press tightly over that and move below it slightly and dry over it so that the winding contraction is evacuated, and cauterize the site.
Mays si tu no la vezes am los tieus huels, alhoras tu cura aquel am excussio del cors e am aquo que expelleys ventositatz, e carmina aquelas am pillulas fetidas e am pillulas de serapi e semblantz.	But if you do not see it with your eyes, then cure that by excising the body and by evacuating the windings, and cauterize those with smelly pustules and pustules of serapi and similar ones.
De extraccio de sagetas.	Of extracting arrows.
Sagetas son diversificadas segon las specias, e segon les locs dels cors en les quals cazo, quar la lor diversitat es que de aquellas so que han grans puntas, e petitas, e concavas, e sordas, so es solidas; e de lor so que han tres angles, e de aquelas a las quals so que han lenguas; e de aquelas a las quals so astelas.	Arrows are diversified according to the species, and according to the parts of the body where they are stuck, because their diversity is that some have great points, and small ones, and concave ones, and smooth ones, and solid ones; and some have three angles, and others have tongues, and still others are astral.
E aquela que es segon les membres e las pessas en las quals cazo es segon dos manieyras: quar les membres o so membres principals concaus, ayssi cum le cervel, le cor, e·l fitge, e le pulmo, e les ronhos, e les budels, e la vezica, e a lor semblantz; e donc quan catz en alcu de aquestz membres e aparo a tu senhals de mort, la qual causa yeu recomtare aprop, lahoras cove que tu evites extraccio de aquela sageta en aquels quar la mort siec aquel en le qual en las majors disposicios, e quan a tu no appareysso aquestz mals senhals, e la sageta no es amaguada en la profunditat del membre, lahoras tu extratz aquela e cura la plagua.	And that which is according to the parts and weights in which it is stuck is according to two manners: because the principal parts are concave, like the brain, heart, liver, lung, intestines, bladder, and their likes; and therefore when it sticks into any of these parts and you feel the signs of death, which I will tell you about, then avoid extracting that arrow in those where the greatest disposition is, and if to you do not appear these evil signs, and the arrow is not lodged deep in the part, then extract it and cure the wound.
E dels senhals del servel es quan catz en lu sageta, e trespassa le os, e es yssit del cyphac le qual es sobre le cervel, quar accideys per lu soda vehement, e scotomia, e vertige, e rogor en les huels, e imflamacio e rogor de la lengua, e spasme e permixtio de entendament e vomi de colera, e fort leu es abscindida la paraula e es destruida la votz, e es yssit del loc de la plagua humiditat blanca semblant a pols, e yeys de lu semblant ad aquositat de la carn.	And the signs of the brain are when it sticks into it an arrow and pierces the bone, and there occurs in the head a violent headache, and scotomia, and vertigo, and heat in the eyes, and inflammation and heat in the tongue, and spasms and confusion of mind, and vomiting of bile, and the words are cut off and the voice is destroyed, and pus comes out from the site of the wound moist like milk, and there appear from it marks like drops of blood.
E donc si appareyso a tu aquestz senhals, lahoras tu abste de la curacio e de la extraccio de la sageta, si non es fora.	And so if these signs appear to you, then abstain from the cure and extracting of the arrow unless it is out.
Mays les senhals de la sageta quan catz en le cor, so que ela es prop de la mamila senestra, e sent am aquela quays sia ficada en causa dura, e no es causa vueda; e fort leu le movement de la sageta es semblant a movement del pols, e corr de la plagua sanc negra, e siec aquel fregiditat de las extremitatz, e suzor freja, e sincopi; e donc sapias que la mort descen ses tot dopte.	But the signs of the arrow when it sticks into the heart are that it is near the left milk vein, and it feels as if it were stuck in a hard cause, and it is not a soft cause; and then the movement of the arrow is like the movement of the pulse, and it runs from the wound black blood, and there appears freezing of the extremities, and fainting, and syncopes; and then you will know that death is coming upon him.
E les senhals quan la sageta ha plaglat le pulmo so eyssiment de sanc spumos de la plagua, e les vayssels que so prop del col so apostematz, e es mudada la color del malaute, e expira sperit gran aut, e demanda atraccio de ayre freg.	When the arrow has pierced the lung, foam-like blood flows from the wound and the vessels near the neck are swollen; the patient's color changes, he exhales with great effort, and asks for air to breathe.
E si catz la sageta en le velament le qual es en le pietz, e la dolor lahoras es prop de las costas petitas, e es fayt le ale gran am vehement dolor e am sospir, e no so maugutz totz les membres dels muscles.	And if the arrow pierces the membrane in the foot, and the pain is near the small ribs, a great wound with intense pain and sighing occur, and not all the members of the muscles are affected.
E si catz la sageta en le stomac, lahoras fort leu yeys de la plagua vianda alcuna indigesta.	And if the arrow pierces the stomach, then a little blood flows from the wound with some indigestible food.
E si catz la sageta en le ventre, e es ficada en lu, yeys alcuna fenda de la plagua, o la tela, o budel le qual es disromput, e no es speransa en la curacio de lu extraccio de la sageta.	And if the arrow pierces the belly and is stuck in it, blood flows from a wound in the membrane or intestine which has been ruptured, and there is no hope for a cure unless the arrow is removed.
E si la sageta catz en la vesica, e es yssida defora urina, e procesesca de lu alcuna causa a las partidas defora, e fort leu es dolor sobre le malaute, lahoras sapias que es mortal.	And if the arrow pierces the bladder and urine flows out, and some cause proceeds from it to the genitals, and great pain occurs in the patient, then know that it is fatal.
Mays les autres membres ayssi cum es la cara, le col, e·l golayro, e las spallas e le adjutori, e les spondils del dos, e la furcula, e la coysa, e la camba e a lor semblantz dels membres, son salvatz segon las majors disposicios quan la sageta no atroba vena ni arteria e no es sageta venenosa.	But the other members such as the face, neck, jaw, shoulders, spine, breastbone, groin, thigh and their like in the members are saved according to the greatest dispositions when the arrow does not hit a vein or artery, and it is not a venomous arrow.
E yeu recomtare aquo a tu que he vist del esser de aquestas sagetas, per que signifiques per aquo sobre la curacio tieua.	And I will recount to you what I have seen of the nature of these arrows, so that you may understand through this about your treatment.
La qual causa es, quar en un home cazec sageta en le lacrimal del huel de lu en la razitz del nas, e yeu extrayssi aquela a lu del autra partida, dejos le grays de l’aurelha de lu, e es sanat, e no accidic en le huel de lu nocument.	The cause is that once an arrow pierced the tear duct in the corner of his eye near the nose, and I extracted it from him through the other opening without hurting the eye, and he was healed.
E extrayssi autra sageta a un Juzeu la qual cazec en lu en lo grays del sieu huel, dejos la palpebra pus dejos, e la sageta ja era occultada e no so conseguit de aquela sino una petita extremitat am la qual adhereys al sieu fust, e era gran sageta de las sagetas agudas dels Turcs , am ferr leon en la qual no havia aurelhas.	And I extracted another arrow from a Jew who had it in the corner of his eye below the eyelid; the arrow was already concealed and he had only a small end protruding to which some fur stuck, and it was a large arrow of the acute arrows of the Turks with an iron tip shaped like a lion's claw, and there were no eyelids.
E senat es le Juzieu , e no accidic en le sieu huel mal accident.	And the Jew was saved, and his eye did not suffer any ill effect.
E extrayssi una autra sageta a un home Crestia la qual era cazuta en le golayro, e era sageta arabica, e es aquela a la qual so aurelhas; e adonc yeu inscidegui sobre aquela entre doas guidegi, e ja era submersa en le golayro de lu; e adonc yeu so subtiliat am aquela, e aprop extraxi aquela, e es sanat le Crestia .	And I extracted another arrow from a Christian man which had pierced his jaw and was an Arabic arrow to which eyelids were attached; then I inserted it between two fingers and it was already submerged in his jaw, and I pulled it out gently and the Christian was healed.
E extraxi autra sageta a un home la qual era cazuta en le sieu ventre, e cogitegui que moris per aquela; e donc, pus que foro passatz xxx dias e no es mudat sobre lu alcuna causa de las suas disposicios, inscidegui sobre la sageta e engenagui sobre aquela, e es sanat, e no accidic a lu accident mal.	And I extracted another arrow from a man which had pierced his belly, and I thought he would die from it; but then since thirty days passed without any change in his condition according to his dispositions, I inserted my finger into the wound and probed around, and he was healed, and no ill effect occurred to him.
E vi mays un home en le qual cazec una sageta en le dos de lu, e consolidada es la plagua sobre lu, e pus que foc aprop set ans, yssic la sageta en la razitz de la coyssa.	And I saw a man in whom an arrow had pierced his back and the wound was closed over him; but then after fire burned him for seven years, the arrow emerged from the root of his thigh.
E vi una femna a la qual cazec sageta en le sieu ventre, e la plagua es consolidada dedintz lu, e no es mudada en las suas disposicios en re, e la femna no atrobec nocument en alcunas de las suas opperacios naturals.	And I saw a woman in whom an arrow had pierced her belly and the wound was closed inside her, and she did not change in any of her natural operations for three years, and the woman did not suffer any harm in any of her natural operations.
E vi un autre home al qual cazec sageta en la sua cara e consolidada es la plagua e romas la sageta, no atrobant aqui mota dolor, e motz semblantz ad aquestz.	And I saw another man in whom an arrow had pierced his face and the wound was closed, and the arrow broke but he did not feel pain, and similar things happened to him.
E extrayssi la sageta del home dels princeps del rey que era cazuda en le mieg loc del nas sieu e ja havia declinat a la partida dreyta un petit, e occultada era tota la sageta.	And I extracted an arrow from the prince of the king's son who had it in the bridge of his nose and it had turned slightly to the right; the entire arrow was concealed.
E yeu fu appelat a la curacio de lu aprop le cazement de la sageta entro a tres dias.	And I was called to heal him when the arrow was extracted after three days.
E adonc yeu atrobegui la plagua de la sageta mot streyta; e adonc yeu inquirigui aquela am tenta subtil, e no sentigui aquela; mays el la sentia puncio dejos la aurelha dreyta, e adonc speregui que aquela punccio era per la extremitat de la sageta.	Then I probed the wound of the arrow gently and he did not feel it, but he felt a pricking under his right eyelid, and then I perceived that this pricking was from the tip of the arrow.
E amplastregui le loc am emplaustre en le qual es vertut atrectiva e digestiva, confizant de mi que·l loc se apostemes per que appares a mi le loc de la sageta, per que secces sobre aquela.	And I applied ointment to the wound with an astringent and digestive mixture, believing that the location would become apparent to me where the arrow was, so it would heal over it.
E no accidic en le loc accident significant que la sageta hagues conseguit aquel loc; e yeu continuegui am le emplaustre sobre lu per motz dias e no accidic accident; e consolidada es la plagua entretant, e romas le malaute de la extreccio de lu per spazi de motz dias entro que un jorn sentic la sageta dintz le sieu nas e recontec aquo a mi.	And no significant incident occurred to the location where the arrow had pierced; and I continued applying the ointment for several days, and no incident occurred; but then the wound closed up, and the piercing was healed over the course of several days until one day he felt the arrow within his nose and notified me.
E adonc yeu pausegui sobre la plagua medicina acuta corrosiva per motz dias entro que foc ubert, e am la tenta yeu assagegui aquel, e atrobegui la extremitat de la sageta subtil, la qual adhereys al fust.	Then I applied sharp corrosive medicine to the wound for several days until pus opened up; and through probing gently, I discovered the tip of the arrow which was sticking to the bone.
E aprop yeu ajustegui en la apersio de la plagua per aquela medicina acuta entro que apparec a mi visiblament la extremitat de la sageta, e passec a mi temps am aquo per le spazi de temps entro quatre meses.	Then I applied that sharp medicine to the wound until it appeared to me visibly, and I waited with it for a period of four months.
E aprop pus que la plagua foc amplificada, e foc a mi possible entrometre las forfexs en lu, e remaure aquela, e no obezic ad eyssiment, lahoras yeu no cessegui subtiliar e ingeniar sobre aquela am manieyras de engen, entro que comensegui un dia sobre aquela am manieyras de engens pendre lu am forceps descentment faytas, segon que vindra la forma de aquelas en la fi del capitol, entro que extraxi aquela; e aprop restauregui aquela plagua.	Then when the wound was enlarged and I could insert the forceps into it without resistance, and it did not yield to pulling, then I ceased probing gently and began using methods of traction with instruments made for this purpose until one day while working on the wound with these instruments, I extracted the arrow; and then I restored that wound.
E alcus metges jutgavan que la cartillage del nas no es restaurada, e yeu restauregui aquela e la plagua es consolidada, e sanat es le malaute per sanetat entiera, e no noguec en lu en deguna causa.	And some doctors judged that the cartilage of the nose was not restored, but I restored it and the wound healed over, and the patient was entirely healthy and did not suffer in any way.
E yeu recomti a tu la qualitat de extraccio de alcunas sagetas per que pauses aquo regla e significacio sobre aquo que no he dit, quar las partidas de aquesta art e las difinicios de aquela no so conprehendudas am narracio ni no comprehen aquelas le libre.	And I recommend to you the quality of extracting some arrows so that you understand the rule and significance of what I have not said, for the parts of this article and its definitions are not comprehended by narration nor understood by the mind.
E le artifexs savi compara am pauc sobre mot; e am aquo que es present sobre aquo que es absent; e atroba operacio novela e instrument novel deves le descendement de las causas extranhas del art quan accideysso.	And the wise craftsman compares a little with much; and from that which is present to that which is absent, and finds a new operation and an unknown instrument, he infers the descent of strange causes when it happens.
E donc yeu dic que sagetas no son fora-gitadas dels membres en les quals son ficadas sino segon dos manieyras: o per atraccio del loc en le qual intrec; o per le contrari de la autra partida.	Therefore I say that arrows are not extracted from the parts in which they are stuck, but according to two methods: either by attraction of the location where they pierce, or by repulsion from the other side.
E aquela que es gitada per le loc don es intrada, o es sageta procedent en loc carnos, e es atirada e fora-gitada.	And that which is stuck by the location it enters is an arrow proceeding from a fleshy location and is pulled and extracted.
E si no obezeys a eyssiment de la hora en la qual catz, lahoras cove que tu la laysses per alcus dias entro que poyresca la carn que es al enviro de lu, e sia alleujada l‘atraccio de lu e la sua egressio.	And if it does not yield to being pulled at the hour in which it pierces, then cover it for several days until the flesh around it becomes swollen and the entrance of it is pushed out and its exit.
E semblantment si es ficada en os e no obezeys a tu a eyssiment, lahoras layssa aquela per alcus dias e itera aquela am atraccio e mocio en quascun dia, e ja es fora-gitada.	And similarly if it is stuck in bones and does not yield to you, then leave it for several days and repeat pulling and motion on each day, and it is extracted.
E si no obezeys a tu eyssiment aprop alcus dias, lahoras cove que tu perforas en le circuit de la sageta en aquel os de tota partida am taravel subtil entro que·l loc sia amplificat de la sageta, e aprop extratz aquela.	And if it does not yield to you after several days, then cover that you pierce around the arrow in that bone on all sides with a subtle bore until the location is enlarged by the arrow, and then extract it.
E si la sageta es ficada en le os del cap e ja ha procezit en un dels ventres del cervel, e apparo en le malaute alcus de aquels accidentz les quals yeu e ditz, lahoras abste de la extraccio de la sageta e layssa aquela entro que·l sieu esser sia equat aprop alcus dias; quar si la sageta perve al ciphac, lahoras la mort no es a lu prolonguada.	And if the arrow is stuck in the bone of the head and has already proceeded to one of the ventricles of the brain, and some of those accidents which I have said and described appear in the patient, then abstain from extracting the arrow and leave it until his condition is equal after several days; for if the arrow pierces the skull, then death is not prolonged for him.
E si la sageta no es ficada sino en le cors del os tant solament e no passa entro al ciphac, e roman le malaute per alcus dias, e no accideys a lu denguna causa de aquels accidentz, lahoras tu engenia en la atraccio de la sageta e en la atraccio de lu.	And if the arrow is not stuck but only in the bone of the skull and does not pass into the brain, and the patient remains for several days without any of those accidents occurring to him, then you practice extraction of the arrow and of it.
Mays si es mot ficada e no obezeys a tu a extraccio, lahoras tu aministra taravels en le circuit de la sageta ayssi cum havem recomtat, e aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat.	But if it is very resistant and does not yield to extraction, then you should administer herbs in the area around the arrowhead as we have recommended, and then treat the area between the arrowhead and the skin so that it heals.
Mays si la sageta ja es amaguada en le loc del cors, e es amaguada del sentiment, lahoras tu inquireys aquela am tenta, e si tu sentas aquela, lahoras atira aquela am alcus sturmentz les quals so convenientz a la atraccio de lu.	But if the arrow is deeply lodged in the body and feels sensitive, then you should probe it with a thin instrument suitable for extraction.
E si no podes sobre lu per la constriccio de la plagua e per la longitut del preon, e aqui no es os ni nervi ni vena, lahoras tu fen sobre la plagua entro que sia amplificada e que sia possible extrayre la sageta.	And if you cannot access it due to the tightness of the flesh and the length of the arrowhead, and there are no bones or nerves or veins in the way, then you should cut through the flesh around the arrowhead so that it is loose enough for extraction.
E si so a lu aurelhas am las quals sia tenguda, lahoras tu deliura la carn en la qual es ficada de tota partida am tot le engen que poyras far; e ingenia sobre aquo, si no podes sobre la evasio de la carn en la fractura de las aurelhas e en torssio de aquelas entro que obezesca.	And if there are nails holding it in place, then you should loosen the flesh around them with any instrument you can find; and if you cannot access the nail itself due to the swelling of the flesh or the torque on the nail, then cut through the swollen flesh around the nail so that it can be removed.
E quan tu administras la extraccio de la sageta en quascun loc on sia, lahoras tu usa am torcio de la tua ma am forceps a totas partidas entro que fassa aquela obezir; e subtilia am deriera subtilitat que la sageta no sia trencada e que sia fayta a tu dificil atraccio de lu e de aquela extraccio.	And when you are extracting the arrow from any part of the body, use your hand and forceps with all your strength to pull it out; and if it is difficult to remove due to its position, then cut through the flesh around it with a sharp instrument so that it can be removed easily without breaking.
E si no podes sobre aquela de la tua hora, lahoras tu layssa per alcus dias entro que se poyrescan las partidas que so en le circuit de lu, e aprop itera aquela quar lahoras es alleujada.	And if you cannot reach it at that moment, then leave it for a few days until the swelling around it goes down, and then try again when it is less difficult to reach.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat flux de sanc, lahoras tu administra aquo que havem dit de curacio en le sieu capitol.	But if you are facing a flow of blood, then treat it as we have described in the relevant chapter.
E guarda la tua vertut de inscizio de vena o de nervi, o de corda, e aministra engen en tota manieyra a tu possibla de la evasio de la sageta; e fay aquo am facilitat e tranquillitat e tarditat e fermetat ayssi cum yeu e a tu recomtat.	And be careful not to cut any veins or nerves, or damage any internal organs; use all the methods we have described to you with caution, and do so slowly, calmly, and firmly, as we have instructed.
E donc que fassas contrayre la sageta per so que·l malaute sia segon la figura segon la qual foc deves le cazement de la sageta en lu, quar es mays juvatiu.	And when you are pulling out the arrow, make sure that the patient is in a position that allows for easy removal of the arrow, as this will be more beneficial for them.
Mays si aquo no es a tu possible, lahoras tu aministra aquo que es a tu possible per las figuras.	But if this is not possible for you, then do what you can according to the figures provided.
Mays las sagetas que son fora-gitadas per le contrari del autra partida, o que ja de lu procezeys alcuna partida a las partidas de fora, o fa gilbositat la extramitat de la sageta per sentiment de la partida pus desus de la codena propdana e vezes aquela eminent; adonc tu secsa sobre aquela; e sia la seccio segon la quantitat en la qual prenguan las forceps; e aprop atira aquela, quar ela es fayta leugiera a eyssiment.	But arrows that are shot in the opposite direction, or those that have already exited one side and entered another, or those that cause pain when they are pulled from the upper part of the body, then you should cut off their tip; and you will know where to cut according to how much space there is between the jaws of your forceps; and then pull it out, as this will make extraction easier.
Mays si es retenguda en le os, lahoras tu tortz lama segon contrarietat entro que la sageta enprema en le os, e amplifique a si meteys, e aprop extratz aquela.	But if it is lodged in the bone, then you should twist a wire in the opposite direction to how the arrow is embedded in the bone, and increase the pressure until it becomes loose, and then pull it out.
E sino, layssa aquela per alcus dias, e aprop itera aquela entro qu’en yesca.	And if not, then leave it for a few days, and then try again when it has become looser.
E si le fust de la sageta es en aquela, lahoras tu impelleys aquela am lu.	And if the shaft of the arrow is inside him, then you should push it out.
Mays si le fust es cazut e voles aministrar inpulsio, lahoras tu intromet e aquela, si es sorda, sturment concau per so que intre la concavitat de lu en la coa de la sageta e aprop impelleys aquela am lu.	But if the shaft is broken and you want to administer an injection, then insert it into the hollow shaft of the arrow and push it through so that it exits through the tip.
Mays si la sageta es concava, lahoras tu impelleys aquela am sturment fort intrant en aquela, quar la sageta es alleujada per aquela.	But if the arrow is hollow, then push it out with a strong instrument inserted into it, as the arrow will be pushed out by this action.
E si la sageta es entoxiguada, lahoras cove que tu concaves tota la carn en la qual es le vere, si es a tu possible aquo, e aprop cura aquela am aquo que si conveneys.	And if the arrow is poisoned, then you must cut away all the flesh around it that has been infected by the poison, as far as you can; and then treat it with what is appropriate.
E si la sageta catz en le pietz, o en le ventre, o en la vesica, o en le costat, e es propinqua per so que tu tocas aquela am la tenta, e es a tu possible secsar sobre aquela, lahoras secsa sobre aquela e guarda te de inscizio de vena o de nervi, e extratz aquela, e aprop cos la plagua si indigeys, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	And if the arrow pierces the foot, or stomach, or bladder, or side, and you can touch it with your fingers, then cut through the flesh around it so that you can reach it; be careful not to cut any veins or nerves, and then pull it out, and close the wound if necessary, and treat it until it is healed.
Forma de forceps am las quals so atiradas las sagetas:	The shape of the forceps used for pulling out arrows:
Sian las extremitatz de lor cum a bec de ausel que son faytas cum serra quan prendon sobre la sageta per so que no la layssen.	If you are unable to remove the arrow due to some contrary cause, then leave it for a few days or weeks, and then try again when it has become looser. The ends of the forceps should be shaped like an owl's beak, with teeth that grip the arrow so that it does not slip out.
E de aquelas son faytas motas specias, grans, paucas e migieras, segon la quantitat de la grandeza de la sageta e de la sieua pauqueza, e de la amplitud de la plagua, e de la constriccio de lu.	And they should be made in different sizes, large and small, depending on the size of the arrow, the thickness of the flesh, the width of the wound, and the tightness of the area.
Forma de impellent concau de aquesta extremitat conquava ayssi cum pena de ausel per so que sia alleujat le intrament de la sageta en lu, e impulcio de aquela sorda:	The shape of the hollow end should be like an owl's feather, with a curved tip that pushes against the arrow inside it, and the other end should be straight:
Forma de impellent de sorda extremitat:	The shape of the end for a hollow arrow:
ayssi cum ray per so que sia alleujat le intrament de lu en la sageta concava e es impellida am aquel.	It should be shaped like a ray so that it pushes against the arrow inside the hollow shaft and is pushed out by this action.
De fleubotomia de las venas.	From phlebitis of the veins.
Las venas de fleubotomia de las quals corr costuma de fleubotomar so .xxx., de las quals so en le cap .xvi., so es doas venas pulsatils las quals so aprop las aurelhas, dic alhasisain; doas herbas que so en les dos templars apparentz; e doas venas que so en dos lacrimals de dos huels que son appeladas aspicientz; e la vena preparada en le mieg loc del front, e la vena que es en la extremitat del nas; e doas guidegi que so al col; e doas venas que so en la labia desus; e doas venas que so en la labia dejos; e — aquestas so las venas que so appeladas algelic —; e so doas venas que so dejos la lengua.	The veins of phlebitis from which blood usually flows are . which are in the head . There are two pulsating veins which are near the eyes, called alhasisain; two herbs that appear on both temples; and two veins on the two lacrimal bones of the two sockets which are called aspicientz; and a vein in the middle of the forehead; and a vein on the tip of the nose; and two guids that are on the neck; and two veins on the upper lip; and two veins on the lower lip; and — these are the veins that are called algelic —; and two veins below the tongue.
Mays las venas que so fleubotomadas en les brasses so .v.; quar de aquelas es una cephalica, e es deves le latz silvestre; e le poble appela “la vena del cap”, e sorda, e es vena migiera, e es composta de un ram de la basilica, e de autre ram de la cephalica; e nomna aquela le poble “vena de tot le cors”, e basilica es vena la qual es pausada en le latz domestic, e es nomnada “citillar”, e nompnan aquela les vulguars “vena del ventre”; e funis del bras, e es pausada sobre le focil, e es aquela en la qual es fleubotomat, e es aquela que appar sobre le poutz per apparicio manifesta; e salvatella, e es la vena que es entre lo dit auricular e·l pus petit dit, e so en lu dos ramps.	But the veins that are phlebitic in the arms are 5. But one of those is cephalica, and it is derived from the basilic vein; and the people call it “the vein of the head”, and it is hollow, and is a small vein, and it is composed of one branch of the basilic vein, and another branch of the cephalica; and the people call it “the vein of the whole body”, and basilic is the vein that is paused on the domestic side, and it is called “citellar”, and the vulgarians call it “the vein of the belly”; and funis of the arm, and it is paused above the elbow, and it is the one through which phlebitis appears, and it is the one that appears on the hand by obvious manifestation; and salvatella, and it is the vein between the small finger and the little finger, and there are two branches.
E en le pe e la camba so tres venas; la una de aquelas es que es dejos la curvatura del denolh del latz silvestre; e la segonda es sophena, e·l loc de lu es dejos la camba del latz domestic; e la vena sciatica, e·l loc de lu es dejos la camba del latz silvestre; e en la camba son autras venas semblantz ad aquelas.	And in the foot and leg there are three veins; one of them is below the curve of the jaw on the side of the jaw; and the second is sophena, and its location is below the calf of the domestic side; and the sciatic vein, and its location is below the calf of the side of the jaw; and in the calf there are other similar veins.
Le juvament de las venas que so aprop las aurelhas es a cataris antics e emigranea e sahafati e ulceracios del cap malas antiquas.	The healing of the veins that are near the eyes is from old catarrh and migraine and bad old ulcers of the head.
E la qualitat de sagnar aquelas es segon que yeu recomti a tu: es que sia ras le cap del malaute, e sia freguat le cap del malaute en le occipiti en le loc de amdoas las venas am drap ample am bona fricacio; aprop strenha le malaute le sieu col am una benda entro que apparan las doas e les locs de lor so aprop las aurelhas en dos locs depremegutz del cap; e quereys aquela am le tieu dit, e si tu sentes le pols de aquelas am le dit tieu, aqui senha am tenta.	And the way to make them bleed is according to what you recommend: it is to wash the head of the patient, and to rub the head of the patient in the occipital region where both veins are with a large cloth with good friction; then tighten the patient's neck with a bandage so that the two spots appear on either side of the head; and feel them with your fingers, and if you feel their pulses with your fingers, here is a sign with the touch.
Aprop tu pren la lancea cutellar, e es aquela que es inscident, e aprop tu intromet aquel dejos la vena en la codena entro que·l fleubotomi vengua al os.	Then you take the scalpel that is appropriate, and it is that one which is inserted below the vein in the groin where the phlebotomy comes to the bone.
E aprop eleva la tua ma am la vena e la codena a las partidas desus e inscideys la vena am inscizio inscident.	And then you raise your hand with the vein and the groin towards the parts above, and cut the vein with an appropriate incision.
E sia la longitut de la inscizio la quantitat de dos ditz ajustatz o entorn de aquo; e fay yssir del sanc atant quant voles.	And let the length of the incision be as much as two fingers, more or less, according to this; and let the blood flow out as much as you want.
E aprop strenh am pulvils e layssa aquela entro que sia sanada.	And then strengthen it with powdered styptic and let that one be healed.
E ja e precedit en le comensament del libre la inscizio de aquelas e de lor la cauterizacio.	And I have already described in the beginning of the book the incision of these and their cautery.
Mays de las doas venas arterias que so als templars le juvament de la fleubotomia es a emigranea antiqua e sode malvada e obtalmia assidua e cors de superfluitatz acutas effusas als huels.	But from the two veins of arteries that are in the temples, the youthfulness of phlebotomy is ancient, and it is an old evil and persistent eye disease and a sharp body of acute superfluous fluids flowing into the eyes.
E la qualitat de fleubotomar aquelas es segon que yeu recomti a tu: constrengua le malaute le sieu col mot entro que apparan las doas venas al sentiment per appericio manifesta e sia demonstrat le pols de lor dejos le tieu dit; e lahoras tu senha am tenta.	And the quality of phlebotomies of these is according to what the eye shows you: tighten the patient's neck in such a way that the two veins appear to the sense by manifest appearance, and let there be demonstrated their pulse below your finger; then you touch with your needle.
E aprop tu eleva la codena desobre la vena a las partidas desus am le tieu dit indic, e intromet le fleubotomi inscident dejos, e eleva la vena en sus; e inscidey aquela ayssi cum has fayt en las doas venas autras; e fay correr del sanc segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	And then you raise the groin above the vein towards the parts above with your index finger, and insert phlebotomy below, cutting in, and raise the vein upwards; and cut that one as well as you have done for the other two veins; and let the blood flow out according to the quantity of your need.
E aprop deslia la coartacio del malaute, e pausa le tieu dit sobre la vena per una hora, e aprop pausa sobre aquela coto e pulvils e strenh aquela desus am fort constriccio, e layssa aquela entro que sia sanada.	And then loosen the constriction of the patient, and place your finger on the vein for one hour, and then place on that one a little cut and styptic and strengthen that above with strong constriction, and let that be healed.
E ja es precedida la rememoracio de lor, e de aquelas la inscizio, e la atraccio en le comensament del libre.	And the remembrance of them, and of those the incision, and the attraction are already described in the beginning of the book.
E donc le juvament de fleubotomia de la vena del front es aprop la fleubotomia de la cephalica a las malautias antiquas de la cara e a emigranea e rogor e ulceracios fetidas.	And therefore the youthfulness of phlebotomy of the vein of the forehead is appropriately phlebotomy of the cephalic one for ancient diseases of the face, and for emigration and redness and festering ulcers.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es segon que yeu recomti a tu; so es que·l malaute strenha le sieu col am una benda entro que apparesca la vena; e aprop pren le insturment le qual es nompnat fossori del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And the quality of its phlebotomy is according to what the eye shows you; it is that the patient tightens his neck with a bandage in such a way that the vein appears, and then take the instrument which is named "fossory", of which this is the form:
Pausa la puncta eminent la qual es al cap del fossori sobre aquela vena e percuteys sobre lu am penche o am autre causa en la manieyra de lu, e layssa lo sanc correr segon la quantitat la qual voles; e aprop deslia la perforacio del malaute e strenh aquela entro que sia sanada.	Place the tip which is at the head of the fossory on that vein and punch it with a needle or other cause in its manner, and let the blood flow out according to the quantity you want; then loosen the perforation of the patient and strengthen that so it is healed.
E alcunas veguadas es uberta am fleubotomi lat, empero no cove que·l fleubotomi sia de acuta extremitat ayssi cum les autres fleubotomis, abantz sia de lada extremitat, e fleubotoma aquela segon le tranvers, quar le os es propda e fort leu trencaria en lu le fleubotomi quan es subtil.	And sometimes it is opened with phlebotomy on the side, however, do not believe that phlebotomy should be of acute extremity like other phlebotomies; but let it be of lateral extremity, and cut that according to its cross-section because the bone is near and would break it into it when it is subtile.
Mays le juvament de las duas venas que so als lacrimals de dos huels per scabia del huels per rogor e sebol en les huels, e a las malautias de la cara.	But the youthfulness of the two veins which are in the tear-glands of the two eyes for roughness of the eye, redness and discharge from the eyes, and for diseases of the face.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia es que·l malaute strenha le col sieu am una benda, e aprop fleubotoma aquelas, e tu sias stant sobre le cap de lu.	And the quality of its phlebotomy is that the patient tightens his neck with a bandage; then phlebotomize those, and you stand over him.
E sia fayta la fleubotomia segon le transvers a longitut un pauc am fleubotomi pauc, quar en le loc no es carn; e si le fleubotomi es subtil, fort leu la extremitat de lu es trencada.	And let phlebotomy be done according to its cross-section in length with a little bit of phlebotomy, because there is no flesh at that place; and if the phlebotomy is subtile, its extremity is easily broken.
E aprop fay correr del sanc atant quant es a tu necessari, e pausa sobre aquelas coto, e strenh aquelas per una nueyt, e aprop deslia aquelas.	And then let the blood flow out as much as it is necessary to you, and place on those a little cut, and strengthen them for one night; then loosen them.
Mays le fleubotomi de la vena del nas es conferent a febre acuta e a soda vehement, e a las malautias de la cara e emigranea e rogor que accideys en la cara, e majorment quan es antiqua.	But the phlebotomy of the vein of the nose is appropriate for acute fever and vehement pain, and diseases of the face, emigration, redness that happens in the face, especially when it is old.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute strenha le sieu col e aprop te le sieu nas am la tua ma sinistra, e pren le fleubotomi subtil lonc e fica aquela en le mieg loc del cap del nas segon rectitut, quar la vena no appar al sentiment aqui, e quar le sanc comensa a fluir tantost.	And the quality of its phlebotomy is that the patient tightens his neck and then hold his nose with your left hand, and take the phlebotomy subtile and long, and insert it into the middle place of the head of the nose according to straightness, because the vein does not appear here to the sense, and because the blood begins to flow immediately.
Cove que tu ultimes la tua ma am le fleubotomi petit a petit e fassas correr del sanc segon la tua necessitat; e aprop lia aquela per una nuoyt, quar aquela es restaurada leugierament.	Believe that you finish your hand with the phlebotomy little by little and let the blood flow out according to your need; then tie that for one night, because that is restored quickly.
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de las doas guidegui a constriccio de ale e a comensament de lepra e a motas malautias e inpetige e malas ulceracios corrosivas ayssi cum herpotromeno.	But the youthfulness of phlebotomy of the two ears is for constriction of ale and for beginning of leprosy, and for many diseases, and impetigo, and bad festering corrosive ulcers like with hydropathy.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquelas es que el malaute strenha dejos quascuna en le sieu col am liament; e estia le artifexs sobre le cap del malaute, e le malaute sia sezent sobre una sezela.	And the quality of phlebotomies of these is that the patient tightens each one in his neck with a bandage; then let the artisan stand over him, and the patient sit on a stool.
E aprop fleubotoma la vena al lonc am fleubotomi ample petit a petit; e aprop extratz de sanc segon temprada quantitat o segon aquo que vezes de necessitat que es ad aquo; e aprop fay semblant del autra vena.	And then phlebotomize the vein in length with wide and little phlebotomy; then draw blood according to the amount of temperature or according to what you see is needed, and then do likewise for the other vein.
E aprop deslia le liament e strenh las doas venas am strictura migiera per so que·l malaute no sia prefocat, e laysa entro al mati quar la plagua es sanada.	And then loosen the bandage and strengthen these two veins with mild constriction so that the patient is not suffocated, and let it be until the wound is healed.
E le juvament de la fleubotomia de las venas algerich, comfereys a petitas apostemas e pustulas de la boca e corrupcio de las gengivas e malas ulceracios e fissuras, e a malas ulceracios que so en le nas e en le circuit de lu.	And the youthfulness of phlebotomy of the veins of the ears, confers to small abscesses and pustules of the mouth and corruption of the gums and bad ulcers, and to bad ulcers which are in the nose and its circumference.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquelas es que fases cezer le malaute denant tu, e strenh le col de lu am una benda, e aprop revolveys las labias de lu e reguarda a doas venas de las quals la una es de la dextra de la labia e la segonda de la senestra; e la demonstracio de quascuna es per la negror de quascuna de amdos, e aquo mays es quar en le circuit de aquelas so venas menudas negras; e adonc inscideys cascuna per inscizio inscident.	And the quality of phlebotomies of these is that the patient opens his mouth in front of you, and tighten his neck with a bandage, and then turn back his lips and look at two veins from which one is on the right side of the lip and the second is on the left; and its demonstration is by the darkness of both of them, and it is more so because in the circumference of those are small black veins; then cut each one with an appropriate incision.
Mays si dubitacio es dejos tu, e no sabes qual es de aquelas, lahoras tu enten a inscisio de la major de aquelas, e de la pus manifesta de aquelas.	But if doubt is under you, and you do not know which one it is, then pay attention to the incision of the largest one of them, and to the pus that is manifest from them.
E fay le semblant de las doas venas que so en las labias desus.	And do likewise for the two veins that are in the lips below.
Mays costuma corr mays a inscidir las doas venas que so en la labia dejos.	But custom is more to cut the two veins that are in the lip below.
Mays de doas venas que so dejos la lengua le juvament es aprop la fleubotomia de la cephalica a prefocacios que so en le guolayro, a la malautia de la uvula, e a malautias de la boca.	But for two veins that are under the tongue its youthfulness is appropriately phlebotomy of the cephalic one for constrictions which are in the gullet, for disease of the uvula, and diseases of the mouth.
E la qualitat de fleubotomar aquelas es que segue le malaute entre las tuas mas denant le solel, e eleva la lengua de lu, e reguarda dejos la lengua, de la un latz de lu vena e del autre latz vena, e la color de quascuna es declinant a negror.	And the quality of phlebotomies of these is that you follow the patient between your fingers in front of the sun, and raise his tongue, and look under his tongue, from one side of him there is a vein, and from the other side there is a vein, and the color of each one declines to black.
E adonc fleubotoma quascuna; e guarda te que no ultimes la tua ma en fleubotoman aquelas, quar dejos aquelas so arterias.	And then phlebotomize each one; and pay attention that you do not finish your hand in phlebotomizing them because below those are arteries.
E las tuas venas que so fleubotomadas en le coyde so en las quals corr costuma en totz les homes, e la fleubotomia de lor es fayta segon dos manieyras, o pongen am le fleubotomi mirtilat o olivar a subtilitat declinant; o secsar am fleubotomi cutellar, e apelha si alnessil, e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And your veins which are phlebotomized in the head are those which flow in all men, and phlebotomy of them is done according to two manners, either by putting on the phlebotomy myrtilat or olive at declining subtility; or cut with a pointed scalpel, and it is called if it is not fast, and this is its form:
E aquest alnessil es que conveneys a seccio e de aquels so specias latz e subtils segon la amplitut de las venas e segon la strictura de aquelas.	And this not-fast one is that it convenes to incision and of those are special sides and sub-thin according to the amplitude of the veins and according to the constriction of them.
Forma de fleubotomi mirti:	The method of bloodletting from the vein:
sia le latz de lu ayssi cum vezes, e conveneys a obrir las venas concavas plenas procedentz apparentz grossas, e ad aquelas que conteno sanc gros torbat.	It is better to open those veins that are on the side of his body, and it is fitting to open those concave veins that contain thick blood.
E aquesta es la forma de fleubotomi olivar:	And this is the method of bloodletting from the olive vein:
E aquest fleubotomi es de menor latitut e de pus subtil extremitat, e conveneys a fleubotomia de venas subtils que conteno sanc subtil citri.	And this bloodletting is of lesser width and more subtle extremity, and it is fitting to open the more delicate veins that contain less thick blood.
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de la vena basilica la qual es una de tres venas: quar extratz le sanc de las malautias que so dejos le guolayro e·l col, e de aquo que siec le pietz e·l ventre.	But the advantage of bloodletting from the basilic vein, which is one of three veins: because it draws out the blood of maladies that are beneath the throat and neck, and that affect the feet and belly.
E conveneys al fleubotomador, quan fleubotomia aquela, que guarde be aquela e sia sobre-temor en aquela, quar dejos lu ha arteria, e si erra e ajusta en la punctura del fleubotomi, inscidira aquela arteria e accidira fluxs de sanc, per so que cove que no fleubotomes aquela am fleubotomi pungent, abantz sia sectant cum alnessil.	And it is fitting for the bloodletter, when he performs that bloodletting, to guard well against that artery and be very careful, because beneath it there is an artery, and if he err and pierce into the puncturing of the bloodletting, it will cut into that artery and cause a flow of blood, so that one must not perform that bloodletting with a piercing instrument, but rather with a cutting instrument.
E si no appar la basilica per apparicio manifesta, lahoras cove que tu laysses aquela e que tu mudes a la autre, o que cerques alcun ram sieu; o que fleubotomes en loc de lu finis del bras, quar aquela es manifesta; e secsa aquela am fleubotomi alnessil ayssi cum havem dit.	And if the basilic vein does not appear through a manifest appearance, then one should leave it and move to the other, or seek out its branch; or that one should bloodlet in the end of the arm, for that is manifest. And one should cut that with a cutting instrument as we have said.
Mays si tu voles la fleubotomia de lu meteyssa, lahoras cove denant la strictura del bras que toques le loc entro que conogues le loc dels pols, e aprop senha sobre lu am tencha; e aprop lia le bras e secsa la vena am seccio concava am fleubotomi alnessil ayssi cum havem dit; e guarda te que caja la percussio per alcu spazi del loc de la arteria.	But if you wish to perform the bloodletting from the vein of the forearm, then one should touch the location between the wrist and the location of the pulse, and one should press hard upon it with a ligature; and one should tie off the arm and cut the vein with a concave cut with a piercing instrument as we have said, and be careful that you do not pierce into the artery in any space within the location of the artery.
E quan tu vezes, cum strenhes le liament, imflacio en le loc que has senhat am tencha, lahoras aquela inflacio es inflacio de la arteria, e donc squiva aquela.	And when you see, while tightening the ligature, that there is a swelling in the location which you have pressed with the ligature, then that swelling is of the artery and therefore you should avoid it.
E si vezes le sanc fluir en la fleubotomia ayssi cum aurina de enfant, e·l sanc es subtil rog, lahoras sapias que es del sanc de la arteria; e lahoras tu coyta e pausa le tieu dit sobre aquel per lonc spazi; e aprop osta le tieu dit, e si lo sanc es abscindit, quar motas veguadas es abscindit, lahoras tu strenh le bras e layssa aquel.	And if you see the blood flowing in the bloodletting as though it were an infant's urine, and the blood is a thick red, then know that it is of the artery; and therefore you should stop it and place your finger over it for a long space, and one should press hard with the finger, and if the blood is stopped, even after several pressings, then one should tighten the arm and leave it.
E guardes le malaute de la moccio de lu, e sia sobre-temor de lu e no maugua aquel per alcus dias entro que sia sanat.	And one must guard against the movement of the patient, and be very careful with him and not harm him for several days until he is healed.
Mays si le sanc no es abscindit, e vezes que deves tu no es present medicina ad aquo, lahoras tu inscideys la arteria, si appar a tu; quar la extremitat de lu es contrayta, e es abscindit le sanc; o que prenguas scorsa de fistic, e fen aquela, e pren la una maytat e strenh aquela sobre le loc de la vena am strictura descent am liament e am pulvils entro al autra dia.	But if the blood is not stopped and you see that there is no medicine for it, then one should cut into the artery if it appears to you; because its extremity is contracted and the blood is stopped; or take a piece of linen and bind it around the location of the vein with a descending binding with a ligature between the days.
E lahoras si le sanc es abscindit, bo es; e sino, lahoras cura aquel am aquo del qual es precedit a la rememoracio del loc de las polveras abscindentz flux de sanc.	And if the blood is stopped then it is good, and if not, then one should cure that with what it came from, to the reminder of the location of the powders that stop the flow of blood.
E la abscizio del sanc de lu es dificil en motas disposicios per le loc petit de la plagua e la possibilitat del liament del bras.	And the stopping of the blood is difficult in many dispositions because of the small location of the vein and the possibility of binding of the arm.
Mays de la vena fusca la fleubotomia es juvament que extratz lo sanc de la partida subirana del cap e a la partida dejos del cors; per aquo quar es composta de ram de la basilica e de ram de cephalica, ayssi cum havem dit.	But from the dark vein bloodletting is advantageous in that it draws out the blood from the superior part of the head and the inferior parts of the body; because it is composed of a branch of the basilic vein and a branch of the cephalic vein as we have said.
E cove al fleubotomant aquela que sia sobre-temor en la fleubotomia de lu, quar dejos aquela es un nervi; e adonc si ajusta en la punctura del fleubotomi e atroba le nervi, accidira a lu stupor, e es difficil la sanacio de lu, e fort leu no es sanat de tot, E aquest nervi motas veguadas apar al sentiment; e si es ocultat ad alcus homes e es subtil e no es monstrat, lahoras cove que tu pauses le fleubotomi am le qual tu fleubotomas am seccio de alnessil, e evita le nervi am la tua fortalesa.	And one must be careful in the bloodletting of the arm, for beneath it is a nerve; and therefore if you pierce into the puncturing of the bloodletting and cut the nerve, stupor will occur to him, and it is difficult for him to heal, and sometimes he does not heal at all. And this nerve sometimes appears to certain men and is subtle and not manifest, then one should pause in the bloodletting with the instrument by which one bloodlets with a cut, and avoid the nerve with one's strength.
E si la vena es entre dos nervis, lahoras tu fen la vena en la longitut.	And if the vein is between two nerves, then one should cut the vein in its length.
Le juvament de la fleubotomia de la vena cephalica es que atratz le sanc del cap e comfereys a las malautias dels huels.	The advantage of bloodletting from the cephalic vein is that it draws out the blood from the head and aids in maladies of the eyes.
E cove en aquest propriament, si vols que la fleubotomes pungen am fleubotomi olivar o am fleubotomi mirti; quar es la pus salva de totas las venas, quar no es dejos lu arteria ni nervi.	And one must be careful in this, if you wish to bloodlet with a piercing instrument or with an olive instrument; for it is the safest of all veins because it does not contain any artery or nerve beneath it.
Mays empero conveneys a tu deves la fleubotomia que guardes que am le fleubotomi no punguas le cap del lacert tant solament, e cerques le loc pus leugier, e no notz a lu, si no es atrobat am la percussio primieyra que sia sobre aquela am fleubotomia alcunas veguadas.	But nevertheless one must be careful in the bloodletting to guard that with the piercing instrument one does not pierce the head of the elbow so solitarily, but seeks out the location more distantly and does not note it if it is not struck by the first piercing that one makes over it with the bloodletting.
Mays empero fort leu es apostemat en alcus homes, quan no es fleubotomat en la primieyra percussio, mays no notz en re aquel apostema.	But nevertheless it rarely occurs in some men when it is not bloodlet over the first piercing, but rather one notes that apostema over it.
Mays la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquela e les accidentz de lu so motz, en les quals te cove cogitar en lor rectificacio.	But the quality of the bloodletting of that and its accidents are many, in which one must consider their rectification.
Le primier de lu es del qual cove que sapias que fleubotomia no es aministrada sino en conservacio de sanetat e per speransa de lu e cautela de aveniment de malautias, e que sia fayta fleubotomia en la una de las venas que so en le coyde, so es: cephalica, fusca e basilica; e que sia fayta fleubotomia al comensament de primaveyra, sobre dejun en primaviera e autunppne, e en invern aprop la comestio, quan apparo significacios de replecio.	The first of these is that one must know that bloodletting is not administered save in the conservation of health and for hope of it and precaution against occurrence of maladies, and that bloodletting be made in one of the veins which are in the head: cephalic, dark and basilic; and that bloodletting be made at the commencement of spring, over breakfast in spring and autumn, and in winter near to the eating, when signs of fullness appear.
E sia fayta fleubotomia e le tertz dia o al primier pus que del jorn siran passadas tres horas.	And it be made bloodletting and the third day or the first more that three hours of the day have passed.
Mays fleubotomia que es aministrada, mays quan provoca convenencia e necessitat ad aquo, o de nuoyt o de dia, en tota hora e en tot temps.	But bloodletting which is administered, but when it provokes convenience and necessity for it, or at night or by day, at any hour and at any time.
E cove que efant no sia fleubotomat entro que aja xiiii ans, e femna que sia prenhs no sia fleubotomada sino del quart mes entro al sete, e les viels no sian fleubotomatz les quals ja han passatz lx ans.	And let the infant not be bloodlet until he has reached twelve years, and a woman who is pregnant not be bloodlet except in her fourth month between the seventh month; and the aged should not be bloodlet who have passed sixty years.
E cum alcu vol esser fleubotomat per qualque manieyra sia, cove que mondifique les sieus budels denant la fleubotomia am clisteri leon, si en aquels ha mota fenda retenguda, per so que las venas no atiro las superfluitatz en la fleubotomia dels budels, que son puridas, e que no noguan als membres principals.	And when someone wishes to be bloodlet for any reason, one must cleanse the intestines before bloodletting with a lion clister, if in them there is a deep split, so that the veins do not push out the superfluities in the bloodletting of the intestines which are cleared and that they do not harm the principal members.
E no sian fleubotomatz les pascientz naucea sacertiva e crapula, ni evasent de malautia ni de ebretat entro que aquo sia remaugut aquo de lor, ni malaute de ydropici, e mays que fleubotomia sia temuda aprop colica passio e aprop vomit, e aprop cos de ventre, e aprop multiplicacio de coyt e de trebal e de exercici de dejunis o de vigilias e de tota causa que dissolveys la vertut, o sia corpore28 o animal.	And let the bloodlet not be made for patients who are new sick with a fever and vomiting, nor from any malady or drunkenness unless it has been removed from them, nor from bad breath nor from an ache in which there is a pain of the colon and vomiting, nor from a headache or colic, nor from throwing up, nor from a bellyache, nor from multiplication of cough or of work or of watching over meals or of vigils, or from any cause that dissolves the virtue, nor from a body or animal.
E aprop considera en subtiliacio de humos denant aquo si le sanc es gros, am viandas e beures, e am medicinas si aquo es a lu possible ad aquo.	And consider in the subtlety of humors before that if the blood is thick with food and drink, with medicines if it is possible for it.
E aprop intre en banh si alcuna causa no prohibeys, o sia excersitat per alcun exercici per so que·l sanc sia subtiliat.	And enter into a bath if any cause does not prohibit it, or be exercised by some exercise so that the blood is sottilized.
E pausa la fleubotomia de lu en le pietz del dia, so es enviro la hora de tercia, ayssi cum havem dit.	And pause the bloodletting of him in the afternoon, so it is around the hour of terce, as we have said.
E perforsa te que·l pietz de aquel sia guardat en aquel dia de totz mals accidentz animals, ayssi cum es angustia, ira, temor, e de totz accidentz corporals, ayssi cum es trebal e pena superflua e coyt e semblantz a lor.	And let the foot of him be guarded in that day from all accidents of bodily things, as though it were anguish, anger, fear, and from all accidents of members, as though it were travail and excessive pain and cough and appearance to them.
E a la sua sezelha fassa esser presentz las causas en le us de la qual corr costuma dels homes am aromaticitat e odorament e am bals e semblantz ad aquels segon la cantitat de possibilitat.	And in his service let the causes be present, in the use of which men usually have aromaticity and odorant, and balsams and likenesses according to the quantity of possibility.
E segua le fleubotomador sobre un coyssi que sia pus aut que·l coyssi de aquel que deu esser fleubotomat.	And follow the bloodletting person on a cushion that is placed higher than the cushion of the one who should be bled.
E aprop extragua le sieu bras, e fregue aquel am la sua ma le fleubotomador doas o tres veguadas; e aprop strenha le liament am correia e involva aquel doas veguadas.	Then pull out his arm, and the bloodletting person rubs it with his hand two or three times; then tighten the bandage and wrap the patient two times.
E sia la strictura temprada, quar la strictura quant no es engual, o la strictura es am superfluitat, lahoras prohibeys de fluxs del sanc; o es am mollificacio, e lahoras prohibeys le cors del sanc eyssament.	And the constriction should be moderate, because when the constriction is uneven, or the constriction is due to superfluity, then blood flow is prohibited; or it is due to softening, and then the body's blood-letting is prohibited.
E aprop la strictura, cove que aquel que deu esser fleubotomat fregue las suas mas ensemps entre lor entro que las venas sian imfladas, e sian declaradas al sentiment.	And for the constriction, let the one who is to be bled rub his hands together between which the veins are swollen and are made clear by feeling.
E aprop le fleubotomador unte le sieu fleubotomi am un pauc de oli antic propriament; e aprop pausa le sieu di indic de la ma senestra sobre aquela vena, dejos le loc del qual vol la fleubotomia, per que la vena fuja un pauc, e la percussio sia sessada quar de las venas es la qual atrobas ayssi cum corda fugent deves la fleubotomia, e de aquelas es que es plena de ventositat e quan pauses le fleubotomi sobre aquela es contrayta deves le fleubotomi, e es desceubut le fleubotomador; e le fleubotomi no uobre la vena, e si uobre, aquela es streyta.	And let the bloodletting person anoint his blade with a little ancient oil properly; and then place his finger of the left hand over that vein, below the place from which he wants the phlebotomy, so that the vein escapes a little, and the pulse is quieted because some veins are compressed like cords when they flee from the phlebotomy, and from those is full of windiness, and when you pause the phlebotomy over that one it is contracted due to the phlebotomy, and is revealed the bloodletting person; and the phlebotomy does not open the vein, and if it opens that one is constricted.
E donc, per aquo cove que·l fleubotomador sia fermat e sia sollicit en totas aquestas causas.	And therefore, let the bloodletting person be stopped and be solicitous in all these causes.
E aprop depause le fleubotomi, mays si la vena es huberta en una veguada, lahoras bo es; e sino, tu itera aquo autra vaguada dejos aquel loc un pauc, o sobre lu am festinacio, si le loc no es apostemat.	And then pause the phlebotomy, but if the vein is opened in one go, then good; and if not, you iterate that or another go below that place a little, or on it with compression, if the place is not apoplectic.
Et si le loc es apostemat, o le malaute se spauresca, lahoras tu le layssa per un dia o per dos, e no strenha le liament, quar fort leu atirara apostema caut, ni no intre en banh.	And if the place is apoplectic, or the patient becomes frightened, then you leave it for one or two days, and do not tighten the bandage, because soon the apoplexy will be cauterized, nor enter the bath.
E aprop itera la fleubotomia si la ama.	And then iterate the phlebotomy if it is needed.
E si la apercio es petita e corr sanc subtilment, e temes que non yesca sanc la cantitat que voles, lahoras tu itera le fleubotomi en aquel trauc segon rectitut e ajusta en la appercio un pauc, e fay aquo am festinacio denant que·l loc sia apostemat, quar le loc es apostemat en motz homes deves pauca apercio.	And if the incision is small and the blood flows subtley, and you fear that it will not draw blood in the quantity that you want, then you iterate the phlebotomy in that wound according to rectitude and adjust in the incision a little, and do that with compression before the place is apoplectic, because the place is apoplectic in most men due to small incisions.
Mays si vezes aquel ja apostemat, lahoras no iteres sobre lu, quar no escusa a tu alcuna causa; e pausa sobre aquel alcuna partida de la fenda de oli, quar alleuja le cors del sanc.	But if you have already apoplectic that one, then do not iterate on it, because it does not excuse you for any cause; and pause over that some part of the wound-oil, because it stimulates the body's blood.
E es milhor en aquest loc que oli e que les autres olis.	And it is better in that place than other oils.
E semblantment aministra fenda de oli en tota fleubotomia am la qual fleubotomes las venas deves la prohibicio de cors de sanc, e fan aquo tyriaca alfadoc e sagzenea quan es pausat de la una de aquelas sobre le loc, quar le sanc es subtiliat e es revolvut quan es gros.	And similarly administer the wound-oil in all phlebotomies by which phlebotomize the veins due to the prohibition of the body' blood, and they do that theriac and almandine when it is paused of one of those over the place, because the blood is subtilized and is rolled when it is thick.
E si en le loc de la fleubotomia es engendrat gran apostema, quar motas veguadas accideys, e majorment ad aquel que no es stat sangnat sino aquela veguada, o en la apercio de la vena pauca, e lahoras tu coyta, e pausa sobre le loc sponja infuza en aygua e sal, un pauc scalfada, e strenh aquela per una hora, quar es dissolvut.	And if in the place of phlebotomy a large apoplexy is engendered, because many goings-over happen, and more so to that one which has not been bled but that going-over, or in the incision of the vein little, then you cut it, and pause over the place sponge infused in water and salt, a little scorched, and tighten that for one hour, because it is dissolved.
E cove que fassa aquo aprop le yssiment del sanc de aquela vena am compliment de lu o de autra vena.	And let him do that who makes the letting of the blood from that vein with completion of it or another vein.
E si roman en le loc per alcus dias alcuna negror o viriditat, no notz aquo; e si voles, pausa sobre aquel alcuna causa de aloen e de mirra dissolvut, o alcuna causa de suc de mentastre o de calament o semblant de lu.	And if there remains in the place for several days some blackness or green, do not mark that; and if you want, pause over that some cause of aloe and myrrh dissolved, or some cause of juice of mallow or of galangal or similar to it.
E motas veguadas accideysso apostemas e eminencias deves fleubotomia de la basilica.	And many times happen apoplexies and eminences due to phlebotomy of the basilic.
E donc pausa la tua ma sobre aquela, e si lahoras tu atrobas mollicia deves la tua compressio sobre aquela, lahoras aquela eminencia es malvada e mala; e adonc guarda te que pauses sobre aquela alcuna causa de aquo que havem dit, quar fort leu fluira de la arteria sanc.	And therefore pause your hand over that, and if you then cause softness due to your compression over that, then that eminence is wicked and bad; and so guard yourself from pausing over that any cause of what we have said, because it will soon flow blood from the artery.
E fay emplaustre am aquo en que es stipticitat, per que le loc sia endurat, e aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	And do plaster with that in which is stipitated, so that the place be hardened, and then cure that with the other cure until it is healed.
E cove que extraguas del sanc a tot hom segon la quantitat de la sua vertut e segon la color vencent sobrc le sanc segon que appar.	And let him withdraw blood from all men according to the quantity of his strength and according to the colour prevailing over the blood according as it appears.
Quar si le sanc es negre, lahoras tu le layssa yssir entro que sia rog; e semblantment si tu le vezes gros, lahoras tu le layssa yssir entro que sia subtiliat; e semblantment si es agut, entro que sia ostada la acuitat de lu.	For if the blood is black, then let it be let out until it is red; and similarly if you see it thick, then let it be let out until it is subtilized; and similarly if it is sharp, let it be let out until the acuteness of it is eased.
E cove ad aquel que es ple e fort e ha necessitat de extraccio de sanc en una veguada, que sia amplificada la fleubotomia de la vena e le fleubotomi sia lat.	And let him to whom it is full and strong and has need of withdrawal of blood in one go that the phlebotomy of the vein be amplified and the phlebotomy be long.
E en aquel que es freul, sia fayt le contrari de aquel, e cove que extragua aquel en tropas veguadas, e que le trauc sia streyt.	And in him who is feeble, let the contrary of that be done, and let him withdraw that in several goings-over, and let the incision be tight.
E le milhor que es administrat en fleubotomia de vena es que sia la seccio transversa, no punctura.	And the best that is administered in phlebotomy of vein is that it be the transverse section, not puncture.
E aquesta manieyra de fleubotomia es salva de flux de sanc e de inscizio de nervi, e es pus lausabla e pus salva que fleubotomia segon latitut e longitut.	And this manner of phlebotomy is safe from flow of blood and incision of nerve, and it is more possible and safer than phlebotomy according to length and breadth.
E a la qual es acostumat sobrevenir sincopi deves la fleubotomia, e cove que tu cures aquel denant la fleubotomia am un petit de pa infus en vi de milgranas o de oximel simple scalfat; e extratz a l u del sanc en tres veguadas o quatre.	And to whom is accustomed to occur syncope due to phlebotomy, and let you cure that before the phlebotomy with a little bread infused in wine of grains or of simple unheated oxymel; and withdraw from him blood in three or four goings-over.
E si es enfregiditat de compleccio, lahoras prengua denant la fleubotomia pa infus en eyssarop de mirra o en eyssarop de mel aromatizat am specias ayssi cum am pebre, canela, gingiebre e semblantz, o en eyssarop aromatizat e mot odorant.	And if it is paleness of complexion, then take before the phlebotomy bread infused in myrrh syrup or in aromatic syrup and many spices thus with pepper, cinnamon, ginger and similar, or in aromatic syrup and many odorous things.
E si accideys sincopi deves la fleubotomia, e es causa de lu issiment de mot sanc, lahoras cove que prengua en beure aygua de carn e eyssarop mot odorant subtil; e use de aromaticitat am algualea, e sia linit le sieu pietz am aquela.	And if there occurs syncope due to phlebotomy and it is cause of it withdrawal of much blood, then let him take drinking water of meat and syrup odorous subtle; and use of aromatization with alder-tree, and may his feet be wrapped in that.
E usa de las autras causas que havem ditas en la divisio en le capitol de sincopi per evacuacio.	And use the other causes that we have said in the division in the chapter of syncope for evacuation.
E qui vol eventar le sieu bras e dissolver le sieu sanc segonda veguada, cove a lu del qual la fleubotomia es per mota evacuacio, e la vertut de lu es freol, que evacue le sanc petit a petit, so es segon la quantitat de la vertut en les dias continuables.	And who wants to vent his arms and dissolve his blood second going-over, let him of whom the phlebotomy is for great evacuation, and whose strength is feeble, let him evacuate blood little by little according to the quantity of his strength in the continuing days.
Mays qui vol eventar le sieu bras, e gitar lo sieu sanc segonda vetz, e le sieu cors es fort, lahoras fassa aquo aprop vii horas o ix de la primieyra fleubotomia.	But who wants to vent his arms and let his blood second time, and whose body is strong, then do that properly seven or nine hours or ten from the first phlebotomy.
Mays qui vol atirar le sanc del cors sieu al contrari de la partida a la qual declina, cove que sia eventat en le segon dia o le tertz.	But who wants to withdraw blood from his body contrary to the part to which he declines, let him be vented on the second day or third.
Mays aquel cors en le qual es mot sanc ja scalfat e es acuit e fa accidir febre, cove que sia gitat de lu sanc en una veguada e sia de lu gitada gran cantitat e sia amplificada la apercio entro que accidesca sincopi, pus que tu auras conservadas totas las condicios de fleubotomia; e que pauses la tua ma sobre le pols de lu deves le cors del sanc, per que no endevengua mort en loc de sincopi, quar motas veguadas endeve aquo quan le fleubotomador es ignorant e negligent.	But the body in which there is much blood already scorched and is acute and fever occurs, let him be bled once going-over and may great quantity be taken from him and the incision be amplified where syncope happens, because you have preserved all the conditions of phlebotomy; and let your hand pause over his pulse due to the body's blood, so that it does not fall into death in place of syncope, for many times this happens when the phlebotomist is ignorant and negligent.
E no cove quan tu voles desliar le bras e evacua le sanc segonda veguada, cum ja sia claus le orrifici de la vena e sia fayt difficil issiment del sanc, que tu premas subre aquel am vehemencia e encurvat sia extendut leugierament, quar aquo es trop mal.	When you want to release the arm and evacuate the blood a second time, when the opening of the vein is already closed and the flow of blood has become difficult, you should press firmly on it with your hand, and its extension should be bent slightly, for this is very bad.
Habantz le layssa entro que sia fleubotomat segondament; o remau aquo am la acuitat del fleubotomi que es coagulat del sanc en le orrifici de la vena; o pausa sobre aquel de tyriaca alfarach, o de sagzenea, e comprem aquel am compressio leugiera entro que·l sanc sia fora yssit.	If the bleeding has not stopped completely, and there remains some quickness of the flow due to coagulated blood in the opening of the vein, put on it a little teriaca or sageneum, and press gently over that until the blood has been extracted.
E si la vena es apostemada, lahoras layssa aquela e no la toques entro que·l apostema sia sedat.	And if the vein is inflamed, then leave it untouched until the inflammation has subsided.
E si necessitat te provoca a evacuar le sanc segondament, e no es excusacio, lahoras tu sagna aquel sobre aquel loc o en l’autre bras en autra vena.	And if you are compelled to evacuate the blood a second time, and there is no excuse, then you should open it in that place or on the other arm into another vein.
E la vena apelada “funis del bras” es fleubotomada en loc de la fusca o de la basilica, quan no so atrobadas o so amaguadas, quar es composta de aquelas.	And the vein called "sleeve of the arm" is opened near the crease or the basilic, when they are not found or are hidden, for it consists of these.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute intrometa la sua ma en aygua cauda entro que·l focil se enrogezesca e que la vena apparia manifestament.	And the quality of the phlebotomy for him is that he immerses his hand in warm water until the vein becomes distended and appears visibly.
E aprop sia strengut sobre aquel am liament am strictura migana; e aprop fleubotoma segon le tranvers petit, no latitudinalment ni segon la longitut.	Then it is pressed tightly over that with a ligature, not longitudinally but according to its small cross-section.
E sia la apercio ampla e sia la tua fleubotomia am la qual tu fleubotomas aquela sobre la junctura de la ma un petit.	And the opening should be ample, and your phlebotomy should be at the junction of the hand, a little one.
E si es prohibit le fluxs del sanc, lahoras tu itera la ma en l’aygua cauda e layssa le sanc correr en la aygua entro que consieguas la tua necessitat.	And if the flow of blood is prohibited, then you should immerse his hand in the warm water and let the blood run into the water until you achieve your need.
Mays si tu eras en les dias d’estiu, lahoras tu yest excusat de la iteracio de la ma en l’aygua cauda, e le mes es pausat le cors del sanc en aygua cauda en temps de yvern.	But if you are in the days of summer, then you are excused from immersing his hand in warm water; and the blood is put into warm water in wintertime.
E la fleubotomia de aquesta vena es pus salva que de totas las autras venas, quar dejos lu no ha vena pulsatil, ni nervi.	And the phlebotomy of this vein is safer than all other veins, for beneath it there is no pulsating vein nor nerve.
E la fleubotomia de la savatella de la ma dreyta es conferent a las malautias del fetge.	And the phlebotomy of the crook of the right hand is related to diseases of the liver.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que tu strenguas la ma am liament o am la tua ma, pus que tu l’as mesa en ayga cauda, entro que la vena sia imflada e sia be demostrada al vezement; e aprop fleubotoma aquela transversan; e si inscidas aquela de tot no nozera aquo en re.	And the quality of the phlebotomy for him is that you should press his hand with a ligature or your hand, after immersing it in warm water, until the vein becomes distended and appears visibly; and phlebotomize it transversely; and if you cut into it it will not harm it in any way.
E conserve que no ultimes la tua ma am la fleubotomi, quar dejos lu so les nervis dels ditz denudatz de carn.	And beware of not completing the phlebotomy with your hand, for beneath are the nerves of the teeth, bared of flesh.
E aprop itera la ma en l’aygua cauda e laysse correr le sanc en aquela, quar si tu no iteras aquela en l’aygua cauda, le sanc sira coagulat en lo orrifici de la vena, e es prohibit de flux.	And you should immerse his hand in the warm water and let the blood run into that, for if you do not immerse his hand in the warm water, the blood will coagulate at the opening of the vein, and flow is prohibited.
E cum es extrayt le sanc segon la quantitat de necessitat, lahoras tu pausa sobre la vena oli e sal, per que no sia consolidada coytadament; e semblantment cove que tu fassas en tot ram streyt.	And when the blood has been extracted according to the quantity of need, then you should put oil and salt over the vein so that it is not congealed tightly; and similarly, do this in every branch that is cut.
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de aquela de la ma senestra, es que es conferent a las malautias de la melsa.	But the youthfulness of the phlebotomy of that of the left hand is related to diseases of the brain.
E fay semblantment en la fleubotomia de lu ayssi cum has fayt en l’autra.	And do similarly in the phlebotomy for him as you have done in the other.
E le juvament de la vena sephena de la fleubotomia es a las malautias que so en la partida dejos del cos, ayssi cum so malautias de la mayre, e a retencio de mestruas, et a las malautias dels ronhos e ulceracios de coyssas e de cambas antiquas, e a lor semblantz de las malautias.	And the youthfulness of the vein sephena of the phlebotomy is to diseases that are in the lower part of the body, as well as diseases of the mother, and to retention of menses, and to diseases of the lungs and ulcers of thighs and legs, and their like of diseases.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute entrometa lo sieu pe en aygua cauda e fassa sobre aquel fricacio entro que be apparen las venas; e lia sobre la junctura del pe am correia; e le loc de la vena le talo apparent deves le dit pous, e de aquela so ramificatz en la facia del pe motz ramps.	And the quality of the phlebotomy for him is that he immerses his foot in warm water and makes friction over it until the veins appear; and tie over the crease of the foot with a ribbon; and the location of the vein is indicated by the tip of your finger, and from that it branches into the facia of the foot.
E donc fleubotoma le pus ample ram o dejos la camba deves le talo deves la agreguacio de lu, quar es milhor e pus sal.	And therefore phlebotomize the most ample branch, or beneath the leg just below the ankle, for that is better and more useful.
E si fleubotomas aquela en la facia del pe, lahoras tu te guarda dels nervis que so dejos aquela sobre la facia del pe, e pausa la tua fleubotomia am la qual tu fleubotomas per le travers, quays cum si tu la volias inscidir.	And if you phlebotomize that in the facia of the foot, then beware of the nerves which are beneath it on the facia of the foot; and put your phlebotomy at the place where you would phlebotomize it across, as if you were cutting into it.
E sia le fleubotomi vosil.	And let the phlebotomies be mild.
Mays si es prohibit le issiment del sanc; lahoras tu itera le pe de lu en l’aygua cauda e layssa correr le sanc en aquela entro que sia evacuat.	But if the flow of blood is prohibited, then you should immerse his foot in the warm water and let the blood run into that until it has been evacuated.
E si le fleubotomador erra en la primieyra veguada, lahoras itera am le fleubotomi en sus un pauc, quar le loc es sal; e no temes de lu malician, mays que te guardes dels nervis ayssi cum havem dit.	And if the phlebotomizer has erred in the first time, then repeat with the phlebotomy a little lower, for the location is safe; and do not fear him at all, but beware of the nerves as we have said before.
E semblantment fay de la sophena del autre pe engualment.	And similarly do to the sophena of the other foot likewise.
E de la vena sciatica, le loc ayssi cum havem dit es deves le talo dejos la cavilha de la partida silvestra.	And for the sciatic vein, the location is as we have said before, just below the ankle of the hind part.
E le juvament de la fleubotomia de lu es a dolo de anca quan es per sanc caut.	And the youthfulness of the phlebotomy for him is to pain in the hip when it is from blood-heat.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute intre en banh, e festine e strenha la cueyssa de lu del latz de la ancha entro desus le talo desus quatre ditz an una benda longua subtil, quar no appar sino per aquo.	And the quality of the phlebotomy for him is that he should enter into a bath, and hasten to strike the head of his toe of the broad side underneath four nails in one slender band, for it does not appear except by this.
E donc quan appar, lahoras tu fleubotoma aquela segon cascun engen que es a tu possible e segon le tranvers, e es milhor; o inscidas aquela per inscizio o secces aquela per seccio, quar le loc de lu es sal.	And when it appears, then phlebotomize that according to whatever angle is possible to you and according to the transverse; and it is better; or cut into it with an incision or pierce it by piercing, for the location of him is safe.
E ela es en motz homes mot ameguada; e si atrobas aquela, e no appar al sentiment de tot, lahoras fleubotoma alcun ram de lu, e es aquel que appar en le dos del pe enves le dit auricular e le anular.	And it is in most men hidden; and if you cut into that, and it does not appear at all to your feeling, then phlebotomize some branch of him, and it is that which appears on the top of the foot between the little finger and the ring finger.
E guarda te dels nervis, e fay correr del sanc la quantitat que voles.	And beware of the nerves; and let the blood run in the quantity that you want.
E aprop deslia la strictura e pausa sobre le loc de la fleubotomia coto e strenh le loc, quar leugierament es sanat.	And then loosen the ligature and put a bandage over the location of the phlebotomy tightly, for usually it heals quickly.
De ventozacio e de las qualitatz de uzar de aquelas.	Of wind-making and of the qualities of using those.
Ventozas so de corns, o de eram, o de veyre.	Wounds are of horns, or of nails, or of a stone.
E ventozacio es fayta segon doas manieyras: la una de lor es am scarificacio e extracio de sanc, e l’autra es ventozacio ses scarificacio.	And wound-making is done according to two methods; one of them is with scarification and drawing out blood, and the other is wound-making without scarification.
E aquesta ventozacio que es ses scarificacio es segon doas manieyras, quar o es am foc o ses foc.	And this wound-making that is without scarification is according to two methods, for there is with fire or without fire.
E a las ventozas que so administradas am scarificacio e extraccio de sanc son xiiii locs del cors, dels quals la un en lo qual so pausadas ventozas es alnocrati, e es la deriera partida del cap; e le mieg loc d’el de doas partz del col ensemp; e ventozas del mento dejos la mandibula pus dejos de la boca; e ventozas de doas spatulas; e ventozas de alohoster, e es sobre la fi de la coeta; e ventozas de dos focils, e so de dos brasses; e ventozas de doas cavilhas; e ventozas de doas cuoyssas.	And to the wounds that are administered with scarification and drawing out blood there are xii locations of the body, one of which is where ventozas are paused on the forehead, and it is the hindmost part of the head; and the middle location of them is between two parts of the neck, and the front location of the face below the jawbone just below the mouth; and ventozas of two spatulas; and ventozas of alohoster, and it is over the end of the throat; and ventozas of two fingernails, and they are on two arms; and ventozas of two cavilhas.
E ventozacio no extratz le sanc sino de las venas menudas sparssas en la carn, e per aquo no catz la vertut per aquelas, ayssi cum es cazement per fleubotomia; ni no cove que ventozacio sia fayta am foc o ses foc en alcuna malautia fayta per replecio entro que le cors tot sia evacuat.	And wound-making without drawing out blood is only of the veins slender and scattered in the flesh, and for that there is no virtue by them, as it is cauterization; nor should wound-making be done with fire or without fire in any disease made from repletion until the whole body has been evacuated.
Mays si necessitat provoca a ventozacio per malautia o per continua, aministrem aquela en tota hora al comensament del mes e en la fi de lu, e en le mieg loc de lu e en qualque temps sia.	But if necessity provokes wound-making for disease or for continuous, administer it at the beginning of the month and in the end of him, and in the middle location of him and in whatever time it is.
La qual causa es quar dels homes es en les quals es sanc multiplicat entro que indigeys de extraccio de lu per ventozacio e atroba en le sieu cap graveza e soda; e de aquels es que atroba replecio e rogor en la sua cara e en le sieu cap, e en le sieu col; e de aquels es que atroba pruziment en la sua cara e en le sieu front e tenebrositat e hebetut en les sieus huels; e de aquels que gieta le loc de la sua ventozacio; e de aquels es que le lor ris es multiplicat; e de aquels es que atroba gustament de sanc en la sua boca, o que la lengua es apostemada e escup sanc; e de aquels es que lor dormir es multiplicat, e de aquels que vetz sanc en lo dormir rogor e antics e plaguas e autras causas a lor semblantz.	The cause is that in some men, blood is multiplied within them, indigestion due to wind and heaviness in their head; and from these, fullness and redness in their face and head, and in their neck; and from these, puffiness in their face and forehead, darkness and dullness in their eyes; and from those who emit wind from the place of their windiness; and from those whose laughter is multiplied; and from those who taste blood in their mouth, or when their tongue is swollen and they spit blood; and from those whose sleep is multiplied, and those who see blood in their sleep, redness and boils, and other causes that appear to them.
E donc quan vezes en alcuna causa de aquelas, e propriament si es en le tertz o miga del mes, lahoras comandam ventozacio esser fayta pus que so passadas del dia dos o tres horas.	And therefore, whenever it happens due to one of these causes, and especially if it occurs on the third or fifteenth day of the month, then they command that a bloodletting should be performed after two or three hours have passed during the day.
E juvament de ventozacio de la nuca es que quan aquela confereys a gravitat en le cap e ad aquo que es efondit als huels; mays cove que aquo sia aprop evacuacio de tot le cors.	And it is helpful to let blood from the nape of the neck when there is heaviness in the head and when it sinks into the eyes; but make sure that it is a complete evacuation of the entire body.
E aquesta ventoza es en le loc de fleubotomia de la cephalica.	And this bleeding is in the place of phlebotomy of the cephalic vein.
E no es legut que use de lu aquel que es de frega complecio, o en le qual es catarr, quar dona ad aquel gran nocument.	And it is not recommended to use bloodletting on someone who has a complicated fever or catarrh, as it will cause great harm to them.
E per aquo no cove que uso de aquela les vielhs, e en les caps dels quals so malautias frejas.	And because of this, one should not use bloodletting on the elderly and on those with cool diseases.
Mays ad aquel que sobre aquela es continuant sobre lu es fayta oblivio; e per aquo cove que tu comandes al ventozador que depause la sua ma un petit am la ventosa a las partidas dejos, temen de la generacio de oblivio.	But if someone is experiencing continuous fainting due to it, then you should command the bloodletter to place his hand lightly on the wound with the cup, fearing the occurrence of fainting.
Mays ventozacio de alkehel es en loc de fleubotomia de la vena fusca e de la basilica: e per aquo confereys a asma, e a la constriccio de ale e a la scissura del sturment de ale, e a tos, e a replecio.	But bloodletting from the elbow is in the place of phlebotomy of the basilic vein and the cephalic vein: and because of this, it helps with asthma, and with the constriction of the larynx and the split of the instrument of the larynx, and with coughing, and with fullness.
E cove que sia enpellida la ventoza alkehel un petit, quar si es pausada dejos, engendra debilitat en le cors e en le stomac.	And it should be applied lightly to the elbow, because if it is applied too low, it generates weakness in the body and in the stomach.
E la ventozacio de alhagdahan confereys a las dolors accident en le cap e a obtalmia, e emigranea, e prefocacio, e a dolors en las razitz de las dentz; e es en loc de fleubotomia de la basiliqua.	And bloodletting from the temples helps with accidental pains in the head and with ophthalmia, and emigration, and pre-fainting, and pains in the roots of the teeth; and it is in the place of phlebotomy of the basilic vein.
E cove que comandes al ventozador que no prema la sua ma am scarificacio per que no inscida la arteria e accida fluxs de sanc.	And you should command the bloodletter not to press his hand after scarification so that he does not cut the artery and cause excessive bleeding.
E ventozacio dejos le mento comfereys a alcola en la boca, e a corrupcio de la gingiva, e a semblantz a lor de las malautias que so en la boca, e stan en loc de fleubotomia de aliheric que so en las doas labias.	And bloodletting below the chin helps with a cough in the mouth, and corruption of the gums, and appearances of diseases that are in the mouth, and they stand in the place of phlebotomy of Aliheric which are on both lips.
Mays la ventozacio que es fayta sobre las doas spatulas confereys a caphatan, le qual es fayt per replecio de caliditat.	But bloodletting that is performed above the two spatulas helps with headache, which is caused by fullness of heat.
E la ventosacio de las doas partidas dedintz dels focils confereys juvament de la fleubotomia de tres venas, so es de la basilica, fusca e cephalica, quar aquela atratz le sanc de totas aquelas venas pus manudas que so en la carn, e aquelas venas menudas de las autras venas pus grossas entro que pervengua la atraccio a las tres venas.	And bloodletting from the two sides of the inside of the lips provides relief from phlebotomy of three veins, namely the basilic vein, the cephalic vein, and the small veins in between that bring blood to those three veins.
E comanda al ventozador que trop no procezesca en scarificacio, quar le loc es denudat de carn, e dejos lu so nervis e arterias.	And command the bloodletter not to cut too deeply in scarification, because the place is deprived of flesh, and below it are nerves and arteries.
E es una ventoza am la qual es ventozat sobre alshosses e confereys a las emorroydas del cul e a las ulceracios pus dejos.	And it is a bloodletting performed above the anus, and it helps with hemorrhoids of the buttocks, and with ulcers that are lower down.
E cove que comandes al ventozador que sia gran ventoza, e que sia de eram, quar le loc indigeys de fort seccio; e fort leu so traucadas ventozas subtils e sia scarificat am scarificacio.	And you should command the bloodletter to make a large cupping glass, and that it be of earth, because the place needs strong incision; and strongly draw with subtle cupping glasses, and let it be scarified with scarification.
Mays ventozas de las cambas minueysso per minuicio manifesta, quar atiran le sanc de tot le cors, e comfereysso a dolors antiquas dels ronhos e de la mayre, e de la vesica; e provocan las mestruas, e comfereysso a bothor e ademil; e stan en loc de fleubotomia de doas sophenas, e alahorcoben, e de doas cavilhas.	But cupping glasses of the legs should be made smaller for obvious reasons, because they will draw blood from throughout the body, and help with old pains in the knees and the hip, and the bladder; and they provoke menstruation, and help with constipation and diarrhea; and they stand in place of phlebotomy of two saphenous veins, and the groin vein, and two small veins.
Enpero mot debelitan tot le cors e fan accidir sincopi en motz homes.	However, they weaken the entire body and can cause syncope in many people.
E de las ventozas alahorcoben le juvament es propda al juvament a las ventozas de doas cambas.	And the benefit of cupping glasses on the groin is similar to the benefit of cupping glasses on the two legs.
E la qualitat de la posicio de las ventozas es que pauses la ventoza al comensament vueda e sucguas per succio temprada, e no prolongues la posicio de las ventozas, mays pausa aquelas leugierament, e reman aquelas coytadament, e que las humors venguan al loc per adveniment engual.	And the quality of the position of the cupping glasses is that you should apply the cupping glass at the beginning while the skin is dry and suck with a gentle suction, and not prolong the position of the cupping glasses, but apply them gently, and let the humors come to the surface evenly.
E no cesses iterar aquo e continuar entro que veja le loc ja enrojezir e inflar e que appara la rogor del sanc.	And do not cease to repeat this and continue until he sees the place already turning red and inflated, and appearing with redness of blood.
E lahoras tu scarifiqua e itera la succio pauc a pauc, e aprop considera en la dispozicio dels cors.	Then you should scarify and gently apply suction little by little, and then consider the disposition of the body.
Quar aquel home que es de tendra carn de rars pors, cove que tu le scarifiques una veguada e no pus, per que le loc no sia ulcerat.	Because a person who has tender skin in few places, you should scarify him once and not more, so that the place is not ulcerated.
E comanda al ventozador que amplifique la scarificacio e pronde un pauc, e atempre la succio am facilitat.	And command the bloodletter to deepen the scarification and take a little, and moderate the suction with ease.
E si en le sanc es grossitut, lahoras cove que scarifiques doas veguadas, quar en la primieyra veguada es uberta la via de subtiliacio al sanc e a la aquositat de lu.	And if the blood is thick, then let him scarify two cupping glasses, because in the first cupping glass, he opens the way to the flow of blood and moisture within it.
Mays en la segunda a la perscrutacio aquisida de la extraccio del sanc gros.	But in the second, he pursues the extraction of thick blood.
E si le sanc es mot feculent, lahoras sia fayta scarificacio la tersa veguada per que consiegua le derier.	And if the blood is very foul, then let a third cupping glass be performed so that he achieves the end.
E derierament, quan volem extrayre le sanc pauc a pauc o un petit, abasta a nos una scarificacio.	Finally, when we want to extract the blood little by little or a little at a time, it is enough to have one scarification.
E si volem extraccio de mot sanc, scarificam am mota scarificacio; e si nos conoyssem que·l sanc es gros, lahoras cove que scarifiquem per scarificacio preonda.	And if we want an extraction of much blood, let us scarify with many cupping glasses; and if we know that the blood is thick, then let us scarify with deep scarification.
E le terme de scarificacio en la qual es la profunditat de la codena tant solament.	And the term of scarification in which it is the depth of the incision so little only.
E si aquel del qual la codena es grossa, dura, fusca, e les sieus pors so streytz, cove que les locs de las ventosas sian untatz lenitius, apertius resolutius; si es en temps d’estiu, ayssi cum es oli de aloen o oli de violat, o oli de amellas dossas, o oli de cemensa de coja; e si es en temps ivern, lahoras oli narci, o oli de liri, o oli de camamilla, o de sanc, e ad aquels semblantz.	And if that of which the skin is thick, tough, dark, and its pores are narrow, let the places of the cupping glasses be anointed gently, opened widely, and resolved; if it is in summer time, also with oil of aloe or oil of violets, or oil of bitter almonds, or oil of cedar wood; and if it is in winter time, then oil of nutmeg, or oil of larkspur, or oil of camomile, or blood, and to those similar.
E si la superfluitat es grossa, freja, lahoras le oli sia amaranti, o oli de balsamita, o oli de aloen, o oli aneti, e a lor semblantz.	And if the superfluity is thick, tough, then let the oil be of myrrh, or oil of balsamita, or oil of aloe, or oil of anise, and to those similar.
Mays si le ventozador es de amples pors de tendra carn, lahoras cove que sia prohibit de oli, e cove que ad aquest les locs de ventozas de lor aprop la ventozacio sian lavatz am ayguaros o am aygua freja de solatrum, o am aygua de coja, o am aygua de bordolaguas, e semblantz ad aquelas.	But if the bloodletter has ample pores of tender skin, then let oil be prohibited from him, and let the places of cupping glasses to which the cupping is applied be washed with water or warm water of saltpeter, or water of cedar wood, or water of camomile, or water of borage, and similar.
E aquel del qual le sanc es de mota humiditat, lava las suas ventozas am vi agre, o am aygua de mirt e sumac e semblant ad aquels.	And for the one whose blood is of great humidity, wash their cupping glasses with sharp wine, or water of myrrh and sumach, and similar to those.
E de aquel del qual las superfluitatz son grossas, lava las suas ventozas am vi antic, o am aygua de sansuc, que es majorana, o de decoccio de anet, o de camamilla, e a lor semblantz.	And for the one whose superfluities are thick, wash their cupping glasses with old wine, or water of sage, which is marjoram, or of fennel, or of camomile, and to those similar.
E cove que la ventozacio sia guardada denant de banh; habantz cove que sia aministrada aprop issiment del banh per una hora o per doas, e cove que dorma aprop la ventozacio.	And let the cupping be kept before bathing; having them let it be administered close to taking a bath for one hour or two, and let him sleep after the cupping.
Quid est quo oportet ut regatur ventosandus aus phlebotomatus ante ventosationem.	What is it that must be regulated, the wind or phlebotomy before windsucking?
Cove que consideras al comensament: lahoras si le ventozador o aquel que·s deu fleubotomar es coleric e ventz sobre lu sanc agut e imflamacio, lahoras cove que prengua causas infrigidantz, ayssi cum milgranas acetosas, e endivia an vi agre e laytuguas, e secanabin, e julep, e a lor semblantz.	Now consider at the beginning: if the windsucker or he who is to bleed is choleric and has hot blood and inflammation on him, then take causes of cooling, such as with milky acetic things, and endive in wine, and lettuce, and sesame, and julep, and like things.
E pausa a lor viandas ayssi cum poletz, e carns de auzels serbiges, e viandas conditas am agras, e a lu semblantz.	And serve him foods such as poultry, and meat from birds that are served whole, and seasoned foods with vinegar, and like things.
E de aquel del qual la compleccio es freja, cove que prengua en beure eyssarop almiva, o eyssarop de alsecanabin de semensas, e sumac, e vi mot odorant migier entre viel et noel; e que a lu sia comendat que use de paucitat de beure e de mangar, e pausa las viandas de lu poletz e canabir e pissers e petitz auzels e colombat.	And for one whose complexion is hot, take in drinking honeyed water or water of sesame seeds with hemp seed, and sumach, and wine with a little scent between vinegar and oil; and let him be commended to use restraint in drinking and eating, and serve his food poultry and meat and peppers and small birds and pigeons.
E cove que en lo dia de ventozacio e de fleubotomia le beure sia major que la vianda.	And let him drink more than he eats on the day of windsucking and bleeding.
E cove que sia donat en beure en alcunas horas ad alcus homes tyriaca alpharac, o medicamentz de musc, so es muscada, o alcelita denant la ventozacio o denant fleubotomia o aprop, per so que·ls membres principals sian confortatz e que·l sanc sia subtiliat; e no cove que prenguan aquela scalfatz.	And let him be given to drink at certain hours by some men thyme, or medicine of musk, as it is musked, or alcelite before windsucking or bleeding, so that the principal members are comforted and the blood is subtleized; and do not take what wounds them.
Mays las ventozas que so ses scarificacio sian ventozas que so pausadas sus le fetge, e sobre la melsa e podagra, e sobre le umbelic, en les locs dels jonolhs, e la pixida del ancha, quar aquestz membres no suffertan scarificacio sobre si.	But the wounds that are made without scarification are those placed upon the liver, and on the gallbladder, and on the umbilical region, and at the joints of the bones, and on the navel, because these members do not suffer scarification.
E no es querit per aquelas sino atraccio de sanc de membre, ayssi cum pausam ventosa sobre mamilha en malautia de flux de sanc del sanc de las nars; e usam de aquela per que sia dissolvuda ventositat freja inviscade del membre, ayssi cum pausam sobre le ventre e l’umbelic; quar aquela rarifique le membre e scalfa lu e ramau la dolor quar resolveys ventositat.	And it is not desired for those but attraction of blood from members, as they put a cupping glass on the breast in a sickness of flux of blood of the blood of the nose; and they use that so that subtleized windiness viscous inside the member, as they place it upon the belly and navel; because that rarefies the member and cuts it and removes pain because it resolves windiness.
E ja es pausada sobre les ronhos quan accideys en lor opilacio o poyra, quar per vertut de atraccio fort leu huobre opilacio e erradica le poyra de son loc.	And it is also placed on the testicles when they grow in their swelling or pimple, because by virtue of strong attraction, their hernia is quickly reduced and the pimple is eradicated from its place.
E semblantment fa quan es pausada sobre le fetge e la melsa deves ventositat en aquels enclausa.	And similarly it does when it is placed on the liver and gallbladder, it removes windiness in those who are enclosed.
E aquestas ventozas so administradas vuedas amb succio tant solament; e alcunas veguadas so administradas am foc.	And these wounds are administered dry with only sucking; and some are administered with fire.
E alcunas veguadas so administradas plenas de aygua tebeza en las malautias de la melsa.	And some are administered full of water in illnesses of the gallbladder.
E aquo es per que la ventoza sia umplida e sia pus gran, so es aygua cauda sola o aygua en la qual sian cuytas herbas ad aquo convenientz.	And this is why the cupping glass is filled and that there is great pus, it is water with herbs in which are cut according to what is convenient.
Forma de ventoza aministrada am foc: sia la amplitud del orrifici de dos ditz, segon que nos la havem formada; e la quantitat del preon sia la maytat de un palm; e sia en lo latz de lu, en le loc que es en le circuit, la maytat de lu, le trauc sia petit segon la quantitat que intre en lu una agulha.	Form of a cupping glass administered with fire: let the aperture be the width of two fingers, according to how we have formed it; and let the quantity of the wound be the size of the palm; and let it be on its side, in the place where there is circuit, the size of itself, the cut be small according to the quantity that goes into it a needle.
Sia fayta de eram rog o citri, de grosses marges, leon, enguals e terses per so que no leda le membre deves la sua posicio sobre lu.	Let it be made of copper or citrine, with thick margins, lion, enemas and tertian fever so that it does not harm the member over which it is placed.
E sia al mieg de lu vergua transversa de eram o de ferr, on es pausada candela am lo foc.	And let there be at its center a transverse wedge of copper or iron, where is placed a candle with fire.
E ja sia aquesta ventoza gran major de aquela la qual havem recomtat; e la pauca mendre de aquela segon las malautias e la etat de aquel que usa de aquela.	And let this cupping glass be greater than that which we have recommended; and the little less of it according to illnesses and the state of him who uses it.
E las ventosas dels efantz e extenuatz so autres que las ventozas dels joves e de grosses corssas.	And the cupping glasses for children and weakened ones are smaller than those for the young and large-bodied ones.
E la qualitat de pausar aquesta ventoza am foc sobre le membre es que extenda la meca am foc de lenha decentment denant una pauca candela de cera, e pausa aquela sobre le mieg de la vergua transversa en le mieg loc de la ventoza, per que le foc sia accendut enviro la partida dejos per que no sia comburit le cors del malaute.	And the quality of placing this cupping glass with fire on a member is that it extends the heat with fire from wood decently before a little candle of wax, and place that over the center of the transverse wedge in the middle place of the cupping glass, so that the fire is lit around the bottom part so that the patient's body is not burned.
E aprop sia pausada sobre le membre del malaute, e le dit sia sobre le trauc que havem dit, entro que quan tenem las ventozas e non indigem que osten le dit e que yesca la vapor sobre aquel trauc, lahoras la ventoza sira tantost dissolvuda.	And then it is placed on the member of the patient, and the finger is over the cut we have said, as long as when we hold the cupping glasses and do not feel the finger and that the vapor rises over that cut, then the cupping glass dissolves immediately.
E prop igneys la meca segon la sua manieyra, e itera aquela si indigeyssas de aquela.	And propine the heat according to his manner, and repeat that if he feels need of it.
Mays en ventosa que es aministrada en la malautia de plauressi, am aygua, en la qual no ha vergua transversa ni trauc, e no es aministrada sino que sia umplida de aygua, e es pausada sobre le membre tant solament.	But in a cupping glass that is administered in the illness of pleurisy with water, in which there is no transverse wedge or cut, and it is not administered unless it is filled with water, and it is placed on the member only.
E aquesta es la forma de lu: E aquesta ventoza quant plus es gran, tant es milhor, per que puya recebre gran quantitat de aygua.	And this is its form: And this cupping glass when it is greater, so much the better, because it can receive great quantity of water.
Capitol .xcvii.	Chapter .xcvii.
Sanguissuguas no so administradas en motz membres sino en les membres en les quals non es possible posicio de ventosas, per la parvitat de aquels, ayssi cum le pot e gingiva e semblantz a lor; o en membre denudat de carn, ayssi cum le dit e·l nas e lors semblantz.	Leechwort is not administered in small members but in members in which it is not possible to place cupping glasses, because of the smallness of those, as with the finger and gingiva and like things; or in a member stripped of flesh, as with the toe and nose and like things.
E la qualitat de usar de aquelas que si has trobadas sanguisugas que so en las ayguas dossas de poyredura mundas.	And the quality of using those that if you have found leeches that are in the doubled waters of boiling and cleaning.
E aprop sian layssadas le dia e la nueyt en aygua dossa entro que sian famolentas, e que no romangua alcuna causa en le ventre de aquelas; e aprop sia evacuat le cors en le comensament am fleubotomia e am ventozas; e aprop fregua le membre del malaute entro que s’enrojezesca; e aprop sian pausadas sobre lu.	And then they are left the day and night in water doubled so that they become fat, and that no cause is broken in their bellies from those; and then the body is evacuated at the beginning with bleeding and with cupping glasses; and then the member of the patient is rubbed so that it reddens; and then they are placed on it.
E cum son umplidas e caso.	And when they are full and closed.
E si es possible succio del loc am ventoza, es mays derier en juvament.	And if it is possible to suck the place with a cupping glass, it is better afterwards in youth.
E sino, lahoras lava le loc am vi agre e aprop am mota aygua; e sia freguat e expremut.	And if not, then wash the place with wine and then with warm water; and let it be rubbed and squeezed.
E si es prolonguat le cors del sanc aprop le cazement de las sanguissuguas, e es aquo resudan, lahoras tu enfon un drap de li en aygua freja, e pausa aquel de sobre entro que sia abdida la resudacio.	And if the course of the blood is prolonged by the placement of leeches and that is oozing out, then you pour a cloth of linen in warm water, and place it over so that it covers the oozing; and let this be done repeatedly until it is stopped.
E si le sanc es multiplicat, lahoras polveriza sobre lu vitriol trissat, o guallas e semblantz a lor de las causas stipticas, entro que·l sanc sia abscidit; o sian pausadas sobre le loc las maytatz de favas excocicadas, e sian layssadas entro que las favas aderescan al loc, e es le sanc abscidit.	And if the blood is profuse, then powder is sprinkled over it vitriol bruised, or gallnuts and like things of the causes astringent, so that the blood is stopped; or they are placed on the place the greatest pods of beans roasted, and they are left so that the beans adhere to the place, and the blood is stopped.
E cove, si es necessaria, iteracio de sanguissuguas, quan es possible mudar aquelas.	And if it is necessary, repetition of leeches is possible when it can be moved.
E si las sanguissuguas son prohibidas de suspenssio, lahoras sia freguat le loc am sanc recent o fique una agulha en les locs entro que yesca sanc; e aprop sian pausadas, quar aquelas quan sento alcun sanc tantost adarysso.	And if the leeches are prohibited from suspension, then let the place be rubbed with fresh blood or stick a needle in the places where blood oozes out; and then they are placed, for those when I feel some blood it is stopped immediately.
E quan voles que cajan, polveriza sobre aquelas un pauc de aloen trissat, o sal, o cendre, e cazo tantost.	And when you want them to stop, powder over them a little aloe bruised, or salt, or ashes, and stop immediately.
Ayssi comensa lo prolec de la tersa partida: de restauracio.	Thus begins the treatment of the third part: of restoration.
Aquest capitol es motas veguadas necessari en la art de medicina; e es restauracio de fractura e de dislocacio accident en les osses.	This chapter is many times necessary in the art of medicine; and it is restoration of fracture and of dislocation accidental in the bones.
O, filh, sapiatz que jactan se de aquest capitol les fols metges e les vulguars e aquels que degun temps no reguardero les libres dels Antics ni legiro de aquels una letra.	Or, son, wise ones that know themselves of this chapter the foolish physicians and the vulgar ones and those who some time did not guard the books of the Ancients nor read from them a letter.
E per aquesta causa es fayt que aquesta manieyra dels scients in terra nostra es privat; e yeu no ho e obliat en aquo degun temps be de tot; e no he adhibit aquo que apres, sino per longitut de lectio dels libres dels Antics e studi sobre le entendement de aquels, entro que extrayssi la sciencia de aquels.	And for this cause is made that this manner of the wise ones in our land is private; and I have not obliged it at any time by anyone; and I have not used it except through length of reading of the books of the Ancients and study on the understanding of those, so that I extracted the science from them.
E aprop adirigui a experiment e studi en la longitut de la mieua vida.	And I have directed my attention towards experience and study throughout the length of my life.
E yeu ja he de aquo descrit en aquest capitol tot aquo que conte la mieua sciencia e sobre le qual es passat lo mieu experiment; pus que agui abreujat aquo a vos autres e deliuregui aquo de occupacio de elonguacio; e abreujegui aquo en la fi de abreujacio; et e monstrat aquo en la fi de declaracio; e formegui en aquo motas formas dels sturmentz que so administratz en aquel, cum es fayt per addicio de declaracio, ayssi cum he fayt en dos capitols precedentz.	I have already described in this chapter all that my knowledge and experience tell me about this subject; for I have now shortened it for you and relieved you of the trouble of reading a long passage, and clarified it by summing up its meaning, just as I have done in the two preceding chapters.
Capitol primier.	Chapter One:
Summae et collectiones ex esse fracturae ossium, ex eis quarum praemissio necessaria est, antequam incipiamus rememorationem membrorum fraftorum et diversorum si uniuscuiusque.	Summary and collection of the things that must be known beforehand about fractures of bones, from which precedes the discussion of the healing of broken members, each according to its kind.
Cove donc que diguam en le prohemi de aquest capitol las summas del sermo; e les capitols al entendament dels quals en le comensament es forsat le artifexs e a stacio sobre la veritat de aquels; so es vos e aquels que so promptz que sapian o aprenguan aquesta art nobla autres de vos.	Let us therefore take up in the proemium of this chapter those things pertaining to speech, and those chapters that are necessary for understanding the truth about these matters; you and those who are skilled in this noble art will be able to understand them promptly, as well as others who may be learning it.
E donc dic que quan accideys a alcu fractura o dislocacio o torcio o cazement, lahoras cove que tu te coytes al comensament am fleubotomia o aleyar aquel, o quascu ensemps, si no prohibeys alcuna causa, ayssi cum debelitat de vertut, o es aquel al qual accideys effant, o viel en decrepitat, o es temps de vehement calor, o de vehement freg.	And so I say that when a fracture or dislocation or twisting or displacement occurs, you must first consider using cauterization, or bandaging it, or any other treatment, unless some other condition prohibits it, as well as considering the debility of the patient's strength, or whether the injury is to an infant, or an elderly person, or whether it happens during a period of intense heat or intense cold.
E aprop sia content en vianda sieua de erbas frejas e de carns de auzels e de crabotz; e prohibem carns grossas e umplir si de viandas e de tota vianda que umple las venas de sanc, entro que siras segurat de apostema caut, e si no temes efusio de materia al membre.	Then the patient should eat a diet of fresh herbs and bird flesh and crab meat; and he should abstain from fatty meats and starchy foods, and from all foods that fill the veins with blood, as long as you can be sure that there will be no pus forming in cauterized wounds, and unless you fear the effusion of matter into the affected limb.
E lahoras retorne le malaute al sieu regiment primier am le qual corr costuma de lu.	Then return the patient to his usual diet, from which he deviated because of his illness.
E donc cum le os trencat comensa esser restaurat, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia pascut de viandas nutritivas de nutriment mot e gros e greu en les quals sia viscositat, ayssi cum so viandas faytas de froment cueyt am aygua, e ris, e caps, e pes, e ventres de vacas, e huous, e peys fresc, e vi gros e semblants ad aquels, e am aquest regiment es fayta coagulacio de fractura pus leugierament e miels.	And so when the broken bone begins to heal, then let the patient be fed with nourishing and substantial foods that are moist and heavy, such as those made from wheat flour cooked in water, rice, peas, beef, mutton, chicken, fresh fish, wine, and similar drinks; and by following this regimen, the fracture will heal sooner and better.
E sapias que les osses trinquatz quan so en les homes que so en la primiera vilura e en los decrepitz, no es possible que sian continuatz e sian consolidatz segon lur natura per la exsiccacio dels membres de lor.	And know that the bones of old people and children will never completely heal and be consolidated according to their nature due to the drying out of their limbs.
E son consolidatz e continuatz segon lor natura tot temps per la exsiccacio de aquels membres, e so continuatz e consolidatz aquels que so de lor en la fi de la lenitat, ayssi cum les osses dels petitz effantz.	And they are consolidated and healed according to their nature all the time because of the moistening of those limbs; and they are healed and consolidated in the end because of the softness, just as the bones of small children are.
Mays empero natura ajusta e amnecteys sobre le os trencat de tota partida alcuna causa semblant a glut en le qual es grossitut que adhereys e strenh aquel entro que so ensemps conglutinatz e liatz ensemps, entro que venen la fi de fortitut e de fermesa, ayssi cum foc al comensament, entro que denguna causa no prohibeys aquel de las suas obres.	But Nature adjusts and brings together the broken bone from every side by a kind of glue that adheres and binds it together until it reaches the end of its strength and firmness, just as fire does at first, unless some condition prohibits it from doing so.
E per aquesta causa es necessari que pauses las viandas del malaute, viandas en las quals so gravitat e viscozitat e grosseza, ayssi cum havem dit.	And for this reason, it is necessary to feed the patient foods that are heavy and viscous and thick, as we have said.
Mota diversitat de fractura segon diversitat del membre.	There is a difference in fractures according to the difference of the affected limb.
E sapias que las specias de fractura son diversas segon la diversitat dels membres, quar fractura del os de la camba es diversa de la fractura del os del cap; e la fractura del os del pietz es divers de la fractura del os del dos; e semblantment totz les autres membres son diverses entre lor.	And know that the kinds of fractures are different according to the difference in limbs, for a fracture of the bone in the leg is different from a fracture of the bone in the head; and a fracture of the bone in the foot is different from a fracture of the bone in the hand; and likewise all the other limbs differ among themselves.
E yeu venc am rememoracio de tota specia de fractura, expausada en le sieu capitol distincta del autre.	And I have covered the recollection of every kind of fracture, expounded in its own distinct chapter from the others.
Mota diversitat de fractura en si meteyssa.	There is a difference among fractures according to where they occur.
E son diversificadas las specias de fractura del os en lor meteyssas; quar es fayta fractura arcuada otra aquo que accidan en lu stellas; e alcunas veguadas es fayta fractura segon la longitut del os: e so las fracturas de lu satagia e astelhas e addicios procedentz e no-procedentz, ayssi cum es fayt en la pena quan es preparada a escriure, e es fractura am plagua e disrupcio en le cap, e es fractura fissura petita.	And the kinds of fractures of bones differ according to their locations; for some occur in an arched manner and others in stars; and there are fractures according to the length of the bone, such as those that happen in the fingers, and these are the fractures of the metatarsus and phalanges, whether proceeding or not proceeding from another, just as they are when writing is prepared on a pen, and there are fractures with splitting and disruption in the head, and fissure-like fractures.
E a tota specia es engen o turment propri en restauracio de lu segon que vindra rememoracio de lu distincta en les sieus locs.	And each kind has its own inherent pain or torment during healing according to the location that will be recounted later, distinct from others in their locations.
Mota senhal de fractura del os.	There is a sign of bone fracture.
E per aquo es conoguda fractura del os: es tortuositat de lu, e de aquel eminencia e appericio de lu al sentiment, e so de lu quan compremes aquel am la tua ma.	And by this is bone fracture known; there is crookedness of it, and an appearance and sensation of it to the touch, and also when you press on it with your hand.
E donc quan no es en le loc tortuositat apparent ni so no es feyt deves le tieu tocament quan toques le os am agitacio e le malaute no atroba gran dolor, lahoras no es aqui fractura.	And therefore when there is no crookedness in the location nor an appearance or sensation when you touch it with your hand and the patient does not feel great pain when you press on it, then there is no fracture.
Habantz es possible que sia tortuositat o petita fissura, adon no cove que tu mauguas aquel am la tua ma e am compressio de tot; habantz pausa sobre lu de las medicinas de las quals ve rememoracio aprop aquel moment le qual conveneys al loc; e aprop sia streyt per strictura subtil.	But it is possible that there is crookedness or a small fissure, and yet you do not feel pain when you touch it with your hand nor when you press on it; then pause over it the medicines about which I will make mention later at this moment, and appropriate for that location; and let there be tightness by subtle compression.
E sapias que·l loc quan es arcuat e no es scindit en dos o otra aquo que no accidan en lu satagie, cum es remauguda tota partida de la sua compar, lahoras cove que comenses de la tua hora a rectificacio de lu habantz que a lu accida apostema caut.	And know that the location when it is arched and not split into two or otherwise that has occurred in the metatarsus, as a whole part of its bone is torn off, then you must begin to straighten it by cauterizing the wound; then let there be strictness by subtle compression.
E si a lu accida apostema caut, lahoras layssa aquel per alcus dias entro que cesse le apostema; e aprop engualha aquel segon quascuna manieyra que podes de levitat e de engen.	And if it has cauterized the wound, then leave off that for several days until the cautery stops; and appropriate according to whatever manner you can lift it up and move it around.
E sapias que restauracio de lu e agulacio de lu es pus leugiera que del os en le qual accideysso sathagie.	And know that the healing of it and its setting is more gradual than in the bone where the metatarsus occurred.
E aprop strenh aquel segon que vindra la rememoracio de lu.	And let there be tightness according to what will be recounted later.
Mays si en le os so satagias, lahoras es necessaria extencio de aquest membre trencat de doas partz, si es la ma o le pe; o am la tua ma si le membre es petit; o am doas cordas o am una corda e la ma.	But if in the bone of the metatarsus, then extension of this broken limb from two parts is necessary, whether it is the hand or the foot; or with your hand if the limb is small; or with two strings or one string and the hand.
E sia la tua posicio am la qual pauses le membre loc engual segon la sua figura natural, mentre que las partidas so extandudas del membre trenquat, lahoras te perforsa que fassas retornar aquelas addicios am engen e segon quascuna manieyra que poyras en lor locs.	And let your position be such that you hold the limb in its natural posture while the parts are extended from the broken limb, then press that you may force them to return to their original state and according to whatever manner you can in their locations.
E guarda te segon la tua forssa que no accida sobre le malaute per la tua operacio delor ni lesio; e perforsa te segon le tieu poder que tu appliques la un os am l’autre son companho segon lors milhors formas.	And beware according to your strength that you do not apply too much force over the patient through your operation of them nor harm him; and press according to your power that you apply one bone against another according to their various forms.
E cove que en aquela hora aprofitablament tu toques am la tua ma aquel, e si vezes aqui alcuna causa diversa, rectifiqua aquel e enguala aquel per la quantitat de la tua vertut.	And let you touch it with your hand in that hour profitably and if you see any diverse cause, straighten it and equalize it according to the amount of your strength.
E exquiva vehement extenssio e compressio, ayssi cum fan mots fols metges que motas veguadas fan accidir apostema caut per la sua operacio, o fan accidir contraccio en le membre ayssi cum havem vist aquo per la operacio de lor motas veguadas.	And avoid violent extension and compression, just as some foolish doctors cause cauterization of the wound through their operation or cause contraction in the limb just as we have seen this happen through their operation many times.
E aprop annecteys, aprop equacio e decent operacio e strictura de aquel membre, e repaus e tranquilitat; amoneste le malaute sobre aquo e fay le squivar que no maugua aquel en la hora de las suas vigilias e del sieu dormir, e ves la sua revolucio e agitacio, e deves la sua egestio, e deves totz les sieus movementz am tota la sua vertut; e aguarda se que la posicio del membre sia posicio am la qual sia asegurada la dolor, la qual causa es quar quan sent en la disposicio de la posicio del membre delor o lesio; lahoras cove que permutes aquel ad autra disposicio de aquela am la qual non senta dolor; e guarda am aquo que la posicio de lu aquela sia dreyta e engual, per so que al membre non accida tortuositat quan es restaurat.	And appropriate extension and equalization of that limb, and decent operation and compression of it, and rest and tranquility; instruct the patient about this and make him avoid striking against it in the hour of his wakefulness and sleep, and look to his revolution and movement, and let him avoid all his movements with all his strength; and beware that the position of the limb be such that there is pain, for that is the cause when one feels discomfort in the position of the limb or injury; then change it to another position without pain; and take care that its posture be straight and equalized, so that the limb does not become crooked when it is healed.
E la qualitat de la strictura del membre tranquat es aquela que yeu recomti; per que sapias que·ls membres trencatz so diversificatz en lor parvitat e en lor grandeza e en la forma de aquels.	And the quality of the constriction of the limb is that which I have described, so that you may know that broken limbs are distinguished by their smallness and their bigness and the shape of them.
E de aquels que son petits ayssi cum le bras e·l dit e·l focil e semblantz ad aquels, lahoras cove que la envolucio sia de drap mol subtil.	And those that are small like the arm and the elbow and the wrist, let the wrapping be of a very thin cloth.
Mays aquels que so grosses ayssi cum la cuoyssa o la camba, cove que en aquels sia envolucio lada e dura, quar la liadura lada connecteys le membre gran e strenh aquel de tota part am strictura engual, enayssi que en lu no intre macula.	But those that are large like the thigh or the leg, let the wrapping be of hard, leaden cloth, for the tight binding of the heavy cloth connects and strengthens the large limb all around, so that no mark will enter it.
E aprop comensa, aprop la tua evacuacio de equacio, pausar liament convenient ad aquo, sobre le loc de aquela fractura am tres envolucios o quatre segon que·l membre mereys; e strenh la tua ma un petit am le liament.	Then, after your own evacuation, put a convenient bandage on it over the site of that fracture with three or four wrappings according to how the limb deserves it; and tighten your hand a little with the bandage.
E aprop ve am aquel a la partida pus sobirana del loc de la fractura, e strenh mens que no foc la tua strictura am la qual has strengut le loc de la fractura.	Then go to that at the highest point of the site of the fracture and tighten so that your tightening with which you have tightened the site of the fracture is not slackened.
E aprop elongua te am envolucio del loc de la fractura un pauc, e mollifiqua la strictura petit a petit, entro que prenguas del loc sa una gran partida.	Then loosen it a little with the wrapping at the site of the fracture and loosen the tightness little by little as you take a large part from the site.
E aprop pren una autra benda e envolveys aquela autra veguada sobre le loc trenquat am envolucio, e aprop ve am las envolucios a la partida pus dejos de la fractura; e sia la tua operacio en la strictura de la envolucio e en mollificacio de aquela segon que havem dit en la envolucio primieyra desus.	Then take another bandage and wrap the other side of the broken site with it, then go to the bottom part of the bandages at the fracture; and your operation should be in tightening the bandage and loosening it little by little as we said above about the first bandage.
E aprop pausa entre las volucios de stopa leon o drap am le qual sia engualada la tortuositat de la fractura, si en lu es tortuositat; e sino, no pauses en lu alcuna causa.	Then place between the bandages a piece of cloth or a bandage with which the crookedness of the fracture is equalized if there is crookedness; but if not, then do not put anything there for any reason.
E aprop pausa sobre lu autra benda, e aprop enguala sobre aquestas envolucios stelhas decentment faytas tantost, si en le loc no es imflacio o apostema caut, e lahoras pausa sobre lu aquo que sede le apostema aquel e que oste la imflacio; e layssa aquela per alcus jorns; e lahoras tu strenh sobre lu las stelhas.	Then put another bandage over that and tighten it over these decently-wrapped bandages as soon as possible if there is no inflammation or abscess at the site, but if there is, then put on what stops the abscess and eliminates the inflammation; leave it for a few days, and then you can tighten the bandages.
E sian las stelhas de la maytat de canna lada raza, e be formada saviament; o sian de fust de pi; o de ramps de palma ; e sia le ample de quascuna stelha segon aquesta forma e aquesta figura:	And the bandages should be made of thin leaded cloth and skillfully formed, or of wood, or of palm-tree bark; and each bandage's width should be according to that shape and form.
Empero cove que la astelha que es pausada sobre aquela fractura sia pus grossa e pus lada un petit que las autras astelhas, e la longitut de la stela segon qu’es legut al membre en magnitut e parvitat; e aprop strenh sobre las astelhas am autra benda segon la tua primieyra strictura; e aprop lia desus am fiel decentment segon que havem dit de strictura, e es que sia la tua strictura segon le loc de la fractura mes, e quant mes es alonguat de la fractura, es mendre la strictura.	However, the bandage that is put on at the fracture should be thicker and a little harder than the others; and the length of it according to how long the limb is in size and smallness. And tighten above it with another bandage as we said about tightening, and tie above it decently as we said about tying, and let your tightening be according to the site of the fracture more, and as much as the fracture is farther away from the fracture, the less the tightness should be.
E cove que les fils sian migiers en grossesa e subtilitat, e sian de li mol; e si les fils so grosses, ayssi cum yeu he vist per la operacio de alcus fols pausantz les lors fils de cordas de li tort, e es error gran, quan catz la strictura fora equalitat.	And the threads should be medium-sized in thickness and subtlety, and they should be made of strong linen; and if the threads are thick, then as I have seen some foolish people doing their operations by tying their threads with rope, there is a great error when the tightness is not equal.
E eyssament fils subtils no so convenientz, quar tu no consaguiras per strictura am aquels aquo que voles, e no cove que entre astela e astela haja mens de un dit.	And thin threads are not convenient, for you will not achieve through tightness with them what you want, and there should not be more than a finger's width between bandages.
E si le malaute es ledit per las extremitatz de las stelas aprop la strictura en les locs sas, lahoras pausa dejos aquelas de stopa leon o lana carmenada entro que aquo no li fassa lesio.	And if the patient is hurt by the ends of the bandages when they are tight on the limbs, then put underneath them lead or wool that has been smeared with something to prevent injury.
Alcunas veguadas fractura es am plagua, e accideys disrupcio en la codena, e yeu vindre am rememoracio en aquela en le capitol segon singularitat.	Sometimes a fracture is accompanied by a plague and disruption in the tendon, and I have come to remember that one in the chapter according to its uniqueness.
E sapias que ges tot membre trencat no es streyt am stelhas al primier dia; la qual causa es quar le membre, quan es gran, no cove que pauses sobre lu stelhas sino aprop v dias o vii o mays, segon la tua seguratat de adveniment de apostema caut.	And know that not every broken limb is tight with bandages on the first day; the cause of this is because when it is large, you should not put bandages over it except after a few days or seven or more, according to your confidence about the occurrence of an abscess.
E aquesta es la manieyra dels emplaustres am les quals les Antics restauravan, les quals so pausatz sobre fractura e dislocacio e torcio.	And this is the manner of the plasters with which the Ancients restored, which were put on fractures and dislocations and twists.
Manieyra de emplaustra comu abruejat de restaurament de fractura, convenient a motas compleccios e majorment a las femnas e als efantz, quar es de aquo sobre le qual no ventz calor ni freg: e es que prenguas de polvera de moli, e es la medula de la farina que pen deves le movement de la mola en las paretz del moli.	Manner of plaster as a means of restoring fractures, suitable for many complications and especially for women and children, because it is that which does not come heat or rub: and you take from the powder of milling, and it is the meal's pith that comes out with the motion of the mill on the walls of the mill.
E comfeys aquel ayssi cum es, sino que cribelles aquel am album de huou, e pausa la comfeccio de lu no-spessa ni subtil; e aprop usa de aquela.	And prepare that as it is, unless you sieve it with egg white, and do not make the preparation thick or subtle; then use that.
Autra manieyra de emplaustre restaurant fractura e dislocacio e torcio: recipe de assafetida, de lapdanum, de acacia, de enula, e migrach, que es razit de milgraner salvage, de totz ana drac. x; de mirra e aloen ana drac. v; alochil ana drac. xx; totz sian trissatz e cribellatz e sian mesclatz am aygua alichil o am album de huou si la compleccio del malaute es scalfada; e aprop usa de aquest emplaustre, quar es de bona composicio e restaura les osses trencatz leugierament, e confereys a motz homes.	Another method of restorative ointment for fracture, dislocation and twisting: take assafetida, myrrh, acacia, enula, and mastic which is made from wild mastic trees, of all of these ingredients take one drachm each; of myrrh and aloe, take five drachms each; of garlic juice, take twenty drachms; mix them all together with honey water or with egg white if the patient's complexion is scorched; and use this ointment, for it is of good composition and quickly restores broken bones, and benefits many people.
Autra manieyra de emplaustre le qual comfereys a fractura e torcio: recipe migrach e met de altea blanca ana drac. x; de mirra e de aloen ana drac v; de acacia drac. vi; de bol armenic drac. .xx.	Another method of ointment which benefits fractures and twisting: take mastic and white madder, both one drachm each; myrrh and aloe, five drachms each; acacia, six drachms; balsam of Armenia, twenty drachms.
Totz sian trissatz en mortier am mota contricio, e sian cribellatz, e sian comfitz am aygua o am album de huou e sia administrat.	All of these are to be pounded in a mortar with a pestle, and sifted, and mixed with water or egg white, and administered.
Manieyra de emplaustre a juncturas e osses separatz de lors locs, e seda dolor accident en aquels e a fissuras e fractaduras: sia presa lana sutza e sia submersa en vi agre e oli cuyt e sia pausat sobre le loc.	Manner of plaster for joints and bones separated from their sockets, and sore pain accidentally in those, and also for splits and fractures: take wool that is plucked and let it be soaked in wine that has been cut with oil, and let it be put on the site.
Mays en aquest emplastre no es vertut de restauracio, de apostema caut e expelleys dolors propriament.	But in this plaster there is not virtue of restoration, nor of an abscess, but it eliminates pains properly.
Autra manieyra de emplastre que restaura os trancat: pren fuelas de figuier sort e fuelas de papaver salvatge; contereys tot e fay emplastre de lor.	Another manner of plaster which restores a broken bone: take figs' leaves and wild poppy leaves; pound them all together and make a plaster from them.
Manieyra de emplastre abreujat aministrat deves la restauracio de fractura de os e quan tu voles resolucio del romanent de apostema: recipe razitz de altea, de camamilla e flors de violes, de farina de ers, de totz ana partida .i.; sian totz trissatz e sian cofitz am vi, si·l membre no es scalfat.	Manner of plaster applied after the restoration of a bone fracture and when you want resolution of the residue of an abscess: take pounded white poplar bark, camomille and violets' flowers, and bran, all pounded .i. parts. All of these are to be pounded and soaked in wine if the limb is not scorched.
Mays si es scalfat, lahoras comfeys aquel am aygua de coliandre humit o am aygua e usa de lu.	But if it is scorched, then prepare that with water of henna or with water and use it.
Autra manieyra de emplastra pus fort en resolucio que aquest primier, quan accideys apostema dur deves la restauracio del membre: recipe de razitz de altea e de semensa de li, e de balaustia, e mellilot, majorana, flors de viol, de camamilla, de totz ana partida i engual; totz sian trissatz e sian cofitz am aygua de sauze o am aygua dousa o am vi, tot aquo segon la qualitat del membre e le repaus de la color de lu.	Another stronger plaster in resolution than that first one, when an abscess occurs after the restoration of a limb: take pounded white poplar bark and linseed, and myrrh, marjoram, violets' flowers, camomille, all pounded i alike; all of these are to be pounded and soaked in water according to the quality of the limb and its rest.
Mays Ypocras no diyssec en le sieu libre que sia pausat sobre le membre trenquat deves la restauracio de lu sino cerot fayt de cera e de oli e no autre causa; e recomtec que sia migier entre grossitut e subtilitat.	But Ipocras does not dry in his own juice when it is put on a broken limb after its restoration unless it is made of wax and oil and nothing else; and let it be thinner between thickness and thinness.
Mays a Gualia es vist que sian pausatz sobre le membre trencat deves la restauracio de lu e las causas en las quals es exsiccacio am petit de caliditat so ayssi cum mirra, enses e semblantz a lor de aquelas causas que havem recomtadas.	But it has been seen that they are put on a broken limb after its restoration and the causes in which there is dryness with little heat are like myrrh, anise and similar to those causes that we have mentioned.
Manieyra de emplastre que comfereys a lesio e dolor: recipe migat, de cezes, de pels de home inscizes o pena de auzel, e de altea, e sal, partidas enguals; sian trissatz e cribellatz e sian cofitz, e sia fayt emplastre.	A method of plaster that confers ease and relief from injury and pain: take a mixture of honey, sesame seeds, human hair or bird feathers, and aloe, and salt, all ground to a powder; strain and sift them, and mold them into a paste, and make a plaster.
Mays la quantitat segon la qual cove que romangua la liadura e aprop sia disliada, es que consideres si no es accidit dolor ni pruziment ni le os es trencat no es maugut de son loc, lahoras tu no deslies de motz jorns.	However, the amount of time it takes for the healing process to complete will vary depending on how severe the injury is; so you must consider whether there is still pain or swelling or if the bone is broken or displaced. If not, then do not remove the plaster for several days.
E si accideys al loc dolor vehement o prusiment o imflacio, lahoras tu te coyte o deslie aquel en la hora, e osta le emplastre de lu.	And if there is intense pain or swelling or inflammation in the area, then you must cut or remove the plaster from it immediately.
E pren drap de li e spongia marina leon humida, e submergeys aquela en aygua tebeza, e am aquela lava le loc entro que cesse aquel pruziment e la dolor sia sedada; e aprop layssa repausar le membre per una hora; e aprop pausa sobre lu lana sutza submersa en vi agre e oli o oli rozat, e lia sobre lu per una nuoyt entro que sias segur de apostema caut, e que repause la imflacio del membre, e sia remauguda la dolor de lu.	And take a piece of linen and marine sponge, wet it in tepid water, and with that wash the area until the swelling and pain are reduced; then let the limb rest for an hour; then apply lanolin saturated with sweet wine or oil, and leave it on overnight so that the wound is protected from infection and the swelling of the limb subsides, and its pain is relieved.
E aprop itera aquela strictura subtil e emplastre petit e no·l strenhas per la tua constriccio primieyra, e subtilia am aquel entro que sia sanat.	And then repeat this gentle compression with a small plaster, but do not tighten it too much with your initial binding; do this gently so that it heals.
E si vezes que le apostema e la rogor e la dolor e la imflacio e tots les accidentz ja so remaugutz de tot, e indigeysses de emplastre e de strictura, lahoras tu itera aquel ayssi cum has fayt al comensant engualment.	And if all the swelling and heat and pain and inflammation and all the other symptoms have subsided completely, and you no longer need plasters or bandages, then repeat what you did at the beginning in the same way.
E si no accideys al membre alcuna causa de aquelas que havem ditas, lahoras no deslies aquel sino aprop tres dias o quatre o v o .vii.; e alcunas veguadas tot aquo es layssat per xx dias segon que a tu appar per la desliadura del membre, ayssi cum havem dit, entro que la fractura adhereys, e se acosta a la coagulacio de la carn sobre aquel.	And if none of the aforementioned causes occur in the limb, then do not remove it but rather leave it on for three or four or five or seven days. And sometimes it is left on for twenty days, depending on how well the limb responds to having the plaster removed, as we have said, so that the fracture can heal and the flesh can adhere to it.
E lahoras ajusta en la strictura mays que en la tua strictura primieyra tota, e ayusta en la engrossacio de la vianda del malaute, segon que es precedida la rememoracio de lu.	And then tighten the bandage more than your initial bandaging, according to how well the patient remembers it, and adjust the padding around the patient,
Mays si tu vezes le loc de la fractura ja desiccar e extenuar mays que no cove, lahoras sapias que·l nutriment es prohibit pervenir ad aquel; e donc embroca aquel am aygua tebeza deves tota veguada que delias aquel; e sia aquo en totz tres dias; e alleuja la strictura un petit, e per aquesta operacio corr al membre le nutriment, e es sanat leugierament.	But if you see that the fracture is dried out and weakened more than it should be, then know that nutrition is prohibited from reaching it; so soak it with tepid water every day for three days; loosen the bandage a little, and through this operation, nourish the limb, and it will heal quickly.
Mays aquo que fan les fols restauradors de la fractura del membre autra veguada quan no es restaurat al comensament, segon que cove, e es restaurat segon tortuositat, es error segon la operacio de lor, e temor gran, e si fos dreyturier aquo agrandit les Antics en lors libres e agueran am aquo obrat.	But what fools do when they restore a broken limb is another way when it is not restored at the beginning as it should be, and it is restored according to crookedness, is an error according to their operation, and great harm; and if this were known to the Ancients in their books, they would have used it.
E yeu no he vist ad alcu de lor aquo far, per que es pus razonable que aquo no fassa.	And I have not seen any of them do this, so it is more reasonable that it not be done.
Capitol segon: De fractura quan accideys en le cap.	Chapter 2: On fractures when they occur in the head.
Las specias de fracturas son motas, e las figuras de lor son diversas, e las causas son distinctas, quar de fracturas alcuna es fayta per percussio de spaza, e la percussio osta tot le os entro al ciphac, le qual es dejos le os, ayssi cum fay ayssa en le fust, e per aquo aquesta specia es nompnada ascial; o la spaza inscideys alcuna partida del os, e inscideys la carn de lu e no passa la inscizio entro al derier de lu; e aquesta specia de fractura es nompnada levatio absoluta.	The types of fractures are many, and the shapes of them are diverse, and the causes are distinct; for some fractures are made by the impact of a club, and the impact strikes all the bone within the skull, which is below the brain, just as it happens in an axe, and through this that type of fracture is named concussion; or the club strikes a part of the bone and penetrates into the flesh but does not go beyond its outer edge; and this type of fracture is named absolute elevation.
E la plagua de aquestas doas fracturas o es gran o pauca, e de fractura que es contricio o atricio; e causa de lu es percussio am poyra o cazement sobre peyra, e a lor semblantz.	And the wound of these two fractures may be large or small, and they are either compressive or tensile; and the cause of them is impact with a fist or a hard object on stone, and similar objects.
E aquesta fractura o es penetrant que ja apropinqua al pannicol le qual es dejos le os; o es en la facia del os, e la plagua de aquestas doas fracturas o es gran o pauca.	And this fracture is either penetrating that it approaches the membrane which is below the bone, or in the surface of the bone, and the wound of these two fractures may be large or small.
E de fractura es que es ameguada en le os, en la subtilitat del cabel petita, e per aquo es nompnada aquesta specia fractura capillar.	And another fracture is when it is hidden in the bone, in the sottlety of the hair, and through this that type of fracture is named capillary fracture.
E es fractura que es fayta o per cazement o per percussio de peyra e a lu semblantz, que fa intrar alcuna lamina del os a las partidas dedintz, e es fayta en le loc concavitat ayssi cum accideys als payroles de eram quan accideys a lor percussio e es partida de lor intrada a las partidas dedintz.	And another fracture is made either by impact or by the blow of a stone and similar objects, causing one of the bone's thin layers to enter into its hollows; and this occurs in the fingers when they are hit with a blow and are split from within.
E majorment es fayt aquo en les cors de osses humitz, ayssi cum so caps de efantz.	And it most often occurs in the bodies of wet nurses, just as their breasts' nipples crack when they wean infants.
E so a totas aquestas specias fracturas satagias, so son pessas ayssi cum stelhas separadas.	And all these types of fractures are bloodless, just as they are separated by membranes.
E yeu vindre am reremoracio de tot aquo en son loc.	And I will come with the memory of all this in my mind.
E conoyssem totas aquestas specias de fractura per deteccio sobre aquelas e per inquisicio de lor am tentas e ostament de carn corrumpuda que es sobre lor.	And we know all these types of fractures by their detection over there and by the inquiry into them through touch and the appearance of corrupted flesh that is over them.
E specia capillar es conoguda per aysso que es descubert sobre le os, e es abstergit, e linit sobre lu am tentha, quar la fractura appar negra.	And capillary fracture is known by what appears after it is uncovered on the bone; when it is wiped and oiled, for the fracture then appears black.
Mays en la curacio de fractura considera al comensament les accidentz del malaute, e lahoras si tu vezes per los accidentz que signifique per significacio manifesta sobre paor, ayssi cum es vomit de colera, e extencio, e perdement de entendament, e abscizio de votz, e sincopi, e febre acuta, e eyssiment dels huels e rogor de aquels, e semblantz a lor dels accidentz en las majors disposicios, ses dopte no es sanat.	But in the treatment of fractures, you must first consider the patient's conditions; and then if you see through these conditions that something signifies by manifest indication regarding fear, just as it happens with vomiting in cholera, and extension, and loss of understanding, and lack of speech, and fainting, and acute fever, and heat and redness in those, and appearance like theirs in the more serious dispositions, then it will not heal.
E si vezes accidentz no-correntz tu speras salut, lahoras tu comensa la curacio de lu.	And if you see that these conditions are not present, then you may begin its treatment.
La qual causa es quar si es vengut a tu le plaguat en le comensament cum es plaguat e aquo es en les dias de ivern, lahoras cove que tu studias en le ostament del os denant le dia xiiii segon tota disposicio.	The reason for this is that if the wound comes to you in the beginning as it is wounded, and it is in the winter days, then you must study the appearance of the bone before the fourteenth day according to every disposition.
E si es en les dias d’estiu, lahoras cove que te coytes ostar le os denant le vii dia, habantz que aquo que es dejos le os sia corromput del pannicol, e que accidescan les accidentz que havem recomtatz.	And if it is in the summer days, then you must cut off the bone before the seventh day, having seen that what is below the membrane is corrupted, and that the conditions we have recounted occur.
E si la fractura ja es pervenguda al pannicol cubrent le cervel, e es am partidas menudas e atricio, lahoras cove que inscidas la partida conminuta e atrita, segon que yeu recomtare a tu.	And if the fracture has reached the membrane covering the brain and is in small pieces with tension, then you must insert the fractured piece, according to what I will recount to you.
E es que tu razas le cap del malaute plaguat, e descuebres sobre le os segon costuma e manieyra a tu possible segon la figura de la plagua, e que sia leugier sobre le malaute.	And it is that you cut open the head of the patient who has been wounded, and uncover the bone according to custom and method known to you according to the appearance of the wound, and let it be easy on the patient.
E si accideys a tu deves la deteccio del os, fluxs de sanc o apostema caut, lahora tu te oppausa a lu am aquo que cove, e es que huemplas le loc de draps infuzes en vi e oli rozat, e fassa repausar la plagua entro que sia sedat le apostema, e sies segur de fluxs del sanc; e aprop comensa en la circuicio del os e en la ablatio de lu.	And if it happens to you that you must make the detection of the bone, and there is blood or pus, then you must stop it with what comes over it, and it is that you apply a poultice of cloths soaked in wine and oil to the wound, and let it rest so that the pus is reduced; and then begin the circuit of the bone and its removal.
E aquo sia segon una de dos manieyras de operacio.	And it shall be according to one of two methods of operation.
E la una manieyra es que tu inscidas le os am inscisori de streyt tal, e aquesta es la forma de lu: E aprop administra un autre inscissori aquest, un pauc pus lat que aquel; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And one way is that you insert the bone with a tight and narrow chisel, and this is its shape: And then administer another chisel, a little wider than the first; and this is its shape:
E aprop administra mays le inscissori pus lat que·l segon.	And then apply the chisel wider than the first.
E cove que sia deves tu nombre de inscissoris diverses, dels quals alcus so pus latz que alcus autres; e alcus de lor so pus breus que·ls autres e sian en le derier de acuitat de las suas extremitatz, e sian de ferr indi o felod.	And it must be that you have a number of various chisels, some of which are wider than others; and some of them are sharper than others and are in the shape of aiguilles, and they are of iron or steel.
E usa de lor am facilitat en percussio sobre le inscissori per so que no concutesca le cap e leda aquel.	And you must use them with ease when hitting the incision so that it does not bruise the head or lead to that.
E si le os es fort, dur, lahoras cove que perfores en le circuit de lu denant que tu administres los inscissoris am les taravels, les quals so nomnatz taravels no-profundantz.	And if the bone is strong and hard, then you must drill through it before administering the incisions with the chisels, which are called non-penetrating chisels.
E no so nomnatz ayssi sino quar aquels no pausan le terme de l’os del test ad aquo que es aprop lu, per so quar al taravel es redonda extremitat o marge sobre aquel que es dejos le cap de lu agut semblant a marge o a cercle petit, le qual prohibeys esser submergit e passar la spissitut del os.	And they are not called that because they do not reach the end of the bone but remain above it; for the chisel is round at its tip or edge below the sharp point, which prevents it from being submerged and passing through the thickness of the bone.
E es convenient que tu prenguas de aquestz taravels gran nombre dels quals quascu convenesca a la spicitut de quascun os, entro que sia a tu present en tottz testz del cervel la extremitat del qual sia aguda, la quantitat en longitut e brevitat sia segon la quantitat de spicitut de aquest test.	And it is convenient that you take many of these chisels, each suited to the thickness of a different bone, while keeping in mind, in all parts of the skull, that its extremity should be sharp, and its quantity in length and breadth should be according to the quantity of thickness of that part.
E aquesta es la forma de tres specias de teravels: La qualitat de perforar en le circuit del os trencat es que pauses le teravel sobre le os e revolvas aquel am les tieus ditz entro que sapias que l’os ja es penetrat; e aprop permuda le terevel ad autre loc, e pausa aquo que es entre tot trauc la quantitat de la grosseza del ray o enviro aquo.	And this is the form of three kinds of chisels: The quality of drilling through the broken bone is that you place the chisel on the bone and turn it with your fingers while knowing that the bone has been penetrated; then change the chisel to another place, and place what is between all traces of the quantity of thickness of the thread or around that.
E aprop inscideys am inscissoris aquo que es entre quascun trauc del os, e fay aquel pus subtil que podes sobre aquo en fi de levitat, ayssi cum havem dit, entro que erradiques le os, o am la tua ma, o am alcuna autra causa per alcus sturmentz les quals auras apparelhatz ad aquo, ayssi cum tanalhas e forceps subtils.	Then insert with chisels what is between each crack of the bone, and make that as subtle as you can, in the end of lightness, thus as we have said, while you radiate the bone, or with your hand, or by some other means for which you have prepared tools, such as forceps and subtle tongs.
E cove que tu guardes am tota cautela que l’inscissori no toque alcuna causa del ciphac.	And you must be careful that the chisels do not touch any part of the brain.
E donc cum auras circuit le os perforan, e sira separat del ciphac si es continuat am lu, e auras aquel extrayt, cove que razas e enguales aquel en la asperitat de lu de aquo que es en le os am autra sturment semblant a inscissori, mays empero cove que sia pus teon e pus subtil que les autres inscissoris.	And when you have drilled through the bone and separated it from the brain if it is still attached to it, and have extracted that, then scrape and gnaw at that in the asperity of it with another tool resembling a chisel, but however make sure that it is more thin and more subtle than the other chisels.
E si roman alcuna partida dels osses petitz e satagias, lahoras pren aquela am facilitat am aquo que es deves tu dels sturmentz; e aprop aquo cura la plagua am lichinis e enguentz les quals havem ditz.	And if any small bones and fragments remain, then pick those up carefully with the tools you have prepared for that purpose; then cure the wound with poultices and ointments as we have said.
E l’autra manieyra de operacio es leugiera, longinqua de paor, la qual diyssec Gualia e la lauzec per gran lausor; e aquest es le sermo de lu: necessari es a tu en le comensament que comenses descobrir la partida del os del loc en le qual es la fractura pus vehement e pus manifesta, entro que quan auras descubert aquela partida e auras pausat dejos lu la extremitat de aquest inscissori lent e alegre del qual aquesta es la forma:	And the other manner of operation is lighter and more distant from fear, which Guiana praises and washes with great praise; and this is its speech: it is necessary for you at the beginning to begin to expose the part of the bone in the location in which there is the most violent and most manifest fracture, while when you have exposed that part and placed below it the extremity of this chisel, slow and gentle, of which this is the form:
E es que la partida lenticular es leon e no inscideys alcuna causa, e la partida aguda es de lu en dos latz avantz en longitut, ayssi cum vezes; que la partida lenticular sia ajustada al ciphac am la facia de lu inscident aguda en le os.	And the lenticular part is lion-like and does not enter anything, and the acute part is of it in two sides in length, thus as a wedge; let the lenticular part be applied to the brain with the acute face of it drilling into the bone.
E aprop percuteys sobre le inscissori de una partida am un petit malhet entro que inscidas tot le os am facilitat ayssi cum es revolvut, e tu sias segur del pannicol que no accida en lu accident que temas en denguna manieyra, e si le medicant14 era le pus fol de totz les homes e le mays ignorant de lor; certament, e si era dorment.	Then strike upon the chisel with a small mallet while you drill into all of the bone with ease as it is turned, and be secure about the membrane not happening to him accidentally in any manner whatsoever, and if the patient was the most foolish of all men and the most ignorant of them; certainly, and if he were sleeping.
Lahoras si romania alcuna causa annexa al os del pannicol en alcus locs de os, inscidira aquel de lu am la extremitat del inscissori aquel lenticular, e deliuraria aquel de lu am facilitat, quar es deliurat de lu ses nocument e ses paor.	Then if there remains any cause attached to the bone of the membrane in some places of the bone, cut that off from it with the extremity of that lenticular chisel, and deliver him from it with ease, for it is delivered from it without harm and without fear.
E si fractura del os no penetra entro al pannicol, e aquo que es abscidit o es ostat del os es la facia de lu, e roman en lu asperitat e satagias subtils, lahoras cove que razas aquela asperitat e erradiques aquelas satagias am razoris subtils per les quals tu has preparat le nombre, de diversas quantitatz per que sia a tu possible administrar de aquels en tot loc les pus convenientz de lor e le pus dreyt de aquels segon aquo en que te perduzeys la tua operacio aquel os trencat e la figura de lu.	And if the fracture of the bone does not penetrate into the membrane, and that which is cut off or remains of the bone is its face, and there remain in it asperity and subtle fragments, then scrape that asperity and pluck those fragments with subtle razors for which you have prepared a number, of diverse quantities so that it may be possible for you to administer those most conveniently in every place and most rightly according to where you wander in your operation on that broken bone.
E cove que administres en la tua razio am la qual razes le os al comensament le pus lat de aquels razoris, e aprop usa aprop lu del pus subtil de lu, e no cesses far aquo segon continuitat entro que pervenguas ad aministrar le pus teon e·l pus subtil de totz aquels.	And it is convenient that you apply in your reason with which you scrape the bone at the beginning the most edge of those razors, and then use that most subtilely, and do not cease doing that according to continuity until you come to administer the most thin and the most subtle of all those.
Mays en quascuna de las autras fracturas petitas capillars e fractura subtil, cove que administres cura segon aquo que perduseys ad rectificacio de lu.	But in any of the other little hairline fractures and subtle fractures, let you apply cure according to what you have wandered into its correction.
E es causa que no es ameguada sobre totz les quals han studi en aquela art.	And it is a cause that is not diminished over all those who have studied in that art.
E stec sobre aquo que nos scriut havem mostrat en grans fracturas.	And we have written about what we have shown in great fractures.
E si le pannicol es retangut quan tu erradiques le os, lahoras cove que prenguas drap de li segon la quantitat de la plagua, e submergeys aquel en oli rozat, e pausa aquel sobre le orrifici de la plagua; e aprop pren autre drap doblat o triplicat e submergeys lu en vi e oli rozat e pausa aquel sobre drap prim e fay aquo al pus leugierament que podes sobre aquel, que no graves le ciphac; e aprop administra sobre aquel liament lat, e no strenhas aquel sino per quantitat que tengua la plagua tant solament.	And if the membrane is stretched when you drill into the bone, then take cloth according to the quantity of the poultice, and soak that in rosewater, and place that over the orifice of the poultice; then take another cloth folded or doubled and soak it in wine and rosewater and place that over the first cloth and do that as gently as you can so that you do not weigh down the brain; then apply to that liniment, and do not strain that except for the quantity that the poultice has only as much.
E layssa aquel am aquesta cura per un dia o per dos entro que sias segur de apostema caut; e aprop deslia aquel e aprop aministra medicinas am las quals es superflua siccitat, ayssi cum razitz de lin e farina de errs, e polvera de enses e de aristologia, e de semblantz ad aquels.	And leave that with this cure for a day or two until you are sure of cauterized pus; then dislodge that and then administer medicines with which there is superfluous dryness, such as linseed oil and bran, and powder of onions and of aristology, and of similar things to those.
E es que tu fassas de aquestas medicinas polvera que sia pulverizada sobre la plagua, ayssi cum son secas; e universalment, administra en aquel tota medicina de proprietat de la qual es que abstergesca e no mordique.	And it is that you make of these medicines powder which is powdered over the poultice, thus as they are dried; and universally, apply to that all medicine of a property of which there is that it cleanses and does not bite.
E guarda te segon la tua vertut que la plagua en la tua curacio sia neta; e no sia en lu surdicia de enguent ni autra; ni no layssas agreguar virulencia en lu; quar quan es ajustada sobre le pannicol del cervel, corromp aquel e poyreys aquel, e accideys sobre le malaute aprop aquo malicia maligna.	And be careful according to your skill that the poultice in your cure is clean; and there is not in it thickness of ointment or other; nor do you leave virulence in it; for when it is applied over the membrane of the brain, it corrupts that and injures that, and there happens about the patient an evil malicious malice.
E accideys en le ciphac del cap, cum de lu es mondificat le os e majorment quan es menspresada la cura de lu, e es negror en la superficia de lu; e donc considera lahoras si accideys al malaute les accidentz que havem ditz, sapias que es parnicios ses tot dopte.	And it injures the brain of the head when the bone is cleansed and chiefly when the cure of that is diminished, and there is blackness on the surface of it; then consider therefore if there happen to the patient the accidents which we have said, know that there are dangerous omens in all directions.
E si no accideys negror sino de la medicina que es pausada desus, e es en vertut de aquela medicina que fassa aquela negror, lahoras cove que tu prenguas de mel una partida e de oli rozat partidas .iii., e am aquels linieys un drap, e aprop pausa aquel sobre le ciphac; e aprop cura aquel am las specias de curacio que conveneys entro que sia sanat.	And if blackness does not occur except from the medicine that is placed above it, and there is in virtue of that medicine that makes that blackness, then it is convenient that you take a portion of honey and portions .iii. of rosewater and with those lines a cloth, and then place that over the membrane; then cure that with the spices of cure which are convenient so that it is healed.
Capitol .iii.	Chapter .iii.
De restauracio del nas quan es trincat.	Of restoration of the nose when it is broken.
Sapias que no es trencat del nas sino doas partidas ensemps pus sobiranas, o una de aquelas alcunas veguadas, per so quar en lu has dos osses, quar la partida dejos es cartillaginosa, e no es trencada e no accideys a lu sino atricio e tortuositat e sinuitat.	Know that the nose is not broken except in two parts altogether most sovereign, or one of those some few times, because in it are two bones, for the part below is cartilage, and is not broken, and nothing happens to it except compression and crookedness and narrowness.
Mays si es trencada la una de las doas partidas de lu, lahoras cove que tu intrometas le dit petit en le sieu nas, e que engualhas aquela fractura dedintz am le tieu dit indic, e am le dit pous defora, entro que retorne le nas segon la sua figura natural.	But if one of the two parts of it is broken, then it is convenient that you put your finger in your nose and gnash that fracture between with your index finger and with your thumb outside, while you return the nose according to its natural figure.
E sia fayt aquo per tu am facilitat, e guarda te que no caja per aquela tua operacio sobre le malaute delor.	And let that be done by you with ease, and be careful that it does not bruise the patient through that your operation.
E si la fractura es en la pus sobirana partida del nas, e le dit no perve ad aquela, lahoras cove que sia equat am la extremitat del ray en le qual sia petita grossitut.	And if the fracture is in the uppermost part of the nose, and the bone does not project out to that point, then it should be made even with the extremity of the bone in which there is a small protuberance.
E si la fractura es en doas partidas, lahoras tu fay le semblant de aquo.	And if the fracture is in two parts, then you should make it like that.
E coyta te am restauracio de lu en le primier dia de la fractura, si es possible; e sino, lahoras aprop le vii o·l x deves le repaus del apostema caut.	And apply the plaster on him in the first day of the fracture if it is possible; and if not, then let him have the warm bath or the hot bath with the rest of the poultice cauterized.
E aprop entromet en la extremitat del nas una meca de drap de li, si la fractura es en una partida, o metz doas calguas, si la fractura es en doas partidas, e sia en la calgua grossitut de tanta quantitat que umpla le trauc del nas.	Then insert into the extremity of the nose a piece of linen if there is one fracture, or put two splints if there are two fractures; and let the splints have thickness of such quantity that it fills up the hole in the nose.
E diysso alcus dels antics restauradors que las calguas sian enfundudas en boder, e sian permudadas en tot dia, mays no es vist a mi; habantz cove que la meca sia enfunduda en album de huou comfit am polvera de moli; e aprop layssa la qualgua entro que l’os sia fermat e sia endurazida la cartillage.	And some of the old healers say that the splints be dipped in wax, and changed every day, but I have not seen it; it is better that the piece of linen is dipped in egg white cooked with honey like powder; then let the splint be placed inside so that the bone is secured and the cartilage is hardened.
E alcunas veguadas sia entromes en le nas, en loc de calgua, pena de auca pus que es envolopada de drap de li leon; e sia que ja te la fractura del nas pus vehement e que le malaute no sia prohibit de inspiracio.	And sometimes instead of the splints, put in the nose a feather of an owl wrapped with linen; and let there be the most violent fracture of the nose and that the patient is not prohibited from inspiration.
E aquesta causa no es a tu necessaria; e si voles, fay aquo, e si voles, fay calguas.	And this cause is not necessary for you; and if you want, do it, and if you want, do splints.
E si accideys autra veguada apostema caut, emplastra le nas am cerot o am coto enfus en vi agre e oli rozat, o am diaquilon.	And if another poultice cautery happens again, plaster the nose with cerotom or with cotton dipped in sweet wine and rose oil, or with daryol.
Mays si no accideys apostema caut, lahoras cove que emplaustres aquel defora am farina de sizami e am polvera de enses cofitz am album de huou; e aprop pausa sobre lu stopa leon, e no lies le nas am alcuna causa.	But if the poultice cautery does not happen, then let you plaster that defect with sesame flour and powder of anise cooked with egg white; and place on it a piece of linen, and do not touch the nose for any reason.
Mays si so trencats les osses del nas am fractura petita o so conminuitz, lahoras cove que scindas sobre aquels, e extraguas aquels am insturmentz que conveno ad aquels; e aprop cos la scissura, e cura aquela am aquo que encarna e consolida, e am emplastres ad aquo convenientz.	But if the bones of the nose are broken with a small fracture or are crushed, then let you split them and extract them with instruments that are convenient for them; and close the split and cure it with something that carnifies and consolidates, and plaster them with something convenient.
E si accideys plagua dedintz le nas, lahoras cove que cures aquela am calguas e administra canulas de plom entro que sia de tot sanat.	And if there is pus inside the nose, then let you cure it with splints and administer lead tubes so that it is completely healed.
Capitol .iiii.	Chapter .iiii.
De restauracio de la mandibula quan es trincada.	Of restoration of the jaw when it is dislocated.
Quan la mandibula dejos es rompuda e la fractura de lu no es am plagua, reguarda lahoras si la fractura es deforas tant solament, e no es trencada en dos e es curvada a las partidas dedintz, lahoras la sua cognicio es leugiera.	When the jaw is broken and there is no pus in it, then examine if the fracture is only outward and not broken into two and bent inward in its parts, then its understanding is easy.
E cove donc, si la fractura es en la part dreyta, que tu intrometas le tieu indic senestre en la boca del malaute; e semblantment si la fractura es an la mandibula senestra, lahoras intromet le dit indic de la ma dreyta; e impelleys am aquel la gilbositat de la fractura dedintz am facilitat a las partidas defora, am la tua autra ma de la partida defora del os; am aquel decentment equa aquelam.	And therefore, if the fracture is on the right side, then you insert your left index finger in the patient's mouth; and likewise if the fracture is on the left jaw, then insert that left index finger; and displace with that the displacement of the fracture inside with ease to its parts outward with your other hand on the outward part of the bone; with that decently equal it.
E si la fractura de la mandibula ja es separada en doas, lahoras cove que administres extensio de doas partz segon rectitut entro que sia possibla la equacio de lu.	And if the fracture of the jaw is already separated into two, then let you administer extension of its two parts according to straightness so that its equalization is possible.
E si accideys conmocio de dentz a disrupcio, lahoras strenh aquelas de las quals speras que romandran am fil de aur o de argent o de ceda; e aprop pausa sobre la mandibula trencada cerot, e aprop pausa sobre lu drap duplicat, e pausa sobre le drap gran stelha decentment fayta, o una pessa de sola engual a la longitut de la mandibula; e aprop lia aquela desus segon que a tu es apparelhada la liadura de lu e que conveneys la applicacio, entro que no es destruida.	And if there is commotion of teeth to disruption, then strengthen those from which you expect that they will break with thread of gold or silver or silk; and plaster on the broken jaw cerotom, and place over it doubled linen, and place on the linen a great star decently made, or a weight of only lead at the length of the jaw; and tie that above according to how the fastening of it is equipped to you and convenient to its application, so that it is not destroyed.
E comanda al malaute que use de repaus e tranquilitat, e pausa la vianda de lu sorbicios leons.	And command the patient that he uses rest and tranquility, and feed him with a soft diet.
E si extimas que ja es alterada la figura en alcuna manieyra, lahoras tu te coyta e deslia aquel al tertz dia; e aprop rectifica aquo que ja es alterat de lu e emplaustra aquel am polvera de moli, am album de huou, o am farina de cisami, pus que tu auras ostat le cerot de lu, e pausa sobre le emplastra lana leon.	And if you think that the figure is already altered in some way, then you untie and loosen it on the third day; and correct what has already been altered from him and plaster him with powder of anise, with egg white, or with sesame flour, after having taken off his plaster, and place over the plaster linen wool.
E adonc cum sta annex e ajustat aquel emplastre sobre lu, e la disposicio del os no es alterada, layssa aquel, que no le deslies entro que sia sanat e strenh la fractura; quar motas veguadas aquesta fractura es streyta en tres sempmanas.	And once you have stood and tightened that plaster over it, and the disposition of the bone is not altered, leave it, so that you do not loosen it until it is healed and the fracture is strengthened; for many times this fracture is tightened in three weeks.
E si autra veguada accida apostema caut, lahoras administra aquo que havem dit motas veguadas en la sedacio de lu entro que sia sanat, e sia remaugut aquel apostema.	And if another poultice cautery happens again, then administer what we have said many times in the healing of it so that the pus is evacuated from it.
E si la fractura es am plagua, lahoras considera si es pessa del os separada o satagias, lahoras tu te subtilia que ostes aquelas satagias am aquo que conveneys ad aquo en la remocio de aquelas dels sturmentz.	And if the fracture is with pus, then consider whether the bone mass is separated or shattered; then you subtilize and remove those shatters with what is convenient for it in the removal of them with instruments.
E si le orrifici de la plagua es streyt, lahoras tu le amplifique am le fleubotomi segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	And if the hole of the pus is narrow, then you amplify it with phlebotomy according to the quantity of your need.
E aprop quan tu auras ostat aquelas satagias, e de aquelas no sira remaugut re, lahoras tu cos le orrifici de la plagua si es ampla; e sino, pausa sobre aquela un dels emplaustres que conveneysso ad aquo e encarnan aquela, entro que sia sanada.	And when you have removed those shatters and from them no pus has been evacuated, then close the hole of the pus if it is wide; and if not, place over it one of the plasters that are convenient for it and carnify it, so that it is healed.
Capitol .v.	Chapter .v.
De restauracio de la furcula quan es trinquada.	Of restoration of the collarbone when it is dislocated.
Motas veguadas es trencada la furcula de la partida denant deves le muscle, e aquela fractura es fayta en una de tres manieyras.	Many times the collarbone is broken from in front of the muscle, and that fracture is done in one of three ways.
Quar o es trencada, o seperada, o es seperada en doas partz otra que no accidan satagias; e es leugier a la restauracio de lu; o es ayssi que accideysso en lu satagias, e es dificil a restauracio de lu; o es ayssi que la fractura es am plagua.	For it is broken or separated, or is separated into two parts other than the shatters do not happen; and its restoration is easy; or it happens that the fracture is with pus, and its restoration is difficult; or the fracture is with pus.
E la operacio en aquela, quan la fractura es ses plagua, es que tu fassas esser present dos ministres, per so que la un tengua le adjutori e siegua la furcula trencada, e l’autre extenda le col ves aquela partida.	And the operation in it, when the fracture is with pus, is that you have two ministers present, so that one has an assistant and follows the collarbone broken, and the other extends its collar to that broken part.
E aprop enguala la fractura am les tieus ditz entro que sia fayta la forma de lu segon que cove, e no sia en lu eminencia pauca ni concavitat.	Then join the fracture with your fingers so that it is made in its form according to how it should be, and do not leave in it a little prominence or concavity.
E si indigeysses mes de extencio, lahoras cove que pauses dejos le titillic del malaute spera de drap o de lana, e sia la grandesa de lu segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat; e exten e eleva la furcula e coarta la spera am la tua ma entro que enguales la frectura segon que cove.	And if you need more extension, then let you place below the chin of the patient a pillow of linen or wool, and let the size of it be according to the quantity of your need; and extend and raise the collarbone and contract the pillow with your hand so that you join the fracture according to how it should be.
E si no podes atirar la extremitat de la furcula a las partidas defora, per so quar es pervenguda al preon, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sua cervitz, e pauses sobre le muscle de lu un coyssi migier en grandeza.	And if you cannot bring the extremity of the collarbone to its parts outward because it is reached at the breast, then let the patient recline on his neck, and place over his chest a pillow on which he leans with his right shoulder, and place on his left shoulder a pillow in size.
E le ministre prema le muscle de lu a las partidas dejos entro que l’os de la furcula sia elevat que es en le preon en sus, e lahoras tu rectifique la fractura e enguala aquela am les tieus ditz.	And the minister presses the muscle of it to its parts downward so that the bone of the collarbone is elevated that it is in the breast below, and then you correct the fracture and join it with your fingers.
Mays si sentes satagias de la furcula e so maugudas, lahoras cove que fendes sobre aquela e extraguas aquelas satagias am facilitat.	But if you feel shatters of the collarbone and swollen, then let you split over it and evacuate those shatters with ease.
E si es retenguda en le os, lahoras tu ingenia inscisio de lu am un dels inscissoris les quals has apparelhatz ad aquo, pus que havias pausat dejos la furcula le sturment que serve le ciphac; e es sturment de fust o de ferr del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And if it is retained in the bone, then you make an incision of it with one of the knives which you have equipped for it, after having placed below the collarbone the instrument that serves the saw; and the instrument is of wood or of iron of which this is its form:
E es semblant a culier del qual aquesta es la concavitat; e sia la sua latitut segon aquo que has necessitat de lu, segon la grandeza del os o la pauqueza de lu.	And it is similar to an awl of which this is the concavity; and let its length be according to what you need from it, according to the size of the bone or the weakness of it.
Mays la longitut de lu sia segon que es a tu possible a la operacio; que haja doas extremitatz ayssi cum vezes, e la una extremitat sia ample e l’autre streyta.	May the length of the patient be according to what is possible for the operation; let there be two extremities as well as times, and one extremity be ample and the other tight.
E si la disrupcio de la plagua la qual has inscidida quan has extraytas la satagia del os es ampla, e yest segur de apostema caut, lahoras tu ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura.	And if the wound you have cut is wide after you have extracted the dead bone tissue, and it is certain that pus will collect, then you should close the two lips of the wound with a stitch.
E si la disrupcio es pauca, o temes apostema caut, lahoras tu uemple la plagua am draps e pulvils segon la quantitat de la scissura de la plagua.	And if the wound is small, or you fear pus will collect, then fill the wound with cotton and powdered drugs according to the amount of the cut wound.
E si accideys apostema caut, lahoras infon drap en vi agre e oli rozat e vi, e pausa sobre aquel.	And if pus does occur, then moisten a cloth in warm wine, rose oil and wine, and place it over the area.
Mays la strictura del os quan es ses plagua e ses seccio, es que pauses emplastre fayt de farina de moli am album de huou, e pausa sobre lu stopa leon, e aprop pausa la spera dejos le titillic de lu, si indigeyssas de aquela, e aprop pren humemate, so es torca la qual teno les Sarrazis , que sia mot longua, e sia latitut de lu de un palm o entorn aquel; e aprop pausa pulvils duplicatz sobre la stopa e l’emplastre; e aprop pren una stela de taula subtil de la qual la latitut d’ela sia de tres ditz e en longitut semblantment; e aprop envolopa aquela en drap, e aprop envolopa aquel drap am la stela en lo loc sobre le loc de la fractura; e aprop pausa humemati ayssi cum es revout, e revol aquela sobre le col de lu e dejos le titillic de lu sa e dejos le titillic de lu malaute, e reduzeys aquela sobre tota partida, e quan vezes que la strictura de la fractura am strictura descent, e es aquo que no es occultat sobre tu.	And the constriction of the bone when there is no wound or break is that you apply a plaster made of wheat flour with egg white, and place a lion's tooth over it, and then place your hand underneath his neck if he shudders from it, and then take an ice pack, the kind that holds the Turks' ice, which should be very long, and its width one palm or thereabout; and then sprinkle powdered drugs over the plaster and the ice pack; and then take a thin wooden rod whose width is three fingers in length, wrap the cloth around it, and wrap the cloth with the rod at the site of the fracture; and then apply an ice pack as often as the constriction of the fracture allows, and that's what you shouldn't hide from me.
E tot, que no sia mauguda la stelha desobre le os trencat; e per so cove que tu vejas le malaute quascun dia, que quan le liament es mollificat o vezas la stela ja esser remauguda, lahoras tu rectifica aquo e strenh la liadura.	And all of this should not be applied to the broken bone; and so that you can see the patient every day, if the binding becomes loose or you see the rod has become loose, then correct it and tighten the binding.
E aprop pausa le dormir del malaute sobre le col de lu, e pausa dejos le titillic de lu deves le dormir de lu en la nueyt un petit coyssi; per so que am aquel sia elevat le adjutori de lu del latz de aquel, e donc es elevada la la fractura de la furcula a elevacio del muscle; o sia le bras de lu liat al col de aquel.	And then place the patient's pillow under his neck, and place another small cushion under his chest when he lies down at night so that with that his helper on that side is elevated, and therefore the broken clavicle is elevated due to the elevation of the muscle; or his arm is bent around his neck.
E no deslies le liament si no accideys en le loc prusiment o apostema, entro a xii dias.	And don't loosen the binding unless pus occurs in the spot or it becomes swollen, for up to twelve days.
E aprop renovelha le emplastre si has vista la facia de lu ad aquo, e ajusta en la strictura e restaura aquel e layssa entro que sia restaurat e sia coagulat la fractura de la furcula.	And then renew the plaster if you have seen his face turn that way, and adjust it in the constriction and restore him and leave it be until it is restored and the clavicle fracture has coagulated.
E es strenguda e comfortada segon le mes en xxviii dias, e alcunas veguadas en alcus homes es fayt en mens de temps de aquel.	And it is strengthened and comforted according to the moon in 28 days, and in some people it is done in less time than that.
Capitol .vi.	Chapter 6.
De restauracio de fractura de la spalla.	Of the restoration of a shoulder fracture.
Spatula tart es trencada en le loc lat de lu e no so trencatz de lu sino les marges.	The spatula is broken on the lateral side and not from him but from the margins.
E donc quan es trencat le loc de lu — e es trencat en le mieg loc de lu — e no es conogut sino per tocament, lahoras segon que es la figura de la fractura sforsa te la preparacio de lu e reduzir aquela segon la figura natural en tota manieyra de engen la qual es a tu possible.	And therefore when it is broken — and it is broken in the middle of him — and it is not known except by touch, then according to how the fracture is spread out you prepare it and reduce it according to its natural figure in every way that is possible for you.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc polvera de moli am album de huou e stopa leon; e aprop pausa pulvil de drap duplicat; e aprop pausa sobre lu stela lada de taula subtil segon la quantitat de la spatula tota o mays un pauc.	And then place over the spot powdered wheat flour with egg white and lion's tooth; and then sprinkle cloth powder doubled over it; and then place over him a thin wooden rod according to the amount of the spatula or more.
Mays si dejos la stela es concavitat en alcu dels locs de la spatula, lahoras tu enguala aquela concavitat am stopa leon, e aprop pueja la stela segon equalitat.	But if under the rod there is a concavity in any of the places of the spatula, then you fill that concavity with lion's tooth, and then push the rod according to equality.
E aprop strenh desus am humemati longua ab constriccio decent e am fermesa de la stela entro que no sia remauguda del sieu loc.	And then strengthen it above with a long ice pack with decent constriction and the firmness of the rod so that it is not loosened from its place.
E considera le liament en quascun dia; e totas veguadas que sia mollificat, lia autra veguada e stren le e equa la stela si es remauguda del sieu loc.	And consider the binding every day; and if it is loosened, then bind another looseness and tighten it and adjust the rod if it has loosened from its place.
E jagua le malaute sobre le sieu latz sa.	And keep the patient on his right side.
E la spatula es restaurada en xx dias o en .xxv.	And the spatula is restored in 20 days or in .XXV.
E donc quan es complit aquest nombre, lahoras tu dissolveys le liament, e que tu scias ensegurat quar aquela es dels osses dels quals la cominicio no es temuda ni lor dissolucio.	And therefore when that number is completed, then you dissolve the binding, and know that of those bones whose beginning is not feared nor their dissolution.
E si procezeys del loc del os pessa e pongeys dejos la codena, lahoras tu scindeys sobre lu, e osta le, e fay segon que havem dit en la fractura de la furcula de sadacio de apostema caut si accideys aqui.	And if the spot of the bone weighs down and puts pressure underneath the collarbone, then you cut it there, and stop it, and act according to what we have said in the clavicle fracture about pus collection if it occurs here.
Capitol .vii.	Chapter 7.
De restauracio de la fractura del pietz.	Of the restoration of a leg fracture.
Le pietz alcunas veguadas es romput en le mieg loc de lu e aquo tart endeve; mays las extremitatz de lu mot endeve que so ciccadas e comminuidas.	The leg sometimes breaks in the middle and that is usually how it ends up; but its ends are very often crushed and broken.
E dels accidentz de lu quan es trencat le mieg de lu es que declina a las partidas dedintz e accideys a lu gran dolor, e dificultat en lo hale, e tos, e fort leu e vomeys sanc; e es declarada en lu cavitat en le os trencat e no es occulta al sentiment.	And of its accidents when it is broken in the middle there is decline to the inside parts and occurs in him great pain, and difficulty in walking, and cough, and strong fever and vomiting of blood; and it is declared in the cavity in the broken bone and is not hidden from sensation.
E la restauracio de lu es que sia resupinat le malaute sobre le sieu dos, e pausa entre las spallas de lu un coyssi; e aprop prem als muscles de lu, e ajusta las costas de lu am las mas de dos costatz, e subtilia te en la operacio de lu e en la equacio segon tota manieyra que es ad aquo possibla e que conveneys ad aquo, entro que retorne la figura del os segon que cove.	And its restoration is that the patient is laid on his back, and a cushion placed between his shoulders, and then press against his muscles, and adjust his ribs with two hands, and act subtly in his operation and according to all ways that are possible for you and convenient to him, until he returns the bone' s figure according to how it should be.
E aprop pausa sobre lu emplastre e estopa e pausa desobre astela de taula subtil de sauze o de caligi e de a lor semblantz en levitat, pus que tu envolopas aquela en drap; e aprop subtilia te en lian aquela sobre le os trencat que no sia maugut; e vay am liadura segon retonditat al dors alcunas veguadas, e strenh aquel am strictura decent; e aprop considera la liadura en tota hora, e quan es mollificada strenh aquela.	And then place over him plaster and a towel, and place under it a thin wooden rod of ash or linden or similar in thickness, which you wrap in cloth; and then act subtly on it over the broken bone so that it is not loosened; and go around him with binding according to roundness at his back sometimes, and tighten it with decent constriction; and consider the binding at all times, and when it is loosened, tighten it.
E si necessitat provoca a desliament de aquela deves corrossio o pruziment, o dolor, o apostema que accideysso en le loc, lahoras tu coyta e deslia aquela e erradica le emplastre e rectifique aquo que accideys per aquo am manieyra de curacio de lu; e aprop reduzeys le emplastre, si vezes ad aquo la facia; e ajusta a lu strictura entro que sia sanat.	And if necessity requires that it be loosened because of swelling or pain, or pus occurs in the spot, then you cut and loosen it and eradicate the plaster and correct what occurs to him by way of his cure; and then tighten the binding, if it occurs, according to his face; and adjust the constriction so that he is healed.
Capitol .viii.	Chapter 8.
De restauracio de las costas quan son trincadas.	Of the restoration of ribs when they are cracked.
Sapias que fractura de las costas no catz sino en locs grosses que siegon le dos; e de las extremitatz de lor de la partida denant no accideys ad aquelas contricio sino per aquo quar so cartillaginosas.	Know that rib fractures do not occur except in large places that follow the chest; and of their ends from the front part, no contriction occurs to them except by that which they are cartilaginous.
E cognicio de lu no es amaguada al sentiment deves la inquisicio de lu am les ditz.	And its sensation is not dulled in feeling because of the inquiry into it with fingers.
E la restauracio sia ayssi que enguales la fractura am les ditz segon la manieyra possibla, entro que sia engulhat segon que cove, e aprop emplastre e strenh le os trencat am stela, si indigeys de aquel.	And its restoration is that you join the fracture with fingers according to the possible way, so that it is swallowed according to how it should be, and then plaster and tighten the broken bone with a rod if it occurs.
E si la fractura de las costas es declinant a las partidas dedintz, lahoras accideys al malaute dolor vehement e punctura, ayssi cum punctura que accideys ad aquel que ha pleureci, e per aquo quar le os ponh le velament; e accideys a lu difficultat de hanelit, e tos, e vomit de mot sanc; e aquesta es de dificil curacio.	And if the rib fracture inclines to the inside parts, then occurs to him violent pain and piercing, as well as piercing that occurs to him who has wept, and because of it that puts difficulty in breathing, and cough, and vomiting of much blood; and this is of difficult cure.
E ja les Antixs so engeniatz en aquela am motz engientz.	And now the Antychus are born in him with many warts.
E de lor so que diso: cove que pauses viandas del malaute que engendro imflacio e ventositat, per que le ventre sia imflat e sia extendut, e la fractura sia impellida a las partidas defora.	And from them you will say: let the patient who engenders inflammation and swelling abstain from foods that cause flatulence and distention, so that his belly is distended and the fracture is driven to the inside parts.
Mays nos avoreyssem aquo per so que no sia causa leugiera a generar apostema caut, si no accideys; e si ja accideys, lahoras ja ajuda ad aquo.	But we abstain from it so that it is not the cause of producing pus collection, if it has not occurred; and if it has already occurred, then help it.
E diyssero alcus de lor que sia pausada desus ventoza e aprop que sucque am fortitut; e es semblant a ratiocinacio, mays empero es temut que la ventoza atire las superfluitatz al loc per la debilitat.	And some of them say that it should be stopped above the vent and then sucked with strength; and it seems like a good idea, but it is feared that the wind may push out the superfluities to the location because of the weakness.
E diyssero alcus de lor: cove que·l loc sia cubert am lana que ja es submersa en oli caut, e sian pausatz pulvils entre las costas entro que sia umplida, que sia la liadura engual quan envolopas aquela segon retonditat; e aprop sia curat le malaute am curacio de pleuresi de vianda e de medicina.	And some of them say: that the location should be covered with wool that is already dipped in hot oil, and there should be powder placed between the ribs where it is filled, so that the binding is equal to the roundness; and then the patient should be treated with a pleurisy poultice of food and medicine.
E si causa vehement constrenh le malaute la qual no sufferta, e le os punh le velament am punctura ledent, temem sobre le malaute, lahoras cove que fendam sobre le loc, descubram de la costa trencada, e aprop pausem desobre aquela instrument que conserve le ciphac, la rememoracio del qual es precedida, e que inscidam le os am facilitat, e extraguam aquel.	And if there is violent constriction that the patient cannot tolerate, and the bones puncture the membrane with their points, we fear for the patient; then we open the location above the broken rib, uncover it, and then place an instrument that conserves the pharynx on top of it, whose memory is preceded by incision of the bone with ease, and extract it.
E aprop que ajustem las doas labias de la plagua, si es gran, am cozidura, e curem aquela am emplastres entro que sia sanada.	And then we should sew both lips of the wound, if it is large, with a stitch, and treat it with poultices until it is healed.
E si accideys dedintz apostema, lahoras tu coyta e enfon pulvils en oli rozat e pausa sobre le loc, e que sia curat le malaute am aquo que cove a la apostema dedintz.	And if blisters arise inside, then you cut and pour powder into rose oil and place it on the location, and the patient should be treated with what is appropriate for the blister inside.
E sia ressupinat sobre le latz sobre le qual dorm, entro que sia sanat.	And it should be re-bandaged on the side on which he sleeps, so that it may heal.
Capitol .ix.	Chapter 9.
De restauracio de fractura del spondil del dos e del col.	Of the restoration of a broken spine and collarbone.
Alcunas veguadas endeve fractura als osses del col, e tart endeve a lor atricio, e semblantment als spondils del dos.	Sometimes there is fracture of the bones of the neck, and they hurt in their traction, and similarly the vertebrae of the spine.
E cum aquo accideys ad alcu e voles saber si sara sanat o no, lahoras considera, quar si vezes las sieuas mas ja mollificadas e stupefaytas e mortas e no pot maure aquelas ni extendre ni strenher aquelas e quan constrenges aquelas am les tieus ditz o punges aquelas am agulha e no sent en aquelas dolor, lahoras sapias que no es sanat, e en las mes de disposicios es mortal.	And when it happens to someone and you want to know if it will heal or not, then consider that if you see the fingers soft, numb, and dead, and they cannot move those or stretch them, and when you press on them with your fingernails or puncture them with a needle and there is no pain in them, then you will know that it will not heal, and in most cases, this is fatal.
E si mau aquelas e sent en aquelas constriccio am les ditz e punctura, lahoras sapias que la nucha de l’os es salva e que le malaute guereys am curacio.	And if there is constriction in them with the fingers and puncture, then you will know that the bone's neck is saved and that the patient will recover with treatment.
E si ve als spondils del col le semblant ad aquo e voles saber si sira sanat o no, lahoras considera als pes de lu.	And if you see the vertebrae of the collarbone like this and want to know if it will heal or not, then consider his feet.
Lahoras si tu vezes que so ja mollificatz, accideys ad aquels aquo que es accidit en las mas, e aprop quan jatz sobre le sieu dos, yeys ventozitat e egestio ses la sua volontat, e alcunas veguadas es resupinat sobre le sieu dos e vol urinar e no pot, lahoras sapias que es mortal, e adonc no trebales en la curacio de lu.	Now if you see that they are already soft and what happens to the fingers happens in his feet, and when he lies on his back, he has wind and involuntary defecation, and sometimes he is re-bandaged on his back and wants to urinate but cannot, then you will know it is fatal, so do not treat him.
Mays si no accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, la causa es milhor e pus leugiera.	But if none of those happen, the cause is better and it will heal more quickly.
E la curacio de lu es que te perforses a la sedacio del apostema caut que pauses sobre le spondil atrissat oli rozat sol, o am mugols de huous asatz; pausa sobre aquela aquel alcunas veguadas le dia entro que sia sedat le apostema caut.	And the treatment for him is to pierce the blisters with a needle and pour into them rose oil only, or with mallow leaves; place it on the broken vertebra some time during the day when the blister is settled.
E lahoras pausa un dels emplastres confortantz e exsitans, e strenh sobre aquel am liament; e comanda al malaute que use de repaus e de tranquillitat e que no dorme sobre la partida am la qual atroba dolor entro que sia sanat.	Then place one of the comforting and soothing poultices on it and strengthen it with a bandage; and command the patient to take rest and tranquility, and not to sleep on the side that gives him pain until he is healed.
E si accideys deves la atricio del os satagias o alcuna causa que ja es seperada de lu, lahoras cove que secces sobre la codena e que ostes aquel os; e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua, am sutura si es gran; e aprop cura aquela am alcu encarnatiu dels enguentz, entro que sia sanat.	And if it happens because of the traction of the bone, or for some other reason that it is already separated from him, then dry over the wound and tie that bone; then sew both lips of the wound if it is large, and treat it with some ointment of the gums, so that it may heal.
Mays si es trencat le derier del os alhoses, e es la fi de la coeta, lahoras cove que tu entrometas le dit pous de la ma senestra en le cul, e que enguales le os trencat am l’autra ma segon que es possible per equacio segonda; e aprop pausa sobre lu emplastre e astelha, si indigeysses de aquels, e aprop strenh aquel.	But if the end of the bone of the hip is broken and it is the end of the socket, then you should insert your left finger into the anus, and grip the broken bone with your other hand as much as possible by second force; then place a poultice on him and splint him, if he has indigestion from them, and strengthen it.
E si sentes satagias trencadas en lu, lahoras tu fen sobre aquela, e osta aquel, e cura la plagua am la curacio que es precedida entro que sia sanada.	And if you feel broken splinters in him, then open that and tie it up, and treat the wound with the treatment that is preceded so that it may heal.
Capitol .x.	Chapter 10.
De restauracio de la ancha.	Of the restoration of the shoulder.
Les osses de las anchas tart so trencats, e si trencan, lahoras la fractura de lor no es sino communicio en las extremitatz de aquelas e son inscidas en la longitut e declinan a las partidas dedintz; e accideys al malaute dolor en le loc e punctura, e la camba es stupefacta quan es fractura.	The bones of the shoulders are usually broken, and if they are broken, then their fracture is not but communication in their extremities and they are inserted into the length and decline to the parts within; and it happens to the patient that there is pain in the location and puncturing, and the arm is numbed when it is broken.
E la restauracio de lu es que tu extendas la tua ma sobre aquel entro que sia sobre la fractura qual es la figura de lu.	And its restoration is that you extend your hand over it so that it is above the fracture which is the figure of it.
E si fractura es en la extremitat de lu tant solament, lahoras tu enguala aquela segon que a tu es apparelhat per equacio engual entro que sia asemblat a la sua figura natural.	And if the fracture is only in its extremity, then grip it according to how it appears to you by second force so that it is assembled into its natural figure.
Mays si la fractura es en le lonc o que ja declina a las partidas dejos, lahoras tu fay jaser le malaute sobre le sieu ventre entro que sia preparada a tu la restauracio de aquela fractura.	But if the fracture is in the length and inclines to the parts below, then you make the patient lie on his belly so that you may prepare for its restoration.
E donc quan auras engualada aquela, pausa sobre lu emplastre, e aprop pausa sobre aquel astela de fust o de codena, e strenh per strictura sobre la qual no temas punctacio de fractura ni remocio de la stelha.	And when you have gripped it, place a poultice on it, and then place a splint of wood or of cord on it, and strengthen it by compression over which you should not fear puncturing of the fracture nor removal of the splint.
E enguala la concavitat am aquo que uempla aquela entro que aquela prengua la strictura segon equalitat, e comanda al malaute que dorma sobre le sieu dos o desobre le sieu costat sa.	And grip the hollow with whatever fills it so that it takes the compression according to equality, and command the patient to sleep on his back or on his side.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras tu cessa de extencio de lu e de la sua restauracio entro que sia sedat le apostema caut, e pausa sobre lu aquo que sede aquel segon que es precedit; e aprop retorna a la restauracio de lu, e strenh aquel ayssi cum cove.	But if blister arises, then cease from extension of it and its restoration until the blister is settled, and place on it what settles that according to what precedes; then return to its restoration, and strengthen it thus as well.
E si accideysso en le os satagias o son comminuidas, lahoras tu las tratz.	And if they happen in the bones or are crushed, then you treat them.
Capitol .xi.	Chapter 11.
De restauracio de la fractura del adjutori.	Of the restoration of the fracture of the helper.
Adjutori es aquo que es entre le coyde entro al cap de la spalla.	The helper is what is between the neck and goes to the head of the shoulder.
E si es trencat, lahoras la restauracio de lu es en una de doas manieyras, de las quals es la una que tu prenguas fust pla de migiera groceza segon aquesta forma:	And if it is broken, then its restoration is in one of two ways, of which the first is that you take wood of sea pine according to this form:
E sian liatz en doas extremitatz dos liamentz, e aprop sia suspendut del loc elevat.	And let them be tied at both ends with two cords, and then it should be suspended from the raised location.
E segua le malaute sobre una sezela; e aprop gieta fora le sieu bras trencat sobre le fust entro que pervengua al titillic de lu en le mieg loc del qual sia annexa la curvitat del fust.	And let the patient lean on a crutch, and then bend his broken arm outward over the wood so that it reaches the tip of him in the middle location to which the curve of the wood is attached.
E aprop suspen sobre aquel alcuna causa greu, o·l minestre extenda aquel a las partidas dejos; e aprop le metge eque la fractura am las sieuas mas ensemps, entro que la fractura retorne segon que cove.	And then let him lean on it for some reason heavy, or the servant extend that to the parts below; and then the bone grip with their fingers, so that the fracture returns as it should.
E l’autra manieyra es que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sieua cervitz e suspen la ma del col de lu am liament; e aprop comanda a dos ministres que la un de lor tengua aquo que es desobre la fractura am las suas mas; e l’autre tengua le pus dejos de lu; e quascu de lor extenda a la sua partida.	And the other way is that the patient lies on his neck and suspends the hand of his collarbone with a bandage, and then command two servants so that one of them holds what is above the fracture with their fingers, and the other holds the feet below him; and each of them extends to his party.
E si voles que la extencio sia pus fort, lahoras tu strenh sobre la fractura am liament e sobre aquela am autre liament, e quascu dels dos ministres extendan a doas suas partidas.	And if you want the extension to be stronger, then strengthen over the fracture with a bandage and over that with another bandage, and each of the two servants extends to their two parties.
E donc si la fractura es propinquada a la extremitat del muscle, lahoras cove que sia pausat la mitat del liament sobre le citillic e l’autre dejos la fractura deves le coyde.	And if the fracture is close to the extremity of the muscle, then let half of the bandage be placed over the tip and the other below the fracture, near the neck.
E semblantment si la fractura es propdana al coyde, lahoras cove que sia pausat le liament sobre aquel loc e sobre aquel coyde.	And similarly if the fracture is close to the collarbone, then let the bandage be placed over that location and over the collarbone.
Enguala aquela am facilitat e ses trebal, e aprop quant sira engualada segon que cove e es applicada per bona applicacio, lahoras strenh aquela si no accideys apostema caut.	Swallow it easily and without effort, and then when the throat is swallowed according to how each person is, and is applied with a good application, then strengthen it if an abscess does not occur.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras layssa la strictura entro al vii dia, e pausa sobre lu lana sutza enbeguda en vi agre e oli rozat entro que repause le apostema, e lahoras tu stren aquela.	But if an abscess occurs, then loosen the stricture within seven days, and place on it soft wool soaked in warm vinegar and rose water until the abscess heals, and then you strengthen it.
E la manieyra de strenher aquela es que pauses emplastre sobre la fractura, e aprop pausa envolopament de drap nau sobre le emplastre; e aprop ajuste le bras sobre aquel adjutori, e pause la sua ma uberta sobre le sieu muscle.	And the way to strengthen it is to place a plaster over the fracture, and then place a new cloth wrap over the plaster; and then adjust the arm to that support, and place your open hand over his muscles.
E pausa le drap e strenh sobre le adjutori le bras per so que·l bras sia en loc de stelhas, si no prohibeys de aquo alcuna causa del os trencat.	And place the cloth and strengthen it over the support of the arm so that the arm is in its place unless prohibited by any cause of the broken bone.
E lahoras usa de stelhas.	And then use splints.
E es que pauses sobre la fractura aquela stela que sia pus lada e pus fort de las autras stelas; e pausa entre quascuna stela la latitut del dit, e sia la longitut de las stelas segon la trencadura am addicio de tres ditz de tota partida.	And it is that you place over the fracture that splint which is wider and stronger than the other splints; and place between each splint the width of a finger, and let the length of the splints be according to the break with an addition of three fingers all around.
E aprop strenh sobre las stelas am la strictura la qual he dita al comensament del capitol.	And then strengthen the splints with the stricture which was described at the beginning of the chapter.
E es que la tua strictura sobre le loc de la fractura sia pus streyt.	And it is that your stricture over the site of the fracture be tighter.
E quant pus es alonguada la fractura sia la strictura menor.	And when the fracture has healed, let the stricture be less.
E donc si vezes le situament de las stelas e la strictura ayssi cum havem dit en la hora en la qual restauras le membre al sieu assituament, lahoras tu fay.	And so if you see the arrangement of the splints and the stricture as we have said in the time in which you are restoring the limb to its setting, then you do.
E si temes apostema caut, lahoras tu layssa la strictura e las stelas entro al dia vii ayssi cum havem dit.	And if you fear an abscess will form, then you loosen the stricture and the splints within seven days as we have said.
E aprop considera le liament en totas partidas per tres dias per so que no accida en le loc pruziment o imflacio; o es prohibida la vianda pervenir al membre per disposicio de superfluitat de strictura; e donc rectifiqua tot aquo segon que havem dit.	And then consider the ligament in all parts for three days so that no inflammation or swelling occurs at the site, or food is prohibited from coming to the limb due to the disposition of excess stricture; and then rectify all this as we have said.
Mays si tu yest sobre confizanssa que no accida alcuna causa de aquo, lahoras no deslias la liguadura sino aprop tres dias o mays.	But if you are certain that none of this will occur, then do not loosen the ligament but wait three days or more.
E sia la sua dormicio del malaute sobre le sieu dos, e las sieuas mas sian sobre le stomac.	And let his sleep be on his back, and let his hands be over his stomach.
E pausa sobre le adjutori cocena plena de lana engualment, e considera en tota hora de la nueyt o del dia que no sia deliada ni dissolta la figura del membre trencat, o que sia le liament mollificat, donc rectifica aquo tot am la tua vertut.	And place over the support a full poultice of wool which is moistened, and consider throughout the night or day that it not be loosed nor dissolved the figure of the broken limb, or that the ligament be softened, therefore rectify all this with your skill.
E pausa la vianda del malaute segon le orde le qual havem denant mes, enayssi que la vianda sia subtil en le comensament entro que es comensat strenher; e lahoras cove que egrossas la vianda de lu.	And give the patient food according to the order which we have given before, so that the food is subtle at the beginning until it is strengthened; and then increase the food for him.
Quar de constuma del adjutori e de la camba de lu es que sian strengutz en xl dias; e lahoras cove que sian desliatz e sia administrat banh e sia medicat am enguentz los quals rectifican aquel.	For the custom of the support and his bed is that they are tightened for 40 days, and then let them be loosed and a bath administered to him and he is medicated with ointments which rectify this.
E si la fractura es layha atrita, lahoras tu no deslies de aquela le liament e las stelhas entro a l dias o entro a dos meses.	And if the fracture is dry, then you do not loosen from it the ligament and splints within two months or 60 days.
Capitol .xii.	Chapter .xii.
De restauracio de fractura del bras.	Of restoration of a broken arm.
Bras es compost de dos osses les quals so appelatz dos focils; dels quals la un es petit, e es aquel que siec le dit pous, e l’autre es gran e es aquel le qual es pausat dejos le petit dit, de la partida pus dejus.	An arm is made of two bones which are called two ulnas; of which the one is small and is that which supports the little finger, and the other is large and is that which is placed below the small one, from the part more below.
E fort leu es trencat le focil major solament, o le petit, e fort leu son trincatz ensemps.	And often only the larger ulna is broken, or the smaller, and often they are both broken together.
E quan es trencat le focil petit desus, lahoras la restauracio de lu es leugiera, e la sanacio de lu es pus leugiera.	And when the smaller ulna is broken above, then its restoration is easier, and its healing is even easier.
E quan es trencat le focil de lu dejos la fractura de lu es mala, e la sanacio de lu es dificil.	And when it is broken below the fracture is difficult to restore, and its healing is difficult.
E pus mala de aquela es quan son trencatz dos osses essemps.	And worse than this is when both bones are broken together.
Donc si l’os le qual es trencat es le focil petit desus, lahoras es convenient al metge, deves la restauracio de lu, que pauze petita extencio am facilitat entro que aquel sia engualhat.	Therefore if the bone which is broken is the smaller ulna above, then it is convenient for the doctor, during its restoration, to place a small extension with ease so that it be moistened.
Mays si le focil gran es aquo que es trincat, lahoras cove que pause extencio pus vehement.	But if the larger ulna is broken, then let him place an extension more vehemently.
E si les dos focils so ensemps trincatz, lahoras cove que tu pauses la extritura mot pus fort.	And if both ulnas are broken together, then let you place the extension even stronger.
E cove que pauses la figura de la ma deves la restauracio de lu e la extencio de lu estenduda sobre un coyssi, e sia le pols de la ma a las partidas desus, pus aut que totz les autres ditz, e le dit auricular sia pus bas dels autres ditz, e le malaute sia cezent sobre una cezela cayrada.	And let you place the figure of the hand in its restoration and extension stretched out over a pillow, and let the wrist of the hand be above the parts more up, more than all the other fingers, and let the auricular finger be more below than all the others, and let the patient be lying on one side.
E sia un coyssi denant lu en la altetut o endreyt de lu, per so que·l malaute no encorra trebalh.	And let one pillow be under him in the height or bend of him, so that he does not fall to one side.
E aprop le ministre extenda le bras de la partida pus dejos am la sieua ma o am liament, e autre ministre extenda desus semblantment.	And then the servant extends the arm from below with his own hand or with a ligament, and another servant extends above similarly.
E aprop le metge engualhe le os entro que redugua aquel segon la milhor figura que pot.	And then the doctor moistens the bone so that he reduces it according to the best figure that he can.
E si en la factura del os so satagias, lahoras te perforsa raduzir tota pessa en le sieu loc am la tua vertut.	And if in the setting of the bone there are bumps, then pierce through all the bumps at its site with your skill.
E si appar en lu satagia separada que punh la codena e no es a tu speransa en la restauracio de lu, lahoras tu fen sobre lu e osta aquela segon la manieyra la qual havem dita desus.	And if a separate bump appears that pricks the tendon and is not to your hope in its restoration, then you file it away and stop it according to the way which we have said above.
Mays si la fractura es am plagua, yeu ja he fayt ad aquo capitol singular, e donc pren la curacio de aquel.	But if the fracture is with a splinter, then I have already written about that particular chapter, and therefore take its cure.
E si accideys apostema caut al comensament de la tua restauracio, lahoras tu lineys un drap am cerot fayt de oli rozat e cera blanca, e sia migier entre specitut e subtilitat, e strenh drap sobre aquel am strictura subtil entro que le apostema sia cedat; e lahoras remau le cerot e pausa emplastre preparat de polvera de moli am clayre de huou, e aprop pausa stelhas; e sia la stela la qual es pauzada sobre aquela fractura pus lada e pus fort.	And if an abscess occurs at the beginning of your restoration, then you line a cloth with cerate made of rose oil and white wax, and let it be between specitute and subtlety, and strengthen the cloth over that with gentle stricture so that the abscess yields; and then remove the cerate and place a poultice prepared from powder of moly with honey, and then place splints; and let the splint which is placed over that fracture be wider and stronger.
E sapias que·l nombre de las stelas del bras so vi en las majors disposicios, o sia la fractura en un focil o en dos focils ensemps.	And know that the number of the splints of the arm is seen in the major dispositions, or it is the fracture in one ulna or in both ulnas together.
E aprop pausa la tua strictura sobre le loc de la fractura pus fort e pus vehement, e quan mays sira la extrictura a las partidas desus de la fractura o a las partidas pus bassas de lu, pausa la strictura un pauc pus molh segon que es precedida la rememoracio de lu en le comensament del capitol.	And then strengthen your stricture over the site of the fracture even more vehemently, and when it is loosed at the parts above the fracture or at the parts more below him, loosen the stricture a little more gently according to how it was preceded in the beginning of the chapter.
E les draps que so envolopatz sobre la fractura sian draps mols humitz, e no sian durs ni aspres, e·l fiel am le qual es strenhut sia de li propriament migier entre subtil e gros, ayssi cum havem recomtat.	And the cloths which are wrapped over the fracture be moist soft cloths, and not hard or rough, and the thread with which it is tightened be of linen properly wetted between subtle and coarse, as we have recommended.
E considera le membre e·l liament aprop alcus dias.	And consider the limb and the ligament after a few days.
E si accideys alcuna causa de la qual rectificacio es necessaria, ayssi cum prusiment le qual accideys al membre, e lahoras cove que tu enbroques le membre am aygua cauda entro que cesse aquel pruziment.	And if there occurs any cause for which rectification is necessary, then as it happens to the limb, and then let you wind the limb with wet water so that it cease that swelling.
E leysses le membre no costreyt entro que repause, e aprop torna la strictura.	And loosen the limb not tightly while it rests, and then tighten the stricture again.
E si la extrictura ja es mollificada e l’os ja es remaugut e semblantz ad aquels, lahoras rectifiqua tot aquo am la tua vertut.	And if the stricture is already softened and the bone is washed and similar to those, then rectify all this with your skill.
E considera mays si le nutriment es prohibit pervenir al membre per superfluitat de strictura, quar lahoras cove que mollifiques aquel un petit e laysses aquel per alcus dias entro que corra ad aquel le nutriment, e aprop strenh aquel.	And consider if the food is prohibited from coming to the limb due to excess of stricture, then let you soften it a little and leave it for a few days so that it comes to it the food, and then strengthen it.
Mays si al malaute no accideys alcuna causa de aquelas que havem ditas, lahoras no cove que sia desliat entro aprop xx dias o enviro de aquels.	But if to the patient does not occur any cause of those which we have said, then do not let it be loosed for more than 20 days or from that time.
E aprop sia suspenduda la ma del malaute per la sua vertut de movement agitatius, e fay aquel dormir sobre le sieu dos.	And then let the hand of the patient be suspended by his skill of moving, and let him sleep on his back.
E sapias que aquesta fractura es restaurada en xxx dias o en xxxii dias, o fort leu es restaurada en xxviii dias, e tot aquo es segon la disposicio de las compleccios e las disposicios de la vertut.	And know that this fracture is restored in 30 days or in 32 days, or very soon it is restored in 28 days, and all of this is according to the disposition of the complications and dispositions of virtue.
Capitol .xiii.	[Chapter 13]
De restauracio de fractura de la pinche de la ma e dels ditz.	On the restoration of a fracture of the finger of the hand and of the teeth.
Sapias que a la pinche de la ma e als nuzes dels ditz tart endeve fractura, e no accideys a lor sino atricio motas veguadas.	Know that in the finger of the hand and the nails of the teeth there should be few fractures, and they do not occur unless through great violence.
E quan accideys a la ma fractura o atrissio, lahoras cove que·l malaute segua cayrat e denant lu lies cezent segon equalitat, e aprop pausa la ma de lu sobre aquela extenduda.	And if a fracture or sprain occurs in the hand, then you should have the patient lie down and lean forward, and then place his hand over that [injured] area which is extended.
E aprop le ministre extenda les osses trencatz e·l metge engualhe aquels entro que sian congongitz am bona congoncio.	Then the minister should extend the broken bones and the doctor should put together those parts that are dislocated with good conjunction.
E lahoras cove que pause emplastre e estopa, si no accideys apostema caut; e aprop pausa stela desus segon la quantitat del loc, e tu ja has envolopada aquela en drap de li.	And then he should apply plaster and bandages if there is no pustule, cauterized; and then put a poultice over it according to the quantity of the area, and you have wrapped that [area] in linen cloth.
Mays si la trincadura es en las partidas dedintz deves le ventre de la palma, e lahoras fay semblant de spera de drap, e comanda al malaute que strenha aquela am la sua palma trincada; aprop sia strenguda am drap lonc.	But if the cut is on the edges inside the palm of the hand, and then make a spear-like shape out of cloth, and command the patient to stretch that  [area] with his palm which is cut; then it should be stretched with long cloth.
E sia la stelha de cuer am drap en le qual sia levitat, per so que le cuer sia aplicat a la palma; e strenh aquela segon que cove.	And the poultice of meat with cloth in which it is lifted, so that the meat is applied to the palm; and stretch it according to how it should be.
Mays si la fractura es a las partidas defora, lahoras cove que pauses desus stela e autre estela de la partida dejos en la palma, per so que la ma sia uberta e dreyta; e aprop pausa la strictura, ayssi cum es revolvuda la ma a la rateta entre les ditz am liamentz.	But if the fracture is on the outside edges, then you should put a poultice over it and another poultice under that   [area] on the palm so that the hand is open and straight; and then apply the compression, as the hand is rolled around between the teeth with laments.
E si accideys fractura a alcu dels nozes dels ditz, lahoras si es le dit pous, sia engualat segon que cove e aprop sia strenhut am la palma e si·t voles, pausa a lu astela petita dreyta per so que sia elevada la fractura e no sia mauguda.	And if a fracture occurs in one of the nails of the teeth, then if it is on the toe, it should be joined according to how it should be and then be bound with the palm; and if you wish, put a small staff over it straight so that the fracture is elevated and not bruised.
Mays si la fractura es en les autres ditz, ayssi cum en aquel del mieg loc, o en le indic, o en le auricular, o en le anular, lahoras sia engualhat e liat am le dit sa le qual siec aquel; o sian totz liatz segon continuacio, e es milhor; o pausa sobre aquel stela petita, ayssi cum havem dit en le pous.	But if the fracture is on one of the other teeth, as well as in that of the middle finger or the index finger or the auricular finger or the little finger, then it should be joined and tied with the finger to which it belongs; or they are all tied according to continuity, and that is better; or put a small staff over it, as we have said for the toe.
E considera, en la tua restauracio, e aprop aquela, la disposicio de apostema caut e oppose — am la tieua operacio — am aquo que cove quan accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, segon que es iterada la narracio de lu.	And in your restoration, consider and oppose that, the disposition of pustule cauterization — by your operation — with that which occurs when any cause of those happens, according to how it is iterated in his narration of him.
Capitol .xiv.	[Chapter 14]
De restauracio de fractura del os de la coyssa.	On the restoration of a fracture of the bone of the thigh.
Le os de la cueyssa motas veguadas es trencat e es declarat al sentiment segon que es convertit a la partida denant e a la pus sobirana.	The bone of the thigh is many times broken and it is declared to the feeling according to how it is converted to the front party and the superior pus.
E la restauracio de lu se fa enayssi que·l liament es strenhut sobre la fractura e autre liament dejos la fractura, e le malaute sia prostrat sobre le sieu ventre e sobre la cara.	And its restoration is done in that the ligament is bound over the fracture and another ligament under the fracture; and the patient should be prostrate on his belly and on his face.
E aprop le ministre extenda tot le liament a la sua partida segon la qualitat, quan la fractura es en le mieg loc del os.	Then the minister should extend all the ligament to its party according to quality when the fracture is in the middle part of the bone.
Mays si es propdana a la razitz de la cueyssa, lahoras sia le liament propda al denolh a la partida del pentenilh, per so que la extencio caja en sus, e le autre liament dejos la fractura.	But if it is near the root of the thigh, then the ligament should be near to the bottom at the party of the pubic bone, so that the extension box on him; and the other ligament under the fracture.
E semblantment si la trencadura es propdana al denolh, lahoras sia fayt le liament propda al denol, e sia la extencio a las partidas dejos.	And likewise if the break is near the bottom, then the ligament should be made near the bottom, and the extension at the bottom parties.
E aprop le metge enguale le os am amduas las sieuas mas entro que reduzesca aquel segon la semblansa natural e l’os es conjungit per bona conjunccio; lahoras cove que pauses emplastre e strictura, si no accideys al membre apostema.	And then the doctor should join the bone with both of his hands until he reduces it according to the natural appearance and the bone is conjoined by good conjunction; and then he should apply plaster and compression if there is no pustule in the member.
Mays si accideys en lu apostema, lahoras tu layssa aquel per alcus dias entro que l’apostema caut sia cedat, e aprop retorna a la tua curacio.	But if a pustule occurs on it, then you should leave it for some days until the pustule cauterization is ceased; and then return to your cure.
La strictura de lu sia ayssi fayta: cove que envolopes sobre la fractura una benda dura, e dobla aquela dos o tres veguadas, e remaugua de lu superfluitat; e aprop envolopa la camba entro que pervengua al talo e a la razitz de la cueyssa.	The compression of it should be done thus: you should wrap a hard bandage over the fracture and fold that two or three times, and remove from him superfluous moisture; and then wrap the leg so that it reaches to the ankle and to the root of the thigh.
E intromet lonc fiel entre la cueyssa e la camba prop del denol a las partidas dejos, e venguan las extremitatz del fiel de la partida pus sobirana de las doas partz, e aprop revolveys sobre la camba e la cueyssa aquo que superflueys de la benda.	And insert long wool between the thigh and the leg near to the bottom at the bottom parties; and let the ends of the wool come from the top part of both parts, and then revolve over the leg and the thigh that which superfluously comes from the bandage.
E aprop pausa sobre la cueyssa en le loc de aquela fractura astelhas, e pausa de aquelas una stela sobre le os de la camba.	And then put over the thigh in the place of that fracture ash-wood, and put one staff over the bone of the leg.
E aprop uempli las vacuitatz entre la camba e la cuoyssa am draps mols, per so que sia coagulada la extrictura.	And then fill the emptiness between the leg and the thigh with soft cloths so that the compression is coagulated.
E aprop comensa am strictura fort del mieg sobre le loc de la fractura am tres envolucios o quatre, e quant mays tu te alonhas am liament del loc de la fractura, la tua strictura sia menor e pus leugiera e pus molha.	And then begin with strong compression over the place of the fracture with three or four wrappings; and as you are longer with ligament of the place of the fracture, your compression should be lesser and looser and moister.
E aprop exten a doas extremitatz del fiel a las partidas dejos entro que pervengua a la cavilha del pe, e strenh amdoas las extremitatz de las stelhas del autra part per so que·l liament no sia remaugut del sieu loc.	And then extend to two ends of the wool at the bottom parties so that it reaches to the ankle of the foot; and strengthen both ends of the staffs on the other party so that the ligament is not removed from its place.
E aprop leyssa la strectura sobre aquel, don esta ayssi que no accideys al membre corrosio ni apostema caut ni emflacio e semblantz ad aquels; e si accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, adonc cueta te am desliament de lu, e rectifica aquo que accideys tot aprop, segon que havem dit motas veguadas.	And then leave the compression over him as it is so that no pustule or cauterization or inflammation occurs on him nor emaciation and likewise to those; and if any of those happens then you should know yourself by dismembering him, and rectify what happens altogether, according to how we have said many times.
Mays si en le os es pessa del os la qual pongua, lahoras cove que tu engualhes aquel segon que a tu es possibla; e sino, fen sobre lu e remau aquel, e cura am aquo del qual es precedida la rememoracio entro que sia sanat.	But if in the bone is a piece of bone which you put, then know that you join that according to what it is possible for you; and if not, then go over him and remove that and cure with that by which it is preceded so that he is healed.
E alcunas veguadas es strenhuda aquesta fractura de la coyssa otra aquo que sian ajustadas a lu stelhas, ayssi cum havem dit en le adjutori e·n le bras.	And sometimes this fracture of the thigh is bound with another so that they are adjusted to him staffs, as we have said in the helper and the arms.
Mays empero en la restauracio de lu en tal manieyra fayta no accideys al malaute claudicacio; e si es restaurada sola, otra aquo que li sia applicada l’autra camba, lahoras es necessari que claudique aquel del qual es tostemps.	But in its restoration made in such a manner let no limp occur on him; and if it is restored alone, then let the other leg be applied to it, then it is necessary that he limps from which it is affected.
E sapias que la coyssa es strenhuda en xl dias o un pauc mes o un pauc mens, e tot aquo es segon la diversitat de las compleccios e de las autras dispozicios.	And know that the thigh is bound for 40 days or a little month or a little more than a month, and all of this is according to the diversity of the complications and other dispositions.
Capitol .xv.	[Chapter 15]
De restauracio de la fractura de la rodela del denolh.	On the restoration of the fracture of the knee of the bottom.
Sapias que fractura de la rodela del denol tart endeve, mays accideys a lu motas veguadas atrissio.	Know that fracture of the knee happens many times, but it occurs on him many times with sprain.
Mays si accideys a lu fractura, lahoras no es sino fissura o trauc en las suas partidas, e aquo es am plagua o ses plagua, e sobre aquo tot es estat am le sentiment.	But if fracture occurs on him, then it is not but fissure or crack in its parts, and that is with wound or wounds, and over all is placed with feeling.
E la restauracio de lu es enayssi que sia engualat aquo que es romput de las partidas de lu am les ditz entro que sia agreguat e conjongit segon que es possible per equacio e facilitat e fabricacio.	And its restoration is thus that it is joined what is broken of its parts with the fingers so that it is added and conjoined according to what is possible by equation and facility and fabrication.
E aprop pausa emplastre e pausa sobre aquel stela redonda, si indigeysses de aquela; e strenh desus am strictura ad aquo convenient.	And then put plaster and put over it a round staff if it oozes from that; and strengthen over him with compression as is convenient.
E aprop considera totas las disposicios las quals havem recomtadas en las autras fracturas, ayssi cum es apostema caut e semblant ad aquels enaissi que se oppause a tot accident am aquo que a lu es convenient entro que sia sanat.	And then consider all the dispositions which we have recommended in other fractures, as well as pustule cauterization and likewise to those on which a staff is opposed to all accident with that which to him is convenient so that he is healed.
Capitol .xvi.	[Chapter 16]
De restauracio de la fractura de la camba.	Of the restoration of a broken leg.
Sapias que en la camba so dos osses dels quals la un es gros, e es le nompnat per nom de la camba; e l’autra es subtil, e es nompnat focil.	Know that in the leg there are two bones of which one is thick, and is named after the name of the leg; and the other is thin, and is called the shank.
E accideys a quascus de las specias de fractura aquo que accideys als dos osses del bras, e per aquo es fayta restauracio de lu ayssi cum restauracio del bras engualment, e la operacio de lu es una.	And it happens in both kinds of fractures that happen to the two bones of the arm, and for this reason, the restoration of it is also the same as the restoration of the arm, and the operation of it is one and the same.
E si so trincatz dos osses ensemps, la camba es convertida a totas partidas.	And if two bones are broken together, then the leg is turned completely inside out.
E si es trinquat le os pus subtil, la camba es convertida a las partidas Denant.	And if only the thinner bone is broken, then the leg is turned inside out.
E si es trincat le os pus gros, atrobas aquel dejos, e es de aquelas causas que no so a tu ameguadas.	And if only the thicker bone is broken, you will see this from below, and it is of those causes that are not to you hidden.
E aprop aministra extencio e equacio e liguacio de las astelas segon aquel engualment.	Then administer extension and alignment and ligation of the bones according to what is mentioned above.
Mays empero cove, si la fractura de la camba es laja havent motas satagias, que la extencio sia mendre e pus leugiera, e alleuja am la tua vertut.	However, if the fracture of the leg is narrow having few gaps, then let the extension be less and shorter, and draw near with your skill.
E en la camba es alcuna causa de operacio sobre le bras, e es quan tu engualas las stelhas e que comples tota la tieua operacio, lahoras tu prendras pessas de fustz de pi le qual es pausat dejos las cauzas las quals so pausades en solies, e so faytas eyssament de brancas de palma; aligeys de aquelas a las quals es petita groceza, e no sia ges de las manudas, e sia la longuesa de aquelas segon la longuesa de la camba, e del denol entro al pus dejos.	And in the leg there is some cause of operation on the arm, and it is when you equalize the bones and complete all your operation, then you shall take weights of wood which is placed below the causes which are placed in soles, and they are made into fingers of palm-widths; align those to which there is a small thickness, and let them not be of the fingernails, and let the length of those be according to the length of the leg, and of the inner part within the most lowly.
E aprop envolopa sobre quascuna drap en doas envolucios segon la longitut de lu, e pausa la una sobre la partida de la camba de la una part e l’autra del autra part, e sian del denol entro al pus bas loc del pe.	Then wrap around each weight in two wraps according to the length of it, and place one over the gap of the leg from one side and the other from the other side, and let them be within the most lowly place of the foot.
E aprop lias las doas stelhas en tres locs de doas extremitatz e al mieg loc, quar am aquesta strectura la camba es prohibida de clinar a la partida dextra e sinistra, e sta per bona stacio.	Then tie the two splints in three places of two ends and in the middle place, for with this constriction the leg is prohibited from tilting to either side, and stands in good position.
E ja es aministrat un brasset de fust segon la longuesa de la camba; e sia pausada en lu la camba per so que conserve aquel de movement.	And a brace of wood has been administered according to the length of the leg; and let it be placed in it so that it conserves that of movement.
E majorment cove que tu fassas aquo en fractura, e quan am aquela es plagua propriament.	And especially if you make this in fracture, and when with that is plague properly.
E aprop considera en quascun jorn la camba e studia am aquel per derier studi, e tu le guardes de apostema e de imflacio o de autres causas semblantz; e cum accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, lahoras opausa te a lu am aquo que cove entro que sia sanat.	And consider in each day the leg and study it with that by final study, and you keep it from pustule and inflammation or other similar causes; and when any of those causes happens, then cease to do so until it is healed.
Capitol .xvii.	Chapter .xvii.
De la fractura del talo e dels osses del pe e dels ditz.	Of the fracture of the ankle and the bones of the foot and the toes.
Al talo no accideys fractura de tot; mays als osses del pe accideys fractura alcunas veguadas; e als ditz del pe pauc accideys fractura, e no accideys a lor sino atricio en las mes de disposicio.	To the ankle does not happen fracture at all; but to the bones of the foot happen fractures some times; and to the toes of the foot happen little fractures, and do not happen to them but atrophy in the months of disposition.
E si als osses del pe endeve fractura e vezes aquels osses esser elevatz sobre si entre lor, lahoras le malaute pause le sieu pe sobre la terra preparat ayssi cum anant.	And if to the bones of the foot indeed fracture and see those bones being raised upon each other, then let the patient place his foot on the ground prepared in that way.
E aprop pausa la un pe sobre aquo que es elevat de aquels osses, e aprop calca aquels, e prem, e engualha aquels entro que torno en los locs.	Then let him place one foot over that which is raised of those bones, and step on them, and press, and equalize them within until they return to their places.
E aprop pausa emplastre e stopa desus, e pausa dejos le ventre del pe una petita taula a la qual sian dos caps plas.	Then let him apply plaster and a stopper over it, and place below the belly of the foot a small board to which are two heads placed.
E aprop strenh aquela am le pe am strectura descent, pus que tu has envolopada aquela am draps e am autres causes de las quals indigeys.	Then strengthen that with the foot with gentle pressure, because you have wrapped it in bandages and other things of which you are ignorant.
E cum a lu passan tres dias o quatre, lahoras tu deslia le liament, quar tu atrobaras les osses engualatz, o sian trincatz o sian dislocatz, e la operacio en aquels es ayssi co coneysses.	And when three or four days have passed, then loosen the binding, for you will find the bones equalized, or broken, or displaced, and the operation in those is thus known.
Mays si alcus ditz son trincatz, lahoras restaura aquels, e enguala aquels ayssi cum yeu e recomtat a tu en la restauracio dels ditz de la ma.	But if any toes are broken, then restore those, and equalize them thus as you were taught in the restoration of the fingers of the hand.
E aprop pausa al dit trincat stela segon la longitut del dit, e sia pus lada de lu un pauc; e aprop dejos le pe aquesta taula la qual e a tu recomtada, e strenh aquela am strictura decent.	Then place to the broken toe a splint according to the length of the toe, and let it be more bent towards it; then below the foot place this board which is told to you, and strengthen that with gentle pressure.
Mays si aquo que es trincat dels osses so dos o tres o mays, lahoras tu pausa sobre quascun dit astela de la sua quantitat envolopada en drap leon, e strenh la taula en le pus bas del pe, e sia stant sobre la un dels caps de la taula foro le ventre del pe per que la tengua am bona retencio.	But if that which is broken of the bones are two or three or more, then you shall place over each toe a splint of its quantity wrapped in linen bandage, and strengthen the board below the foot, and let it stand upon one of the heads of the board so that it has good retention.
E es convenient a tu que no oblides que no consideres totas las causas las quals que e ditas a tu en las autras fracturas dels accidentz que havem dit; e opausa te a tot accident am aquo que cove.	And it is convenient for you that you do not forget that you do not consider all the causes which I have told you in the other fractures of the accidents that we have said; and apply to every accident what is appropriate.
Capitol .xviii.	Chapter .xviii.
De fractura del conh de la femna e del os del pentenilh e de la vergua del home.	Of fracture of the knee-pan and the shinbone and the ankle of a man.
Quan le conh de la femna es trincat, lahoras fay aquela ceser en cezela cayrada, e aprop enclina aquela a la partida del dos un petit, e sia tenguda detras.	When the knee-pan is broken, then let her sit in a chair, and let her lean forward a little, and let her be held back.
E aprop la matrona umpla le conh de coto, e sia fayt en le conh de lu ayssi cum spera; e aprop la femna sia concutida, e eleva le dos de lu petit a petit, quar tot aquo es fora-getat entro que sia denant la partida del conh ayssi cum spera e l’os trincat retorna.	And the midwife fills the knee with cotton, and let it be done in the knee thus with sperm; and let the woman be bent down, and raise up her knees little by little, for all that is forgotten within when it is bent forward with sperm and the broken bone returns.
E aprop pausa pulvils sobre le dos de lu, e quan vol urinar remaugua le coto am facilitat e aprop urine, e reduzeys e retorna aquel segon la manieyra segon la qual mezist aquel al comensament, e aprop retorne al sieu pulvil primier.	And let them put powder on the knees, and when she wants to urinate, let her loosen the crotch with facility, and let it urinate, and reduce and return that according to the manner in which you measured it at the beginning, and let it return to its first powder.
E fassa ayssi per vii dias o enviro aquels, quar aquel es restaurat.	And do thus for seven days or turn those, for that is restored.
E si voles, pren una vezica de ovela e strenh sobre le trauc de lu una canula de canavera; e entromet tota la vesica en le conh de lu, e aprop ensuffla en la canula am vertut entro que la vesica sia imflada dedintz le conh, quar la fractura retorna.	And if you want, take a bag of wool and strengthen over the crack of it a cannula of a reed-bed; and insert the whole bag in the knee, and let them insufflate in the cannula with skill until the bag is inflated within the knee, for the fracture returns.
E aprop sia umplida de coto e estia per alcus dias segon que havem recomtat, entro que sia sanat.	And let it be filled with cotton and stay for some days according to what we have recommended, until it is healed.
E quan le os del pentenil de home o de femna es trincat, lahoras aministra en la restauracio e agulacio de lu aquo que havem recomtat en l’os del anca.	And when the shinbone of a man or woman is broken, then administer in its restoration and healing of it what we have recommended in the bone of the hip.
E aquo que es dreyt no es occultat en aquestas fracturas proprinquas e que pauc endeveno, majorment ad aquel al qual es alcun studi e us e enten aquest meu libre mot; quar aquela fractura significa a tu en las majors disposicios via dreyturiera en la restauracio e en la strictura de lu, e donc enten be.	And that which is straight is not hidden in these close fractures and which hardly turns out, most especially to that to which there is some study and understanding to this my free thought; for that fracture indicates to you in the major dispositions the straight way in the restoration and in the constriction of it, therefore understand well.
Mays en la vergua del home quan es trincada, pren guarguamela de auca, e met la vergua en aquela; e aprop pausa sobre lu envolucio de drap, e sia envolopada, e aprop sia layssada per tres dias o enviro aquels, e sia sanada.	But in the ankle of a man when it is broken, take a cow’s penis, and insert it into that; then let him apply plaster over it, and let it be wrapped up, and let it be left for three days or turn those, and let it be healed.
Capitol .xix.	Chapter .xix.
De restauracio de fractura dels osses quan es am plagua.	Of restoration of the bones when they are swollen.
Convenient es ad aquel al qual accideys fractura am plagua, e majorment si le os es gran ayssi cum es le os de la cuoyssa o de l’adjutori, o semblant ad aquel, que tu te cuoytes e fleubotomes aquel tantost si las condicios de fleubotomia a tu o testifican ayssi cum desus havem dit.	Convenient is to that to which fracture happens with swelling, and especially if the bone is large as is the bone of the jaw or of the shoulder, or similar to that, that you treat it and fleabots that as soon as the conditions of fleabits to you testify to us thus.
E si la plagua eflueys sanc, lahoras cove que tu te coytes a la retencio de lu enayssi que tu polverizes sobre lu zegi trissat, si a tu autra causa no es present.	And if the swelling and pain cease, then it is convenient that you apply to the retention of it in that way that you pulverize over it chalk ground with vinegar, if another cause is not present.
E aprop comensa restaurar la fractura en aquel meteys dia, e no prolongues aquo, si no accideys apostema.	Then begin to restore the fracture on that same day, and do not prolong it, if inflammation does not happen.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras tu layssa la restauracio de lu entro al ix dia, entro que sia cedat le apostema, e no apropinques a lu en le tertz dia e·l iiii de tot, quar tu faras accidir mals accidentz.	But if an abscess occurs and you don't see its restoration within nine days, then the abscess has to be lanced by the third or fourth day at the latest, otherwise you will bring about harmful accidents.
Mays si le os trencat es eminent sobre la codena descubert, lahoras cove que te perforses reduzir aquel e engualar aquel am las tuas mas am facilitat e am pauca extencio.	But if the broken bone is prominent above the uncovered skin, then you have to pierce and reduce it with your hands with ease and little extension.
Mays si extencio no es a tu preparada e la equacio de lu am las tieuas mas, lahoras tu reduzeys aquel am las tuas mas am aquest sturment; e es sturment le qual es fayt de ferr, la longitut del qual es de vii ditz o de viii e la latitut del qual es segon la quantitat de la plagua; e per aquo es necessari al metge que prengua de aquels tres o quatre segon la quantitat que indigeys ad aquo en la curacio en tota specia de fractura.	But if extension is not prepared for you and the adjustment by your hands, then you reduce it with this instrument; and this instrument is made of iron, whose length is seven or eight digits, and its width according to the quantity of the wound; therefore it is necessary for the doctor to use these three or four according to the quantity that he needs for that in all kinds of fractures.
E sia redon, e sia en lu pauca groceza per so que no sia doblat deves la comprecio sobre aquel en la hora de la operacio.	And it should be round and not have much thickness so that it is not bent because of the pressure on it during the operation.
E sia de aguda extremitat al qual sia marge en las sieuas extremitatz; e sia le desus de lu a grossetut tendent, e de la maytat de lu entro a las partidas.	And its tip should be sharp and its edges smooth; and the upper part of it should have a thick edge, and the lower half into the parts.
E aquesta es la forma de lu:	And this is the shape of it:
E es nompnat en grec “labre volentz atelarem”, so es paleta pauca.	And it is named in Greek "labre volentz atelarem", that is, a little palette.
Per que cove que sia pausada la extremitat de lu acuda elevada sobre la extremitat del os eminent.	So that the tip of it may be placed elevated on the prominent end of the bone.
E inpelleys aquel en una veguada entro que retorne le os, e sia engualat am alcuna equacio.	And push it into a hollow until the bone returns, and let it be adjusted by some position.
E donc esforsa te engualar las extremitatz de la fractura entre lor, e si la extremitat de lu trencada es subtil, e no pren aquela le sturment per bona axcepcio, lahoras cove que tu inscidas la extremitat de aquel os entro que l’insturment haja poder de aquo.	And therefore try to adjust the ends of the fracture between them, and if the broken end of the bone is thin, and does not take the instrument by a good exception, then you have to insert the end of that bone so that the instrument can do it.
Mays si no podes reduzir le os de tot am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras enscideys aquel am aquo que coveneys a lu dels inscizoris les quals havem ditz; o serra aquel am una de las serras en qualque manieyra sia a tu possible.	But if you cannot reduce the bone at all with what we have advised, then cut it with one of the cutting instruments which we have mentioned; or saw it with one of the saws in whatever way is possible for you.
E aprop ratz aquel que roman en le os de asperitat e de scorsas menudas.	Then smooth the part that remains in the bone, and of roughnesses and small scars.
E cum le os es reduzit, e aprop la reduccio le malaute atroba dolor vehement ledent, lahoras sapias que le os no es retornat al sieu loc natural; e adonc fay aquo quar tu confereyses al malaute gran juvament.	And when the bone is reduced, and if the patient feels strong pain during the reduction, then know that the bone has not returned to its natural place; and therefore do what you confer on the patient great benefit.
Cum es complida la tua restauracio la qual fas al os, e lahoras submergeys drap en vi stiptic negre, e propriament si es en estiu, e no pauses sobre la plagua cerot ni autre causa en la qual sia oli, per so que no fassa en lu accidir poyredura e corropcio.	When you have completed the restoration which you do to the bone, then soak cloth in black styptic vinegar, and especially if it is summer, and don't apply ointment or anything else on the wound that has oil, so that no putrefaction and corruption occur in it.
E aprop aministra stelas en la hora del tieu compliment de la restauracio de l’os, e layssa la plagua descuberta enayssi que inscidas le trauc am forfexs e uses de envolucios segon la quantitat de la plagua.	And especially administer stars in the hour of your completion of the restoration of the bone, and let the wound remain uncovered unless you insert the trauma with forceps and use bandages according to the quantity of the wound.
E guarda te am tota cautela que no strenhas la plagua am la fractura, quar motas veguadas an fayt aquo les fols metges, e fero accidir sobre les sieus malautes mort o malautia corrodent o zuthement, so es sania.	And guard yourself with all caution that you do not strain the wound with the fracture, for many times foolish doctors have done this and caused death or harmful corrosion or putrefaction on their patients, it is a matter of life.
E si la tieua strictura leugiera, molli, diversa de la strictura de las autras fracturas.	And if your tightness is loose, soft, different from the tightness of the other fractures.
E si la plagua es gran o es plagua mala, e temes sobre aquel alcus accidentz mals les quals havem recomtatz, e atrobas dolor en le loc, lahoras no cove que pauses sobre aquel astelas, mays fay ad aquel envolucio de draps durs en loc de stelas e strenh lu am aquelas.	And if the wound is great or it is bad, and you fear some harmful accidents which we have mentioned, and you feel pain in that place, then do not put stars on it, but make an envelopure of hard cloths in the place of stars and tighten it with those.
E cum aprop un dia o dos vezes ja la plagua comensar, que en lu sia engendrat brac, lahoras tu osta desus le drap le qual havias pausat sobre aquel am vi, e aprop aministra calguas, enguentz am les quals de nostra constuma es que mediquem las plaguas, ayssi cum enguentz tetrafarmacon e semblantz ad aquel.	And when about a day or two has passed and the wound begins to mend, and in it is engendered pus, then remove above the cloth which you had placed on it with vinegar, and especially administer cauteries, of which according to our custom we medicine wounds, thus with cauteries of tetrafarmacon and alike.
E conveneys a tu que deslias le liament e considera la plagua en quascun dia mati e vespre entro que sia consolidada e fermada, e cove que·l membre sia preparat en tal manieyra que la poyredura corra de lu a las partidas dejos am facilitat.	And it is convenient for you to loosen the ligature and consider the wound every day morning and evening until it is consolidated and closed, and that the member be prepared in such a way that the putrefaction runs from it to its parts below with ease.
si a la plagua passan motz dias, e no es consolidada ni es abscindit de lu le brac, lahoras sapias que aqui so satagias de las petitas per que cove enquieras la plagua am tenta.	If after several days the wound is not consolidated or the pus is not discharged from it, then know that here are signs of the little ones because you touch the wound with a tent.
E de aquelas satagias aquelas que so separadas remau e extratz, aquelas que de lor no so separadas e pongen le membre e fan accidir dolor, perforsa te a inscidir aquelas segon que a tu aquo es possibla.	And of those signs which are separated and removed, those from whom the member is not separated and they cause pain, pierce them according to what you can do it.
E si accideys a la plagua zuchem o eluchen, so es stiomenios, o autra specia de corrupcio e de putrefaccio, lahoras cove que pauses a quada un de aquels am aquo que conveneys a lu de la curacio del qual es precedida narracio en le sieu capitol.	And if it happens to the wound that it suppurates or becomes light, so is stiomenia, or another kind of corruption and putrefaction, then do what convenes to its cure, of which a precedent is given in its chapter.
E de aquo en le qual cove que stia lo mieu sermo e tu fassas present la tua pessa: quan os gros es trincat, emineys sobre le membre ayssi cum le os de la coyssa e del ajutori e semblantz ad aquels dels membres grans, e que no presumas atraccio de lu, ni la extraccio de lu quar motas veguadas accideys per aquo la mort; habantz layssa aquel entro que poyresca, quar fort leu cayra per si aprop xx dias o .xxx.; e lahoras cura la plagua si a tu es vist, e si no layssa aquela.	And of that in which you have to stay the same word and make known your opinion: when a large bone is broken, raise it above the member thus with the bone of the thigh and of the support and alike of those of the great members, and do not presume traction on it, nor its extraction for many times death happens because of that; leave it so that pus runs from it, for if it is strong by itself it will fall after about xx days or .xxx.; And then cure the wound if you see it, and if not leave that.
Capitol .xx.	Chapter .XX.
De la curacio de nodacio que accideys en le vestigi de alcuna fractura.	Of the cure of nodation which happens in the track of any fracture.
Motas veguadas accideys aquesta nodacio en le vestigi de sanacio de fractura, e majorment que es prop de las juncturas, e es orrasada per lu la figura del membre; e fort leu prohibeys le membre de la sua operacio natural.	Many times this nodation happens in the track of healing fracture, and especially it is near to the joints, and its figure of the member is affected; and usually the member is prohibited from its natural operation.
Adonc considera si la nodacio es recent e aministra en aquela medicinas que han stipticat ayssi co es aloen, e enses, e mira, e sercacollo, e acrassia, e semblantz ad aquels; enayssi que prenguas de aquela alcunas o totas, e comfesiys aquelas am vi stiptic, o am album de huou, o am vi agre, e pausa aquela sobre la nodacio en estopa, e constringeys aquelas sobre lu per bona constriccio.	Then consider if the nodation is recent and administer in that medicines which have tightened as aloe, and milk thistle, and marjoram, and wild thyme, and alike; so take some or all of those, and mix them with vinegar, or with egg white, or with wine, and apply that on the nodation on wool, and constrict that on it by good compression.
E leyssa extrictura que no deslies aquela per motz dias; e aprop deslia aquela e itera autra, entro que sia remauguda la nodacio; o strenh sobre aquela lamina de plom descentment, quar plom ha proprietat de remaure tot aquo que es imflat en les membres.	And let the compression which do not remove that for several days; and then loosen it and repeat another, until the nodation is soft; or tighten on it a leaf of lead descending, because lead has property of softening all that is swollen in members.
Mays si nodacio ja es en peyra convertida e streyta es e nessessitat provoca a ostar aquela coytadament, e lahoras scindeys aquela per la partida pus sobirana de lu, e inscideys la superfluitat e eminent, o ratz aquela am alcus rezoris entro que sia remauguda; e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	But if the nodation is already turned into stone and it is hard and necessary causes to bear that bandage on it tightly, then cut that by the part of pus which has risen from it, and insert the superfluity and prominent, or smooth that with some cauteries until it is soft; and cure that as it is healed.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter .XXI.
De restauracio de fractura quan es restaurada e aprop aquo roman le membre subtil e freul no segon la sieua natura.	Of restoration of fracture when it is restored and especially if that has happened to the member thin and frail, not according to its nature.
Quan fractura de os es restaurada, e aprop aquo roman le membre subtil e freul, lahoras aquo no es fayt sino per motas causas: de las quals la una es multitut de solucio del liament e de la liguacio de lu fayta no segon que cove; o per superfluitat de strictura dels liamentz entro que·l nutriment sia prohibit correr al membre; o per multitut de embrocaccio superflua; o per movement superfluent no en la sua hora; o per pauquesa de sanc en le cors del malaute e per debelitat de lu.	When bone fracture is restored, and especially if that happens to the member thin and frail, then that is not done but for several causes: of which one is multitude of solution of the ligature and of its binding made not according as it should; or by superfluity of compression of the ligaments within which the nourishment is prohibited from running to the member; or by multitude of effusion; or by superfluous movement, not in its hour; or by lack of blood in the body of the patient and by debility of it.
E curacio de aquo es dar a mengar al malaute e far le cor de lu tendre entro que·l sanc sia multiplicat en lu; e aministra banh; e entromet gaug e leticia sobre lu.	And cure of that is to make the patient eat and make his heart tender within which blood is multiplied in him; and administer bath; and insert gaultheria and licorice on it.
E aprop pausa pegua sobre le membre, per so que la pegua atire a lu mot nutriment, o continua embrocacio de lu am aygua tebeza, entro que·l nutriment corr e retorne a la sua figura natural.	And then apply plaster to the affected limb, so that the plaster draws out moisture and continues to foment it with warm water until the swelling goes down and returns to its natural state.
Capitol .xxii.	Here is the next sentence:
De curacio dels osses trincatz quan so restauratz tortuozament e prohibeys la operacio de lor de aquo que cove.	Translation:
Quan accideys al membre ja restaurat aprop la sanacio de lu de tortuositat e eminencia al os trincat e nodacio, e es per aquo fededa de forma del membre, mays empero le membre no es prohibit de la sieua operacio natural, lahora no cove que tu recipias la paraula de aquel que exsistima aquel membre sia de novel trincat.	Translation:
Mays ja so statz motz fols metges e restauradors les quals han fayt aquo en nostra tera; e aquesta operacio es mot vituperable perduzent a gran temor le senhal de la qual es mortal.	Translation:
Mays si claudicacio e nodacio son recentz, lahoras cove que sian enbrocatz am aygua tebeza en la qual so coytas erbas mollificantz, ayssi cum son fuelas de altea e razitz de lu, e mellilot, e semblantz ad aquels; e sia fayt a lu emplastre am emplastre mollificatio ayssi cum dyallaquilon ben fayt; o que sia preza mucillage de razit de altea e sia contucida am gray de gualina o am oli de cirami, e sia emplastrat am aquel; o que sian prezes figuas grassas e sian trissadas am fems de colom, e semblantz ad aquels de las medicinas que son nompnadas amermans consolidacio.	If the limp and the nodule are recent, then they should be bathed in warm water containing soft herbs such as comfrey leaves and roots, sweet basil, and similar; or a liniment should be made with linseed oil, or a poultice of marshmallow root should be applied, either with woolen cloth or olive oil, and then bandaged with that; or fatty figures should be made and bound with dove droppings, and similar to those medicines named "brothers' consolidation."
E alcunas vetz es dissolvuda am assidua fricacio leugiera que sia am las mas humidas, e sia administrat movement del membre a tota partida en totas horas.	And sometimes it is dissolved by continuous gentle friction with the moistened hands, and motion of the limb in all directions at all times.
Mays si tortuositat ja es anada denant e es fayta fort e convertida es en peyra e provocada es necessitat a curacio de lu am ferr, lahoras cove que sia le pus desus cecsat e la continuacio del os sia dissolvut, e sia inscidit aquo que superflueys de nodacio de aquel meteys am le os am inscissoris subtils, e sia aministrada facilitat en aquel am sollicitut e studi.	But if tortuosity has already gone too far and become strong and turned to stone, and requires treatment with iron, then let the pus above be dried up, and the continuation of the bone be dissolved, and let that which is superfluous of the nodule be cut away from the bone with thin instruments, and ease be administered in that by solicitation and study.
Capitol .xxiii.	Chapter 23.
De sermo en dislocacio.	Of speech in dislocation.
Dislocacio es eyssiment de alcuna de las juncturas del sieu loc, per que es prohibida de movement, e es orrezada la figura del membre, e fa venir sobre le malaute dolors e lesios grans.	Dislocation is the displacement of one of the joints of its place, by which it is prohibited from moving, and the figure of the limb is altered, and brings great pain and injury to the patient.
Donc quan accideys ad alcu dislocacio, lahoras cove tantost perforsar que sia reduzit, e no tarde aquela reduzir, quar si es tardada, le loc es apostemat e fort leu am aquo es fayta dificil la reduccio de dislocaccio.	Therefore, when dislocation occurs, let it be immediately forced back into place, and not delayed in being reduced, for if it is delayed, the joint will be inflamed and very strong, and the reduction of the dislocation will be difficult.
E per aysso no cove que sia maugut ni stendut en la hora de la apostemacio, quar motas veguadas fa venir spasme e dolors ledentz.	And for that reason, one should not be bled or stretched during the hour of inflammation, because many times it brings on spasms and pain to the patient.
Mays quan aquo accideys, lahoras cove que tu te coytes a la flaubotomia del malaute, e aprop sia layssat entro que repause le apostema; e aprop le membre sia embrocat am aygua cauda e oli, e aprop sia reduzit am facilitat.	But when this happens, let you resort to phlebotomy on the patient, and let him be laid flat so that he may rest the inflammation; and let the limb be bathed with warm water and oil, and let it be reduced with ease.
E tot membre sia curat am aquo del qual la rememoracio vindra en son loc.	And every limb shall be cured by what its memory will return to its place.
E yeu ja e ordenatz les capitols de dislocacio segon que es precedit en fractura; de la partida del cos pus sobirana entro a la partida pus dejos.	And now we have ordered the chapters on dislocation according to what was preceded in fractures, from the highest part of the body down to the lowest.
Capitol .xxiiii.	Chapter 24.
De curacio de dislocacio de la mandibula dejos.	Of the cure for dislocation of the lower jaw.
So dislocadas las doas mandibulas si no tart; e la dislocacio de amdos es fayta segon una de dos manieyras: que o son remaugudas de lurs locs per pauca remocio, e so mollificadas un petit; o so dislocadas per entiera dislocacio e complida, entro que sian mollificadas a la partida de la junctura entro que corro saliva del malaute e que no puesca tenir aquela ni puesca claure la sua boca, e la lengua de lu sia envolopada en sa paraula.	The two mandibles are dislocated if not bitten; and the dislocation of both is done in one of two ways: they are either dislocated from their places by a small movement and slightly softened, or they are fully dislocated and completed, so that they are softened at the joint where saliva runs down the patient's throat, and he cannot hold it in his mouth or close his mouth, and his tongue is wrapped around his words.
Mays quan la dislocacio de lu es pauca, lahoras en las majors disposicios retorna per si an pauca causa.	But when the dislocation of him is slight, then in the greatest dispositions it returns by itself for a slight cause.
Mays si la dislocacio es entiera e complida, lahoras cove que sia administrada reduccio de lu leugierament, e no sia tardada de tot.	But if the dislocation is entire and completed, then let the reduction of it be administered gently, and not delayed at all.
E es que·l ministre tengua le cap del malaute, e entrometa lo metge le dit pous de la una sieua ma en la razit de la dislocacio de la mandibula dedintz la boca de lu, si la dislocacio es de la una part; o que entrometa les sieus dos pouzes ensemps, si la dislocacio es de doas partz, e les autres ditz de las mas de lu sian defora am les quals enguale; e comanda al malaute que cesse las suas mandibulas e absolva aquelas anar de quascuna partida; e le metge engualhe la mandibula e enpellisca la mandibula entro que retorne al sieu loc.	And let the minister hold the patient' head, and let the doctor put one of his fingers in the root of the dislocation of the mandible inside the patient's mouth, if the dislocation is on one side; or that he put both fingers in together, if the dislocation is on both sides, and the others outside with which he grips; and command the patient to cease moving his mandibles and relax those everywhere; and let the doctor grip the mandible and press it in until it returns to its place.
E si dificil es la reducio de lu, e majorment si amdos las mandibulas so essemps dislocadas, lahoras aministra evoporacio am aygua cauda e oli, entro que sia fayta leugiera la reduccio de amdos e no tardes la reduccio de amdos de tot, ayssi quo havem dit.	And if the reduction of it is difficult, and especially if both mandibles are fully dislocated, then administer evaporation with warm water and oil, so that the reduction of both is made gentle, and do not delay the reduction of both at all, as we have said.
E donc cum retornam e so engualadas, e es clausa la boca del malaute e no es mollificada, lahoras pausa sobre aquelas polvils de drap am cerot, e sia fayt de cera e oli rozat; e aprop sia liat am facilitat am liamens mols.	And therefore when they are returned and are closed, and the mouth of the patient is not softened, then pause upon them with a powder of linen with cerot, and let it be made of wax and rozat oil; and let it be bound with ease by mild bonds.
E sia le dormir del malaute sobre le sieu dos, e·l cap de lu sia stant entre dos aurelhes, per so que no maugue aquel a la partida dreyta ni a la sinistra; e no li fassas per forsa masteguar alcuna causa; habans la sieua vianda sia forbicio leon, entro que quan las dolors sian remaugudas e las mandibulas so nozadas, lahoras maugue aquo que vol.	And let the patient sleep on his back, and let his head stand between two pillows, so that he does not bite to the right or left; and do not force him to chew for any reason; having his food be lion's paw, so that when the pains are increased and the mandibles are swollen, then let him bite what he will.
E aquo sia aministrat am facilita, e no trebalhe sobre la apercio de la boca deves la comestio e beure e ocitatio, entro que la mandibula sia nozada e sanada.	And that shall be administered with ease, and do not work upon the opening of the mouth after eating and drinking and waking, so that the mandible may be swollen and healed.
E si es dificil la reduccio de duas mandibulas quan so dislocadas en alcuna hora e no so convertidas als lors locs, lahoras motas veguadas accideysso febres e soda assidua, e fort leu es alerguat le ventre del malaute, e fort leu e vomeys colera pura.	And if the reduction of two mandibles is difficult when they are dislocated at any time and not returned to their places, then many times it happens that fevers and continuous fever occur, and very strongly the belly of the patient is swollen, and very strongly he vomits pure cholera.
E quan tu vezes aquo, lahoras sapias que es perdicio; e motas veguadas mor aquel al qual accideys aquo en x dias.	And when you see that, then know that it is a loss; and many times the one to whom that happens dies within ten days.
Capitol .xxv.	Chapter 25.
De reduccio de la dislocacio de la furcula e de la extremitat del muscle.	Of the reduction of the dislocation of the collarbone and the extremity of the muscle.
Furcula no es dislocada del latz dedintz per la sua continuacio am le pietz; e alcunas veguadas es dislocada a la partida defora, e aquo es declarat al sentiment.	The collarbone is not dislocated from the side within by its continuation with the shoulder; and sometimes it is dislocated at the outer part, and that is declared by feeling.
E la restauracio de lu es que·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu dos e extenda les sieus brasses.	And its restoration is that the patient hangs over his head and extends his arms.
E aprop coarta le loc am la tua palma am fort coartacio, quar ela retornara.	And let it be pressed into place with your palm with strong compression, for it will return.
E aprop pausa sobre aquela emplastre e pulvils e strenh aquela.	And let plaster and powder be paused upon that and strengthened there.
Mays la extremitat de aquel que siec le coyde e·s continuat am aquel, no es dislocada en alcun dia; lahoras cove que sia reduzida e engualhada segon que havem dit e segon que es a tu aparelhat.	But the extremity of that which is connected to the collarbone and continued with it, is not dislocated in any day; then let it be reduced and closed as we have said and according to what is your apparatus.
E aprop pausa sobre aquela emplastre, e pulvils, e extrictura, e comanda al malaute adherir a trenquilitat e a repaus entro que sia sanat.	And let plaster and powder and tightness be paused upon that, and command the patient to adhere in tranquility and rest until it is healed.
E am aquesta meteyssa curacio es reduzida la extremita del muscle quan es separada del sieu loc.	And with this medicine of cure, the extremity of the muscle is reduced when it is separated from its place.
Capitol .xxvi.	Chapter 26.
De la reduccio de la dislocacio del muscle.	Of the reduction of the dislocation of the muscle.
Sapias que·l muscle no es dislocat sino segon tres manieras, de las quals es la una que sia dislocat a la partida del titillic a la partida dejos.	Know that the muscle is not dislocated except in three ways, of which one is that it is dislocated at the tip of the tittil at the lower part.
E la segonda es que sia dislocat a la partida desus del muscle, e aquo es fayt tart; e no es dislocat a las partidas detras per la spalla; e no es dislocat a las partidas denant per les nervis.	And the second is that it is dislocated at the top of the muscle, and that is done quickly; and it is not dislocated at the sides by the shoulder; and it is not dislocated at the front by the nerves.
E majorment es dislocat e defora eyssit a las partidas dejos deves le titillic, e majorment en aquels dels quals las carns son paucas, leugierament es dislocat; mays en aquels en les quals so motas carns, es eyssit fora am dificultat.	And most of all it is dislocated and out from the lower parts beneath the tittil, and most of all in those whose flesh is thin, it is dislocated quickly; but in those in which there is much flesh, it is forced out with difficulty.
E fort leu accideys ad alcus homes percussio o cazement, e le muscle de lu es apostemat de apostema caut, e es cujat per aquo que ja sia dislocat.	And very often it happens to some men by blow or fall, and the muscle of him is inflamed with inflammation from inflammation, and it is healed by that which has already been dislocated.
Adonc cove que tu sproes aquo entro que estias sobre-sertetut de lu, e lahoras procesiscas en la curacio de lu.	Therefore, let you inquire about that while you are on top of him, and let the process be in his cure.
E es conoguda la dislocacio de lu quan es a las partidas dejos deves le titillic; per so que distingescas entre le muscle dislocat e·l muscle sa, quar tu atrobas entre aquels diversitat manifesta; e atrobas en le cap del muscle concavitat e dejos le titillic deves le tocament del cap del muscle ayssi quo un huou, e al malaute no pot redusir la sua ma a la sieua aurelha, ni maure aquela per totz movementz.	And it is known that the dislocation of him is when it is at the lower parts beneath the tittil; so that you distinguish between the dislocated muscle and the uninjured muscle, for you press upon them with manifest difference; and you press in the head of the muscle concavity and beneath the tittil from the touch of the head of the muscle just as a nail, and let the patient not be able to reduce his hand to its shoulder, nor move that by any movements.
Si es dislocat deves le pietz o ensus, e tu lahoras atrobas manifest tocament, e no es amaguat.	If it is dislocated, you must obviously feel a click and it cannot be hidden.
E de aquesta dislocacio es fayta leugiera reduccio quan es fresca e le malaute es enfant.	And from this dislocation, there is an easy reduction when it is fresh and the patient is young.
E la reduccio de lu es que·l ministre eleva la ma de lu a las partidas desus; e aprop pause les tieus pouses dejos le titillic de lu, e eleva la junctura am fortaleza en sus al sieu loc, e·l ministre eleva la ma de lu, e extenda aquela en sus; e aprop pausa aquela dejos quar ela retorna leugierament.	And the reduction of this is that the minister lifts the patient's hand to his shoulder; and then places his fingers under the patient's chin, and lifts the joint with strength back into its place; and the minister lifts the patient's hand, and stretches it upward; and then he places it underneath so that it returns more easily.
Mays si per aquo que havem dit no retorna, e so del comensament que accidic la dislocacio, motz dias, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia banhat en aygua cauda e sia aministrada enbrocacio que mollifique e liniesca ayssi cum si so coytz razitz de altea, e fenugrec, e melillot en aygua, e sia administrada.	But if it does not return after what we have said, and because of the beginning of how the dislocation occurred, many days later, the patient should be bathed in hot water and given an ointment that softens and lubricates like a mixture of oil from tall plants, fenugreek, and melilot in water, and it should be applied.
E aprop le malaute sia ressupinat sobre le sieu dos e sia pausat dejos le titillic de lu espera de lana que sia engual entre levitat e strictura, e aprop le metge pause le sieu talo sobre la spera, e eleva le cap del muscle am vertut, e atire la ma del malaute per que no sia mauguda a las partidas dejos, e autre ministre tengua le cap del malaute, que no sia maugut a las partidas dejos, quar aquela tantost retorna al sieu loc.	And then the patient should be reclined on his back and a pillow placed under his chin, held between elevation and compression, and the doctor should place his thumb on the globe, and lift the head of the muscle with strength, and pull the patient's hand so that it is not caught at the top; and another minister should hold the head of the patient so that it is not caught at the bottom as this returns to its place.
E si voles, reduzeys aquel segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu fassas esser prezent un home le qual sia pus lonc que·l malaute, e estia de la part de aquel latz, e entrometa le sieu muscle dejos le titillic del malaute e eleve le titillic de lu a las partidas desus entro que·l malaute sia suspendut en ayre, e autre ministre tire la ma del malaute de las partidas dejos del sieu ventre.	And if you want, reduce this second way: and it is that you ensure the presence of a man who is taller than the patient, and he should stand on the same side as the dislocation, and insert his arm underneath the patient's chin and lift the patient's chin upward to the top while the patient is suspended in air; and another minister should pull the patient's hand from the bottom of his abdomen.
Mays si le malaute es leugier, lahoras cove que am lu que autre causa sia suspenduda, per so que grave aquel, quar la dislocacio retorna tantost.	But if the patient is thin, then it returns right away due to the cause of suspension, because of gravity.
E es reduzit eysament segon autra manieyra: e es que sia ficat en terra un fust lonc le cap del qual sia redon de figura, ayssi cum pilo de mortier, que no sia gros ni subtil, e aprop sia pausat dejos le malaute; pus que so pausatz sobre·l cap del fust draps leons, e·l malaute sia stant segon la longitut del fust, e aprop sia extenduda la ma de lu a las partidas dejos del autra part; e sia extendut le cos de lu del autre part am fortaleza, quar la junctura retorna al sieu loc am velocitat.	And it is reduced in the same way: and it is that a long post is placed on the ground, the top of which is rounded in shape, like a mortar, neither thick nor slender; and then cushions are placed underneath the patient; and the patient stands according to the length of the post, and his hand is stretched out to the bottom on the other side; and his body is stretched on the other side with strength, because the joint returns to its place with speed.
E si es dificil reduccio de lu per totas las causas que havem ditas, lahoras usa de aquesta cura: e es que tu prenguas un fust la quantitat del qual sia en le lonc de dos brasses, e latitut de aquel sia de quatre ditz, e la grossetut de lu sia aleujat en le preon del tittilic segon aquesta forma:	And if the reduction is difficult due to all of the causes we have mentioned, then use this treatment: and it is that you take a post two yards long, four inches wide, and one inch thick; and its thickness should be removed in the area under the chin according to this form:
E aprop sobre le cap redon sian liatz drap leons per so que·l fust no ledesca le malaute.	And then soft cushions are placed on top of the round head so that the post does not hurt the patient.
E aprop sia pausat dejos le titillic del malaute, e sia extenduda la ma o le bras sobre·l fust entro a las partidas dejos, e sia liat le fust sobre le adjutori e le bras e la extremitat de la ma.	And then the patient's chin is placed underneath, and his hand or arm is stretched out over the post to the bottom; and the post is tied around the elbow and arm and fingertips.
Aprop sia pausat le bras sobre un scalo de scala segon la latitut, e la ma sia extenduda a las partidas dejos, e l’autre cos sia suspendut de l’autre part, quar la junctura intra tantost.	Then the arm is placed on a step of stairs according to its width; and the hand is stretched out to the bottom; and his body is suspended on the other side as the joint returns immediately.
E cum le intrament de lu es complit segon quascuna maniera que es a tu possibla, e lahoras cove que tu pauses dejos le titillic spera de lana de engual quantitat; e aprop pauza emplastre perparat de polvera de moli am enses e album de huou sobre tot le muscle, ayssi quo es revolvut desus, e aprop strenh dejos le titillic am strictura decent; e le liament sia revolvut sobre le emplastre, e la ma de lu sia annectida al col de lu, e sia leyssat, e no sia mauguda la ma de lu per vii dias.	And when the instrument is completed according to any method that is possible for you; and then a bandage is placed underneath the chin, evenly as much; and then an ointment prepared from ground moly with honey is applied over the entire muscle, just like it is rolled over; and the area around the chin is compressed with decent tightness; and the bandage is rolled over the ointment, and his hand is connected to his neck, and it is left, and his hand is not caught for seven days.
E cove que sia pausada la vianda del malaute pauca, entro que·l membre sia confortat, quar es pus leugier a la sanacio de lu.	And let the food of the patient be little, until the member is comforted, because it is easier for his healing.
E aprop la vianda sia donada major aprop vii o v e sia exercitat un movement; e donc si es fermat e no es mollificat, lahoras ja es sanat.	And then food is given more frequently after seven or eight days, and exercise is done; and if it is firm and not soft, then it is healed.
Mays si la junctura es dislocada motas veguadas per humiditat que accideys a lu o per autra causa, lahoras cove que en aquela sia administrat cauteri am tres traucs, segon que denant es dit en le capitol de cauteri.	But if the joint is dislocated many times due to humidity that happens to it or due to another cause, then in that case, cautery should be administered with three punctures as mentioned earlier in the chapter on cautery.
E si tot aysso es fayt e aprop vii dias es desliat le liament e la junctura no es fermada, e le emplastre e la strictura son reduzitz sobre lu alcunas veguadas, e no es fermada e catz e no pot elevar aquel bras a las partidas desus, lahoras sapias que·ls nervis de lu, les quals so al cap del muscle, ja so inscizes o extendutz o mollificatz, e sapia que la junctura nul temps no sira ficada en loc sieu.	And if all of this is done and then after seven days the bandage is removed and the joint is not firm, and the ointment and compression are applied to it several times, and it is not firm, and there is a cat, or he cannot lift his arm upward to the top; then know that the nerves of him, which are at the head of the muscle, are cut or extended or soft; and know that the joint will never return to its place.
De la dislocacio de aquela qu’es fayta deves le pietz e la mamilha o las partidas detras, la reduccio es fayta am impulcio e extencio am las mas, entro que retorne.	From the dislocation that is done to the feet and the breast or the parts behind, the reduction is done with thrusting and extension by hand, as it returns.
E sia administrada en aquela l’autra strictura, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	And let the other compression and cure be applied to it as it is healed.
E si accideys aprop la sanacio gravitat en le membre e tarditat en le movement de lu, lahoras le malaute uze de banh motas veguadas entro que aquela gravitat sia alleujada e que retorne a la natura de lu primiera.	And if the healing happens slowly in the member and there is slowness in its movement, then the patient should take baths several times as that heaviness is relieved and he returns to his first nature.
Capitol .xxvii.	Chapter .XXVII.
De curacio de dislocacio del coyde.	Of the cure of dislocation of the neck.
Sapias que la junctura del coyde es dislocada am difficultat e semblantment retorna am difficultat; e aquela es dislocada a totas partidas, e majorment a la partida denant a la partida detras, e la dislocacio de lu no es amaguada a tu quar es cazent dejos le vezement o dejos le tocament segon qualque figura sia dislocat, e quan ajustes le coyde disloguat am le sa, aquo es a tu declarat manifestament, quar la junctura es concavada e no pot doblar le bras, ni tocar am aquel le sieu muscle.	Know that the joint of the neck is dislocated with difficulty and returns with difficulty; and it is dislocated to all parts, and most to the front from the back, and its dislocation is not hidden from you because it is evident, when you adjust the neck dislocated by the throat, then it is declared to you manifestly, because the joint is concavely and cannot bend the arm or touch with that his own muscle.
E cove que·t coytes, e reduzescas la dislocacio tantost denant que vengua a lu apostema caut, quar si ve a lu apostema caut, dificil es la reduccio de lu, e fort leu no es sanat de tot; e majorment quan es a las partidas detras, quar pus mala es de totas las autras specias de dislocacio, e de major dolor, e motas veguadas deyssen am aquela la mort.	And know that your neck joints are dislocated as soon as it comes to you with an abscess cauterized, because if it comes to you with an abscess cauterized, the reduction is difficult, and most of all when it is at the back parts, because above all the other species of dislocation, it has greater pain, and many times it ends in death.
E la restauracio de lu, quan es aquela que es possibla reduzir, es que la ma de lu sia extenduda am doas mas, e le bras de lu sia expandut, e las mas del metge sian sobre le coyde e dejos lu, e el empellisca la junctura am les pouzes de las suas mas ensemps, o am la razit de la sua palma entro que torne en son loc.	And the restoration of it, when it is possible to reduce, is that his hand is stretched with two hands, and his arm is expanded, and the doctor's hands are on the neck and underneath him; and he pushes the joint with his fingertips or the edge of his palm inward so that it returns to its place.
Mays si la dislocacio es a las partidas denant, lahoras retorna ayssi que dobla la ma am la sua ma, entro que percuta le coyde am la razit de la sua palma.	But if the dislocation is at the front parts, then it returns as he bends his hand with his own hand, as he thrusts the neck with the edge of his palm.
E si la dislocacio no obezeys a la reduccio, lahoras aministra vehement extencio e mot fort.	And if the dislocation does not obey reduction, then administer violent extension and a strong blow.
E es que dos ministres extendan le bras, e tenguan aquel eyssament dos ministres per so que no sia remaugut deves la extencio.	And two ministers should expand his arm, and hold that joint so that it is not caught due to the extension.
E aprop sia revolvut le bras deves tota part, pus que es envolopat drap doblat lonc sobre la ma de lu, o liament.	And then his arm is rolled over all parts, because it is wrapped in a long folded cloth over his hand, or bandage.
E quant le metge toca la junctura am la sua ma, unte aquela am alcun oli per so que aquo sia aquelas causas las quals ajudan en lubricitat de la junctura am facilitat; e aprop empellesca la junctura am empulcio vehement entro que retorne.	And when the doctor touches the joint with his hand, he should smear it with some oil so that it aids in lubricating the joint with ease; and then he pushes the joint with violent thrust inward as it returns.
E aprop la reduccio de lu cove que sia pausat sobre aquela empastre en le qual sia stipticitat e excequacio am album de huou, e sia extrenhut am strictura descent, e·l bras sia suspendut del col, e sia layssat per alcus dias.	And then its reduction should be that it is placed over that ointment in which it was bound and tightened with liniment, and let it dry with a gentle heat; and his arm is suspended from the neck and left for several days.
E aprop sia desliat; e donc si la junctura es formada en le sieu loc, lahoras tu deslia le liament de lu e layssa aquela.	And he should be unbound; and if the joint is formed in its place, then you should loosen his ligament and leave it there.
E si vezas la junctura no be strenher, lahoras tu itera le emplastre e·l liament, e layssa aquela per alcus dias entro que sia extrenhuda; e aprop deslia aquela.	And if you see the joint is not strained, then you should repeat the plaster and the ligament, and leave it for a few days until it is relaxed; and then loosen it.
Mays si accideys a lu gravitat aprop la reduccio de la junctura, e la disposicio de lu es en movement, lahoras aministra humectacio en banh e fricacio subtil, e comprecio, entro que sia aleujat; o pausa sobre la junctura aleliati, so es coyssa de moto grassa; e aprop sia liada, e layssa aquela sobre le os le dia e la nueyt.	But if it happens to him gravity in the reduction of the joint, and his disposition is in movement, then administer moisture in bath and subtle friction, and compression, while he is moved away; or pause over the joint ointment, if it is a joint of moving fat; and then it should be bound, and leave it on the bone for day and night.
E aprop osta aquela, e met aquel en banh; e quan suza, lahoras tu fregua la junctura am fricacio temprada, e aprop itera sobre aquela aleliati, so es ronhonal de moto, una veguada, e la segonda, e la .iii.a.,	And then stop that, and put him in a bath; and when he is warm, then you should rub the joint with tempered friction, and then repeat over it ointment, if it is a joint of moving, once, and the second, and the third,.
corrupcio ja es pervenguda sobre le denolam intrament de banh, entro que sia linit.	Corruption has already occurred in the brain through the instrument of bathing, so it should be treated with liniment.
E si voles, pausa sobre aquela fenda de vaca humida e scalfada am boder e stren sobre aquel; e fay aquo alcunas veguadas, quar aquela es humida e reduzeys a la sua disposicio.	And if you want, put on that wound of cow's milk and calve it with a string over that; and do this several times, because that is moist and returns to its disposition.
Capitol .xxviii.	Chapter .XXVIII.
De curacio de dislocacio de malassen, so es de la junctura que es entre·l bras e la ma.	Of the cure of dislocation of the elbow, if it is of the joint that is between the arm and the hand.
Malassen de la ma alcunas vetz es deslocada, e la reduccio de la dislocacio de lu es leugiera, e·l contrari es de las autras juncturas, mays empero cove que sia velocitat en la reduccio de lu en la hora en la qual es deslocada, denant que le loc sia apostemat o que accida en lu apostema caut.	The elbow of the hand is sometimes displaced, and its reduction from dislocation is easier, and it is the contrary in other joints, but nevertheless there must be velocity in its reduction in the hour in which it is displaced, lest the place should become apoplectic or apoplexy occur in it.
E la reduccio de la dislocacio de lu es que tu pauses la junctura de la ma del malaute sobre una taula e le ministre extenda la ma de aquel, e le metge pause la sua ma o o la sua palma sobre la iminencia de la junctura, e empellisca aquela entro que retorne al sieu loc.	And the reduction of its dislocation is that you put the joint of the hand of the patient on a table and have the minister extend his hand, and the doctor puts his hand or the palm of his hand on the prominence of the joint, and push it in until it returns to its place.
Mays empero cove que sia considerat si la palma ja es ostada al ventre de la ma, lahoras le malaute pause le dos de la sua ma sobre una taula deves la extencio e la reduccio; e si la dislocacio es precedent deves le dos de la ma, lahoras sia la posicio de la ma de aquel intrinicequement sobre la taula, per so que la ma del metge caja sobre aquela iminencia de la junctura.	But nevertheless there must be considered if the palm is already turned to the belly of the hand, then the patient should put his fist on a table opposite to the extension and reduction; and if the dislocation is previous to the fist, then the position of the hand of the patient should be intrinically upon the table, so that the hand of the doctor lies over that prominence of the joint.
E donc si retorna tantost, bon es; e sino, lahoras strenh aquela am empastre cedant le apostema e layssa aquel; e no iteres aquo, quar sino, no soferta ni no podes sobre la reduccio de lu pus que passan a lu dias.	And therefore if he returns immediately, it is good; and if not, then tighten that with plaster, yielding the apoplexy and leave it; and do not repeat this, because if you do not suffer or cannot bear the reduction of it until several days have passed.
Mays empero la junctura roman segon la sua tortuositat; e no notz al malaute alcuna causa, sino que la ma es mollificada e no pot strenher alcuna causa; lahoras sapias que les nervis son trincatz o trissatz, e lahoras no es engen en lu sino que sia strenhuda am cauteri prop le cazament de lu e fort leu aquo confereys alcuna causa.	But nevertheless the joint is bent according to its tortuosity; and do not cause any pain to the patient, unless his hand is softened and cannot tighten anything; then you should know that the nerves are torn or cut, and there is no skill in it except that it is tightened with cautery near its joint and tightly bound to it.
Donc cum malassem es retornada, lahoras pausa sobre lu empastre le qual havem recomtat, e sia layssat e strenhut per v dias; e aprop sia desliat e sia layssat e la ma de lu sia excercitada.	Therefore when the elbow is returned, then put over it plaster which we have recommended, and let it be left and bound for several days; and then loosen it and let it be left and the hand of him exercised.
Mays si le movement de lu es ostat e accideys en lu alcuna gravitat, lahoras leniys aquela am aygua cauda e am fricacio alcunas veguadas, entro que sia alleujat.	But if its movement is impeded and any heaviness occurs in it, then loosen that with warm water and friction several times, until it is relaxed.
Capitol .xxix.	Chapter .XXIX.
De la curacio de dislocacio dels ditz.	Of the cure of dislocation of the fingers.
Alcunas veguadas so dislocatz les ditz a tota partida.	Sometimes the fingers are completely dislocated.
E quan es dislocat alcun dit de aquels al dos de la palma o al ventre de lu, lahoras sten le dit e impelleys la dislocacio de lu am les tieus pouses, entro que retorne.	And when any finger is dislocated on the back of the palm or belly, then press the finger and push its dislocation with your fingers, until it returns.
E aprop sostenta le cap del dit, e suspen aquel deves la part a la qual es dislocat, e layssa aquel per dos dias.	And then support the head of the finger, and suspend that depending on the part to which it is dislocated, and leave it for two days.
E aprop suspen aquel e exten aquel entro que dreyt sia engualhat en aquel sieu dia.	And then suspend that and extend that until it is straight in that its day.
E quan sira noyt, lia aquel segon aquela narracio, e no cesses desliar aquel en le dia e exercitar am movement, e lia aquel en la noyt; e fay aquo per alcus dias entro que sia streyt.	And when it is night, loosen that according to that narration, and do not cease to loosen it during the day and exercise with movement, and do this in the night; and do this for several days until it is tight.
E fay semblant am aquo, si es dislocat al ventre de la ma, e lia aquel ad aquela partida e fay am aquo la tieua primiera operacio, entro que sia sanat.	And do this if it is dislocated to the belly of the hand; and loosen that to that part and do with that your first operation, until it is healed.
E semblantment fay am aquo quan es dislocat a las autres partidas.	And likewise do with that when it is dislocated to other parts.
Capitol .xxx.	Chapter .XXX.
De la curacio de dislocacio dels spondils del dos.	Of the cure of dislocation of the vertebrae of the back.
Quan accideys ad alcun dels spondils del dos o del col dislocacio complida, e so remaugutz motz spondils de lors locs, lahoras en aquela no es curacio, quar la mort se coyta al malaute.	When it happens to any of the vertebrae of the back or neck complete dislocation, and only a few vertebrae remain in their places, then there is no cure for that, because death approaches the patient.
E senhal de aquo es que la egestio del malaute es fora-eyssida ses voluntat, e no pot retenir aquela; e motas veguadas so mollificatz alcus membres de lu o doas cambas de lu o dos brasses de lu, o un de aquels; o es remaugut un spondil de son loc, quar motas veguadas es remaugut e motas veguadas es fayta la remocio de aquels a quatre partidas.	And the sign of that is that the excretion of the patient is outside his will, and he cannot retain it; and often some members of him are softened or both legs or two arms, or one of those; or a vertebra is torn from its place, because often it is torn and often the removal of those to four parts.
Donc aquela ja es remauguda a las partidas detras e es nompnada gelbozitat.	Then that is torn to the parts behind and is called hernia.
Mays la curacio de lu es que lahoras consideras si la gelbozitat accidey de puerissia, quar lahoras en aquela no es curacio ni de aquela no es sanacio de tot.	But the cure of it is that then you consider if the hernia occurs from infancy, because then there is no cure for it nor of that is there no healing at all.
Mays en aquela que ve per cazement o per percussio o per semblant ad aquels, ja diyssero les Antics las manieras de curacio am sermo prolixs, del qual lo mays retorna am profieyt; mays yeu ja e abreujat de aquel del qual lo pauc escusa del trop de lu, per la mieua propinquitat a la entencio mieua exposicio, am la qual he aquo expausat et format ex instrument divers de aquel am le qual mostrero aquo e espausero aquel.	But in that which comes from falling or by beating or by similar to those, then the Ancients have described their ways of curing with long speech, of which the most returns with profit; but I and I have abbreviated that of which the excess of it, by its nearness to my intention has exposed me to that, on which I have expounded and formed various instruments.
E dic que en gelbosita que accideys de la partida denant en le pietz, no es engen ni sanacio de aquela; e semblantment en aquela que es fayta a dos latz.	And I say that in hernia which occurs on the front in the feet, there is no skill nor healing of that; and likewise in that which is made to two sides.
E de aquelas no es curada sino aquela que accideys en le dos propriament am aquo que yeu recomti.	And of those none is cured except that which occurs on the back precisely with that which I have described.
E es que·l malaute sia extendut sobre la sua cara sobre pug engual prop de paret, e sia extendut dejos lu esturment molh per so que no sia lidit le pietz de lu.	And let the patient be extended upon his face upon a flat pillow, and let him be extended below a wet cloth so that his feet are not cold.
E aprop un fust dreyt sia pausat, ficat en la terra en la extremitat del pug entorn le cap de lu, e autra fust en aviro les pes de lu en l’autra extremitat del pueg.	And then a straight staff should be placed, fixt in the earth at the end of the pillow around his head; and another staff in the air beneath his feet at the other end of the pillow.
E·l ministre tengua le fust, e no sia fermat en fossa; e autre ministre tengua l’autre segon aquela forma.	And one minister should hold the staff, and it should not be fixed in a pit; and another minister should hold the other according to that form.
E aprop envolopa sobre le cap del malaute e dejos les titillic liamen leon ferm; e exten la extremitat del liamel al fust le qual es deves le cap de lu, e lia aquel en lu; e aprop strenh l’autre liament sobre las ancas de lu les denols de lu, e deves las cambas de lu; e aprop ajusta totz les liamentz e lia aquels en l’autre fust le qual es deves les pes de lu.	And then wrap around the head of the patient and under the armpits let the lion's tongue be stretched; and extend the end of the tongue to the staff which is opposite his head, and loosen that in him; and then tighten the other ligament over his loins with his fingers, and let it be bound over his feet; and then adjust all the ligaments and loosen those in the other staff which is opposite his feet.
E aprop le ministre cascu extenda le liament a la partida del fust, e no sian remaugutz les dos fustz e les liamentz dels sieus locs en les quals son ficatz, mays empero no so fermatz ayssi cum havem dit.	And then the ministers each extend the ligament to the end of the staff, and let not the two staffs be torn and the ligaments of their places in which they are fixt, but nevertheless do not fix them as I have said.
E le metge pause las suas palmas sobre le spondil am fortaleza entro que retorne, o que pause sobre aquela una taula, e aprop que ajuste sobre la taula les sieus pes entro que retorne.	And the doctor put his palms over the vertebra with strength until it returns, or that he lie on a table, and then let him adjust his feet upon the table until he returns.
Mays si no retorna per aquesta forma, lahoras pren una taula de la qual la latitut o la longitut sia en aviro de tres brassas, e cava en la paret de la qual havem dit que es prop le malaute un loc en le qual intre la extremitat de la taula.	But if he does not return by this form, then take a table of which the width or length is in the air for three arms, and hollow in the wall of which we have said that it is opposite to the patient a place into which enters the end of the table.
E aprop pausa la maytat de la taula sobre le spondilh, e·l metge pause les sieus pes sobre l’autre extremitat, e estrenha be entro que le spondil sia coartat e que retorne al sieu loc.	Then place the smaller part of the board over the spine, and the doctor places his feet on the other end, and stretch well so that the spine is straightened and returns to its place.
E si tu voles, obre am torn le qual es revolvut am la ma; e es que tu fiques en terra deves le cap del malaute en le derier del pug dos fustz, la longitut dels quals sia d’un bras, e deves le cap de lu en le derier del pug eyssament dos fustz; e sia la longitut que es entre quascun fust un palm, e ja es fayt en quascun fust trauc en le qual corr torn, e quascun sia mot fermat en terra per so que no sia maugut.	And if you want, open the anus with your hand; and you should put the patient's head on the ground in front of his feet, the length of which is one arm, and his head in front of his heels, two feet; and the length between each post is a palm, and now there is made on each post a hole through which the rope runs, and each is very firmly fixed to the ground so that it is not moved.
E sia mes un fust redon en le qual es le torn, e sia revolvut en les dos traucs dels dos fustz.	And there should be placed a round post in which is the pulley, and it is wound around the two pegs of the two posts.
E en la extremitat de lu es un trauc en le qual es format le fust, la longueza del qual es un palm am aquo que es revolvut; e en les dos autres fustz es semblant de aquel.	And on its end is a hole in which the post is formed, the length of which is a palm where it is wound; and on the other two posts there is similar to that.
E aprop strenh les liamentz que has streyt en le pietz del malaute en le trau le qual es deves le cap de lu, e les liamentz que has streyts en las coyssas de lu en le torn le qual es deves les pes de lu.	Then stretch the ligaments that you have tightened on the patient's feet in the hole that is under his head, and the ligaments that you have tightened on his thighs in the pulley that is under his feet.
E aprop deves quascun torn e stia un ministre que torssa le torn am la sua ma, e le metge engualhe le spondil segon que havem dit.	And then fix each pulley and have an assistant twist the pulley with his hand, and the doctor straightens the spine as we have said.
E aquesta es la forma del torn:	And this is the form of the pulley:
E aprop pus que le spondil es retornat, e le loc es engualhat, lahoras cove que pauses empastre exciccatiu am album de huou, e aprop estopa; e aprop pause sobre le empastre astela de taula de la qual la latitut sia de tres ditz o enviro aquels, e la longitut de lu sia quantitat que prengua le loc de la gelbositat, e sobre la partida del spondil sa.	And when the spine is returned and the place is healed, then cover it with a paste of oil and wax, and stop it up; and then place over the paste a board whose width is three fingers or so, and the length of it is the quantity that covers the area of the hunchbackness, and over the top of the spine.
E aprop sia liat am liament le qual havem dit, e uze le malaute de nutriment subtil entro que sia sanat.	And then let it be bound with a ligament as we have said, and feed the patient subtle food while he is healing.
E si roman alcuna iminencia en le loc en la fi de la sanacio, lahoras cove que sian aministradas medicinas que moilifico e liniscan am aministracio de la taula per lonc temps, la qual havem recomtada; e ja es aministrada en aquel loc lamina de plom.	And if any swelling remains in the area at the end of the healing, then cover that with medicines that soften and smoothen by application of the board for a long time, which we have recounted; and now it is applied to that place lead sheet.
E alcunas veguadas accideys imminencia en le derier dels spondils del dos, e es cujat per aquela dislocacio; e es aquel os le qual ja imineys per que no cove que sia fayta prosompcio a lu am aquesta medicina, quar fort leu fara a tu accidir mort.	And sometimes there is swelling in the rear of the spine's two bones, and it is healed by that dislocation; and it is the bone which already swells so that it will not cover him with this medicine, for it will soon cause death to him.
Capitol .xxxi.	Chapter .xxxi.
De curacio de anca dislocada.	Of cure for a dislocated hip.
Sapias que la junctura del ancha e la junctura del muscle no endeve sino dislocacio tant solament, e no accideys ad aquelas aquo que accideys a las autras juncturas de petita remocio e concavitat.	Know that the joint of the hip and the joint of the muscle do not bend but only dislocate, and do not happen to those which happen to other joints of little removal and concavity.
E la junctura de la ancha es dislocada segon quatre manieyras, quar es dislocada a las partidas dedintz, o a las partidas defora, o a las partidas denant, o a las partidas detras.	And the joint of the hip is dislocated according to four ways, for it is dislocated at the inner parts, or at the outer parts, or at the front parts, or at the back parts.
E majorment es dislocada a las partidas dedintz, e pauc a las partidas denant o a las partidas detras.	And mostly it is dislocated at the inner parts, and few at the front or back parts.
E senhal de la dislocacio de lu a las partidas de dintz es quar, quan tu ajustas la camba del malaute sana am la malaute, es pus longua e·l denolh es pus heminent que de la sana, e·l malaute no pot doblar le sieu pe deves le lenguonar, e es le loc que siec le lengonar apostemat de apostema caut, per so que·l cap de la coyssa ja es pervengut aqui.	And the sign of its dislocation at the inner parts is that when you straighten the patient's leg, it is longer and the joint is more prominent than of the healthy one, and the patient cannot bend his foot because of the lengthening, and there is a place which lengthens the joint by an aposteme cauterized, so that the head of the thighbone has come here.
E·l senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio es a las partidas defora, es que les accidentz de lu so contraris ad aquest accident.	And the sign of that which it happens to dislocate at the outer parts is that its accidents are contrary to those above.
E senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio a las partidas denant es quar expan la camba sieua segon compliment, mays empero no dobla aquela ses dolor que es en le denol, e si se perforsa ad anar e no pot sobre aquo a las partidas denant; e la urina de lu es retenguda e l’engonar de lu es apostemat, e deves la ambulacio de lu sobre le talo.	And the sign of that which it happens to dislocate at the front parts is that it extends his leg according to its complement, but indeed does not bend that joint without pain which is in the joint, and if it forces itself to walk and cannot go forward over that towards the front parts; and his urine is retained and his joint is apostematized, and he should walk on his heel.
E senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio a las partidas detras es que no expande le denol, ni no puesca doblar aquel denant que doble le engonar, e la camba de lu es pus breva que l’autra, e l’engonar es mollificat, e·l cap de la coyssa es deves aquel loc.	And the sign of that which it happens to dislocate at the back parts is that it does not extend the joint, nor can bend that joint towards the front which bends the joint, and his leg is shorter than the other one, and his joint is softened, and the head of the thighbone is at that place.
Mays reduccio de las specias de aquesta dislocacio es que tu consideras, lahoras, si la dislocacio es vetusta et antiqua, que ja es anticada am le havent aquela aprop tu aministras reduccio de lu e roman segon la sua disposicio, lahoras no es en aquela curacio de tot; e adonc no cove que en aquela sia fayta prosompcio.	But the reduction of the species of this dislocation is that you consider, then, if the dislocation is old and antique, which has already been healed by you administering its reduction and remaining according to its disposition, then there should not be done a prosthesis on it.
Mays en aquel del qual la dislocacio es recent, e es una de las quatre specias de dislocacio, lahoras te coyta ad aquo que volvas la junctura e extendas aquela a las partidas dedintz e a las partidas defora, e mau aquela a la dextra e sinistra, quar fort leu retorna e no indigeys de autra cura.	But in that one of which the dislocation is recent, and it is one of the four species of dislocation, then you go to that one you want to turn the joint and extend it at the inner parts and the outer parts, and then to the right and left, for it will soon return and not need another cure.
Mays, si no retorna en aquesta manieyra, lahoras cove que tu prepares ministre fort e extendas la camba de lu de la partida pus dejos, o am las suas mas, o am liament lo qual es liat sobre la camba desus le denol; e autre ministre extenda la ma de aquel desus enayssi que meta las suas mas dejos les titillics de lu; e aprop strenha am liament leon sobre la razit de la coyssa, e tengua autre ministre ters le extremitat del liament.	But if it does not return in this way, then you should prepare a strong minister and extend the leg of him from the bottommost part, or with his fingers, or with a ligament which is tied over the leg below the joint; and another minister extends his hand over that below in such a way as to put his fingers below the nipples of him; and then tighten with a ligament lion over the root of the thighbone, and let another minister press the end of the ligament.
E sia extencio de lu o de la partida dedintz a l’angonar a la partida de la furcula, o de la partida detras a la partida del dos.	And it should be extended either from the inner part to the antingling of the collarbone, or from the back part to the part of the shoulder blade.
E sia la extencio de totz aquels en una veguada entro que·l malaute sia elevat am le sieu cos de terra e que romangua pendent.	And it should be extended in one go while the patient is raised up by his body from the earth and hangs bent.
E aquesta specia de extencio es specia cominal a totas quatre.	And this species of extension is common to all four.
E donc si la dislocacio retorna am aquo que havem dit, sira bo; e sino, lahoras es necessari a tota specia aquo que dire de la propria curacio.	And so if the dislocation returns by what we have said, then all is well; and otherwise, it is necessary for every species that I say about its own cure.
En la reduccio de lu propria, quan es dislocada, e la dislocacio es a las partidas dedintz, cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre le sieu latz sa; e aprop pausa les liamentz sobre la razit de la coyssa en aquel loc le qual entre le cap de la coyssa e·l loc que es dejos le langonar; e aprop exten le liament en sus de la part del angonar a la pus auta partida de la furcula.	In its own reduction, when it is dislocated, and the dislocation is at the inner parts, let the patient be laid on his back; and then place the ligaments over the root of the thighbone in that place between the head of the thighbone and the part which is below the joint; and then extend the ligament above from the part of the antingling to the highest part of the collarbone.
E aprop autre ministre fort prengua les brasses de lu, e amerme le loc gros de la coyssa malaute e extenda a las partidas deforo per extencio vehement, quar aquela retorna en le sieu loc.	And then another strong minister should take the armpits of him, and hold up the large place of the patient's thighbone and extend to the outer parts by violent extension, for that returns in its place.
E aquesta specia es de pus leugiera curacio am la qual aquest membre es reduzit que las autres specias.	And this species is of further lengthier cure by which this member is reduced than the other species.
Mays si es excusat sobre tu e no obezeys al entrament am aquesta specia de curacio de tot, lahoras cove que sian liatz les dos pes del malaute ensemps am liament fort, leugier, sobre amdos les talos e amdos les denols.	But if it is excused from you and does not obey the treatment by this species of cure of all, then let his two legs be bound together with a strong ligament, lengthier, over both heels and over both joints.
E sia la longitut de quascun de son par la quantitat de quatre ditz, e sia la camba malaute extenduda mays que l’autre per quantitat de dos ditz.	And let the length of each of his parts be the quantity of four fingers, and let the leg of him be extended more than the other by a quantity of two fingers.
E aprop le malaute sia suspendut sobre le cap del fust, e que sia en la mayso; e sia la longitut de lu de la terra la quantitat de dos brasses.	And then let the patient be suspended over the head of the post, and let it be in the middle; and let its length from the earth be the quantity of two arms.
E aprop comanda a un jove fort que minuesca le cap de la coyssa, e sia suspendut am le malaute autre jove, e l’autre jove minuent la coysa am fortaleza empellesca, quar la junctura retorna al sieu loc am velocitat.	And then command a strong youth to shorten the head of the thighbone, and let it be suspended by another youth, and that other youth shorten the thighbone with strength, for the joint will return to its place with speed.
Mays en la reducio propria, quan es dislocacio a la partida defora, cove que·l malaute jaga sobre pug segon que havem recomtat en le havent gelbozitat; e sia strenhut le liament sobre la camba malauta propriament e sobre le pietz de lu.	But in the true reduction when it is a dislocation to the outside, let the patient lie on his side as we have recommended with the elbow bent; and let the ligament be stretched properly over the patient's chest and over their feet.
E aprop dos fustz sian pausatz, la un als pes de lu, e l’autre al cap; e aprop sian pausatz fustz ajustatz al mieg del pueg ficat sobre·l qual draps humitz sian envolopatz, per so que·l malaute no sia dampnajat per que·l fust sia entre las coyssas de lu, per que deves la extencio a las partidas dejos no sia atirat.	And let two poles be placed, one at the patient's feet and the other at their head; and let poles be placed under their buttocks, with a cloth moistened in vinegar wrapped around the pole so that the patient is not harmed by the pole being between their thighs, so that the extension to the lower parts is not drawn.
E aprop quascun ministre extenda a la sua part, e·l metge am la sua ma enguala la reduccio segon l’art.	And let each minister extend to their side, and the doctor have his hand on the reduction according to the art.
Donc, si obezeys a revercio, sira bo grandament; e sino, pausa sobre aquela diligentment e ayssi quo havem dit en gelbozitat per aquela engualment.	Therefore, if they obey the reversal, they will get better soon; and if not, apply it to that diligently and in the same way as we have said about the bending in the elbow joint.
Mays cove que·l malaute jagua sobre les sieus latz sa quetament.	But let the patient lie on their side quietly.
E quan la dislocacio es a las partidas denant, lahoras cove que la camba sia extenduda leugierament, e es segon aquesta meteyssa narracio sobre pueg; e le metge pause la palma de la sua ma dreyta sobre·l langonar malaute, e aprop coarte aquel am l’autra ma, e am aquela coartacio pausa aquel extendut a las partidas dejos a la partida del denol.	And when the dislocation is to the front parts, then let the chest be stretched slightly, and it is according to this narrative on the elbow; and let the doctor place the palm of his right hand over the painful shoulder, and let him tightly hold that with his other hand, and with this tight grip he extends that to the lower parts to the tip of the toe.
E si la dislocacio es a las partidas detras, lahoras no cove que·l malaute sia extendut a las partidas dejos, e es elevat sobre la terra; habantz cove que sia pausat sobre causa dura, ayssi cum cove le eyssament si l’ancha de lu es dislocada a las partidas defora, segon aquo que havem dit del jasement de lu sobre dos anchas; e es sobre la sua cara e les liamentz sian extendutz, segon que havem dit, no ha guayre.	And if the dislocation is to the back parts, then let the patient not be extended to the lower parts, and they are elevated above the earth; unless it is placed on a hard surface, as well as how we have said about the placement of it on two arms; and they are on their face and their ligaments are stretched, according to what we have said, there is no harm.
E cove que sia aministrada compressio am taula sobre le loc al qual yeys la junctura.	And let compression be administered with a table over the place to which you turn the joint.
Donc cum la reducio es complida segon que cove — e·l senhal de la reduccio de lu no es amaguat a tu, e es que tu extendas del malaute doas cambas, e quan tu vezes aquelas enguals e le malaute extrenh la sieua camba e expandeys aquela ses excusacio, lahoras sapias que·l membre segon que cove es retornat — e lahoras tu ajusta doas coyssas e pausa empastre e extrenh am benda ayssi que la ancha no sia mauguda en alcuna de las partidas; e adheresca le malaute a repaus per tres dias o per quatre.	And when the reduction is done according to what you see — and the sign of the reduction is not hidden from you, and it is that you extend the patient's two arms, and when you see those bent and the patient stretches his arm and expands without any excuse, then you know that the joint according to what it is returned — and then you adjust both thighs and apply plaster and stretch with a bandage so that the joint is not damaged in any of the parts; and let the patient rest for three or four days.
E aprop deslia le liament e l’empastre, e compara la una camba am l’autra.	And then loosen the ligament and the plaster, and compare one arm to the other.
Lahoras, si vezas aquelas enguals en vustament, lahoras sapias que la dislocacio ja es fermada, e adonc layssa le malaute anar.	Then, if you see those bent in truth, then you know that the dislocation is already closed, and then let the patient walk.
E si vezas alcuna causa de mollificacio, lahoras tu retorna e emplastra aquel, e extrenh aquel segon la tua primiera strectura, e layssa aquel en tres dias.	And if you see any cause of softening, then return and plaster that, and stretch it according to your first stretching, and let that be for three days.
E aprop deslia aquel, e fay aquel tardar en ambulacio sobre quascu per alcus dias, entro que sia confortat.	And then loosen that, and have that delay in walking on any day, until it is comforted.
Capitol .xxxii.	Chapter .xxxii.
De curacio de dislocacio del denolh.	Of the treatment of dislocation of the shoulder joint.
Le denolh es dislocat segon tres manieyras, quar es dislocat a las partidas defora, e a las partidas dedintz, e a las partidas dejos mays a las partidas detras; e a las partidas denant no es dislocat.	The shoulder joint is dislocated in three ways, for it is dislocated to the outside parts, and to the inside parts, and to the lower parts but not to the front parts.
E le senhal de dislocacio de lu es que comandes al malaute que aplique la sua camba am la coyssa; lahoras sapias que·l denol es dislocat.	And the sign of dislocation of it is that you command the patient to apply their arm to their thigh; then you know that the shoulder joint is dislocated.
E la restauracio de totas las manieyras de lu es que fassas cezer le malaute dreyt, enayssi que ja extenda la sieua camba, si pot sobre aquo; adherir le tieu dos a la cara de lu, e pausa le pe de lu entre les tieus pes; e aprop fay adherir le denol de lu am las tuas palmas, e rete aquelas entre les tieus ditz sobre le denolh de lu am fortaleza, e autre ministre extenda le sieu pe entro que·l denol retorne a son loc.	And the restoration of all its ways is that you make the patient lie straight, so that they already extend their arm, if they can on that; adhere to the patient's two cheeks with your hands, and place the patient's foot between your feet; then let another minister extend the patient's arm while you hold their shoulder with your palms, and another minister extends the patient's leg while the doctor applies reduction to the shoulder joint with strength.
E senhal de reddicio de lu es que la sua camba adharesca am la coyssa am levitat no-laboroza.	And the sign of its reduction is that their arm adheres to their thigh without laborious lifting.
E aprop emplastra aquel e fay adhirir la camba am la coyssa, e aprop lia aquelas emsemps am una benda per tres dias o per quatre, e aprop deslia aquelas.	And then plaster that and have the arm adhere to the thigh, and then bind those together with a bandage for three or four days, and then loosen them.
E no uze le malaute de ambulacio per alcus dias, entro que sia sanat e cofortat.	And do not let the patient walk for several days, until it is healed and comforted.
Mays si la reduccio de lu a tu es excusada, lahoras aministra fort extencio am liamentz dels quals en la curacio de la hancha precedit narracio.	But if its reduction to you is excused, then administer strong extension with the ligaments from which in the treatment of the hip joint there is preceding narrative.
Capitol .xxxiii.	Chapter .xxxiii.
De la curacio de la dislocacio del talo.	Of the treatment of dislocation of the ankle joint.
Le talo alcunas veguadas es remaugut per petita remocio, e alcunas veguadas es dislocat segon compliment, e la dislocacio de lu es fayta o a las partidas dedintz o a las partidas deforo.	The ankle joint is sometimes dislocated by small removal, and sometimes it is dislocated according to completion, and its dislocation is made either to the inside parts or to the outside parts.
E le senhal de la dislocacio de lu es que vezes le talo imflat procedent a la partida a la qual es dislocat.	And the sign of its dislocation is that you see the ankle swollen proceeding from the part to which it is dislocated.
Mays la curacio de la remocio de lu es de leugiera reddicio, e es que sia extendut am facilitat am las mas e sia engualhat entro que retorne.	But the treatment of its removal is of slight reduction, and it is extended with facility by hands and bent while it returns.
Mays en la curacio de lu quan es dislocat segon compliment, cove que fasses cezer le malaute dreyt, e tengua aquel un ministre fort e valent de la partida detras del dos de aquel en le mieg loc de lu.	But in its treatment when it is dislocated according to completion, let the patient lie straight, and have a strong and valiant minister from behind their back in the middle location of them.
E aprop te tu am la tieua ma dreyta le pe de la pus sobirana part, e am la tua ma sinistra de la part pus dejos del pe en le loc de la cavilha.	And then you with your right hand take the ankle from the highest part, and with your left hand from the lowest part of the ankle in the location of the ankle bone.
E aprop atira le pe a tu am la tua ma dreyta, e aprop am la sinistra per dos veguadas, e aprop exten am la sinistra; e empelleys le pietz del pe am la dreyta deves la camba ses trebalh.	And then pull the ankle to you with your right hand, and then with the left twice, and then extend with the left; and press the foot of the ankle to you with the right behind the arm in its labor.
E fay aquo doas veguadas segon que havem comtat.	And do that two times according to what we have counted.
E aprop empelleys le pietz del pe a la camba la tersa veguada, e tu es a la cavilha.	And then press the foot of the ankle to the calf the third time, and you are at the ankle bone.
Donc si retorna en una veguada o en dos segon aquesta manieyra, e si vezes le pe engualhat, es bo; e sino, lahoras sobre lu itera la operacio, quar aquel retorna.	Therefore if it returns in one time or two according to this way, and if you see the ankle bent, it is good; and if not, then repeat the operation on it, for it will return.
Mays si a tu es prohibida la reduccio de lu am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras fay jaser le malaute sobre le sieu dos sobre terra, e estrenh un paysel mot en terra fermat, e que caja entre las coyssas de lu, e tu ja has envolopat sobre lu drap per so que no ledesca le malaute.	But if to you the reduction of it is prohibited according to what we have recommended, then let the patient lie on their back on earth, and stretch a wooden stake in firm earth, and that it be placed between the patient's thighs, and you already wrapped a cloth around it so that the patient does not slip.
E aprop le ministre de lu tengua las suas coyssas, e aprop autre ministre extenda le pe am las suas mas o am liament que lie sobre le col del pe; e aprop extenda aquel quascun ministre contre extencio del sieu par, e le payssel sia extant entre las coyssas del malaute retinent aquel, per so que·l cos de lu no sia atirat a las partidas dejos deves la sua extencio.	And then the minister of it has his thighs, and then another minister extends the arm with their hands or with the ligament that lies on the neck of the ankle; and then each minister extends against the extension of their fellow, and the stake is extended between the patient's thighs holding them so that the body of him is not drawn to the lower parts because of his extension.
E aprop le metge enguala la dislocacio am las sieuas mas, e autre ministre tengua la coyssa sana a las partidas dejos, quar la dislocacio retorna am la facilitat.	And then the doctor applies reduction with their hands, and another minister has the healthy thigh to the lower parts, for the dislocation returns with facility.
E donc cum retorna la dislocacio e es declarada a tu la sanetat de la reduccio de lu, lahoras pausa emplastre e extrenh aquela am liamentz fortment, e ligua le pe am liament a la camba.	And then when the dislocation returns and you are informed of its reduction, then apply plaster and stretch it firmly with ligaments, and tie the ankle to the calf.
E cove que temes o te guardes dels nervis les quals so detras sobre le talo, per que le liament sobre aquel no sia vehement e leda aquel fortment.	And let you beware or keep watch on the nerves which are behind on the ankle, so that the ligament over it is not vehement and that one does not lead it strongly.
E aprop layssa aquel per dos dias o per tres; e si le liament es mollificat, extrenh aquel.	And then let him lie for two or three days; and if the ligament is softened, stretch it.
E aprop deslia aquel en le ters dia o en le quart, e prohibeys le malaute de anament per xl dias.	And then loosen that on the third day or on the fourth, and prohibit the patient from walking for 40 days.
Mays si es forsat de anar denant aquel spazi, no es fayta segurtat que la dislocacio no sia sobre lu dissolvuda e corrumpuda, e aprop aquo que no recipia curacio.	But if it is forced to go in front of that space, then there is no guarantee that the dislocation is not dissolved and corrupted in it, and so it receives no cure.
E si accideys a lu apostema caut, lahoras cove que tu aministre en la cedacio de lu aquo en lo qual precedic la nostra narracio, en autre loc de curacio e de embrocacio, entro que sia remauguda.	And if it happens that the wound turns bad, then you must apply in the treatment of it that which we described earlier, in another place of cure and of bandaging, until it is healed.
Capitol .xxxiiii.	Chapter 34.
De curacio de dislocacio dels ditz dels pes.	Of the cure of dislocation of the big toe of the foot.
Cove que aquel qu’es dislocat sia engualhat am pauca extencio ses trebal; e aquo que no es dificil, abantz es leugier.	Let him who is dislocated be anointed with a little oil, and that which is not difficult, rather let it be lighter.
Mays si la dislocacio es en alcus nozes del dos del pe, lahoras cove que fassas cezer le malaute le sieu pe sobre loc engual de la terra o sobre taula, e sia estant ayssi cum si anava.	But if the dislocation is in one of the joints of the big toe of the foot, then let him have his foot cut off from under him and lie on the ground or a table, and remain there as if he were walking.
E aprop tu sta de pes, e pausa le tieu pe sobre aquo que imineys de las juncturas, e aprop calca aquel am le tieu pe am vertut entro que retorne, e que vejas aquel ja engualhat e no aparesca en le loc eminencia.	Then you stand on your feet and place your foot over what is causing the pain from the joints, and then press that with your foot with strength until it returns, and see if it has been anointed and there is no lump.
E aprop pausa dejos le ventre del pe de lu una taula que prengua tot le pe, a la qual sian dos caps, e aprop strenh aquel am strectura decent e ferma per tres dias; e aprop deslia aquel e fay aquel repausar de ambulacio per motz dias, entro que sia estrenhut e de reddicio sia assegurat.	Then place under his foot a board that supports the whole foot, which has two ends, and then stretch it with decent and firm tension for three days; and then loosen it and let him rest from walking for several days, until he is restored and his healing is assured.
Capitol .xxxv.	Chapter 35.
De las specias de dislocacio que sian faytas am plagua o am fractura o am quascuna ensemps.	Of the kinds of dislocation that are done by plague or by fracture or by any other cause.
Quan accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, e tu te perforssas en la curacio de aquela e en la restauracio de lu, motas veguadas succezeys la mort.	When one of those causes occurs, and you persevere in the cure and restoration of him, many times death ensues.
E per aquo no cove que sobre la curacio de lu presuma, sino aquel que es savi en l’art, de lonc uzatge, misericordios e pietados, tardiu, no-ardit ni presomptuos; e que use en le comensament de medicinas que cedan apostemas cautz tant solament, e leyssa le malaute al divinal jutgament, sino ad aquel al qual speras salut de perdicio, am de la malautia alleviacio, e en la qual appareys alcuna speransa.	And so you must not presume upon the cure of him, but let him who is wise in the art, with great skill, compassion, and pity, be slow, not hasty or presumptuous, and use at the beginning of medicines that soothe bad wounds only slightly, and let the patient depend on divine judgment, unless you hope for salvation from loss, from the alleviation of illness, and see some hope in it.
E adonc esforsa te tantost far de lu la reduccio en le comensament de la causa, denant que endevengua apostema caut.	And then immediately strive to reduce him at the beginning of the cause, before he develops a bad wound.
E adonc si le membre retorna segon que volem, lahoras aministra regiment le qual ceda apostema caut e cura la plagua am aquo que conveneys a lu dels enguentz desiccatius.	And then if the member returns as we want, then administer treatment that soothes bad wounds and cures the plague with what is suitable for him of the dry ointments.
E si dislocacio es am fractura e accideys en le os satagias separadas, lahoras tu perforsa le stement de lor, e fay en aquo so que havem dit en las malautias simplas de aquo que es precedit en les locz de aquels.	And if the dislocation is by fracture and the bones are separated, then you must persevere in the treatment of them, and do in those what we have said earlier about the simple illnesses of those.
E guarda e esquiva segon la tua vertut aquel del intrament en las vias de temor segon que a tu es precedida la mia predicacio; quar aquo es milhor a tu deves le tieu Creator, e mays permanent a la tua gloria, e mays saludos al tieu cos verays aquels en le tieu temps.	And guard and avoid, according to your ability, that from the instrument in the ways of fear as it is foretold to you in my prophecy; for that is better for you, and more beneficial to your true glory, and more healthful for your real body, those in your time.
Ayssi fineysso las paraulas de Albucasim perfieytament de las quals Dieus ne sia benezeyt.	Thus ends the words of Al-Bukasi perfectly, of which God be praised.
Amen.	Amen.
