Ayssi comensan las paraulas de Albucasim .	Thus begin the words of Albucasis.
O, filhs, pus yeu he a vos complit aquest libre, le qual es le derier de la sciencia de medicina, per le compliment de lu so consequit la fi en lu, e per las exposicios de lu, e per las declaracios de lu, es a mi vist que yeu complesca aquel a vos am aquest tractat, le qual es partida de la operacio am ma, so es cyrurgia.	O sons, if I have fulfilled this book for you, which is the last of the science of medicine, through its completion in me, and through its expositions and declarations by me, it seems to me that you will complete it with this treatise, which is part of the operation with the hand, and that is surgery.
Quar la operacio am ma es prostrada en nostre regio e en nostre temps de tot privada, entro que fort leu peric la sciencia de lu, e le vistigi de lu es ostat; e no romasero de lu sino alcunas petitas descripcios en les libres dels Antics, les quals mudero las mas e endevenc ad aquels error e heyssitacio entro que son clausas las entencios de lu e es elonguada la forsa de lu e l’art.	For the operation with the hand is deprived in our time and age of all its strength, while the science of it is lost and its traces are left behind; and there remain of it only a few small descriptions in the books of the Ancients, which they have changed and directed to error and confusion, so that their understandings of it are closed off and its art is prolonged and stretched out.
E es vist a mi que yeu vivifique aquela am ordenacio de aquest tractat en aquela segon la via de exposicio e de declaracio e de abreviacio; e per que vengua am las formas dels ferramentz de cautheri e dels autres instrumentz de la obra cum sia per addicio de la declaracio, e per preparacio de lu, la qual causa es necessaria.	And it seems to me that you will enliven this through the ordering of this treatise according to the way of exposition and declaration and abbreviation; and so that you may come to the forms of the tools of cautery and of the other instruments of the work as is fitting, through addition of declaration and through preparation for it, which is necessary.
Mays la causa per la qual no es atrobat bo artifex am la sieua ma en aquest nostre temps, es quar la art de medicina es longua, e que cove le sieu actor denant aquo esser excercitat en la sciencia de anotomia la qual recontec Gualia entro que sapia les juvament dels membres e las formas de aquels, e la conjunctio e la separacio de lor; e haia la conoyssensa dels osses, dels nervis e dels lacertz, e·l nombre de aquels, e la egrecio de lor; e de las venas pulsatils e de las quietas, e dels locs del eyssiment de lor.	But the cause why there is no good artificer with his hand in our time is that the art of medicine is long, and that one has to be exercised before it in the science of anatomy, which was known to the Gauls as they knew the parts of the members and their forms; and the connection and separation of them; and had knowledge of the bones, the nerves, and the tendons, and the number of these, and their outgoing.
E per aquo ditz Ypocras que am u nom es mot, mays en l’obra petit, e majorment en la art de la ma.	And for this Hypocras says that with a name is much, but in the work little, and most especially in the art of the hand.
Mays nos ja avem dit de aquel en l’introit de aquest libre; quar qui no es scient aquo que li avem dit de anotomia, no es evacuat que no caia en error per la qual siran mortz les homes, ayssi cum yeu he vist trops de aquels, quar alscus son formatz en esta sciencia e gettan se de aquela ses sciencia e ses experiment.	But we have already said this in the introduction to this book; for whoever is not learned in what we have said of anatomy is evacuated and will fall into error by which men will die, as I have seen many of those, for some are formed in this science and throw themselves from it without experience.
Quar yeu vi un metge folh e enperit aver incidit un apostema escrophilos en le colh de una femna, e incidic alcunas arterias del colh per que fluic gran sanc entro que la femna cazec morta entre las mas de lu.	For I saw a foolish and inexperienced physician make an ulcer of scrofula in the neck of a woman, and incise some arteries of the neck so that much blood flowed and the woman died under his hand.
E vi un autre metge que pres que el traguera una peyra d’un home le qual avia procesit en sa etat, e la peyra era gran, e venguet a lu e trayssec aquela peyra am un tros de la vesiqua, per que aquel home al tertz dia es mort.	And I saw another physician who had to swallow a stone of a man who had a process in his state; and the stone was large, and he came to him and pulled out that stone with a piece of the bladder, and the man on the third day died.
E yeu ja apelat fuy a estrayre aquela, e vi que per la grandesa de la peyra e per la disposicio del malaute conogui subre lu que morira.	And I called to draw out that one, and saw that by the size of the stone and the disposition of the patient, who lay over him, he would die.
E vi un autre metge le qual prenia stipendic de un duc de nostra terra per cyrurgia, e endeven a un crastrat negre le qual era deves lu fractura en la coyssa de lu; e perparec le metge am la sua ignorancia, estrayssec la fractura, sobre la plagua, am pulvinas e astelas am forta strectura, e no layssec a la plagua espiracio.	And I saw another physician who took stipends from a duke of our land for surgery, and treated a broken bone of a black person; and through his ignorance he drew out the fracture on the wound with poultices and bandages with strong tightness, and did not leave the wound to breathe.
E aprop le desliet segons los sieus desiriers, e aprop le relieg, e aprop le leyssec per alcus jorns e comandec que nos deslies le liament; e estec ayssi entro que la coyssa e·l pe foro apostematz, e pervenguet a perdicio.	And he drew it out according to his desires, and bound it up, and left it for several days, and commanded that we loosen the bandage; and he did this so that the leg and thigh became ulcerated, and came to harm.
E yeu fuy apelat a lu, e aparelhegui a desliar le liament, e conseguida es tranquilitat e enayssi amermet de sas dolors.	And I was called to him, and prepared to loosen the bandage, and peace came to him, and he grew calm of his pains.
Mays empero ja corrupcio era confermada en le membre, per que no pogui refrenar aquela, e no cessec perambular la corrupcio en le membre entro que·l malaute peric.	But indeed the corruption was confirmed in the member, so that I could not restrain it, and the corruption did not cease to wander in the member until the patient died.
E vi un autre metge le qual perforec un apostema cancros, e fo ulcerat aprop alscus dias, entro que foc magnificada la malicia de lu am lo senhor de lu.	And I saw another physician who made an ulcer of a malignant cancer, and it was ulcerated for several days, until the wickedness of it grew great with its lord.
La qual causa es quar le cranc caut es pur de humor melencolic, lahoras no cove que pervengua a lu am ferr de tot, sino que sia an membre le qual suffertes que de tot fos hostat.	The cause of this is that the malignant humour is pure in its nature; but it does not come to it through iron, unless there is a member which suffers from it altogether.
E per aquo, filhs, necessari es a vos que la operacio am ma sia devisada en dos devesios: so es en operacio a lu qual es associada salut, e en obra am la qual es perilh en las majors disposicios.	And for this, sons, it is necessary for you that the operation with the hand be considered in two ways; one is an operation associated with health, and the other an act with which are associated the greatest dispositions.
E yeu ja he exsitat aquo en tot loc de aquest libre en le qual venc opperacio en la qual es error e temor; per que necessari es a vos que guardetz aquo e layssetz aquel, per que les folhs no atrobo via a parlar e a vos desonestar.	And I have already exhorted this in every place of this book in which occurs an operation in which there is error and fear; so that it is necessary for you to guard against this and leave that, so that the foolish do not obstruct your way and dissuade you.
E donc prenetz las vostras armas am sollicitut e am proteccio de Dieu , e les vostres malautes am falicitat e am fermetat.	And therefore take up your weapons with solicitude and with protection of God, and your patients with facility and firmness.
E usatz de la milhor via per la gracia de Dieu perdusent a salut e a lausabla successio, e laysatz las malautias terriblas de difficil sanacio, e ostatz las vostras armas de aquo que vos fa temer, per so que ysitatio en vostra fe e en le vostre nom no vos evasisca: quar mays es remanent a la vostra gloria, e pus aut en le mon e en derier a las vostras sanctitatz.	And use the best way through the grace of God, to lead to health and praiseworthy success; and lay aside the terrible illnesses of difficult cure, and take up your arms against what causes you fear, so that solicitude in your faith and in your name does not fail: for it will remain for your glory, and more in the world and beyond to your sanctities.
Gualia ja diyssec en alcunas sieuas monicios:	Gaulish already said in some of his own words:
“No mediquetz malautia mala, per so que mals metges no siatz nompnatz”.	“Do not treat illnesses with evil, so that bad physicians are not named.”
E yeu ja he devesit aquest libre segontz tres capitols.	And I have composed this book according to three chapters.
Comensa la divisio del libre, e primier de la primieyra partida.	Begins the division of the book, and first of the first part.
Le primier capitol ordenat del cap entro·s pes, en las formas dels instrumentz e en les ferrementz dels cauteris, e de aquo que necessari es en la opperacio.	The first chapter ordered from the head into the feet, in the forms of the instruments and in the tools of cautery, and of what is necessary in the operation.
La divisio de la segonda partida.	The division of the second part.
Le segon capitol, de siccio e perforacio, e de ventosas, e de plaguas, e de extractio de sagetas e de semblantz ad aquelas, tot capitolat e ordenat de las formas dels instrumentz.	The second chapter, of bleeding and piercing, and of cupping, and of bandages, and of extraction of thorns and their like, all chaptered and ordered according to the forms of the instruments.
Divisio de la tersa partida.	Division of the third part.
Le tertz capitol, de restauracio e de dislocacio, e de curacio de torcio e de semblantz ad aquels; capitol ordenat del cap entro·s pes, e de las formas dels instrumentz.	The third chapter, of restoration and dislocation, and of cure for twisting and their like; a chapter ordered from the head into the feet, and of the forms of the instruments.
De cauteri am foc e am medicina aguda e rememoracio de la opperacio.	Of cautery with fire and with sharp medicine and memory of the operation.
Am aquel comensa le tractat de tot le libre.	With that begins the treatise of all the book.
Cove que yeu digua la qualitat dels juvamentz de aquel cauteri e dels noccumentz de lu, e en qual compleccio sia prohibit cauteri.	May I declare the quality of the parts of that cautery and the pains of it, and in what disposition cautery is prohibited.
Donc dic que·l sermo de la qualitat del juvament de cauteri e del noccument de lu es sermo lonc e prolixs, e subtil per sciensa, e secret amaguat; e ja de lu a parlat gran multitut de savis, e de lu se son desacordatz, et a mi abasta un petit dels sermons de lor, temen perlonguacio.	Therefore I say that the word of the quality of the part of cautery and of the pain of it is long and prolix, and subtle through science, and secret hidden; and many wise men have spoken much of it, and they disagree on it, and for me a little of their words suffices, fearing prolixity.
E donc dic que cauteri comfereys a tota compleccio universalment la qual es am materia o ses materia, exceptat dos compleccios, las quals son compleccios caudas ses materia .	And therefore I say that cautery brings forth universally in all complections, except two complecions, which are complictions of cold without matter.
En la compleccio cauda e secca am materia se desecordero; quar alcus dyssero que cauteri es juvatiu ad aquela, e les autres dyssero le contrari de aquel, que cauteri no es convenient en malautia la qual es per qualiditat e per siccitat, quar natura del foc es qualiditat e siccitat, e enconvenient es que malautia cauda e secca am aquo que es caut e sec sia sanada.	In the compliction cold and dry with matter they disagree; for some say that cautery is beneficial to it, and others say the contrary of that, that cautery is not convenient in illness which is by quality and dryness, for the nature of fire is quality and dryness, and inconvenient that illness cold and dry is cauted and dry be healed.
E diysec aquel que ditz le contrari de aquel, que per cauteri es fayt juvament en tota malautia cauda e secca que ve en les cors dels homes, quar quan tu comparas le cors de home e las humiditatz de lu a la compleccio del foc, atrobas le cors de home freg.	And he says the contrary of that, that by cautery is made benefit in all illness cold and dry which one sees in the bodies of men; for when you compare the body of man and his humours to the compliction of fire, one feels the body of man hot.
E yeu dic per le sermo de aquel, que esperiment aquo ja a mi alscunas vetz a descubert.	And I say through the word of that, that I have discovered this experiment many times.
Mays empero no cove que vengua sobre aquo aquel que ja es exproat e excersitat en le capitol de cauteri per derier exercici, e a conogut la diversitat de la compleccio dels homes e la disposicio de las malautias en lor meteyssas, e las causas de aquelas, e·ls accidentz de lor, e l’espasi del temps de aquelas.	However, one should not come to this topic unless he is experienced and practiced in the chapter of cauteries through his knowledge of the diversity of human complexions and the dispositions of illnesses in their bodies, and the causes of those, and their accidents, and the space of time of those.
Mays en las autras compleccios, no es sobre vos temor, e majorment en las malautias fregas e humidas, quar ja totz les metges se son acordatz sobre aquels, e no so desecordatz en le juvament am cauteri en aquelas.	But in the other complexions, there is no fear of harm, especially with cold and damp illnesses; all doctors have agreed on this, and they are not disagreed upon when cauterization is done on them.
E sapiatz, filhs, que del secret de curacio per cauteri am foc e de la bontat de lu, so sobre cauteri am medicina comburent, es quar le foc es simple, la accio del qual no perven sino al membre le qual es cauterizat e no notz al autre membre am lu ajustat sino am petit nocument.	And know, children, that the secret of healing through cautery with fire and its goodness is that it is a simple action that only affects the part that is cauterized and does not affect any other part except with little harm.
Mays la accio de medicina comburent perven ad aquel en les membres le qual de lu alunhat, e fort leu fa venir en le membre malautia de dificil sanacio e fort leu ausit.	But the action of a burning medicine spreads to the other parts of the body and makes it difficult to heal them and causes great harm.
Mays le foc, per la sua sublimitat e de la sua substancia bontat, no fa aquo sino que superfluisca E ja es a nos conogut per experiment e per longitut de servitut de studi am l’art sobre le veritat de las causas; e per aquo yeu so excusat de la longitut del sermo E si no fos que no es legut al mieu libre en aquest pausero a vos secret amaguat am le foc, e la qualitat de la operacio de lu en les cors e de la sieua expulcio per la qual expellis las malautias, am sermo philosophic demostratiu, le qual siria acuit en las vostras pessas.	But fire, through its subtlety and the goodness of its substance, only affects the part that is cauterized and not any other parts except with little harm. And we know this from experience and from a long time serving as a student in the study of the true causes; and so I am excused from speaking at length about it. And if it were not for the fact that I was not reading from a book, but rather a secret hidden in my mind, that the heat of fire and the quality of its action in the body and how one expels illnesses through it, demonstrated through philosophical reasoning, would be sharper in your minds.
E sapiatz, filhs, que els se desacordan del temps en le qual es convenient far cauteri e pausan le milhor temps de primaveyra.	And know, children, that they disagree on the time when it is convenient to do cauterization and stop, choosing the best time in springtime.
E yeu dic que cauteri es convenient en tot temps, per so que le nocument per le temps accident es submergit en le juvament de aquo que am le cauteri es atirat, e majorment si le cauteri es per dolors o de dolors necessaries, fortz e fistinas, las quals no suffertan tarditat per so que es temut de aquelas que vengua malicia, que es major que petit nocument entrant per lo temps.	And I say that cauterization is convenient at all times because the harm caused by the accidental time is submerged in the benefit of it that is drawn from cauterization, especially if the cauterization is for pains or necessary wounds, strong and festering, which do not endure delay due to the fear of their coming, which is greater than the little harm caused by the timing.
E aysso no catz en vostras pessas, o, filhs, aquo no estiman sino le poble vulguar e les fols metges, so es que ad aquela malautia que es sanada per cauteri no es redicio tot temps, e pausan aquel consequen.	And so do not fear in your hearts, o children, that this is not believed except by the common people and foolish doctors; it is that to that illness that is healed through cauterization, there is no reduction of time, and they pause the consequence of that.
E la causa no es ges ayssi quo els cuydan per aquo, quar cauteri no es sino en loc de medicina la qual altera la compleccio e esicca las humiditatz las quals son causa per que veno las dolors.	And the cause is not as they think because cauterization is only in place of medicine that alters the complexion and dries the humidity which causes pain to come.
Mays empero cauteri superflueys sobre la medicina per volicitat de la sua valitut e vertut de la sua operacio e grandesa del sieu senhor.	But cauterization surpasses medicine through the will of its strength and power of its action, and the greatness of its lord.
E es possible que la sua malautia retorne en alcuna hora del temps, segon la compleccio del malaute e la locacio de la sua malautia, e la vertut de lu, e aquo que es preparat en le cors de lu de la agreguacio de las superfluitatz en lu, e aquo que es pervengut a lu en la sua acquisicio en viandas e semblantz de aquelas causas; sino que la malautia en la qual sia aministrat cauteri sia malautia subtil en membre de paucas superfluitatz e humiditatz, ayssi cum cauteri de dent per dolor e semblantz ad aquel, possible es que en lu no retorne aquela dolor, mays aquo se fa en petitz.	And it is possible that the illness returns at some time of the year, depending on the complexion of the patient and the location of their illness, and the strength of it, and what has been prepared in the body from the accumulation of excesses in it, and what has come to them through food intake and similar causes; but if the illness in which cauterization is administered is a subtle illness in a part with few excesses and humidity, just like tooth pain and its likes, then it is possible that the pain does not return, but this happens in small amounts.
E mays sermo vulgar es que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina, e es sermo dreyturier, no ad aquo que els entendo en lu, quar els crezo que no es curacio que aprofieyta am medicina ni am autra causa aprop cauteri.	But the common speech is that cauterization is the last resort of medicine; and this speech is true, not to say that they understand it, because they believe that it is not healing that benefits from medicine or any other cause except cauterization.
E la causa es en contrari de aquo; e la entencio que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina no es sino quan administram las manieyras de curacio en alcunas malautias, e aquelas medicinas no conferieysso, e aprop en la fi de la causa aministra hom cauteri, e aprofieyta ad aquela.	And the cause is in contrast to that; and the intention that cauterization is the last resort of medicine is only when we administer methods of healing on certain illnesses, and those medicines do not confer it, and especially at the end of the cause, they administer cauterization, and it benefits from that.
E lahoras de aqui cat16 que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina, no segon la entencio la qual entendo les vulgars e trops dels fols metges.	And so from here we see that cauterization is the last resort of medicine, not according to the intention that the commoners and foolish doctors understand it.
E diyssero les antics que cauteri am aur es milhor que cauteri am ferr, e no diyssero aquo sino per la equalitat del aur e sublimitat de la sua sustancia.	And the ancients said that cauterization with gold is better than cauterization with iron; and they did not say this except for the equality of gold and subtlety of its substance.
E diyssero que le loc de cauteri no fa brac, cum aquo no sia absolutament vertat, quar yeu ja he aquo proat e he atrobat que aquel no fa aquo sino en alcus cors ses les autres, e cauteri am aquel es bo e milhor que am ferr ayssi quo els diyssero; mays empero quan tu fas cauteri am foc am de aur, no es a tu declarat, quar es egnit segon la quantitat que tu vols per la rugor de l’aur, e quar prepara a recebre freg; e si ajustas sobre lu ignicio se fon l’aur per le foc, e caso en le foc alcunas laminas per que le artifex catz per la occupacio de aquel.	And they said that the location of cauterization does not make a difference except when it is absolutely true; for we have already proven that it only makes a difference in some bodies without the others, and cauterization with gold is good and better than with iron just as they said; but when you do cauterization with fire with gold, it is not clear to you because it is heated according to the quantity that you want due to the thickness of the gold, and because it prepares to receive friction; and if you place it over the fire, some thin layers are formed so that the artisan can see through that.
E per aquo es fayt cauteri am ferr deves nos pus leugerament e pus propdanament a rectitut de operacio.	And for this reason, cauterization with gold must be done more gently and closer to the operation.
E yeu ja he ordenat aquest capitol en le cauteri segon capitols, et he ordenat aquels del cap entro les pes, per so que aleugo le demandant aquo que vol de lu.	And we have already ordered this chapter on cauterization according to chapters, and I have ordered those of the head between the feet, so that I may ask you what you want from it.
De cauteri de dolor de cap per frigiditat e humiditat.	Of cauterization for pain in the head due to coldness and humidity.
Le capitol primier.	The first chapter.
Aquesta cauterizacio confereys a la humiditat e frigiditat sobre le servel accident de la qual so doas causas, so es causa de soda e multitut de flux raumatic, apelat corissa, del cap a las partidas dels huelhs e de las aurelhas fluent, e multitut de dormir, e de dolor de dentz e del guolayro, e universalment de tota malautia que ve per fregiditat, ayssi cum paraliticament, sodo e apoplexio, e semblantz en aquelas malautias.	This cauterization confers with humidity and coldness the servant accident of which there are two causes; it is a cause of soda and multitude of fluxes, called rhinitis, from the head to the parts of the ears and from the eyes flowing, and multitude of sleeping, and of tooth pain and of the gullet, and generally of all illnesses that come through coldness, just as paralysis, stroke, and their likes in those illnesses.
La forma de aquesta cauterizacio es aquesta, que primieyrament comandes al malaute que sia evacuat am medicina lacsativa le cap mondificant, per tres o per quatre nueytz, segon que exhigeys la vertut del malaute e la edat de lu e la sua costuma.	The form of this cauterization is as follows: first of all, command the patient to be evacuated with laxative medicine for three or four days, according to the strength of the patient and their age and habit.
E aprop comanda li que raza le sieu cap am razor, e aprop fay aquel sezer entre las tuas mas sobre una banca cayrada e que pause las suas mas sobre le pietz sieu.	And then command that they shave their head with a razor; and then let him lie between your legs on a low bed and let them place their hands on their feet.
E aprop pausa la razit de la tua palma aprop le pous sobre la razit del nas entre les huels sieus.	And then pause the edge of your palm, then let it rest on the edge of the nose between your eyes.
Mays empero, cum le tieu dit del mieg loc es pervengut, signa aquel loc am tenta, e aprop igneys le cauteri olivar del qual aquesta es la forma:	But when the place of your middle finger is reached, mark that place with a tent, and then light the cauterization olive, of which this is the form:
E aprop pausa aquel sobre le loc senhat am tenta, a manieyra que descent, am la qual la tieua ma sia constrengida petit a petit, e tu revolveys aquel.	And then place it on the marked location, in such a way that it descends, and your hand be pressed little by little, and you revolve it.
E aprop leva la tua ma leugerament e reguarda le loc, e si veses ja del os esser descubert alcuna quantitat del cap, ayssi cum la quantitat de gra de errs, lahoras eleva la tua ma, e si no torno la tua ma am aquel ferr, am autre de aquel, si es enfrigidat, entro que sia vist del os aquo que yeu he dit a tu.	And then lift your hand gently and look at the location; if you see that any amount of the head is uncovered with bone, just as with the amount of grain, then lift your hand and if it does not return with that iron, with another one, if it is cooled down, until that is seen by the eye what we have said to you.
E aprop pren un petit de sal e disolveys aquel sobre le loc e leyssa aquel per tres jorns.	And then take a little salt and dissolve it on the location and let it be for three days.
E aprop pausa sobre lu coto enbegut en boder e leyssa aquel sobre lu entro que sia destrusida la scara del foc.	And then place over it cotton soaked in oil and let it be over it until the char of the fire is destroyed.
E aprop cura le loc am anguent tetrafarmacon entro que sia sanat.	And then heal the location with tetramedication ointment once it has healed.
E ja diyssero que quant la plagua roman uberta, tant mielhs geta le brac, per que es milhor e mays juvatiu.	And so they say that when the Roman plaster becomes wet, as many times you throw a cloth over it, it is better and more beneficial.
E diyssero alcus de lor que sia cauterizada la codena entro al os, e sia tengut le cauteri entro que sia adhurida alcuna partida de la specitut del os.	And some of them say that the bone should be cauterized within the eye, and to have the cauterization within it until a part of the substance of the eye is destroyed.
E aprop sia ras aquo que es adhust del os, e aprop sia curat.	And then scrape away what is dry from the bone, and then heal it.
E diyssero autres que am lo cauteri pervengua al derier, entro que enprema en le os forta enprecio entro que le os caga, e aquesta es la forma de alphecati petit:	And others say that with the cautery one must go to the end, until they press on the strong bones within which are found the bones, and this is the form of small alpecat.
E estiman de aquel loc expiran la vapors del cap.	They think that from that place the vapors of the head expire.
E sia tenguda la plagua uberta per lonc temps, e aprop sia curada entro que sia consolidada.	And if the ulcer is open for a long time, it should be healed until it is consolidated.
Mays a mi no so vistas aquestas doas specias de cauteri de tot, sino en alcus homes segon via de temor; e layssa aquel, deves mi, milhor es am salut, quan es; quar le cap es develitat per solucio de continuitat de lu ayssi cum havem testificat en les autres membres, e majorment quan le cap del malaute es de freul natura.	But I have not seen these two species of cautery at all, except in some men according to the path of fear; and leaving that aside, for me it is better for health when it is; because the head is devitalized by solution of continuity in him just as we have testified in other members, and especially when the patient's head has a phlegmatic nature.
E la specia de cauteri primieyra es mays salva e milhor deves mi; e de aquela husi e am aquela obra am salut.	And the species of cautery first is more safe and better for me; and of that house and with that work I am saved.
Capitol segon.	Chapter second.
Del cauteri del cap.	Of cautery of the head.
Quan en tot le cap accideys dolor cronica e longua e aquo es en le malaute prolonguat, e usa de gerras e de cochias e de capipurges e de emplaustres e de guatz e de cadels e de gualinas e de semblantz, e majorment si ja es cauterizat am un cautere le qual recontam e no aprofieyta a lu deguna de aquelas causas, lahoras considera quar si le cap del malaute es de fort creacio en la sua natura; e no es freul et atroba mot gran freg, lahoras aquel cauterisa am autra cauteri dejos aquel un pauc.	When in the whole head there occurs a chronic and long pain and this is prolonged in the patient, and he uses leeches and cupping glasses and caput medusae and poultices and cataplasms and bandages and cauteries and similar remedies, and especially if he has already been cauterized with a cautery which we relate and does not benefit him at all from those causes, then consider that if the patient's head is of strong creation in its nature; and it is phlegmatic and finds great friction, then cauterize it after that with another cautery below that one a little.
E aprop cauterisa aquel sobre le corn del sieu cap am cauteri entro que la codena es partida.	Then cauterize that above the horn of his head with a cautery until the scum is broken.
Incisa la codena e sia descuberta del os la quantitat la qual havem recontat e cauteriza aquel am un cauteri en la partida deriera del cap en le loc le qual es apelat vas, — e es aquel loc en le qual es pausada ventosa.	The scum having been cut away and the quantity we have related discovered and cauterized, then cauterize that with a cautery in the rear part of the head in the place which is called a vessel — and that is the place in which the windsock is placed.
Et alleuja la tua ma en aysso, e no descobras le os, quar le malaute per aquo atroba mot gran dolor diversa de la dolor de totz les autres cauteris del cap.	And loosen your hand over it, and do not discover the bones, because by that the patient experiences great pain different from the pain of all other cauteries of the head.
E yeu diyre aquest cauteri en son loc, quar cove que·l cauteri am le qual so cauterisatz les corns del cap e le occiput es pus subtil cauteri que aquel am le qual es cauterisat le mieg loc del cap; e aquesta es la forma de lu.	And I say that this cautery is in its place, because the cautery with which you cauterize the horns of the head and the occipital is a more subtle cautery than that with which the middle part of the head is cauterized; and this is its form.
Capitol ters.	Chapter third.
De cauterisacio de emigranea no-antiqua.	Of cauterization of not ancient migration.
Quan endeve en la partida del cap dolor sodo, o es stenduda dolor entro al uelh, sia evacuat am medicinas le cap mondificantz, e sia aministrada l’autra curacio, la qual yeu he dita en las devesios de las malautias; e tot no aprofieyta, lahoras cauterisacio en lu es en dos manieyras: o cauterisacio am medicina acuta comburent, o am ferr.	When in the front part of the head there is a hard pain, or a stinging pain goes into the eye, then evacuate with medicated shampoos, and administer the other treatment which I have written about in the beginnings of illnesses; and if all does not benefit, then cauterization in it is in two ways: either cauterization with an acute burning medicine, or with iron.
Mays cauteri am medicina comburent es que tu prenguas una dolsa de alh, e escorgas aquela e abcindas las extremitatz de lu de amdos les caps.	But cauterization with a burning medicine is that you take a piece of alder wood and cut it up and mix the ends of it with both ends of the cautery.
E aprop incideys le loc de la dolor en la templa am una lanceta lada entro que sia en lu feyt loc dejos la codena, entro que sia occultada.	Then pierce the location of the pain in the temple with a pointed lance until it is in the place below the scum, and hidden.
E aprop strenh sobre lu am stopada per descent constreccio, e layssa aquel per le spazi de tres horas; e aprop deslia le e tratz le alh, e laysa la plagua per dos o per tres jorn, e aprop pausa sobre lu coto submergit en boder entro que le loc fassa brac.	Then bind it tightly over it with a descending constriction, and let that be for the space of three hours; and then loosen the ligature and treat it with water poured on it until the place makes a blister.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia sanat.	Then cure that with an ointment until it is healed.
E si tu voys, fe aquo am alcunas medicinas comburentz las quals yeu he scriutas en le douse tractat de medicinas comburentz.	And if you wish, do this with some burning medicines which I have written about in the second treatise on burning medicines.
Mays la cauterisacio am ferr segon aquesta manieyra: igneys per cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma:	But the cauterization with iron is according to this manner: ignite the cautery of which this is the form:
e es apelat claus clavilhs, quar le cap de lu es ayssi cum forma de clavel en le qual es alcuna curvitat, e·n le mieg loc de lu es eminensia petita.	and it is called a nail claw because its head has the form of a claw in which there is some curvature, and in the middle part of it is a small protuberance.
E aprop pausa sobre loc de la dolor, e rete la tua ma — per que no sia adhurida la arceria la qual es dejos — e revol le ferr petit a petit am velocitat.	Then pause over the location of the pain, and hold your hand  — so that it is not heated by the iron which is below  — and turn the iron little by little with speed.
E si la quantitat de lu que es adhurida per la specitut de la codena ayssi quo la maytat de lu, e elava la tua ma per so que la arteria no sia adhurida la qual es dejos, per so que no vengua flux de sanc.	And if the quantity of it which is heated by the specificity of the scum as far as its depth, and raise your hand so that the artery is not heated which is below, so that there does not come a flow of blood.
E aprop enbibeys coto en aygua de sal e pausa aquel sobre le loc, e layssa aquel per tres dias; e aprop pausa coto mulhat am boder, e aprop cura am enguent entro que sia sanat.	Then moisten the cautery in salt water and pause it over the location, and let that be for three days; then pause a moistened cloth with vinegar on it, and cure it with an ointment until it is healed.
E si voys, cauterisa am la extremitat del cutellari segon cauteri, e guarda te de incisio de arteria en aquesta emigranea propriament no-antiqua.	And if you wish, cauterize with the end of the scalpel according to cautery, and beware of incision of artery in this not ancient migration particularly.
Capitol quart.	Chapter fourth.
De cauterizacio d’emigranea antiqua.	Of cauterization of ancient migration.
Quan tu curas emigranea am aquo que havem dit de la curacio precedent, e aquo que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias, e no aprofieyta la curacio, e vezes per la malautia que no abasta a lu aquo que havem dit del primier cauteri am medicina o del cauteri am foc, lahoras cove que tu igniscas le cauteri cutellar entro que sia albificat, pus que significas sobre le loc de la dolor am linha de longuesa de la qual sia la maytat del dit, o quays aquel; e depausa la tua ma per una veguada e strenh aquela entro incidiscas la arceria e pervengua entro al os.	When you cure a migration with what we have said about the treatment preceding, and what we have said in the divisions of illnesses, and the treatment does not benefit, and you see for the illness that it does not suffice to it what we have said about the first cautery with medicine or with fire, then if you ignite the cautery cut into the scum until it is whitened, and when you have done this, then pause your hand over it for a while, and tighten it so that you cut the artery and it comes within to the bone.
Empero necessari es a tu que guardes de la continuacio de la mandibula, la qual es mauguda deves la masticacio, e que le lacert no sia adhurit e le nervi le qual mau aquela, e que no s’endevengua espasme.	However it is necessary for you to guard against the continuance of the mandible which is damaged because of mastication, and that the ligament not be heated and the nerve which hurts that, and that there not come from it a spasm.
E si es sobre la custodia e cautela de flux de sanc de l’arteria que es abciza, quar en la abcizio de lu es temor, e majorment ad aquel le qual ignora aquo que fa e no es studios e esproat; e layssa la operacio en lu al comensament.	And if it is over the custody and precaution of flow of blood from the artery that is cut, because in the cutting of it there is danger, and especially to him who ignores what he does and is not practiced and experienced; and let the operation be in him at the beginning.
E yeu vindre am rememoracio del regiment de flux de sanc accident de la arceria segon la sieua manieyra, en le sieu loc de aquest libre.	And I will come with reminder of the regiment of flow of blood accidentally from the artery according to its way, in your location of this book.
E si veses de aquesta malautia que no abaste aquest cauteri e veses le cors del malaute tollerable, cauteriza aquel en le mieg loc del cap ayssi cum havem recontat, e cura la plagua entro que sia sanada.	And if you see of this illness that it does not suffice to that cautery and you see the patient's body tolerable, then cauterize that in the middle part of the head just as we have related, and cure the ulcer until it is healed.
E si voys, aministra le cauteri le qual havem dit en le capitol de streccio de arceria am cauteri havent dos cotels, e es milhor cauterizacio aquesta e mays conferent.	And if you wish, administer the cautery which we have said in the chapter on stretching of artery with cautery having two ends, and that cauterization is better and more fitting.
Capitol .v.	Chapter fifth.
De cauterisacio de las dolors de aurelhas.	Of cauterization of pains of ears.
Quan en la aurelha ve dolor per freg e es curat am causas lacsativas e am l’autra curacio la qual he dita en la divisio, e no es remauguda la dolor, lahoras igneys le cauteri, e es aquest le qual ha nom puncta, del qual aquesta es la forma:	When in the ear there is pain from friction and it is cured with lacerative causes and with the other treatment which we have said in the division, and the pain is not alleviated, then ignite the cautery, and that is the one called puncta of which this is its form:
E aprop puncta aprop la ignicio, e sia menat al enviro de tota la aurelha ayssi cum roda es revolguda, o en le circuit de quascuna essemps si la dolor es en quascuna.	Then pause the cautery and let it be directed toward all of the ear just as the wheel is turned, or in the circuit of either eardrum if the pain is in one.
Alonga te am le cauteri de la razit de la aurelha pauc a pauc pus que aias senhat le loc am tenta.	Draw you out with the cautery of the edge of the ear little by little, so that you feel the location with your hand.
E si le cauteri de detz puntz en tota aurelha, e quays aquela, e aprop cura les locz entro que sian sanatz.	And if the cautery of many points in all the ears, and that is it, then cure the locations until they are healed.
Capitol .vi.	Chapter sixth.
De cauterizacio de turtura.	Of cauterization of torture.
Turtura la qual es curada e am cauterizacio no es sino de las specias las quals veno per flecma, segon que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias.	Torture which is cured and has cauterization not but of the spices which come by phlegm, according to what we have said in the divisions of illnesses.
Esquiva cauterizacio de la specia que endeve per siccacio o per spasme del nervi.	Avoid cauterization of the affected area due to dryness or nerve spasm.
Quan tu curas aquela specia de turtura am jerras e capipurgi e guarguarismes, e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas le malaute am tres cauteris: la i deves la razit de la aurelha, e·l segon un petit dejos le sieu templar, e le ters deves la conjunccio de doas labias.	When you treat this type of torture with blisters and scabs and wounds, and your cure is not effective, then you should cauterize the patient in three places: first, at the root of the ear; second, a little below his temple; and third, at the junction of two lips.
E pausa lo tieu cauteri per le contrari de la partida malauta, quar mollificacio no ve sino en la partida que apar sana.	And apply your cautery opposite the affected area, for softening only occurs in the part that appears healthy.
E la forma de cauterisacio es que cauterizas aquel am le cauteri en le dreyt de la extremitat de la aurelha pus sobirana un petit sobre le corn del cap, e en le templar autre, la longuesa del qual sia segon la longitut del dit pous, e depausa la tua ma am cauteri entro que sia comburida la quantitat de la maytat de la specitut de la codena.	And the way of cauterization is that you cauterize the ear at the highest point of its extremity, and on the temple another one, whose length should be according to the length of the fingernail; and apply your hand with the cautery until half of the size of a grain of cummin is burnt.
E aquesta es la forma del cauteri, e es specia del cutellari, la forma del qual es denant mesa.	And this is the form of the cautery, and it is made by the cutler, its shape being that of a table.
Mays empero pus subtil es que aquel un pauc ayssi co vesas; e cove que cotel en lu de superflua groceza un pauc.	But it is more subtle if you make it a little smaller; and one should cut away the excess thickness a little.
E aprop cura le loc am aquo que es denant procezit entro que sia sanat.	Then treat the area with what has been described before, until it is healed.
Capitol .vii.	Chapter 7.
De cauterizacio de apoplextia antiqua.	Of cauterization for ancient apoplexy.
Quan apoplextia es antiquada e curas aquela am aquo que havem dit e no confereys la tua medicacio e le malaute no ha febre, lahoras cauteriza aquel am quatre cauteris: sobre totz les corn del sieu cap; e am cauteri e le mieg loc del cap, ayssi cum havem dit; e am cauteri en le coguot.	When apoplexy is ancient, and you treat it as we have said, but your cure is not effective, and the patient has no fever, then cauterize him in four places: on all the corners of his head; with a cautery, also on the middle of his head, as we have said; and with a cautery on his neck.
E la manieyra del cauteri es fayta segon que es desus dit.	And the manner of the cautery is done as it has been said above.
E ja es cauterizat sobre la boca del estomac; e es mays derier; e aprop sia curat am aquo que procezeys.	And it is cauterized on the mouth of the stomach; and it is more effective behind; and it should be treated with what has been described.
Capitol .viii.	Chapter 8.
De cauterizacio de obblivio fayta per flacma.	Of cauterization for oblivion caused by a flame.
Cove que sian donatz al malaute en le comensament jerras grans e pilulas le servel mondificantz.	Let the patient be given at the beginning large blisters and pills of the purgative.
E aprop ras le cap tot del malaute e pausa sus le coguot de lu emplaustre de cetre descrit en le tractat dels emplastres.	Then scrape the head all over, and apply to his neck a plaster of vinegar described in the treatise on plasters.
E pausa aquel alcunas veguadas, quar aquel es manieyra de cauteri.	And apply it several times; for that is the way of cauterization.
E fay aquo segon aquel meteys orde le qual ja he dit.	And do that according to the order which medicine has given, which I have already said.
E donc si per aqueles sanat bo es; e sino, lahoras fay a lu tres cauteris en la deriera partida de sieu cap, les quals sian deysendentz de la partida pus sobirana del cap entro a la partida pus dejos del col.	And if it heals well because of that, but if not, then do to him three cauteries in the back part of his head, which descend from the highest part of the head to the lowest part of the neck.
E pausa entre quascun cauteri la grossetut del dit, e aprop cura lo cauteri am aquo que es procedit.	And let the distance between each cautery be the thickness of a fingernail, and treat the cautery with what it proceeds from.
Mays si tu vos addicio e le malaute es aquo tollerant, lahoras fay a lu cauteri en le mieg loc; e si voys major addicio, lahora cauteriza aquel sobre les dos corns.	But if you wish to increase the number and the patient can tolerate it, then do to him cauteries in the middle part; and if you wish to increase even more, then do them on the two corners.
Aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat; e sia le cauteri olivar segon la forma denant donat.	Then treat that until it is healed; and let the cautery be olive-shaped according to the form which has been given above.
Capitol .ix.	Chapter 9.
De cauterisacio de parazili e de mollificacio de tot le cors.	Of cauterization of parasites and of softening of all the body.
Cove que tu procesiscas en mondificacio del cap am jerras e am aquo que havem dit; e aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap, e am cauteri sobre totz les corns del cap, e am cauteri sobre la deriera partida de lu, e am tres cauteris sobre les spondils del col.	Let the patient be purged in his head with blisters and what we have said; then scrape the head of the patient, and cauterize him with a cautery on the middle part of his head, and with a cautery on all the corners of his head, and with a cautery on his neck, and with three cauteries on the back part of his neck.
E si es necessari en la malautia de mollificacio del cors de trops aquel e les malautes tollerantz e la malautia es fort, lahoras cauteriza aquel am quatre cauteris sobre les spondils del dos, e dererament am cauteri entro que sia comborit de la codena mot de lu, e aleva la tieua ma.	And if it is necessary in the softening of the body's parasites, and the patients tolerate it, and the illness is strong, then cauterize him with four cauteries on the back part of his neck, and lastly with a cautery on the place where half of a grain of cummin has been burnt, and lift up your hand.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat, e aquest sia cauteri olivar.	Then treat that until it is healed; and let this be an olive-shaped cautery.
Capitol .x.	Chapter 10.
De cauterisacio de epilemcia.	Of cauterization for epilepsy.
No es cauterizat le epilemtic sino aquella epilemcia es per flecma.	The epileptic should not be cauterized unless the epilepsy is caused by phlegm.
E donc cove que mondifiques le cervel de lu al comensament de lu am yeras e am l’autra curacio la qual havem dicta en la divisio quan le malaute es gran e es tollerant la exceperacio de las medicinas.	And so, let the brain of him be purged at the beginning with herbs and with the other cure which we have said in the division when the patient is large and tolerates the exception of medicines.
E si es enfant le qual no sufferte las medicinas, lahoras aministra guarguarissmes e mastiguatoris le servel mondifican, denant aquo per motz dias, am bonifficacio de las viandas.	And if he is a child who does not tolerate medicines, then administer to him purgatives and masticables, before which for several days there should be an abstinence from food.
E aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop cauteriza aquel am un cauteri en le mieg loc del cap segon la manieyra precedent, e am autre cauteri en le occiput de lu, e sobre quascun corn del cap sieu cauterisa.	Then scrape the head of the patient, and cauterize him with a cautery on the middle part of his head according to the previous manner, and with another cautery on the back of his head, and on each corner of his head.
E si le malaute es fort e es tollerant, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteris les quals he ditz, en havent paraliticament e mollificacio del cors sobre les spondils del col e les spondils del dos.	And if the patient is strong and tolerates it, then cauterize him with cauteries which I have described, having paralysis and softening of the body on the back part of his neck and the back part of his back.
E sia cauteri olivar segon qu’es precedit.	And let the cautery be olive-shaped according to what has preceded it.
Mays si le malaute es enfant, lahoras pausa cauteri subtil segon aquesta manieyra.	But if the patient is a child, then apply a subtle cautery according to this manner.
Capitol .xi.	Chapter 11.
De cauterizacio de melencolia.	Of cauterization for melancholy.
Quan las causas de melencolia so humiditatz corrompudas e flacma gros, lahoras cauteriza aquel am les cauteris les quals havem ditz en le havent paralisi.	When the causes of melancholy are corrupted humours and gross phlegm, then cauterize him with cauteries which we have said to cause paralysis.
E si la causa de melencolia es superfluitat declinant a melencolia, e le cors del malaute es humit, lahoras da ha beure aquo que mundifica le cervel de lu segon aquo que ha precedut en la divisio.	And if the cause of melancholy is an excess which inclines to melancholy, and the patient's body is moist, then give him something which purges his brain according to what has preceded in the division.
E aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop fay tortora decentment fayta de li sobre le cercle, e aprop depausa aquela en le mieg loc del cap.	Then scrape the head of the patient, and properly make a bandage of linen over his skull, and apply that to the middle part of his head.
E le malaute sia sesent cayrat, e sia tengut de tota partida.	And let the patient be seated, and let him be held in every part.
E aprop pausa liniment; et es pus digne de boder antic de ovelhas.	Then apply liniment; and it is more worthy of old wine of sheep.
E escalfa aquel sobre le foc per calefaccio temprada per mesura, le qual le dit sufferta quan es mes en lu.	And warm that over the fire with a moderate heat, the amount which he can tolerate when it is on him.
E aprop vuo’ aquel en le mieg loc del cap de lu en le cercle, e leysa lu entro que sia enfregidat.	Then put that on the middle part of his head in the circle, and let him lie down until it is cold.
E fay aquo am le malaute en tota semmana una veguada, am le autre regiment de lu bo entro que sia sanat; o si vols, cauteriza aquel fazen petitz puntz segon lo mays de lu, sino que tenguas la ma am un cauteri ayssi ordenat: aquesta es specia de cauteri la qual humecta le cervel am equalitat.	And do that to the patient every day for a week with one application, while he keeps his other regimen until it is healed; or if you wish, cauterize him making small points according to his strength, unless you have your hand over a cautery thus ordered: this is a cautery which moistens the brain in equality.
E aprop pausa aquel coto enbegut en boder o en grays de gualina.	Then apply that cloth steeped in wine or in woolen rags.
Capitol .xii.	Chapter 12.
De cauterisacio de aygua descendent en le huel.	Of cauterization for water which descends into the hole.
Quan a tu es declarat le comensament de aygua en le huel per les senhals les quals yeu he ditz en la divisio, lahoras comensa e dona en beure al malaute aquo que mondifique le cap de lu, e guarda aquel de totas humiditatz.	When you have been told of the coming of water into the hole through the passages which you have described in the division, then begin and give to the patient something which purges his brain, and guard that from all moistness.
E fay aquel suzar en banh en degu per alcus jorns.	And let him sweat in a bath for several days.
E aprop comanda a lu que raza le sieu cap, e cauteriza aquel am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap; e aprop cauteriza aquel am dos cauteris sobre dos templas si es le comensament de ysement de aygua en dos huels, o de la un latz si es comensamen de l’aygua en un huel.	Then command that he wash his head, and cauterize him with a cautery on the middle part of his head; and then cauterize him with two cauteries on two temples if there is the coming of water into two holes, or from one side if there is the coming of water from one hole.
Incideys am cauteri totas las venas e arcerias las quals so dejos la codena; e sian les cauteris en aquela lonh en la latitut de las templas.	Penetrate with a cautery all the veins and arteries which are under the skin; and let the cauteries be long in that length of the temples.
E guarda te de fluxs de sanc quan es cauterizat; e si veses de lu fluxs de sanc, osta le am alcuna medicina, la qual es a tu possible.	Be careful of bleeding when cauterizing; and if you see bleeding from him, stop it with some medicine which is possible for you.
E yeu vindre am savieza la qual es en extraccio de arcerias e am abscizio de aquelas e cautela de fluxs de sanc.	And let there come to you wisdom, which is in extraction of arteries and abstention from those, and caution regarding bleeding.
E alcunas vetz es cauterizat en le cervitz dejos dos osses am dos cauteris dererament produzitz.	And sometimes it is cauterized in the neck below the bones with two cauteries recently produced.
Capitol .xiii.	Chapter 13.
De cauterizacio de lacrimas antiquas.	On cauterization of old tears.
Quan lacrimas dels huels so antiquas assuduament e per las venas e arterias las quals so en le loc manifest del cap defora e es verificat que aquo es superfluitatz frejas flecmatiquas, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteri le qual havem recontat en le capitol de comensament de aygua cazent en les huels, e am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap e am dos cauteris en la cervitz dejos dos templas, e am dos cauteris en la cervitz dejos dos osses.	When tears of the holes are old and thickly gathered, and through the veins and arteries which are in the manifest place of the head, and it is verified that this is superfluous, then cauterize that with a cautery which we have recounted in the chapter on the beginning of water falling into the holes, and with a cautery in the middle place of the head, and with two cauteries in the neck below the temples, and with two cauteries in the neck below the bones.
E si indigeyses de addicio, lahoras cauteriza aquel en tot latz de la coa del huel sobre la extremitat del sobrecilh am petit cauteri.	And if there is a need for addition, then cauterize that in all parts of the hole of the eye above the extremity of the eyebrow with a small cautery.
Capitol .xiiii.	Chapter 14.
De cauterizacio de fetor de nas.	On cauterization for foul odor of the nose.
Quan tu medicas aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no aprofieyta la tua medicacio, lahoras tu aparelha e dona en beure al malaute las cochias per tres noytz; e aprop ras le cap de lu, e cauteriza le am cauteri migier am cauteri olivar.	When you are treating someone with that which we have said in the division, and your treatment does not help, then prepare and give the patient enemas for three nights; then cut his hair, and cauterize him with a cautery made of olive oil.
E aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri clavelh am dos cauteris sobre les dos sobrecilhs dejos les cabels un petit.	Then cauterize that with a cautery of clove on both eyebrows below the hair, one small cautery on each.
E guarda te de la arceria que no incindas aquela.	And be careful not to ignite the artery.
E del cauteri clavilh aquesta es la forma.	And this is the form of the cautery of clove:
Capitol .xv.	Chapter 15.
De cauteri de mollificacio de palpebras dels huels.	On cauterization for softening of eyelids of the holes.
Quan la palpebra del huel es mollificada per malautia o per humiditat, lahoras cauteriza aquela palpebre1 am un cauteri am aquest cauteri lunar; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	When the eyelid of the eye is made soft by illness or by moisture, then cauterize that eyelid with a cautery with this lunar cautery; and this is its form:
E si vos, cauteriza aquel sobre les dos sobrecils un petit am dos cauteris en tota partida, e sian elonguatz de las timporas.	And if you treat it, cauterize that on both eyebrows a little with two cauteries all around, and let them be extended from the temples.
E sia la longitut de quascun cauteri segon la quantitat del sobrecil.	Let the length of each cautery depend on the size of the eyebrow.
E no premas trop la tua ma am le cauteri, mays segon la quantitat que la tersa partida de la palpebre sia adhurida.	And do not press your hand with the cautery too much, but according to the amount that the upper part of the eyelid is adhered.
Capitol .xvi.	Chapter 16.
De cauteri de la palpebre del huel quan les pels so convertitz a las partidas dedintz e punho le huel.	On cauterization for the eyelid of the eye when the hairs have turned to the parts inside and close the eye.
Quan les pels del huel son convertitz a las partidas dedintz ayssi que pungo le huel, cauteri en aquels es segon dos manieyras, quar cauteri o es am fer o es am medicina comburent.	When the hairs of the eye have turned to the parts inside and close the eye, there are two ways to cauterize them: one way is with fire, and one way is with burning medicine.
Si am cauteri de lu am foc, comanda al malaute denant aquo que leyse les sieus pels ayssi cum aquels les quals les mundan, entro que sian prolonguatz e engualhatz; e si punho aquel deves le lor naysement, lahoras tu strenh les huels de lu am una benda per so que no sia maugut entro que·ls pels sian nascutz.	If you cauterize him with fire, order the patient to open his eyes in such a way that he spreads out those hairs which are growing inwards, and let them be prolonged and curved; and if he closes his eye, then you strengthen his eyelids for him with a bandage so that he does not rub it while the hairs are growing.
Donc cum siran nascutz e engualhatz, lahoras pausa le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop senha sobre la palpebre dels huels de lu am tenta, am senhal le qual sia segon la figura de fulha de merta, e sia le comensament del senhal prop dels pels.	Then when they are growing and curling, then put the head of the patient in your lap, and press on the eyelid of the eye with your finger, with a sign that is according to the shape of a dead leaf, and let the beginning of the sign be near the hairs.
E aprop pausa coto enbegut en album de huou o en mucillatge de ptilli sobre le huel.	Then put cotton dipped in egg white or in mullein tea on the eye.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu.	Then heat up the cautery, of which this is the form:
E aprop cauteriza sobre la figura la qual as senhada, petit a petit, em motas veguadas, entro que sia comburida la superficia de la codena la qual es ayssi cum fuelha de mirta, tota aparent propriament.	Then cauterize over the figure which you have marked, little by little, in small spots, until the surface of the skin is burnt up, as though it were a leaf of myrtle; let it appear wholly as it should.
E senhal de sanetat de la tieua obra es que tu vegus la palpebre de l’huel ja esser contrayta e·ls pels de lu esser elevatz deves la punctura del huel.	And a sign of health from your work is that you see the eyelid of the eye already contracted, and its hairs raised above the punctured place of the eye.
E donc eleva la tua ma e laysa aquel per tres jorns, e aprop pausa sobre lu coto am boder entro que sia eredicada la scara.	Then raise your hand and loosen it for three days, then put cotton on it with a bandage until the scar is healed.
E aprop cura aquela am enguent entro que sia sanat.	Then treat that with ointment until it is healed.
Mays si retorna per les pels alcuna causa aprop lor naysement e la palpebra es mollificada, lahoras fay autra vetz le cauteri sobre aquel tot ayssi cum avias fayt primieyrament.	But if the hairs return for any cause, and the eyelid is made soft again, then do the cautery on that place again all over as you did at first.
Mays si les pels so en la palpebra dejos, lahoras cauterisa aquela entro que sia elevada al sieu loc natural e sia engualhat e que les pels no punhan le huelh.	But if the hairs are in the eyelid, then cauterize that until it is elevated to its natural place and is curved, and let the hairs not poke the eye.
Mays le cauteri am medicina comburent aquest es que comandes al malaute que leyse les pels entro que sian prolonguatz e engualhatz, e aprop sia fayta de carta de drap la forma de fuelha de mirtra.	But the cautery with burning medicine is that you order the patient to open his eyes in such a way that the hairs are prolonged and curved; then let the sign be made of linen according to the shape of a leaf of myrtle.
E aprop pren de sabo conogut e de caus viva ana unc. .i., o quays aquo, e aprop mescle3 aquelas causas be, e fay aquo am festinacio per so que no sia enfregidat; e aprop expandeys de aquo sobre la carta la qual es fayta ayssi cum forma de fulha de mirtra, e pausa aquel sobre la un huel od amdos; e pausa dejos le huel coto enbegut en album de huou, e el cap del malaute sia en le tieu se.	Then take of sage, one ounce, and of live coals, half an ounce. .I., Take that and mix it with honey, and make it into a poultice so that it is not cold; then spread that over the linen which is made according to the shape of a leaf of myrtle, and put that on one eye or both; then put cotton dipped in egg white on the eye, and let the head of the patient be in your lap.
E pausa le dit sobre le medicina e prem aquela un petit e no la mauguas entro que lo malaute senta la mordicacio de la medicina, quar mordicacio es en lu ayssi cum de foc.	Then hold the finger on the medicine and press that a little and do not rub it while the patient feels the biting of the medicine, for the biting is in him as though it were fire.
E donc cum percevera aquo que el atrobo mordicacio, lahoras leyssa la medicina e mau aquela am le tieu dit; donc cum cessa la mordicacio, lahoras remau la medicina he lava le huel am aygua; e lahoras considera si vezes la palpebra ja es levada ayssi cum es lavada deves la costriccio am foc o am incisio, quar lahoras esta be; e si no torna sobre aquela de la medicina sobre le loc en le qual no ha empremut la medicina e no se denigra entro que sia engualhada la tua operacio e sia contrayt le huel.	Then when he perceives that the biting has ceased, let him loosen the medicine and wash it off with water; then consider if you see the eyelid already lifted up as though it were washed after cauterization with fire or with incision, for then it is well; and if it returns to that of the medicine on the place in which the medicine did not take effect and is not blackened until your operation has been curved and the eye drawn together.
E aprop pausa sobre lu coto am boder entro que sia eradicada la codena de la adhustio, e aprop cura aquel am enguent deafinicon o am autre entro que sia sanat.	Then put a bandage on it so that the skin of the swelling is eradicated, and treat that with ointment of diascordium or another one until it is healed.
E es necessari a tu, deves la tua operacio que guardes am pervigil diligencia que en le huel no caia re de la medicina, e si la palpebre aprop alscus dias es mollificada e alcuna causa dels pels punh en le huel, lahoras itera la tua medicina sobre aquel loc le qual de la palpebre es mollificat, e propriamen ayssi quo as fayt al comensament, e aprop enaviro lu entro que sia sanat.	And it is necessary for you, after your operation to guard against the falling in of the medicine, and if the eyelid within a few days is made soft and some cause makes the hairs poke into the eye, then repeat your medicine on that place from which the eyelid is made soft, and altogether as you did at the beginning, and cover it so that it is healed.
E aquesta es la forma de fuelha de mirtra.	And this is the form of a leaf of myrtle.
E sapias que les huels dels homes son diversificatz segon la magnitut e la parvitat, e donc segon aquo es fayta la tua contraccio.	And know that the eyes of men are various according to magnitude and smallness, therefore according to that is made your contraction.
E no sira amaguada la via de rectetut ad aquel al qual es studi en aquesta art.	And do not be amazed at the way of rettitude for him who studies this art.
Capitol .xvii.	Chapter 17.
De cauterizacio de fistula que es en le lacrimal de l’huel.	On cauterization for a fistula which is in the tear duct of the eye.
Quan tu curas fistula am aquo que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas aquela segon aquesta manieyra: comanda al malaute que pause le cap sieu en le tieu se, e tengua le cap de lu alcun ministre entre las tieuas mas en tal manieyra que no sia maugut ni agitat am le sieu cap.	When you cure a fistula with that which we have said in the divisions of illnesses and your treatment does not confer, then know that you cauterize it according to this manner: order the patient to put his head in your lap, and let him hold his head by some servant in such a way that it is not rubbed or moved with his head.
E aprop pausa coto enfus en album de huou o en mucellage de ptilli sobre le huel de lu.	Then put cotton dipped in egg white or in mullein tea on the eye of him.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma:	Then heat up the cautery, of which this is the form:
le qual sia conquau, ayssi cum es forma de cana o de pena de voltor, de la una extremitat am la qual es fayta lo cauteri.	Which is hollow, as it is shaped like a reed or a feather, from one extremity on which the cautery is made.
E si voys, sia penetrant entro a la autra extremitat.	And if you wish, let it be penetrated into the other extremity.
E si vols sia sort ayssi cum tenta.	And if you want to let it come out like this with a tent.
Mays empero aquel que es concau es milhor a la tieua obra.	But however, what is convenient is best for your work.
E aprop prem la fistula si es uberta, e tra de lu sania et exsicca aquela.	Then compress the fistula if it is open and draw out from him pus and dry that up.
E si no es uberta, lahoras obre aquela e extratz la poyredura de lu.	And if it is not open, then open it and extract the rottenness from him.
E aprop pausa sobre lu le cauteri le qual sia be ignit, e te am aquel la tieua ma un petit deves le cauteri del huel a la partida del nas, per so que no erre la tua ma o le malaute sia enquietat, e lahoras pausa le cauteri en le grays del huel e corrompas aquel.	Then place upon him the cautery which should be well ignited and have your hand a little below the cautery at the start of the nose so that your hand does not err or the patient be disturbed, then place the cautery in the grommet and corrupt that.
E donc si al comensament del tieu cauteri perve entro al os, bo es; e sino, lahoras itera le cauteri una veguada o dos, si mestiers era; e layssa aquel ayssi per tres jorns, e aprop pausa sobre aquel coto am boder e enviro lu am enguent exsiccatiu entro que sia sanat.	And therefore if at the beginning of your cautery it pierces into the bone, that is good; and if not, then repeat the cautery once or twice, if necessary; and leave that as it is for three days, and then place upon that spot a plaster and surround it with an ointment which is drying until it is healed.
Mays si eran passatz xi dias e no es sanat, lahoras pausa sobre lu medicina aguda corrosiva entro que l’os sia descubert e sia ras segon que conveneys en le sieu capitol.	But if eleven days have passed and it is not healed, then place upon him an acute corrosive medicine so that the bone is uncovered and scrape according to what is convenient in his case.
E es autra manieyra de cauteri de fistula la qual alscus primiers diysero: enten al loc de la fistula e fen aquela e aprop pausa en aquela fissura camaen subtil del qual es la forma de lu: E fon en aquela la quantitat de i unc de plom fundut; e te la tua ma am camaem am bona retencio, e no sia maugut le malaute per so que le plom fundut no pervengua al huel de aquel; e cove que pausas sobre le huel del malaute coto enfus en album de huou o en aygua, quar plom adhureys le loc de la fistula e sana aquela per sanacio meravilhora.	And there is another manner of cautery for a fistula which some first said: enter into the place of the fistula and close it up and then pause in that fissure a subtle thread of which the form of it is; and pour into that the quantity of one ounce of molten lead; and hold your hand with good retention, and let not the patient be disturbed so that the molten lead does not reach the grommet of that; and cover where you pause upon the grommet of the patient with white linen or with water, for the lead adheres to the place of the fistula and heals it by a wonderful healing.
E si la fistula es sanada am aquo que havem dit del cauteri e de la curacio, bo es; e sino, lahoras es necessari aministrar trauc del nas e reduzir la fistula al cors del nas segon que vindra en son loc propri.	And if the fistula is healed with what we have said of the cautery and the cure, that is good; and if not, then it is necessary to administer an incision of the nose and reduce the fistula into the cavity of the nose according to where it will come in its proper place.
Capitol .xviii.	Chapter 18.
De cauterizacio de la fendedura des potz.	Of cautery of the fissure of the nose.
Motas veguadas accideysso fissuras en las labias, e majorment en las labias dels enfantz.	Many times fissures happen in the lips and especially in the lips of children.
Donc cum tu curas aquelas fissuras am aquo que nos havem dit en las divisios e no aprofieyta la tua cura, lahoras igneys le cauteri petit cutellar segon aquesta forma que s’ensiec:	Therefore when you cure those fissures with what we have said in the divisions and your cure is not profiting, then ignite the cautery of a small scalpel according to this form that it is set:
E sia la conquavitat de lu segon la subtilitat de cotella.	And let its cavity be according to the subtlety of the blade.
Aprop pausa aquel init cuytadament en aquelas fissuras entro que·l cauteri pervengua al preon de las fissuras.	Then pause that gently in those fissures so that the cautery reaches the bottom of the fissures.
E aprop cura aquel am cerotz entro que sia sanat.	And then cure that with ointment until it is healed.
Capitol .xix.	Chapter 19.
De cauterizacio de fistula en la boca.	Of cautery of a fistula in the mouth.
Quan en la razit de uvula o en le paladar o en las razitz de las dentz endeve apostema e aprop fa brac, e aprop es rompuda, e aprop es antiquada, e corr brac e es fayta fistula, e aprop tu curas aquela e no aprofieyta a curacio, lahoras cove que tu igniscas cauteri segon la quantitat que sia receubuda en la fistula, e aprop met aquel ignit en le trauc de la fistola, e te la tua ma entro que pervengua le ferr ignit al preon de lu, e al derier de lu fazen aysso una veguada o dos; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que nos havem dit de la curacio entro que sia sanat.	When in the root of the uvula or in the palate or in the roots of the teeth there is an ulcer and then it comes to a head, and then it is broken, and then it is old, and then it becomes rotten and there is made a fistula, and then you cure that and your cure is not profiting, then where you ignite cautery according to the quantity that is received in the fistula, and then place that ignited iron into the opening of the fistula, and have your hand so that the hot iron reaches the bottom of it, and at the end of it do that one or two times; and then cure that with what we have said about the cure until it is healed.
E donc si la sania es abscindita e es sanat, bo es; e sino, lahoras es necessari de descubrir le loc e hostar le os corrumput segon que vindra en son capitol.	And therefore if the pus is discharged and it is healed, that is good; and if not, then it is necessary to uncover the place and scrape away the rotten bone according to what will come in its chapter.
Capitol .xx.	Chapter 20.
De cauterisacio de las dentz e de mollificacio de las angivas.	Of cautery of teeth and of softening of gums.
Quan las angivas son mollificadas per humiditat e las dentz son maugudas, e curas aquelas am medicinas e no confereys, lahoras pausa le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop igneys le cauteri la forma del qual vindra aprop aysso, enayssi que tu pauses la quanula sobre la dent e entromet en aquela le cauteri ignit festinantment, e te la tieua ma un petit entro que·l malaute cente la calor del foc a la razit de la dent esser pervenguda.	When the gums are softened by moisture and the teeth ache, and you cure those with medicines and it does not confer, then place the head of the patient in your lap, and then ignite the cautery of which the form will come hereafter, so that you pause the quanula on the tooth and insert into that the ignited cautery quickly, and have your hand a little so that the patient feels the heat of the fire at the root of the tooth where it is pierced.
E aprop leva la tua ma, e aprop itera le cauteri alcunas veguadas segon que vols.	And then lift up your hand, and then repeat the cautery several times according to what you want.
E aprop le malaute huompla la sua boca de aygua de sal e tengua aquela per una hora, e pueys stupa aquela, quar la dent mauguda es fermada e la gengiva mollificada es strenguda e la humiditat corrompuda es exsiccada.	And then the patient will hold his mouth open with water of salt and hold that for one hour, and then stop that, for the aching tooth is bound and the softened gum is tightened and the corrupted moisture is dried up.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter 21.
De cauterisacio de dolor de dent.	Of cautery of toothache.
Quan dolor de dent es per fregiditat, o en lu es freg o verm, o no comfereys la curacio am medicina, lahoras cauteri en aquela es segon dos manieyras: o cauteri am boder de vacas, o cauteri am foc.	When toothache is by frigidity, or in it is cold or wormy, or does not confer the cure with medicine, then cautery in that is according to two manners: or cautery with a cow's udder, or cautery with fire.
Cauteri am boder es que tu prenguas boder de vacas e bulhas aquel en culhe de ferr , e aprop pren coto e envolopa le sobre la extremitat de la tenta, e aprop enmergeys aquel am boder bulhit, e pausa aquel sobre la dent dolorosa festinantment entro que sia enfregidat.	Cautery with udder is that you take the udder of a cow and boil that in horn of iron, and then take hold and wrap that around the end of the tent, and then immerse that in boiled udder and pause that over the aching tooth quickly so that it is frigid.
E aprop itera aquela alcunas veguadas entro que la vertut del foc pervengua a la razit de la dentz.	And then repeat that several times until the virtue of the fire reaches the root of the teeth.
E si voys, submergeys lana o coto en le boder desus dit, e pausa aquel sobre la dent dolent, e pausa sobre aquel ferr ignit entro que·l ferr pervengua al preon de la conquavitat de la dent.	And if you wish, immerse wool or hold in the said udder above, and pause that over the aching tooth, and place upon that hot iron so that the iron reaches the bottom of the cavity of the tooth.
Mays empero la cauterizacio am foc es que tu atendas a la quannula de eram o de ferr, e sia en le cor de lu alcuna grocesa e la acuitat del foc no pervengua a la boca del malaute.	However the cautery with fire is that you attend to the needle of brass or iron, and let there be in it some thickness and the acuity of the fire not reach the mouth of the patient.
E aprop igneys le cauteri la forma del qual vindra, e pausa aquel sobre la dent e te la tua ma entro que·l cauteri sia enfregidat; e fay aquo alcunas veguadas quar la dolor sira remauguda o en aquel dia o en l’autre dia.	And then ignite the cautery of which the form will come, and pause that over the tooth and have your hand so that the cautery is frigid; and do that several times because the pain still remains or on that day or on another day.
E cove que per empressio de aquel cauteri que·l malaute umpla la sieua boca de bon boder e tengua aquel per una hora e aprop scupa le; e aquesta es la forma del cauteri.	And where by impress of that cautery that the patient fills his mouth with good udder and holds that for one hour and then spits it out; and this is the form of the cautery.
E cauteriza am qual que tu voys extremittat segon que a tu es possible.	And cauterize with which you wish extremity according to what is possible for you.
E aquesta es la forma de la cannula:	And this is the form of the needle:
Capitol .xxii.	Chapter 22.
De cauterizacio de extrophulos.	Of cautery of hernia.
Quan extrophulos so de flecma e de humors fregas e no so hobedientz a digistio per medicinas e tu voys la digistio de aquelas leugerament, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri conquau la forma del qual es aquesta seguen, havent dos extremitatz hubertas per que yesca le fum deves le cauteri per l’autra extremitat, e pausa aquel ignit sobre aquel apostema una veguada, e autre si indigeyses de aquel, entro que pervengua al preon del apostema.	When hernia is of phlegm and of cold humors and they are not obeying digestion by medicines and you wish the digestion of those slightly, then you ignite the cautery which the form of which is this following, having two extremities bent so that the smoke of the cautery goes through the hernia from one side, and pause that ignited over the ulcer once, and if it does not discharge of that, then do that over the hernia.
E si l’apostema es pauca, lahoras pausa le cauteri segon la quantitat del apostema, e aprop leyssa le per tres jorns e pausa sobre lu coto enfus en boder entro que sia remaugut aquo que·l foc ha comburit.	And if the hernia is small, then pause the cautery according to the quantity of the hernia, and then let it be for three days and pause over that hold in udder so that what the fire has burned is softened.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent e tentas e draps entro que sia sanat.	And then cure that with ointment and poultices and bandages until it is healed.
E la forma de la cannula o deu cauteri a tal es comveyter.	And the form of the needle or iron for cautery is as follows:
Capitol .xxiii.	Chapter 23.
De cauterizacio de rauquiera de votz e de constriccio de ale.	Of cautery of wound and of contraction of Ale.
Quan las humiditatz veno sobre le quanal del pulmo, e majorment quan aquo es am fregiditat de compleccio, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia evacuat al comensament am medicinas laxativas, e aprop cauteriza aquel deves la razit del golayro en le loc depremegut.	When moisture comes upon the top of the lungs and especially when that is by frigidity of constitution, then where the patient is evacuated at the beginning with laxative medicines, and then cautery that after the root of the gullet in the place which is pierced.
E guarda te que no pervenguas am le cauteri al golayro ni no comburas de la codena de lu sino un pauc.	And be careful that you do not reach the cautery to his gullet, nor burn his throat, but only a little.
E cauteriza aquel am autra cauteri deves la junctura del col en le derier espondil de lu.	And cauterize that with another cautery at the junction of the neck at his last vertebra.
E·l cauteri de lu sia clavilh sego la maniera precedent.	And let the cautery be a red-hot iron in the manner described previously.
E aprop cura aquel am aquo que es precedit entro que sia sanat.	Then treat that with what has been described before, so that it may heal.
Capitol .xxiiii.	Chapter 24.
De cauterizacio de malautia del pulmo e de tos.	Of the cautery for diseases of the lung and of coughing.
Quan tos e malautia de pulmo so de humiditatz fregas e le malaute no ha febre ni tisic e es malautia antiqua, lahoras cauterisa aquel am dos cauteris sobre la furcula en les locz depremegutz leontz e buoytz; e am autra cauteri en le mieg loc del pietz entre dos mamillos; e sia le cauteri clavilh segon la forma precedent.	When coughing and lung disease come from moist humors infiltrating, and the patient does not have a fever or consumption and it is an old disease, then cauterize that with two cauteries above the furcula in the places just beneath the collar bones, and with another cautery in the middle of the chest between the two nipples; and let the cauteries be red-hot according to the form described previously.
E si vols, sia la tua cauterizacio punctan am le cauteri que es apelat puncta, la forma del qual precedeys en la ponctacio de dolor de aurelhas.	And if you wish, let your cautery be puncturing with the cautery that is called puncta, the form of which is given in the puncturing for earache.
E sian puntz entro cays ad aquels; e aprop cura aquel am aquo meteys que es precedit entro que sia sanat.	And let there be small punctures under those; and then treat that with what has been described before, so that it may heal.
E ya sia le cauteri haventz tres ramps quar cauterizacio es am aquel: am una veguada podes far tres cauteris segon aquesta forma:	And if you have the cautery with three spikes, this cautery is for that: with one view you can make three cauteries according to this form:
Capitol .xxv.	Chapter 25.
De cauterizacio de titillic que es le cap del ajutori.	Of the cautery for tics that are in the head of the helper.
Quan le cap del ajutori es dislocat per causa de humiditatz lubricas e no es fermat en la hora del sieu retornament deves la sua dislocacio entro que sia a lu aquo costuma de retornar, e aprop per un petit movement es deslocat ayssi que s’endeve, ayssi cum nos havem testificat, lahoras cove que primieyrament redusiscas la dislocacio, e aprop le malaute sia reversat sobre le sieu dos o sobre le latz sa; e aprop eleva la codena la qual es en la partida dedintz del citillic a las partidas desus am les ditz de la tua ma sinistra, si la junctura es dislocada a las partidas dedintz.	When the head of the helper is dislocated by moist and slippery humors that is not returned in its return hour due to his dislocation within so that it may be to him what usually happens, and if he has been displaced because of a slight movement as it should be, then first of all reduce the dislocation, and let the patient be turned onto his back or on his side; and then elevate the windpipe which is in the upper part of the tic into the upper parts by your left-hand fingers if the joint is dislocated at its upper part.
E aprop igneys le cauteri havent dos caps; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And let the cautery have two heads; and this is the form of it:
E aprop cauteriza la codena entro que penetre aquela entro al autre latz; e vindra la figura de cauterizacio lahoras de iv caps cauteris.	And then cauterize the windpipe so that it penetrates to the other side; and then the figure of cautery will come when from two-headed cauteries.
e so aquel subtils segon la quantitat de tenta; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And it is subtle according to the amount of tent; and this is the form of it:
E alcunas veguadas es ajustat segon aquest comte i per que son les cauteris .viii.	And sometimes it is adjusted according to that count for which there are eight cauteries.
E aprop pausa sobre le cauteri porys cuytz am sal, e aprop fay adherir le malaute a trenquilitat, e lo membre no sia maugut per alcun temps entro que sia confortat.	And then place powdered salt on the cautery and then make the patient adhere to tranquillity, and let the limb not be disturbed for some time so that it may be comforted.
E si la dislocacio es a las partidas desus e tart es fayt aquo, lahoras cauteriza sobre le muscle am cauteri clavilh o am motz cauteris puntan, quar la junctura es confermada e la humiditat es romauguda e le malaute es sanat.	And if the dislocation is at the upper parts and it is made thus, then cauterize over the muscle with a red-hot cautery or with pointed cauteries, for the joint is confirmed and the moisture is burnt up and the patient is healed.
Capitol .xxvi.	Chapter 26.
De cauterizacio del stomac.	Of cautery for the stomach.
Quan veno en l’estomac freg e motas humiditatz entro que aquel extrazo de la sua compleccio e so multiplicatz raumases a lu, e si tu continuas las manieyras de curacio e no confereyso, lahoras cove que le malaute sia sobre le sieu dos ressupinat, e extenda las suas mas e las suas coysas, e aprop cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris: an un cauteri dejos le pietz per la quantitat d’un dit am cauteri clavilh, e am dos cauteris dejos del dos costatz del cauteri, entro que vengua la figura de cauteri triangulada; e elonga entre els que no sian ajustatz que faran poyredura.	When there is movement and moisture infiltrates in the stomach so that it distends from its natural condition and they are multiplied within him, and if you continue the methods of treatment and do not agree with them, then let the patient be lying on his back with his arms stretched out and his head extended, and cauterize that with three cauteries: one cautery below the chest by the amount of a finger with a red-hot cautery, and two cauteries below the rib cage on both sides so that the figure of the cautery comes as a triangle; and lengthen them so that they are not close together and will make heat.
E si la profunditat del cauteri la quantitat de les dos terses de la grocesa de la codena.	And if the depth of the cautery is the quantity of two-thirds of the thickness of the windpipe.
E sia la figura del cauteri segon aquesta forma ses addicio, E si vols, cauteriza am gran cauteri en le mieg loc del estomac segon aquesta forma; et aquest sia un cauteri segon la forma de cercle segon aquesta forma:	And let the figure of the cautery be according to this form, and if you wish, cauterize with a large cautery in the middle of the stomach according to this form; and this is a cautery according to the form of a circle according to this form:
E sia cauterizat l’estomac punctan ad aquel que de aquest cauteri es spaventat: e es que tu senhes sobre l’estomac punt segon la quantitat que voles am tenta, e aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri en les puntz; e aprop cura aquel am la curacio qu’es precedita entro que sia sanat.	And let the stomach be punctured to that which is frightened by this cautery: and it is that you sense on the stomach punctured according to the quantity that you wish with tent, and then cauterize that with a cautery in the punctures; and then treat that with the cure which is given before so that it may heal.
Capitol .xxvii.	Chapter 27.
De cauterizacio del fietge fret.	Of cautery for a painful liver.
Quan endeve en le fietge dolor per fregiditat o per humiditat o per grossa ventositat entro que de la sieua normal compleccio sia getat per egressio superflua, e es curat le malaute am aquo que havem dit e no comfereys, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sua cervitz, e senhes am tenta tres cauteris segon aquesta forma et aquesta quantitat meteyssa sobre le fietge dejos dels ipocondres, la hon perve le decubit de home.	When there is pain in the liver from coldness or moisture or from gross flatulence so that from its natural condition it is thrown by excessive egression, and it is treated with what has been said and does not agree, then let the patient be turned onto his back with his arms stretched out and his head extended, and sense on the liver punctured according to the quantity that you wish with tent, and cauterize that with three cauteries according to this form and this quantity pressed over the liver below the hypochondrium from which comes the decubitus of a man.
E sia l’espazi le qual es entre quascun cauteri segon la grossetut del dit, e sia le cauteri segon la longitut del cors dreyta.	And let the space between each cautery be according to the thickness of a finger, and let the cauteries be according to the length of the body right.
E no compremas la tua am le cauteri mot.	And do not press it with the cautery too much.
E si la quantitat de aquo que es adhurit la quantitat de la maytat de la specitut de la codena, e no y sia pus ajustat; e si le malaute stant sobre les pes de lu; e si no es estant, lahoras sia jassent, le qual ja ha extendudas las suas coysas, e eleve les sieus brasses.	And if the quantity of what is burnt is equal to the thickness of the width of the windpipe, and it is not pushed too close together; and if the patient stands on his feet, let him then sit down, for he has already extended himself, and raise his arms.
E es aquesta la forma del cauteri:	And this is the form of the cautery:
E a tu es possible que cauterizes aquestz cauteris am cauteri cutellar, quan es am tu subtilitat e prudencia en l’art.	And it is possible for you to cauterize these cauteries with a cautery-spoon when you have subtlety and prudence in the art.
E guarda te que trop no procesiscas en la cauterizacio, e sia adhurida la specitut de tota la codena per que sia adhurit tot le cors e pervengua entro als budels, quar la codena aqui es subtil; e sapias aquo.	And beware that you do not go too far in the cauterization, and let the windpipe of all the chest be burnt so that it may reach into the intestines, for the windpipe here is subtle; and know this.
Capitol .xxviii.	Chapter 28.
De perforacio de apostema del fietge am cauteri.	Of piercing an abscess of the liver with a cautery.
Quan endeve excitura o apostema en le fietge e voles saber si aquel apostema es en le carn del fietge o en la tunica de lu, lahoras si es en la carn del fietge, le malaute atrobo gravitat e dolor ses acuitat.	When there is inflammation or an abscess in the liver and you wish to know whether that abscess is in the flesh of the liver or in its tunic, then if it is in the flesh of the liver, the patient has heavy breath and the pain has become acute.
E si es en la tunica del fietge, am la dolor es acuitat gran e vezes que ja afatiguatz les metges la cura de lu.	And if it is in the tunic of the liver, with the pain being made acute and when the doctors have become weary with the cure for him.
Donc cove que·l malaute sia enversat sobre la sieua cervit; e aprop senha le loc de l’apostema am tenta; e aprop igneys le cauteri le quel es asemblat a rag, la forma del qual a precedit en l’autra pagina.	So let the patient be turned onto his back, and then sense the location of the abscess with tent, and then heat the cautery which is formed like a needle, the form of which has been given on the previous page.
E cauteriza am aquel i cauteri entro que tota la codena sia comborida, entro que pervengua al ciphac, entro qu’en yesca sania.	And cauterize with that hot cautery so that all the chest may be burnt so that it may reach into the diaphragm, so that in it there is burning phlegm.
E aprop cura aquel per curacio dels autres apostemas entro que sia sanat.	And then treat that by the cure for other abscesses so that it may heal.
E no cove que de aquesta forma de cauteri use sino aquel del qual le estudi en l’art de medicina es prolonguat, e en las mas del qual motas malautias an conogut; mays aquest am esperiment alcunas veguadas sia ardit sobre aquesta operacio, mays empero leyssa aquela deves nos, e es miels.	And do not use this form of cautery except that from which the one who studies in the art of medicine has become experienced and in whose hands many diseases have been known; but however that is tried by us it should be burned on this operation, for it is better.
Capitol .xxix.	Chapter 29.
De cauterizacio de plauresi.	Of cautery for pleurisy.
Diyssero les antics cauteri de las razitz de aristologia a plauresi frega segon aquesta manieyra esser fazedor, e es aquest que tu prenguas de las razitz de aristologia longa secca una razit pun longua que es trobada, e sia de la grossetut del dit.	Remove the old cauteries from the roots of the pleurisy by friction according to this way that you take them from the roots of the pleurisy a long dry root that is found, and let it be of the thickness of a finger.
E aprop submergeys aquela en oli e eysen aquela al foc, e aprop cauteriza per un cauteri en aquel loc le qual es entre la continuacio de la furcula am le col; e am dos cauteris petitz dejos guidazi, un pauc declinans a la partida que es dejus la barba, e am dos cauteris en aquo que es declinant entre la quinta costa e la cizena, declinant un pauc a las partidas detras; e am autre cauteri en le mieg loc del pietz; et am autre sobre l’estomac, et am tres cauteris de las partidas detras; et am un cauteri en aquel loc le qual es entre las dos spallas, e am dos cauteris dels dos latz del pietz, dejos le cauteri le qual es entre doas spallas.	And then submerge it in oil and iron it with fire, and cauterize with a cautery at the location between the collarbone and the furcula; and with two small cauteries guided downward, one slightly inclining towards the area below the beard, and with two cauteries inclining towards the area between the fifth rib and the armpit, inclining slightly towards the back; and with another cautery in the middle of the foot; and another over the stomach; and with three cauteries on the back; and with a cautery in the location between the two shoulders; and with two cauteries on the sides of the foot, below the cautery between the two shoulders.
E no cove que compremas la tua ma am le cauteri, ans sia en le manifest de la codena en obra.	And do not wrap your hand with the cautery, but let it be in the open air.
E ja diyssero alscus antics que so alscus dels homes les quals uson de cauteri de ferr semblant a ray e igneysso aquel, e meto aquel en aquel loc le qual es entre las costas, entro que pervenguam am aquel ad aquel apostema e sia foragetada sania, ayssi cum havem dit en l’apostema del fietge.	And some ancient people said that they used cauteries of iron similar to a spear, and heated it, and placed it in the location between the ribs, until we reached that ulcer and it became a healthy wound, just as we have said about the ulcer of the lung.
Mays en aquesta perforacio am cauteri no es ses temor, quar hu mor tantost ho accideys en le loc fistula a la qual no es sanacio.	But in this piercing with a cautery, there is no fear, because it will happen immediately in the location of the fistula to which there is no cure.
Capitol .xxx.	Chapter 30.
De la cauterizacio de la melsa.	Of the cauterization of the melt.
Quan tu curas la malautia de la melsa am aquo que havem dit de la curacio en la divisio e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cauteri en lu es segon tres manieras, las quals totas son dreyturieras, de las quals la una es que fassas tres cauteris o quatre linhan segon la longitut de la melsa segon la figura dels cauteris del fietge, la figura dels quals ha precedit.	When you are treating the sickness of the melt with what we have said about treatment in division and do not apply your cure, then cauterization in it is according to three manners, all of which are correct, and one of them is that you make three or four lines according to the length of the melt according to the figure of the cauteries of the lung, the figure of which has preceded.
E sia entre quascun cauteri la grossetut d’un dit o un pauc mes, e la manieyra del cauteri sia la manieyra la qual havem dita en le cauteri del fietge engualment.	And the other way is that the cautery be round and not make a line around the melt but only cauterize the central location of the foot; so if the melt is made at the top of the foot, around the ankle, if the melt is made at the heel of the foot, at the bottom, if the melt is made in the middle, around the fascia, and if the melt is made at the neck of the foot, then cauterize with a round cautery according to the figure of the gout which we have said.
E no compremas la tua ma am le cauteri; e le malaute sia eves sobre lo sieu dos.	And the third way is that the cautery be in the shape of a sword, and if the melt is made at the heel of the foot or around the ankle, then cauterize according to the figure which we have said in the cauterization of the foot; so if the melt is made at the top or bottom of the foot, then cauterize according to the figure of the cautery of the neck of the foot.
E es autra manieyra de cauterizar, so es que tu igniscas le cauteri haventz dos vertimentz, la qual causa havem dita en le capitol de dislocacio del muscle, e elava la codena la qual es en le endreyt de la melsa la hon perve le jazer del malaute sinistre.	And it is another way to cauterize, which is that you ignite the cautery having two garments, the cause of which we have said in the chapter on dislocation of the muscle, and elevate the tendon which is in the direction of the melt where the left side of the patient lies.
E sia la tua elevacio am la qual elevas la codena segon la longuesa del cors, per que sian faytz cauteris segon la latitut del cos.	And then cauterize the location of the foot according to the way which we have said with the cautery of a sword, and if the melt is made around the ankle or at the heel of the foot, then cauterize according to the figure of the round cautery.
E aprop entromet les dos vernimentz, ignitz mot, en aquel entro que am aquels penetres la codena de la autra part.	And then immerse the two garments, heated up, into that end through which you penetrate the tendon from the other side.
E aprop extrayt le cauteri; e donc son faytz quatre cauteris.	And then extract the cautery; and thus are made four cauteries.
E si voys, cauteriza am cauteri havent tres vernimentz.	And if you wish, cauterize with a cautery having three garments.
E aprop tu cura le cauteri pus que aia laysat de getar brac per trops jorns, quar mays es comferent que las autras causas precedentz en la curacio.	And then you cure the cautery when it has lain for many days, because the other causes precede in the cure.
Capitol .xxxi.	Chapter 31.
De cauterizacio de ydropici.	Of the cauterization of water-gout.
Cauteri no catz en ydropici sino en alcinte3 propriament.	Cautery does not cut in gout but properly in hernia.
Quan tu curas le ydropic am las manieyras de curacio las quals havem ditas en la divisio e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que aquel cauterizes am quatre cauteris en le cercuit del embelic e am un cauteri sobre l’estomac, e am autre cauteri sobre le fietge, e am autre cauteri sobre la melsa, e am dos cauteris entre les spondils del dos, e un cauteri en lo dreyt del pietz, e am autre cauteri sobre l’estomac.	When you are treating the gout with the manners of cure which we have said in division and do not apply your cure, then cauterize it with four cauteries in the circuit of the hernia and with a cautery over the stomach, and with another cautery over the lung, and with another cautery over the melt, and with two cauteries between the spurs of the two shoulders, and with a cautery on the right side of the foot, and with another cautery over the stomach.
E la quantitat de la profunditat del cauteri sia propdana a la spicitut de la codena.	And the quantity of the depth of the cautery should be proportionate to the thickness of the tendon.
E aprop layssa le cauteri ubert per so que gete brac per lonc temps.	And then let the cautery lie open so that it lies for a long time.
E no evacuas le malaute de curacio aprop le cauteri am aquo que cove per que sian agreguadas a lu doas entencios, e sira festinada a lu am ajutori sanacio.	And do not evacuate the patient from cure when you are cauterizing him so that two tendons be added to it, and let him lie in it with help of cure.
La forma del cauteri am lo qual es cauterizat lo ventre sia clavilh segon que la forma de aquel es desus precedent, e es aquel am le qual es cauterizat le dos sia olivar segon qu’es precedent a la sua forma.	The form of the cautery with which the belly is cauterized should be clave-shaped according to that which precedes it above, and that with which the back is cauterized should be olive-shaped according to that which precedes it.
Capitol .xxxii.	Chapter 32.
De cauterizacio de pes e de las coyssas.	Of the cauterization of the lung and of its causes.
Quan les pes so apostematz en ydropitz e so repletz de aygua sitrina, cove que cauterisas les pes sobre le dos del pe in nocrati aquo que es entre le auricular e le anular, e eleva la tua ma am le cauteri e no torses aquel; e aprop eleva la tua ma, e no retornes aquela de tot, quar l’aygua satrina rezuda.	When the feet are pustules with gout and are filled with yellow water, then cauterize the feet above the heel of the foot in the location which is between the auricular and the ring finger, and elevate your hand with the cautery and do not twist it; and then elevate your hand and do not return it at all, because the yellow water will ooze out.
Es le cauteri segon aquesta forma: E aprop fay sobre las doas coyssas dos cauteris, e en quascuna coysa sia feyt cauteri am la extremitat del cauteri cutellar.	The cautery is according to this form: and then make two cauteries on each thigh, and in each thigh let the cautery be made with the tip of the sword-shaped cautery.
E sia le cauteri segon la longitut de la coyssa: i dejos le denolh e l’autre jos le mieg loc de la coyssa; e sobre quascuna coyssa dos cauteris.	And let the cautery be according to the length of the thigh: one below the groin and the other above the middle location of the thigh; and on each thigh two cauteries.
E layssa la plagua uberta ses curacio per lonc temps per so que alcuna aygua resuda de lu.	And let the wound lie open without cure for a long time so that some water oozes from it.
E aprop cura le am aquelas causas las quals havem ditas.	And then cure the causes which we have mentioned.
Capitol .xxxiii.	Chapter 33.
De cauterizacio de cos de ventre.	On cauterization of the abdomen.
Quan cos de ventre es per freg e per humiditat entro que debelice las vertutz, so es la vertut digestiva e retentiva, las quals so en l’estomac e en les budels, e es curat aquo am las manieyras de curacio e no confereys, e vezes le malaute suffertan cauteri de vertut exhiberant, lahoras cauteriza aquel am gran cauteri sobre le sieu stomac segon que a precedit en la cauterizacio del estomac, am le cauteri del cercle e am quatre cauteris en le cercuit del embelic subtils, am cauteri clavilh subtil; e am cauteri sobre le alcatin sobre alozis gran, o am dos cauteris.	When the body is affected by cold and moisture which weaken the digestive and retentive faculties, which are located in the stomach and intestines, it is treated with healing remedies rather than bleeding, and sometimes the patient endures cauterization to restore the virtue of digestion, then cauterize that area with a large cautery over his stomach as has been described in the chapter on cauterization of the stomach, using the circular cautery and four cauteries around the omphalus with a slender cautery; or cauterize the alcatena over oiled cotton wool, or with two cauteries.
E si vezes las humiditatz exhuberants e le malaute aquo tollerant, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre le pentenilh e sobre les budels, e fort leu ajustant dos cauteris sobre l’estomac e prop dels inguonas, quar es curacio perficent de juvament de la qual no erras.	And if the moisture is excessive and the patient can tolerate it, then cauterize that area over the penis and intestines, and apply two cauteries near the groin on either side; this is a perfect cure for sexual dysfunction and you will not err.
Capitol .xxxiv.	Chapter 34.
De cauterizacio de emorroydas antiquas.	On cauterization of ancient hemorrhoids.
Quan so en la natura derier emorroydas antiquas o una de humors grossas fregas o de humiditatz corrompudas, e son curadas am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no confereys la tieua curacio, lahoras cauterisa am tres cauteris sobre le pus dejos spondilh del dos petit e petit triangular, e am cauteri desus le ombelic cays per dos ditz.	When in nature there are ancient hemorrhoids from thick humors or corrupted moisture, and they are cured by the method we have described in the division without bleeding, then cauterize them with three cauteries on the lower part of the small spine of the coccyx in a small triangular shape, and with a cautery above the navel where two tendons cross.
E si doptas que l’estomac de lu sia enfregidat e la vianda de lu no sia degerida, e la cara de lu vezes apostemada, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre l’estomac am gran cauteri segon que es precedit; e am un cauteri sobre fietge, e am autre cauteri sobre la melsa de lu am cauteri clavilh, e leyssa le cauteri per alcun temps ubert, e aprop cura lu entro que sia sanat.	And if his stomach is swollen and his food undigested, and his face sometimes pustular, then cauterize that area over the stomach with a large cautery as has been described; and with one cautery on the anus, and another cautery on his navel with a slender cautery; let the cautery remain open for some time, then cure him until he is healed.
Capitol .xxxv.	Chapter 35.
De cauterizacio de atheyl aprop la abscizio de lor.	On cauterization of athlete's foot near the incision.
Quan tu abscindes atheyl, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri que es asemblat a ray.	When you make an incision on athlete's foot, then ignite the cautery which is similar to a ray.
Aprop entremet aquel ignit en aquel atheyl abscis, e ultima la tieua ma entro que pervengua le cauteri al orifici de la vena de la qual ve la sanc.	Then place that ignited cautery into the incision, and close your hand over it until the cautery reaches the orifice of the vein from which the blood comes.
E fay aquo una vetz o doas, quar si achieyl son trops, lahoras cauteriza quascun de lor segon que havem recontat, e aprop cura aquels am aquo que confereys a lor dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	Do this once or twice, for if they are too numerous, then cauterize each one according to what we have recounted, and cure them with that which you use for their wounds until it is healed.
E si cauterizas am gran cauteri sobre alquatin, es mays derier en juvament.	And if you cauterize with a large cautery over oiled cotton wool, it is more effective in healing.
Capitol .xxxvi.	Chapter 36.
De cauterizacio de fistolas que son faytas en la natura derie en las partidas de lu.	On cauterization of fistulas which are caused naturally in the parts of the body.
Quan la natura no obeziys a la obra la qual havem recomtada en son loc, e·l pacient es espaventat per aquo, sia sanat am cauteri.	When nature does not obey the method we have described in its place, and the patient is terrified by that, let it be healed with cauterization.
Donc quan ad alcun ve fistola en la natura derier, e es antiquada, corro sania de lu e humiditatz corrompudas, e donc aquo que es pus digne que cove es que proes aquela am tenta subtil, e aprop conoys la quantitat de la profunditat de lu am la devant dita tenta.	Therefore, when you see a fistula in nature which is ancient, and it emits foul matter and corrupted moisture, then probe that with a slender probe, and thus know the quantity of its depth with the aforementioned slender probe.
Aprop igneys le cauteri que es semblant a ray.	Then ignite the cautery which is similar to a ray.
E aprop met aquel cauteri ignit en aquesta fistula, e segon la quantitat en la qual intrec la tenta.	Then place that ignited cautery into this fistula according to the quantity where you inserted the probe.
E itera sobre aquela le cauteri entro que sian comburitz aquels cors corrumputz tost una veguada o dos o tres, segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	And repeat the cautery on that area until those corrupted humors are burnt once or twice or three times according to the quantity of your need.
E guarda te de combustio de nervi e de vena; o si fistula va al cors de la vesica o al cors del budel, lahoras guarda te de totz aquels locz; e no fassas aquo sino quan la fistula es en loc carnos e cogitas que no es penetrant.	And beware of cauterizing nerve or vein; or if the fistula goes to the bladder or intestine, then beware of all those places; and do not do this unless the fistula is in a fleshy place and you are certain that it does not penetrate.
E aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat.	Then cure that area until it is healed.
E si le loc es sigillat, e so abscindidas de lu las materias, e roman ayssi per lonc temps, lahoras sapias que ja es curat entierament.	And if the place is sealed and those matters are discharged from him for a long time, then know that it is completely healed.
E si las materias no so de lu ostadas, lahoras sapias que es penetrant o en le preon de lu os corromput, o cays aquo de aquelas causas de las quals vindra rememoracio en son loc.	And if those matters are not discharged from him, then know that they are penetrating into his bone or have corrupted it there, or that cause will return in that place.
Capitol .xxxvii.	Chapter 37.
De cauterizacio dels ronhos.	On cauterization of warts.
Quan en les ronhos endeve dolor per freg o per grossa ventozitat, e per aysso le coyt del malaute es amermat, lahoras cove que cauterizes aquel sobre les ronhos am cauteri sobre quascun ronho am cauteri clavilh del qual precesic la rememoracio.	When in warts there is pain from cold or from grossness of wind, and the skin of the patient is withered, then know that you should cauterize those warts with a cautery on each wart with a slender cautery of which you have the recollection.
E fort leu cauterizam am le segon un petit dejos, per que vindran tres cauteris liniatz, e donc siran mays deriers en juvament.	And apply them very quickly with the second one small below, so that there will be three linear cauteries, and thus they will be more effective in healing.
Capitol .xxxviii.	Chapter 38.
De cauterizacio de la vesica.	On cauterization of the bladder.
Quan accideys en la vesica debelitat e mollificacio per freg e per humiditatz ayssi que·l malaute la urina no retengua, lahoras cauteriza aquel en la partida pus dejos sobre la vesiqua, la hon comensan les pels del pentenilh, e cauteriza am un cauteri en la partida dreyta, e am autre en la senestra de lu.	When there is debility and softening of the bladder from cold and moisture so that the patient cannot retain urine, then cauterize that area in the lower part of the bladder, where the hairs of the penis begin, and cauterize with one cautery on the right side of him, and another on his left.
E sia la longitut de quascun cauteri segon la cantitat dels not del pous; e cauteriza aquel am cauteri en la partida pus bassa del dos, o am dos cauteris si es necessitat.	And let the length of each cautery be according to the amount of the hairs; and cauterize that area with a cautery in the lowest part of the abdomen, or with two cauteries if it is necessary.
E sia cauteri clavilh segon que es procesit.	And let the cautery be slender according to what has been described.
Capitol .xxxix.	Chapter 39.
De cauterizacio de la mayra.	On cauterization of the mother's milk.
Quan veno en la mayra freg e humiditatz, e per aysso es prohibida enpreignacio, e son corrompudas las mestruas de lu, e es tardada la provocacio de lor, e accideys dolor deves le haveniment de lor, lahoras cove que·l loc sia cauterizat am tres cauteris en le circuit del ombelic, ayssi cum havem dit en le cauteri de la vesica; e am cauteri sobre le loc pus dejos del dos, o am dos cauteris, e sia le cauteri clavilh.	When there is cold and moisture in the mother, and she is prohibited from conceiving, and her menstruation is corrupted, and there is delay in provoking it, and pain comes from the retention of it, then let that area be cauterized with three cauteries around the navel as we have described in the cautery of the bladder; and with a cautery on the lowest part of the abdomen, or with two cauteries, and let the cautery be slender.
Capitol .xl.	Chapter 40.
De cauterizacio de la dislocacio de l’anqua.	On cauterization of the dislocation of the ankle.
Quan humiditatz moucozas so efundudas a la partida de la anqua, e so faytas causas del yssiment del sieu loc, e senhal de lu es que la coyssa es prolonguada sobre l’autre quan so comparadas entre lor.	When moist humors are infused into the ankle and are the cause of the displacement of its joint, and the sign of it is that the leg is prolonged over the other when compared between them.
E le loc de la dislocacio es atrobat en lu quays boyt.	And the place of the dislocation is pressed in where the bone juts out.
Adonc cove que cauterizas le malaute sobre la partida de la anqua de lu am cauteri a sercle semblant, pus que tu auras senhat am tenta en le cercuit de la partida ayssi cum es revolguda, e per so que la partida caia el mieg loc del cercle.	Therefore let the patient be cauterized over the ankle of him with a circular cautery similar to a ring, more than you have probed with the probe in the circuit of that part as it is turned, and because the part falls the middle of the circle.
E sia le cauteri del qual precedit la forma en la cauterizacio del estomac.	And let the cautery be the same as the one described in the cauterization of the stomach.
E si aquest cauteri no es a tu present, lahoras cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris am cauteri olivar gran.	And if that cautery is not at hand, then cauterize that area with three cauteries with a large olive-shaped cautery.
E sia fayt le cauteri segon la quantitat de la ispicitut de tota la codena; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And let the cautery be done according to the amount of the thickness of all the tendons; and cure that area until it is healed.
Capitol .xli.	Chapter 41.
De cauterizacio de la vena sciatica.	On cauterization of the sciatic nerve.
Quan dolor ve en la partida de anqua, e so causa de lu freg et humiditatz, le malaute es curat am aquo que havem dit e no confereys, e aquo es antiquat, lahoras cove que tu lacses le malaute de humors grosses am pillulas fetidas o am pillulas artificials o semblantz; e aprop cauteriza aquel.	When pain comes in the ankle and it is caused by cold and moisture, the patient is cured by that which we have described and does not bleed, and if it is ancient, then let the patient be bled from gross humors with suppurating pills or artificial ones similar to them; and cauterize that area.
E la manieyra del cauteri en aquela es segon dos manieyras: o cauteri am medicinas comburentz, o cauteri am foc.	And the manner of the cautery in that place is according to two manners: or cautery with burning medicines, or cautery with fire.
Sira segon dos manieyras scientas, de las quals es la una que cauterizes aquel sobre la partida de l’ancha de lu am tres cauteris triangulatz segon aquesta forma; e fay am aquels bona profunditat.	There are two known ways to do this, one of which is to cauterize the area above the patient's hip with three triangular cauteries in this shape; and make sure to go deep enough with these cauteries.
E sia le spazi le qual es entre cascun cauteri la quantitat de la grossitut del dit e si le cauteri olivar o gran.	And the space between each cautery should be the width of the finger or thumb, depending on whether the cautery tool is small or large.
Mays alcunas veguadas sia le cauteri sobre le mieg loc sobre le cap de l’anquan per que son quatre cauteris.	In some cases, the cauteries are placed in a cross shape over the top of the hip, so there are four cauteries total.
E si vols, cauteriza am le cercle del qual es precesida la forma en la cauterizacio de la dislocacio de l’anqua, la i que sia cercle continent e comburey la ispicitut de tota la codena.	And if you wish, you can cauterize the circle of which the shape is preceded in the cauterization of the dislocation of the hip; and it should be a containing circle that burns away the sharpness of the entire tendon.
E aquesta es la manieyra de cauteri in ciatiqua quan dolor es adherent al anqua e no es estenduda entro a la coyssa.	And this is how you cauterize a sciatica, when there is pain adherent to the hip that does not extend into the thigh.
Mays si es estenduda entro a la coyssa, lahoras cauteriza aquel am dos cauteris sobre la coyssa sobre le loc al qual envireys le malaute que es la dolor; e am un cauteri sobre la cavilha per quatre ditz un pauc deves la part cilvestra.	But if the pain extends into the thigh, then you should cauterize it with two cauteries on the thigh, at the location where you direct the patient's gaze, which is where the pain resides; and also with one cautery on the ankle, four fingers' worth, on the wild side.
E si le cauteri cutellar, e sia la profunditat del cauteri segon la quantitat de la ispicitut de la codena.	And if you are using a knife for cauterization, then the depth of the cautery should be according to the thickness of the tendon.
E si le malaute envireys que la dolor es estenduda entro al loc prop les ditz des pes, lahoras cauteriza aquel aqui on envireys am cauteri per tres puntz o quatre o mays si indigeys de aquel.	And if you direct the patient's gaze such that the pain extends down to the location between their toes, then cauterize this area with three or four cauteries, or more if necessary.
E si le malaute envireys dolor esser dejos le donolh ves la coyssa, lahoras cauteriza aquel aqui am un cauteri cutellar.	And if you direct the patient's gaze such that the pain goes down the front of the thigh to the knee, then cauterize this area with a knife.
E guarda te en tota cauterizacio que no ultimes am le cauteri en tant que comburas nervi o gran arceria, e que per aquo a tu es sobre le malaute mal noccument o contraccio.	And in all cauterizations, be careful not to burn nerves or large arteries; and for this reason, you should place your hand over the patient's chest in order to prevent harm or contraction.
E yeu ja e vist un e autre de aquels les quals cauterizero sobre la cavilha e ultimero en la cauterizacio, e la cama foc inflada entro que la tumor aconseguit lo pe, e foc perforat e corromput tot le pe.	And you have seen one or another of those who cauterize on the ankle and finish in cauterization, and then the fire inflames inside the foot, and the foot becomes perforated and rotten all throughout.
E aprop accidic fort solucio de ventre, e aprop aquo la mort.	Then he experiences a strong pain in his belly, and there he dies.
E si la dolor es en dos partidas ensemps cauteriza quascuna segon aquesta manieyra.	And if the pain is in two places at once, then cauterize each one according to this method.
E diysero les savis alcus en la cauterizacio de anqua cauteri del qual aquesta es la manieyra: fay semblant a cercle de ferr del qual le cercuit sia la maytat de un palm; e sia deves le sieu orrifici segon la grossesa de un os de datil o mens un pauc.	And the wise say that in cauterization of the hip, this is how you should do it: make a circle out of iron whose circuit is half a palm; and its opening should be according to the thickness of a finger or less.
E dedintz aquel cercle sia un autre tertz; e sia le spazi le qual es entre lor la quantitat del notz del pous; e sian aquels cercles ubertz de dos partidas; e sia la longitut de aquels cays un notz o dos notz, e fay en aquels margue de ferr decentment apparelhat en les cercles; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And inside that circle, there should be another third; and the space between them should be the width of a finger joint; and those circles should open on two sides; and the length of the nails in those circles should be one or two joints, and make decently bent edges in the circles; and this is its shape:
Aprop sia ignit en le foc entro que s’enrogesisca e gete scintillas, e aprop sia pausat sobre la partida del anqua, le malaute colcat sobre le latz sa.	This is how you cauterize the hip when it is dislocated: first, ignite a fire inside that it becomes red-hot and gives off sparks; then place it on the top of the hip, with the patient lying on his side.
E donc cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris redontz en una veguada.	And then cauterize that area with three round cauteries at once.
E aprop layssa aquel per tres jorns; aprop emplastre aquel am boder e layssa la plagua uberta per trops dias; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And then let it rest for three days; and then dress that wound with a bandage and leave the plaster open for several days; and then heal that wound with ointment until it is well.
Diys Albucasis : o, filhs, de aquesta specia de cauteri pauc havem usat per la terror del reguardament de lu, e per aquo que paucs havem trobatz les quals reguardan sobre lu.	Albucasis says: O sons, we have used this type of cauterization sparingly out of fear for the life of the patient, and because few have been found who practice it.
Mays dels bos cauteris a lu qui les sufferta, et atroba am aquel le loc de lu.	But from those who suffer from these diseases, find out where they hurt him and examine that location.
Mays cauteri am medicinas adhurentz es que tu fassas dos cercles haventz armula perforada en la qual deyssen le guaffo de la porta de ferr; sia la longuitut de la paretz en la nauteza de lor sian dos nozes o quays aquels.	But when you administer cauteries with medicines that burn, make two circles with a tool that has a perforated door in which the handle of the iron door is placed; let the length of its sides be two joints or as much.
E si le spazi le qual es entre quascu la quantitat de la grossitut del dit; e sian ubertz dejos e desus, e sian que contenguan se entre lor segon aquesta forma:	And let the space between each one be the width of a finger joint; and let them be open below and above, and let them contain themselves according to this shape:
E aprop pausa sobre la partida de la anqua le malaut jasent sobre le latz sa, e comprem la tua ma sobre la partida de la anqua; e aprop pren de aygua cauda e fon la entre dos cercles, e la qualiditat de aquela sia am le foc petit a petit, e te aquela per la quantitat de una hora, e sufferta le malaute la mordicacio e la adhustio de lu — quar aquel atrobo mordicacio ayssi cum de foc — entro que cesse la mordicacio.	And then place the patient on his side, and press your hand against the top of the hip; and then take water-tail and dip it between the two circles, and let its quality be small by little with fire, and hold that for an hour, and let the patient suffer the biting and squeezing of it — for there will be biting as from fire — until the biting ceases.
E aprop eleva la tua ma am le instrument et abstergeys l’aygua cauda de tota la anqua am aygua dousa.	And then lift your hand with the tool and wipe away the water-tail from the entire hip with warm water.
E aprop leyssa aquel per tres jorns e pausa sobre aquel boder entro que sia la negror de la adhustio remauguda, e leyssa aquo per alcus jorns, e correra de lu poyredura; aquest es derier en juvament.	And then let it rest for three days and place a bandage over the bite mark until the blackness of the squeezed mark is removed, and let him rest like that for several days, and a swelling will go away.
E aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And then heal that wound with ointment until it is well.
E si la dolor es extenduda entro la coyssa o la camba, fay a lu estatua en lu que contengua aygua segon que es feyt en la anqua engualment.	And if the pain extends into the thigh or the leg, make him stand in such a way that he contains water according to how it is done in the hip equally.
E aquesta es la manieyra de aygua cauda, e yeu ja he scrit aquela en le tractat de la rectificacio de medicinas.	And this is the method of water-tail, and I have already written that in the treatise on the refinement of medicines.
Recipe de alcali e de caus no extinta de amdos ana partida una, e trissa les e pausa en una ola nova de la qual la partida dejos sia perforada per un petit trauc, segon la quantitat que intre en lu ray.	Take one part of alkali and one part of non-extinguished ash from both ends, and mix them together and place them in a new bowl whose bottom is perforated with a small hole, according to the amount that goes into him.
E pausa dejos le fons de la ola autra ola enveyriada, e gete sobre aquel alcali e caus viva de aygua doussa la qual cobra aquels per un dit, e pus que tu compremes aquels am la tieua ma per bona compressio, e leyssa la hola que deyssenda de lu aygua aguda en la partida dejos a la ola enveyriada.	And place the bottom of the other bowl on top of it upside down, and pour over that alkali and live ash from warm water which covers those by one finger, and then compress them with your hand, and let the bowl that hangs from him pour sharp water into the area below the bowl.
E aprop ajusta tota aquela aygua, e geta la sobre autra caus viva e autre alcali renovelatz, quar aquela lahoras sira de mot forta acuitat, la qual es aministrada en motas operacios de medicina e en cauterizacio dels autres membres, quar operacio fa de foc.	And then adjust all that water and pour it over the other live ash and another renewed alkali, because that hour makes strong fire which is administered in many medical procedures and in cauterization of the other limbs, because that operation makes fire.
E so de las medicinas alcunas am las quals es cauterizat ancha, ayssi cum tezizic e mel anacrat e caus am sabo enayssi que sian mesclatz.	And some medicines are cauterized with broad tools, like tweezers and honey and ash with soap that have been mixed together.
E Gualia recontet de un home dels antics la operacio e la curacio am la qual es curada dolor de anqua e de vena sciatica, e magnifiquet mot be esser de aquel, e diys que no hac necessitat de autra curacio, e quar es sanat per una veguada ayssi cum recomtec, quar fort leu aquel intrec en banh e eysic ja sa d’aquel.	And Gualia recorded from an ancient man the operation and the cure by which is cured pain of hip and sciatic nerve, and magnifies much that body part because of it, and says that he did not need any other cure, and that it was healed by one method with a bath and ointment that he made himself.
Et es que sia pres de certarragi vert, e si no es atrobat vert, sia presa figua recent; e mot sia trissada am un pauc de grays e sia pausat sus la anqua en la qual es la dolor, o en la coyssa, o en la camba, e sia liat.	And let it be pressed with a certain wine, and if it is not pressed, then take the fig juice; and let the body part be twisted by a little with grays, and let it be placed over the hip where there is pain, or in the thigh, or in the leg, and let it be bound.
E sia layssat per la cantitat de tres horas o per la quantitat que·l malaute centa cedacio de la adhustio.	And let it rest for the amount of three hours or for the quantity that the patient feels the biting of the squeeze.
E aprop met aquel en banh e donc quan le cors de lu sia enrozat, entromet aquel en le sol, quar la dolor cessa e es sanat.	And then put him in a bath and then when his body is heated, put him in the sun, because the pain will cease and he will be well.
E sapias que no cove que alcu use de cauteri am aquestas medicinas sino aprop la evacuacio del cors.	And know that it is not good for anyone to use cauterization with these medicines except after the evacuation of the body.
Mays ja Escorides diysec que quan am fenda de cabra la vena stretica es cauterizada, aprofieyra a lu mo be; e sia le cauteri am lu segon aquesta manieyra: sia presa lana e sia enbeguda en oli antic, e sia pausat entre le pous del pe e entre le fossil.	But Ja Escorides says that when the vein is stretched with a goat's skin, it should be cauterized, he makes him go; and let the cautery be done according to this method: take wool and dip it in old oil, and place it between the toes of the foot and between the bone.
E aprop pren fenda de cabra secca e emflasma aquela am foc entro que sia fayta carbo; e aprop pausa lu sobre la lana e leysa la entro que sia estengida.	And then take dry goat skin and blow it with fire until it is made into charcoal; and then place it over the wool and let it hang until it is dry.
E aprop itera aquo, e no cessas far aquo entro que·l scintiment de la mordicacio pervengua entro al anqua e repausa la dolor.	And repeat this, and do not stop doing this until the sensation of the bite reaches the elbow and the pain subsides.
Et aquesta manieyra de cauteri es apelat cauteri de vaquas.	And this method of cauterization is called cow's-tongue cautery.
Capitol .xlii.	Chapter 42.
De cauterizacio de dolor de dos.	On the cauterization for joint pain.
Alcunas veguadas dolor es en le dos per tropas causas, cum per cazement o per percucio o per superflua evacuacio, e per causas ad aquelas semblantz, per infusio de materia frega e humida.	At times, pain occurs in the back for various reasons, such as bruising or puncture, or excessive discharge, and due to similar causes, from the infiltration of moist and irritating matter.
E cauteri no catz sino en aquesta sola specia la qual es fayta per efusio de materia frega.	And cauterization should not be performed except in this one case, which is caused by the infiltration of moist and irritating matter.
Donc cove, aprop evacuacio del malaute am pillulas fitidas e am semblant a lor, que sian faytas sobre·l dos en le qual es la dolor tres linhas segon la latitut de lu, pus que senhas am tentha en quascuna linha v cauteris o mays, segon la quantitat que ve de la tolleransa del malaute e de la vertut de lu.	Therefore, once you have made a poultice with fomentation and similar ingredients on the back where the pain is located, draw three lines according to its width across the back, and then pierce each line with ten or more cauteries, depending on the patient's tolerance and the strength of his constitution.
E sia fayta cauterizacio am cauteri de punt.	And the cauterization should be performed with a pointed cautery.
E si vols, cauteriza am tres cauteris o am quatre am cauteri clavilh medial segon aquesta forma:	And if you want, cauterize with three or four cauteries using a nail-shaped cautery according to this form:
Capitol .xliii.	Chapter 43.
De cauterizacio al comensament de gilbositat.	On cauterization for the beginning of gangrene.
Motas veguadas endeve aquesta malautia als petitz enfantz; e senhal del comensament de lu en les enfantz es que accideys sobre lor estrectura en le ale eves la elevacio e·l movement.	At times this disease affects young children, and the sign of its onset in infants is that they experience constriction in their gut, which causes elevation and movement.
E atrobas en le derier espondil del dos e dels notz de lu que ja comensa a sobremontar sobre les autres spondils.	And you should also target the lower spine and the knots on it that are beginning to rise above the others.
E donc quan tu vezes aquo e voles prohibir, lahoras cauterisa aquel am cauteri que sia cercle segon aquesta forma:	And so when you see this and want to prevent it, then cauterize that area with a circular cautery according to the following form:
que prengua le cauteri sobre tota partida del spondilh engualment.	that the cautery should cover the entire joint evenly.
E si vols, cauteriza en le circuit del spondilh am le cauteri de punt dos linhas o tres.	And if you want, cauterize around the joint with a pointed cautery, making two or three lines.
E sian les puntz propdas entre lor.	And the points should be close to each other.
E aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat am aquo que havem dit.	Then return and treat the area that was cauterized according to what we have described above.
Mays guarda que cauteri no sia administrat en gelbositat que sia fayta per spasme de nervi.	But be careful not to administer cauterization in cases of gangrene caused by nerve spasm.
Capitol .xliv.	Chapter 44.
De cauterizacio de podagra e de dolor de juncturas.	On the cauterization for gout and joint pain.
Quan dolor de juncturas son faytas per humors fregas les quals so enfundutz a quascun membre del cors, lahoras quan veno dolors en los pes, de costuma dels metges es que aquo apelen podragua propriament.	When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
E donc cum es curada podagra de causa frega am manieyra de cura e no so remaugudas las dolors, lahoras las remau cauteri.	And therefore when gout caused by moist matter has been treated in the way described above and the pains have not been relieved, then apply cauterization.
E es que tu cauterizas aquel aprop evacuacio en le circuit de la junctura del pe am motz cauteris.	And you should cauterize that area around the joint of the foot with many cauteries.
E sia cauteri olivar del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And the cautery should be olive-shaped, and this is its form:
E si es necessitat que puntz sia fayt sobre la fassia del pe, lahoras fay am cauteri de punt.	And if it is necessary to make points on the surface of the foot, then do so with a pointed cautery.
E si las dolors pujan entro als denolhs o a las autras juncturas, e aquo motas vetz s’endeve, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre quascun donolh am tres cauteris o quatre de tota partida am aquest cauteri olivar.	And if the pains shoot up into the knees or other joints, and this happens frequently, then cauterize each knee with three or four cauteries using this olive-shaped cautery across its entire width.
E si motz cauteris que aquestz cauteris sian a tu necessaris, lahoras cauteriza aquel e no premas trop la tua ma am le cauteri abans, sia tant solament enviro la specitut de la codena.	And if you find that these cauteries are necessary for you, then apply them and do not press too hard with the cautery beforehand, but simply touch the skin lightly with its tip.
E si las dolors pugan entro al donolh e·l dos, lahoras aministra le cauteri le qual havem dit en le sieu capitol.	And if the pains shoot up into the knee and back, then administer the cautery we described in its chapter above.
E si las dolors so en las mas tant solament, e es apelada suagra, lahoras puncta en le circuit dels focils ayssi cum se revolvo, puncta en aquels dos linhas.	And if the pain is only in the hands and is called sciatica, then while rotating them, prick around their joints with two lines.
E si reman de las dolors en les ditz, lahoras puncta en le cercuit dels focils sobre quascun notz e sobre la pinche de la ma.	And if the pain remains in the fingers, then prick around their joints and over the knuckles of the hand.
E si las dolors pugan aprop alscus jorns als coydes o als muscles, lahoras cauteriza les quascus de tota part dels ajutoris.	And if the pain shoots into the shins or muscles, then cauterize all of their joints evenly.
E no evacuas le malaute de bon regiment e de recepcio de medicinas, quar si es fayt bon regiment e flacma es evacuada am aquest cauteri sira sanat, Dieus ajudan.	And do not discharge the patient from good treatment and the taking of medicines, for if good treatment is given and phlegm is discharged by this cautery, God willing, she will be healed.
Capitol .xlv.	Chapter 45.
De cauterizacio de rompeduras.	On the cauterization for fractures.
Quan endeve rompedura en les angonars e diysendo les budels denant l’atela al genetiu, e aquo es comensan de aprop, lahoras cove que tu mandas al malaute layssar la sua comestio en le sieu dia e que use de causas leniens per so que la fenda deyssenda del sieu ventre.	When a fracture occurs in the angles and joints, cutting through the skin to the soft tissue underneath, and this is evident immediately, then you must command the patient to stop eating for that day and to fast for several days so that the wound can heal.
E aprop segua le malaute entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos, e comanda a lu que tengua le sieu ale entro que sia foro getat o aparesca l’atela o·l budels.	Then return the patient to his bed and command him to keep his leg elevated so that it is either bent or straightened out at the hip.
E aprop retorna aquel am les tieus ditz e senha am tenta la ruptura sobre le os del pentenilh am senhal la extremitat del qual sia semblant a la maytat de cercle a las subiranas partidas del cors.	Then return the patient with his arms and indicate to him that he should press on the fracture at the tip of the bone, which is similar in appearance to the bottom of an inverted cup over the upper parts of the body.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	Then apply the cautery, and this is its form:
entro que sia mot rog e gete cintilhas.	until it becomes red and bloated.
E aprop reduzeys le budel o l’atela a la sua conquavitat, e aprop pause la sua ma sobre le loc per so que le budel no yesqua.	Then return the intestine or hernia to its cavity, and place your hand over the area to prevent the intestine from coming out.
E tu ja has ubert entre las coyssas del malaute e dejos lu as pausat un coyssi, et autre servent sia sus las cambas de lu, e autre sus le pietz de lu, le qual tengua las suas mas.	You have already opened the space between the patient' s thighs, placed a cushion under them, another servant on their legs, and another on their chest, holding their hands.
E aprop pausa le cauteri sobre aquel senhal am la tua ma am cauteri stan dreyt, e te aquel entro que am lu consieguas le os del pentenilh entro al mieg del duiduni; e itera am aquel autra veguada si a tu aquel no has conseguit en la primieyra veguada entro al os.	Then apply the cautery to that sign with your hand using a straight cautery, and apply it again with another application if you have not achieved anything in the first application on the bone.
E observa saviament del ysiment del budel en la hora de la tua cauterizacio, que no comburas aquel budel per so que sobre le malaute no vengua in mort o autre gran malicia.	And be careful to observe whether the intestine is hot when you cauterize it so that it does not burn and cause death or some other great harm.
E sapias que quan tu am le cauteri no atenhas le os, no confereys la tua operacio.	And know that when you apply the cautery, do not press down on the bone because then your operation will be ineffective.
E cove que·l cauteri dels enfants sia subtil segon le gran e la mesura de lor.	And see that the cautery for children is subtle according to their age and size.
E aprop cura le loc del cauteri per tres dias am boder entro que sia remauguda la scara del foc.	Then dress the wound of the cautery after three days when the scar of the fire has healed over.
E aprop cura aquel am les autres enguentz entro que sia sanat.	Then treat that with other remedies according to what ails it.
E le malaute sia jasent sobre le sieu dos per xl dias entro que sia sigillat le loc e la plagua.	And the patient should lie on his back for 40 days so that the wound is sealed and healed.
E cove que pauses le nutriment de lu segon la longitut del temps de la curacio de lu le qual le linesca le ventre de lu, e que le budel no yesca fora deves le esforsament de guerir.	And see that he is fed according to the length of time it takes to heal him, for which his belly is bound so that the intestine does not come out when he tries to move.
E aprop quan se vol levar aprop xl dias, lahoras aministra liament decentment fayt, e tengua aquel per autres xl jorns.	Then after he wants to get up after 40 days, then treat him decently, and have that for another 40 days.
E sia mermat de trebalh e de replecio de vianda e de beure, e de votz vehementz, quar quan usa de aquest regiment de sanacio entiera sira sanat.	And let him be fatigued by work and the taking of food and drink, and of violent movements because when he uses this method of healing, she will be healed.
E yeu diyre la curacio de las rupturas en las autras partidas del ventre, e so al comensament, e vols que no treguan, lahoras cauterisa la ruptura d’aquel am cauteri redon segon la quantitat de lu, e sia aquo que es exhurit de la codena ayssi cum la tersa partida de lu; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit, e no es ajustat.	And it can also be used to heal fractures in other parts of the belly, and when you start, and you want that they do not draw each other, then cauterize the fracture with a red-hot cautery according to its amount; and return and treat that according to what we have said above, and it is not closed.
E ja diyssero alcus primiers que ruptura sia cauterizada am cauteri triangular segon aquesta forma, pus que es senhada am tenta:	And now I will say the first which should be cauterized with a triangular cautery according to this form, for it is marked with trying:
e es pausada linha que eys per la latitut en le latz pus sobira de la ruptura, e autra linha al desus; e depausa la tua ma am un cauteri clavilh, mays le primier cauteri es pus leugier e milhor.	And a line is drawn from the eye to the side most opposite to where the rupture is, and another line above it; and your hand is placed with a cautery pin, but the first cautery is farther away and better.
Capitol .xlvi.	Chapter 46.
De cauterizacio de torcio.	On cauterization for torticollis.
Quan endeve en alscus membres per cazement o per percussio dolor e persevera aquela dolor per lonc temps e no comfereys al u curacio am medicinas, lahoras cove que cauterizes am cauteri de punt.	When there is pain in any part due to a dislocation or blow, and the pain persists for a long time and does not respond to medicines, then you must cauterize with a pointed cautery.
E sia le cauteri de tot membre segon la magnitut e la parvitat de lu, e vertut e develitat de lu, e locacio de torcio e dolor de lu.	And the cautery of every member should be according to its size and smallness, nature, and location of the torticollis and its pain.
Donc si·s sanat per le primier cauteri, bo es; e sino, lahoras itera sobre lu le cauteri; quar de costuma de aquelas dolors es que sian punctatz de membre ad aquel membre le qual apropinque al u, per que cove que consieguas aquels am cauteri entro que·l malaute sia sanat.	Therefore, if he is healed by the first cautery, it is good; but if not, then do the cautery again; for usually such pains are punctured into that member which is nearest to the patient, so that you may achieve the healing of the patient through the cautery.
Capitol .xlvii.	Chapter 47.
De cauterizacio de lepra.	On cauterization for leprosy.
Les lebros alcunas veguadas am cauteri per mot gran juvament, e magerment si la specia de lepra que es fayta per putrefaccio de flacma e de melencolia.	Lepers sometimes are cauterized with great benefit, especially if the type of leprosy is due to putrefaction of phlegm and melancholy.
E donc cum tu vols cauterizar aquel, considera si la lepra es comussan e as aquela curada am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no deysen, ni esta, e temes sobre le malaute que la corrupcio comprehenda tot le cors de lu e tota la compleccio de lu, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre le cap am v cauteris: am un en le mieg loc del cap, e am le segon pus dejos de lu, eves le front a la fi dels cabels; e amdos sobre dos corns; e am un detras, sobre la nuca o servitz.	And so when you want to cauterize him, consider if the leprosy is dry and has been healed as we have said in the division, or if it is moist and rotting, and fear that the corruption affects his whole body and all its parts; then cauterize him on the head with five cauteries: one in the middle of the head, another lower down, avoiding the forehead at the end of the hairline; two more cauteries on the sides, behind, on the nape or neck.
E ultima la tua ma am le cauteri un pauc entro que emprema en le os una petita empressio, e de lu sian deslocadas las scorsas, per so que la expiracio de grossas vapors sia alleujada de lu; e cauteriza sobre la melsa segon que es precesit.	And with the last cautery, press your hand a little onto the bone, so that the skin is displaced and the expiration of thick vapors is driven out from him; then cauterize over the wound according to what has been prescribed.
E si la lepra es ja expanduda sobre le malaute e apar manifestament, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas aquel am aquels cauteris les quals havem ditz en le cap; e am cauteri sobre la extremitat del nas, e am dos cauteris sobre las doas maysselas, e am dos cauteris sobre dos spondils del col, e am vi cauteris sobre les spondils del dos, e am un gran sobre les spondils prop de la coeta, e un sobre la cotea , e am dos sobre las anquas, e am un sobre quascuna anqua, e am dos sobre les donols e un sobre quascun donolh, e am dos sobre les coydes, e am dos sobre les muscles, e am dos las teneretutz del sieu pietz; e cauteriza aquel sobre totas las juncturas dels ditz de las mas e dels pes, e sobre quascun talon dels sieus pes, e sobre les foscils de las suas mas.	And if the leprosy is already spread over the patient and appears manifestly, then you must cauterize him with those cauteries we have mentioned for the head; and with a cautery on the end of the nose, and two cauteries on both knees, and two cauteries on both shoulders, and six cauteries on the back, one large cautery on the spine near the tailbone, and one cautery on the coccyx, and two cauteries on the hips, and one cautery on each hip, and two cauteries on the heels, and two cauteries on the muscles, and cauterize all the joints of the fingers and toes, and on each talon of the feet, and on the sockets of his hands.
E guarda te dels nervis les quals so sobre le talo que no comburas aquels.	And beware of the nerves which are above the talus that you do not burn them.
E alcunas veguadas es cauterizat am un cauteri sobre le os del pentenilh e am autre sobre la boca del stomac, e autre sobre le fietge.	And sometimes it is cauterized with one cautery over the bone of the little toe and another over the mouth of the stomach, and another over the anus.
E sapias que quant mays ajustas cauteris, tant es mays juvatiu e mays conferent; e sapias que le malaute no ha en le cauteri dolor, ayssi cum han les sas, per so quar le cors de lu ja es stupefayt.	And know that the more cauteries you apply, the greater the benefit and effect will be; and know that the patient does not feel pain in the cautery as the unhealed do, because his body is already stupified.
E cove que les cauteris sian grans o paucs segon les membres e las juncturas segon que es precedit de las specias dels ferramentz.	And let the cauteries be great or few according to the members and joints, as it is preceded by the species of the tools.
E aprop cura le cauteri am farina de errs coyta am mel e am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	Then treat the cautery with flour of bran cooked with honey and with other healing remedies until he is healed.
Capitol .xlviii.	Chapter 48.
De cauterizacio de stupor.	On cauterization for stupor.
Quan alcun membre es stabozit o adormit e es curat am medicinas, olis e emplastres, e no es sanat, lahoras tu cauteriza aquel membre stabozit am cauteris segon que merita la grandesa del membre o la parvitat de lu.	When a member is numb or asleep and is not healed by medicines, oils, and plasters, then you must cauterize that numb member with cauteries according to the size of the member or its smallness.
E sia lo tieu cauteri intrant la ispicitut de la codena un pauc.	And let your cautery go a little into the thickness of the tendon.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia sanat.	Then treat it with ointment until it is healed.
E alscunas veguadas es cauterizada alcuna stupor le qual endeve a las mas e als pes, e als spondils del dos e ves le eysiment dels nervis les quals mavon aquel membre, e es remauguda la stupor.	And sometimes a stupor is cauterized which also involves the hands and feet, and the shoulder blades and also the movement of the nerves that move that member, and the stupor is refreshed.
Mays no prusuma sobre aquo sino aquel que es savi en la anotomia dels membre e de la egressio dels nervis tot le cors moventz.	But do not presume on this without being wise in anatomy of the members and the going out of nerves that move all the body.
Capitol .xlix.	Chapter 49.
De cauterizacio de albaras que es morfea.	On cauterization for scale-like leprosy.
Quan albaras es antiqua e no comfereys a lu alcu dels enguentz de medicina, lahoras tu cauteriza sobre aquela am cauteri preon un pauc segon la quantitat de la specitut de la codena entro que sia remauguda la blancor e la color de lu, e la color de lu sia mudada.	When the scales are ancient and do not respond to any of the healing ointments, then you must cauterize them with a cautery slightly according to the quantity of the thickness of the tendon so that the whiteness and color of it is refreshed and the color changed.
E aprop cura aquel am farina de errs e de lentilhas am oli rozat e am folhas de arnagrosa, e am sanc de colomba o am sanc de yronda, da cascuna sia una partida e totas sian mescladas, e aprop sia linit un drap e sus le loc sia pausat entro que sia sanat.	Then treat it with flour of bran and lentils with roasted oil and with leaves of arnagrosa, and with pigeon blood or with blood of a young hen; let each be a portion and all be mixed together; then let it be bound up in a cloth and placed on the spot until it is healed.
Capitol .l.	Chapter 50.
De cauterizacio de cranc.	On cauterization for scrofula.
Quan canser es comensan e vols aquel ostar, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteri de cercle en le circuit de lu ayssi cum es revolgut.	When the scrofula is coming out and you want it to go away, then cauterize it with a circular cautery around it as it is being turned over.
E diysero les savis que sia cauterizat am lo derier cauteri en le mieg loc; mays a mi no es vist aquo, quar temi que sia ulcerat, e yeu ja e vist aquo alcunas veguadas.	The wise say that it should be cauterized with the last cautery in the middle; but I have not seen this, because I fear that it would be ulcerated, and I have seen this happen some times.
E es pus dreyturier que sia cauterizat en le circuit de lu am cercle ayssi cum avem dit, o am motz cauteris.	And it is much more direct that it should be cauterized around it with a circle as we have said, or with many cauteries.
Capitol .li.	Chapter 51.
De cauterizacio de adubilati.	On cauterization for adubilated.
Quan alcun adubilati es tardat en maturacio, e aysso es per la superfluitat fazen aquela, o per etat del malaute, quar es vielh en decrepitat, de pauc sanc, o per le temps, e tu vols festinar en la maturacio de adubilati; lahoras cauteriza en le circuit de lu am motz cauteris petitz punctan; e aprop leyssa aquela quar ela fastinara en maturacio.	When any adubilated one is slow in ripening, and also because of the superfluity they make that, or because of the state of the patient, for he is old in decrepitude, of little blood, or because of the season, and you want to hasten in the ripening of the adubilated; then cauterize around it with many small puncturing cauteries; then let it be bound up so that it will hasten in ripening.
Mays si tu vols la perforacio de lu am cauteri, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu: e depausa aquel en le mieg loc de adubilati entro que penetre la codena.	But if you want to pierce it with a cautery, then heat the cautery of which this is the form of it: and place it in the middle of the adubilated so that the tendon penetrates.
E si le cauteri en aquel loc que es pus dejos, per so que le cors del brac sia alleujat; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if the cautery in that place that is lower down, so that the arm of the body is driven out; then treat it until it is healed.
Capitol .lii.	Chapter 52.
De cauterizacio de corrodent.	On cauterization for corrodent.
Corrodent es corrupcio ambulant en le membre, la qual corrodeys aquel ayssi cum a foc comedent lenha secca.	Corrodent is a walking corruption in the member, which corrodes it as if by fire eating dry wood.
Donc si vezes aquel corrodent en loc le qual sufferte cauteri am foc, lahoras tu igneys cauteris clavils motz paucs, e grans segon que es convenent en aquel loc en le qual es corrodent.	Therefore, if you see the corrodent in a place that suffers cautery by fire, then heat small pin-like cauteries, and large ones according to what is suitable in that place where the corrodent is.
E aprop cauteriza aquel de tota partida entro que erradiques tota la corrosio e no romangua alcuna causa de lu.	Then cauterize it completely all around so that you remove all the corrosion and not let any cause remain in it.
E aprop leyssa aquel per tres dias, e pausa sobre les locs cauterizats solpre trissat am oli mesclat entro que las scaras sian totas eradicadas e tota la corrupcio.	Then bind it up for three days, and place over the cauterized spots a compress with a soft cloth that is dipped in oil mixed within which all the scars are eradicated and all the corruption.
E aprop cura aquel am enguentz carn engendrantz.	Then treat it with generative ointments.
Mays si aprop tres dias vezes que la carn nasca sana en la qual no es corrupcio, bo es; mays sino, lahoras itera le cauteri sobre aquo que es romas en les locs corrumputz.	But if after three days the flesh does not grow and is healed in which there is no corruption, then it is good; but if not, then do the cautery again over that which is rotten in the places that are corrupted.
E corrodent es medicat alcunas vetz am medicina aguda, quar aquela es meza en loc de cauteri.	And sometimes a medicine is applied to the sores, which serves as a kind of caustic.
Mays empero cauteri am foc es de pus leugier juvament.	But cautery with fire is a swifter remedy.
E yeu ja e dit la curacio de lu am medicina aguda en la divisio, e donc pren aquela quan de lu auras endegencia.	And I have already spoken of the treatment for this disease using caustic medicine in the section on division, so take that remedy when you see fit.
Capitol .liii.	Chapter 53.
De cauterizacio de claus e dels autres semblants.	On cauterization of sores and similar maladies.
Motas veguadas endeve a las partidas dejos del pe malautia que s’apela clau, e es causa grossa, fentrada, la qual ladeys le pe; e cauteri en aquels es segon dos manieyras, so es cauteri am foc e cauteri am aygua cauda.	Many times one finds in the affected parts of a sick person a sore called a claw, and it is a serious, deep malady that penetrates the foot; and there are two methods of cauterizing them: with fire or with boiling water.
Mays cauteri am foc es que igniscas le cauteri concau semblant a pena de voltor, le qual sia feyt de ferr segon la quantitat la qual contengua le clau de tota partida, e sia de subtils marguas.	But cauterization with fire is done by lighting the cautery tool, which should be shaped like a vulture's beak and made of iron according to the size of the sore; its edges must be thin.
E aprop pausa aquel ignit sobre le clau, e aprop revolveys la tua ma am le cauteri en le circuit del clau entro que·l cauteri pervengua a la profunditat del clau.	Then hold the lit cautery tool over the sore and, while doing so, move your hand in a circular motion around the sore until the cautery reaches the depth of the sore.
E leyssa aquel per tres dias entro que comense getar brac.	Let this be done for three days until pus begins to discharge.
E aprop emplastre aquel am malvas salvatges trissadas am sal, e leyssa le emplastre sobre aquel per una nuoyt, quar aquel sira eradicat de las suas razitz.	Then apply a plaster made of crushed marsh mallows and salt over the sore for one night; this will pull out the roots of the malady.
E aprop cura le loc am enguent de carn generatiu entro que sia sanat.	And then treat the wound with generative ointment until it is healed.
E si so no-convertitz, e motas veguadas accideysso en la superficia del cors, majorment en las mas e les pes, lahoras cove que tu aministres en aquels cauteri am aygua, e es que prenguas una quannula de eram o de ferr o de pena de voltor, e pausa aquela sobre le clau; e aprop geta en la quanula de aygua cauda pauca cantitat, e rete la tua ma, e tu revolveys aquela am compressio de la tua ma de tot, e sia enpremut le marge de la canula en la razit del clau, e atrobara la aygua cauda via al preon de la razit del cau; e espera le malaute un pauc la mordicacio de l’aygua cauda per una hora, e aprop remau aquela, quar le clau am las suas razitz sira erredicat.	And if it does not heal and often occurs on the surface of the body, especially in the hands and feet, then you must administer cauterization with water to those sores; take a pipette made of bronze or iron or shaped like a vulture's beak, and hold it over the sore. Draw some boiling water into the pipette, close your hand around it, and move your hand in a circular motion around the sore so that the water penetrates the depth of the sore. Wait for an hour while the water bites into the sore; then remove the pipette, for the claw with its roots will have been pulled out by the boiling water.
E ayssi fe am aquels la i aprop l’autre entro que venguas sobre totz les quals de lor so en le cors.	And do this to all of them that appear on his body.
E aprop cura aquels pus que las razitz dels claus so erradicadas am aquo dels enguentz les quals la carn ve engenran.	And then treat the sores from which the roots of the claws have been pulled with ointments that promote the growth of new flesh.
Capitol .liiii.	Chapter 54.
De cauterizacio de tremor.	On cauterization for tremors.
Quan endeve ad alcu tremor per freg en le nervi o per febre de causa frega, o per autra causa semblant, lahoras cove que tu cauterises aquel am quatre cauteris o am v sobre les spondils del dos, entre quascun spondilh am un cauteri; e am cauteri en le pietz de lu, e sobre l‘estomac de lu, am cauteri olivar.	When you see someone with tremors caused by cold or feverishness or for some similar cause, then you must cauterize those sores with four cauteries or five on the vertebrae of his back, one cautery between each vertebra; and cauterize the soles of his feet and over his stomach with a olive-shaped cautery.
E la tremor de lu se repausa e festina la sanetat de la malautia frega.	And his tremors cease and the sickness from cold is quickly healed.
Capitol .lv.	Chapter 55.
De cauterizacio de albati accidentz al cors.	On cauterization for white sores on the body.
Quan en le cors so espellitz albati, e so pustulas fendas las quals so feytas de materias grossas corruptas; donc cove al comensament cum apareyso, que sia cauterizat sobre tot cap de la fistola am cauteri subtil am fustz de mirt, la extremitat del qual es estenduda am foc; o am razitz de erestologia longua; o am cauteri lentecular.	When white sores appear on the body and pustules break open to release matter that is corrupt and thick, then at the beginning, when they first appear, those sores should be cauterized at the head of the fistula with a fine-pointed cautery made from a branch of myrtle, the end of which has been heated; or with long rasps of erysipelas; or with a lenticular cautery.
E alscunas veguadas es cauteri ademamil al comensament de la sua expulcio segon aquesta manieyra; e no so cregudas, e es disrumpuda la superfluitat fazens aquels, et sana de aquels.	And sometimes it is done when the pus has not yet been expelled in this way: you break up and burst open the superficial matter by cauterizing them, and they heal after that.
Mays empero cove que aquo sia fayt aprop evacuacio am fleubotomia.	But it must be done with phlebotomy first.
Capitol lvi.	Chapter 56.
De cauterizacio de fluex de sanc accident per incisio de arceria.	On cauterization for accidents of blood flux caused by incision of an artery.
Tropas veguadas endeve fluex de arceria que es inciza deves la plagua la qual endeve deforo, o deves la incizio de apostemas o cauteri del membre, e alor semblantz, e es dificil remaura aquel.	Sometimes a flux of blood occurs after incision of an artery that has been cut or because of a wound or cauterization on the affected limb; and similar accidents occur, and it is difficult to stop that.
Donc cum accideys ad alcu aquo, lahoras tu·t coyta am la tua ma a l’orrifici de la arceria, e pausa sobre aquel le tieu dit endic estrenh aquel motas veguadas entro que sia ostat le fluex del sanc dejos le tieu dit, e que non yesqua.	Therefore, when this happens to anyone, you must grip the orifice of the artery with your hand and place your thumb over that hole, pressing it firmly to stop the blood flow; and sometimes you must push in with your thumb inside that hole until it is stopped.
E aprop pausa en le foc les cauteris olivars paucs e grantz, per nombre motz, e exsuffla sobre aquels entro que sian mot ignitz.	And then place the olive-shaped cauteries, which are few and large, over those holes; and blow on them until there are many embers.
E aprop pren de aquels un petit o un gran segon le loc e la plagua en la qual es rompuda la arteria, sobre aquela vena festinantment pus que auras remaugut le tieu dit, e te le cauteri entro que sia abcindit e restreyt aquel sanc.	And then take one small or large cautery according to the site and the wound in which the artery was cut; and press it firmly over that vein, hastening the pus that you have stopped with your thumb, and hold the cautery there until the blood flow is completely stopped.
E si le sanc es expellit de l’orrifici de la arteria quan tu remaues le tieu dit e extringeys le cauteri, lahoras pren la un autre cauteri coytadament dels cauteris les quals en le foc son preparatz, e donc no cesses fer aquo un aprop autre entro que le sanc sia restrengit.	And if blood flows from the orifice of the artery when you remove your thumb and loosen the cautery, then take another cautery that has been prepared in the fire, and do this repeatedly until the blood flow is stopped.
E guarda te que no comburas le nervi que aqui es, e que vengua sobre le malaute autra malicia.	And beware of burning the nerve that is here, lest another malady come upon the patient.
E sapias que quan de l’arteria flueys sanc, lahoras no es possible en aquels restrenge la sanc, e majorment quan l’arteria es gran, si no am una de quatre manieyras: o am cauteri ayssi quo dit havem, o am extraccio quan no es extrayta, quar quan es extrayta las extremitatz de lu miels son comburidas e es restreyt le sanc, o que sia liat am fiel o am liament per fort strectura, o que sian pausadas sobre lu medicinas de las quals la vertut es restringir la sanc; e sian strengudas am pulvinar am costriccio decent.	And know that when blood flows from an artery, it is not possible to stop the flow in those cases unless by one of four methods: either by cauterization as I have said, or by extraction if it has not been extracted; for when it has been extracted, its extremities are burned and the blood flow is stopped, or by binding with a ligature or by a strong constriction, or by medicine whose virtue is to stop the blood flow; and they are tightened with a bandage by decent compression.
Mays aquel que aministra restriccio decent de lu am liament e am strictura am draps o per posicio de causas comburentz e de semblantz, no comfereys sino tart.	But he who applies decent constriction with a bandage or by compression with rags or by causing burns and similar effects does not achieve anything but harm.
Mays si aquo endeve ad alcu e no sia le metge present ni medicina, lahoras obre am pausament del dit indic sobre le orrifici de aquela vena ayssi cum havem dit, e entenda a la gran costreccio de lu entro que le sanc sia ostat de la sobirana partida de la plagua, e sobre la arceria le dit no sia remaugut; e de sobre la arceria sia aspergit am aygua frega de mot gran fregiditat entro que·l sanc sia congilat e engrossat; e mays cossire en que ha de cauteri o de medicina necessitat.	But if it occurs in someone and the doctor is not present nor medicine available, then open your finger over that orifice of the vein as I have said, and apply great constriction to him until the blood flow stops from the main part of the wound; and on the artery let there be no biting by the finger; and if on the artery there should be cauterization or need for medicine.
Comensa la segonda partida.	Begin the second part.
De incisio e perforacio e ventozas e de fleubotomia e de plaguas e de lor semblants.	On incision and puncturing, on phlebotomy, on wounds, on causes, on bandages and their kinds.
Aquestas son paraulas de Albucazis.	These are the words of Albucasis.
Ja havem dit en le primier capitol tota malautia en la qual cauteri am foc es convenient e am medicina comburent, e las occasios e las causas de lu, e les instrumentz en aquels necessaris am las formas dels cauteris; e he ordenatz les capitols de la subiranetat del cap entro als pes.	I have already said in the first chapter about all illnesses for which cauterization with fire is convenient and about their occasions and causes, and about the instruments that are necessary for them, and I have arranged the chapters concerning the parts of the head above the feet.
E yeu procesire en aquest capitol per aquela meteysa guisa, per que sia alliujat lo querent aquo, lahoras sobre aquo que aura demandat.	And now I will go through this chapter in that order so that it may be helpful to the reader, and on whatever he has requested.
E denant que yeu comense aquo, cove, fils, que aprenguatz que en aquest capitol es per terror aquo que es en le capitol primier de cauterizacio.	And before I begin it, let there be, sons, that we may learn what is in this chapter that is in the first chapter on cauterization.
E per aquo que cove que sia en lu gran cautela, quar en la operacio la qual es en aquest capitol motas veguadas catz evacuacio la qual es am sanc am le qual esta la vida deves la aspersio de la vena o incisio sobre l’apostema o apercio de exsitura o puracio de la plagua o extraccio de sageta o incizio de peyra e a lor semblantz.	And let there be great caution in it, for in the operation that is in this chapter there is often a need to stop bleeding, which comes from the vein or incision on an abscess or puncturing an ulcer or opening of a wound or piercing with a stone or similar objects.
E de totz aquels so acompanhatz temor e tremor e en le mas de lor catz la mort.	And they are all accompanied by fear and trembling, and in their legs the fear of death.
E yeu amonesti vos que sobre vos no caia aquo en le qual es esitacio, quar alcunas veguadas cazo deves vos manieyras de homes am manieyras motas de malautias.	And I warn you that this should not happen to you, for it often occurs because of the bad habits of men with evil habits.
E de lor es alcu que s’irays am la sua malautia e es leugiera deves lu la mort, e aysso per la vehemensia de aquo que troba de sa malautia, e per longuesa de la malautia de lu, e am la malautia es paor la qual significa mort.	And among them are those who are sent away with their illness and are temporarily spared death, due to the severity of their ailment, and because of the longevity of their illness, and through fear of the disease that signifies death.
E de aquels es le qual dona a tu son aver e ditta, tu esperant am aquel sanetat, e la sieua malautia es perniciosa.	And among them is the one who gives you their goods and tells you, while you wait for their health, and their illness is lethal.
E donc no cove que tu consentas en aquel que ve a vos del qual es aquesta manieyra; e la vostra cautela sia major que covesitat e la vostra rapacitat; e no presumatz alcuna causa sobre aquo sino aprop sciencia certa la qual virifica aquo deves vos, e al qual perve successio lausabla.	And so you should not consent to anyone who comes to you with this disease; and your caution should be greater than greed and your rapacity; and you should not assume any cause for it except through certain knowledge which verifies it to you, and to whom praiseworthy success comes.
E usatz en la curacio de totz vostres malautes de pronosticacio e indicacio de lu al qual es salut convertida, quar en aquel es a vos ajutori sobre adquisicio de fama e de memoria, de lausor e de gloria.	And you should use in the cure of all your illnesses, prediction and indication of him to whom health is converted, for in him you will have aid in acquiring fame and memory, praise and glory.
O, filhs, Dieus en vos spire le sieu entendement e no oste a vos direccio e proteccio, quar aquo es en la sua ma.	O children, may God inspire you with his understanding and not withhold from you direction and protection, for he is in his hand.
E yeu e ordenat aquest capitol distingent per capitols segon que precedit en le capitol de cauteris, de la cura del cap entro als pes, per que sia a vos alleujat aquo que demandatz de aquo e del qual havetz necessitat.	And I have ordered this chapter distinguished by chapters according to what precedes in the chapter of cauteries, of the cure of the head into the feet, so that it is lightened from you that which you demand of that and of which you have need.
Capitol primier.	Chapter first.
De la curacio de aygua la qual es contenguda en le cap dels enfantz.	Of the cure of water that is contained in the head of infants.
Sapias que aquesta malautia motas veguadas endeve als enfantz deves le enfantament e quan la noyrissa estrenh le cap del enfant ses livitat.	Know that this illness often strikes infants after childbirth, and when the nurse tilts the infant's head sideways.
E alcunas veguadas endeve per causa amaguada la qual no es saubuda.	And sometimes because of a hidden cause, which is not washed away.
Mays yeu no vi aquesta malautia sino en les enfantz; e a totz aquels les quals yeu vi se coytec la mort, e per ayssi es a mi vist layssada obra en aquels.	But I have not seen this illness except in infants, and in all of them towards whom I saw was death, and for that reason is to me left work on those.
E yeu e vist que un enfant le cap del qual era d’aygua omplit, e·l cap de lu era totjorn ayssi magnificat entro que ceser no podia sobre si meteys per la grandesa del sieu cap, e mays que la humiditat fe aucmentada entro que foc mort.	And I have seen an infant whose head was full of water, and the infant's head was always so swollen that a nurse could not carry him around due to the size of his head, and yet that the moisture increased so much within that it killed him.
E aquesta humiditat o es agreguada entre la codena e l’os, o es agreguada dejos le os sobre le ciphac.	And this humidity is either aggregated between the cord and the bone, or it is aggregated below the bone onto the brain.
Quar la operacio en aquel si la humiditat es entre la codena e l’os e le apostema es pauc, lahoras cove que tu fendas en le mieg loc del cap am una fissura en la latitut, e sia la longitut de la fissura cays dos notz entro que corra la humiditat, e aquesta es la forma del spatum:	Because if the operation on that is little if the humidity is between the cord and the bone and the abscess is that you should cut in the middle part of the head with one fissure in width, and let the length of the fissure be four notches so that the humidity runs out, and this is the form of the spatula:
E donc si la humiditat es mays augmentada e l’apostema es major, lahoras son aqui dos fissuras segon aquesta manieyra:	And therefore if the humidity is more increased and the abscess is greater, then here are two fissures according to this way:
E si la humiditat es dejos le os, senhal de lu es que tu vezes la comissuras del cap ubertas de tota partida e l’aygua es spremuda quan tu compremes aquela am la tieua ma a las partidas dedintz e no es aquo a tu amaguat.	And if the humidity is below the bone, a sign of it is that you will see the comissures of the head swollen and soft all over, and the water is squeezed out when you compress that with your hand against the openings inside, and this is not hidden from you.
Cove que tu fendas en le mieg loc del cap am tres fissuras segon aquesta manieyra:	So that you cut in the middle part of the head with three fissures according to this way:
e aprop la inscizio extratz ne tota la humiditat; e aprop strenh las fissuras am draps e plumassols; e aprop enbroca aquo de sobre am vi e oli entro al quint dia, e aprop deslia le liament e cura la plagua am tentas e enguentz, e strenh le cap am equalitat; e mange le malaute am vianda secca de pauca humiditat entro que·l membre sia confortat e sanat.	And then extract all the humidity from it; and tightly close the fissures with bandages and plasters; and pour on it wine and oil beginning on the fifth day, and loosen the dressing and cure the wound with poultices and ointments, and strengthen the head with moderation; and feed the patient dry food with little humidity so that the member is comforted and healed.
E es autra manieyra de incisio, que consideras hon apar la magnitut del apostema e la colleccio de l’aygua, quar alcunas veguadas es mays en le occipicii, o en la partida denant, o en la destra, o en la sinistra; e donc aten am la incizio on appar le apostema e la replecio de l’aygua, e fen aquo segon que a tu es miels possible.	And there is another way of cutting, which you consider where the magnitude of the abscess and the collection of water appears, for sometimes it is more in the occipital, or in the front part, or on the right, or on the left; and therefore pay attention to the incision where the abscess and the collection of water appear, and cut that according to what is best possible for you.
Et observa que no inscindas la arteria e endevengua flueys de sanc e mora le malaute per aquel flux de sanc am evacuacio de humiditat.	And observe that you do not cut the artery and cause a flow of blood and kill the patient through that flow of blood with an evacuation of humidity.
Capitol .ii.	Chapter ii.
De inscisio de las arterias las quals so aprop las aurelhas, apeladas hilasseysse.	Of cutting of the arteries which are near the ears, called aural arteries.
Capitol segon.	Chapter second.
Quan endeveno ad alcu catars o raumas als huelhs o al pietz, e es antiquat aquo, e no confereys en aquo la curacio de las medicinas, lahoras la deriera curacio en aquest es incizio de aquelas dos arterias.	When something occurs to someone catars or raumas in the ears or the feet, and it is old, and the cure of medicines does not work on that, then the latter cure for this is incision of those two arteries.
E donc cove quan tu vols inscidir aquelas que le malaute raza lo sieu cap, e aprop fregua le loc am drap aspre per so que aparan las arcerias, e aprop sia strengut le col del malaute am alcu drap; e aprop considera on polsa la vena; e les locs de quascuna sobre les locs les quals so aprop las aurelhas depremutz, e tant se occultan sino en alcus homes.	And therefore when you want to cut those which the patient's head goes through, and then rub the place with an astringent cloth so that the arteries appear, and then tightly tie the neck of the patient with some cloth; and consider where the pulse is; and the locations of each over the locations which are near the ears pressed down, and they are hidden except in some men.
E aprop senha sobre la arceria am tenta, e aprop inscideys quascuna am le spatum de quascuna partida agut am inscizio pervenient entro al os, e sia aquo per la latitut del cap.	And then sign over the artery with a tent, and then cut each one with the spatula of each part cutting into the bone, and let that be through the width of the head.
E si vols, entromet le spatum dejos la arteria e trenqua aquala a las inciden a las partidas desus.	And if you want, insert the spatula below the artery and pierce that to the parts beneath.
E sia la longitut de la inscizio cays dos ditz ajustatz, quar quan alcuna vena es inscizida le sanc es eyssit am egressio pulsatil, le qual saut deforo per saut frequent.	And let the length of the incision be four digits adjusted, for when some vein is cut, the blood is ejected with a pulsating exit, which jumps out frequently.
Mays si la arceria no apareys al cintiment, lahoras cove que tu mesures de la aurelha la quantitat del spazi de tres ditz, e aprop senha am tenta, e fen entro al os.	But if the artery does not appear with the touch, then measure from the ear the quantity of space of three digits, and then sign with a tent, and cut into the bone.
E aquo que cove getar del sanc es quantitat de vi unc., e fort leu ne geta de lu mays o mens, e tot aquo es segon la quantitat la qual appareys de la vertut del malaute e de la replecio de la arceria de lu.	And that which is bled out is quantity of wine ounces, and stop the bleeding from it more or less, and all that is according to the quantity which appears of the virtue of the patient and the collection of the artery in him.
E aprop considera la plagua, e donc si reman sobre le os alcuna causa del ciphac, lahoras inscindys aquo per so que no endevengua apostema caut.	And then consider the wound, and therefore if anything remains on the bone causing the headache, then cut that so that it does not cause an abscess.
E aprop strenh la plagua am plumassols e am liamentz de drap de li, e aprop cura aquela am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And then tightly close the wound with plasters and bandages of linen cloth, and then cure that with ointments until it is healed.
Capitol .iii.	Chapter iii.
De extraccio de las arcerias las quals so en las templas.	Of extraction of the arteries which are in the temples.
Quan ad alcu accideys emigranea antiqua o catertz agutz, per humiditatz agrimonials e per qualiditat en les lacertz des templas, o sodo antiqua vehement e semblantz ad aquels, e es medicat am las manieyras de curacio de medicina e aquo no comfereys, lahoras nos hem sproatz en aquestas malautias extraccio de las arcerias en les templas, o cauterizacio de aquelas ayssi cum havem mostrat.	When something happens to someone with ancient migraine or catars, because of humorional humors and because of quality in the eyes, or old vehement and similar to those, and it is medicated with methods of cure of medicine, and that does not confer with it, then we have demonstrated in these illnesses extraction of the arteries in the temples, or cauterization of those thus as I have shown.
E la manieyra de la operacio e extracio de aquelas es que·l malaute raza les pels les quals son en les templas; e entenda a la arceria apparent en le templar quar ela es a tu mostrada per le sieu pols, e·s occultada sino en paucs homes per vehemencia de freg.	And the way of the operation and extraction of those is that the patient touches the temples with them; and feel the artery appearing in the temple because it is revealed by the pulse, and it is hidden except in a few men by strength of touch.
E si a tu es occultada, lahoras le col del malaute sia strengut am alcun drap; e aprop fregua le loc am un drap aspre o evapora le loc am aygua cauda entro que aparesca a tu la arceria manifestament.	And if it is hidden from you, then the neck of the patient should be tied with some cloth; and then rub the place with an astringent cloth or evaporate the place with warm water until the artery appears to you manifestly.
E lahoras tu pren le spatum del qual aquesta es la forma:	And then you take the spatula, of which this is its form:
E aprop tu scorja la codena am aquel am facilitat entro que pervenguas a la arceria; e aprop geta en lu onti e extratz aquela a las partidas sobiranas entro que extraguas aquela de la codena e descobras aquela de las tunicas las quals so dejos aquela, de tota partida.	And then you scorch the cord with that easily so that you reach the artery; and then pierce it and extract that from the parts above so that you pull it from the cord and uncover those which are below it, from all parts.
Mays si la arteria es subtil, lahoras envolveys aquela am la extremitat del oncii, e aprop inscindeys de aquela una partida segon la quantitat per la qual sian alonguadas las extremitatz de lu e sian contraytas, e no endevindra flux de sanc, quar si no so inscididas no pujara le sanc de tot.	But if the artery is subtle, then wrap it at its extremity with a thread, and then cut one part according to its quantity so that the ends of it are lengthened and contracted, and there will be no flow of blood, for if they are not cut, the blood will not flow from them.
E aprop evacua del sanc de vi unc. entro a tres.	And then evacuate the blood of wine. Enter at three.
E si la arceria es gran, lahoras cove que tu lies aquela en dos locs am fiel dopble fort de ceda o am cordas a lonc, e no coyte a lu putrefaccio denant la consolidacio de la plagua e endevengua flux de sanc.	And if the artery is large, then you must ligature it in two places with strong double catgut or with long cords, and do not allow putrefaction to happen before the consolidation of the plague and it should produce a flow of blood.
E aprop incideys la superfluitat la qual es entre dos liamentz; e fay aquo en aquela hora o aprop autra ora.	Then cut away the superfluity that is between two tendons; do this at that moment or some other time.
E si vols, cauteriza aquela am cauteri entro al os am cauteri cutellar entro que sian incididas las extramitatz de lu, e stara en loc de aquela meteyssa obra.	And if you wish, cauterize it with a cautery knife within the bone at those places where the ends have been cut off and will remain in place of that mutilated part.
E es milhor obra sino que·l malaute aia febre o es de escalfada compleccio; quar cauteri es de aquelas causas que ajudan a las humiditatz finidoras, e donc es milhor en juvament.	And it is better that the patient does not have fever or be of heated complexion; for cautery is one of those things which help to dry up moisture, and therefore is better in healing.
E cove aprop la extraccio de las arcerias que huomplas le loc de coto antic, e sian pausatz sobre lu polvils decentement fayt, e aprop sia curat am medicinas seccas fazen naysser la carn e am calguas entro que sia sanat.	And then the extraction of the arteries which spread to the site of the old wound should be applied with powders made decently and then let it be healed by dry medicines which make flesh grow and by poultices on top which heal the wound.
E si mentre obres autra veguada endeventa flux de sanc de la arceria, lahora tu te coyta a restrenger aquel sanc, o am cauteri, o que omplas le loc de coto, e strenh la tua ma entro que sia restreyt le sanc.	And if while you are working another vein opens and produces a flow of blood from the artery, then you must constrict that blood with a ligature or cautery, or by pressing on the site of the cut, and press your hand to restrict the blood.
E si deguna causa de aquelas no es a tu present, lahoras pausa le tieu dit sobre le loc entro que·l sanc sia congilat, e enbroca le loc am aygua de vehement fregiditat entro que la acuitat repausa, e sia strengut segon que cove.	And if none of these reasons are present to you, then place your finger on the site where the blood has congealed and wet the site with water of violent coldness so that the acuteness is relieved, and constrict it according to what is necessary.
E aquo que es pus leugier en extraccio de arceria es que tu cauterizes la vena am aquest cauteri haventz dos cotels, pus que tu has senhat les dos locs am tenta, e depausa quascus, mot ignitz, entro que pervenguan al os e inscindan la vena en dos locs, per so que sia elonguat aquo que es entre las extremitatz de lu, quar no son consolidadas de tot am aquest cauteri.	And what is easier in the extraction of an artery is that you cauterize the vein with this cautery having two points, since you have sensed the two sites with a probe and touch each one, with burning fire, until they reach the bone and split the vein in two places, so that what is between its ends may be elongated, for it is not consolidated by this cautery.
E aquesta es la forma del cauteri:	And this is the form of the cautery::
E sia la acuitat dels dos cotels esemps.	And let the keenness of the two edges be equal.
Mays empero si so mendres acuitat que dos cotels es milhor, quar si so agudas cum dos cotels propera a quascuna freg, e no enscideysso la carn am velocitat.	But if they are less keen than two edges then it is better, for if they are acute on both sides they will come near to each other and not cut through the flesh with speed.
Donc cum en aquels es alcuna grossitut, es tenguda la calor del foc en aquels e la carn es abscindida leugierament.	Therefore, since there is some thickness in those, the heat of the fire is held in them and the flesh is cut more easily.
E aquesta obra es milhor en tota obra e pus leugiera.	And this action is better in every action and easier.
E sia le spazi le qual es entre dos cotels la quantitat de la grossesa del dit.	And let the space which is between two edges be the quantity of the thickness of a finger.
Capitol quart.	Chapter four.
De la cura de cors de lagremas agudas e aciduas dels huels.	Of the cure of acute and acidic wounds of the bowels.
Quan so lagremas aciduas, e es le cors de aquelas venas las quals so sobre le test del cap deforo, e no comfereys en aquo alcuna causa de la curacio de medicina, e vezes la cara del malaute ja enrogesir e sent en le sieu front deambulacio ayssi cum si era deambulacio de formiguas, e·ls huels de aquel so extenuatz, humitz enayssi que ja les pels de lor son conodutz, e las parpelas so scalfadas per la acuitat de las lacrimas, les antics agro mesties en la curacio de aquelas de aquesta operacio, e nompnero aquela curacio am spassa.	When they are acidic wounds and the veins which are above the forehead, and there is no use of medicinal cure in that medicine, and the face of the patient becomes red and he feels in his forehead as if there were a procession of ants, and the bowels of him are exhausted, moistened like this so that the hair of them is known, and the eyelids are scorched by the keenness of tears, the ancient remedies in the cure of those from this operation, and I will name that cure with spassa.
E es que tu comandas al malaute rayre les pels les quals son en le sieu front, e aprop inscideys en le front tres fissuras engualment distans segon la longitut del front.	And it is that you command the patient to shave the hair which are on his forehead, and then cut into the forehead three fissures evenly distant according to the length of the forehead.
E si’ la longitut de la fissura cays dos ditz: la una fissura sia engualment distant a la longitut del nas en le mieg loc del front, e la segonda segon la longitut un petit del movement dels lacertz les quals so en le lacrimal, e la tersa del autre part.	And if the length of the fissure is two fingers: let the first fissure be evenly distant to the length of the nose at the middle place of the forehead, and the second according to the length of a little movement of the tear which are in the tear gland, and the third from the other part.
E guarda te de la incizio de las arcerias las quals so en dos latz, e elongua la tua ma de la continuacio de amdos las mandibulas.	And beware of the incision of the arteries which are on both sides, and lengthen your hand from the continuation of both mandibles.
E si’ l’espazi de quascuna inscizio la quantitat de tres ditz ajustatz.	And if the space of each incision is the quantity of three fingers joined together.
E si’ a tu una pessa d’espongua apparelhada o draps seccatz motz am les quals exsiccas le sanc.	And if you have a sponge equipped with or dry rags wet with which to dry the blood.
E aprop entremet le spatum de dos agudas extremitatz, del qual aquesta es la forma de la inscisio de lu:	Then interpose the spatula between two acute extremities, of which this is the form of its incision:
que es de la partida des templas entro a la segonda inscizio.	that is from the part of the temples into the second incision.
Exxcorja am aquel tota la codena la qual es entre dos incizios am le ciphac le qual es sobre le os, e aprop fay aquo de la inscizio migera entro a la segonda inscisio.	Excise with that whole cord which is between two incisions by the ciphac which is above the bone, and then do this of the mid incision into the second incision.
E aprop stratz ne aquest spatum e entromet en la primieyra inscizio autra vetz un autre instrument le qual es apelat cutellar, agut de una part e del autre no agut.	And then press on that spatula and insert it into the first incision another time with another instrument which is called a scalpel, sharp on one side and not sharp on the other.
E pausa le latz de aquel agut deves la carn annexa deves la codena, e le latz de lu leon dintz le os, e empelley aquel entro que pervengua a la fissura migera, e abscindeys am aquel totz les vaysels que descendo del cap als huels.	And place the side of that sharp against the flesh annexed to the cord, and the side of it against the tooth against the bone, and use that so that it comes to the fissure mid, and cut with it all the vessels which descend from the head to the bowels.
Mays que sia continuada la inscizio ad aquo appar de la codena, e aprop fay aquo en la fissura migana entro al autra fissura.	But let the incision be continued until it comes to the appearance of the cord, and then do this in the mid fissure into the other fissure.
E pus que corr del sanc quantitat engual, exprem les locs de las pessas del sanc congilat.	And when blood flows in equal quantity, squeeze those places of congealed blood.
E aprop pausa en quascuna fissura calgua de coto vielh, e pausa sobre aquels polvils enbegutz en vi e oli e vi agre, e vegas que no endevengua apostema caut.	And then place in each fissure a piece of old bone, and place upon them powders soaked in wine and oil and sour wine, and let there be no pus.
E en le tertz dia deslia le liament e aministra gran enfusio de aygua cauda o tebeza, e aprop cura aquo am enguent bazilicon am oli rozat e autres entro que las plaguas sian sanadas.	And on the third day loosen the bandage and administer a great infusion of warm water or tea, and then cure that with unguent of basil with rose oil and others so that the pla
Capitol .v.	Chapter five.
De la cura de lagramas per catartz e als huels descendentz de las partidas dedintz del cap.	Of the cure of wounds by cauterization and of the bowels which descend from parts within the head.
Quan ad alcu veno catartz agutz e continuantz, e vezes les huels del malaute extenuatz petitz, e ja le reguardament de lor es debelitat, e las palpebras ulceradas e de lor cazo les pels, e en le preon del cap es dolor aguda ledent e extrenutacio consequent, lahoras sapias per aquestz accidentz que las materias e catartz no veno sino de motas venas de las partidas dedintz procedent.	When then cauteries are done and continued, and the bowels of the patient exhausted feeble, and the eyelids ulcerated and their hair fallen out, and in the forehead is acute pain and intense tension consequent, then know by these accidents that the materials and cauteries do not come but from few veins which proceed from parts within.
E la milhor curacio en aquels es aquesta: que comandes al malaute que raza lo sieu front, e aprop inscideys en aquel una fissura al mieg loc del front, un petit per la latitut (e comensa am la fissura del templar senestre entro al dextre templar; e sia inscisio entro al os; e eslongua la tua ma dels lacertz del templas lesquals son maugutz deves la mastigacio), entro que sia le os descubert.	And the best cure in those is this: command the patient to wash his forehead, and then cut into that a fissure at the middle place of the forehead, a little by length (and begin with the fissure of the left temple into the right temple; let it be an incision into the bone; and lengthen your hand from the tear glands of the temples which are bitten because of mastication), so that the bone is uncovered.
Exsicca tot le sanc am espongua o am drap secc e aprop repleys entre las doas labias de la fissura am coto vielh o am draps de li.	Dry up all the blood with sponge or with dry cloth and then fill between the two lips of the fissure with old bone or with strips of linen.
E aprop estrenh desus am polvils enbegutz en vi e oli per so que no endevengua apostema caut.	And then bind it up with bandages soaked in wine and oil so that there be no pus.
E quan deslias aquo e veses que l’apostema ja es diminuit, lahoras cove que fregua le os entro que comensa en lu nayser carn, e aprop cura aquel am regiment exsiccatiu le qual fassa neysser la carn, ayssi cum si tu prenes de farina de froment dos partidas e de colofania quatre partidas e mescla o, e de lor sia fayt emplastre e sia aministrat en aquestas plaguas a de la carn nativitat.	And when you have removed that and see that the apostema is diminished, then know that the cauterization of the bone begins where the new flesh begins, and then cure that with an astringent regimen which makes the flesh, like this as if you took flour of wheat two parts and of resin four parts and mix them together, and of their mixture make a plaster and administer it to these wounds of the native flesh.
Capitol .vi.	Chapter six.
De la cura de aquo que catz en las aurelhas.	Of the cure of what is cauterized in the ears.
Tota causa que catz en las aurelhas es una de quatre specias, quar o es peyra mineral o causa semblant a peyra, ayssi cum ferr e veyre, o es de planta ayssi cum ceze o fava, o es causa fluxtibla ayssi cum aygua e vi agre e a lor semblantz, o alcuna bestia.	The whole cause that cauterizes in the ears is one of four species, for it may be mineral stone or cause similar to stone, like iron and vinegar, or it may be plant like celery or bean, or it may be volatile cause like water and sour wine and their similars, or any animal.
E donc quan peyra catz en l’aurelha o autra causa semblant de aquelas causas que no ajustan ne creysso en l’aurelha, e pausa la aurelha al solelh, e si vezes la peyra, lahoras distilla en aquela alcuna causa de oli violat o sizami, e aprop aministra la extraccio de lu, e fay le stornudar am condizi, e oppila las nars deve le aveniment de stornutacio.	And when you see a stone in the ear or other similar cause that does not go away or grow in the ear, and you hold the ear towards the sun, and if you see the stone, then distill it with some oil of violets or sesame, and then administer its extraction, and make the person sneeze with snuff, and close the nostrils after the sneezing.
E aprop pausa en le circuit de la aurelha alscunas pessas de drap o lana, e dextendas la aurelha a las partidas desus, quar motas veguadas es foro-getada am aquestas causas.	And then place some pieces of cloth or wool in the ear canal, and extend the ear upwards, for it is often cured by these means.
E si no n’es getada, lahoras aministra extraccio de lu am le instrument apelat gesti epicicarios subtil del qual aquesta es la forma:	And if it is not cured, then administer its extraction with the instrument called a subtle epicyclet, of which this is the form:
E si es foro-getada am gesti, bo es; e sino, lahoras aministra la extraccio de lu am onci subtil de pauca duplicacio.	And if it is cured by the epicyclet, that is good; and if not, then administer its extraction with a thin needle of slight thickness, made with few turns.
E donc si no es foro-getada per aquo, lahoras fay una canula de aram e entromet la extremitat de la canula en le trauc de la aurelha e claus a l’enviro de la canula am cera e am oli mollificada per so que no sia ubert sino la canula.	And if it is not cured by that, then make a tube of brass and insert the end of the tube into the hole of the ear, and close around the tube with wax and softened oil, so that nothing goes inside except the tube.
E aprop extratz am le tieu vent am fort atraccio, quar tropas veguadas cum aquo que havem recontat.	Then pull it out with your thumb with a strong吸引力, for it often comes out with this method that we have described.
Mays si no es foro-getada en aquesta manieyra, lahoras pren de halka alumbat o de vecz aparelhat am le qual son preses les ausels una patita quantitat, e pausa aquel en la extremitat de ray, e aprop envolopa sobre aquel coto decentment pausat.	But if it is not cured in this manner, then take a little bit of alumbated wool or of wax prepared with which birds' nests are taken, and place that on the end of the ray, and then wrap that part decently placed.
E aprop entromet aquel en le trauc de la aurelha am facilitat, e aprop excicca la aurelha de la humiditat.	Then insert that into the hole of the ear with ease, and then dry the ear from humidity.
E donc si no es foro-getada am totas las causas las quals havem recontadas, lahoras tu coyta a talhar aquela denant que endevengua apostema caut o espasme.	And if it is not cured by all the causes we have described, then you cut it before it becomes an abscess or spasm.
E la manieyra de talhar aquela es que tu al comensament sancnes le malaute de la vena sephasica e extratz del sanc segon la mannieyra de la vertut de lu, e aprop fay aquel cezer entre las tuas mas e converteys l’aurelha a las partidas desus, e fen am petita fissura en la razit de la aurelha deves lo greys de lu en le loc be premegut de lu.	And the way to cut it is that you first bleed the patient from the vein on the side of the ear and stop the bleeding according to the nature of the wound, and then you close your hand over the wound and turn the ear upwards, and make a small incision at the root of the ear, where you have previously pricked it.
E sia la fissura de figura lunar entro que pervengua a la peyra, e, la peyra atrobada, osta aquela si podes am instrumentz apropriatz; e aprop cos la fissura en aquela hora am velocitat, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	And let the incision be moon-shaped so that it reaches the stone; and if the stone is found, remove it with appropriate instruments; and then close the incision at once, and cure it until it is healed.
E si la causa cazent en la aurelha es un dels gras que creysso e so inflatz, lahoras aministra la curacio e la extraccio de lu; mays si no obezeys a tu ad eyssiment, lahoras tu pren spatum teune subtil segon aquesta forma:	And if the cause is a growth in the ear that has become swollen and inflated, then administer its cure and extraction; but if it does not obey your treatment, then you take a thin spatulum according to this form:
e aministra am aquel la abscizio de aquel gra lo qual es cazut en l’aurelha.	and with that administer the incision of that growth which is fallen into the ear.
E no fassas aquo quan cogitas que aquel ja es humectat per la vapor del aurelha, e pausa aquel en motas pessas, e prop extratz ne aquelas am les oncis o am gesti subtil, o ab inscizio ayssi co dit havem, quar es alleujada la extraccio de lu.	And do not do that when you think it is already moistened by the vapor of the ear; and place it in some pieces, and then extract those with needles or a thin instrument, or with an incision as we have described, for its extraction is thus made easier.
Mays en l’aygua la qual es intrada en l’aurelha cove que·l malaute use de sternutacio am condizi al comensament, e omple la sieua aurelha am alcu coto vielh, e jagua sobre aquela aurelha en la qual es l’aygua, e si per aquo es foro-getada, bo es; e sino, lahoras pren tropas peyras teunas e leons segon la longitut del dit, e calfa aquelas en le foc un pauc, e le pacient entrometa una de aquelas en le trauc de la sua aurelha e saute sobre la un pe sieu de aquela partida e percussia am una autra peyra sobre la peyra la qual es dintz la aurelha.	But in the water which has entered the ear because of sneezing with snuff at the beginning, and fill your own ear with some old cloth, and spit on that ear in which is the water, and if it is cured by that, good; and if not, then take thin stones the size of fingers according to their length, and heat those in the fire a little, and let the patient insert one of those into the hole of his ear, and suck on the other stone with his mouth from that end and strike with the other stone on the stone which is in the ear.
Donc no cesse aquo am peyra entro que tota l’aygua sia foro-getada.	So do not cease that until all the water is extracted.
E ja l’aygua sira foro-getada enayssi que tu prenguas de papier o de gonc .i., e met la una extremetat de lu en l’aurelha e estendas l’autre extremitat am foc entro que sia comburit le may de lu.	And when the water is extracted so that you take out paper or wax, and place one end of it in the ear and extend the other end with fire until its thread is burned.
E prop met i autre gonc e fay aquo tantas veguadas entro que tota l’aygua sia foro-getada, e stratz aquel am canula ayssi co desus es dit de la peyra extrasadora.	Then put in another piece and do that as many times until all the water is extracted; and then tie that with a tube as we have described for the stone extractor.
Mays en la extraccio de bestia intrant en aquela aurelha, si es a petit cos, ayssi piussa e a lu semblant, cura aquel ayssi cum havem dit en la divisio; mays si es de gran cos la qual causa apar al sen del vezement, lahoras aministra la extraccio de lu am gesti e oncis, e la causa de lu es pus leugiera de totas las autras causas que cazo en l’aurelha.	But in the extraction of a foreign body entering that ear, if it is a small thing like pus and similar to it, cure it as we have said in the division; but if it is a large thing causing a wound on the eardrum, then administer its extraction with instruments and needles, and the cause of it is a long-standing disease longer than all other diseases that affect the ear.
Mays en la extraccio de verm engendrat en la aurelha, quan tu curas aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e en le tractat de distillacios e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu reguardes la aurelha al solelh.	But in the extraction of a worm generated in the ear, when you cure it as we have said in the division and in the treatise on distillation, and do not trust your cure, then look at the ear towards the sun.
E donc si apar aqui alcuna causa dels verms, lahoras extratz aquel am gesti o am onci subtils, mays si no apar deguna causa, lahoras pren una canula dejos streyta e desus ampla de la qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And if you see some cause of the worms, then extract that with instruments or thin needles; but if you see no cause, then take a tube which is narrow at the bottom and wide on top, of which this is the form:
E entromet la extremitat subtil en la aurelha segon la quantitat la qual suffertar puesca le malaute; e aprop sucgeys am aquela per succio fort, e fay aquo motas veguadas, entro que totz les verms sian foro-gitatz.	And insert the thin end in the ear according to the amount which the patient can endure; and then suck it strongly with that many times until all the worms are extracted.
Mays si no obezeysso a tu al ayssiment, lahoras tu opila e claus en le circuit de la canula am cera ayssi cum havem dit; lahoras aministre distillacios las quals han ja esproadas les antics en la curacio dels verms, e atrobaras aquo en le tractat de distillacios.	But if it does not obey your treatment, then plug and close the tube all around with wax as we have said; then administer distillations which have already been tried by the ancients in the cure of worms, and you will find that in the treatise on distillation.
E sia la tua efusio am la qual efundas les olis medicinas en la aurelha am aquest strument del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And let your effusion with which you pour the medicinal oils into the ear be with that instrument of which this is the form:
E fay aquela de argent o de eram, dejos streyt, en le qual sia un petit trauc, e am pla desus.	And make that of silver or brass, narrow at the bottom and wide on top, in which there is a small hole, and flat on top.
E donc sia cum empellent a que es en la conquavitat de la canula de continent aqui on sira necessari.	And let it be as if it were in the cavity of the tube that contains what is necessary here.
E si vols, pren le ray e envolveys en la extremitat de lu decentment coto, e aprop gieta oli en la concavitat del auziment, o suc de alcuna herba, o aquo que vols de aquestas medicinas en la canula — e aquela es en la aurelha —, e aprop entromet le ray am coto desus e exprem am la tua ma aquel am compressio temprada de lu entro que l’oli sia expellit en la concavitat del auziment e le malaute senta le oli dedintz.	And if you want, take the spatulum and wrap its end decently with a cloth, and then pour oil into the cavity of the instrument, or squeeze some herb, or whatever you want of these medicines in the tube — and that is in the ear —, and then insert the spatulum with the cloth on top and press it with your hand until the oil is forced out of the cavity and the patient feels the oil within.
E aquo que sia enfundut en la aurelha sia ja scalfat am foc un petit.	And whatever is put in the ear, let it be heated by fire a little.
E guarda te que la causa la qual distillaras en l’aurelha no sia trop frega, quar las medicinas de aurelha no suffertan aquo.	And beware that the cause which you distill in the ear is not too hot, for the medicines of the ear cannot endure that.
Capitol .vii.	Chapter 7.
De curacio de opilacio de aurelhas.	On the cure of pain in the ears.
Alcunas veguadas alcus enfantz yeysso dels ventres de lors mayres no-perforatz, e aquo ja accideys en alcus homes, opilacio en le meat de la aurelha per plagua o per carn nada en aquela; e aquesta opilacio alcunas veguadas es fayta en le preon del trau de la aurelha la qual no consiec le vezement, e alcunas veguadas es en las partidas defora.	Sometimes some children are born with pain in their ears, and that happens in some adults as well, opilacio in the middle of the ear by pus or by nothing at all in that spot; and this opilacio sometimes occurs in the middle of the ear canal which does not affect the eardrum, and sometimes it is on the outside.
E aquela que accideys en le preon de lu, la qual no comprehen le vezement, es en las majors disposicios de dificil sanacio.	And that which happens in the middle of it, which does not affect the eardrum, is in the most difficult dispositions for curing.
E en aquela en qual consegueys le vezement, cove que tu pauses la aurelha del malaute al solelh e reguarda en aquela.	And when you achieve that, look at the ear towards the sun.
E donc si vezes oppulacio apparent, obre aquela am espatum subtil del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And if you see an abscess, open it with a thin spatulum of which this is the form:
Si’ la extremitat de lu en la qual sia petita la latitut, del qual la una partida sia aguda e l’autra no; e le spatum sia de dos latz leon per so que no fassa lizio al aurelha.	If its end is narrow and one side is sharp while the other is not, and the spatulum is of two edges so that it does not hurt the ear.
E donc si la opilacio es per carn nascuda en la aurelha o en le meat de lu, lahoras te aquela am oncis subtils e incidiys aquela vehement facilitat entro que sia ostada tota la carn.	And if the swelling is due to flesh grown in the ear or in his head, then cut it away with sharp knives, carefully and gently, until all the flesh is removed.
E si opilacio es en le preon de la aurelha, lahoras pren ray subtil leon e escalfa aquel am foc un pauc, e aprop met aquel en le meat de l’aurelha.	And if the swelling is in the ear canal, then take a thin rod and heat it in fire a little, and then put it into the ear canal.
E donc si as scentit oppulacio am aquo que le malaute atroba am facilitat, per gravetat de ausir, esforsa la oppressio de lu am facilitat; e guarda te que no plagues les nervis del aurelha.	And if you have felt the swelling with water that the patient drinks easily, due to the difficulty of breathing, relieve his oppression easily; and beware lest you irritate the nerves of the ear.
E aprop pausa en l’aurelha drap de li segon la quantitat del ample del trauc lo qual tu as envolvutz en l’enguent egipciac; e fay aquo per alcus jorns entro que sias segur de la consolidacio de la plagua; o que prenguas qualgua e enfon aquela en ayguaros e pulveriza sobre lu segi trissat e usa de lu; e si vezes la aurelha ja esser apostemada, lahoras cove que tu estraguas la qualgua e permutes aquela am autra qualgua la qual tu envoloparas en cerot que sia fayt am oli rozat, entro que sia le apostema caut cedat; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	Then put into the ear a cloth of the size of the wound that you have wrapped in Egyptian ointment; and do this for several days until you are sure that the ulcer is healing; or take some of it and dissolve it in water, and spray it on the patient's mouth, using a sprayer, and use it; and if you see that the ear is already suppurating, then cut away the dead flesh and replace it with fresh flesh, which you will wrap in cerated ointment made from rose oil, until the suppuration stops; and then heal it.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc, lahoras submergeys esponga o drap en aygua frega e pausa sobre la aurelha, e usa del autra curacio la qual restrengeys le flux del sanc, la qual es dita en le tractat de distillacio.	But if blood flows, then soak a sponge or cloth in water and place it over the ear; and use the other cure which restricts the flow of blood, as is described in the treatise on distillation.
Capitol .viii.	Chapter 8.
De cura de athezil le qual endeveno a las palpebras.	Of the treatment of athezia, which occurs in the eyelids.
Athezil les quals endeveno a las paupebras dels huels alcuna veguada so humitz, alscunas veguadas son secs.	Athezia occurs in the eyelids due to some humidity, sometimes it is dry.
Donc cove que tu tenguas aquels am tenhalhas o am onci, e inscindas aquels am espatum de las suas razitz, e aprop pausa sobre les locs segi trissat.	Therefore, you should have them cut with tweezers or a sharp knife, and remove them from their roots; and place the cut end of the piece on the affected area, using a pointed instrument.
Mays si dolor am flux de sanc veno, lahoras tu cauteriza aquels am cauteri lanticular subtil.	But if pain comes with the flow of blood, then you should cauterize them with a very fine pointed cautery.
E la milhor cauterizacio es aprop las inscizios e tropas veguadas retornam quan reman alcuna causa de sas razitz; e quan so cauterizadas am foc, aquelas razitz son comburidas e no retornan.	And the best cauterization is when the cuts are made and the roots are pulled out, after some cause has returned them to their roots; and when they are cauterized with fire, those roots are burned and do not return.
Capitol .ix.	Chapter 9.
Cura de grandeyssa que veno a las palpebras dels huels.	The cure for granulation that occurs in the eyelids of people.
Motas veguadas endeve en las palpebras dels huels alcuna causa la qual es asemblada a grandissa en sa fortalicia e duricia, e per so grandissia es apelada.	Often it occurs in the eyelids of people due to some cause which resembles granulation in its strength and hardness; and therefore granulation is called.
E es agreguacio de humiditat grossa en la palpebra dejos e desus.	And it is an accumulation of thick humidity in the eyelid, both below and above.
Donc la opperacio en lor es que consideras lahoras si la grandissia es procedent en lu en aquo que apar de la palpebra e es mauguda a tota partida; e la causa de lu es leugiera.	Therefore, the operation on it is that you should consider whether the granulation comes from something that appeared under or above the eyelid and has spread everywhere; and the cause of it is ulceration.
Donc fen sobre aquela am fissura per la latitut, e aprop escorga aquela de tota partida am facilitat entro que evasesca, e aprop suspen aquela am onci e abscindeys aquela.	Therefore, cut it open with a wide slit, and then scrape away the granulation all around with ease, until it is eliminated; and suspend it with a knife and excise it.
Mays si a tu no es apparelhada la incizio de lu si no pus que penetras la palpebra am inscizio pauc a pauc, lahoras aquo no notz en deguna causa.	But if you are not equipped for the incision of it, unless there is pus penetrating the eyelid, a little at a time, then this will not be noticed in any way.
E si la figura es gran, lahoras tu l’ajusta am sutura; e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	And if the size of it is large, then you should stitch it up; and cure it until it is healed.
E si es pauca, a tu no sobrevindra mal per aquela quar l’anguent de lu restaura aquela e encarna.	And if it is small, you will not suffer harm from it because the eye's moisture restores it and incorporates it.
E si la grandissia es declinant a las partidas dedintz de la palpebra deves la superficia dedintz, lahoras evesa la palpebra e suspen la grandissia am onci, otra que tu indigescas de incizio, e prem aquela de tota part, e si la palpebra per inscizio es alonguada, aquo no notz en deguna causa.	And if the granulation is declining towards the inner edges of the eyelid, then you should eviscerate the eyelid and lift up the granulation with a knife; cut away any other cause of it that you find there, and press down on it from all sides, and if the eyelid is elongated by the incision, then this will not be noticed in any way.
E aprop la incizio, lava le huel am aygua salada; e cura le loc am aquo que encarna entro que sia sanat.	Then wash the eye with salted water, and cure the wound so that it incorporates into the skin until it is healed.
Capitol .x.	Chapter 10.
De la cura axcirnah en la palpebra desus del huel.	Of the cure of a cyst in the eyelid, above the eye.
Axcirnath es grays le qual es engendrat en las tunicas de la palpebra desus, e majorment endeve als enfantz, agrava les huels de aquels et accideyso a lor catartz le mayti; e no podon reguardar la claror del solelh per aquo quar lagremas se coytan ad aquels.	A cyst is a grayle growth which is generated in the eyelids, above the eye, and mostly occurs in children; it damages the eyes of those who experience it, and they cannot bear to look at the brightness of the sun because tears are drawn towards them.
E per so tu vezes aquels jaser sobre les lors caras tot temps, e sobre les lors caras dormen; e so a las palpebras de lor dejos les sobrecils humidas, las quals ja ha cuberta imflacio, e iminencia de accernac apparent es en l’uelh; e que quant tu premes le loc am les tieus ditz, tu centes accernac entro aquels.	And so you will see them hanging down over their faces all the time, and sleeping over their faces; and so, under their eyebrows, the eyelids are moistened with cystic swelling, which appears as a protuberance in the eye; and when you press the spot with your finger, you feel that protuberance within.
E alcuna manieyra de opperacio es en aquel que le malaute pausa le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop pausa drap de li e de lu fay calgua, e fay de lu cercle segon la quantitat la qual contena arthernach de tota partida, e aprop pausa aquel sobre aquela e prem am les tieus ditz de tota per que sia agreguat arcernac en le mieg del cercle, e aprop fen en le mieg de aquela humiditat am spatum inscident am fissura per la latitut, e la fissura no sia major que la fissura que es fayta en flaubotomia.	And another method of operation is that the patient places his head in your lap, and then you place a cloth over him and make a poultice, and make a circle according to the amount that contains arternach all around, and then place it over the cyst and press with your fingers all around so that the cystic swelling is aggregated within; and then cut out that humidity with cauterizing with fire through a slit, and let the slit not be larger than the slit made in phlebectomies.
Mays en le preon cove que tu fendas la codena tota entro que pervenguas ad arcernach, quar en las mays desposicios proceseys arcernach per fissura segon la forma de grayseza blanca.	But in the front, you should cut all the way through so that you reach the cystic swelling, for in most cases the cystic swelling appears through a slit according to the shape of white grayness.
Donc extratz aquela am draps los quals tu as envolopatz entre les tieus ditz a las partidas deforo e revolv entre la ma dextra e sinistre entro que sia dispargut.	Therefore, extract it with poultices which you have wrapped between your fingers at the parts outside and revolve between the right and left hands so that it is dispersed.
E guarda te que no ajustes en la fissura per so que am le spatum no pervenguas al huel e ladescas aquel.	And beware lest you cut into the slit with the cautery so that, when you use the cautery, you do not reach the eye and burn it.
Mays si no apar a tu arternach en le comensament de la fissura, mays que tu ajustes en la fissura un petit am fecilitat entro que procesisca arternach; e aprop extratz aquela ayssi quo havem dit; e aprop submargeys draps de li en aygua e vi agre e pausa les sobre le loc e estrenh aquels am polvils.	But if you do not reach arternach at the beginning of the slit, but only touch it slightly so that arternach processes; and then extract it as we have said; and then soak poultices in water and wine and place them over the spot and press down on those with powder.
E so alcus que trissan sal e pausan aquel en la conquavitat de la fissura per so que aquo que es remas de aquela humiditat.	And then let salt and bread remain there in the cavity of the slit, so that what remains of that humidity.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	Then cure it until it is healed.
Mays si accideys en le loc apostema caut, lahoras cura aquel am emplastres cedatils entro que sia sanat.	But if an ulcer occurs on the spot, then cure it with cauterized plaster so that it is healed.
Capitol .xi.	Chapter 11.
De manieyras de tactimi del huel.	Of methods of touching the eye.
Quan en las palpebras dels huels so natz pels ajustatz dejos les pels naturals e so antiquatz, lahoras aquels noso al huel e fan endevenir manieras de malautias ayssi cum lacrimas assiduas e mollificacio de palpebras e tela entro que aquo sia causa de destruccio del huel que s’apela tactinir del huel, e cura se en quatre manieyras: o per cauteri am foc; o am medicina acuta segon que denant es dit en le capitol de cauteri; o es fayt atactini per inscizio e sutura; o per cannas segon que yeu diyre.	When the eyelids of people are touched by foreign objects, and then they are irritated, then these cause the eye to cry profusely and soften the eyelids and membrane so that this results in the destruction of the eye, and it is called tactimi of the eye; and it is cured in four ways: either by cauterization with fire; or with sharp medicine as described in the chapter on cauterization; or it is done with an incision and suturing; or with cannulas as we will say below.
E donc cove que tu pauses le cap del malaute en le tieu se; aprop converteys la palpebra del uelh am la tua ma sinistra, e si es convertida, bo es; e sino, entromet agulha en aquela en la qual sia fiel de la partida pus dejos de la palpebra, e fay penetrar la agulha am fiel desus, e aquo sia — prop del marge de la palpebra en le qual naysso les pels — prop dels pels, e tira le fiel a las partidas desus am la palpebra, e converteys aquela am le ray.	Then place the patient's head in your lap; then lift up the eyelid of the eye with your left hand, and if it is lifted, good; but if not, insert an awl into that where there is a pus pocket below the eyelid, and let the awl penetrate above, and let it be – near the margin of the eyelid at which the lashes grow – near the lashes, and draw out the pus from above towards the eyelid, and convert that with fire.
E aprop fen en la partida dedintz de la palpebra dejos les pels ajustatz am spatum inscidentz del lacrimal major entro al lacrimal mendre; e aprop extratz le fiel e pausa dejos la palpebra polvilhs petitz de coto o de drap, e aprop senha sobre la palpebra am tenta, e sia ayssi cum figura de fuelha de mirt.	Then cut into the inner part of the eyelid where the lashes are inserted with cauterizing with fire from the lacrimal major towards the lacrimal minor; and then extract the pus and place below the eyelid small pieces of cotton or cloth, and then bind over the eyelid with a tent, and let it be thus as a sign of mirt.
Mays empero cove que sia la figura segon la quantitat de helevacio de la palpebra, quar aquo ja es diversificat en les homes, quar de aquels es le quals indigeys que sia inscidit de la palpebra gran quantitat segon la quantitat per la qual la palpebra es mollificada.	However, it is necessary to consider the shape according to the amount of swelling of the eyelid, since this differs among people; some require that a large quantity be excised from the eyelid according to the amount by which the eyelid is softened.
E aprop fen am le spatum sobre las doas linhas las quals has senhadas, e comensa del lacrimal major entro al lacrimal menor.	Then use the spatula along the two lines you drew, beginning from the larger tear duct and moving towards the smaller one.
E si’ la tua fissura prop dels pels naturals ayssi cum es la grossetut del rey.	And if the incision is near the natural hairline, make it as thick as the width of a king's hair.
E aprop met le onci en un dels dos angles de la codena, e aprop excoria aquela tota, e aprop ajusta am la scitura las doas labias am gula o fiel de lana subtil, e abstergeys le sanc, e fay adherir aquo que superflueys dels fiels sobre dos sobrecils am alcunas causas enviscans, si voles far aquo, e sino, non cures.	Then place the needle in one of the two corners of the wound, and excise all of it; then sew together the two lips with a thread made from fine wool or gut, wipe away any blood, and adhere the excess skin on the eyelids with some viscous substance if you want to do so, but if not, don't worry about it.
E aprop leyssa la sutura dels fiels entro a tres dias o quatre, e aprop cura aquo.	Then let the stitching heal within three or four days, and take care of it.
E si vols, layssa la plagua ses sutura, e cura aquela am aquo que exsicca e constrenh, quar la palpebra es alevada deves la sigillacio de la plagua e la agreguacio de lu; mays sutura es milor E donc aysso diysso les antics de taxanir.	And if you wish, let the wound remain unsutured and heal it with something that dries and constricts, for the eyelid will be raised due to the sealing of the wound and the addition of ointment; but suturing is better. And so say those who know about these things.
Mays empero en lu sia sollicitut sobre le malaute, e es de bona operacio, e no es en lu temor.	However, there should be no hurry in operating on the patient; it is a good operation and there is no danger involved.
E es autra manieyra en taxmir, e es que senhes sobre la palpebra figura ayssi cum fuelha de mirt, e aprop eleva la palpebra am tres uncis segreguatz e congreguatz segon aquesta forma:	There is another method of operating, and it involves marking a figure on the eyelid like a leaf of a myrtle tree; then elevate the eyelid using three curved and clustered hooks according to this shape:
Mays si no es possible aquo, tener les uncis, e aquo no es engualhat, lahoras pren una agula en la qual haia fil e met aquela en le mieg de la figura, e entromet le autre fiel prop le lacrimal major, e·l fiel segon prop le lacrimal mendre, e ajusta entre les tieus ditz les fiels am equalitat, e aprop am aquels eleva la tua ma am elevacio engual, eleva tota la codena sobre la qual es senhat ayssi cum havem recomtat.	However, if that is not possible, and the hooks are not available, take a needle with thread and insert it at the center of the figure; then pass the other end of the thread near the larger tear duct, and the second end near the smaller one, and tie the threads between your fingers equally, and using those, elevate your hand with an even elevation, thus lifting the entire eyelid as we have described.
E aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	Then sew together the two lips of the wound and let it heal.
Mays si accideys apostema deves la tua inscizio o la tua fissura, seda aquel apostema am cerot e a lu semblantz, e am enguentz.	However, if an abscess occurs due to your incision or your cut, dry up that abscess with cerot and similar substances, and with ointment.
E alcunas veguadas endeve a la palpebra que·ls sieus pels sian convertitz, adonc cove que tu uses en aquela de aquo que havem dit de inscizio; mays sutura en quascus es mays artificial.	And if the hair on the eyelid has turned inwards, then you should use what we have said about incision; but suturing is more artificial.
Ataxinir am cannas es segon aquesta forma:	Operating with canes is done as follows:
e es que tu convertas la palpebra e scindas la figura qu’es dedintz segon que he recontat; e aprop per art fay doas cannas o doas astelas subtils de las quals longitut sia segon la longitut de la palpebra e la latitut de lor sia mendra de la latitut del spatum.	and it is that you convert the eyelid and split the figure within it as I have described; then with skill, make two thin canes or asteles, of which their length should be according to the length of the eyelid and their width narrower than the width of the spatula.
E tu ja has inscidit en las extremitatz de quascunas partidas, la on tenes les fils.	And you have already cut into at the ends of some of these sections, where you hold the threads.
Aprop agregua quascuna am subtilitat subre aquo que superflueys de la palpebra del huel, e constres las cannas de quascunas partidas am fort strictura, e layssa aquela per alcus jorns, quar la codena per la strictura morira e sira denegada e se poyrira entro que per si meteyssa cayra.	Then adhere each one with subtlety beneath what protrudes from the eyelid; and tie the canes in some places with a strong constriction, and let it be for several days, for the eyelid will die and turn black due to the constriction and fall off on its own.
Mays si es tardat, lahoras trenca la am las toroyras, e aprop cura la plagua entro que sia sanat.	However, if it is delayed, then break it with tweezers, and let the wound heal as it should.
Donc cum es solidada, la palpebra es elevada e les pels no pungo.	Then, when it is healed, the eyelid is elevated and the hairs do not poke out.
E aquesta es la forma de doas cannas las quals faras segon aquesta forma:	And this is the form of two canes which you will make as follows:
e haia la quantitat de la longitut e de la latitut ni mays ni mens.	and have their quantity in length and width neither more nor less.
Capitol .xii.	Chapter .xii.
De elevacio de pels pungentz en le huel am agula quan le pel es dur.	Of the elevation of hairs poking out from the eyelid with a needle when the hair is thick.
Quan son pels no-naturals, durs e aspres e pungentz les huels, lahoras la operacio en lu es que tu prenguas agula subtil e pauses en aquela fiel de ceda subtil e leon, e aprop que tu ajustes las extremitatz de lu e nozes quascu en manieyra mot subtil.	When the hairs are unnatural, thick and coarse, and poke out from the eyelids, then the operation on it is that you take a thin needle and pass it through a thread made of fine silk and linen; then tie its ends in a very subtle manner.
E sia la longitut dels fiels de quantitat de una palma.	And let the length of the threads be the amount of one palm.
E aprop tu compon2 autre fiel subtil dejos lu en breu, e nuza las extremitatz de aquel si tu·t vols.	Then you place another thread beneath it briefly, and tie its ends if you wish.
E aprop pause le malaute le sieu cap en le tieu se, e sia prop del solelh per que la tua obra sia declarada, quar es operacio subtil e menuda.	And let the patient hold his head towards you, and be facing the sun so that your work is revealed, for it is a subtle and delicate operation.
E aprop intromet la agulha en la razit del pel ajustat la qual ha necessitat de engen, e fay aquela penetrar en la palpebra festinantment entro que extraguas aquela desus le pel natural.	And then insert the needle at the root of the hair which needs it, and let it pierce the eyelid swiftly as you extract the unnatural hair above.
E aprop tire le pel entro desus e intromet aquel en alixati, e sian les pels un o dos o tres e no mays.	And then pull out the hair from beneath and insert the needle again into the eyelid, and let them be one or two or three hairs but no more.
E aprop tira la tua ma am aquel entro que·l pel sia fora-gitat am alixolati en la palpebra am le pel natural.	And then pull out your hand as the hair is extracted by the needle from the eyelid with the natural hair.
Mays si es atirat alixalati e non es gitat le pel, atiraras alixati a las partidas dejos am le fiel le qual tu has compost am aquela, entro qu’en sia gitat alixalati del trau sobira.	However, if it is extracted by the needle but not removed from the eyelid, then you will pull out that thread from the parts where you have placed it, as the hair is extracted from the eyelid with the natural hair above it.
E vegas aquela am la visio del huel, quar lahoras tu gitaras alixati e lo fiel, e grotan quascu e clautz le huel, e laysse le claus per dos dias o tres, entro que·l pel adheresca al sieu loc e nasque sobre aquel bona carn.	And you will dress it with ointment after the extraction of the hair, for you will bandage each and close up the eyelid for two or three days, as the hair adhere to its place and grow new healthy skin.
E si es mays breu le pel, lahoras tu ajusta un pel lonc dels pels naturals, e es elevat am aquel, o que·l leysses entro que sia alonguat aprop alcu spazi, e lehoras tu eleva aquel.	And if the hair is longer, then you will attach a long hair of those which are natural, and it will be elevated by that, or you will let it hang freely after it has been lengthen to some space, and then you will elevate it.
Capitol .xiii.	Chapter .xiii.
De la cura de ehacratir la qual ve en la palpebra desus.	Of the cure of echacratir which appears in the eyelid above.
Quan ve en le huel ehacratir, e es contraccio de la palpebra quan es contrayta en sus, o a dextra o a sinistra partida, per mala consolidacio de plagua o de seccio o de cauteri, e es apelada leporina, e aquesta ahercrati o es natural o accidental, e es fayta per consolidacio de plagua o de seccios o de cauteri, o per semblantz a lor malcuratz.	When there appears in the eyelid echacratir, and it is a contraction of the eyelid when it is pulled to one side or the other, due to poor healing of the wound or the scar or the cautery, and it is called leporina, and this inflammation or is natural or accidental, and it is caused by healing of the wound or scars or cauteries, or by similar things to their diseases.
May la manieyra de la operacio en lu es que tu fendas aquela consolidacio e que separes las labias de lu, e pauses en lu en aquo que es entre aquelas una meca de drap de li, e ligues aquelas entro que sian sanadas.	The manner of the operation on it is that you split that consolidation and separate its lips, and place in it something that is between a cloth made of linen, and tie those so they are healed.
E no cove que tu uses de curacio de lu de las causas las quals exsiccan, constrenho; quar si tu fas aquo retorna alixacratir pus mal que nulh temps no foc habantz.	And do not use for the cure of it any causes which dry out and constrict, for if you do that it returns achacratir worse than before.
Usa en aquela de causas que mollifico ayssi cum es fenugrec, e embroca am la aygua en la qual son coytz altea e semensa de li, o enguent dyaquilon, le qual sia liquefayt am alcu dels olis, e submergeys en aquel la meca, e cura am aquel.	Use for it causes which soften as fenugreek does, and mix with water in which are soaked the flowers of broad beans and seeds of linseed, or with unguent of rose, which has been liquefied by one of the oils, and immerse in that the cloth, and cure it with that.
E lo tesaur de la tua curacio es que tu perforsses am tot engen que no sia consolidat segon la forma que foc al comensament.	And the basis of your cure is that you pierce with total skill so that nothing is consolidated according to its beginning.
E aquesta operacio la qual havem dita, no es sino alcuna rectificacio de ehalixacrati que no retorna la forma del loc segon que foc denant.	And this operation which we have described is not other than some rectification of achalixacti which does not return the shape of its location according to how it was before.
Capitol .xiiii.	Chapter .xiiii.
De la cura de ehacrati le qual es fayt en la palpebra dejos.	Of the cure of achalixacti which is made in the eyelid beneath.
Aquesta alxacrati la qual es fayta en la palpebra dejos, la qual es nompnada vertadierament alxacrati; e es de lu alcuna natural, autra accidental.	This achalixacti which is made in the eyelid beneath, which is named veridieramente achalixacti; and it can be natural or accidental.
Mays accidental es fayta per plagua o per scissura o per cauteri o per autres semblantz.	But accidental is caused by a wound or by a scar or by cautery or by similar things.
E la via de la operacio de lu es que tu prenguas una agula en la qual haga fil doble, e fiques aquela en la carn, e que la fassas passar del lacrimal de senestre entro al lacrimal dextre, entro que·l fil pervengua en las doas extremitatz de la carn.	And the way of the operation on it is that you take a needle with which there are double threads, and insert it into the flesh, and let it pass from the tear duct of the left side to the tear duct of the right, as the thread comes out at both ends of the flesh.
E aprop exten la carn a las partidas desus am la agula e cus aquela am la agula, e inscideys am spatum ample.	And then stretch out the meat at the parts above with the needle and sew that up with the needle, and insert it with a wide spatula.
E donc si retorne la figura de la palpebre segon que cove, bo es; e sino, pren le ray e pausa aquel en la figura fenduda, e am aquel converteys la palpebra, e fen las doas fissuras en le latz de la palpebra dejos.	And then return the shape of the eyelid according to what is appropriate; and if not, take the thread and place it in the split figure, and with that, convert the eyelid, and split the two fissures on the side of the eyelid below.
E sian las extremitatz de las doas fissuras de dos angles de la inscizio, la qual has fayta entro que concurren, e sia de lor fayt angle entro que quan se congreguan sia fayta figura de lor.	And let the extremes of the two slits be at the two angles of the incision which you have made so that they meet; and an angle should be made from them so that when they come together, a figure is formed from them.
E aquesta figura es letra greca: la landa.	And this figure is the Greek letter: lambda.
E aprop osta la carn aquela per la quantitat que es le latz de lu agut dejos de lu, aquo que siec la palpebra.	Then hold that meat up by the amount that is the width of his eye under him, which cuts off the eyelid.
E aprop ajusta las partz seperadas e cos aquelas am le fil de lana; e aprop cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit de las medicinas mollificativas e de las calguas entro que sia sanat.	Then bring together the separated parts and sew those up with the thread of wool; and then treat those with what we have said about the softening medicines, and the poultices until he is healed.
E si alxacrati endeve per fissura o sutura o cauteri, lahoras cove que tu fendas am fissura plana sobre les pels de la palpebra segon que es precedit.	And if it becomes infected through the slit or stitch or cautery, then make a flat slit with the slit on the skin of the eyelid as has been described.
E aprop separa am la calgua entre doas labias segon que havem dit.	Then separate them with the poultice between two lips as we have said.
En la suma del sermo de la cura de alxacrati quan es desus o dejos, que corra en lu operacio, segon que es preparat de la forma de alxacrati, e aquela es en forma de motas diversitatz.	In the summary of the speech of the cure for infection whether it is above or below, let the operation run on him according to how he was prepared in the form of infection; and that has many different forms.
E le artifexs savi totz temps prepara engen en quascuna manieyra la qual es possibla a lu entro que fassa retornar la figura a la forma natural, o prop de aquela, e aquel malaute segon que a lu conveneys de la operacio e dels strumentz en las majors disposicios.	And the skilled doctors always prepare their plans in every way that is possible for them so that they can return the figure to its natural shape, or close to it; and the patient according to what he needs from the operation and the instruments in the most suitable conditions.
Capitol .xv.	Chapter 15
De la adherencia de la palpebra am la conjunctiva o am la cornea.	Of the adhesion of the eyelid with the conjunctiva or with the cornea.
Quan accideys aquesta consolidacio a motz homes enayssi que sia solidada la palpebra pus desus am le album del huel, e sia prohibida de la facilitat del movement e de las suas obras naturals, donc cove que tu entrometas la extramitat del ray dejos la palpebra, e eleva en sus aquela, o exten aquela am le unci.	When this consolidation happens to many people that the eyelid is glued to the white of the eye, and it is prohibited from the facility of movement and its natural works, then you must insert the end of the thread under the eyelid, and lift it up there; or stretch it with the ointment.
E aprop tu inscideys la adherencia am spatum subtil, le qual no sia am acuitat de las inscisios, habantz obtus un petit per so que·l malaute no sia inquietat deves la operacio, e remau le spatum que no ledesca le huel am la sua acuitat.	Then you insert the adhesion with a thin spatula, which is not sharp on the edges, having been made blunt a little so that the patient is not disturbed by the operation, and let the spatula not cut the eye with its sharpness.
E sia la tua inscizio quays excorjan aquela adherencia am facilitat entro que sia retornada la palpebra segon la sua forma natural e que sia sanada tota la adherencia.	And let your incision cut through that adhesion with ease so that the eyelid is returned to its natural shape and that the whole adhesion is healed.
E aprop tu met en le huel aygua salada am la qual tu laves; o distilla en lu de zunia dissolvut en l’aygua.	Then put in the eye salt water with which you wash it; or distil in it vinegar dissolved in water.
E aprop separa entre la palpebra e l’huel am calgua de li, e pausa sobre le huel lana infuza en album de huou, e aprop le tertz jorn usa de causas consolidativas entro que sia sanat.	Then separate between the eyelid and the eye with the poultice of it, and put on the eye wool infused in white of egg; and then use it for three days with healing causes so that it is healed.
Capitol .xvi.	Chapter 16
De inscizio de ungla e de eminencia de carn dels lacrimals.	Of incision of nail and prominence of meat of the tear ducts.
Sapias que ungla es segon dos manieyras, quar o es nervosa, e es semblant a ciphac dur subtil; o es no-nervosa, semblant a humiditat blanca congilada, la qual quan ferr la toca, o es forsat aquela prendre am onci, es abscindida e le onci no es ficat en lu.	Know that the nail is according to two ways; one is nervous, and it is like a thin hard cipack; or it is not-nervous, like white humidity congealed, which when the iron touches it, it either takes up the ointment, or it is cut off and the ointment is not put in it.
E amdos las specias no comensan sino del lacrimal major entro que va petit a petit que cobre la vista e prohibeys le lum e·l movement de huel.	And both kinds do not heal except by the large tear duct which goes little by little to cover the sight and prohibits the light and the movement of the eye.
Mays la manieyra del obrar en la inscizio de lu es que·l malaute pause le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop obre les huels de lu, e eleva la palpebra am la tua ma, e aprop colligeys la ungla am onci de pauca duplicacio e exten aquela a las partidas desus.	But the way of operating in the incision of it is that the patient leans his head to you; then open his eyes, and lift up the eyelid with your hand, and then gather the nail with ointment of little doubling, and stretch it to the parts above.
E aprop pren una agula e entromet en aquela un pel de cavalh o de buou o de vaqua, o de semblantz, o de fiel fort, o duplica la extremitat de la agulha petit a petit e fica aquela en le mieg de la ungla, e penetra aquela am la agulha, e lia am fiel la ungla; e exten aquela a las partidas desus, e excorja am le pel le latz de la ungla lo qual siec la pupilla.	Then take a needle and insert in it one hair of horse or ox or cow, or similar, or of strong pitch, or double the end of the needle little by little and put that into the edge of the nail; then pierce it with the needle, and attach it with pitch; stretch it to the parts above, and cut out with the hair the side of the nail which covers the pupil.
E ayssi tu sieguas aquela am le pel entro al derier de lu.	And so you follow that with the hair until it reaches the back of it.
E aprop tu inscideys le romanent en la razitz del lacrimal am spatum subtil o am petitas forfexs, e leysa la carn del lacrimal natural per so que per inscizio de aquela no endevengua fluxs de lagremas continuabla.	Then you insert the remainder in the roots of the tear duct with a thin spatula or with small forceps; and cut the meat of the natural tear duct so that through the incision of it, there are not continuous flows of tears.
E alscunas vetz la ungla am le sol onci estenduda o am fiel, ayssi co havem dit, e aprop sia excurjat am spatum leon del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And sometimes the nail with only ointment stretched or with pitch as we have said; and then it is cut out with lion's spatula of which this is the shape of it:
E guarda te que am le spatum no toques la tunica cornea e que avengua en lu ruptura, e que la pupilla sia perforada.	And be careful that with the spatula you do not touch the corneal tunic and that there is rupture in it; and that the pupil is perforated.
Aprop la inscizio geta en le huel un pauc de sal trissa o di cief fayt de siniar, e leyssa aquel entro al autre dia; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove entro que sia sanat.	Then put in the eye a little of ground salt or ash made from vinegar, and let it be until the next day; then cure that with what is appropriate so that it heals.
E si la ungla no es nervoza e no podes metre la agulha, ni es ficada en aquela le onci, lahoras motas veguadas aquesta specia de ungla es curada am medicinas, e es sanada ayssi cum yeu e recomtat en la divisio.	And if the nail is not nervous and you cannot put the needle in it or it is not stuck in it, then many times this kind of nail is cured with medicines, and is healed thus with the eye and composed in the division.
E si tu vols inscindir aquela, lahoras tu obre le huel del malaute e pren spatum subtil leon de freul acuitat segon aquesta forma:	And if you want to cut it, then open the eye of the patient and take lion' s spatula of sharp iron according to this form:
am subtilitat.	with thinness.
E si vezes que aquela es rarificada e es confugida e empren en aquela razit, lahoras distilla de la tua ora en le huel de cief fayt de siniar o am cief rog o am sal trissat, e opila le huel entro a l’autre dia.	And if you see that it is dried and closed up and it has taken root, then distil from your eye vinegar made of vinegar or with fine rosin or salt ground; and close the eye until the next day.
E aprop itera sobre aquela la operacio entro que sia remaugut tot aquo que es de lu, sino que·l contrari apostema caut sia en le huel, quar lahoras tu leyssa aquela, e cura al comensament la apostema entro que sia sanat.	Then repeat the operation on it until everything that is of it has been healed; unless the opposite pustule cauterize in the eye, because then you cut it and cure the pustule at the beginning so that it is healed.
E aprop itera la tua operacio sobre aquela am razo entro que sia sanat.	Then repeat your operation on it with wisdom until it is healed.
La emenencia de la carn lacrimal, si notz en le huel per gran nocument, sia suspendut am onci; e inscideys aquela de aquela una partida, e no ultimes la inscizio per so que no inscidesqua fluxs de lagremas.	The prominence of the meat of the tear duct, if noted in the eye with great damage, is suspended by ointment; and insert it at one end, and do not complete the incision so that you do not cause flows of tears.
E aprop distilla en le lacrimal cief rog e fayt de siniar entro que sia sanat.	Then distil in the tear duct vinegar made from vinegar until it is healed.
Capitol .xvii.	Chapter 17
De inscizio de alguazardenic e de aquo que es nascut de carn ajustada en le huel.	Of incision of alar-sack and what has come from meat pressed in the eye.
Alcunas veguadas en les huels de alcus es nascuda carn roga, e es sobre-pausada entro que cobre la pupilla, o apropinqua o estrenh sobre las palpebras e fort leu comprem las palpebras a las partidas deforo e es assemblada a roza de balaustra.	Sometimes in the eyes of some is born meat like rope, and it is pressed in so that it covers the pupil, or it approaches or narrows on the eyelids, and it strongly presses the eyelids to the front and it assembles to the rope of a bowstring.
Mays la operacio en lu es que·l malaute pausa le sieu cap en le tieu se; e aprop obre les huels de aquel e colligeys tota aquela carn am oncis convenientz ad aquo, e te aquo am una forcep o am cesti; e aprop inscindiys la carn el comensament entro que tot sia finit am le encisori, e guarda te del huel que no ledescas aquel deves la tua operacio.	But the operation on it is that the patient leans his head to you; then open its eyes and gather all that meat with convenient pins towards that, and have that a forceps or a basket; then cut the meat at the beginning so that everything is finished by the scissors, and be careful of the eye that it does not get cut by your operation.
E sia la tua inscizio am la qual inscides aquelas o am espatum le qual nos havem recomtat en la inscizio de la ungla, o am petitas forfexs am las quals es colligit ascebel segon que vindra la forma de lu aprop aquest capitol.	And let your incision be with which you cut those or with the spatula by which we have recommended in the incision of the nail, or with small forceps with which it is gathered according to that comes the shape of it then this chapter.
Donc cum es complida la tua inscizio e es remauguda tota aquela carn, lahoras omple le huel de sal trissa, o destilla en lu polvera roga e semblantz a lu de las medicinas corrossivas, e pausa sobre le huel deforo coto am album de huou entro que sia asegurat de apostema caut.	Then when your incision is completed and the meat has been cut off, then fill the eye with ground salt or distil in it vinegar powder and similar to it of the medicines that cause scorching, and put on the eye from the front cotto with white of egg so that it is secured from pustule cauterize.
E si roman alcuna causa de alguardenici e es senhoragat sanc caut, e temes apostema caut, lahoras leyssa le huel e cura aquela apostema am aquo que ceda aquela apostema, e aprop itera sobre aquel am operacio entro que sia sanat, e semblantment fay en la carn ajustada la qual accideys en le huel de aquesta especia.	And if you find any cause of ulceration and there is pus and fear of abscess, then open the wound and treat that abscess with something that will drain that abscess, and then repeat on that wound until it is healed, and do the same for the flesh around which has become infected due to that type of wound.
Mays empero tu cove que alienes tota curacio del huel freul per via natural o per via accidental, obran am ferr, e no metas la tua ma en alcuna de aquestas operacios entro que veges que aquel membre sia suffertant aquela operacio.	However, you must avoid all treatment of the wound through natural or accidental means, using tools made of iron, and do not put your hand in any of these operations until you see that member suffering from that operation.
Capitol .xviii.	Chapter 18.
De colleccio de sabel en le huel.	On the collection of pus in the wound.
Sabel so venas rogas las quals son testudas sobre le huel e prohibeysso al vesement la sua operacio, e develican le huel am longitut de dias.	Pus is red veins that are hardened on the wound and prevent healing; they open the wound for a long time.
Donc necessari es al comensament que tu consideres si le huel en le qual es sabel es fort e en lu no es autra malautia que sabel, lahoras tu colligeys aquel sabel.	Therefore, it is necessary at the beginning for you to consider whether the wound in which there is pus is strong and does not have any other disease than pus; then collect that pus.
E es que tu comandes al malaute que pause le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop suspen aquelas venas am un onci o am dos segon la tua prudencia; e sia aquel onci de subtil duplicacio segon aquesta forma:	And command the patient to lean their head on you, and then suspend those veins with a needle or two depending on your discretion; that needle should be of a subtle double thread according to this form:
o so dos oncis gradantment en un cos segon aquesta forma:	or two needles gradiently in one body according to this form:
E aprop sian colligidas aquelas venas am forses subtils, am subtilitat, e abstergeys le sanc hora aprop hora, entro que vegas aquelas venas esser remaugudas del huel e sian revolgudas.	And collect those veins with subtle threads, with subtlety, and wipe the blood hour by hour, until you see those veins being sucked into the wound and being rolled up.
E guarda te que tu no ledes le huel am las extremitatz del spatum; e si’ la tua operacio en le miegjorn denant le solelh, e sias mot ferm en la tua operacio que no inscidas sino aquelas venas.	And be careful not to cut the wound with the edge of the spatula; and if your operation is in the middle of the sole, and remain motionless during your operation so that you do not insert anything except those veins.
E quan tu auras complitz, lahoras tu distilla en le huel cief vert o rog per que am sa acuitat corrodesca aquo que es remaugut del sabel.	And when you are finished, then you distill on the wound chief vinegar or red wine so that with its acuity it corrodes what has been sucked from the pus.
Mays si aquo no es a tu possible colligeys tot en aquela hora, e lahoras tu emplastra tot am aquo que cede la dolor de lu, e leyssa lu per alcus dias entro que sia sedada la dolor de lu e que sia asegurat de apostema caut.	But if it is not possible for you to collect all in that hour, then dress the whole with something that relieves its pain, and let it be for a few days until its pain is relieved and it is secured from abscess.
E aprop itera sobre lu segon que la mateyssa manieyra entro que sia sanat.	And repeat on it according to the former manner until it is healed.
E aquesta es la forma de las forfexs:	And this is the form of the tweezers:
Capitol .xix.	Chapter 19.
De reduccio de arizati al nas.	On the reduction of hernia in the nose.
Quan tu curas arisati am cauteri o am medicina aguda comburent segon que es precedida la narracio de lu e no es sanat, lahoras no es engen en lu sino que fendas sobre le apostema deves la maturitat de lu, e que extraguas tota la humiditat la qual es en lu e·l poyre entro que sia descubert le os.	When you treat hernia with cautery or with a sharp medicine according to what is preceded in its narration and it is not healed, then there is nothing in it but that you split on the abscess according to the maturity of it, and draw out all the moisture which is in it and the pus until the bone is exposed.
E donc cum es descubert le os e vezes en lu corrupcio o negror, lahoras tu ratz lu am un sturment del qual aquesta es la forma:	And therefore when the bone is exposed and you see corruption or blackness in it, then you scrape it with an instrument of which this is the form:
E es nompnat de aspre cap, e sia feyt de fer indi, e sia le cap redon ayssi cum asir le qual sia fayt punctat per punctacio de lima o aliskalfati per punctacio subtil (ayssi cum es en la forma seguent).	And it is named from rough head, and let it be made of hard iron, and let the head be round like a file which is made pointed by filing or polished with a subtle file (just as in the following form).
E pausa aquel sobre le loc corrumput del os, e aprop revolveys aquel entre les tieus ditz, e prem la tua ma petit a petit entro que sapias que aquela corropcio es rasa.	And place that on the corrupted part of the bone, and then roll it between your fingers, and press your hand little by little until you know that corruption is scraped.
E aquo sia fayt alcunas veguadas, e aprop restaura le loc am causas exsiccativas e stipticas.	And that should be done several times, and then heal the place with astringent and styptic causes.
Donc si·l loc es consolidat e es en lu nascuda bona carn e es abscindit le cors de la sania e roman per xl dias, e no es renovat e no es apostemat e no accideys en lu accident, lahoras tu sapias que es sanat.	Therefore if the place is consolidated and good flesh has grown on it and the body is cut off from the wound and there is no abscess and no incident happens in it and it does not become inflamed, then you know that it is healed.
E sino, lahoras no es en lu engen sino reduzir la fissura a la forma del nas, e segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu descuebras de segon os am ferr o am medicina acuta, e cum sira descubert le os, lahoras tu pren tribo segon aquesta forma:	But if not, then there is nothing in it except to reduce the fracture to the form of the nose, and according to this manner: and it is that you uncover from the bone with iron or sharp medicine, and when the bone is exposed, then you take ash according to this form:
Sia la extramitat de lu ferr triangulada, e·l fust de lu sia prim extenuat entro a la extremitat ayssi cum vezes assi.	Let its outer end be triangular, and let its shaft be cut straight to the outer end just as it is seen.
E aprop pausa aquel sobre le os, e sia aquel prop del lacrimal; e alongua la tua ma un pauc del huel, e aprop revol la tua ma am le tribo entro que penetre tot le os, e aquel sente le malaute per asso que atroba vent yssir per so quan te la sua ma.	And then place that on the bone, and let it be close to the tear duct; and lengthen your hand a little from the wound, and then roll your hand with the tribe until it penetrates all the bone, and that feels the patient through breath coming out of him when you press his hand.
Donc lahoras restaura le loc am medicinas stipticas exsiccantz ayssi cum t’e eyssenhat.	Therefore then heal the place with astringent and drying medicines just as you have dried it.
Donc cum nays la carn e·l loc es endurazit, lahoras la materia la qual effundia a las partidas deforo retorna al nas, donc aquo es pus leugier sobre le malaute.	And when the flesh and the place are hardened, then the matter which oozed to the edges of the hole returns to the nose; therefore that is pus coming out on the patient.
Capitol .xx.	Chapter 20.
De reduccio de la eminencia del huel.	On the reduction of the prominence of the wound.
Quan le huel emineys am la sua totalitat e no accideys en le vezement nocument ni diminuacio, lahoras cove que laxas le malaute, e aprop que·l segues, e aprop que pausas ventozas en le cervitz ses scarificacio e succa per bona succaccio; e aprop pausa sobre le huel liniment le qual sia fayt de acatra e aloe e enses e sarcocolla, e aprop strenh le emplaustre sobre le huel am motz polvils.	When the wound protrudes with its entirety and there is no incident of harm or diminution in it, then you should loosen the patient, and then that he breathes and sucks through good sucking; and then place liniment which is made of myrrh and aloe and oil and mastic over the wound, and then strengthen the bandage over the wound with strong powdery bandages.
E la manieyra dels polvils es que prenguas draps de li leons motz, e quascun drap sia duplicat en quatre plecs; e fay de aquels motz.	And the manner of the powdery bandages is that you take linen cloths thin, and each cloth be folded into four folds; and make those plies.
E aprop pausa aquels la un sobre le autre segon la quantitat de la qual ha le huel necessitat.	And then place those one over the other according to the quantity of which the wound has need.
E aprop strenh sobre aquels am drap dur am fort strictura; e itera las ventosas am succio ses scarificacio; e aprop osta las ventosas e leyssa le huel streyt le dia e la nueyt.	And then tighten over those with a hard cloth with strong compression; and repeat the cupping with sucking without scarification; and then place the cups and let the wound be tight during the day and the night.
Mays si entretant le liguament es mollificat, lahoras cove que sia mot streyt.	But if in between the ligament is softened, then you should make it strong.
E aprop osta le liament aprop le dia e la nueyt ayssi cum havem dit.	And then place the ligature during the day and the night just as we have said.
E si vezes le huel ja esser redusit, bo es, e sino, lahoras itera le emplastre am les polvils e la strictura e las ventosas entro que sia sanat.	And if you see that the wound is already reduced, well then; but if not, then repeat the bandage with the powdery bandages and the compression and the cupping until it is healed.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter 21.
De la inscizio de la eminencia de la tunica uvea.	On the incision of the prominence of the venous membrane.
Quan endeve disrupcio en la tunica uvea, e aprop es eminent e procezeys fora las palpebras ayssi cum un gra de rasim, e es orrazada la forma de home per aquo, e vols aquo inscidir, lahoras la operacio en lu es ayssi cum havem recomtat, que tu entrometas la agula en la razitz de la uvea de la partida dejos en la partida desus, e aprop met la agula autra en la qual sia fil doble de la part del lacrimal, e fay aquela penetrar e leyssa la primieyra agula segon la sua disposicio; e aprop inscideys le loc del fiel doble e leva am aquel la partida de la uvea en le circuit de la agula, e strenh aquela mot.	When there is disruption in the venous membrane, and then it is prominent and proceeds out of the eyelids just as with a grain of sand, and its shape is man-like for that, and you want to incise it, then the operation on it is just as we have prescribed, that you insert the needle into the root of the vein from the lower part towards the upper part, and then insert the other needle in which there is a double thread of the tear duct, and make that penetrate and let the first needle according to its disposition; and then incise the place of the double thread and lift with it the membrane of the vein around the needle, and tighten that.
E aprop extratz la agula e pausa sobre le huel lana infusa en album de huou e leyssa entro que cayha le fil am la uva.	And then pull out the needle and place over the wound wool infused in white wine and let it until the thread falls off with the vein.
E aprop cura le huel am aquo que conforte aquel entro que la plagua sia sanada.	And then heal the wound with that which comforts that until the ulcer is healed.
E alcunas veguadas aduna de tota partida am cercle de drap entro le huel ajuste eminencia gran, e aprop sia perforat am le spatum subtil que vengua al preon del huel, e corra la humiditat albuginea, e descen le huel e intra tantost.	And several times gather from all parts with a circle of cloth around the wound, and then let it be penetrated by the spatula subtly so that the white moisture comes out, and the wound goes down and as long as it has not healed.
E aprop strenh entro que sia sanat.	And then tighten until it is healed.
Capitol .xxii.	Chapter 22.
De curacio de alconati.	On the cure of alconitis.
Aquesta malautia que es apelada alconati no es sino sania la qual es ajustada en le huel semblant a aygua dessendent e no es aquela.	This disease which is called alconitis is not but an ulcer which is formed in the wound like water descending, and it is not that.
Mays la manieyra del obrar en ela es que fasses le malaute sezer sobre la sela aparelada e dreyta, e aprop pren le cap sieu en las tuas mas de doas partz e mau aquel entro que veias la sania pervenir a las partidas dejos, e aprop sia siccada e no descenda, e sia ostat le lum, e·l malaute veia las causas ayssi cum vezia.	But the manner of working on it is that you make the patient sit upright on the chair with his head held up by both hands and look down; and then take the head in your hands from two parts and hold him so that you see the ulcer coming to the lower parts, and then let it be dried and not go down, and let there be light, and the patient sees the causes just as he looks.
E si no descendra en jos, sapias que es aygua.	And if it will not come down, know that it is water.
Mays si no es preparat le descendement a la sania am aquo que havem dit, lahoras fay le malaute sezer entre las tuas mas e aprop pren spatum subtil e fen am aquel sobre le pannicol cernent un petit deves la continuacio de la conjunctiva am la tunica cornea en la corona (entro al loc vuet), entro que sia fora-getada la sania.	But if the discharge is not prepared to come out in the way that we have said, then make the patient cough between his hands and then take a sharp stick and poke it into the skin surface over the panniculus carnosus about a small distance from the continuation of the conjunctiva into the tunica cornea at the crown (into the place where one wants), until the discharge comes out.
Donc cum es fora-getada, lahoras tu distilla en le huel aygua cauda en la qual has mesclat mel o aygua en la qual ja has bulit fenugrec e mel.	Once it is discharged, then you distil into the wound water in which you have mixed honey or water in which you have boiled fenugreek and honey.
E aprop sia curat am las autras causas entro que sia sanat.	And let it be cured with the other remedies until it is healed.
Capitol .xxii.	Chapter 22.
De la curacio de la aygua descendent del huel.	Of the cure for a wound from which water discharges.
Ja havem dit las specias de la aygua en la divisio e qual conveneys a perforar am sermo declarant, lahoras aquel segon la sanetat.	We have already said about the types of water in the division and according to the health condition, then it is necessary to pierce with a needle, describing it as follows:
Lahoras cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute entre las tuas mas sobre un cayrat e lia le sieu huel sa, lu mot stringent.	Then you should make the patient cough between his hands over a container and collect the water that discharges from him, then bind it tightly.
E aprop pausa prop de la palpebra del sieu huel la tua ma senestra, si le huel en le qual es l’aygua es le huel senestra; o am la tua ma dreyta, si le huel es le dextre.	Then place your left hand near the eyelid of his eye, if the eye from which the water discharges is on the left side; or with your right hand, if it is on the right side.
E aprop am la tua ma dextra pren almagda, si le huel es senestre; o am la tua ma senestra, si le huel es de dreyt.	And then take alum with your right hand, if the eye is on the left side; or with your left hand, if the eye is on the right side.
E aprop pausa la extremitat de almagda prop de la corona per la grossesa del ray en le album del huel de part del mendre lacrimal, e aprop enpelleys almagda am vertut e revol la tua ma am aquel.	And then place the end of the alum near the edge of the cornea over the thickness of the membrane in the white part of the eye at the smaller tear duct, and push the alum with strength and rotate your hand with it.
E aprop penetre en le album del huel e sentas que almagda ja es pervenguda a causa vueda.	And then penetrate into the membrane of the eye and feel that the alum has already reached the cause of the vision.
E cove que sia la masura del cami de almagda al preon la mesura del spazi le qual es de la pupilla entro a la fi de la negror, e es la corona del huel; quar tu veyras am aquel pupilla am la visio de l’huel per la clartat de la tunica cornea.	And when it is the distance of the path of the alum to the pupil the measurement of the space that is from the pupil to the edge of the blackness, and it is the cornea of the eye; for you will see with it the pupil with the vision of the eye through the clarity of the tunica cornea.
E aprop pausa almagda entro al loc en le qual es l’aygua, e aprop tu la atira en jos una veguada aprop autra, e donc si la aygua descen tantost, lahoras vetz le malaute aquo sobre le qual huebre la sua vista tantost, e almagda en le sieu huel.	And then place the alum into the place where the water is, and then you draw it down another time, and thus if the water descends immediately, then you see the patient above on which he opens his sight immediately, and the alum in his eye.
E aprop repausa se un pauc; donc si la aygua es descenduda, lahoras tu depausa aquela autre veguada abantz que almagda ne sia getada.	And then rest a little; therefore if the water has discharged, then you remove that other compression before the alum is applied.
E donc quan es sicada e no descen, lahoras tu extrat almagda am facilitat, e revol am aquel la tua ma pauc a pauc, e aprop dissolveys en l’aygua un petit de sal clara de gemma e am aquela lava le huel dedintz; e aprop pausa fora le huel coto o stopa o lana infusa en oli rozat e album de huou e ligua am aquo le huel sa.	And then when it is dry and does not discharge, then you extract the alum with ease, and rotate your hand a little by little with it; and then dissolve in the water a little of white clear salt of gemma and wash the eye inside; and then place over the eye a cotton or stop or wool soaked in rose oil and egg white with that which is the eye.
Mays nos e aquels que so de nostre temps pause sobre aquel comi trissat am album de huou.	But we and those who are of our time place over it cooked rice with egg white.
E si no obezeys a tu almagda al intrament de l’huel per la sua duricia — quar es alcu dels homes del qual le huel es dur mot —, lahoras cove que prenguas le spatum le qual es nompnat alberid del qual aquesta es la forma:	But if it does not obey you, the alum to the instrument of the eye because of its hardness — for it is one of those men of which the eye is very hard —, then take the stick which is named “alberid,” of which this is the form:
E donc perfora am aquel aquela conjunctura, e no ultimes la tua ma en le trauc, e no es si no que fassas via ad almagda loc subtil.	And then pierce with it that conjunctiva, and do not pierce your hand in the hole, and do not cease until you have made way for the alum to a subtle place.
E aprop entromet almagda segon que havem dit.	And then insert the alum as we have said.
E deves le compliment de la tua obra, sia preparat al malaute dormitori descentment fayt en le qual dorma sobre le sieu dos en mayson tenebrosa, e sia prohibit de totz movementz .	And after you have finished your work, let the patient be prepared for sleep in a dark room in which he sleeps on his back in darkness, and all movements are prohibited.
E pausa en la natura de lu aquo per que sia linida la sua natura, e no maugua le sieu cap a la partida dreyta ni senestra de tot.	And place over his head that which makes the nature of him to be cool, and do not turn his head to either the right or left at all.
E sia le liament segon la sua disposicio entro al tertz dia.	And let there be the poultice according to his disposition on the third day.
E aprop deslia aquel en aquela maysso tenebrosa e exproha la freol vista, e fay li vezer alcunas causas, e aprop retorna le liament entro al dia .vii.	And then take off that in the morning darkness and let him see some things, and then return the poultice on the seventh day.
E no cove que fassas aquo en la hora de las curacios o tantost aprop la infusio.	And do not do this in the hour of the poultices or immediately after that; also let there be an infusion.
Habantz cove que tu alienes aquo per so quar la aygua puega leugierament per gran e vehement de reguardament.	Let it be until you remove that so that the water can flow freely and vehement from retention.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras cove que deslias le huel denant le vii dia, e rectifica aquel am aquo que ceda apostema.	But if pustules happen, then let there be poultice until the seventh day, and rectify that with water that softens pustules.
Lahoras tu absol la vista de lu e pausa sobre la cara de lu oral per le qual sia regit le vezement de lu dejos lu per alcus dias, lu existent en la mayszo tenebrosa.	Then you open the sight of him and place over his face oil that he may regulate his gaze below him for several days, existing in darkness.
E aprop sia gitat de aquela mayzo gradantment e conversa8 en las suas causas.	And then let there be poultice gently and conversation with him about some things.
E sapias que in alchatea no es excusat le discipol de visio alcunas veguadas, e lahoras tu sias ardit sobre la operacio.	And know that in cataract it is not excused the disciple of sight some views, and then you feel ardor over the operation.
E ja es pervengut a nos de alcu de aquels les quals so al Artach , e alcu disse que fayt foc en al Ayrac magdaam perforat am le qual es succada la aygua.	And it has come to us from some of those who are in the Artach , and someone said that when fire was made in Ayrac a magdaam was perforated with which is sucked water.
Mays empero yeu non e vist degu en la nostra terra le qual haia perfeyt aquo, ni e aquo legit en alcu dels libres dels antics; e es possible que aquo sia novel.	But nevertheless I have not seen that in our land which he has performed it, nor is it read in any of the books of the ancients; and it is possible that this is new.
E aquestas so las formas de las specias de magdaan per que sia sobre aquelas aquel le qual ignora aquelas:	And these are the forms of magdaam so that it is over those who do not know them:
E sian faytas de eram o de ferr propriament, e sian las extramitatz de lor am aquesta subtilitat triangulada, la extremitat aguda ayssi cum aquela es la forma.	And they are made of gold or of iron properly, and they are the extremities of them with this subtle triangular shape, the acute extremity as well; that is the form.
Capitol .xxiv.	Chapter 24.
De la curacio de carn nada en le nas.	Of the cure of a swelling in the nose.
Quan en le nas so nascudas carns diversas ajustadas de las quals es alcuna causa la qual es assemblada a scorpio de motz pes, o a polip peys; e aquesta malautia es apelada polipus quar es a semblansa de aquel peys representat.	When in the nose there are various swellings of which is some cause which is attached to scorpio of hair feet, or to polyps of hair; and this illness is called polypus because it is of the appearance of that hair represented.
E de lu es carn cancrosa, lapadea, de fusca color; e de lu es que es carn leon no de color fusca.	And from him there is swollen flesh, flaccid, of dusky color; and from him there is that is not leon not of dusky color.
Donc en aquela que es en aquestas carns leon no fraudulenta ni cancroza, cove que fassas le malaute sezer entre las tuas mas e posat al solelh, e huebre las nars de lu, e picoys le tieu onci en aquelas carns.	Therefore in that which is in these flesh not fraudulent or cancerous, let there be the patient lying between your hands and exposed to the sun, and open his nose, and rub the eye of him in that flesh.
E aprop extrat aquela a las partidas deforo, e aprop inscindeys aquo que has comprehendut de aquelas am spatum agut subtil de la una partida entro que sapias que tota la carn ja es ostada; que si roman de lu deguna causa de la qual la abscisio es possibla, lahoras tu ratz aquo am la un dels estrumentz subtils am facilitat entro que de lu romangua denguna causa.	And then extract that to the foramen, and then pierce with that which you have understood with a sharp stick from the foramen, and if when you have drawn it there is no cause from which the abscission is possible, then rub that with one of the subtle instruments with ease from which there is no cause.
Mays si senhoreja am sanc o accida apostema caut, lahoras tu pausa a lu aquo que cove; o es dels apostemas malignes, lahoras tu coyta e cauteriza aquel entro que sia abscindit sanc e sian ostadas las cavas totas.	But if it oozes blood or pustules form, then let there be placed to him that which you have; or they are of the malignant pustules, then cut and cauterize that from which the blood has been discharged and all the cavities are completely open.
E aprop sia getatz en le nas aprop la inscizio vi agre e aygua o vi.	And then let there be placed in the nose also after the incision oil and water or vinegar.
Mays si le nas es ubert e de lu procezeys humiditat entro al palat, lahoras sapias que ja es sanat.	But if the nose is open and from it proceeds humidity into the palate, then know that it is healed.
Mays si la humiditat no penetra segon que cove, lahoras tu sapias que dedintz lu es carn nada en los pus sobiras osses de las nars als quals non es pervengut abscizio.	But if the humidity does not penetrate according as it should, then you know that within him there is swollen flesh in the nose bones of which there has been no discharge.
Donc lahoras cove que entromitas fiel de li al qual sia alcuna grosseza, e nuza en lu motz nuzes, e pausa entre quascun nutz la quantitat del dit o mens, e engene le malaute e entromet una extremitat del fiel en le nars am lo ray o am autra causa la qual es a lu possibla.	Therefore let there be placed in the nose also after the incision oil of which there is some thickness, and rub in it hair of needles, and place between each joint the quantity of the finger or more, and open the sight and insert one end of the needle into the nose with the ray or other cause from which it is possible.
E pus que aquo aura fayt, que atire le sieu odorament entro que pervengua a las canals de las nars, e sia eyssit sobre le sieu golayro, quar tropas veguadas le semblant ad aquesta accio fan les enfantz a las scolas, e es leugiera causa ad aquel que ho vol far.	And once this is done, let them take their incense and hold it until it reaches the nostrils, and let it be burned over their throat; for many experienced soldiers do this action when they want to.
E aprop pausa las dos extramitatz del fiel, una extremitat que iesca sobre le nas et l’autra que romangua en le nas, e aprop aministra serratura de carn am les nuzes que so en le fiel, e fay aquo entro que sapias que las carn ja so am les nuzes del fiel.	Then pause the two ends of the gallbladder; one end comes out through the nose and the other goes into the nose. Administer cauterization of flesh with the nails that are in the gallbladder, and do this until you taste that the flesh is cauterized by the nails.
E aprop extratz le fiel, e pausa en le nas aprop la abstraccio del sanc una calgua , e fay aquo per tres dias o mays entro que l’enguent corrodo tot aquo que es romas de las carns.	Then remove the gallbladder and place in the nose a cauterization of blood, and do this for three days or more until the ointment corrode all that is rotten in the flesh.
E aprop en la fi de la causa, pausa en le nas una canula de plom per alscus jorns entro que sia sanat.	And at the end of the cause, place a lead pipe in the nose for several days until it is healed.
Mays si endigeys de curacio que exsique, usa de aquela.	But if the wound starts to bleed again, use that one. [i.e., the cauterization]
E aquesta es la forma del instrument a capipurge fazedor am le qual son distillatz olis e medicinas en le nars:	And this is the form of the instrument for the head purging by which oils and medicines are distilled into the nose.
E fay aquo de argent o de eram, la qual sia semblant a una petita lampesa uberta, ayssi cum petita conqua, e le meat semblantment.	And do this with silver or gold, which should be like a small open lamp, also with a small hole, and the wick similarly.
E si vols, fay una canula clausa ayssi cum cana, e la cancula del estrument a capipurge fazedor e sia plana, descuberta; a la qual sia manubre en lo derier de lu, am le qual tenguas aquela quan escaufas en lu oli o aquo que tu vols dels sucs e de las causas suctiblas.	And if you want, make a closed canal like a reed, and the canal of the instrument for head purging should be flat and open; to which there is a handle on it, with which you have that when you pour into it oil or water that you want from the juices and suction causes.
E aquestz capipurgi es precios: recipe de enforbi de castor, de balayra blanc, de giengiebre, e piletre de safra, de pebre lonc, de escafragia, de epetum de spic ana unc. vi cumfizeys am suc de bleda e de caul, e sian faytas pillulas, e sia destemprada una pillula am aygua tebeza, e sia gitat en las nars del malaute jasent envers.	And these head purges are precious: take a drachm of beaver castoreum, white balsam, ginger, long pepper, frankincense, myrrh, and spikenard in the amount of half an ounce. Take it with juice of nettle and cabbage, and let them be made into pills, and temper a pill with water of tebezia, and let it be given to the patient lying on his back facing up.
Capitol .xxv.	Chapter 25.
De theyls natz en las extramitatz del nas.	Of holes in the ends of the nose.
Motas veguadas es nat theyl en las extramitatz del nas, e es magnificat e omentat en alscus dias entro en que mot es leg le reguardament de lu.	Many times it happens that a hole occurs in the ends of the nose, and it becomes swollen and enlarged within several days if one does not observe the guard of it.
E per aquo cove que tu inscidas aquel en le comensament de la apparissio de lu, e erediques tot aquel.	And because of this, insert that into the beginning of its appearance, and remove all that.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc o cauteri o medicina comburent la qual estia en loc de lu.	Then place over it a cautery or burning medicine which stays in its place.
Mays si es tardada la sua inscizio entro que sia magnificat, lahoras considera si es lapificat, dur, de fusca color e de pauc sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel am ferr quar es apostema crancos; quar motas veguadas ad aquel que inscideys aquesta apostema endeve per lu granda malicia sobre aquel le qual aquel havia.	But if its eruption is delayed until it becomes swollen, then consider if it has become hard, of dusky color and with little feeling, then do not touch that with iron because it is a pustular abscess; for many times when you insert this abscess through it great harm comes to the one in whom it was.
E si le apostema es de leon tocament e no es de fosca color, e vezes que inscizio es possibla en tot aquel, lahoras evacua le malaute e inscideys aquel senes temor, e cura le loc am aquo que exsique e costrenh entro que sia sanat.	And if the abscess is of a soft touch and not of dusky color, and it is possible to insert into it without fear, then empty out the patient and insert that without fear, and cure the place with something that corrode and constrict until it is healed.
Capitol .xxvi.	Chapter 26.
De sutura del nas e de las labias e de la aurelha quan la continuitat es dissolvuda per plagua o per semblantz.	Of suturing of the nose and lips and ears when their continuity is dissolved by ulcer or similar.
Sapias que quan accideys solucio de continuitat en una de aquestas cartillages, pauc confereys en aquela operacio sino en alcus homes.	Know that when there is a solution of continuity in one of these cartilages, few perform the operation except for some men.
Donc cove, quan endeve ad alcu alcuna causa de aquelas, que consideres si es plagua fresca am le sieu sanc, e lahoras tu ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	Therefore, whenever because of some cause, you consider that it is a fresh ulcer with its blood, then adjust the two lips of the ulcer with a suture, and then cure it until it is healed.
E si las labias de solucio de continuitat so ja separadas, e quascuna es fayta sana, lahoras cove que tu excorjes quascuna partida de la sua codena apparent entro que n’iesca sanc.	And if the lips of solution of continuity are already separated, and each is made healthy, then cut off each part of its visible cord until blood comes out.
E aprop ajusta las doas labias am sutura e strenh aquelas, e sobre aquelas pulveriza sanc de drago e enses trissat, e pausa sobre la polvera una pessa de emplaustra diafinicon, o de alcu autre dels emplastres consolidatius, e leyssa aquel liat per dos jorns o per tres, e aprop deslia aquel e permuta aquel emplaustre e leyssa aquel entro que·ls fiels per si sian abscinditz, e aprop cura am enguent entro que sia sanat.	Then adjust the two lips with a suture and strengthen them, and over them pulverize dragon blood and sprinkle thrisat on it, and place over the powder a piece of emplaster of diafinicon, or of some other of the consolidating plasters, and let that be bound for two days or three, and then remove that plaster and change that emplaustre and let it be bound until the scabs are separated, and then cure it with ointment until it is healed.
Mays la manieyra de la sutura es que tu agregues la solucio de continuitat o am agulhas ayssi cum havem recomtat en la sutura del ventre, o agregua la solucio de continuitat am fiel ayssi cum a tu e fayt saber.	But the way of suturing is that you add the solution of continuity or with needles as we have recommended in the suturing of the belly, or add the solution of continuity with thread just as we have taught you.
Capitol .xxvii.	Chapter 27.
De extraccio de aquela causas que veno en las doas labias en las partidas dedintz.	Of extraction of those causes that come in the two lips in their parts inside.
Motas veguadas endeve a motz homes en las partidas dedintz de las suas labias alcus apostemas durs semblantz a gras de errs, e alscunas de lors son mendres e alcunas son majors.	Many times in some men in the parts inside of their lips there are certain hard abscesses which resemble grit of err, and some of them are minor and some are major.
Donc cove que tu convertas las labias e fendas quascuna de aquelas duricias de tota part, e aprop la abscizio umpliscas le loc de sagi trissat entro que·l sanc sia restrengut, e aprop sia lavat am vi agre e sia curat le loc am aquo que es stipticitat, entro que sia sanat.	Therefore cut open the lips and split each of those hard spots throughout its parts, then fill in the wound with sage thrisat until the blood is restricted, and then wash it out with wine vinegar and cure the spot with something that constricts it until it is healed.
Capitol .xxviii.	Chapter 28.
De inscizio de la carn ajustada en las gengivas.	Of incision of the flesh pressed against the gums.
Granre de veguadas nays sobre la gengiva carn ajustada la qual les antics apelero albulus, adonc cove que tu suspendas aquela am onci o que tenguas aquela am las forfecs e inscidas aquela deves la sua razit, e leyssas la sania correr o le sanc.	Great care should be taken over the gum of flesh pressed against it which the ancients called albulus, therefore suspend that with an incision or what you have it with forceps and insert it above its root, and let the pus flow out or the blood.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc sagi trissat o autra polveras stipticas o excicativas.	Then place over it sage thrisat or other astringent or cauterizing powders.
E si aquela carn retorna, lahoras inscideys aquela segundariament, e cauterisa aquela, quar aprop le cauteri no retornara.	And if that flesh returns, then insert it secondly and cauterize it, for the cautery will not return.
Capitol .xxix.	Chapter 29.
De razo de dentz am ferr.	Of extraction of teeth with iron.
Quan en la superficia de las dentz de las partidas dedintz e de las de foro e entre las gingivas so ajustadas escorsas aspras, legas, e alcunas veguadas son de nigradas e son faytas citrinas o vertz entro que a la gingiva ve per aquo corrupcio e son faytas las dentz legas.	When on the surface of the teeth in the parts inside and outside and between the gums are adjusted rough scars, scabs, and some are blackened and are made citrines or green because of the gum coming through that corruption, and the teeth are bound.
E donc cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute entre las tuas mas e pausar le cap de lu en le tieu se, e ratz las dents en las quals apareysso aquelas escorsas e causas semblantz arena entro que de lor no romangua deguna causa, e aquo fay de la negror e de la citrinitat e de las autras entro que sian mondificadas.	Therefore cut the patient between your fingers and let him hold his head down, and scrape the teeth in which appear those scars and causes looking like sand so that no root of any cause remains, and that will be made of the blackness and of the citrineness and of the others until they are cleansed.
Donc si es ostat aquo que es en aquelas del comensament de la razio, bo es; e sino, lahoras tu itera la razio sobre aquelas al autra dia e al segon e al tertz entro que vengua al derier stament en aquo que tu vols.	Therefore if it is left over what is in those of the beginning of the root, well; and if not, then you iterate the root over those on another day and again and again until the final result that you want.
E sapias que las dentz han necessitat de motz rezoris de diversas formas e de motas figuras segon que es preparat a la tua operacio.	And know that teeth have need of many kinds of instruments, of diverse forms and figures according to the preparation for your operation.
E per so quar le razori am le qual la dent es raza de la partida dedintz es autre del razori am le qual es ras entre las dentz segon autras formas, e aquestas formas de razoris sian deves tu preparadas las quals veyras tantost:	And because the teeth that are pulled out of the gums have another shape than those that are cut between the teeth, and these shapes of instruments you should prepare right away, which you will see immediately:
Capitol .xxx.	Chapter 30.
D’eradicacio de dentz.	Of tooth extraction.
Cove que tu cures la dent de la sua dolor am tot engen e tardes en tota eradicacio de lu, quar no es denguna causa que suplisqua la veguada de lu quan es eradicada, quar es sustancia sublima entro que es excusacio en la eradicacio de lu.	Because you should treat the tooth of its pain with every art and delay in any extraction of it, because there is no cause that prevents its growth when it is extracted, for it is a sublimated substance inside which is an obstacle to its extraction.
Mays cove quan le malaute es forsat aquela dent eradicar, que fermament deves tu sia certificat quala es la dent dolent, quar motas veguadas la dolor descep le malaute e cuga que sia en dent sana, e tu eradicas aquela e aprop la dolor no cessa entro que la dent malauta e dolent sia eradicada, quar nos ja havem vist aquo per operacio dels barbies.	But when the patient is forced to have that tooth extracted, you must be certain which is the painful tooth, because many times the pain deceives the patient and it appears in a healthy tooth, and you extract that one and the pain does not cease until the sick and painful tooth is extracted, for we have seen this through the operation of the teeth.
Donc cum deves tu es sertificat qual es la dent dolent, e que o sabes be, lahoras cove que tu scarifiques en le circuit de la dent am spatum en le qual sia alcuna vertut, entro que sia dissolvut de la dent de la gingiva de tota partida, e aprop mau aquel am les tieus ditz, o am forfexs subtils al comensament petit a petit entro que aquela concucesquas.	Therefore when you are certain which is the painful tooth and know it well, then you should scarify the gum around the tooth with a spatulum in which there is some virtue, until it is dissolved from the tooth of the gum of all division, and then masticate it with your teeth, or with fine forceps little by little as you concuss it.
E aprop alogua en lu fortz tenalhas grans per bona loquacio o estuptura fort, e pausa le cap del malaute entre les tieus denolhs que be le tengues que no·s maugua, e aprop tratz la dent segon rectitut en manieyra que no trenques aquela, ni al malaute major dolor no dones.	And then hold it firmly with strong fingers by good speech or strong stupor, and place the head of the patient between your teeth which you hold well so that he does not bite you, and then treat the tooth according to rectitude in a way that you do not break it nor give the patient greater pain.
E donc si no es foro-getat, lahoras pren un de aquels instrumentz, e met aquel dejos lu de tota part am facilitat e esforsa la remocio de lu ayssi que es feyt al comensament.	And therefore if it is not forgotten, then take one of those instruments and place that underneath him from every part with facility and exert the removal of him as well as he can be done at the beginning.
Mays si la dent es trauquada o corrosa, lahoras cove que tu comples de drap aquel trauc e estrenguas aquel am la extremitat de ray subtil per so que no sia trinquada en la hora de la tua constriccio sobre aquela am tenalas.	But if the tooth is cracked or rotten, then you should cover that crack with a cloth and tighten that with the end of a fine thread so that it is not squeezed in the hour of your constriction upon that with your fingers.
E cove que tu obres exquesitament am scarificacio en le circuit de tota part de la gingiva e guarda mot la tua fortaleza que no trenques aquela e romangua partida de lu, e retorne sobre le malaute per la malicia que sia majo que la primieyra dolor de lu.	And if you have any instrument which could be made of the root of a tree with the virtue of scarification, and it is necessary to extract the tooth by the head of the patient according to this way: And then open wide with scarification around the gum in every part and guard your strength that you do not break it and break a part from him, and return over the patient so that he is better than the first pain.
E guarda te que no fassas aquo que fan alscus ignorantz barbiers en lor fistinacio e audacia sobre la eradicacio de lor, ses que no aministran aquo que nos havem recomtat; quar motas veguadas fan venir sobre les homes malautias grans las quals son pus dificils que sian trinquadas, e las razitz de lor remaugudas totas, o alcunas de aquelas, o que extrayguas aquela am alcus osses de la mandigula ayssi cum motas veguadas havem testificat.	And if the tooth is extracted from the gum by the head of the patient and it cannot be done by the head of the patient, then it is necessary to extract it by another way which you will be certain by which it is extracted. And guard yourself that you do not do what some ignorant barbers do in their foolhardiness and audacity about extraction, without administering what we have recommended; for many times they bring upon men great sicknesses which are more difficult than they were squeezed, and the roots of them all wriggled, or some of those, or that you extract that with some bones of the jaw as we have testified.
E aprop la eradicacio de lu sia lavada la boca am vi caut o vi agre am sal.	And then the extraction of it is washed the mouth with warm wine or sour wine with salt.
E si endeve fluxs de sanc per aysso, ayssi cum motas veguadas endeve, lahoras trissa alcuna quantitat de zegi e aspergeys sobre la plagua, e si no confereys aquel zegi, cauteriza.	And if blood flows from that, thus as it should, then take some quantity of vitriol and sprinkle over the wound, and if it does not work that vitriol, cauterize.
La forma de las forceps e tenalas subtils am las quals es mauguda la dent al comensament sia de longua extramitat, de breu manubre e gros, per so que no sian doblatz quan am aquels deves obrar.	The form of the forceps and fine tweezers with which the tooth is masticated at the beginning are of long extremity, of short handle and thick, so that they are not bent when you work with them.
E sian ayssi cum vezes de gros manubre entro que quan estrenhas am aquelas no sian dobladas, sian breus extramitatz.	And be thus with handles of thick extremity so that when you stretch with those they are not bent, let them be short extremities.
E sian faytas de ferr de India descentment faytas de dreytas extramitatz, e en las extramitatz de aquelas sian dentz de las quals las unas intron en las autras e estrenhan per constriccio descent fort, e alscunas veguadas las extramitatz de aquelas sian la forma del bec d’un auzel le qual ha nom ciconia, so es guanta, e son de fort constriccio.	And be made of iron of India descended from straight extremities, and in the extremities of those are teeth of which the one enters into the other and stretch by strong constriction, and some times the extremities of those are the form of a beak of a stork whose name is Ciconia, it is hooked, and are of strong constriction.
Capitol .xxxi.	Chapter 31.
De erradicacio de dentz e d‘estraccio dels osses de las mandibulas trincadas.	Of extraction of teeth and of dislocation of the bones of the jaws bitten.
Quan deves la eradicacio de dent le qual es trinquat roman alcuna causa, lahoras cove que tu pauses sobre le loc coto am boder per un jorn o per dos entro que·l loc sia mollificat; e aprop entromet algesti o tenalhas las extramitatz de las quals so asembladas al bec de un auzel apelat ciconia o guanta, la forma de las forceps:	When you should extract a tooth which is bitten for some cause, then you should pause over the place cut with a bandage for one or two days until the place is softened; and then insert your finger or tweezers the extremities of which are like the beak of a stork called Ciconia or hooked, the form of forceps:
Las extramitatz de lor sian faytas dedintz ayssi cum lima o alfagi.	The extremities of them be made inside as with file or chisel.
E si no obediys a tu a eyssiment am aquestas forceps o tenalas, lahoras cove que tu caves sobre la razit e descrobas tota la carn e entrometas le instrument le qual ha nom atali, so es palanca petita del qual la forma es aquesta:	And if it does not obey you by these forceps or tweezers, then you should dig over the root and remove all the flesh and insert the instrument which is called atalium, it is a little lever of which the form is thus:
E sia de breu extremitat grossa un petit, e no sia enbegut per so que no sia trinquat.	And be of short extremity thick a little, and not be bent so that it is not squeezed.
Donc si per aquo la razit es foro-getada, bo es; e sino, ajuda te am aquestz autres instrument dels quals aquestas son las formas: la forma del primier instrument es de triangulada extramitat en la qual sia alcuna grossesa:	Thus if the cause of this is forgotten by you, it is good; and if not, aid yourself with these other instruments of which these are the forms. The form of the first instrument is triangular with a pointed end in which there is some thickness:
La forma del segon instrument es que sia de triangulada e de pus subtil extremitat.	The shape of the second instrument is that it be triangular and of a very thin extremity.
E ja so ajudatz am aquest instrument havent dos ramps del qual aquesta es la forma aprop la seguent:	And you are aided by this instrument having two spikes, the shape of which is to follow:
e am autres instrumentz les quals precidero en rasura de dentz; quar juvament es fayt am aquest instrument le qual es asemblat a onci gran, e aquesta es la forma:	and with other instruments which precede in tooth extraction; for there is made with this instrument which is assimilated to a large needle, and this is the shape:
de la triangulada extremitat torta o curta, la qual sia alcuna grossesa, e no sia enbegut per so que no sia trinquat.	of the twisted or short triangular extremity, which has some thickness, and is not bent so that it is not snapped.
E otra sapias que·ls instrumentz de las dentz motz so e semblantment les autres instruments.	And another thing to know about the instruments of moving teeth are similar and akin to the other instruments.
Mays le artifexs savi e subtil en l’art, atroba per si mateys segon aquo que a lu significa la operacio e las malautias diversas; quar son de las malautias a las quals les antics no diysero ni pausero propri instrument, per las formas de diversas specias.	But the wise and subtle artisans in the art find for themselves many ways according to what they understand of the operation and the diverse illnesses; for there are diverse illnesses which the ancients did not name or put into proper instruments by their forms of diverse species.
Mays si es trinquat l’os de la mandibula o dels autres osses de la boca, o si poyreys, lahoras sia pes curat sobre aquel en son loc am aquo que es a lu convenient dels instrumentz e de las forceps las quals havem dit en la extraccio de las razitz de las dentz, e ajuda te am gesti del qual aquesta es la forma:	But if the bone of the jaw or of the other bones of the mouth is cracked, then it must be cured on that in its place with what is convenient to him of the instruments and forceps which we have said in the extraction of the roots of the teeth, and aid yourself by the gesture of which this is the shape:
E sia en lu alcuna grosseza petit a petit, e sia instringida o tenguda am la boca per que no evasesca o fuga entro que l’os de tot sia foro-getat; e aprop restaura le loc am medicinas convenientz ad aquo.	And there must be some thickness in it little by little, and it must be bound or held by the mouth so that it does not escape or leak until all of the bone is forgotten; and then restore the place with appropriate medicines to that.
Mays si en l’os es petita poyredura, lahoras ratz aquel de aquela poyredura e de la sua negror, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	But if there is a small breaking in the bone, then scrape that of that breaking and of its blackness, and cure it within until it is healed.
Capitol .xxxii.	Chapter .xxxii.
De la cura de las dentz eminentz sobre las autras.	Of the cure of teeth which are prominent above the others.
Quan las dentz so eminentz no segon lor cors natural per aquelas la forma es laga, e majorment quan endeve a las femnas, e majorment a las piuselas venerablas; donc cove que tu consideras: si dent es nada aprop autra dent, e no es possibla sarradura ni linament de lu, lahoras radica aquela; mays que no sia annexa am autra dent, lahoras tu inscideys aquela am aquest instrument del qual aquesta es la forma; e es semblant a morr de porc, e sia feyt de ferr de India de extramitat mot aguda.	When teeth are prominent not according to their natural form by those the shape is lacking, and especially when it happens in women, and especially in elderly women; therefore you must consider: if the tooth is next to another tooth, and it is not possible for there to be a lancing or lining of it, then remove that one; but if it is not attached to another tooth, then you insert that one with this instrument of which this is the shape; and it is similar to pig's tooth, and it must be made of Indian iron with an extremely sharp end.
E sia la tua inscizio am la qual inscideyses aquela en trops dias per la duricia de la dent, e que no sia comauguda autra de las dentz.	And your incision should be such that you insert it into the tooth in several days because of the hardness of the tooth, and not cut another of the teeth.
E si es dent eminent expausat a limadura, lahoras lima aquel am lima de ferr de India del qual aquesta es la forma:	And if it is a prominent tooth exposed to grinding, then you grind that one with an Indian iron file of which this is the shape:
E sia tot de ferr de India e·l margua eysament; e sia de motz menutz puntz ayssi cum lima am la qual son faytas agulhas, am la qual la dent sia limada pauc a pauc en motz dias am fecilitat, per so que no sia autra dent comauguda e caga.	And let it all be of Indian iron and the margin evenly; and let it have small points like a file with which needles are made, and with which the tooth is ground little by little in several days with facility, so that no other tooth is cut or broken.
E aprop lineys aquela en la fi, e ratz aquela am alscus razoris.	And then you line it at its end, and scrape it with a sharp razor.
E si es dent del qual una partida es trinquada e lideys la lengua, lahoras cove que tu limescas aquel entro que l’aspretat de aquela fraccio sia ostada e engualhada, e sia aplenada per so que la lengua no ledesca ni la paraula no corrumpa.	And if it is a tooth of which one part is cracked and cuts the tongue, then you must grind it within until the sharp edge of that fracture is worn down and flattened so that the tongue is not cut nor speech impaired.
Capitol .xxxiii.	Chapter .xxxiii.
De restauracio de dentz maugudas am fiel de aur o de argent.	Of the restoration of broken teeth with gold or silver wire.
Quan accideys a las dentz devant concussio e remossio per percussio o per cazament, e le malaute no pot strenher sobre aquo que manga, e tu has curat aquel am medicinas stipticas, e no ha valgut la tua curacio, lahoras per so que no cagan es engen en aquelas que sian strengudas am fiel de aur e no de argent, quar argent se fa vert e aprop se poyreys aprop alscus dias, mays aur nul temps no es mudat.	When it happens to the teeth that there is concussion and removal by striking or falling, and the patient cannot hold onto what they chew, and you have cured them with astringent medicines, and your cure has not helped, then so that they do not rot, it is useful that they are bound with gold wire and not silver, for silver becomes black and soon rots after several days, but gold does not change at all.
E sia le fiel en tal subtilitat e grocesa segon la quantitat que puesca entrar entre las dentz; e la forma de la reccio es que prenguas le fiel e pren lo doble de lu entre doas dentz sanas, e aprop que cresques am doas tortuositatz del fiel entre doas maugudas, o si’ una o motas, entro que pervengua la tela a la dent sana del autra partida.	And let the wire be of such thinness and thickness according to the quantity that can enter between the teeth; and the shape of the binding is that you take the wire and place twice its length between two healthy teeth, and then let it grow with two tortuosities of the wire between two broken ones, or if one or more, within so that the thread comes to the healthy tooth from the other part.
E aprop itera le teyssiment entro a la partida de la qual comenciest, e strenh la tua ma am facilitat e savieza entro que no sia mauguda.	And then repeat the binding within to the part from which you began, and strengthen your hand with facility and skill within so that it is not broken.
E sia la tua striccio am la qual strenhas le fiel deves las razitz de las dentz que no evasesca.	And let your binding be such that you bind the wire over the roots of the teeth so that it does not leak.
E aprop inscindeys las extramitatz del fiel superfluens am las forceps o tosoyras, e agregua aquelas en quascun loc am gesti, e converteys aquelas e las occulta entre la dent sana e la dent mauguda, per so que no fassa lesio a la lengua.	And then you insert the wire’s excess ends with forceps or tweezers, and draw those to each other in every place with gestures, and convert them and hide them between the healthy tooth and the broken one, so that it does not harm the tongue.
E aprop leyssa aquela ayssi streyta cum roman.	And then let her tightly close it thus with Roman wax.
Mays si es desliada o rumpuda, strenh aquela o aquelas am autra fiel en tal manieyra en tot son temps.	But if it is loose or broken, strengthen that or those with another wire in the same way at all times.
E aquesta es la forma de las dentz e la figura de la rectacio de doas dentz sanas e de doas maugudas, ayssi cum vezes aquestas liadas:	And this is the form of teeth and the figure of the binding of two healthy teeth and two broken ones, thus with their threads bound:
E quan se fa que retorno una dent o doas aprop le cazement de quascuna en lors locs, e sian recrescutz ayssi cum havem recomtat, e que remauguan.	And when it happens that one tooth or two return to their places of origin, and they are regrown thus as we have recommended, and that they rot again.
E no fa aquo sino bo artifexs e savi.	And it does not do anything but good artisans and the wise.
E alcunas veguadas es aptat alcuna causa dels osses de vaca, e es fayt de lor ayssi cum forma de dent, e es pausada en loc en le qual defayl la dent, e es strengit ayssi cum havem dit, e reman e serveys am aquel per lonc temps.	And sometimes it is apt for some cause of the bones of a cow, and it is made in the shape of teeth, and placed in the place where the tooth fails, and is strengthened as we have said, and remains and serves with him for a long time.
Capitol .xxxiv.	Chapter .xxxiv.
De inscizio del liament le qual ve en la lengua e prohibeys loquela.	Of the incision of the thread which appears in the tongue and it prohibits speech.
Aquest liguament le qual ve dejos la lengua alcunas veguadas o es natural am le qual hom nays, o accidental e accideys per plagua la qual ja es consolidada.	This ligament which appears under the tongue some times, or is natural to him, or it happens accidentally and occurs because of a wound that is already consolidated.
E la operacio en lu es que huobres la boca del malaute, le sieu cap existent en le tieu se; e eleva la sieua lengua, e aprop inscideys aquel liament nervos segon la latitut entro que sia solvuda la lengua de la sua recencio.	And the operation on it is that you open the mouth of the patient, the jaw being held in your hand; and elevate the tongue, and then insert the nervous thread according to its length so that the tongue is released from its binding.
Mays si en aquela es alcuna duricia o denodacio, e aquo es stat per consolidacio de plagua, lahoras tu gieta unci e scindeys aquel per la latitut entro que aias inscindit le liament e sia dissolvuda la nodacio.	But if there is any hardness or knottiness in it, and that is standing because of consolidation of the wound, then you cut a notch and split it according to its length so that you have split the thread and the knot is dissolved.
E guarda te que no sia fayta fissura en le preon de la carn e que scindas aqui arceria e vengua flux de sanc.	And beware that there is not made a fissure in the lip of meat, and you split here the artery and blood flows out.
E aprop sia lavat le vestigi de la inscisio am ayguaros o am vi agre o am aygua frega; e aprop pausa dejos la lengua licini; so es meca la qual tengua le malaute dejos la lengua en quascuna nuoyt per so que no sia consolidat autra veguada.	And then it is washed with vinegar or wine or vinegar and water, and then the patient spits out; so that the tongue be not bound up by another wound.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc, pausa sobre le loc vetriol trissat; mays si le sanc ventz, lahoras cauteriza le loc am cauteri lantiginos le qual conveneys ad aquo.	But if blood flows out, place on the spot vinegar triphled; but if blood vents, then cauterize the spot with a burning cautery appropriate to that.
E aprop aquel cura am las autras causas entro que sia sanat.	And then it is cured by the other causes until it is healed.
Capitol .xxxv.	Chapter .xxxv.
De extraccio de ranula dejos la lengua.	Of the extraction of ranula under the tongue.
Alcunas veguadas accideys dejos la lengua apostema asemblant a nomla petita prohibent la lengua de la sua operacio natural; e fort leu es magnificada entro que huempla la boca.	Sometimes it happens under the tongue an apostema resembling a small nut which prohibits speech, and strong is enlarged within so that it fills the mouth.
E la operacio en lu es que huebras la boca del malaute sesent devant le solel e considera le apostema.	And the operation on it is that you open the mouth of the patient facing the sun and consider the apostema.
E si tu le vezes de fusca color o de negra, dur, al qual le malaute no atroba sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel quar es cranc.	And if you see it of a dusky or black color, hard, to which the patient does not respond with feeling, then do not touch that because it is rotten.
E si es declinat a blancor, en le qual es humiditat, lahoras tu met le onci en lu, e inscideys aquel am spatum subtil, e inscindeys le de tota partida; e si sanc te ventz en la hora de la tua operacio, lahoras tu pausa desus zegi trissat, so es vetriol, entro que sia restreyt le sanc.	And if it is turned white and humid, then you put the ointment on it, and insert that subtle sponge, and insert the whole thing; and if blood comes out during your operation, then you stop above with a trussed bandage, so that the blood is restricted.
E aprop retorna a la obra tua entro que lo haias trayt am compliment de lu, entro que sia lavat am vi agre e sal; e cura aquel am l’autra curacio ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	Then return to your work while it is still wet with the ointment, and wash it with sweet wine and salt; and heal it with another healing until it is healed.
Capitol .xxxvi.	Chapter 36.
De extraccio de apostema de doas aurelhas e de aquel que es nada en le golayro e de las autras apostemas.	Of the extraction of an abscess from both ears, and of that which is in the throat, and of other abscesses.
Quan endeveno en le golayro godat, so son glandulas las quals son asembladas algodat, las quals accideysso deforas e son nompnadas doas aurelhas, las quals quan tu las curas am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no es sanat, lahoras tu considera si le apostema es dur, de fusca color, de pauc sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel am ferr.	When an abscess appears in the throat, it is like glands which are clustered together, which are cut open and are called both ears, which when you treat them with what we have said in the division, and they are not healed, then you should consider whether the abscess is hard, of a dusky color, with little feeling; then do not touch that with iron.
E si es de roga color e la razic es grossa, lahoras no toques aquela am ferr per le flux del sanc; abantz layssa aquel entro sia madurat, e lahoras o tu trauqueras aquel, o sira romput per si.	And if it is of a red color and the root is thick, then do not touch that with iron for fear of bleeding; unless you let that one remain until it is ripe, and either you will cut it out or it will burst on its own.
E si es de blanqua color, radon, e la razit de lu es subtil, lahoras aquel es que cove esser inscidit.	And if it is of a white color, soft, and the root of it is fine, then that one should be cut into.
E la operacio en lu es que consideras, denant la tua operacio, si ja ha repausat le apostema de lu caut am repaus complit o si es deminuit am alcuna deminucio; e lahoras fay sezer le malaute denant le soleyl, e·l cap de lu sia en le tieu se, e huebre la boca de lu, e le servidor prenent entre las suas mas prema la lengua de lu dejos am instrument mot noble del qual aquesta es la forma:	And the operation on it is that you consider, before your operation, whether the abscess has rested completely or has diminished by any diminution; and then have the patient lie down facing the sun, and his head be in your lap, and open the mouth of him, and the servant holding his hands press the tongue of him downward with a noble instrument, of which this is the shape:
E sia fayt de argent o de aram, e sia subtil cum cotel.	And it should be made of silver or bronze, and be fine like a needle.
Donc cum tu premes am aquel la lengua e es mostrat a tu la apostema, e catz sobre aquel le tieu vezement, lahoras pren onci e fica aquel en l’amenla, e tira aquel a las partidas defora tant quant podes.	And when you press with that the tongue and it is shown to you the abscess, and you put over that your thumb, then take ointment and insert that into the hollow, and draw that out to the outside parts as much as you can.
Otra aquo que tiras alcuna causa de las tunicas, e aprop incideys aquela am instrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	Another way is that you draw some cause from the membranes; then insert that with an instrument of which this is the shape:
e es asemblat a forceps, empero las extramitatz de lu son corvadas, ayssi que l’orrifici de quascuna de aquelas es en le endreyt del autra, mot agudas, le qual sia de ferr indi enbegut.	It is like a pair of forceps, except that its ends are bent so that the aperture of each of those is in the direction of the other, very sharp, and it should be made of iron coated in wax.
Mays si aquest instrument no es a tu present, lahoras inscideys aquel am spatum del qual aquesta es la forma de lu: E sia agut de la una part, no agut del autra part.	But if this instrument is not available to you, then insert that with a sponge of which this is the shape: and it should be sharp on one side and blunt on the other side.
E pus que has inscidit una mella, inscideys l’autra segon aquesta meteyssa manieyra de inscizio, e aprop la inscizio le malaute guarguarise de aygua frega	And after you have inserted one hole, insert the other according to this method of insertion, and then let the patient gargle with water.
Mays si endeve flux de sanc, guarguarise aygua de decoccio de scorsa de milgrana o de fuelha de mirtra e semblantz ad aquel de las causas stiptiquas entro que·l flux del sanc sia restreyt, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	But if blood comes out, then gargle with water of cooking liquid from the rind of pomegranate or leaf of myrtle, and similar to that of the causes of constriction so that the flow of blood is restricted, and then heal that until it is healed.
E alcunas veguadas naysso en le guolayro autras apostemas otra aquelas doas aurelhas, e inscideys aquelas segon que yeu e dit en la inscizio de doas mellas engualment.	And sometimes in the throat there are other abscesses besides those two ears; and insert those according to what has been said about the insertion of two holes equally.
E yeu ja fu medicat una femna de apostema le qual era nat en le golayro de lu, le qual apostema tendia a color fusca, de pauc sentiment, le qual ja havia claus le golayro de lu, e la femna respirava am meat streyt, e ja havia prohibit a lu comestio e beure de aygua, e ja era pervenguda a la mort si mays agues stat per un dia o per dos.	And I have once treated a woman of an abscess which was in her throat, and that abscess had turned dusky in color, with little feeling; it had closed up her throat, and the woman could breathe only through a narrow opening, and she had prohibited herself from eating and drinking water, and she was on the verge of death if she had not taken any food or drink for one or two days.
E l’apostema ja tant havia pugat que havia mezes dos ramps entro que eyssiro per dos traucs.	And that abscess had pushed so much that it had made two bumps within which fluid would drip through two openings.
Donc yeu me cuytegui fisturalment e fiquegui en un de lor onci, e tiregui aquel, e atirada es de lu gran porcio, e aprop yeu incidigui aquela de on comprendegui del autre trau, e aprop yeu obrigui la boca de lu, e compremegui la sua lengua, e aprop yeu fiquegui le onci en aquela apostema.	So I cut her throat with a scalpel and put in one of them the ointment, and drew that out, and it came out from her a great portion; then I cut into where I understood was the other opening, and then I closed her mouth, pressed her tongue, and then I put the ointment on that abscess.
E aprop yeu abscizi gran partida de lu, e no corria de lu sino un pauc de sanc.	And then I cut off a great portion of it, and only a little blood flowed from it.
Donc absolut es le guolayro de aquela femna, e comensec tantost beure aygua, e aprop presec vianda, donc yeu no cessegui inscidir de aquela apostema motas vetz per lonc temps, e succesia apostema en loc de aquel, le qual inscizia entro que es prolonguat aquel.	So absolutely her throat was closed, and she began to drink water at once, and then took food; therefore I did not cease cutting that abscess many times for a long time, and the abscess returned in the place of it, which cut into it again and again as long as it was prolonged.
Donc yeu engen agui e cauterizegui le guolayro de lu, donc astec de addicio; e aprop yeu perambulegui e no saubi que fec Dieus de aquela aprop mi.	So I had iron and cauterized her throat, therefore she was in great distress; and then I walked around and did not know what God had done to that; therefore I believed.
Capitol .xxxvii.	Chapter 37.
De inscizio de huvela quan es apostemada.	Of the incision of a hernia when it is abscessed.
Quan catarr deysen a la huvula, e es apostemada e es longa, lahoras ela es nompnada perpendicular; e si es en la partida dejos grossa e redonda, e lahoras ela es apelada buba.	When pus comes out of the hernia and it is abscessed and long, then that is called a perpendicular hernia; and if it is swollen and round at the bottom, then it is called a buba.
Mays quan es curada am aquo que havem dit en la divisio, e no comfereys la tua curacio, e eyssament ja vezes que apostema caut ja es ostat de lu e es subtil, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquela que es agreguadas redonda; e si es ad aquela longitut, e es sanguina, de fusca color o de negre, e no es a lu centiment, lahoras cove que tu temtes la inscizio de lu, quar en aquela es temor sobre le malaute.	But when it is healed with what has been said in the division and does not conform to your cure, and the abscess cauterized is already old and thin, then you should insert that which is swelled around and round; and if it is long and blood comes out of it, dusky or black in color, and there is no feeling in it, then beware of cutting into it, for fear over the patient.
E quan tu vezes aquela segon la manieyra que yeu he dita de la sua blancor e longuesa, que tu fassas sezer le malaute e premas la lengua de lu am instrument del qual procesic la sua forma e aprop fica le onci en la nuva, e tira aquela en jos e inscideys aquela am un de dos instrumentz les quals e ditz en la inscizio de dos mellas.	And when you see that according to the manner that I have said of its whiteness and length, that you make the patient lie down and press his tongue with an instrument of which you process its shape, then put ointment in the new one, and draw that out from above and insert it with one of the two instruments which I said about the insertion of two holes.
E cove que no inscidas aquela sino aquo que es ajustat sobre le terme natural ses addicio, quar si tu inscides de lu mays, lediyras le sieu parlar.	And beware that you do not insert that unless it is drawn up over the natural term by addition, for if you cut into it more, you will draw out its speech.
E aprop la inscizio, usa de aquo le qual havem recomtat en la inscizio de dos mellas, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	And then after the incision, use that which we have recommended in the insertion of two holes, and heal that until it is healed.
Mays si era le malaute espaventat per la inscizio de lu, cove que use de engen en la cauterizacio de lu ses temor, e la manieyra del cauteri en lu no es sino am aygua aguda, e es que tu pauses le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop prem la lengua de lu am le instrument le qual havem dit, e aprop pren de l’aygua la qual havem dita en le capitol de cauterizacio, e comfeys am aquela caus viva, e pausa aquela no spessa ni subtil, e de aquela omple la concavitat de l’estrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	But if the patient is frightened by the incision of it, then use the iron in cauterizing it without fear, and the manner of cauterizing in it is not but with sharp water; and let the patient's head be in your lap, and then press his tongue with the instrument which we have said, and then take that water which we said in the chapter on cauterization, and conform to living cause, and put that not thick nor thin, and of that fill the hollow of the instrument of which this is the shape:
Sia la extramitat de lu conquavitat en la qual sia pausada la medicina ayssi cum la conquavitat de culher de ray, e pausa le strument am la medicina sobre la vula, e·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu latz per so que corro saliva o musellage de la boca de aquel per la intrinscequa medicina, per so que no deyssenda de aquela deguna causa sobre le golayro de lu e que ledesca aquel.	Let the end of it be hollow in which the medicine is paused as with the concavity of a spoon; and put the instrument over the hernia, and let the patient lie on his side so that saliva or spittle drips from the mouth of him due to the intrinsic medicine, so that nothing goes down into the throat of him and let it drip.
E aprop te la tua ma am la medicina, e exprem aquela sobre la uvula per l’espazi de miega hora entro que vegas aquela esser denegrada e sedada per la mordicacio de la medicina.	And then hold your hand over the medicine, and express that onto the uvula for a space of half an hour until you see it blackened and soothed by the biting of the medicine.
E si vols, prengues coto e envolopes aquel sobre la extremitat del ray, e submergeys le coto en la medicina, e entrometas le ray am le coto en una canula de sobre entro que·l coto adheresca en aquela canula, e fay aquo tantas vetz entro que consiegues aquo que vols de la cauterizacio de la uva, e aprop leyssa aquela quar ela se seccara e cayra aprop tres dias o quatre.	And if you want, take a cloth and wrap that over the end of the iron, and immerse the iron in the medicine, and insert the end into a tube of wax so that the iron adheres to that tube; and do that as many times until you accomplish what you want from cauterizing the grape, then let it dry and fall off after three or four days.
E si indigeysses que iteras la medicina, itera aquela, e aprop la cauterizacio abstergeys en le circuit de la uva am coto enbegut en boder, e mondifica am aquel aquo que es en le circuit de lu de la medicina, e sia lavat am aygua frega, e sia curat deforo am embrocacio, e dedintz am guarguarismes entro que sia sanat.	And if you feel that the medicine needs to be repeated, repeat it, and then cauterize the area around the ulcer with a cotton swab dipped in wine, and cleanse the area around the ulcer with the water from the medicine, and wash it with rubbing alcohol, and treat the inside of the ulcer with ointments until it heals.
E aquesta especia de curacio es pus salva que inscizio e pus long de temor.	And this type of treatment is more safe than surgery and less painful and terrifying.
Alcunas veguadas es curada la uvuola am aquo que es pus subtil que cauteri e inscizio, quar es curat am subfumigacio en aquesta manieyra: recipe calament, ysop, origua, ruda, scicados arabic, camamilla, broyda e semblant ad aquels de las erbas, e ajusta totas aquelas causas, o alcunas de lor, en una ola, e sian submergidas am vi agre, e bulhan; e la ola sia be lutada am lut decentment, e sia en le mieg loc de la ola un trauc, sobre le qual sia pausat un instrument conquau de aram segon aquesta manieyra; sia fayt de argent o de aram.	Sometimes the ulcer is healed with a liquid that is thinner than cauterization and incision, for it is healed by sublimation in this way: take calamine, hyssop, oregano, rue, Arabic scordium, camomile, bruised plants and similar to these herbs, and put all those causes, or some of them, in a vessel, and let them be steeped in mild wine; and the vessel should be warm with decent heat, and there should be a hole in the middle of the vessel, on which an appropriate hollow instrument made of silver or bronze is placed; it should be made of silver or bronze.
E sia entromesa la extremitat en la boca del malaute entro que la vapor poge a la uvula sobre la quanula, entro que la uvula sia mot ofuscada.	And the end of this instrument is inserted into the mouth of the patient so that the steam reaches the ulcer on the glottis, until the ulcer is very foggy.
E aprop itera sobre aquela motas veguadas entro qu’es secca, e guarda te que no fassas aquesta curacio al comesament de l’aveniment de apostemas, quar trop ajustaria en le apostema, e no cove que tu fassas aquo, sino deves la declaracio de apostema de lu caut.	And then repeat this several times until it is dry, and beware of performing this treatment at the beginning of an inflammation of an ulcer, for it would make the inflammation worse; rather, you should wait for the declaration of the ulcer's cautery.
Mays si no es a tu present aquest instrument, lahoras pren una cana e compon en la extramitat de lu un clos de huou, per so que la boca del malaute sia comborida, quar le closc del huou prohibeys la vapor comburir la boca.	But if you do not have this instrument, then take a cane and attach a piece of holly at its end, so that the mouth of the patient is protected, for the holly's close prevents the steam from burning the mouth.
E aquesta curacio es bona am salut.	And this treatment is good for health.
Capitol .xxxviii.	Chapter 38.
De extraccio d’espinas e de aquo que adhereys en le golayro e de las autras causas.	On the extraction of thorns and of what adheres in the throat, and of other causes.
Motas veguadas adhereys en le guolayro o spina de peys o alcuna autra causa.	Sometimes there is adhesion in the throat or a thorn in the foot or some other cause.
Adonc cove que tu extraguas aquo que de aquels es apparent, sobre le qual catz la vista, pus que tu premes la lengua am instrument denant solelh, per so que a tu sia declarat aquo que es en la guola.	Then you should extract what is visible from these, by looking at it with an instrument in front of the sun, so that you can see what is in the throat.
E aquo que no apar e es a tu occultat en le guolayro, cove que tu fassas vomir le malaute denant que la vianda sia degerida en l’estomac, quar fort leu la causa annexsa le golayro sira foro-getada per vomit; o que deglusia le malaute una pessa de nap o de razit de laytuga o un boci de pa sec; o prengua una pessa de sponga marina sequa leon, e lia aquela fortment am fiel, e aprop le malaute transglussia aquela, quar cum perve al loc en le qual so spinas e es extrahuda, lahoras so foro-getatz.	And what is hidden and concealed in the throat, you should make the patient vomit before the food has digested in the stomach, for often the cause of the throat lies hidden by vomiting; or let the patient swallow a piece of napkin or a leaf of lettuce or a piece of dry bread; or let him swallow a piece of dried sponge, and then apply vinegar to it strongly, and then let the patient swallow it, for when it reaches the place where the thorns are, they will be dislodged.
E mays pren una anguila e be am fiel liada, e sia dedintz mesa e soptament sia extrayta; o pren un porr e soptament le metas e soptament l’en tratz.	And if you take an eel and apply vinegar to it, and let it be inside and applied, it will be extracted; or take a needle and push it in and push it out.
Mays si no so foro-getatz am aquelas causas las quals havem ditas, lahoras husa de un instrument de plom segon aquesta forma:	But if they are not dislodged by those causes which we have mentioned, then use an instrument made of lead according to this form:
E sia pus gros que ray un petit, e en la extramitat de lu sia conquavitat la qual tu entrometas en la sua guola am facilitat.	And it should be thicker than a small needle, and at its end there should be a hollow which you can insert into the patient's throat easily.
E el aga le sieu cap elevat en sus, e guarda te que·l tocament del sieu os de la gola, per so que endevengua a lu cos e am aquela que enpellesca le os o la spina, o que aquel le metge am la sua ma.	And let the patient' head be elevated, and beware of touching his bones in the throat, so that he does not cough or vomit, or that the doctor holds his hand over his mouth.
Mays empero que·l malaute aquel entrometa es miels, per la sua sciencia del loc de la causa annexa e enpellisca en jos, e tira la sua ma am le instrument en sus, tot aquo segon la quantitat la qual es a lu preparada entro que sia foro-getada.	But if the patient himself inserts it, because of his knowledge of the location of the cause and pulls the instrument upwards, all this according to the amount for which he is prepared until it is dislodged.
Capitol .xxxix.	Chapter 39.
De extraccio de sancguisugua annexsa al golayro.	On the extraction of blood-letting annexed to the throat.
Quan es medicada sanguisugua am aquo que havem dit en la divisio de la curacio am medicinas e no comfereys, considera lahoras en le guolayro del malaute al solelh, pus que tu aias compremuda la lengua de lu am instrument le qual a tu havem recomtat.	When blood-letting has been administered with what we have said in the division of treatment by medicines, and it does not help, then consider the throat of the patient towards the sun, for you should have applied his tongue with an instrument which we have recommended.
Donc si tu vezes la sancguisugua, extratz aquela am onci petit o am gesti subtils decentment.	Therefore if you see blood, extract it gently with a small needle or with decently thin tweezers.
E si no es a tu possible estrayre am aquel, lahoras pren una canula concava e entromet aquela en lo guolayro del malaute, e aprop pausa en la concavitat de la canula un ferr ignit, e fay aquo tantas vetz (entro que la sancguisugua sia morta e se osta del guolayro) e abstengua se le malaute tot lo jorn de aygua.	And if you are unable to extract it, then take a hollow tube and insert it into the throat of the patient, and then place a hot iron in the hollow of the tube, and do this as many times as necessary (until the blood-letting is stopped and it ceases from the throat), and let the patient abstain from water all day.
E aprop prengua una veyria plena de aygua frega, e obra la boca de lu en aquela, e lava la boca am aquela; e no trasglucia de aquela alcuna causa e maugua l’aygua una hora aprop autra am la sua ma, quar la sancguisugua tantost cum sent l’aygua catz.	And then take a sponge saturated with rubbing alcohol, and open the patient's mouth with it, and wash his mouth with it; and do not let any cause enter into his throat, and do not let him drink anything for an hour or more with his hand, for the blood-letting will soon cease when he drinks.
Mays si no es foro-getada am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras subfumigua le malaute am cimetz o am assafetida per le instrument le qual havem recomtat en la sufumiguacio de uvula.	But if it is not stopped by what we have recommended, then subliminate the throat with camphor or asafetida using the instrument which we have recommended for sublimination of the ulcer.
Fay aquo, so en quar cayra.	Do this, so that in whatever way it falls.
E es un’autra manieyra de operacio en sufumiguacio de aquela, es que tu prenguas una ola en la qual sian carbos ignitz e la ola sia cuberta am una cobertora en le mieg de la qual sia un trauc, e sia compausat en aquel trauc la extremitat del instrument; e aprop dega desus la subfumigacio; e pause le malaute la sua boca en la extremitat de la canula, e claugua la sua boca per que la subfumiguacio no sia foro-getada entro que sapias que la subfumigacio es pervenguda a la sancguisugua, quar la sancguisugua tantost cayra.	And there is another way of operating in sublimination of it: take a vessel in which are burning coals and the vessel should be covered with a cover on top of which there is a hole, and the end of the instrument should be placed in that hole; then apply the sublimation; and let the patient open his mouth over the end of the tube, and close his mouth so that the sublimation is not wasted until you know that the sublimation has reached the blood-letting, for the blood-letting will soon cease.
E si no catz, lahoras tu itera la subfumiguacio motas vetz, e abstengua le malaute de beure, e mange causas saladas e alhs, e no begua aygua, e ayssi necessari es que am aquest regiment sia fora-getada.	And if it does not cease, then repeat the sublimation several times, and let the patient abstain from drinking, and eat salt and alder wood, and do not drink water, and so by this regimen it will be stopped.
E aquesta es la forma del instrument am le qual es trayta sancguisugua del guolayro quan es vista; e es semblant a forceps ayssi cum vezes, sino quar es en lu alcuna curvitat:	And this is the form of the instrument with which blood-letting from the throat is extracted when it is seen; and it is similar to forceps except for having some curvature:
le qual sia mesa al guolayro, e la extremitat de lu es semblant a bec de ciconia, que es guanta, en la qual es aspretat de lima, per so quar, quan comprem alcuna causa, aquela no leyssa.	which is applied to the throat, and its end is similar to a wooden beak of a stork, which is smooth, in which there is a cut with lime, so that when it grasps something, it does not slip.
Capitol .xl.	Chapter 40.
En le qual es la suma del sermo en apercio de apostemas e en seccio de lor.	In which is the sum of the tongue in perception of ulcers and in section of them.
Les apostemas so motas specias, de motas manieyras, segon que ve rememoracio de lor, de quascuna en aquest libre.	Ulcers are of various kinds, from various causes, according to which we remember them, each in this book.
E so diversas en perforacio e seccio de lor per doas manieyras, de las quals la una es per la specia de apostemas en si meteys; e per aquo que comprem de las humiditatz.	And they are diverse in penetration and section of them by two ways: one is by the nature of ulcers themselves; and by what we perceive from humidity.
E la segonda manieyra es prop les locs en les quals accideys del cos, quar le apostema accident en le cap es autra de la apostema accident en le cul; e le apostema en le loc carnos accident es autra del apostema accident en junctura; e a quascun de lor es son juguament per operacio.	And the second way is by the places in which they occur, for the accidental ulcer on the head is different from the accidental ulcer on the heel; and the ulcer in a fleshy place is different from the ulcer in a joint; and each of them has its own treatment by operation.
E mays de apostemas so alcunas las quals cove que no sian perforadas sino aprop maturacio de la sania en aquels o compliment de lor.	And there are also some ulcers which do not need to be penetrated, but rather require maturation of the pus in them or completion of them.
So autras apostemas les quals cove que sian traucatz quan son cruzes, e no son maturatz segon lor compliment, ayssi cum apostemas que son propdas a las juncturas, quar apostema quan ve prop junctura, lo esser de lu es prolonguat entro que·s poyreys aquo que es en le circuit de lu, e fort leu son corromputz les liamentz o les nervis de aquela junctura, per que es fayta causa de contraccio de aquel membre; o es apostema prop de membre principal, e si tu tardas la perforacio de lu entro sia madurat nosira al membre principal; o es prop le cul, donc perfora aque no-madurat; e no cove que·l perforas cru, de no-complida degestio, sino aquel que es prop del cul, per so que no poyresca le preon de lu e sia elonguat a las partidas dedintz del cul, e sia fayta fistula, o que sia fayt en le terme de lu que no sia sanat.	And there are other ulcers which are not cut but rather have成熟(maturation) of the pus in them or completion of them. And there are also some ulcers which are near joints, for when there is an ulcer on a joint, its matter is prolonged to the parts around it, and very often the ligaments or nerves of that joint are corrupted, for this is the cause of contraction of that member; or it is near a main member, and if you delay penetration of it until it becomes mature, it will corrupt the main member; or it is near the anus, so penetrate it when it is not mature; and do not cut into a crux, unless there is complete digestion, but rather that which is near the anus, so that it does not corrupt the front of it and is prolonged to the parts around it, and there has been made a fistula, or that which is at the end of it and has not healed.
Mays cove que tu sapias la hora de la perforacio de la apostema, e aysso es quan es maturat.	You should know when to pierce the pustule, and that time is when it has matured.
E sapias que es madurat quan es la cedacio de la dolor e la cessacio de la febre, e aprop la diminucio de la rogor e de la pulsacio, e la acuitat del cap del apostema, e les autres senhals.	You should know that it has matured when there is a decrease in pain and fever, as well as a decrease in redness and pulsation, and the head of the pustule becomes pointed, along with other signs.
E quar cove que sapias la perforacio cazer en le loc pus dejos del apostema e de pus venient de curacio de la eminencia.	You should also know that piercing should be done in the lowest part of the pustule and where pus is coming from the healing of the eminence.
E perforacio tostemps sia per le lonc de la carn o del cors, si las apostemas son en las partidas de las mas o dels pes, e en loc dels lacertz, de las cordas dels nervis, de las arcerias; e, al derier, en totz locs enguals en les quals no es reflecio; quar en aquels que so reflectitz, usa de perforacio segon aquel membre.	And piercing should always be done through the length of the skin or body, if the pustules are on the hands or feet, and in the places of the veins, nerves, and arteries; and in all places alike where there is no reflection; for in those where there is a reflection, use piercing according to that member.
Mays quan le apostema es en loc carnos, lahoras miels es que leysses la perforacio de lu entro que sia confermada la digestio de lu segon compliment, ayssi quo havem dit; quar si tu perforas aquel denant aquo, es prolonguat le cors del poyre de lu e de mota sordicia, e fort leu las labias de lu so enduradas e la profunditat de lu.	But when the pustule is in a fleshy place, it is better to pierce it after digestion has been confirmed according to what we have said; for if you pierce it before that, the body of the pus and dirt are prolonged, as well as the lips of it being hardened and its depth.
Mays alcus apostemas so perforatz segon la latitut de la carn o del cos deves la necessitat, o segon aquo del qual lo membre indigeys.	But some pustules are pierced according to the width of the skin or body due to necessity, or according to that of which the member is in need.
E cove que administres petita perforacio , e·n les apostemas grans gran perforacio e ampla o motas seccios segon la diversitat de la grandesa dels apostemas.	And you should administer a small piercing for small pustules, a large and ample piercing for large pustules, or many piercings according to the diversity of the size of the pustules.
E autras so dels apostemas en les quals cove que la codena sia conquavada e sia encidida, quan es fayta ayssi quo pan e fayta es en terme que ja stigua, ayssi cum aquel que accideys en trops de dubelec e de bubos.	And there are others of pustules in which the membrane is hollowed out and cut, when it is done so that bread is made, as it happens with those on the scrotum and testicles.
E de aquels so que so insciditz am seccio havent tres angles; e de aquels es en le qual es inscidit ayssi cum figura de fuelha de mirtra, ayssi cum las apostemas dels angonars.	And there are those that are cut with a section having three angles; and there is one that is cut in the shape of a leaf of bay laurel, as are the pustules on the elbows.
E de lor so en les quals es administrada seccio redonda e seccio lunar, e semblantz ad aquels.	And there are those in which round and lunar sections are administered, and similar to those.
Mays aquel al qual no es cap ayssi cum son apostemas leons superficials, cove que tu perforas aquel am perforacio superficial, o plana tant solament.	But that which is not tipped as are superficial pustules, you should pierce it with a superficial piercing, or simply a flat one.
E cove quant le apostema es gros e ya ha colligit mota sania, que perfores aquel e no te coytes que extraguas tot le poyre en aquela hora; habantz extratz de aquel una partida, e aprop opila le apostema entro al autre dia, e aprop extratz una partida major, e aprop fa aquo motas veguadas segon graduacio entro que sia foro-getat.	And when the pustule is large and has collected a lot of pus, you should pierce it and not be afraid to extract all the pus at that time; having extracted a part of it, then plug the pustule again on the next day, then extract a larger portion, and do this repeatedly until it is completely drained.
E majorment si·l malaute es de freol vertut, o femna prens, o enfant petit, o viel en decrepitut, quar l’esperit animal motas vetz es resolvut am la egressio de la sania, e fort leu mor le malaute, e tu operte les.	And especially if the patient is of a cold nature, or a woman in labor, or a small child, or an old person in decline; for the animal spirit is often resolved by the discharge of pus, and it rarely harms them, and you should operate on them.
Don guarda aquest capitol am gran cautela, e aprop la tua perforacio en la qual perforas aquestz apostemas, cove que abstergescas las plagues e consideras donc si la plagua del apostema es pauca, o es una seccio plana, lahoras tu aministra las qualguas de li o de coto antic; e si le apostema es gran, e las fissuras de la perforacio son motas, lahoras cove que tu pauses meca en quascun trauc entro que pervenguan ensemps.	Therefore take great care with this chapter, and when you pierce these pustules, cleanse the wounds and consider if the wound of the pustule is small or a flat section, then you should administer the cauterizations of old wine or vinegar; but if the pustule is large and the fissures of the piercing are many, then you should place a plug in each crack as they appear.
E si en le apostema es abscindit una partida de la codena o has concavada aquela en le circuit, lahoras cove que tu la complescas de coto viel o de fil fayt de drap de li, ayssi cum quan has traytz pans o razizos, ses humiditat; e strenh aquel entro al tertz dia; e aprop proceseys aquel e cura le am aquo que cove dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And if a part of the membrane is torn off or you have hollowed it out in the circuit, then you should complete it with old wine or a thread made of linen cloth, just as when you treat wounds or roots, without moisture; and strengthen it on the third day; and then process and cure it as you would any other wound.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc en la hora de la operacio tua, lahoras tu aministra aygua frega e vi agre en les quals mules un drap de li, e pausa aquel sobre le loc del fluxs del sanc motas veguadas.	But if bleeding occurs at the time of your operation, then you should administer water mixed with vinegar and wine in which a linen cloth has been soaked, and place it over the site of the bleeding many times.
Mays si persevera le fluxs del sanc, lahoras cove que tu aministres regiment e curacio e polveras las quals he recomtadas en motz locs de aquest nostre libre e de divisio.	But if the bleeding persists, then you should administer regimens and curettages, and powders which I have recommended in other places of this book.
Mays si es en temps de hivern, e·l loc de la apostema es loc de motz nervis, lahoras cove que tu enfundas pulvils en vi e oli caut, e pauses aquels sobre les locs.	But if it is in the winter time, and the site of the pustule is a place of many nerves, then you should soak cotton in wine and oil mixed with cauterizations, and apply them to those places.
E si es en estiu, e les locs son carnoses, lahoras cove que tu pauses pulvils enbeguts am aygua e oli o am vi e oli, e tot aquo sia freg entro que sia le ters dia, ayssi cum havem dit, e lahoras cove que tu deslies le apostema e abstergescas aquel e aministres en la curacio de lu aquo que a lu conveneys entro que sia sanat.	And if it is in the summer, and the sites are fleshy, then you should place cotton soaked in water and oil or wine and oil, and let it be for three days as we have said; then pierce the pustule, cleanse it, and administer whatever suits it according to what has been said until it is healed.
E aysso es aquo que es necessari de la cognicio de la curacio de apostemas universalment, mays segon la via de distinccio ja he dit de tot apostema en qual manieyra es via de la cura de lu per capitols singularment.	And this is what is necessary to know about the cure of pustules universally, but according to the way of distinction I have said before, so I have spoken particularly about each pustule in its own chapter.
Capitol .xli.	Chapter 41.
De seccio de apostemas les quals veno en la codena del cap.	Of the section of pustules that come in the membrane of the head.
En la codena del cap petitz apostemas, e so de specias de nodes les quals conteno tunicas que so a lor factz ; e las specias de lor so motas.	In the membrane of the head there are small pustules, and they contain nodules which are formed from them; and their species are many.
E de lor son pingas, e de aquelas so que conteno humiditat semblant a lima.	And from them are blisters, and from those containing moisture similar to lime.
E de aquelas so las quals conteno humiditat semblant a pols, et asemblantz a lor; e de aquelas so que son lapideas, durs.	And from those there are which contain moisture similar to ash, and also similar to them; and from those there are which are scaly and hard.
E en la seccio de totz, e en la extraccio de aquels no es temor, cum deves la exteccio de aquels no fa contrariat arceria.	And in the section of all of them, and in the extraction of those there is no fear, although you should be careful not to cut the arteries.
E la operacio en seccio de aquels es que tu esproes aquels am instrument la forma del qual ve aprop aysso, le qual es apelat entromes, entro que sapias que contengua.	And the operation in the section of those is that you express them with an instrument the form of which you will see below, the one which is called a probe, so that you know what it contains.
Quar si aquo que conte es humiditat, lahoras scindeys aquel am seccio segon la longitut per seccio superficial segon aquesta forma:	For if what is contained is moisture, then you should split it with a section according to its length by a superficial section in this form:
E comensa en la seccio de la linha de .B. entro a la linha de .G. Donc cum la humiditat es evacuada, lahoras tu excoria aquela pel que conte aquela humiditat, e no leysses de aquela alcuna causa de tot, quar tropas veguadas retorna, si roman de aquela alcuna causa.	And you should begin the section from line .B to line .G; so that when the moisture is evacuated, then you should scrape off that in which the moisture was contained, and not leave any of it behind, for repeatedly returning, if there is any cause remaining.
E aprop submergeys coto en enguent egipciach, si es present, e sino, en aygua e sal; e umpleys am aquel la plagua e layssa aquel entro ad autra dia, quar am aquo corrodeys tot so que es romas de aquela pellicula.	And then immerse the wound in Egyptian ointment, if it is available, or else in water and salt; and fill it with that, and let it sit overnight, for by that you will corrode everything that remains of that membrane.
E aprop itera sobre aquel coto am enguent egipciach segondament e tersament si indigeyses de lu, entro que·t comfides que no y haia romas alcuna causa de aquela pellicula; lahoras cura la plagua am enguent entro que sia sanada.	And then apply ointment to it again secondly and thirdly if it needs it, while you are confident that no cause of that membrane remains; then cure the wound with ointment until it is healed.
E si apostema conte nodi gras, lahoras tu inscideys aquel segon aquesta forma:	And if the pustule contains a nodule of fat, then you should split it according to this form:
am seccio havent forma de crotz, e geta oncis entre doas labias de la seccio e scorsa aquel de tota partida, e esforsa la tua vertut en extraccio de la tunica la qual conte aquel.	by making a section having the shape of a cross, and cut the edges between the two lips of the section and scrape it entirely from every part, and use your strength in extracting the membrane which contains that.
Mays si a tu arceria fa contrarieta, lahoras fay aquo que yeu t’e recontat primieyrament.	But if an artery causes a contradiction to you, then do what I have told you primarily.
E semblantment fay en le apostema lapificat de seccio e de curacio segon que a tu havem dit; e seccio sobre apostema lapificat es pus leugiera, quar es de pauc sanc e de pauca humiditat.	And similarly do in the pustule which is lapidified by section and cure as I have said to you; and section on a lapidified pustule is pus-like, for it is of little blood and little moisture.
E alcunas vetz so alcus de aquestz apostemas les quals so en le cap en alcus homes am los quals de tot no es humiditat; la qual causa es quar yeu inscindigui sobre un apostema en le cap de una femna vielha e atrobegui le apostema ayssi cum peyra sorda, aspra, blanqua, la qual no podia esser trinquada, e si a alcu fos am aquela percussit, plaguera aquel.	And sometimes some of these pustules are in the head in some people in whom there is not moisture at all; that cause is that they split one on the head of an old woman and plug up the pustule with a piece of hard, rough, white pebble, which could not be moved, and if anyone hit it, it bled.
Mays en les autres apostemas accidentz en le cap otra aquest no es aquest capitol, ayssi cum les apostemas que veno als caps dels enfantz e deves las razitz de las aurelhas, mays la seccio de aquestz totz sia seccio superficial.	But in other pustules which are accidental in the head, this is not that chapter; except for those which come on the heads of children and from the roots of the ears, but the section of all of them should be a superficial section.
E pausa la perforacio de aquels de la partida pus bassa de lor per so que sia alleujat le cos de la sania a las partidas pus bassas.	And make the incision at the lower end of them, so that the body is relieved from illness to its lower parts.
E aprop cura aquelas am aquo que conveneys ad aquel de curacio.	Then cure these with what you consider appropriate for healing.
Capitol .xlii.	Chapter 42.
De seccio de scrophulas las quals accideyso en le col.	Of the cutting of scrofula which happens in the neck.
Motas veguadas endeveno aquestas apostemas en le colh e en las aysselhas e en les angonars; e alcunas veguadas accideyso en las autras partidas del cos.	These bumps often appear on the neck, armpits and angles of the joints, and sometimes elsewhere in the body.
E so aquelas que accideysso en le colh, e so motas que so engendradas entre lor, e tota scrofula de aquelas es dintz la sua tunica propria, e ayssi cum en les nodis e apostema del cap, ayssi cum havem recomtat.	And those that happen in the neck are some that are engendered among them and all scrofula of these is within its own envelope, as we have already described, as well as with nodes and bumps on the head.
E las specias de aquestas scrophulas son motas, quar de aquelas so alcunas lapideas, e de aquelas so que conteno humiditatz, e de aquelas so malignas las quals no obeseysso a curacio.	And there are different kinds of scrofula: some are hard, some contain moisture and some are malignant and resistant to treatment.
Donc en aquela la qual tu vezes de bona disposicio en le Tocament, de la qual la color de aquo que es manifest es propda a la color de la codena, e es mauguda a tota partida, e no es annexsa am le nervi del colh, ni am las venas, ni am la arceria, e no es preonda, cove que tu inscidiscas aquela am siccio superficial de la partida desus a la partida dejos del cos de la linha de .G. entro la linha de .B., e scorja aquela de tota partida, e exten dos labias de la codena am onci, o am motz oncis si has necessitat de aquels, ayssi cum havem dit en las apostemas del cap, e extratz aquela petit a petit.	Therefore in one where you see a good disposition in the touch, of which the color that is apparent approaches the color of the skin, and it is swollen to all parts, and is not annexed to the nerves of the neck, or to the veins, or to the arteries, and is not deep, you ought to cut into this with a superficial incision from above the body to below the line of 10 between the lines of GI and GB and scrape off all around it, and extend two lips of the skin with pincers or with small forceps if you have need of those, as we have said in the bumps on the head, and extract this little by little.
E es mays cautela que no sia inscidida la vena o nervi.	And it is more important that the vein or nerve not be cut.
E sia le spatum no mot agut, que no ajuste a tu la tua ma am inscizio, o que enquiete le malaute, e que inscidas aquo que no es necessari inscidir; quar si inscideysses vena o arceria e prohibeys tu de la tua operacio, lahoras pausa en la plagua vetriol trissat o autras polveras las quals ostan fluxs de sanc, e estrenh la plagua, e layssa aquel entro que·s repausa la acuitat de la apostema e sia mollificada la plagua e comense esser poyrida.	And the spatula must not be sharp, so that you do not touch with it or hurt the patient, and you ought to cut only what is necessary to cut, for if you cut a vein or artery and stop your operation, then put on the wound vitriol in powder or other powders that stop blood flow, close the wound, and leave there that which causes the acuity of the bump to cease and the wound to soften and begin to be suppurative.
Quan le sanc es abscindit.	When the blood is abstained.
Donc retorna a la tua operacio entro que l’aias complida.	Therefore return to your operation until you have finished it.
E aprop inquireys am le tieu dit indic si es romas alcuna causa de las autras petitas scrophulas, donc inscideys aquelas e munda aquelas.	And then inquire with your finger if there is any cause of the other small scrofula, therefore cut into those and clean them.
E si es en la razit de la scrophula gran vena, cove lahoras que no inscidas aquela scrophula de la sua razitz.	And if in the root of the large scrofula there is a vein, then you ought not to cut that scrofula from its root.
Abantz cove que lies aquela am fiel doblat fort e que leysses aquela entro que caia per si ses nocument.	And so that it falls by itself without harm, you ought to press this with a folded cloth and let it drop until it falls down of itself.
E aprop omple la plagua de coto vielh le qual tu has ja submirgit en enguent egipciac, e aprop cura aquel.	Then fill the wound with old wine in which you have already soaked Egyptian ointment and cure this.
E si inscides aquela scrophula tota, lahoras cove que tu ajustes las doas labias de la plagua e cuzas2 tantost pus que no y ha romasa deguna superfluitat.	And if you cut the scrofula entirely then you ought to press together the two lips of the wound and stop immediately any pus that has not run out.
Mays si tu vezes que haia romasa superfluitat per la grandeza de la scrofula, cove que tu entendas a inscidir la razit de aquela, e astrayra aquela e aministra sutura e aquo que es dit.	But if you see that there is pus running out due to the size of the scrofula then you ought to understand cutting into its root and opening it up and administering cauterization and what is said.
E aquela de las scrophulas que conteno humiditatz, perfora aquela am perforacio superficial aqui la on appar a tu le loc de maturacio de lu, e pausa perforacio de aquo que siec le pus bas del cos, ayssi cum havem dit.	And those of the scrofula which contain moisture, pierce this with a superficial incision where you see the site of maturation of it to be, and make an incision so that the pus runs out from the bottom of the body as we have said.
E aprop aministra perforacio, calguas am enguent e semblantz ad aquels, per so que corroda aquo que es romas de la corropcio.	And then administer an incision, apply a cautery and plasters to these that the suppuration is stopped.
E aprop quan tu vezes la plagua ja esser mundada, lahoras tu cura aquela am enguent de carn generatiu entro que sia sanada.	And then when you see the wound already cleaned, cure this with ointment of generative flesh until it is healed.
Capitol .xliii.	Chapter 43.
De seccio del pilhot del apostema accident dintz le guolayro.	Of the cutting of the pus of bumps in the gullet.
Diyssero les antics aquesta seccio en le epilhot, e no vist alcu hom en nostra terra que aquela aia fayta.	The ancients wrote about this incision in the pilhot and I have not seen any person in our land who has had it done.
E aquesta es la inscriptura del sermo de aquels.	And this is the inscription of their language.
Mays en les homes haventz esquinencia, cove que sia esquivada la extraccio del epilhot, cum per aquo no sia fayt juvament per so quar totas las venas e las majors del malaute so aqui.	But in men who have a constriction, if the extraction of the pilhot is avoided for fear that all the veins and the major nerves of the patient are there.
Mays en aquels que han apostemas cautz en la boca o guolayro o dos aurelhas, quan la malautia no es en la cana, cove husar de la seccio de epilhot a fugir la perdicio la qual es fayta per perfocacio.	But in those who have bumps cauterized in the mouth or gullet or two ears, when the patient is not in the throat, then it is useful to do the incision of the pilhot to avoid the harm that happens by piercing.
Donc cove quan volem aquo, que inscidam le epilhot dejos tres cercles dels cercles del epilhot, o quatre am petita seccio per la latitut en aquel que es entre dos cercles per quantitat, que la seccio sia en ciphac, no en la cartillage, e aquest loc es convenent a seccio, quar es privat de carn e les vayselhs de sanc de lu son luhen.	Therefore when we want this then let us cut the pilhot below three circles of the circles of the pilhot or four with small incision for the breadth in that which is between two circles for quantity, and the incision should be in pharynx not in the cartilage and that place is convenient to incision because it is deprived of flesh and the vessels of blood are there.
E si le metge es pauruc, cove lahoras que extenda la codena del golayro am onci, e aprop fenda la codena entro que pervengua a la canal, mays evite les vaysels de sanc si vetz de aquelas alcuna causa.	And if the doctor is fearful then let him extend the skin of the gullet with pincers and then split the skin so that it reaches the canal but avoid the vessels of blood if you see any cause for that.
E aprop inscida li ciplach segon que havem recomtat; e es significat sobre la seccio de la canal per le flacma le qual es de aquela eyssit am aquo que es de lu disromput e per la abscizio de la votz.	And then cut the larynx according to what we have described, and it is indicated about the incision of the canal by the flame which is of that which has exited from that which is of him broken apart and by the piercing of the voice.
E layssa la plagua uberta per alcun temps.	And let the wound remain open for some time.
Donc cum la hora es remauguda en la qual perforacio es temuda, agregua doas labias de la codena de la plagua, e cus aquela sola ses la cartillage.	Therefore when the time is healed in which the piercing is feared, draw together two lips of the skin of the wound and split only that which is the cartilage.
E aprop administra medicinas que fan naysser la carn entro que sia sanat.	And then administer medicines which make flesh grow so that it may be healed.
E diyssec Albucasis que la summa del sermo le qual havem recomtat, exposicio no es sino que veias que alcus de aquetz apostemas ja han opilat lo guolayro del malaute, e le malaute es vengut entro a mort, e le ale de lu es entresecat, e alcus van a inscidir le epiglos per so que respire le malaute sobre le loc de la plagua per alcuna respiracio, e sia salvat de mort.	And Abucasis said that the sum of their language, the exposure is only that some of these bumps have been cauterized in the gullet of the patient and the patient has come to death and his throat is cut through and some go to cut the epiglottis so that the patient can breathe through the site of the wound by any breathing and he is saved from death.
E per aquo comandero layssar la plagua uberta entro que sia consumida la malicia de la malautia; e es la malicia de lu per tres dias; e donc lahoras comandero cosi la plagua, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	And for that they commanded to leave the wound open until the malice of the illness is consumed and the malice of it is for three days then afterwards he commanded to close the wound and cure this so that it may be healed.
E aquo que yeu he vist per mi meteys, es que una sirventa pres un cotel e mesec le en le sieu golayro e inscidic am aquel una partida de la cana del pulmo, e yeu fu apelat a la curacio de lu, e atrobegui la mugen ayssi cum es mugit del moridos, e descubrigui la plagua e atrobegui le sanc le qual era yssit de la plagua petit.	And that which I have seen by my doctors is that it serves for a woman to press one breast and moisten it in the gullet of the patient and cut into there one part of the canal of the lung, and he was called to the cure of him and discovered the wound and found the blood which had run out from the wound.
Donc yeu fo confessat que aquela no havia inscidit vena ni guidegi, e le vent yssia de la plagua, e curegui aquela entro que foc sanada.	Therefore he confessed that this had not cut vein nor artery and the wound bled out from it and he cured this so that the fire was healed.
E no accidic a la sirventa si no rauquiera en la votz, e aprop alcus dias retornec ad miloracio de las suas dispozicios.	And did not consent to the servant unless she had applied in the voice and then after some days he returned to the examination of his dispositions.
E ara dic yeu que en la seccio del epilhot no ha temor.	And now I say that in the incision of the pilhot there is no fear.
Capitol .xliv.	Chapter 44.
De seccio sobre apostema le qual accideys en le golayro defora, e es apelat hernia del golayro.	Of the cutting on bumps which happen in the gullet outward and is called hernia of the gullet.
Aquest apostema nompnat hernia del golayro es apostema gran segon la color del cors, e es mot en las femnas.	This hernia of the gullet is a great hernia according to the color of the body and it happens in women.
E es segon dos manieyras, quar o es natural o accidental.	And it is according to two manners because either it is natural or accidental.
E en le natural no es engen de curar.	And the natural one is not difficult to cure.
E l’accidental es segon dos manieyras del qual la un es semblant a nodes grasses, e l’autra manieyra es semblant apostema le qual es fayt per nodacio de arteria, e en aquel es temor.	And the accidental is according to two manners of which one is like nodal bumps and the other manner is like a hernia which is caused by piercing of an artery and in that one there is fear.
E no cove que·s fassa presumpcio a lu cum ferr sino en aquel que es petit.	And do not let anyone touch him with an iron except for a small one.
E tu proha aquel e investigua aquel am le dit, e si atrobas lu semblant a nodi gras, e no es suspendut am alcuna de las venas, lahoras tu inscideys aquel ayssi cum les nodes, e extratz aquel am aquo que conte lu de la pel e bursiclam; e sino, lahoras es perscrutat tot le sieu esser, e aprop cura le loc am aquo que cove de curacio entro que sia sanat.	And you investigate him and if you find anything like a nodule of fat that is not suspended by any vein then you cut into it with something that contains the fat and pus; and if not then examine all of his body, and treat the area with something for healing until he is cured.
Capitol .xlv.	De le podrague e de los podraguers.
De seccio de las specias de nodes.	Of the gout and gouty nodes.
Dels nodes so motas specias e yeu ja he dit totas las specias de lor en la divisio.	There are many types of nodes, and I have already described them all in the division above.
E cove que yeu recomte assi la diferencia entre node e exitura cum fassa dubitacio.	And whoever wishes to know the difference between a node and an ulcer, let him ponder this.
Donc yeu dic que am exitura es caliditat e febre e dolors vehementz entro que es sedada la ebullicio de la superfluitat; e es complida putrefaccio que lahora cessa la febre, la dolor e la calor.	And I say that with an ulcer there is heat and fever and violent pains until the ebullition of the superfluous matter is stopped; and there is a completed putrefaction when the fever, pain and heat cease.
Mays am node no es caliditat ni febre ni dolor, e conte aquel ciphac leon le qual es al u sac propri.	But if there are pains and heat without it being necessary to call it gout then it should be cauterized in order to be cured.
E es segon la color del cors, e le comensament de lu es cum un ceze e es fayt ayssi cum vace, sia major o minor, e son segon dos specias, quar o so grassas e conteno humiditat, e las colors de la humiditat son motas, segon que yeu diyssi en la divisio.	And it is according to the color of the body and the origin of it is like a cyst and it happens in this way with a vacuole, whether it is greater or smaller, and they are according to two species, either fatty or containing humidity, and the colors of the humidity are many, as I described in the division.
Donc cove, quan pervenas a la curacio de node, que exprohes aquel e inquiras aquel al comensament am sturment le qual es apelat intromes, segon que vindra la sua forma en le capitol le qual es aprop aquest.	And whoever, when he comes to the cure of a nodule, cuts it and probes it at the beginning with an instrument called an intromens, according to its form which will come in the chapter which is next.
E es manieyra de inquisicio de apostemas e de totz nodes, e es que tu prenguas aquest sturment e entromet aquel en le loc pus humit le qual atrobas en le apostema, e tu revolveras les tieus ditz am aquel petit a petit entro que sapias que·l sturment ja ha penetrat la codena.	And it is the way of examining pustules and all nodes, and it is that you take this instrument and put it into the moist place which you find in the pustule, and turn your fingers with it little by little until you know that the instrument has penetrated the membrane.
E aprop ultima la tua ma segon la mesura de la grandeza del apostema, e aprop extratz le entromes e considera aquo que es yssit en le vestigi de lu.	And then close your hand according to the size of the pustule and take out the instrument and consider what has come out through its orifice.
E si es fora-getada la humiditat corrent, de qualque color sia, lahoras tu le inscideys am seccio superficial segon que he dit en les autres apostemas.	And if the humidity has drained away of whatever color it is then you cut into it superficially as I have said in other pustules.
E si del vestigi de l’intromes no hieys humiditat, lahoras sapias que es gras.	And if there is no humidity coming out through the orifice of the instrument then you know it is fatty.
E secca sobre lu am seccio havent forma de crotz segon aquesta forma:	And dry over it by cutting into it in the form of a cross according to this form:
ayssi cum t’e ensenhat, e suspen aquel am oncis, e excorja la codena de tota part am facilitat, e guarda la pel o sac, si podes, sobre aquel e extraguas aquela sania am le node.	And you cut into it as I have taught you and suspend it by pins and excise the membrane from all sides with ease and keep the skin or sac over it and draw out that pus with the nodule.
Mays si es romput en la operacio, no es possible extrayre aquela sana, e motas veguadas endeve aquo, e lahoras tu la extratz a pessas entro que de lu no romangua denguna causa.	But if it is broken in the operation and it is not possible to draw out that pus then you take it away by pieces so that nothing remains within it that could cause its rupture again.
Quar si de lu roman denguna causa, pauc o trop, le node retorne segon le mays.	For if something remains within it then the nodule will return according to the more or less.
E si tu vezes que de lu roman alcuna part petita, lahoras comple la plagua de alcunas polveras corrosivas agudas e strenh la plagua, e pausa sobre aquela que sede apostema caut, e cura aquel del autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	And if you see that a small part remains within it then complete the poultice with some sharp and corrosive powders and strengthen the poultice and put it over where the pustule is cauterized and cure it with another cure until it is healed.
E si es node gran, lahoras tu cus las doas labias de lu e cura aquel am aquo que encarna.	And if it is a large nodule then you split its two lips and cure it with that which it incarnates.
Mays si vena pulsatil es a lu contraria, o no-pulsatil, lahoras tu coyta e huemple le loc de zegi trissat que es vetriol e leyssa aquel streyt per dos dias o per tres entro que·s poyresca la plagua e que repause la ebullicio del sanc; e aprop retorna a inscindir aquo que es romas del node.	But if there is no pulse or a weak pulse then you cut and fill the place with ground vitriol which is powdered and let it rest for two days or three until the poultice hardens, and then return to cutting what has broken of the nodule.
Capitol .xlvi.	De le podrague e de los podraguers.
De las formas del sturmentz necessaris en seccio e perforacio.	Of the gout and of the gouty nodes. Of the forms of the instruments necessary for cutting and piercing.
De aquels so las formas dels intromesas, e so de tres specias, que de aquels es alcu gran, e de lor es migier, e de lor es petit.	And it is not necessary for anyone to touch him with an iron except for a small one. And there are three species of them, some of which are great and some medium and some small.
La forma de intromes gran es aquesta:	The form of the large intromens is this:
La forma de intromes migier es aquesta:	The form of the medium intromens is this:
La forma de intromes petit es aquesta:	The form of the small intromens is this:
Sian faytz de ferr, de alfulud, de extremitatz cayradas decentment, per so que festino le intrament en les apostemas.	And let them be made of iron, of alfuld, of extreme tips cut decently, so that they are sharp for use in pustules.
E aquestas so las formas dels experientz, e son nompnatz albered, e un de aquels es apelat berid.	And these are the forms of the experiments and one of them is called albered and another berid.
E so de tres especias, quar de lor es gran, migier e pauc.	And they are of three species, some of which are great, medium and small.
La forma de experient gran, forma de lu:	It is a great experiment, and it happens to him:
La forma de experient migier, forma de lu:	It is a great experiment, and it happens to him:
La forma de experient pauc, forma de lu:	It is a small experiment, and it happens to him:
Conveneysso que sian per aquels apostemas e exituras e fistulas e bubos per so que entre aquelas so dels osses e de autras causas.	These are caused by apoplexy, effusions, fistulas, and tumors, among other causes, and they occur between the bones and from other causes as well.
E so faytz redontz, grosses, leons, ayssi cum grans agulhas am las quals son cosidas las selhas, e son faytas de eram citri, o de eram o de ferr, o de argent, E las milhors so quan so faytas de eram citri.	And they make round, large, and pointed ones, with great needles with which the membranes are sewn, and they are made of copper, or of iron, or of silver, and the best ones are when they are made of copper.
E son faytz les experient de plum negre, les quals se acordan que per aquels sian ubertas las fistulas en la conquavitat de las quals so reflexios, que sian reflectidas am la sua levitat am aquelas refleccios.	And they make the experiment with black feathers, which are used to open up the fistulas in the cavity where they are reflected, that they may be reflected by their lightness with those reflections.
E so de tres specias, quar alcus de lor so loncs, e dels autres migiers, e dels autres breus, segon la quantitat del ample de la fistula e de la strictura de lu.	And they are of three types: some are long, others are small, and others are short, according to the amount of the width of the fistula and its constriction.
Forma del experient gran de plom:	The form of the great experiment with lead:
Forma del experient migier de plom:	The form of the small experiment with lead:
Forma del experient petit de plom:	The form of the small experiment with lead:
Las formas dels oncis so de motas specias, quar de aquels so alcus simples, als quals es una curvitat solament, e so de tres specias: grans, paucs e migiers.	The forms of the hunchbacks are of many types, for some are simple, having only one curve, and they are of three types: large, small, and medium.
E de lor so uncis orps, e so de tres specias.	And their bodies are curved, and they are of three types.
E de aquels so uncis haventz doas curvaturas, e so de tres specias.	And some are curved with two curvatures, and they are of three types.
E de lor so haventz tres curvaturas, e so de tres specias.	And some have three curvatures, and they are of three types.
E totz aquetz so necessaris en lor loc.	And all of these are necessary in their place.
Forma de unci simple gran, forma de lu:	The form of a simple hunchback, large, is:
Forma de unci simple migier:	The form of a simple hunchback, small, is:
Forma de unci simple pauc, forma de lu:	The form of a simple hunchback, small, is:
Forma de unci orp gran:	The form of a curved body, large, is:
Forma de unci orp migier, forma de lu:	The form of a curved body, medium, is:
Forma de unci orp pauc, forma de lu:	The form of a curved body, small, is:
Forma de unci gran havent dos curvaturas:	The form of a large hunchback with two curvatures is:
Forma de unci migier havent dos curvatas:	The form of a medium hunchback with two curvatures is:
Forma de unci pauc havent dos curvaturas:	The form of a small hunchback with two curvatures is:
Forma de unci gran havent tres curvaturas:	The form of a large hunchback with three curvatures is:
Forma de unci migier havent tres curvaturas:	The form of a medium hunchback with three curvatures is:
Forma de unci pauc havent tres curvaturas:	The form of a small hunchback with three curvatures is:
E aquestas so las formas dels scalpels am les quals son seccatz e scorjatz les nodes e le apostemas, e so de tres specias, quar de aquels es gran, migier, e pauc.	And these are the forms of the scalpel with which they are dried and cut, the nodes and the apoplexy, and they are of three types: large, medium, and small.
Forma de scapel gran:	The form of a large scalpel is:
Forma del scapel migier:	The form of a medium scalpel is:
Forma de scapel pauc:	The form of a small scalpel is:
Las extramitatz de aquels am les quals es fayta seccio so agudas e las autres extramitatz so no-agudas, e no so pausadas en tal manieyra, sino per que sia fayt juvament en la excorjacio dels nodes la temor de inscizio de vena o de nervi, e per aquels sia sanat le malaute e atrobe tranquilitat un petit per la adustio la qual atroba deves la excoriacio del apostema.	The ends of those with which the incision is made are sharp, and the other ends are not sharp, but it is done gently in the excising of the nodes to avoid the fear of cutting a vein or nerve, and for that one should cure the patient and return tranquility a little by the burning of which the excoriation of the apoplexy.
E aquestas son las formas de almagidas, e so de tres specias: gran, migier e pauc, ayssi cum veyras.	And these are the forms of poultices, and they are of three types: large, medium, and small, with verities.
La forma de magda gran:	The form of a large poultice is:
Forma de magda migier:	The form of a medium poultice is:
Forma de magda pauc:	The form of a small poultice is:
Sian faytas de eram e so semblantz de ray am le qual e fayt alcofol.	They are made of wax and they are similar to a needle with which it is made alcohol.
E es en la extramitat lada punctada am spatum occultada e en aquela corr a las partidas dedintz e defora, quan tu vols, ayssi cum veses.	And its end is pointed with a hollow point and in the other it is pointed to the sides, inside and out, whenever you want, also as needed.
Las formas de spatimis, les quals so amaguatz entre los ditz deves la perforacio dels apostemas e no les percebo les malautes, e so de tres specias: gran, migier e pauc.	The forms of the spatulas, which are hidden between the fingers due to the puncturing of the apoplexy and do not perceive the patients, and they are of three types: large, medium, and small.
E aquestas so las formas de aquels:	And these are the forms of those:
Las formas de ventozas am las quals es abscindit le flux del sanc, e so de tres specias; gran, migiera e pauca; las formas de lu:	The forms of syringes with which the flow of blood is stopped, and they are of three types: large, medium, and small; their forms are:
Sian faytas de eram citri, redondas am alcuna longitut , e sian subtils.	They are made of citron wax, round with no length, and are thin.
E cove que sian aquestas specias de ventosas deves tu grans, migieras e paucas, per so que per aquelas abscindas flux de sanc am velocitat en necessitat, e lahoras quan a tu primieyrament no es medicina.	And so that these types of syringes may be great, medium, and small, so that through them you may stop the flow of blood with swiftness in necessity, and also when at first there is no medicine.
Enpero no uses de aquelas ad abscidir sanc en tot loc del cors, e non uses sino en locs carnoses, ayssi cum en les lacertis de las cambas e de las coyssas, e en les lacertz dels brasses, e de las mamillas e del ventre e dels engonars, e semblantz a lor dels lacertz carnoses humitz.	However, do not use them to stop blood in any part of the body, and do not use them except in fleshy parts, just like the joints of the limbs, and of the hips, and of the elbows, and of the breasts and of the abdomen and armpits, and similar to the fleshy joints.
E alcunas veguadas son faytz de aquels strumentz autres petitz semblantz scorsas de fisacs segon aquesta forma; per les quals lo sanc es abscindit quan es fayt per fleubotomia, o deves inscizio de vena o de arceria.	And some are made of those instruments also small, similar to the scours of phlegmon, through which blood is stopped when it is done by phlebotomy, or because of an incision of a vein or artery.
E alcunas veguadas son faytas redondas segon aquesta forma:	And some are made round like this:
Capitol .xlvii.	Chapter 47.
De la cura de las mamillas dels homes las quals so asembladas de femnas.	Of the cure of the breasts of men which are resembling those of women.
Alcunas veguadas so infladas las mamillas de alcus homes deves le compliment del dormir cum comensan esser pellutz, e aprop so infladas las mamillas, e so asembladas las mamillas de las femnas, e romano apostemosas, lejas.	Some men's breasts are inflated because of the accompaniment of sleep as they begin to be covered in skin, and also the breasts are inflated, and they resemble women's breasts, and Roman apoplexy, leeches.
E ad aquel que avoreys aquo, cove que inscidisca aquelas am seccio lunar segon aquesta forma, de la linha de .B. entro a la linha de .G., e aprop excorja la groceza tota, e aprop uempla la plagua de medicament encarnatiu, e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am cosidura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And to that which you pour it in, see that you incise those with lunar section according to this form, from the line of B. into the line of G., and then excise the thickness entirely, and then fill the wound with medicated ointment, and then stitch together the two lips of the wound, and cure what is inside that is healed.
Mays si la mamilla declina a las partidas dejos e es mollificada per la sua magnitut ayssi cum endeve a las femnas, lahoras sia fendut en dos latz sieus pus sobiras, am dos seccios semblantz a figura lunar, de las quals quascuna sia contenguda en l’autra deves la fi de quascuna, entro que sia que la linha major contengua la menor segon aquesta forma de la linha de .B. e la linha de .G. E aprop excorja la codena la qual es entre dos labias de la plagua, e osta la pingueza, e aministra aquo que havem dit de la sutura e de las polveras aquo que es necessari en la curacio entro que sia sanat.	But if the breast declines to the sides and is softened by its weight also like women's breasts, then cut it in two edges down, with two sections resembling a lunar figure, of which each one is contained in the other according to the end of the major line into the minor line according to this form from the line of B. into the line of G. And then excise the codicil which is between the two lips of the wound, and remove the pus, and administer what we have said about the suture and the powders that are necessary in the cure until it is healed.
E si tu non conpleysses la inscizio de aquo que cove inscidir per la inquietut del malaute, e per flux de sanc, lahoras cove que huemplas la plagua de coto submergit en enguent corrosiu e layssa aquel entro que aquo corroda que es romas de la grayssa, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if you do not complete the incision of that which see to be incised by the inquietude of the patient, and by the flow of blood, then see that you fill the wound with a cut piece of wood submerged in corrosive ointment, and let it lie there until it is healed.
Capitol .xlviii.	Chapter 48.
De perforacio de apostemas que veno dejos le titillic.	Of the puncturing of apoplexy that comes from below, the twitching.
Aquetz apostemas que veno dejos le titillic so de las specias de scrophulas, durs, las quals conte una pel que es sac.	Apoplexy that comes from below, the twitching is of the species of scrophulas, tough, which contain a membrane that is dry.
E de aquelas so alcunas que conteno humiditatz; e aquelas que conteno humiditatz cove que sian inscididas am seccio lunar segon aquesta figura: de la linha de .G. a la linha de .B. E cum es tot evacuat aquo que es en le apostema de la sania, lahoras tu le comple de coto viel e leysa le entro al autra dia.	And of those some contain moisture; and of those which contain moisture see that they are incised with lunar section according to this figure: from the line of G. into the line of B. And when it is all evacuated what is in the apoplexy of the phlegm, then you fill it with a cut piece of wood, and let it lie there during the day.
E aprop le coto sia ostat e sia curat am enguent convenient ad aquo, entro que sia sanat.	And then the cut is dried up and healed with appropriate ointment, until it is healed.
E si le apostema de las specias dels nodes es, e de las scrophulas, lahoras tu scindeys sobre aquel ayssi cum havem dit en la seccio sobre las scrophulas engualment.	And if the apoplexy of the species of the joints and of the scrophulas is, then you cut above that just as we have said in the section about the scrophulas engualment.
May si la plagua es extenduda en aysso que yesca poyredura, lahoras administra en lu cauteri segon que en aquo havem denant dit.	If the wound is extended so that it causes bleeding, then administer cautery to him as we have already said before.
Capitol .xlix.	Chapter 49.
De seccio de apostemas que accideysso per arceria o per vena.	On the cutting of abscesses that happen through an artery or a vein.
Quan arceria es rompuda, e la codena es consolidada la qual es sobre aquela, lahoras motas veguadas accideys apostema E les senhals per les quals es conoguda que imflamacio e apostema sian per la arteria o per vena: quar quan apostema es per arceria es lonc agreguat en le preon del cors; e que quan inpelleysses le apostema am les tieus ditz, sentes en lu quays sia stridor.	And the signs by which you can tell that inflammation and abscess are caused by an artery or vein: and when an abscess is caused by an artery it occurs deep inside the body; and when you press on the abscess, if you feel a pulse in it, this indicates a stridor.
E aquel que es per vena es redon al manifest del cors.	And that which is caused by a vein is round at the surface of the body.
E seccio sobre aquest apostema es error, e majorment en aquel que es dejos las aysselhas, e en les angonars, e en le col, e en motz locs del cors; e es mot gran, donc cove que la sua curacio am ferr sia esquivada, e aquel que es en las extramitatz, o al cap, cove que sia evitat.	And cutting into this abscess is dangerous, especially in those that are beneath the armpits, and in the angles, and on the neck, and in many other parts of the body; and it is very great, so it should be avoided.
Mays sobre aquel que es de lor per imflacio de l’orrifici de la arceria, scindeys en la codena seccio en le lonc; e aprop huebre la seccio am uncis e aprop la arceria, e deliura de las tunicas entro que sia descuberta.	But if they are caused by inflammation of the opening of an artery, cut into the artery in the long axis; and once you have opened the artery with pincers, and have uncovered the tunics inside,
E aprop met sobre aquel agulha e fay aquela penetrar entro al autre latz, e estrenh la arceria am fiel doble en dos locs, — la qual causa yeu a tu eyssenhegui en extraccio de doas arcerias les quals so en les templars.	And then put an awl into it and force it to penetrate to the other side, and constrict the artery with a double thread in two places — which will cause you to tie it off in extraction of two arteries which are in the temples.
E aprop punh le loc le qual es entre dos liamentz am spatum entro que yesca le sanc tot que es en lu, e sia dissolvut le apostema.	And then plug up the place between the two ligaments with sputum so that all the blood in it is dried up and the abscess is dissolved.
E aprop administra curacio en la qual es engendrat poyre entro que caian les liamentz; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz convenientz ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	And then administer treatment so that pus is produced inside it until the ligaments fall away, and then cure that with a suitable ointment until it is healed.
E si es apostema per seccio de vena, lahoras cove que tu tenguas am la tua ma aquo que es a tu possible del apostema am la codena, e aprop intromet la agulha dejos le loc le qual tu has tengut dejos la tua ma, e fay aquela penetrar; e sia en aquela fil doble entro que tu extraguas aquel del autre latz, e aprop ligua le apostema am bo liament segon que yeu he dit a tu en le liament de uva4 de doas partz am doas extremitatz del fil.	And if it is an abscess caused by cutting of a vein, then you must hold what is above the abscess with your hand as firmly as you can, and then thrust in the awl underneath that place which you are holding with your hand, and force it to penetrate; and let there be a double thread in it so that you extract it from the other side, and then tie off the abscess with a good ligament according to what I have told you before about the ligament of the grape in two parts with two ends of the thread.
Mays si temes que extraguam le fil, lahoras entromet le fiel am aquela agula dejos tot le apostema deves la inscizio de la agulha primieyra, e strenh les tieus fiels en quatre locs.	But if you fear that the thread will be extracted, then put in the awl underneath the whole abscess behind the first incision of the awl and constrict your double threads in four places.
Aprop secca le apostema en le mieg loc de lu entro que quan es yssit aquo que es en lu, lahoras tu inscideys la superfluitat de la codena, e layssa aquo que de lu es liat.	Then dry up the abscess in its middle place so that when it has drained out what is inside it, you insert your instrument into the superfluity of the artery and leave behind what is tied to it.
E aprop pausa sobre lu pulvil le qual has submergit en vi e oli, e aprop administra la curacio la qual es fayta am calguas e enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And then place on it a powder which you have submerged in wine and oil, and then administer the treatment which is made with leeches and ointments until it is healed.
Capitol l del apostema le qual accideys per torcio de nervis.	Chapter 50: Of the abscess which happens from the twisting of nerves.
Ayssi cum accideys apostema en arceria e en vena, e semblantment accideys apostema en les nervis quan accideys en lor percussio o accideys per trebal superfluable, e per semblantz.	Just as abscesses can happen in arteries and veins, so also can they happen in nerves when they happen from a blow or happen because of some other similar thing.
E es fayt le mays de lu en les locs dels adjutoris o del talo, o en tot loc en le qual so maugudas las juncturas.	And it is most often done in the places of the auxiliaries or of the talus, or in any place where there are joints in the body.
E es apostema greu, e es asemblat a la color del autre cors, e es en las majors de lu disposicios ses de lor e quan es streyt am vehementia, sent en lu le malaute semblant stupor.	And it is a grave abscess and is the same colour as the rest of the body, and there are many veins in it, and when it is constricted with violence, the patient feels a stupor throughout his body.
E no es apostema agreguat en le preon del cors, e per so es dejos la codena, e el es maugut a tota partida e no va a las partidas denant ni detras.	And it is not an abscess located in the cavity of the body, and therefore it is beneath the artery, and it is beaten at all parts and does not go to the parts in front or behind.
Donc aquo de aquels que es en las juncturas no cove que sia envasit am ferr, quar fort leu endevenguera contracio.	So it is not necessary for those which are in the joints to be cauterized with iron, because they will quickly develop a contraction.
Mays aquel que es en le cap o en le front fen la codena am spatum.	But that which is on the head or forehead, open the artery with sputum.
Mays si es apostema pauc, lahoras te aquel am les forfecs e abscindeys aquel de razitz.	But if it is a small abscess, then cut it out with forceps and cut off its roots.
E si es gran, lahoras tu le suspen am unci, e excorja aquel, e aprop osta aquel; e ajusta la plagua am sutura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	But if it is large, then suspend it with a hook and cut it out, and then put a patch over it; and stitch together the wound, and cure that until it is healed.
Capitol .li.	Chapter 51.
De seccio de apostema le qual accideys de cheil que accideys al ventre.	On the cutting of an abscess which happens in the jaw which happens in the belly.
Endeveno ad alcus homes motas veguadas en les ventres de aquels e en las autras partidas del cors de aquels theils les quals son apelatz funguals per similitut de aquels am funges, dels quals la razitz es subtil e·l cap de aquel es gros; e ja las labias de aquels so conversas, e es de aquels que es petit, e es de aquels que es mot magnificat.	Many people experience in their bellies and in other parts of their bodies a certain kind of abscesses which are called by a likeness to mushrooms because their roots are thin but the top is large; and they have twisted lips, and they are either small or very large.
E yeu ja e vist un, e en le ventre de lu eran dos theils les quals eran mays a funges semblantz, e no era diferencia entre aquels blancs, de menuda razitz.	And I myself have seen one, and in his belly were two which were like mushroom-like, and there was no difference between them white, of very thin roots.
E ja las labias de aquels eran enversadas e se fendian, e humiditat corria de aquel tot temps.	And the lips of these were turned inside out and torn, and moisture ran from it all the time.
Donc yeu inscidegui aquels e atrobegui en la un en pes quays xviii unc. e l’autre quays vi unc.	So I cut into them and found in one of them stones weighing 15 ounces. And the other 6 ounces.
E la operacio en la inscizio de lor es que consideres lahoras si·l malaute es humit, e la color de atheil es blanca, humit, de subtil razitz; lahoras tu le inscideys am spatum lat, e sian en la presencia tua cauteris en le foc, quar motas veguadas deves la seccio de lu es expellit mot sanc; e si te ventz le sanc, cauteriza aquel.	And the operation at the incision of these is that you should consider whether the patient is moist, and if the colour of the wound is white, moist, of thin roots, then you cut into it with sputum lengthwise, and they will be cauterized in the fire, because many times blood is expelled from the incision; and if you see blood, cauterize that.
E si vezes le malaute pauruc e temeros, guarda te de inscizio am ferr; mays lahoras pren fiel de plom recent fayt, e strenh am aquel atheil, la manieyra del qual es aquela que havem dita; e leyssa aquel per dos dias.	And if the patient is timid and fearful, be careful not to cut into him with iron; but take some new lead wire and constrict that wound, in the manner which we have said before; and leave it for two days.
E aprop ajusta en la strictura del fil de plom; donc, no cesses strenher le plom granre devetz en theil, entro que sia abscindit e cayha per se ses trebalh.	And then tighten the lead wire in the constriction; so do not cease to constrict it with the large lead, until it is cut off and falls away by itself.
Mays si theil es de grossa razitz, lahoras en la inscizio de lu es alcuna causa de temor e de paor, e majorment en aquel que es en le ventre.	But if the wound is of thick roots, then in its incision there is some cause for fear and horror, especially in that which is in the belly.
Mays possibla es que tu inscindas la maytat de lu , e aprop cauteriza aquel per que no retorne.	But it is possible that you cut out the matrix of it, and then cauterize that so that it does not return.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanada la plagua.	And then cure that until the wound is healed.
E guarda te que tu no presumas inscidir theil le qual es de fusca color, de pauc sentiment, de leg reguardament, quar aquel es absi cancros.	And be careful not to assume that you will cut out a wound which is of dusky colour, of little feeling, of regular guard, because that is an abscess.
E yeu vindre am rememoracio de cranc aprop aysso.	And I came by memory to the skull.
Capitol .lii.	Chapter 52.
De curacio de eminencia del umbilic.	On the treatment of an abscess in the navel.
Eminencia del umbilic es fayta per motas causas; o per fissuras del ciphac le qual es sobre le ventre, e yeys de lu la tela o budel segon que endeve en las autras rupturas; o per sanc le qual flueys de vena o de arceria segon que es denant dit, o per ventositat coarctada en lu.	Abscess in the navel is caused by many causes; or by fissures of the diaphragm which is above the belly, and from it the membrane or bowels slip inside according to other ruptures; or by blood which flows from a vein or artery as has been said before, or by constriction of the intestines.
Mays si es per fissura del ciphac e per yssiment de la tela, lahoras la color del apostema es semblant a la color del cors; e es leon ses dolor, e aprop appar de divers situament.	But if it is from a fissure of the diaphragm and a slip of the membrane, then the colour of the abscess is like that of the body; and there is little pain in it, and it appears in various places.
E si es per egressio del budel, lahoras le situament de aquel am lu de aquo que havem recontat, de mays vehement diversitat, e cum tu premes aquel am les tieus ditz es occultat, e aprop retorna; e fort leu es am lu so, e es magnificat mot deves le introt de banh e vehement trebalh.	And if it is from a rupture of the bowels, then its location according to what we have said before, with more violent diversity, and when you press that with your fingers, it is concealed, and then returns; and it is very large inside, and is magnified by the taking in of food and violent labour.
Mays si per humiditat, lahoras es leon e no es occultat quan premes am la tua ma, ni es constrengut, ni es cregut.	But if it is from moisture, then it is easy to feel and is not concealed when you press with your hand, nor constricted, nor cut.
E si es per sanc, lahoras am aquestz senhals apareys le apostema a negror declinant.	And if it is due to blood, then with these signs the abscess will decline towards blackness.
Mays si es per carn nada, lahoras es apostema greu, gros e dur, e es ficat segon una quantitat.	But if it is due to flesh, then the abscess is heavy, large and hard, and it is located according to a certain amount.
Mays si es per ventositat, lahoras le tocament de lu es leon.	But if it is due to windiness, then its touch is leonine.
E la operacio en lu es que consideras lahoras si la eminencia de l’umbilic es per sanc de arceria, o de vena, o per ventositat; lahoras cove que sias prohibit de la curacio de lu, quar en aquela es temor e paor ayssi cum t’e ensenhat en le capitol en le qual he dit les apostemas per arceria e per vena.	And the operation on it is that you consider whether the prominence of the navel is due to arterial blood, or venous blood, or windiness; then you must abstain from the cure of it, for in that there is fear and dread as I instructed in the chapter where I discussed abscesses from arteries and veins.
E si la eminencia del umbilic es per le budel o per la tela, lahoras cove que comandes al malaute que tengua le ale sieu, e sia stant extendut; e aprop senha am tenta en le circuit de tot le umbilic, e aprop comanda a lu que stia envers entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos, e aprop circunda am spatum lat en le circuit del umbilic sobre le loc le qual has senhat am la tenta; e aprop exten la maytat del apostema a las partidas desus am unci gran; e aprop lia en le circuit am fiel fort o am ceda e la manieyra del liar decent.	And if the prominence of the navel is due to the intestine or hernia, then you must command the patient to hold his breath and be standing extended; and then sign with your hand around the entire navel, and then command him to breathe in towards your palm on his chest, and then circle with your finger around the navel over the area which you have marked with your hand; and then extend the majority of the abscess upwards with a large needle; and then bind around the area with strong thread or twine, and the manner of binding decent.
E aprop huebre le mieg del apostema extendut sobre le liament e intromet le dit tieu en aquel indic e quereys le budel; e si tu l’as atrobat ni guardat per le liament, lahoras tu extratz alxorati e impelleys le budel a las partidas dedintz del ventre.	And then open the middle of the extended abscess over the ligament and insert your finger into that opening and seek out the intestine; and if you have caught it or retained it by the ligament, then you extract it and push the intestine back inside the belly.
E si has atrobada la tela, lahoras pren aquel am unci; e inscideys las superfluitatz de lu.	And if you have caught the hernia, then take that with a needle; and incise the excess of it.
Mays si es contraria a tu arceria o vena, lahoras circunda aquel mot, e aprop retorna a la tua operacio; e pren dos agulhas e met en aquelas dos fiels fortz e entromet dos agulhas en le circuit le qual has feyt entorn le apostema en manieyra de crotz, las quals fassas penetrar; e aprop strenh le apostema en quatre partidas sobre las agulhas.	But if it is contrary to your artery or vein, then surround that mark, and then return to your operation; and take two needles and put on them strong threads, and insert the two needles into the circuit which you have made around the abscess in a crosswise manner, so that they may penetrate; and then tighten the abscess in four places over the needles.
E si tu vols, osta las agulhas e leyssa le loc entro que poyresca la carn extenduda e caia per si; o inscideys aquel quan es subtiliat e se poyreys, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And if you want, remove the needles and allow the extended flesh to fall back in and heal by itself; or incise what is sottile and will heal, and then cure that with water which is good for wounds.
E si la eminencia del ombilic es de carn nada en lu o per humiditat, lahoras cove que tu conquaves le apostema ayssi cum havem dit e estraguas le sanc o la humiditat, la qual atrobas en lu, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove e que consolide le loc.	And if the prominence of the navel is due to flesh in it or humidity, then you must hollow out the abscess as we have said and extract the blood or humidity which you find in it, and then cure that with water which covers it and consolidates the area.
Capitol .liii.	Chapter 53:
De curacio de cranc.	On the cure of a hernia.
Ja havem dit, en la divisio, de specia de cranc e en qual manieyra es via a la curacio de lu am medicinas, e que es squivador en lu la curacio am ferr per so que no sia ulcerat; e havem dit cranc engendrat en la mayra e cautela de la curacio de lu.	We have already said, in the division, about the kind of hernia and in what way there is a path to its cure by medicines, and that it is different in it the cure by iron so that it not be ulcerated; and we have said about hernias engendered in the mother and caution in the cure of them.
E diyssero les antics que alcunas veguadas cranc es en loc on es possibla la eradicacio de lu, ayssi cum de cran le qual es en las mamillas o en la coyssa e a lor semblantz dels membres allocat a estrayre tot aquel, e majorment quan es comensant petit.	And the ancients said that in some cases hernias are in a place where their eradication is possible, as with those in the breasts or the groin and their similar parts assigned to be extracted from, especially when they begin small.
Mays quan es antiquat e es gra, no cove que te propries a lu, quar yeu non pogui sanar de aquel alcu ni no he vist autre, ni que sia pervengut ad aquo.	But when it is old and large, you must not approach it, for I have not seen that any such one has healed from it nor that one has come to that.
E la operacio en lu es quan es allocat ayssi cum havem dit, es que tu precedescas e laysses le malaute e purgues de colera negra alcunas veguadas, e aprop sagna aquel, si es atrobada replecio manifesta.	And the operation on it when it is allocated as we have said, is that you precede and let the patient and purge from black bile in some cases, and then bleed that one if a manifest fullness is found.
E aprop prepara le malaute am preparacio en le qual sia locat am operacio, e aprop prohiceys en le trauc uncis les quals cove ad aquel; e aprop concava de tota part am la codena sego bona perexcrutacio entro que no romangua alcuna causa de las razitz de lu.	And then prepare the patient with preparation in which he will be located for operation, and then prohibit in the wound hooked tools which go there; and then hollow out all parts with good cutting until no cause of the hernia remains.
E layssa correr le sanc, e no abscidas aquel leugierament, e exprem les locs, e abstergeys le sanc gros tot am la tua ma o am instrument am le qual es a tu possible dels instruments.	And let the blood flow, and do not cut that loosely, and squeeze out the places, and wipe away all the clotted blood with your hand or with an instrument by which it is possible for you from among instruments.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat de sanc gros inscizio de vena o de arceria, lahoras cauterisa aquela entro que·l flux del sanc sia cessat, e aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	But if it causes contrary from clotted blood flowing from a vein or artery, then cauterize that one until the flow of blood is ceased, and then cure that with the other cure until it is healed.
Capitol .liv.	Chapter 54:
De curacio de ydropici.	On the cure of hydropsy.
Nos ja havem recomtat, en la divisio, de las specias de ydropici de l’aygua, e les senhals de quascuna especia, de la curacio de lu am medicinas.	We have already recommended, in the division, about the kinds of hydropsy from water, and the signs of each kind, about the cure of it by medicines.
E aquela la qual es curada am ferr no es sino la specia de althitas sola, e no es aproximat am ferr a la specia de timpanistres ni a la especia de yposarcha, quar aquo es mortal.	And that one which is cured by iron is only the kind of solitus, and it is not approached by iron to the kind of tympany or to the kind of hiposarca, for that one is deadly.
E quan tu ja has medicat aquesta especia de ydropici timpanistre am medicinas e no comfereys la tua medicacio, lahoras considera, quar si al malaute ja es conseguida debelitat, o es am aquel autra malautia otra ydropici, ayssi cum si es en lu tos o cos de ventre e semblant ad aquels, lahoras guarda te que no le mediques am ferr, quar temor es sobre aquo.	And when you have treated this kind of hydropsy tympany with medicines and it does not respond to your medicine, then consider, for if the patient already has acquired debility, or is with another malady, another hydropsy, as if it is in him coughing or an ache in the belly and similar to those, then guard yourself that you do not treat him with iron, for fear is over that.
Mays si tu vezes le malaute de vertut exuberant, e am lu no es autra malautia sino ydropici tant solament, e no enfant ni vielh, lahoras la manieyra de la operacio de lu es que tu eleves le malaute entre las tuas mas, e le ministre aprop lu exprema le ventre de lu am la sua ma, enpellen la aygua a la partida dejos del pentenilh, e aprop pren spatum spinos segon aquesta forma:	But if you see the patient of healthy exuberance, and with him there is not another malady but hydropsy only, and not a child or old person, then the manner of the operation on him is that you elevate the patient between your palms, and then he will press his belly with his palm, pushing the water to the part below the navel, and then take spatha spiny according to this form:
sia de dos partz agudas lonc, de aguda extremitat ayssi cum spatum; mays empero sia en lu alcuna brevitat petit a petit, per so que en la operacio am aquel no passes entro al budel, e que ledas aquel.	It should have two acute parts long, with an acute extremity as spatha; but nevertheless it must be in him some shortness little by little, so that in the operation with it you do not pass into the intestine, and lead that one.
E aprop considera si la generacio de ydropici es de part dels budels, quar lahoras cove que tu am la seccio te alonhes del ombelic per la quantitat de tres ditz a las partidas dejos, en le dreyt de lu sobre le pentenilh.	And then consider if the generation of hydropsy is from parts of the intestines, for then you must with the section lengthen the navel to the amount of three fingers to the parts below, in the right of him over the navel.
Mays si la generacio de hydropici es per malautia del fietge, lahoras la tua seccio sia sinistra del ombilic per tres ditz.	But if the generation of hydropsy is from malady of the liver, then your section must be left of the navel by three fingers.
E si la generacio de lu es per la melsa, lahoras la tua seccio sia en le las dreyt.	And if the generation of it is from the spleen, then your section must be in the right.
E no cove que la tua seccio sia sobre le costat sobre le qual vol jaser le malaute per que no corron las superfluitatz ad aquel loc freul.	And do not let your section be over the side over which the patient wants to lie so that the excesses do not flow to that place.
E aprop perfora am le instrument tota la codena, e aprop entromet en aquela seccio, e eleva la tua ma am le spatum entre la codena e·l siphac, e tu excorja aquel; e si’ la quantitat de una ungla o enviro.	And then pierce with the instrument all of that one, and insert into that section, and elevate your palm with spatha between the navel and the diaphragm, and you squeeze that one; and if the amount of a fingernail or more.
E aprop perforo le ciphac entro que pervengua le spatum al loc vuoyt, e es loc de l’aygua.	And then pierce the diaphragm until the spatha reaches the desired place, and it is a location of water.
E aprop extratz aquel e entromet un instrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	And then extract that one and insert an instrument of which this is the form:
e es semblant a canula de argent subtil; es fayt de argent o de eram o de lato leon, al qual en la partida pus bassa de lu es un petit trauc, e en les costatz de lu so tres traucs: dos de una partida e un del autra partida; e fayta es la extremitat de lu insciza segon la manieyra de pluma, ayssi cum vezes:	and is similar to a cannula of subtle silver; it is made of silver or of ram or of lion horn, and in the low end of it there is a small opening, and on its sides are three openings: two from one end and one from the other end; and its end is split according to the manner of a feather, as follows:
E en la extramitat de lu pus sobirana es armilla, quar quan le instrument perve al aygua, lahoras aquela tantost deysen sobre le instrument, donc evacua de l’aygua en la ora miega quantitat, quar si tu evacuas de aquela mes que no cove en la hora, fort leu mor le malaute per resolucio del sieu spirit animal, o accideys a lu cincopi que es appropinquada la mort.	And in the superior end of it is a ring, for when the instrument reaches the water, then that one immediately comes off from the instrument, therefore it evacuates from the water in an immediate quantity, for if you evacuate from that one more than you should at once, strongly harm the patient by resolution of his animal spirit, or approach him to death.
Mays evacua de aquela segon la quantitat de la vertut de lu e segon que significan a tu las disposicios del malaute de la vertut del pols de lu e de la bontat de lu.	But evacuate from that one according to the quantity of his virtue and according to what signify to you the dispositions of the patient's pulse and of its goodness.
E aprop extrats le instrument, e rete l’aygua la qual causa es quar tantost es retenguda per la codena la qual rete le trauc que es sobre le ciphac del qual e recomtat a tu que perfores aquel segon aquela manieyra.	And then remove the instrument and release the water which is causing the pain; it will be retained by the cord that binds the wound on the head, and you should pierce it in that manner.
E aprop itera le instrument al autra dia si vezes le malaute tollerant aquo, e extratz de la aygua petita quantitat, e fay aquo per alcus jorns sobre temor, e guarda te de error entro que no romangua de l’aygua sino pauc.	And then return the instrument on the next day if the patient can tolerate it, and release a small amount of water each day for fear of errors, and be careful not to break the water except in small amounts.
Mays si tu temes sobre le malaute, e leyssas de l’aygua gran quantitat, lahoras cura aquel am sepultura en arena cauda, e mota suzor en banh, e al solelh espere per lonc temps; e cura aquel am medicinas dessicativas entro que sia sanat.	But if you are afraid for the patient and release a great quantity of water, then treat it with a poultice in sand, move him to a bath, and expose him to the sun for a long time; and treat it with drying medicines until it is healed.
E cauteriza sobre le stomac, e la melsa e·l fitge aprop la extraccio de l’aygua, segon que yeu he recontat en aquo que es precedit.	And cauterize the stomach, and the wound and the vein from which the water is being released, according to what I have related before.
Capitol .lv.	Chapter 55.
De la curacio dels enfants les quals so natz les locs de la urina no-perforatz.	Of the cure of children who are born with the orifice for urine not perforated.
Alcunas veguadas alcun dels enfantz es eyssi del ventre de la sua mayre e·l cap de la sua mixtio no es perforat (o es trauc streyt o no es en son loc).	Sometimes, one of the children is born from the belly of his mother and the orifice of his mixture is not perforated (or it is a tight crack or it is not in its place).
Donc cove coytar am perforacio de lu tantost que es nascut am spatum mot subtil segon aquesta forma:	Therefore, you should pierce it immediately after he is born with a very sharp spatulum in the following manner:
E aprop pausa en le trauc un clavil subtil de plom e ligua aquel, e te per tres jorns o per .iiii.tre.	And then insert a subtle nail of lead into the crack and ligature it, and let it remain for three days or for 4 days.
E quant vol urinar sia remaugut e hurine; e aprop retorne aquel.	And when he wants to urinate, let him be held and urinate; and then return it.
E si tu no pauses le plom, ja es possible que la urina la qual va sobre le loc, no leysa aquest claure.	And if you do not insert the lead, it is possible that the urine which goes to that place will not harm this closure.
Mays aquel del qual le trauc es streyt sia medicat am clavil de Plom, ayssi cum havem dit, per trops dias entro que sia amplificat.	But that which is a tight crack should be treated with a nail of lead, as we have said, for several days until it is enlarged.
Mays aquels en les quals es le trauc no en son loc, so leditz, la qual causa es quar de aquels, aquel que es nat e·l trau es deves la fi del cap de la vergua per que no pot urinar a las partidas dedintz, entro que eleva la vergua am la sua ma a las partidas desus; e no es a lu generacio, per so quar le sperma no pot pervenir a la mayre segon rectitut, e es malautia mot laga.	But those in which the orifice is not in its place, they are blind, and the cause of this is that when he was born the head of the penis was placed at the end so that he cannot urinate into the parts above; and it does not have generation because the semen cannot reach the mother according to the rule, and it is a very serious illness.
E la manieyra de la operacio en lu es que·l malaute sia envessat sobre le sieu dos, e aprop exten le cap de la vergua de lu am la tua ma sinistra am vehement extraccio, e inscideys le cap del cap de la vergua del loc del perpucii am spatum agut, ayssi cum es inscizio de pluma, o que tu ne razas alcuna partida, per so que·l mieg de lu vengua semblant al cap de la vergua e que le trauc caia en le mieg loc segon que cove.	And the manner of the operation on him is that the patient be turned over onto his back, and then extend the head of his penis with your left hand with a forceful pull, and insert the head of the penis at the place of the foreskin with a sharp spatulum, as if it were split like a feather, or so that you may split a part of it, so that the end of his penis will come to resemble the head of the penis and that the crack falls into its proper place according to how you wish.
E guarda te que en la tua operacio de flux de sanc, quar motas vetz accideys aquo; e pausa te a lu am aquo que abscindeys le sanc, e cura la plagua entro que si’ sanada.	And be careful that in your operation you do not cause bleeding, for this often happens; and bind it with something that will stop the bleeding, and heal the wound until it is healed.
Capitol .lvi.	Chapter 56.
De albater le qual accideys en le prepucii en le cap de la vergua e de corropcio e negror e adherencia del prepucii del cap de la vergua.	Of whitlow which occurs in the foreskin at the head of the penis and of callosity, blackness, and adhesion of the foreskin to the head of the penis.
Motas veguadas accideys aquest albater en la vergua e es eminencia de carn laga.	Often this whitlow occurs in the penis and is an eminence of flesh which is painful.
E de aquela una es maligna e autra es no-maligna.	And one of them is malignant and the other is not malignant.
No-maligna, cove que suspendas am unci subtil e abscindas aquela entro que aquela mondes tota; e aprop pausa sobre aquela coto submirgit en enguent egipciac; e aprop aquel, cura le am enguent diafinicon entro que sia sanat.	Non-malignant, where you suspend it with a subtle needle and cut it entirely; and then place that which is cut under the milk of Egyptian onions; and then heal it with ointment dayfinicon until it is healed.
E si albater es maligna, de lega color, lahoras cove que tu aministres cauteri aprop la inscizio de lu e la razio de lu.	And if the whitlow is malignant, and it has a white color, then you should administer cauterization near its beginning and its cause.
Mays si albater es en le prepuci del cap de la vergua no-circumcis, e la una partida de albater es dedintz le prepucii e l’autra partida es defora, lahoras cove que tu ostes albater le qual es dedintz al comensament entro que es consolidat; e lahora tu cura aquel deforo, quar quan tu curas aquel ensemps le prepuci, no es asegurat que no sia trinquat.	But if the whitlow is in the foreskin of the head of the penis and not circumcised, and one part of the whitlow is inside the foreskin and the other part is outside, then you should cut off that which is inside at its beginning until it is healed; and then heal that hole, because when you heal both the foreskin, it is not certain that it will not happen again.
E ja eysamen accideys en les genetius e en le prepuci negror e corruccio, adonc cove que tu conquavas tot aquo que ja es denigrat e que ja se vol corrompre o que ja es corrumput; e aprop lineys sobre aquel aprop aquo am mel, le qual es contusit am farina de scorsa de milgrana e de errs trissatz e crivellatz.	And you have seen that it also occurs in the testicles and in the foreskin blackness and callosity, therefore you should cut away all that which is already blackened or about to be corrupted or which has been corrupted; and then line it with honey, which has been ground with flour of walnut husks and sieved.
E aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sana.	And then heal it with the other cure until it is healed.
Mays si endeve flux de sanc, lahoras aministra cauteri lunar segon aquesta forma:	But if bleeding occurs, then administer lunar cauterization in the following manner:
quar cauteri juvatiu es a dos disposicios ensemps, so es a flux de sanc e a la plagua quan es corrumpuda.	Because the hot cauterization is to two dispositions at once, it is to bleeding and to the wound when it is corrupted.
E si le cap de la vergua es corrodut e es destruit tot en la hora, lahoras cove que tu intrometas en lo meat del prepucii una canula de plom per so que le malaute urina per aquela.	And if the head of the penis is eaten away and destroyed entirely at once, then you should insert into the hollow of the foreskin a lead cannula so that the patient may urinate through it.
En la adherencia del prepucii am le cap de la vergua (et aquesta adherencia no accideys sino en aquel del qual le prepucii es sa, e sobre lu no es exhigida circumcizio; e quan accideys adherencia per plagua o per apostema) cove que excorjas am spatum obtus entro que sia dissolvut le liament e sia deliurat le cap de la vergua de tota partida.	In the adhesion of the foreskin to the head of the penis  (and this adhesion does not occur except in that one of whom the foreskin is not circumcised, and on him circumcision is not required; and when it occurs due to a wound or ulcer) you should scrape with an obtuse spatulum until the binding is dissolved and the head of the penis is freed from all parts.
E si es dificil desirnir aquelas exquisidament, lahoras cove que tu excorjes am spatum alcuna causa del cap de la vergua e del prepucii, e aysso es quar le prepucii, quan es subtil, fort leu es perforat per la sua subtilitat leugierament.	And if it is difficult to withdraw them gently, then you should cut with a spatula some of the foreskin of the penis and of the prepuce, and this is because the prepuce, when it is thin, is easily pierced by the thinness of the skin.
E aprop separa entre·l prepucii e·l cap de la vergua am dra7 de li subtil, le qual ja es mulhat en l’aygua frega per que no adherescan autra veguada.	Then separate the foreskin from the head of the penis with a wet sponge so that they do not adhere again.
E aprop sia curat am vi stiptic entro que sia consolidat.	And then let it be treated with a styptic to stop the bleeding and to allow it to heal.
Capitol .lvii.	Chapter 57.
De mundificacio dels enfants e de la curacio de aquo que accideys ad aquels de circumcisio.	Of the purification of children and the cure for those who are circumcised.
Circumcisio no es solucio de continuitat ayssi cum las autras plaguas: mays empero cum sia de la nostra operacio e de nostra voluntat, e lus de aquela sia propriament en les enfants, es necessari que asignem en aquela milhor operacio e via pus leugiera perdusent a salut.	Circumcision is not a cure for continence like other diseases; but since it comes from our action and our will, and its cause is particularly in children, we must choose the best operation and shortest way to restore them to health.
Donc dic que les antics no diyssero circumcisio en alcu dels lors libres, quar no n’usan en las suas leys, e no es sino quar havem aquisit per speriment, la qual causa es que yeu he atrobat la major partida dels artifexs e dels barbies usar circumcisir e mundificacio am novacula e am torores; e usan de liament am fiel e de inscizio am la ungla.	Therefore I say that the ancient people did not order circumcision for any of their freemen, because they do not use it in their laws; but we have acquired it through experience, and the cause is that I have seen the majority of artisans and barbers use circumcision and purification with a razor and with cauterization with the nail.
E yeu ja he prohadas totas aquestas manieras e no atrobegui milhor mondificacio am forfexs, am liament am fiel que en mondificacio cum la ungla, quar motas vetz efugeys la codena pus desus, quar la codena del prepucii a dos tunicas, e roman la tonica pus dejos, e fort leu es forsat ad autra inscizio e dolor sicura.	And I have prohibited all these ways and found no better purification with forceps, or with cauterization with the nail that is used in purification; because many times the foreskin has escaped above, because the foreskin of the prepuce has two tunics, and the inner one remains below, and it is easily forced to another incision and certain pain.
E am mundificacio le qual es fayta per alphecati, e es digital, del qual usan les sabatiers, no es segurada la inscizio de la extremitat del membre viril, quar fort leu intra en le trau de lu.	And the purification which is done by aphecatium, and is digital, which is used by surgeons, does not secure the incision of the extremity of the virile member, because it easily goes into the orifice of the penis.
Mays en la operacio am ungla, fort leu obazeys ferr e corromp la tua operacio.	But in the operation with the nail, it easily damages iron and corrupts your operation.
E la codena del enfant es breu per natura, e motas veguadas nays en tal manieyra que no ha necessitat de mondificacio, e yeu he vist aquel.	And the foreskin of the child is short by nature, and many times it has been in such a way that there was no need for purification, and I have seen this myself.
Mays de la mondificacio que·s fa am forfexs e liamentz am fiel, la bontat, experiment descrobic a mi, quar las forfexs so de proporcional inscizio, per aquo quar la acuitat que es desus es ayssi cum la acuitat que es dejos; e donc cum tu premes la tua ma so proporcionadas dos acuitatz, e inscideysso segon una comperacio en un temps; e es fayta compressio del fiel am figura contenent la codena de la vergua de tota partida, am le qual no catz error de tot.	But of the purification which is done with forceps and cauterization with a nail, I discovered its goodness through experience, because the forceps are of proportional incision, so that the sharpness which is above is like the sharpness which is below; and therefore when you press your fingers in proportionate measure and incision according to a comparison at one time, there is compression of the nail with a form containing the foreskin of the penis from every part, with which no error can occur.
E la manieyra de la operacio primeyra es que tu fassas estar le enfant majorment si es de aquels que entendo un petit, que no fassas sino que tu lies le fiel en la sua vergua tant solament, e que leysses aquel entro al autra dia.	And the manner of the first operation is that you make the child stand mostly if he is one of those who understand a little, and do not do but that you apply the nail to his penis only so much, and that you leave it until the next day.
E aprop fay aquel alegrar en tota aquela manieyra que es a tu possibla de aquo que recep la sua intelligencia.	And then make him happy in all those ways which are possible for you to receive his intelligence.
E aprop fa aquel estar entre las tuas mas estatuir preparadament, e no sia ges cezent; e occulta las forfexs en la tua ma o dejos le tieu pe, que l’enfant no veia aquelas ni degun autre dels instruments.	And then make him stand between your hands in a position prepared, and do not be frightened; and hide the forceps in your hand or under your foot, so that the child does not see those or any other of the instruments.
E aprop entremet la tua ma a la vergua de lu e suffla en la codena, e tira aquela entro que sia eyssit le cap de la vergua, e aprop mondifica aquel de aquo que es agregat en ela de sordicia.	And then introduce your hand into the penis and breathe into the foreskin, and draw it out so that the head of the penis is exposed, and then purify it of what is aggregated in it from dirt.
E aprop lia le loc signat am fiel dobla, e aprop ligua pus bas de aquel un petit le segon liament, e aprop te am le dit pous e endic tieu le loc del liament dejos am bona retencio, e inscideys entre dos liaments.	And then apply the nail to the marked place and then apply another small cauterization below it, and then touch it with your finger and indent the place of the cauterization below with good retention, and insert between two cauterizations.
E aprop eleva la codena sus leugierament e estratz le cap de la vergua; e aprop leyssa le sanc corre petit e petit, quar es milhor ; e pausa polvera desus e sobre la polvera pausa drap en le qual es spandut mugol de huou coyt en ayguaros concosit am oli rozat recent bo; e layssa aquel sobre aquel entro al autra dia; e cura aquel am curacio entro que sia sanat.	And then elevate the foreskin gently and stretch the head of the penis; and let the blood flow a little at a time, because that is better; and pause powder above it and over the powder place cloth in which is spilled myrrh of oil cooked in rosewater recently; and let it be over it until the next day; and cure it with a dressing until it is healed.
La forma de las forfexs a mondificacio, aquesta es la forma:	The form of the forceps for purification, this is its form:
Sian las unas extramitatz no-talhantz e las autras sian talhant, que non sia yssit le ram del clau, e sia la longitut de las doas acuitatz ayssi cum la longitut de dos manubres engualment.	Let the ends not be cut and the others cut, so that the point of the claw is not raised; and let the length of both sides be like the length of two handles equally.
Mays la error en mundificacio es quar fort leu efugeys la codena intrinseca tota, o partida de lu deves la inscizio.	But the error in purification is that the foreskin which is inside entirely escapes or is torn from it by the incision.
Donc cove que tu extendas aquela de la tua hora am la tua ungla denant la apostemacio del loc e que inscidas aquela segon equalitat.	Therefore see that you stretch it with your finger before the application of the cauterization, and that you insert it according to equality.
E si no la podes tenir am la tua ungla, lahoras extratz aquela am unci e inscideys aquela.	And if you cannot hold it with your finger, then draw it out with tweezers and insert it.
Mays si son passatz tres dias, e roman aquo que es imflat dejos la vergua apostemat, lahoras tu leyssa aquo entro que sia cedat le apostema caut, e excorja aquel am fecilitat, e inscidex aquel segon que a tu es preparat.	But if three days have passed and what is swollen below the penis has not subsided, then let you insert that which has ceased the aposteme cauterization, and cauterize it with ease, and insert it according to how you are prepared.
E guarda te del cap de la vergua, quar no nosera a lu aquo.	And beware of the head of the penis, because nothing will hurt him.
E donc cura aquel am aquo que la plagua consolida de las polveras las quals havem recomtadas en le tractat de las polveras.	And therefore cure it with that which the disease is consolidated from powders of which we have spoken in the treatise on powders.
E si es inscidit de la codena sobre mesura, e obezeys a las partidas desus, aquo no notz a lu.	And if it is cauterized from the foreskin beyond measure, and it adheres above it, that does not harm him.
E mays cura aquel am aquo que havem dit entro que sia sanat.	But cure it with what we have said earlier so that it is healed.
Capitol .lviii.	Chapter 58.
De curacio de urina retenguda en la vesiqua.	Of the cure for urine retained in the bladder.
Retencio de urina en la vesica es fayta per oppulacio fayta per peyra o per sanc congilat, o per poyre o per carnada, e semblantz ad aquels de aquo que havem dit de las manieyras de curacio en la divisio.	Retention of urine in the bladder is done by oppulacion made by stone or by blood clotting, or phlegm or similar to those of which we have spoken about the ways of cure in the division.
E si no es dissolvuda la urina, e veses retencio de lu esser per peyra le qual ja es en le col de la vesica, lahoras cove que le malaute sia encorbat sobre les sieus denolhs.	And if the urine is not dissolved and there is retention of it because of stone which is already in the neck of the bladder, then see that the patient lies on his side.
E aprop conponeys les pes de aquel sobre le sieu dos e extendas le sieu ventre de la partida pus desus del sieu dos, e le malaute estrengua le sieu ale tant quant es a lu possible.	And then put the feet of him on his back and extend his belly from the part above his back, and let the patient stretch his arm as much as is possible for him.
Donc lahoras le col de la vesica es costreyt ha espulsio de la peyra a las partidas detras, per que la urina es absolta.	Therefore the neck of the bladder being tightened has expulsion of the stone to the parts behind, so that the urine is expelled.
E si no es dissolvuda am aquo que havem dit he vehement es fayta la causa sobre le malaute, lahoras cove que aministres extraccio de lu am instrument le qual es apelat siringua, del qual aquesta es la forma: Sia de argent e sia subtil leon conquau, ayssi cum canula de pena de ausel am subtilitat de ray lonc en similitut d’un palm e mig, al qual sia cana subtil en le cap de lu.	And if it is not dissolved with that which we have said, and the cause is made over the patient, then see that administration of extraction from him with an instrument which is called syringe, of which this is its form: Let it be of silver and let it be thin lion’s claw, also with reed of ash with thin needle in similarity of a ray long in similarity of half palm, to which is thin cane at the tip of it.
E la manieyra del eyssiment de la urina per aquel es que prenguas le fiel doblat e lies en la extramitat de lu lana o coto per bona liadura; e entrometas las extramitatz del fiel en la partida dejos de la ciringua, e inscideys am las forfexs si superflueys alcuna causa de la lana, mays intromet la en la canula am vehemencia E aprop enongeys la ciringua am boder e am album de huou.	And the manner of the emission of urine through it is that you take the nail bent and place it in the extremity of him wool or cloth with good binding; and insert the extremities of the nail in the part below the syringe, and insert it with forceps if any cause of the wool exceeds, but insert it into the cane with strength. And then grip the syringe with strength and with egg white of hen.
E fay cezer le malaute sobre la selha, e embroca la vesiqua de lu e la vergua am olis umitz, e oli de oliva e ayguaros.	And let the patient lie on his back, and close the bladder of him and the penis with olive oil and rosewater.
E aprop entromet la ciringua am facilitat entro que pervengua a la razit de la vergua; e aprop dobla la vergua desus a la partida del embelic; e aprop empelleys la ciringua dintz aquela; e aprop empelleys aquela entro que pervengua a la vesica, e aquela centa le malaute esser pervenguda a la causa vuoda, e no es fayt asso segon aquest orde, sino le meat en le qual va a tortuositat.	And then insert the syringe with ease into that from which it comes to the root of the penis; and then bend the penis above to the part of the emblic; and then press the syringe in that; and then press that until it comes to the bladder, and let it be centring the patient from the cause hollowed, and not do the heat according to this order, but go in which he goes to tortuosity.
E aprop exten le fiel am la lana petit a petit, quar la urina siec la lana.	Then slowly stretch out the gallbladder using wool, because urine dries up the wool.
Aprop extratz aquela e fay per curacio urina, e usa ciringua, no cesses fer aquo e usa ciringua entro que sia evacuada la vesica e le malaute atrobe alleviacio.	Then extract that and make a catheter using urine, and do not stop doing this until the bladder is emptied and the patient is relieved.
Capitol .lix.	Chapter 59
De qualitat de clisterizacio de la vezica am clampcedra e am semblantz instrumentz les quals sian acordants ad aquo.	Of the quality of enema of the bladder with camphor and similar instruments which are appropriate for this.
Quan accideys en la vesica ulceracio o apostema, o sanc congilat en aquela, o es coartat poyredura, e vols en aquela destillar ayguas e medicinas, lahoras sia fayt am instrument le qual es apelat clampcedra, e aquesta es la forma de lu:	When ulcers or blisters occur in the bladder, or clotted blood, and you want to distill water and medicines into it, then an instrument called camphor should be used, and this is how it is made:
sino que en la extramitat de lu es sorda, so es clausa.	unless its end is closed.
Et en aquela so tres traucs: dos de la una partida , ayssi quo vezes.	And in the end there are three holes: two on one side, thus as many as you like.
En le comensament es loc concau, en le qual es aquo que es enpellit, e sia segon quantitat que oppile aquel, ses addicio, entro que quan alcuna causa es ab aquel tirada de las humiditatz, sia atirada, e quan es expellida, am aquo sia atirada, e quan es expellit lonc, segon que fa clampcedra am la qual es phicat naphta en las batalhas de mar.	In the beginning there is a concave space, in which something is placed to be filled, and it should be according to quantity that pushes that object, with its addition, so that when for any reason that object is pulled out of the dampness, it is pulled out, and when expelled, it is expelled with that, and when expelled, long, as clampcedra makes naphtha in the battles of the sea.
Donc cum tu vols prohicir humiditatz en la vesica, entromet la extremitat de clapcedra en la humiditat, e atira am aquel aquo que es empellit a las partidas desus, quar la humiditat es atirada en la conquavitat de clapcedra.	Therefore, when you want to introduce moisture into the bladder, insert the end of clapcedra into the moisture, and pull with that which is pushed into the parts above, because moisture is pulled into the concavity of clapcedra.
E aprop entromet la extramitat de clapcedra en la vergua segon que havem recomtat en la ciringua; e aprop empelleys la humiditat am aquo que empelleys, quar aquela humiditat perve a la vesica tantost, e le malaute cent aquela.	Then insert the end of clapcedra into the urethra as we have recommended in the catheter; and push the moisture with what you push it with, because that moisture immediately reaches the bladder, and the patient feels it.
Forma del cristeri subtil am le qual la vesica es cristerizada, e es aquela la forma:	Subtle form of enema with which the bladder is enemaed, and this is its form:
E sia fayta de argent o de lato, de la qual le cap pus aut sia semblant a petita pluma, e dejos lu cana dedintz liament.	And it should be made of silver or brass, the tip being like a small feather, and below it a tube.
E aprop pren vesica de moto, e pausa en aquela la humiditat que vols cristirizar en la vesica, e aprop lia aquela entre dos am fort liguatura am fiel doble, e escalfa aquela humiditat sobre le foc.	Then grab the bladder with your hand, and put into it the moisture you want to use as an enema in the bladder, and then tie that moisture between two with a strong ligature using double gallbladder, and heat that moisture over the fire.
E aprop entromet la extremitat del cristeri en la vergua.	Then insert the end of the enema into the urethra.
E aprop estrenh la tua ma sobre la vesica am la humiditat am strectura descent entro que·l malaute centa que aquela humiditat ja es pervenguda a la vesica.	And then squeeze your hand over the bladder with that moisture with a descending motion until the patient feels that moisture has already reached the bladder.
Mays si a tu no es present vesica, lahoras tu pren una pessa de parguames e fay de aquel cercle; e perfora aquel de tota la sua retonditat; e aprop entromet fiel fort en aquels traucs, ayssi quo so revolgut; e aprop agregua le cercle ayssi quo es agreguat alsofatur, pus que tu pausas en aquel aquo que tu vols de las humiditatz, e olis e ayguas.	But if you don't have a bladder, then take a piece of lamb's leather and make a circle out of it; and pierce that all around its circumference; and then insert gallbladder firmly into those holes, so that they turn inside out, and then add the circle as you would alsofatur, because when you put into that what you want of moisture, oils and waters.
E aprop tu lia aquel en le instrument e fay am aquel ayssi cum has fayt am la vesica, e exprescio am la tua ma entro que la humiditat pervengua a la vesica.	And then you hold that in the instrument and do with that as you did with the bladder, and express with your hand until moisture reaches the bladder.
Capitol .lx.	Chapter 60
De extraccio de peyra.	Of stone extraction.
Nos ja havem dit en la divisio las specias de peyra e curacio de lu am medicinas, e la diferencia entre peyra engendrada en los ronhos e peyra engendrada en la vesica, e les senhals de aquela.	We have already said in the division of the types of stone and its cure with medicines, and the difference between stone generated in the kidneys and stone generated in the bladder, and their signs.
E havem dit la peyra en la qual catz operacio am ma, e seccio.	And we have said that stone which requires operation by hand, and incision.
E la peyra engendrada en la vesica propriament es aquela que es ficada en la vesica.	And the stone generated in the bladder itself is that which is lodged in the bladder.
E yeu so narrant aquel am exposicio manifesta e abreviacio.	And I will now describe it with clear exposition and summary.
Donc dic que peyra engendrada en la vesica majorment ve als enfantz; e dels senhals de lu es que la urina que es eyssida de la vesica es semblant a aygua en la sua subtilitat, e apar en aquela arena; e le malaute fregua la sua vergua, e motas veguadas pen, e aprop es dressada; e am aquo yeys foro le cul en motz de aquels.	Therefore I say that stone generated in the bladder mostly affects infants; and its signs are that the urine which exits from the bladder is like water in its thinness, and there is sand in it; and the patient rubs his urethra, and hurts many times, and then it is relieved; and with this there is a hole in the glans of those.
E es laugiera la sanacio dels enfants de aquela entro que han conseguitz xiiii ans; e es dificil curacio en les viels.	And its cure is easier for infants who have reached 14 years, and it is difficult to cure in the old.
Mays en les joves es migiera per aquo quar es entre aquels.	But in the young, it is milder because of that which exists among them.
E de aquel del qual la peyra es major e la curacio es pus leugiera; E si es pauca, es contraria ad aquela.	And if the stone is larger and its cure is easier, then it is contrary to that.
Donc cum pervenem a la curacio de aquela, cove al comensament de aquela que mondifiquem le malaute am cristeri le qual extragua tota la fenda la qual es en les sieus budels; quar aquela fenda alcunas veguadas prohibeys la envencio de la peyra deves la inquisicio de lu.	Therefore, when we come to the cure of that, let us first begin by cleansing the patient with an enema which extracts all the humors which are in his intestines; because that fathom sometimes prohibits the expulsion of stone through inquiry.
E aprop sia pres le malaute am les sieus pes e sia contosit e maugut enjos per so que la peyra descenda al preon de la vesica, o que saute de loc aut alcunas veguadas.	Then let the patient stand on his feet and be pressed and squeezed from behind so that the stone descends to the bottom of the bladder, or that he jumps up in place.
E aprop fay aquel cezer entre las tuas mas preparat, e las mas de lu sian dejos las coysas de lu, per so que la vesica tota sia fayta declinant a las partidas dejos.	Then do this procedure between your hands, and let his arms be behind him, so that the bladder is completely bent downward.
E aprop perquier aquela e tota aquela deforo.	Then push it out entirely.
Donc si sentes la peyra en l’espazi, lahoras tu te coyta tantost am seccio sobre lu.	Therefore, if you feel the stone in that space, then you cut him immediately with incision on him.
E si no catz de tot dejos le tieu tocament, lahoras cove que tu untes am oli le tieu dit indic de la ma sinistra, si malaute es enfant, o le dit miga si es jove complit, e entrometas aquel en le sieu cul.	And if it does not come out with your touch at all, then put your left index finger into the urethra of an infant, or the middle finger of a young person who is complete, and insert that into his urethra.
E perquier de la peyra entro que stia dejos le tieu dit.	Then push out the stone so that it goes down your finger.
E converteys aquela petit a petit entro al col de la vesica.	Then gradually push that into the bottom of the bladder.
E aprop prem sobre aquel am lo tieu dit, e expelleys aquel a las partidas defora ves le loc del qual vos la seccio.	Then press on that with your finger, and expel that out through the hole which you made with your incision.
E comanda al ministra que prema la vesica am la sua ma; e comanda a un autra ministra que am la sua ma dextra extenda les genetius a las partidas desus, e am la sua autra ma remaugua la codena la qual es dejos les genetius, en partida del loc en le qual se fa la seccio.	And command the assistant to press the bladder with his hand; and command another assistant that with his right hand extends the scrotum upwards, and with his other hand squeeze the chord which is below the scrotum in the part where you made the incision.
E aprop entromet espatum be inscident del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	Then insert the probe bent into which this is the form of it:
e scindeys en lu aquo que es entre·l cul e·ls genetius, no en le mieg loc, abantz al latz de la coyssa sinistra; e sia la seccio sobre aquela peyra e·l tieu dit sia en le cul, e sia fayta seccio transversa, per que la seccio defora sia ampla e dedintz streyta segon la quantitat que egrecio de la peyra sia a lu possibla, e no major, quar fort leu comprem le tieu dit le qual es en le cul la peyra deves la seccio, e es foro-getada ses defacultat.	and cut into him whatever is between the anus and the scrotum, not in the middle location, but towards the left side of the scrotum; and let the incision be made across, so that the opening be wide and the cut narrow according to the quantity by which the stone can exit to him, and not more, because you strongly press his finger which is in the anus from where the stone exits through the incision, and it is pushed out.
E sapias que de la peyra es alcuna a la qual so angle e margers, per que le eyssiment de lu es fayt deficil per aquo.	And know that there is some stone which has angles and margins, so that its exit from him is made difficult by that.
E de aquela aquo es leon semblant a glan, e es redonda, e es fayt de lu leugier eyssiment.	And of that there is some like a glans, and it is round, and it makes easy exit.
Donc si es aquela al qual so angles e marger, ajusta en la fissura.	Therefore, if it is that to which there are angles and margins, then adjust in the crack.
E si no es ayssi foro-getada, lahoras cove que tu engenes sobre aquel, o que strenguas sobre aquel am gesti decentment, la extremitat del qual sia ayssi cum lima am le qual strenguas sobre la peyra, e no evasesca de lu; o que entrometas dejos lu instrument subtil de curvada extremitat.	And if it is not so hole-gotten, then let you push on that or squeeze it with decent gesture, the end of which be like file with which you squeeze on the stone, and do not loosen from him; or insert below him subtle instrument bent at the end.
Mays si tu no podes sobre aquel, lahoras tu amplifica le trauc un petit, e si tu veus flux de sanc, abscindeys en strenh aquel am vitriol trissat.	But if you cannot on that, then let you increase the cut a little, and if you see flow of blood, bind it tightly on that with vitriol.
Mays si la peyra es mays de una, lahoras al comensament tu impelleys la ma a la boca de la vesica, e aprop inscideys sobre lu; e aprop impelleys un petit aprop aquo; e semblantment fay si son motas mays de doas.	But if the stone is more than one, then at the beginning push your hand to the mouth of the bladder, and then insert it; and then push a little, and do similarly if there are more than two.
E si es peyra mot gran, lahoras ignorancia es que tu inscidas aquel am gran seccio, quar accideys al malaute una de doas causas: o que mora o que endevengua a lu destillacio de urina continuabla, per aquo quar le loc no es de tot consolidat.	And if the stone is very large, then it is ignorance that you insert that with great incision, because it happens to the patient two causes: or that he is slow or that there occurs to him continuous distillation of urine, because that place is not completely consolidated.
Mays aministra expulcio de lu entro que sia fora-getada, o engenia en la fractura de lu am las forfexs entro que extragua aquela en pessas.	May they administer an expulsion from him while he is unconscious, or use forceps on the fracture to extract it in pieces.
Donc cum tu auras cumplit la tua opperacio, lahoras omple la plagua de enses de aloe e de sanc de drago, e strenh aquel.	Therefore, when you have completed your operation, fill the wound with aloe and dragon's blood, and bind it tightly.
E pausa sobre aquel drap enfus en oli e vi, o en oli rozat e aygua frega, per so que apostema caut sia cedat.	And place over that a cloth soaked in oil and wine, or in rosewater and water, so that the boil is reduced.
E aprop resupina le malaute sobre le sieu col, e no deslias le liament entro al tertz dia.	Then return the patient to their back, and do not loosen the bandage until the third day.
E cum aquel auras desliat, embroca le loc am aygua e mot oli, e aprop cura aquel am enguent diafinicon e am enguent diabazilicon entro que sia sanat.	And when you have loosened it, wash the area with water and warm oil, and treat that place daily with ointment of diafenicon and ointment of diabasilicum until it is healed.
Mays si en la plagua accideys apostema caut, adhust e corrosiu, e de aquel semblantz ayssi cum si le sanc es en la vesica congelat, e per lu es la hurina prohibida (e aquo es conogut per la egressio del sanc am urina), a donc entromet lo tieu dit en la plagua e extratz aquel sanc, quar si roman provoca la vesica a corropcio de la vesica e de lu putrefaccio.	But if in the wound there is a boil, and it is hot and swollen, and it looks like the blood is congealed in the bladder, and because of this the urination is prohibited (and this is known as the exit of blood with urine), then cut into the wound and draw out that blood, for if the bladder is damaged it will cause decay in the bladder and the patient will rot.
E aprop lava la plagua am vi agre, aygua e sal, e am opposicio a tota specia, am aquo que conveneys a lu de la curacio entro que sia sanat.	Then wash the wound with sour wine, water and salt, and apply any ointment that is suitable for it, until it is healed.
E cove en las horas de tota la curacio que tu lies amdos las coyssas e ajustes las medicinas las quals so pausadas sobre le loc.	During the course of the treatment, you must wash both thighs and apply the medicines that are placed on the area.
E si la peyra es petita e es en le meat de la vergua, e es ficat en lu, e eyssement de urina es prohibit, lahoras cura aquel am aquo que yeu recomti denant que pervenguas a seccio, quar tropas veguadas per aquesta curacio yest acusat de seccio; e ja yeu e esproat aquo, e es que tu prenguas un perforador de ferr alfelut, del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And if the stone is small and it is in the middle of the penis, and urination is prohibited, then treat that with what you learned before coming to this section; for many have been accused of causing gangrene through this treatment. And now I will explain it to you, and it is that you take an iron tool wrapped in felt, of which this is its shape:
de triangulada extramitat, agut, ficat en fust.	It has a pointed triangular end, inserted into the shaft.
E aprop pren fiel, e lia am aquel la vergua dejos la peyra per so que no retorne a la vesica.	Then take some pitch, and apply it to the penis under the stone with a piece of wool, so that it does not return to the bladder.
E aprop entromet le ferr en la vergua, perforant am fecilitat entro que·l perforador vengua ad aquela peyra.	Then insert the iron into the penis, piercing easily until the tool reaches the stone.
E revolveys le perforador am la tua ma en aquela peyra petit a petit, e tu perforsa la perforacio de lu entro que fassas aquel del autra part penetrar; quar la urina tantost es absolta.	And turn the tool with your hand on that stone little by little, and you pierce it from the other side; for the urine is immediately expelled.
E aprop prem la tua ma sobre aquo que es romas de la peyra de la partida deforo de la vergua, quar aquela es trinquada, e es foro-getada am la urina, e le malaute es sanat.	Then press your hand over where the stone was broken off from the shaft of the penis, for that is closed, and it is blocked by urine, and the patient is healed.
Mays si aquesta curacio no es a tu aparelhada per alcuna causa la qual prohibeys de aquela, lahoras lia un fiel dejos la peyra, e autra fiel desus la peyra.	But if this treatment is not prepared for any reason which prohibits it, then apply pitch under the stone, and another piece of pitch above the stone.
E aprop encideys sobre la peyra en aquela vergua entre doas liaduras.	Then tighten around the stone in that shaft between two ligatures.
E aprop extratz aquela.	Then pull it out.
E aprop deslia le liament e mondifica le sanc congilat, le qual es fayt en la plagua.	Then loosen the ligature and cleanse the congealed blood which is made in the wound.
E no es necessari liament de fiel dejos la peyra, sino per que no retorne a la vesica, e l’autre liament desus sino, quar quan es desliat le fiel aprop la egrecio de la peyra, la codena retorna a son loc e cobra la plagua.	And it is not necessary to have pitch under the stone, except so that it does not return to the bladder; and the other ligature above, except that when the pitch is loosened the exit of the stone is caused, the urethra returns to its place and the wound heals.
E per aquo es a tu necessari quan lias le fiel desus, que tu eleves la codena a las partidas desus, o que retorne deves le tieu compliment, e cobra la plagua ayssi co havem dit.	And for that it is necessary when you tie the pitch above that you lift the urethra to the parts above, or that it returns after your treatment, and the wound heals in this way as we have said.
Capitol .lxi.	Chapter .lxi.
De extraccio de peyra de las femnas.	On the extraction of a stone from women.
Peyra en las femnas pauc es engendrada.	A stone in women is rarely generated.
Mays si ve peyra ad alcuna de aquelas, lahoras dificil es la curacio de lu, e es prohibida per tropas manieyras.	But if you see a stone in any of them, then the treatment for it is difficult, and is prohibited by many methods.
La una de lor es quar la femna fort leu es verges.	One of them is because the woman is very young.
E la segonda es quar tu no trobas femna be scient que descroba si meteyssa al metge quan es casta, o es de las femnas haventz maritz.	And the second is because you do not find a wise woman who discovers if the midwife told the truth when she was chaste, or it is of women who have been married.
La tersa es quar tu no hatrobas femna be sabent aquesta art, majorment la operacio am ma.	The third is because you do not find a woman who is skilled in this art, especially the operation with the hand.
E la quarta es que·l loc de la seccio sobre peyra en las femnas es longinc del loc de la peyra, per que indigeys de seccio preonda, e en aquela es temor.	And the fourth is that the place of the incision on a stone in women is distant from the place of the stone, because it causes deep gangrene, and in that there is fear.
Mays si necessitat provoca a tu ad aquo, lahoras cove que tu prenguas una femna metga be scient, e pauc es atrobada.	But if necessity compels you to do this, then take a woman midwife who is wise, and she is rarely found.
Mays si tu es privat de aquela, lahoras cerca metga quast e subtil, o presenta una femna matrona be esenhada en le feyt de las femnas, o femna que en aquesta art ennueys partida del art.	But if you are deprived of that, then seek a midwife who is astute and subtle, or present a woman midwife who is experienced in the nature of women, or a woman who has given birth to children in this art.
Donc fay aquela present, e comanda a lu que fassa tot aquo que tu li mandaras, de la enquisicio sobre la peyra al comensament; la qual causa es que reguarde si la femna es verges, lahoras cove que meta lo sieu dit en le cul de lu e quiera la peyra.	Therefore let her present, and command her to do everything you instruct, from the inquiry into the stone at the beginning; the cause is that she guards whether the woman is chaste, then place your finger in her vulva and seek the stone.
Donc si atroba aquela, coarte aquela dejos le sieu dit, e lahoras comanda a lu que inscida sobre aquela.	Therefore if she finds it, seize that beneath your finger, and then command her to press on that.
Mays si no es verge, lahoras comanda a la matrona que entrometa lo sieu dit en le conh de la malauta e enquiera sobre la peyra, pus que pausa la sua ma sinistra sobre la vesica, e comprem aquela am bona comprecio.	But if she is not chaste, then command the midwife to insert her finger into the vagina of the patient and seek the stone, for she places her left hand over the bladder, and seize that with a good grip.
Donc si atroba aquela, lahoras cove que gradantment maugua aquela de l’orrifici de la vesica a las partidas dejos am somman de la sua vertut entro que pervengua am aquel a la razit de la coyssa.	Therefore if she finds it, then gradually press that beneath the opening of the bladder to the parts below with the force of her hand until it comes to the root of the vagina.
E aprop inscida sobre aquela apposicio de la maytat del conh deves la razit de la coyssa de qualque part sia a lu parada e cent la peyra en aquela partida, e·l dit de lu no sia remaugut de la peyra coartan dejos lu.	Then insert the tip of the instrument into the opening of the vagina beyond the root of the vagina from whatever side it is stopped at and hold the stone in that place; and the patient's finger should not be twisted by the stone, blocking it.
E la seccio sia pauca al comensament; e aprop entrometa lo ray sobre aquela seccio, e si sent la peyra, lahoras ajuste en seccio segon la quantitat la qual sap que la peyra sira getada de aquela.	And the incision should be small at the beginning; and then insert the knife over that incision, and if she feels the stone, then make another incision according to the amount she knows the stone is extended from there.
E sapias que las specias de peyra son motas: quar de aquelas es pauca e gran, e leon e aspra, e longua e redonda, e havent ramps.	And know that the species of stones are many; for some are small and great, sharp and smooth, long and round, and having horns.
Donc tu sapias quantas specias so de lu per aquo que tu signifiques sobre aquo que vols.	Therefore you know how many species there are according to what you intend to say about what you want.
E si tu veus flux de sanc, ajusta en le loc vetriol trissat e te aquela per una hora entro que sia abscindit le sanc, e aprop retorna a la tua operacio entro que la peyra sia fora-getada.	And if you see blood flow, bind it in the place with triturated vitriol and hold that for an hour until the blood is expelled, then return to your operation until the stone is extracted.
E fay que prepares am tu dels instrumentz les quals e ditz en la extraccio de peyra en les homes, per so que sias ajudat per aquels en la tua operacio.	And prepare with you tools which are used in the extraction of stones in men, so that you are helped by them in your operation.
E si tu veus flux de sanc, e sabes que la expulcio del sanc es de la arceria que es insciza, lahoras tu pausa polvera sobre le loc e estrenh aquel am pulvils e strictura descent, e no iteras aquo; e layssa la peyra e no extraguas aquela, quar fort leu morira la malauta.	And if you see blood flow and know that the expulsion of blood is from the urethra which is broken, then you place powder on the spot and tighten it with a bandage and do not loosen it; and let go of the stone and do not extract it, for certainly the patient will die.
E aprop cura la plagua.	Then treat the wound.
Donc cum es cedada la acuitat del sanc aprop alcus jorns, e·l loc se poyreys, lahoras tu retorna a la tua operacio entro que la peyra sia fora-getada.	Then when the flow of blood is stopped and the place becomes quiet, then return to your operation until the stone is extracted.
Capitol lxii.	Chapter lxii.
De seccio sobre ernia acoza.	On incision on a hernia that is acute.
Hernia ayguoza no es sino agregacio de humiditat en le ciphac blanc lo qual es dejos la codena dels genetius contenent le huou, e es nompnat ciphac.	Hernia that is not except for the accumulation of moisture in the white fold which is beneath the diaphragm containing the bowels, and it is called diaphragm.
E alcunas veguadas es en le propri pannicol le qual a lu preparec natura en la partida del huou, entro que sia cuyat que ja es autre huou; e es la codena del genetiu entre le ciphac blanc le qual havem dit, e no es aquo sino tart.	And some are in the proper membrane which naturally prepares in the part of the bowels, so that it is seen that there is another bowels; and it is the diaphragm between the white fold which we have said, and it is not that except for the skin.
E la generacio de aquest hernia es per debelitat la qual accideys als genetius, per que ad aquels es efundunda aquesta materia, e alcunas vetz accideys per percuscio fayta sobre les genetius.	And the generation of this hernia is through weakness which occurs to the bowels, for it is poured out to those bowels; and some occur due to pressure made on the bowels.
E aquesta humiditat es havent motas colors, quar la color de lu o es declinant a citrina o a sanguinent, o rog, o es negra feculenta, o es ayguosa blanqua, e es aquo que es mays.	And this moisture having various colours, for the colour of it either inclines towards citron-yellow or to blood-red, or red, or is black and fetid, or watery white, and that is what is most common.
E les senhals per les quals es saubut on es aquesta agreguacio de aygua so aquestz: quar si es en le ciphac blanc le qual havem dit, lahoras le apostema es redon declinant un pauc a longitut ayssi cum figura de huou, e appar le genetiu, quar la humiditat conte aquel de tota part.	And the signs by which one can tell that this accumulation of water exists are these: for if it is in the white head which we have described, then the pustule is round, declining a little in length like a fig, and the genitals become visible, because the moisture contains them on all sides.
E si la humiditat es en le propri pannicol, lahoras le apostema es redon am partida del huou e per aysso hom estima que es autre huou.	And if the moisture is in the skin itself, then the pustule is round with a split in the middle and one assumes that it is another hole.
E si la humiditat es entre la codena dels genetius e·l ciphac blanc, lahoras catz dejos le centiment.	And if the moisture is between the skin of the genitals and the white head, then cut below the feeling.
E cum tu vols la cognicio de la color de la humiditat, lahoras tu esproa la color de la humiditat en le apostema am entromes cayrat del qual la forma es precedida; e segon aquo que es eyssit en le vestigi del entromes, jutga de aquo que es dedintz lu.	And when you wish to know the colour of the moisture, then you probe the colour of the moisture in the pustule with a cautery of which the tip is made red-hot; and according to what comes out on the trail of the cautery, judge of what exists within it.
Donc quan nos vinem a la curacio de lu am ferr, lahoras cove que comandem al malaute que sia fleubotomat si aquo es a tu possibla, e vezes le cos de lu ple.	Therefore when we come to the cure of it with iron, then we command that the patient be made phlebotomized if this is possible for you, and see the body of him full.
E aprop sia resupinat sobre le sieu dos sobre alcuna causa un pauc auta, e pausa dejos lu motz draps.	And let him be reclined on his back on account of some cause a little higher, and place under him several folded cloths.
E aprop setz tu sobre la part sinistra de lu, e comanda al ministra que segua a la dextra de lu, le qual extenda la sua vergua a hun de dos latz a la codena dels genetius e a la partida del mirac del ventre.	And let you sit on the left side of him, and command the assistant to stand on the right side of him, and let him extend his finger on one side to the area of the genitals and at the end of the navel.
E aprop pren spatum lat e scindeys la codena dels genetius del mieg loc per la longitut entro prop le pentenilh.	And take a broad spatula and split the skin of the genitals in that middle place for the length between the two testicles.
E sia fayta la seccio segon rectetut engualment distant de la linha que deveseys la pel dels genetius, entro que pervengua al ciphac blanc comprehendent.	And let the incision be made according to a straight line equally distant from the hairline which divides the hair of the genitals, arriving at the white head encompassing it.
E excorja aquel, e observa, e guarda te per aysso que tu no inscidas aquel; e la tua excoriacio am la qual aquel excorjas per partida jassia que sia suspenduda am le huou mays e subtilment escruta am la excoriacio segon la quantitat a tu possibla.	And cut that, and observe it, and guard against it so that you do not cut yourself; and your incision with which you cut it by the hole let it be suspended by the most red and thin part and scrutinize carefully through the incision according to how much is possible for you.
E aprop perfora le ciphac ple de aygua am perforacio ampla, e extratz tota l’aygua.	And pierce the head full of water with a broad piercing, and extract all the water.
E aprop separa entre doas labias de la seccio am uncis, e exten le ciphac a las partidas desus; e no toques la codena les genetius comprehendent, e inscideys le ciphac en aquela manieyra que es a tu possible.	And separate between the two lips of the incision with your nails, and extend the head upwards to the parts above; and do not touch the skin of the genitals encompassing it, and cut the head in that manner which is possible for you.
E inscideys aquel am la sua totalitat o en pessas, e majorment le sieu latz subtil, quar si tu no perscrutas exquisidament la inscizio de lu, no es fayta segurtat que la aygua no retorne.	And cut it with its entirety or in pieces, and especially its side very thinly, for if you do not scrutinize the incision of it exquisite ly, there is not certainty that the water will not return.
Mays si le huou procezeys de aquela defora de la sua codena en la ora de la tua operacio, lahoras quan tu auras complida la seccio del ciphac, retorna dedintz aquel, e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la codena dels genetius am sutura, e aprop cura aquel ayssi cum las autras plagua, entro que sia sanat.	But if the blood proceeds from that hole in the skin at the time of your operation, then when you have finished the incision of the head return it within, and let the two lips of the skin of the genitals be joined with a suture, and cure that just as the other wounds, until it is healed.
E si atrobas le huou corromput per autra malautia, lahoras cove que tu lies les vayssels les quals so sore le suspensori, e extrat le huou, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit.	And if you find the blood corrupted on account of another illness, then let the vessels which are sore on the suspender be tied, and extract the blood, and cure that just as we have said.
Mays si l’aygua es agreguada en doas partidas esemps, lahoras sapias que doas son las ernias; donc inscideys aquela partida segon que has feyt en l’autra engualment; e si es a tu vist que sia una opera, lahoras tu la fay.	But if the water is accumulated in two places, then know that there are two hernias; therefore cut that part just as you have done in the other similarly; and if it is seen to be one operation, then do it.
E aprop tu abstergiys le sanc, e entramet en las seccios lana submersa en oli o en oli rozat; e pausa deforo autra lana la qual tu as submersa en vi e oli, e expandeys aquela sobre dos genetius e·l mirac del ventre; e pausa desobre draps doblatz e pulvils, e lia aquels desobre am liament le qual es segon aquesta forma:	And you shall wash the wound and insert into the incisions wool dipped in oil or rose oil; and place outside another wool which you have dipped in wine and oil, and spread it over the two genitals and the navel; and place on top folded cloths and apply to them a poultice made according to this form:
e aprop sian preses dos draps e sian humplitz de lana carmenada segon aquesta semblansa; e sian faytas las extremitatz am les quals es premut de coto o de lana humida, e sian agreguatz am strectura en le braguier de las braguas, e la una de las extremitatz prengua del cul entro al dos, e la segonda prengua a la partida del pantenilh, e dos extramitatz sobre dos coyssas dejos e dos extramitatz autras sobre dos angonars, e tota extrictura sia ajustada en le braguier de las braguas.	and let two cloths be pressed and filled with wool coloured according to this resemblance; and let the extremities by which it is pressed be made of linen or of dampened wool, and let them be tied with tightness around the waistband of the breeches, and one extremity press the anus into the two, and the second press at the end of the foreskin, and two extremities over two thighs and two other extremities on two angles, and all tightness be tied in the waistband of the breeches.
E alcunas veguadas aquesta hernia es medicada artificialment am cauteri en loc de seccio am ferr; e es que tu prenguas cauteri cutellar subtil e que inscidas am aquel la codena dels ginitius, e es ignit segon que havem recomtat entro que sia descubert le ciphac blanc contenent la aygua, e lahoras tu pren cauteri segon aquesta forma:	And sometimes this hernia is treated artificially by cauterisation instead of incision with iron; and it is that you take a thin cutlass and cut with it the skin of the genitals, and it is ignited according to what we have recommended until the white head containing the water is uncovered, and then you take cautery according to this form:
e es asemblat a letra greca.	and is arranged like Greek letters.
E aprop perfora am aquel ciphac, e es ignit entro que tota la humiditat sia fora-gitada.	And pierce with that head, and it is ignited until all the moisture is driven out.
E aprop exten le ciphac am uncis, e excorja am uncis, e excorja am cauteri subtil ignit; e inscideys aquel segon que es a tu possible entro que eradiques tot lu; e guarda te del huou que·l foc no·l toque.	And extend the head with your nails, and cut it with hot cautery, and scrutinize it carefully until you have eradicated all of it; and guard against the blood not being touched by the fire.
E sapias que aquesta operacio es pus salva e pus longinqua de flux de sanc, e milhor que operacio am seccio.	And know that this operation is much safer and much further removed from bleeding of blood, and better than operation with incision.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat apostema caut en la hora de seccio o en hora de cauteri, o flux de sanc, lahoras cove que tu cures qual contrarietat fa a tu per aquo, am curacio la qual conveneys a lu segon que es dit.	But if you find that cautery is applied in the hour of incision or in the hour of cautery, or bleeding of blood, then let you cure which contradiction it does to you according to what it is said by that cure.
Mays si le malaute es pauruc, e no spera la segonda operacio per la sua horribilitat, lahoras administra perforacio segon que yeu recomti aquo; e es quan es certificat deves tu, per aquo que havem dit de las significacios, que aquela hernia es ayguosa.	But if the patient is fearful and does not expect the second operation on account of his horror, then administer piercing according to that which we have said, and it is when you are certain through the signs that we have said that the hernia is watery.
Lahoras cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute sobre alcuna cezelha elevada, aprop perfora le apostema en la partida pus bassa de lu am spatum lat, e pausa la perforacio segon la longitut del cos.	Then let you raise the patient on some high support, then pierce the pustule in its lowest part with a broad spatula, and make the piercing according to the length of his body.
E sia la apercio ampla entro que corro tota l‘aygua.	And let the piercing be broad so that all the water is driven out.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc coto e lia aquel e layssa aquel, per so que corro le romanent de l’aygua.	And let the cut be tied and the poultice applied and left on so that it drives out the remainder of the water.
E aprop cura aquel entro que la plagua sia sanada.	And cure that just as the poultice is healed.
Mays si contrarietat es a la egrecio de l’aygua en aquela hora tu perforas aquela: e aquo no es fayt sino per aquo quar le pannicol blanc en le orrifici de la plagua fa contrarietat e prohibeys le eyssiment de l’aygua, lahoras cove que tu metas en la plagua pena o instrument am la qual es extrayta l’aygua dels ydropitz, la forma del qual es precedida; o ajusta en la opprecio de la plagua un petit.	But if contradiction is to the egress of the water in that hour you pierce that: and this is not done except because the white skin around the wound makes contradiction and prohibits the egress of the water, then let you put into the wound a pebble or instrument by which the water is extracted from the pustules, the shape of which is preceded; or tighten in the oppression of the wound a small pebble.
E sapias que l’aygua retorna, e es agueguada aprop vi meses o enaviro aquels; e cum es agreguada, lahoras sia perforat segon aquela meteyssa manieyra, quar le malaute ayssi passara les sieus dias.	And know that the water returns and is retained for several months or around that time; and when it is accumulated, then let him be pierced according to that same manner mentioned, for the patient will thus pass his days.
Capitol .lxiii.	Chapter .lxxxiii.
De seccio sobre hernia carnosa e la curacio de lu.	Of incision upon fleshy hernia and its cure.
Sapias que en la seccio sobre aquesta hernia es temor perdusent a pernicia en las majors disposicios; per que a mi es vista la dimissio de lu e esser salvat per aquela milhor.	Know that in incision upon this hernia is lost fear for the greater dispositions; for it has seemed to me that there was discharge of it and saved by that better.
E yeu so rememorant la operacio en aquela e las specias dels apostemas.	And you shall remember the operation in that and the spices of the pustules.
Donc, dic que l‘apostemas natz en les cos dels quals les genetius so conponutz e es fayt aquo per motas causas: o per superfluitat aguda agra, la qual es efundida als genetius, o per percuscio.	Therefore, we say that the pustules are born in the parts of which the genitals are composed and it is done by many causes: or by acute acute superfluity, which is poured out upon the genitals, or by percussion.
E es la color de la apostema segon la color del cos, e no es atrobat en lu dolor, e es apostema greu.	And its color follows that of the body, and there is no pain in it, and it is a hard pustule.
E fort leu es apostema lapificada, del qual la color es fosca, e no es centiment a lu.	And soon after is the pustule lapidified, whose color is dark, and there is no feeling in it.
E alcunas veguadas es fayt per nodacio de las arcerias, e per imflacio de aquelas ayssi quo ja es perceubut la rememoracio de lu, o per imflacio de venas.	And sometimes it is caused by a nodule in the arteries, and by inflammation of those through which the memory of pain is perceived, or by inflammation of the veins.
Mays aquo que es per imflacio de arcerias es conogut per la dispercio de la apostema quan compremas aquela am les tieus ditz; e no cove que aquel toques.	But that which is caused by inflammation of the arteries is known by the dispersion of the pustule when one presses it with his fingers; and it does not hurt if one touches it.
Mays aquel que es fayt per imflacio de vena no es dispergut de lu alcuna causa deves la compressio am les ditz.	But that which is caused by inflammation of a vein is not dispersed by pressure with the fingers for any reason.
E ja es possible que sobre aquesta specia sia fayta seccio e sobre les autres carns; e es que tu inscida la codena dels genetius, e aprop esten le huou a las partidas desus, e extratz aquel del ciphac blanc, e deliura le suspensori dels vaysels, e ligua les, e inscideys le suspensori pus que tu deliuras aquel de tota partida de las partidas del huou.	And it is possible that in this species section is performed and on the other meats; and you should insert the needle into the genitals, and stretch out the tissue above them, and extract that of the white head, and loosen the suspensory of the vessels, and tie them, and loosen the suspensory after you have extracted it from all parts of the head.
Donc si l’huou ja es am aquelas carnadas consolida, lahoras cove que tu extraguas le huou e inscidas aquel.	Therefore, if the head is already consolidated with those meats, then it is necessary to extract the head and insert that.
E si es adherencia entro alcuna causa del ciphac, o entre aquo que es entre les bayssels, lahoras cove que tu deliures tota aquela adherencia e inscidas aquela per inscizio redonda.	And if there is adhesion for some reason between the head and that which is between the vessels, then it is necessary to loosen all of that adhesion and insert it by a circular incision.
Mays si es nativitat de carn en le loc de la adherencia la qual es detras, lahoras cove que tu inscidas tot aquo que es de lu, e extraguas le huou ayssi cum havem dit.	But if there is meat growing in the place of the adhesion which is at the back, then it is necessary to insert all that is in it and extract the head as we have said.
Donc cum es complida la tua operacio, lahoras omple la plagua de lana imfuza en oli rozat e vi; e aprop cura aquela am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	Therefore, when your operation is completed, then fill the wound with wool dipped in rose oil and wine; and then treat it with the other treatment until it is healed.
Capitol .lxiv.	Chapter .lxiv.
De la curacio de hernia que es de vitz.	Of the treatment of hernia that is from the bowels.
Vit es apostema envolut per alcuna envolucio semblant a broto am mollificacio dels testiculs, e es fayt dificil movement exercitiu e deambulacio sobre le malaute.	It is a pustule wrapped in some wrapper like a bud with moistening of the testicles, and it makes difficult movement exercise and walking for the patient.
E en la curacio de aquesta malautia es per temor per aquo del qual es precedida rememoracio.	And in the treatment of this disease, there is fear from that from which memory precedes.
Empero cove que diguam opperacio en aquela segon que fero les primiers.	However, we should act according to what they do first.
E dic que cove que fassas sezer le malaute sobre una cezelha elevada; e aprop enpelleys le suspensori dels testiculs a las partidas dejos; e aprop te la codena dels genetius am les tieus ditz am les baysels que so probdas a la vergua; e tengua aquels autre ministre que tu, e extenda aquels am extencio vehement.	And he says that you should lift the patient up on a high bed; and then tighten the suspensory of the testicles at the lower parts; and insert the needle into the genitals with the fingers at the veins which are proven to be connected to the scrotum; and hold those others with your hand, and stretch them with violent extension.
E aprop inscideys am spatum lat agut per seccio traversa en le dreyt dels vaysels entro que sian les vayssels descubertz.	And then insert the needle with a sharp, wide point through a transversal incision in the right of the vessels so that the vessels are uncovered.
E aprop excorja de tota partida ayssi quo a tu havem dit en extraccio de arceria las quals so en las templas.	And then scrape off all the tissue as we have said in extraction of the arteries which are in the temples.
E aprop fica en aquelas un’agulha en la qual sia fiel doble, e lia aquel en le primier del locs en les quals accideys vit, e lia aquel autra veguada en le derier de lor.	And then insert a needle into those in which there is a double fold, and bind that in the first of the places in which the hernia occurs, and bind that other again in the last of them.
E aprop inscideys aquels en le mieg loc per seccio dreyta segon la longuesa del cos, e extratz aquo que es agreguat de las humiditatz fetulentas e corruptas.	And then insert those in the middle place by a straight incision according to the length of the body, and extract that which is aggregated from the putrid and corrupt humors.
E aprop cura la plagua am curacio de las autras plaguas en las quals vols sania esser engendrada per so que caian les vaysels les quals noyreysso un de dos genetius, quar no es mal per aquo.	And then cure the wound with the treatment of other wounds in which you want sanative to be generated so that they fall the vessels which blackened one or both testicles, for that is not bad for it.
Mays si accideys vit a totz les bayssels, lahoras cove que·ls testicols sian extragutz o que les testicols per aquo se cequo am les vayssels, per que sia privat de tot nutriment per la inscizio dels vayssels, e que sian estaborits, o que cequo per so que no sia juvament am aquels.	But if the hernia occurs in all the vessels, then either extract the testicles or that the testicles are privated from their food by the incision of the vessels so that there is no benefit to them, or that they are withered because of it.
Capitol .lxv.	Chapter .lxv.
De la cura de hernia entestinal.	Of the cure of intestinal hernia.
Le adveniment de aquesta hernia es per seccio que endeve en le ciphac extendut sobre le ventre de part dels angunars del mirac del ventre, per que deysendo les budels de aquela ruptura ad alcu dels budels.	The occurrence of this hernia is from an incision that extends into the head over the belly from the parts of the angles of the navel of the belly so that the intestines are pushed out through that rupture in some intestines.
E aquesta ruptura es o del ciphac o de excencio de lu, e accideysso aquestas doas specias per motas causas: o percussio, o per sautz, o per clamor, o per elevacio de alcuna causa greu, o per semblantz.	And this rupture is either of the head or from an incision there, and both species occur for many causes: either from a blow, or from saucing, or from crying, or from the elevation of some heavy cause, or from the like.
E·l senhal de aquo, quan es per extencio del ciphac, es que accideys pauc a pauc en lonc temps, e no accideys soptament, e es apostema engual entro ves le preon per so quar le ciphac comprem le budel.	And the sign of this, when it is from an extension of the head, is that it occurs little by little over a long time and does not occur suddenly, and it is a hard pustule between the veil and the skin because the head compresses the intestine.
E le senhal de lu es quan es per seccio del ciphac, quar al comensament fa accidir dolor vehement sobtament; e es apostema divers aparent dejos la codena propdana aparent, e aquo es per eyssiment del budel, e·l cos de lu a las partidas deforo del ciphac.	And the sign of it is when it is from an incision in the head, for at the beginning it causes violent pain suddenly; and there are divers appearances beneath the skin near the genitals, and that is from thrusting out of the intestine, and the body of it appears at the parts below the navel of the belly.
E alcunas veguadas es fora-getat am le budel la tela, e es apelada aquesta hernia entestinal zirbal.	And sometimes the membrane is thrust out with the intestine, and this hernia is called intestinal hernia of the bowels.
E alcunas veguadas es fayta am ventositat, e alcunas veguadas corr en le budel fenda, e aqui es retenguda, e es am aquo gran pernitia3 del malaute, e alcunas veguadas fa endevenir dolor malvada e majorment quan es premut.	And sometimes it is caused by windiness, and sometimes there is a fissure in the intestine, and here it is retained, and it is very harmful for the patient, and sometimes it causes bad pain and most when it is pressed.
E en la curacio de las especias de aquesta malautia am ferr es temor, per que cove que sia esquivat le cazament en aquela.	And in the treatment of these species of this disease with iron there is fear, for it is necessary to avoid the cautery in that.
E la manieyra de la operacio de aquela es que comandes al malaute que redugua le budel am la sua ma a las partidas dedintz de la sua conquavitat si obezeys al sieu retornament, e aprop sia envessat sobre le sieu col entre las tuas mas, e eleva las cambas de lu.	And the manner of the operation for this is to command the patient to reduce the intestine with his hand at its parts inside its cavity if he obeys its returnment, and then have him bent over so that his chest is between your hands, and lift his legs.
E aprop sten la codena la qual siec la codena dels testicols a las partidas desus, e inscideys la codena dels testicols tota per le lonc; e aprop fiqua en doas labias de la seccio uncis segon que indigeysses a hubrir la seccio am aquels.	And then tighten the one which covers the genitals at its parts above, and insert the needle of the genitals all through its length; and then fix in two lips of the incision hooks according to how you open it with those.
E si’ la seccio segon la quantitat que a tu sia possible que de aquela le huou sia foro-getat.	And if the incision according to the amount that for you is possible, then from that the head is pushed out.
E aprop excorja aquela ciphaqueth les quals so dejos la codena dels testicols, entro que sia descubert le ciphac blanc dur de quascuna partida.	And then scrape those chaps which are beneath the genitals, so that the white head of the head is uncovered in all its parts.
Lahoras tu entromet le tieu dit en aquo que siec le testicol, en aquo que es entre ciphac blanc, le qual es dejos la codena del huou, e entre le ciphac segon, e absolve am aquel’adherencia que es en la partida detras del huou.	Then you insert your finger in that which covers the testicle, where there is between the white head and the head according to the second one, and release with that the adhesion which is behind the head.
E aprop mau am la ma la codena dels testicols a las partidas deforo, e am aysso exten le ciphac blanc en sus am la ma sinestra, e eleva le huou am le ciphac a la partida de la seccio; e comanda al ministre que extenda le huou ensus e tu dissolveys la adherencia que es detras am solucio complida.	And then hold with your hand the one which covers the genitals at its parts outside, and extend the white head in him with your left hand, and lift up the head with the head at the place of the incision; and command the servant to extend the intestine within you and you dissolve that adhesion behind with completed solucio.
E cerqua am les tieus ditz que lay no sia alcuna causa del budel envelopat en le ciphac blanc dur.	And approach with your fingers so that there is no cause of the intestine being wrapped in the white head.
Mays si tu atrobas de lu alcuna causa, lahoras tu enpelleys aquel al ventre dejos.	But if you press on it for any cause, then you insert that into the belly below.
E aprop tu pren una agulha en la qual sia fiel gros fayt de x fiels, e entromet aquel deves le derier del ciphac, le qual es jos la codena dels testicols, la qual siec seccio; e aprop inscideys las extremitatz las quals emineysso del fiel entro que sian quatre fiels, e aprop compausa alcus de lor sobre alcuna figura en manieyra de crotz; e lia am aquel le ciphac del qual havem dit que es dejos la codena dels testicols am fort liament de dos partz.	And then take a needle in which there is a large fold made of x fields, and insert that behind the head where there are four fields, and then compress all of them over any figure in the shape of a cross; and bind with that the head from which we have said that it is beneath the genitals with strong binding of two parts.
E aprop envolveys las extremitatz dels fiels e lia aquelas am liament vehement entro que alcu dels vayssels que noyrrisso aquels no puscan trametre alcuna causa per so que de aqui no accida apostema caut.	And then wrap the ends of the fields and bind those with violent binding so that some of the vessels which blackened them cannot transmit any cause from here so that from there no hernia occurs.
E pausa autra veguada liament segon foro le primier liament, lonh de lu mens tres ditz; e aprop aquestz dos liaments layssa del ciphac le qual es dejos la codena dels testicols la quantitat de la grandeza del dit, e inscideys tot le romanent segon redondeza, e osta de lu le huou.	And let there be another wound made according to the first wound, long by three fingers; and these two wounds leave out of the scrotum which is below the testicles the quantity of the size of a finger, and incise all the rest according to roundness, and tie it up.
E aprop inscideys en la partida dejos de la codena dels testicols per seccio de la qual corra sanc e sania ayssi cum havem recomtat en aquo que havem dit.	And then incise in the part below the scrotum by section, of which blood and pus will flow out just as we have commanded in what we have said.
E aprop aministra lana submersa en oli, e pausa en la plagua; e aministra le liament le qual havem recomtat (e alcunas veguadas le ciphac blanc es cauterizat, le qual havem dit aprop la inscizio de lu temen de flux de sanc, quar motas veguadas accideys aquels) e leyssa le liament entro que per si caia.	And then administer wool submerged in oil and place it on the wound; and administer the bandage which we have commanded (and some times the scrotum is cauterized, which we have said near the incision of it they fear from a flow of blood, for many times this happens) and let the bandage fall within so that by itself it may drop.
Mays si le cazement de lu es tardat, lahoras de aygua cauda sia embrocat, e pausa sobre aquel entro que caia segon que havem dit.	But if the healing of it is delayed, then let there be applied warm water, and place it over that within which falls according to what we have said.
E aprop cura la plagua am l’autra curacio de las plaguas entro que sia sanat.	And then heal the wound with the other healing of wounds until it is healed.
Capitol .lxvi.	Chapter 66:
De hernia ventosa.	Of the hernial hernia.
En aquesta hernia no e vist alcu que sia estat ardit sus la curacio de lu am ferr.	In this hernia I have not seen anyone who has been burned on the cure of it with iron.
E les primiers diyssero que es fayta ayssi cum havem recomtat en la hernia que es am vi; la qual es que tu lies les vayssels aprop la seccio sobre aquela am fecilitat de lu; e aprop secca en le mieg loc en enviro le apostema am aquo que obro aquel, entro que caian les vayssels.	And the first said that it is done thus as we have commanded in the hernia which is with wine; which is that you tie the vessels near the section over that with ease of it; and then dry up the middle place around the abscess with that which caused it, while the vessels fall.
E cura la plagua segon que havem dit entro que sia sanada.	And heal the wound according to what we have said until it is healed.
Capitol .lxvii.	Chapter 67:
De la disropcio que es fayta en les anguonars.	Of the disruption which is made in the angles.
Alcunas veguadas endeve ruptura en les angonars ayssi cum havem dit, e emineys le loc.	Sometimes there is a rupture in the angles as we have said and the place protrudes.
E no deyssen als genetius alcuna causa dels budels al genetius; e si deyssen, aquo es pauc; e retorna s’en en totas horas.	And the genitalia should not be any cause of the intestines to the genitalia; and if they are, that is few; and return to it in all hours.
Mays si es prolonguat le temps am aquo, es ajustada fissura en le ciphac entro que deysenda le budel en le ciphac; e accideys aquo per la extencio del ciphac le qual es en le angonars ayssi cum havem dit, la qual causa es quar le ciphac es estendut, e aprop es mollificat e·l loc es apostemat e emineys.	But if the time of that is prolonged, a fissure is made in the scrotum from which the intestine descends into the scrotum; and this happens by the extension of the scrotum which is in the angles as we have said, the cause being that the scrotum is stretched, and then it softens and the place is abscessed and protrudes.
E la cura de lu es am cauteri ayssi quo es precedida la narracio de lu.	And the cure of it is with cauterization thus as is preceded by the narration of it.
E alcunas veguadas es curada am ferr segon aquesta manieyra: e es que·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu dos entre las tuas mas, e aprop secca le loc de la ruptura dels apostemas emineys am seccio per la latitut segon la quantitat de tres ditz.	And sometimes it is cured with iron thus: and the patient hangs over his head between your hands, and then dries up the place of the rupture of the abscesses protrude by section to the breadth according to the quantity of three fingers.
E aprop strenh le ciphac blanc que es jos la codena entro que sia descubert.	And then strengthen the white scrotum which is below the scrotum so that it is uncovered.
E aprop pren le ray e pausa aquel sobre le loc eminent del ciphac, e prem aquel al preon del ventre.	And then take the thread and place it over the prominent place of the scrotum, and press it to the pressure of the belly.
E aprop cus le dos locs eminentz sobre la extremitat del ray del ciphac, e ajusta am la sutura un de aquels am l’autre.	And then sew together the two prominent places on the end of the thread of the scrotum and join them with each other.
E aprop extratz la extremitat del ray, e no inscidas del ciphac de tot, ni no extenda le huou, ni autra causa ayssi cum yeu te fi saber en la curacio de hernia entestinal.	And then pull out the end of the thread and do not incise of the scrotum at all, nor extend the heat, nor other cause just as you will know in the cure of intestinal hernia.
E aprop cura aquela am la curacio de las plaguas, e cum inscideyses les fiels, mundifica aquela e restaura la plagua entro que sia consolidada; quar le ciphac es contrayt e no es ajustada la eminencia de ruptura.	And then heal that with the healing of wounds and when you have incised the testicles, cleanse it and restore the wound so that it is consolidated; for the scrotum is contracted and the eminence of the rupture is not adjusted.
E cauteri es milhor en aquest loc, quar es pus propda a salut.	And cauterization is better in this place because it is closer to health.
Capitol .lxviii.	Chapter 68:
De mollificacio de la codena dels testiculs.	Of the softening of the scrotum of the testicles.
Motas veguadas la codena dels testiculs en alcus homes es mollificada per aysso quar las carns que so entre aquela son mollificadas, e es fedat le reguardament de lu.	Many times the scrotum of the testicles in some men is softened because the flesh that is between it is softened and the guarding of it is lost.
Adonc necessari es ad aquel que es preguat en la curacio de lu que fassa jazer le malaute segon le sieu dos, e enscida tota la codena la qual es mollificada sobre la codena natural; e aprop que ajuste doas labias am la sutura.	Therefore it is necessary that he who is practiced in the cure of it makes the patient lie according to his head and incise all the scrotum which is softened over the natural scrotum, and then sew two lips together.
E si vols, cus en le comensament la superfluitat de la codena mollificada am tres cozeduras o quatre e am ferma sutura.	And if you wish, cut off in the beginning the superfluity of the softened scrotum with three or four cuts and with firm suturing.
E aprop inscideys entre las suturas; e aprop cura per curacio de las autras plaguas entro que sia sanat e caian les fiels.	And then incise between the sutures, and then heal by the healing of the other wounds until it is healed and the testicles fall down.
Capitol .lxix.	Chapter 69:
De castracio.	Of castration.
Sapias que castratio en nostre ley es excomengada, mays per causa es legut a mi que·m remembre de lu en aquest libre; e no es necessaria la rememoracio de lu sino per doas manieyras, de las quals es la una per so que aquo sia en la sciensa del metge quan es enterroguat de aquela, que sapia la curacio de lu al qual accideys; e l’autra manieyra es que nos motas vetz havem necessitat de castracio de autras bestias per les juvamentz nostres per aquelas, ayssi cum de motos, e de bocs, e de porcs, e de semblantz a las bestias.	Know that castration in our law is excommunicated, but for the cause it is read to me that I remember it in this book; and the remembrance of it is not necessary except by two ways, of which one is that it be in the science of the doctor when he is questioned about it, so that he knows the cure of it from which happens; and the other way is that we many times have had the necessity of castration of other beasts for our young ones because of them, just as of horses, and of oxen, and of pigs, and of beasts similar to the beasts.
E donc dic que castracio es fayta en dos manieyras: o per atrissio, o per fissura a seccio.	And therefore I say that castration is done in two ways: or by tearing, or by incision to section.
Mays en aquela que es fayta per atrissio, la via de la opera es que nos fassam cezer la bestia en aygua cauda entro que·ls genetius de lu sian mollificatz e sian linhitz e que pendan.	But in that which is done by tearing, the way of the operation is that we cause the beast to lie in warm water so that its testicles are softened and hang down and that they are cut off.
E aprop pren aquels am la tua ma entro que sian resols e no apparescan dejos le tocament.	And then take them with your hand so that they are resolved and do not appear underneath the touch.
Mays en castracio fayta per fissura e seccio, cove que tu tenguas la bestia e premas la codena dels testicols de lu am la ma senestra.	But in castration done by incision and section, see that you have the beast and press the scrotum of its testicles with your left hand.
E aprop lia le suspensori, e inscideys sobre quascun huou am una seccio entro que dos huous proceseysso.	And then ligate the suspensory ligament, and incise over each eye with one section so that two eyes are processed.
E aprop inscideys aquels pus que auras quascu excorjat.	And then incise those which you will have bled.
E no leysses sobre aquels del ciphac alcuna causa, sino le ciphac subtil le qual es sobre les vazes.	And do not cause over those of the scrotum any cause except the subtle scrotum which is over the veins.
E aquesta manieyra de castracio es milhor la qual es fayta per atrissio, quar atrissio fort leu layssa alcuna causa dels testicols per que la bestia desira coyt.	And this way of castration is better which is done by tearing because tearing leaves no cause of the testicles so that the beast desires coitus.
E aprop cura la plagua entro que sia sanada.	And then heal the wound until it is healed.
Capitol .lxx.	Chapter 70:
De la cura de hermafrodozia.	Of the cure of hermaphroditism.
Hermafrodozia en les homes es segon dos manieyras: la una es quar o appar en aquo que siec l’espazi en la codena de testiculs, en aquel que es entre dos testiculs figura quar cunh de femna en la qual so pels.	Hermaphroditism in men is according to two ways: one is when or appears the space between the scrotum of the testicles, in that which is between two testicles figure that clitoris of woman in which there are hairs.
E alcunas veguadas de aquel corr urina le qual es en la codena dels testiculs.	And sometimes from it urine the one which is in the scrotum of the testicles.
Mays en las femnas es una specia: e es que·l conh de la femna sobre le pentenilh es ayssi cum dos testiculs de home un pauc de tot yminiheys a la partida deforo ayssi cum le perpucii de home e dos testicols.	But in women it is one species: and it is that the clitoris of woman over the penis is like two testicles of man a little bit of all and foreskin of man and two testicles.
E la curacio es de tres specias: de dos dels homes e de una specia de las femnas.	And the cure is of three species: of two of men and of one species of women.
E es que cove que tu inscidas aquelas carns ajustadas entro que efuga la emprecio de aquela, e aprop que cures aquelas am curacio de las autras plaguas.	And it is that see that you incise those tightened flesh so that the impression of it flow out, and then heal those with the healing of the other wounds.
E en la segonda specia dels homes de la qual yeys urina la qual es en la codena dels testiculs, no es curacio ni opperacio en lu.	And in the second species of men of which it flows urine which is in the scrotum of the testicles there is no cure or operation in it.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter 71:
De lentinge e de carn eminent per causas de las femnas.	Of hernia and of prominent flesh by causes of women.
Lentige fort leu es ajustada sobre causas naturals entro que es etressat e es fayt leg le reguardament; e alcunas veguadas es magnificada en alcunas femnas en tant entro que es spandit ayssi cum en les homes e perve entro al coito.	Strong hernia is tightened over natural causes so that it is stressed and made tight the guarding, and sometimes it is enlarged in some women so that it is split just as in men and pierces during coitus.
Adonc cove que tu tenguas la superfluitat de lentinge am la tua ma o am unci e inscidas.	And then you who have the superfluity of linen with your hand or with a cloth and insert it.
E no ultimes en inscizio, majorment en le preon de la razit, per so que no endevengua flux de sanc.	And do not finish the incision, especially in the root of the vein, so that there is no flow of blood.
E aprop cura aquela am curacio de las plaguas entro que sia sanada.	Then cure with ointment the wounds inside until they are healed.
Mays carn nascuda es carn que nays en le horrifici de la mayre entro que umple aquel, e fort leu es eyssit a las partidas deforo segon semblansa de coa (e per aquo alscus primiers appelero aquo “malautia caudada”); donc cove que nos inscidam ayssi cum inscidem lentinge, e curem aquela entro que sia sanada.	Meat born from the orifice of the mother's womb and filling it, and quickly exit outside according to the appearance of a tail (and therefore some call this "tailed disease"); therefore we should cut in such a way as we do with linen, and cure it inside until it is healed.
Capitol .lxxii.	Chapter 72:
De curacio de alratica.	On the cure of an inguinal hernia.
Alratica es que le conh de la femna no sia perforat, o sia le trauc petit.	A hernia is when the vagina of a woman is not perforated or the hole is small.
E es o natural o accidental.	It can be natural or accidental.
Accidental es per malautia la qual ha precedit, e aquela es fayta o per carn nada ajustada o per ciphac subtil o espes.	An accidental hernia is caused by gout which preceded it, and it is made either by a membrane that is too tight or by a thin or hard cyst.
E es fayt o en le preon de la mayre, o en les costatz de lu, o en le pus sobira de lu, o en le pus bas de lu, e prohibeys de cuoyt e de enprenguacio e de enfantament, e fort leu prohibeys las mestruas.	And it happens either in the opening of the mother's womb, or in her ribs, or in the upper part of her belly, or in the lower part, and it prohibits coitus and pregnancy, and strongly prohibits menstruation.
E la cognicio de aquela es fayta per reguardament de la metrona, si la oppilacio es apparent, propdana; mays si no es apparent, lahoras tu cerqua aquela am les tieus ditz o am le ray.	And the knowledge of it is gained by observation of the midwife, if the pregnancy is apparent, it is a premature delivery; but if not apparent, then you examine it with your fingers or with your hand.
Mays si oppilacio es per ciphac subtil, e es propda a las doas labias, lahoras tu coyta e disromp aquela.	But if the pregnancy is by a thin cyst and it is close to both labia, then you cut and rupture it.
E es que pauses sobre las doas labias pulvils, e aprop pausa les tieus ditz indicz de amdoas las mas encemps.	And you place on both labia some powder, and you place your fingers indicating in both hands.
E la femna sia sobre le sieu dos, las sieuas coyssas extendudas, e aprop exten las doas labias am forsa entro que aquel ciphac subtil sia romput e la oppilacio sia uberta.	And the woman should be on her back, with her thighs stretched out, and you stretch both labia with force so that the thin cyst is broken and the pregnancy is opened.
E aprop pren lana e enbeu le4 en oli e pausa aquela sobre·l loc, e jagua am home le dia per so que·l loc inscis no sia consolidat.	And then take wool and dip it in oil and place it on the wound, and let him go for a walk during the day so that the cut is not healed closed.
Mays si le ciphac es gros e espes, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquel am spatum lat o am fuelha de mirta.	But if the cyst is large and thick, then you should cut it with a spatule or with a blade of myrrh.
Mays si la oppilacio es per carnada, lahoras suspen aquela am unci, e inscideys aquela.	But if the pregnancy is by membrane, then suspend it with oil and cut it.
E sian am tu las medicinas que fan cessar flux de sanc ses mordicacio, ayssi cum ahacatia, e sanc de drago, e enses, ajustat am album de huou.	And you should have the medicines that stop bleeding without biting, such as aconite, dragon's blood, and gum arabic, adjusted with egg white of an eagle owl.
E aprop aministra una canulha de plom ampla per so que la plagua no sia consolidada leugierament.	And then administer a wide lead cane so that the wound is not closed too quickly.
E tengua aquela per alcus jorns e aministra calgua de li sec.	And hold it for several days and administer cold water.
E aprop sia curada am l’autra curacio de consolidacio entro que sia sanada.	And then it should be cured with the other cure of consolidation until it is healed.
E alcunas vetz accideys en la mayre nativitat de autres carns, e lahoras cove que inscidas segon aquesta manieyra.	And sometimes accidents happen in the mother's birth of other meats, and then you should cut according to this manner.
Mays si aysso es per apostema crancos, a l’apostema crancos le qual es en la mayre no sia fayta contrarietat am ferr en deguna manieyra.	But if it is by a crust, then there should be no contradiction to the crust with iron in any way.
Capitol .lxxiii.	Chapter 73:
De la cura de emorroydas e de tayl e de botor roja que accideysso en le conh de las femnas.	On the cure of hemorrhoids, and of tail, and of red botch that happens in the vagina of women.
Emorroydas so apprecio dels orificis de motas venas entro que de aquelas corro mot sanc continuadament; e cum so antiquadas emorroydas e son fayts theyls.	Hemorrhoids are an appearance of openings of many veins from which flow much blood continuously; and when they are old hemorrhoids and are swollen.
E ja yeu he dit en la divisio las specias de aquelas e les senhals de aquelas, e diyre ayssi aquelas que recebo curacio e aquelas que no recebo curacio.	And I have already said in the division of these their kinds and their signs, and say thus those that receive cure and those that do not receive cure.
Donc dic que emorroydas e theyls quan so en le preon de la mayre e no apparo al sentiment, lahoras en aquelas no sia fayta curacio am ferr.	Therefore I say that hemorrhoids and theyls when they are in the opening of the mother's womb and do not appear in sensation, then in those there should be no cure with iron.
Mays aquelas las quals so en le orrifici de la mayre sobre las quals catz sentiment, so aquelas que so curadas.	But those which are in the opening of the mother's womb over which there is sensation, these are the ones that are cured.
E cove que tu metas la femna en mayso frega e aprop exten atheyl am les forfexs, o am drap aspre, e inscideys aquelas am las razitz.	And you should put the woman in a bath and stretch them with tweezers or with rough cloth, and cut them with blades.
E aprop pulveriza sobre aquelas deves le fluxs del sanc de una de las polveras insciscivas ses mordicacio, ayssi cum acassia e semblant ad aquels.	And then sprinkle over them the flow of blood of one of the powdery medicines without biting, thus with aconite and similar to these.
E aprop enpellesca les sieus pes per una hora, e aprop pausa aquela en aygua freja.	And then let her walk for an hour, and then place her in cold water.
E si persevera le fluxs del sanc, lahoras fay aquela sezer en decoccio de sumat e de scorsas de milgranas e de gualas e de semblantz.	And if the flow of blood persists, then do it again with a poultice made of sumac and husks of pomegranates and walnut shells and similar.
E aprop pren farina de ordi e comfiys aquela am miel e vi agre e fay emplastre am aquo sobre le dos de lu.	And then take flour of wheat and cook it in a bath with honey and sour wine and make a poultice with this over its back.
E si le sanc es abscindit, bo es; e sino, fay adherir am dos ventozas, e a las mamilhas ses escarificatio.	And if the blood is dried up, it is good; and if not, do the sticking with two leeches, and to the nipples its escarification.
E aprop pren lana e submergeys aquela am suc de coliandre o am suc de arnagloza o am suc de guarravier am vi pentit e fay adherir al loc; e aprop cura le loc am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And then take wool and soak it in juice of colander or in juice of wild basil or in juice of wild garlic with red wine and place it on the wound; and then cure the wound with ointments until it is healed.
Mays athyl rog le qual es de aspre reguardament, cove que tu inscidas aquo que a tu appar de aquel segon que he dit en theyl engualment.	But hard tail which is of rough guard, you should cut it according to what appears to you from that according to what I have said in its opening.
E cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And cure it until it is healed.
Capitol .lxxiv.	Chapter 74:
De perforacio de eyssedura accident en la mayre.	On the accidental piercing of the eardrum in the mother's womb.
Motas specias de apostemas accideysso en la mayre, ayssi cum cranc e apostema lapident e ulceracios e adhubelat e erpetromens e fistulas emorroyas e raguarrias e thyl e autres apostemas.	Many kinds of crusts happen in the mother's womb, thus with crust and crusty ulcer and suppuration and red botch and fistula and hemorrhoids and rattle and tail and other crusts.
E yeu ja he dit aquestas malautias e las specias de aquelas e les senhals de aquelas, e las curacios de lor en la divisio.	And I have already said these diseases and their kinds and their signs, and their cures in the division.
E cove que yeu digua en aquest tractat de apostema caut le qual ve en la mayre quan es dels apostemas que collegeysso sania, e si vols saber en qual manieyra se fa la opperacio de lu am ferr.	And you should know in this treatment of crust cauterization which appears in the mother's womb when it is of the crusts that are connected to the blood vessels, and if you want to know in what manner its cauterization is done with iron.
Adonc cove que tu consideres si la dolor de la apostema en le sieu comensament es aguda am percussio e flecma e febre, e vezes aquel enrogezir e si catz sobre aquel le sentiment, lahoras no·t coytes am perforacio de lu, e cura aquel am aquo que ajuda sobre la maturacio entro que cesse la acuitat dels accidentz.	Therefore you should consider if the pain of the crust in its origin is acute with percussion and phlegm and fever, and it throbbs and there is sensation over it, then do not cauterize it, and cure it with that which helps over the maturity until the acuteness of the accidents cease.
E lahoras cove que tu fassas cezer la femna sobre una cezelha que aia doas cezelhas; e recline sobre le sieu dos e ajusta les sieus pes a la partida pus dejos del ventre, e las sieus coyssas sian expandudas, e pausa les sieus brasses dejos les sieus denols, e lia quascus am liament ad aquo convenient.	And then you should make the woman to lie on her back over a board that has two boards; and recline on its back and adjust her feet at the bottom of the belly, and let her thighs be spread out, and place her arms under her ears, and lie each one on what is convenient.
E aprop la matrona segua del latz dreyt e aministre le instrument am le qual es ubert le orrifici de la mayre, la forma del qual vindra en aquelas causas que·s faran aprop.	And then the midwife should hold the instrument straight and administer it to open the opening of the mother's womb, the form of which will come into those causes that are fitting.
E cove quan vols ministrar aquest instrument que tu fiques am lo ray le preon de la mayre de la femna, e aquo que del instrument es intrat en la mayre no sia mays que·l preon de la mayre e leda le malaute.	And when you want to administer this instrument, you should dip it in the water of the mother's womb, and that which is entered into the mother's womb is not more than the opening of the mother's womb and lead the patient.
Mays si l’estrument es major que·l preon de la mayre, lahoras cove que tu pauses pulvils sobre la textura del preon de la mayre per sso que sia prohibit l’intrament de tot instrument en le preon de la mayre.	But if the instrument is larger than the opening of the mother's womb, then you should place powder over the texture of the opening of the mother's womb so that there is prohibited entry of any instrument into the opening of the mother's womb.
E cove que tu pauses le vertitge que corr en le strument del latz pus desus e que le ministre tengua le strument e revolva le vertitge entro que sia ubert le orrifici de la mayre.	And you should place the water that runs in the instrument of the womb above, and let the midwife hold the instrument and rotate the water inside so that it is opened the opening of the mother's womb.
E cum appar la excitura, e es tocada am la ma e es leon e molh, lahoras cove que tu secces aquela deves le cap de lu am spatum lat.	And when there appears the effusion and it is touched by the hand and is cold and moist, then you should dry it with a spatule.
E cum la sania es evacuada, lahoras cove que tu pauses en la plagua una meca submersa en oli rozat o oli vert en le qual sia alcuna stiptisitat; e pausa la calca7 en la seccio en le preon de la mayre.	And when the blood is drained, then you should apply to the wound a sponge soaked in rose oil or green oil with some styptic in it; and place the bandage on the incision over the vein of the arm.
E pause deforo la mayre e sobre le pentenilh lana munda submersa en aygua en la qual sian bulidas malvas.	And place wool, clean and soaked in water with malva flowers, outside the arm and over the elbow.
E aprop sia curada aprop dos dias am enguent le qual conveneys ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	Then it should be healed within two days by applying a ointment suitable for this purpose.
E alcunas veguadas es lavada la mayre e la plagua enayssi que es cristerisat am aygua e mel, e aprop am aygua en la qual es bulhida razit de liri o de aristologia longua, e aprop retorna al enguent.	And sometimes the arm and wound are washed with water in which is dissolved honey, and then with water in which is ground rhubarb or long pepper, and then return to the ointment.
E si la plagua es dedintz en la mayre ameguada, lahoras cove que tu sias prohibit de la curacio de lu am ferr, habantz cura aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio.	And if the wound is inside the arm which has been cut, then you should abstain from treating it with iron, but treat that one as we have said in the previous section.
Capitol .lxxv.	Chapter 75:
A ensenhar las matronas en qual manieyre les enbrios bius sian medicatz quan yeysso segon figura no-natural.	To instruct midwives on how to treat stillborn children, when their shape is not natural.
Necessaria causa es que la matrona conogua en le comensament la figura del enfantament natural per senhals de lu, e es que quan tu vezas la femna expremar a las partidas dejos e desira odorar le ayre, e sobre aquo es enleujada per aquo que sobre ela es del part, e festina le eyssiment del enbrio, lahoras sapias que aquest part es segon figura natural, e es l’eyssiment de lu sobre le sieu cap, e la segondina am aquel o suspensa o pendent del ombelic.	It is necessary that the midwife recognize in the beginning the shape of a natural childbirth by its signs, and it is when you see the woman expressing her breasts, and desiring to breathe the air, and feeling relaxed over what is above her, and hastening the birth of the child, then you know that this position is according to a natural shape, and it is the delivery of it over their head, and the second one with it suspended or hanging from the umbilical cord.
Donc cum tu vezes aquels senhals, lahoras cove que·l ventre de lu sia compremut per so que l’embrio deysenda leugerament quar quan deyssen sobre le sieu cap, deysen a lu la segondina, e es mondada de aquelas superfluitatz am bona mondificacio.	Therefore, when you see those signs, then the belly should be compressed so that the embryo descends gently, and when it is over their head, they deliver the second one, and the placenta is removed with a good cleansing.
Mays aquel que es otra aquest part es no-natural e no-lausable, quar quan le enbrio es eyssit sobre sos pes e·l cos de lu es eyssit devant le cap de lu e·ls pes de lu, e la ma de lu una, o al pe de lu .i., o es eyssit le cap de lu e la ma de lu, o al ventre de lu, e fort leu es convertit sobre le sieu col, e semblant de las figuras de lu no-lausablas.	But when this childbirth is not natural and laudable, because the child is born on its feet, and their body comes out before their head and their feet, or when one of their hands or feet is born first, or when their head and hand are born, or when the belly is delivered first, and very soon it is returned to their neck, and resembling one of these non-laudable shapes.
Don necessaria causa es a la matrona que sia savia e subtil en totas aquelas causas, e que·s guarde de error e de decepcio.	It is necessary that the midwife be wise and subtle in all those causes, and guard against error and deception.
E yeu so mostrant tota figura de aquelas, e qual engen es en aquelas per so que sia significat per aquo e sia stat sobre aquo.	And I will show you all the figures of them, and what cunning is in them so that it may be understood by this and be established upon it.
Quan le feyt es eyssit sobre le sieu cap per egrecio natural, e aquel es vehement sobre la femna e es fayt a lu part dificil, e vezes la vertut de lu ja debelitada, lahoras fay aquela sezer , o que las femnas tenguan lu, e evapora le conh de lu am fenugrec coyt e am olis humitz.	When the child is born over their head through natural exertion, and it is violent on the woman and a difficult delivery for them, and you see the strength of her already weakened, then make that incision, or if the women are holding onto it, evaporate their grip with fenugreek powder and with oiled rags.
E aprop entrometa la metrona entre les sieus ditz espatum petit e fenda am aquel la segondina, o secce aquela am la sua ungla entro que corro aquo que es en ela de humiditat.	And the midwife should insert her finger between their teeth gently and push with it the second one, or dry it up with her fingernail in between so that she removes what is inside it of moisture.
E preme le ventre de la femna entro que deyssenda le fet.	And press the woman's belly so that the child goes down.
Mays si no deyssen, lahoras cove que la femna sia cristirizada de mucellage de ptilli e mucellage de fenugrec am cizami.	But if it does not come out, then the woman should be anointed with a mixture of styrax and fenugreek with honey.
E aprop comanda a lu, aprop le cristeri, que sia compremuda e fay aquela stornudar am condisi; e te la boca de lu e·l nas de lu per huna hora, quar le fet sira foro-getat tantost.	And the midwife, who is anointing it, should compress and make that sneeze with seasoning; and hold their mouth and nose for an hour, because the child will be forced out immediately.
E si las doas mas del fet so foro-getadas al comensament, lahoras cove que tu redusiscas aquelas am fecilitat petit a petit.	And if both of the child' hands are born first at the beginning, then you should draw them back little by little gently.
Mays si no obezeys al intrament, lahoras pausa la femna sobre una cezelha e leva les pes de lu sus, e aprop concuceys la cezelha sobre la terra; e la femna sia tenguda que no caia deves la concussio.	But if she does not obey the instrument, then place the woman on a plank and raise their feet up, and the plank should be tilted towards the ground; and the woman should be held so that she does not fall from the tilt.
E si las mas no son dedintz tornadas e morr le fet, lahoras inscideys aquelas e extratz le romament del fet o lia le cors a la ma de lu am drap e extratz aquel am equalitat, quar aquel sira foro-getat.	And if the hands are not turned inside out and the child is stillborn, then insert those and pull the child's arm or tie the body to their hand with a cloth and pull it equally, because that will be forced out.
De eyssiment del embrio sobre les sieus pes.	Of delivery of the embryo on their feet.
Quan le fet yeys sobre les sieus pes, lahoras cove que tu impelliscas aquels en sus, e aprop convertas le fet petit, e aprop que engualhes aquel, e aprop que prenguas un pe de lu e extendas aquels petit a petit.	When the child is born on their feet, then you should push those up, and the child will turn little by little, and when you have taken one of their feet, extend those little by little.
Mays cum son eyssit entro a las coyssas, lahoras tu comanda a lu que se exprema, e fay aquela extornudar am condizi, quar sira foro-getat si Deus lo vol.	But when it is born between their thighs, then you command them to push out, and make that sneeze with seasoning, because it will be forced out if God wills it.
E si no es foro-getat am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras tu retorna le fet petit a petit entro que pauses aquel segon figura natural, quar aquel sira lahoras foro-getat am leugier eyssiment.	And if it is not forced out with what we have recommended, then return the child little by little to where they should be according to the natural shape, because it will be forced out later with easier delivery.
E si es prohibit am tot aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras pren de musellage de altea e de goma dissolvuda, e percuteys tot en le mortier per bona percussio, e aprop linieys am aquo le conh de la femna, el pus bas del ventre de lu.	And if it is prohibited by all that we have recommended, then take of a mixture of aloe and dissolved gum, and beat them both in the mortar with good beating, and line with that the inside of the woman' vagina, the lowest part of the belly.
E aprop fay aquela cezer en aygua tebeza, entro que consegua les ypocondias.	And then make her sweat in lukewarm water, so that she gets rid of phlegm.
E cum vezes que las partidas dejos de lu so lenificadas, lahoras fay a lu subfumiguacio de mirta e sub-pausa aquela a lu.	And when you see that the breasts are softened, then make fumigation of myrrh and apply to it what is below.
E quan te la sub-fumiguacio per una hora, lahoras tu la fay sezer sobre una cezelha, e aprop fay aquela stornudar e extrenh la boca de lu, e levas de aquela, e prem la partida pus bassa del ventre de lu am leugiera compressio, quar le fet sira tantost foro-getat.	And when you have made fumigation for an hour, then make her sneeze on a plank, and then make that sneeze and open the mouth of it, and lift up from there, and press the lowest part of the belly gently, because the child will be forced out immediately.
Eyssiment del fet sobre les sieus denols e las suas mas.	Delivery of the child on their hands and feet.
Quan le fet eyssira segon aquesta forma, lahoras tu engenies en entrometen las suas mas petit a petit; e aprop la femna stia evessada sobre le sieu col, e les pes de lu pengo en jos, e aquelas sia jasent sobre le lieyt, e complegua las suas mas.	When the child is born in this shape, then you should insert their hands little by little; and the woman will be bent over, and their feet pointing down, and those will be resting on the bed, and close their hands.
E aprop prem sobre le ventre de lu petit a petit, e aprop extratz aquo que es dejos les pes de lu de las aurelhas entro que sia preparada en la partida pus dejos.	And then press on the belly little by little, and pull what is below their feet from the armpits so that it is prepared in the lowest part.
E si le fet no es fora-getat, lahoras pren les pes de lu e mau aquels am movement vehement, e aprop prem aquo que es sobre les ypocondres petit a petit entro que le fet puege a las partidas desus.	And if the child is not forced out, then take their feet and hold them with violent movement, and then press what is above the armpits little by little so that the child can come to the parts above.
E aprop entrometa las suas mas e engualhe le fet petit a petit, e comanda a la femna que se exprema entro que le fet sia foro-getat.	And then insert their hands and turn the child little by little, and command the woman to push out so that the child is forced out.
Eyssiment del fet latutidinalment pendent una de las suas mas.	Delivery of the child hanging from one of their hands.
Sia engeniat en reduccio de la ma de lu, mays si no podes aquela reduzir, lahoras eleva la femna e fe aquela anar.	It should be understood as reduction of the hand, but if you cannot reduce it, then lift the woman and make her bend.
E si anar no pot, lahoras fay la jazer sobre le lieyt, e concuteys las coyssas de lu am concussio vehement, e aprop aministra liamentz les quals yeu e recomtatz de mucillages.	And if she cannot bend, then make her lie on the bed, and press their thighs with violent pressing, and administer to them what they have been prescribed of mucilages.
E si es vengut le enfantament, lahoras fay aquela sezer sobre cezelha, e aprop studia sobre la reduccio de la ma, e enguala le fet segon figura natural, e fay stornudar la femna e comanda a lu que comprema a si entro que sia foro-getat.	And if the delivery has come, then make her sneeze on the plank, and then study on reduction of the hand, and turn the child according to the natural shape, and make the woman sneeze and command them to push so that it is forced out.
Eyssiment del fet sobre·l col expandudas las suas mas e la fassia de lu es al dos de la sua mayre.	Delivery of the child on their neck with their arms and belly expanded towards their mother's back.
Cove que la matrona tengua la ma del fet e aprop revolva aquel petit a petit, e eque aquel am facilitat.	It should be that the midwife holds the hand of the child and then turns it little by little, and it will be with ease.
E cum es e quant so es engualhat, e lahoras pausa sobre le conh de lu aquo que havem recomtat de oli e de mucellages.	And when it is out and the umbilical cord is cut, then apply to it what we have recommended of oil and mucilages.
E aprop comandas a lu que·s maugua petit a petit, e quan auras feyt aquo, lahoras fay aquela cezer sobre una cezelha e comanda li que sia inclinada sobre le latz dreyt, e aprop comanda a lu que sia compremuda; e fay aquela stornudar am condizi.	And then command the mother to suckle it little by little, and when she has done that, then make her sneeze on a plank and command them to be tilted to the right side, and then command them to compress it; and make that sneeze with seasoning.
Exitus foetus praeparati super latus.	The preparation of the fetus is placed on its side.
Quan deyssen a horrifici de la mayre segon aquesta manieyra, considera, e lahoras tu inscideys la segondina am la tua ungla entro que sia evacuada de la humiditat.	When you see that the mother is giving birth according to this manner, consider and then insert your finger inside so that the humidity is evacuated.
E si le fet es suspendut sobre la cara e·l col de lu, lahoras tu inscideys aquela del embelic, per so que no sia retengut e mora.	And if the child is suspended above its face and neck, then insert that of the umbilical cord, so that it is not retained and dies.
E aprop empelleys le fet a las partidas dedintz entro que pauses aquel segon que cove, e manda a la femna que comprema a si alcunas veguadas, e el sira fora-getat am eyssiment leugier, si Dieus o vol.	Then pull the child to its limbs inside so that you pause that according to what covers it, and command the woman to compress herself in several places, and let it be extracted easily if God wills it.
Exitus geminorum aut foetuum multorum.	The exit of twins or multiple fetuses.
Sapias que gemels motas veguadas so natz, e alcunas vetz naysso tres o quatre , mays aquo es estranh e tart s’endeve; mays v so causas foro natura, e no vivo.	Know that twins are often born in many places, and sometimes three or four, but this is strange and rare; but there are several causes of nature, and not life.
E conte aquelas, ja sia que sian montiplicatz, una segondina, e son seperatz per ciphac, distingen aquels enter le liguament en l’ombilic de cascun de aquels E alcunas veguadas so foro-getatz ayssi cum es un fet per eyssiment natural leugier, e so eysitz alcunas veguadas per eyssiment no-lausabla ayssi cum havem recomtat.	And count those, that they may be multiplied, a second one, and are separated by the umbilical cord, distinguish those within the ligament in the umbilical of each of them. And sometimes they are extracted like a single fetus with a natural easy delivery, and sometimes some are delivered with an un-laudable delivery as we have mentioned above.
E si son dificils alcus de lor deves le enfantament e perveno ad aquo que havem dit de las figuras no-naturals, lahoras tu cura aquels ayssi cum havem recontat.	And if they are difficult to deliver and reach that which we have said about the unnatural shapes, then you cure those as we have related.
E si’ la matrona subtil e fassa aquo que fa am facilitat e subtilitat, e am tarditat, e sia ingeniat segon tota figura segon que es a lu preparat de l’engen amenant a salut.	And if the midwife acts sutilly and does that which she does with facilitaion and subtlety, and delay, and is ingenious according to every shape according to how it is prepared in her womb leading to health.
Rememoratio eius quod formatur in matrice ex embrionibus et Abortiuntur.	The remembrance of that which forms in the matrix from embryos and abortions.
Alcunas veguadas son formatz en la mayre un, e dos, e tres, e quatre, e v, e vi, e vii, e mays x, e ja es deves mi verificat que una femna abortem ne getet vi, e una autra x totz formatz, la qual causa fo fayta per mensuracio dels glorios savis.	Sometimes they are formed in the womb one, two, three, four, five, six, seven, and up to ten, and I have indeed seen a woman miscarry six times, while another had ten, all formed, due to the wise men measuring them out.
E tot aysso cove que sia en la sciencia de la matrona quar fort leu ad aquela parve semblant de aquo, e donc opause se ad aquo am so que cove.	And all that is hidden from that which is in the science of the midwife how powerful she goes to that small one resembling it and therefore pause over there.
Capitol .lxxvi.	Chapter .lxxvi.
De extraccio del fet quan es mort.	Of the extraction of the child when it is dead.
Quan tu curas le fet mort am aquo que havem dit en la divisio de la medicacio e no es defora eyssit, e tu yest forsat usar de opperacio am ma, lahoras cove que consideras si la femna es de sana vertut e no es am alcu dels accidentz per les quals sobre ela es temuda perdicio.	When you cure the dead child with that which we have said in the division of medicine and is not extracted out, and you are forced to use cauterization with your hand, then consider if the woman is of healthy nature and does not have any of the accidents by which over her there is feared loss.
Lahoras cove que la femna sia envessada sobre le lieyt sobre le sieu dos, e sia le cap de lu enclinat enjos e las coyssas de lu sian elevadas.	Then let the woman be laid down on her back, and her head be inclined downward and her thighs elevated.
E·l ministre tengua aquela de doas partz o sia liada en le lieyt per so que·l cos de lu no se extenda deves la extraccio del fet.	And the attendant hold that of two parts or be laid in bed so that the body of it does not extend due to the extraction of the fetus.
E aprop tu humecta la boca de la mayre de lu am olis humitz e am mucellage de altea e de fenugrec e de semensa de li.	And then you moisten the mouth of the mother with oiled water and with mucilage of alder and fenugreek and of linseed.
E aprop unte la matrona la sua ma am aquels olis e mucellages, e aprop entrometa la sua ma am fecilitat en la mayre, e aprop cerque am la ma loc en le qual fique les uncis en le fet.	And then the midwife apply her hand with those oils and mucilage, and then insert her hand with facilitation in the mother, and then surround with her hand the place where the claws are in the fetus.
E locs convenient en aquo: adonc tu considera si le fet es preparat que deysenda sobre le sieu cap, e lahoras tu fique les uncis en les huels de lu, o en le col, o en la boca, o en le palat, o dejos la barba, o en la furcula de lu, o en les locs propdas de las costas, o dejos les ypocondres.	And convenient places in that: then consider if the fetus is prepared to descend over its head, and then insert the claws in the hollows of it, or in the neck, or in the mouth, or on the palate, or below the beard, or in the armpit of it, or in the close places of the ribs, or below the hypochondrium.
Mays si le deysendiment es sobre les pes de lu, lahoras en le pentenilh, o en le mieg de las costas.	But if the descent is over its feet, then in the instep, or in the middle of the ribs.
E cove que tengua le unci am la ma dreyta, e pausa la curvitat de lu en aquel loc le qual es entre les ditz de la ma senestra, e entrometa la ma am facilitat e fique le unci en alcu de aquels locs les quals havem ditz, entro que pervengua a la causa boyda.	And let it have the claw with its right hand, and pause the curvature of it in that place which is between the fingers of the left hand, and insert the hand with facilitation and insert the claw in some of those places which we have mentioned, until it reaches the desired cause.
E aprop pause e fique en la apposicio de lu un autre unci, o le tertz si es necessitat, per so que sia atraccio engual, e no sia extencio segon la sua rectetut tant solament.	And then pause and place in the opposition of it another claw, or the third if necessary, so that there is an attraction together, and not an extension according to its rectitude only.
Ans sia maugut a tota partida, per so que l’eyssiment de lu sia alleujat ayssi cum es fayt en dent deves la eradicacio de lu.	And let the hand be bent in every part, so that the extraction of it is separated as it is done in teeth due to its removal.
E cove en lu aquo que es entre lor que la extencio sia mollificada; e si alcuna partida de lu es retenguda, lahoras cove que la matrona unte alcus sieus ditz am oli e entrometa aquels espertament e revolva am aquels aquo que es retengut.	And let that in it which is between them that the extension be softened; and if any part of it is retained, then let the midwife anoint some of its fingers with oil and insert those expertment and revolve that which is retained.
Donc si la partida del fet es fora-getada, lahoras les uncis sian permudatz entra loc le qual sia pus aut; e fay aysso entro que tot le fet sia fora-getat.	Therefore if the part of the fetus is extracted, then the claws be moved into the place which is most out; and do this so that all the fetus is extracted.
Mays si la ma es eyssida denant l’autra, e no es possible reduzir aquela per la coartacio de lu, lahoras cove que drap sia envolopat sobre aquela; e aprop extratz aquela entro que tota sia fora-getada, e inscideys aquela o en la junctura de la ma o en le coyde.	But if the hand is extracted in front of the other and it is not possible to reduce that by the contraction of it, then let cloth be wrapped around that; and then extract that until all is extracted, and insert that or in the joint of the hand or in the elbow.
E ayssi cove que fassas en l’autra ma e en les dos pes.	And do the same with the other hand and with the two feet.
Mays si le cap del fet es gran, o accideys a lu coartacio en le eyssiment, o es en le cap de lu aygua ajustada, lahoras cove que entrometa entre les ditz espatum spinos e fenda le cap e extragua la aygua, o que discroba aquel am un instrument le qual es nompnat “alundat”, la forma del qual vindra am las formas dels autres instruments en le capitol le qual es aprop aquest.	But if the head of the fetus is large, or it happens to it contraction in the extraction, or there is water in its head tightly attached, then let the midwife insert between the fingers spatula with thorns and split the head and extract the water, or uncover that with an instrument which is named “alundat”, the shape of which will come with the shapes of other instruments in the chapter which is next to this.
E semblantment fassa si·l fet es de gran cap per natura: e lahoras cove que inscida aquel am algematu, o que prengua aquel am alunda ayssi cum havem dit; e aprop extra les osses am les forceps.	And do likewise if the fetus is of a large head by nature: and then insert that with compression, or grasp it with forceps as we have said above; and then extract the bones with forceps.
E si le cap es eyssit e es coartat deves la furcula, lahoras sia fendut entro que la humiditat la qual es en le pietz sia efunduda.	And if the head is extracted and is contracted due to the armpit, then let it be split so that the humidity which is in its feet is poured out.
Mays si no es complicat, ni obezeys a eyssiment, lahoras tu inscideys le cap tantost segon que a tu sira possible.	But if it is not complicated or resistant to extraction, then you insert the head as much as possible to you.
E si le dejos del ventre es apostemat o es en lu ydropici, lahoras cove que tu perfores aquel entro que corro la humiditat que es en lu.	And if the abdomen is swollen or there is water in it, then let you pierce that so that the humidity that is in it runs out.
Mays si le fet es sobre les sieus pes, lahoras la atraccio de lu es leugiera e la direccio de lu a la boca de la mayre es leugiera.	But if the fetus is over its feet, then the attraction of it is easier and the direction of it to the mouth of the mother is easier.
Mays si es coartat deves le ventre e·l pietz, lahoras cove que tu extraguas aquel am drap le qual auras envolopat sobre la tua ma, e que fendes le ventre e·l pietz entro que corra aquo que es en aquels.	But if it is contracted due to the abdomen and feet, then let you extract that with cloth which you have wrapped around your hand and split the abdomen and feet so that that which is in them runs out.
Mays si les autres membres so ostatz e torna le cap, lahoras la metrona entrometa la ma senestra; mays si la boca de la mayre es huberta, lahoras intrometa la ma en le preon de layre, e cerque am aquela le cap, e atira aquel am les ditz entro a la boca de la mayre, e aprop entrometa en lu un unci, o dos uncis, e atire lu am aquels.	But if the other members stand out and turn the head, then let the midwife insert the left hand; but if the mouth of the mother is opened, then insert the hand in the pubis, and surround with that the head, and draw it with those fingers into the mouth of the mother, and then insert into it a claw or two claws, and draw it with those.
E si la boca de la mayre es coartada per apostema caut le qual accideys a l’u, lahoras cove que no sia trebelhat sobre lu; abantz cove lahoras aministrar efusio de causas humidas grassas.	And if the mouth of the mother is contracted by an ulcer which happens to the u, then let it not be pressed upon it; rather let there be administered a diffusion of causes of moist heat.
E aministre emplastres; e segua le pacient en ayguas que mollifican e humectan.	And administer poultices; and follow the patient with waters which soften and moisten.
E si le fet es sobre le sieu costat, lahoras si possible es, sia agulat: e sia aministrat aquo que havem dit en le fet viu.	And if the fetus is on its side, then if possible it should be turned over; and let that which we have said about the living fetus be administered.
E si aquo no es possible, lahoras sia inscidit en pessas, e sia extrayt.	If this is not possible, then it should be cut into pieces and extracted.
E cove que non layssas alcuna causa dedintz de la segondina.	And whoever leaves any cause inside the second stomach,
E cum tu auras complida tota la tua opperacio, lahoras aministra aquo que havem dit de la curacio en les apostemas cautz les quals accideysso de la mayre.	And when you have completed all your operations, then administer what we have said about the cure of ulcers caused by cold humors.
E si accideys flux de sanc, lahoras deyssendas en ayguas stipticas e aministra l’autra curacio.	And if there is bleeding, let it flow into astringent waters and administer the other cure.
E yeu ja e vist una femna en le ventre de la qual era fet mort, e aprop sobre aquel foc autra veguada emprenhada, e aprop foc mort es le fet autre.	And I have seen a woman whose belly was pregnant with a dead fetus; and on that fire another fire was lit, and the dead child fell out.
Accidit al u aprop lonc temps apostema en le sieu embelic; e inflat es entro que foc ubert, e comensec a getar brac.	It happened to her that for a long time an ulcer developed on her navel; and when the fire opened, she began to spit up fire.
E yeu fu appelhat a la cura de lu, e medicat a lu per lonc temps, e la plagua no es consolidada.	And I was called to cure him, and I treated him for a long time, but the plague did not heal.
Adonc yeu pausegui sobre lu de alscunas causas emplastra de forta atraccio, e eyssic de lu un os, e aprop passero alcus jorns, e eyssic un autre os; e yeu fu trop meravilhat, cum en le ventre no sia os.	Then I placed on him some plaster with strong attraction, and a bone came out of him, and after a few days another bone; and I was very amazed because there were bones in his belly.
E adonc yeu cogitegui que eran dels osses del fet mort.	And then I thought that they were the bones of the dead fetus.
Donc yeu enguisigui la plagua, e extrayssi de lu motz osses , la femna existent en las sieuas milhos disposicios, e ja visquec en tal manieyra per lonc temps, correc de lu un petit de brac.	Then I opened the wound and pulled out many bones; the woman was in the same condition for a long time and had a small fire coming out of her.
E yeu no afermegui asso esser stranh, sino quar en aquo es sciensa e ajutori ad aquo que le metge artifec am la ma per curacio aministra.	And I did not fear anything strange, but only that in this there is science and help to what the doctor does with his hand for curing.
De las formas dels instrumentz que so necessaris a extrayre le fet.	Of the forms of instruments which are necessary to extract the fetus.
Forma de vertitge am la qual es uberta la mayre:	Form of the incision by which the uterus is opened:
Aquesta es la forma de strenhedor en le qual so engualhatz les libres, al qual engualhament sian dos virtitges en doas extremitatz de dos futz.	This is the form of the string with which the ligaments are tied, with a knot at each end of two threads.
May empero aquesta virtitge cove que sia pus subtil de strictori, e sia fayt o de eba o de fust de boys.	But this thread must be very thin and made of linen or cotton.
E sia la latitut de quascun fust quays dos ditz e le marge de quascu amdos quays un dit, e la longitut de quascu es un palm e mig; e en le mieg loc de dos fustz so dos ajustaments de aquel meteys fustz les quals ja son fermatz, dels quals la longitut es la maytat de un palm e un pauc mes, e la latitut de quascu es quay dos ditz, o un pauc mes.	And the thickness of each rod is two fingers and the margin on both sides is one finger, and the length of each is half a palm; and in the middle of the two rods are two fastenings of that same rod, whose length is about half a palm and their thickness is about two fingers.
E aquestz dos additamentz sian entromeses en la boca de la mayre per que sia uberta am aquels quan tu revolves las doas prescriptas virtigges.	And these two attachments are inserted into the mouth of the uterus so that when you turn those two threads, it opens.
Forma autra semblant de aquela pus subtil e pus leugiera:	Other form resembling that one but thinner and longer:
Sia fayta de fustz de eba o de boys segon la semblansa de forceps.	It is made of linen or cotton according to the likeness of a pair of tongs.
Mays empero en la extremitat de lu so dos additament ayssi cum vezes, e la longitut de aquels additament es quays un palm, e la latitut de quascu es dos ditz.	But at the end of it are two attachments like a pair of pliers; and the length of those attachments is about half a palm, and the thickness of each is two fingers.
E cum tu vols am aquels ubrir la mayre, lahoras tu fay cezer la femna sobre le lieyt les pes pendentz, ubert aquo que es entre las coyssas de lu.	And when you want to open the uterus with those, then let the woman lie on her back, opening that which is between her thighs.
E aprop obre la tua ma am le instrument ayssi cum fas am forfexs engualment segon la quantitat que vols de la aprecio de la boca de la mayre entro que la metrona fassa so que vols.	And open your hand with the instrument as you do with tongs, according to how much of the mouth of the uterus the midwife wants to do what you want.
La forma de vertitge la qual diysero les antics:	The form of incision which the ancients said:
Forma de impellent am le qual es empellit le fet:	Form of incision by which the fetus is pushed out:
Forma de amisidat2 am le qual es conterit le cap gran	Form of incision by which the large head is contained:
E es asemblat a forceps al qual so dentz en la extremitat, ayssi cum vezes, e alcunas veguadas es fayt lonc ayssi cum forceps segon aquesta forma, ayssi cum vezes, al qual so dentz ayssi cum dentz de ressegua am le qual es inscidit e conterit.	And it is like tongs whose ends are in the extreme, and some times it is made long like tongs, whose ends are like a pair of pliers, with which it is cut and contained.
Forma de amesidat pauc:	Form of incision few:
Forma de unci havent una spina:	Form of an inch having a spine:
Forma de unci havent doas spinas:	Form of an inch having two spines:
Forma de forceps a la qual so dentz de cerra am le qual le cap del fet sia conterit:	Form of tongs whose ends close, by which the head of the fetus is contained:
Forma de spatum havent dos extremitatz am le qual le cap es abscindit:	Form of spatula having two extremities by which the head is cut:
Forma de dos espatums latz:	Form of two wide spatulas:
Totz aquels instrumentz so excersitatz, e quan mes so multiplicadas las specias de aquel e so preparadas deves le artifexs, quant es pus leugier a la sua opperacio e pus aut deves les homes per la sua quantitat.	All those instruments are practiced, and when they are more refined and prepared by the artisans, then it is easier for the operator and better for men because of its quantity.
E no obres de aquels instrumentz ja sia qua sia deves tu aparalhat, quar la necessitat de aquels no es excusabla.	And if there are not any instruments, then you must prepare them, for the need of them is inexcusable.
De extraccio de la segondina.	Of extraction of the secundine.
Quan la segondina es retenguda deves le enfantament, lahoras cove que tu comandes a la malautae que retengua le sieu ale, e aprop fay aquela stornudar am condizi, e strenh la tua ma sobre la boca de lu e sobre las nars de lu, e si per aysso es defora eyssit, bo es.	When the secundine is retained after childbirth, then let the midwife retain her own milk, and then let her vomit with herbs, and strengthen your hand over the mouth and nose of it, and if through that it is expelled, good.
E sino, lahoras tu pren una ola e perfora en la cuberta un trauc e pausa en aquela erbas ubrent la boca de la mayre, ayssi cum calament e ruda e anet e camamilla e scicados arabic e cassia lignea e santaurea.	And if not, then take a woolen cloth and pierce it in the covering with a hole, and put into that herbs which open the mouth of the uterus, like hellebore and rue and anise and camomile and scachola arabica and cassia lignea and santal wood.
Totas aquestas erbas o alcunas de lor sian submersas en aygua en la ola, e pausa aquela sobre le foc.	All those herbs or some of them are to be soaked in water in the cloth, and then let that hang over the fire.
E aprop pausa una canula de canaviera en la boca de la mayre, e tengua aquela entro que la evapor vengua a la concavitat de la mayre.	And then place a hollow reed in the mouth of the uterus, and hold it so that the vapor goes to the cavity of the uterus.
E aprop fay aquela stornudar ayssi cum havem dit, e la segondina sira fora-getada am velocitat.	And then let her vomit as we have said, and the secundine will be expelled very quickly.
Mays si roman aprop aquesta curacio e no es eyssida, lahoras tu comanda a la matrona que submerge la sua ma sinistra en oli sizami o en micellage de altea, e aprop entrometa aquela en le conh e queresca am aquela la segondina, e cum aquela auras trobada, lahoras pren la e exten aquela pauc a pauc Mays si es annexsa en le preon de la mayre, lahoras entrometa la sua ma segon que havem recomtat, e quan aura trobat la segondina, extragua aquela petit a petit segon rectetut per so que la mayre no caja deves la atraccio vehement.	But if this cure is applied and the secundine is not expelled, then let the midwife soak her left hand in sesame oil or in mallow milk, and then insert that into the uterus and seek out the secundine with it, and when it has been found, pull it out little by little according to its length so that the uterus does not receive violent force.
Abantz cove que sia permudada als costatz dreyt e sinestre am facilitat.	Before let it be turned right and left with ease.
E aprop sia ajustat en la quantitat de atraccio, quar ela obedira e evasira de adhirencia.	And then let the uterus be reduced in amount of tension, for it will obey and be released from adhesion.
E si la boca de la mayre es coartada, nos ja havem recomtat la curacio am sturnutacio e am medicacio de la ola am erbas.	And if the mouth of the uterus is constricted, we have already recommended the cure with a syringe and herbs soaked in water.
Mays si no es fora-getada am totas las causas las quals havem recomtadas, lahoras guarda te que no fetigues sobre aquela en iteracio de abstracio, mays empero cove que aquo que es eyssit de lu a la boca de la mayre lies a la coyssa de la femna, e aprop cristeriza aquela am enguent e tetrafarmacon; quar aquel fara poyrir aquela aprop alcus dias e sira dissolvuda e sira fora-getada.	But if it is not expelled with all the causes we have recommended, then beware that you do not tire on it with too much force, but rather let what comes out of the mouth of the uterus flow to the woman's thigh, and then strengthen that with ointment and tetrafarmacon; for it will make it boil in a few days and be dissolved and expelled.
Mays quan se poyreys, es de lu elevada mala audor al cap, e al estomac, e aquo ledeys la malauta; e adonc cove que sian aministradas sub-fumiguacios e convenientz ad aquo.	But when it boils, there is a bad smell to the head and stomach, and then let the medicines be administered according to that.
Mays alcus dels Antics ja so esproatz sub-fumigacio de nazitort e de figuas seccas.	But some of the Ancients have already tried sub-fuming with hellebore and dry figs.
Forma de instrument am le qual la femna es sub-fumiguada deves la retentio de mestruas e de la segondina:	Form of an instrument by which the woman is sub-smoked because of the retention of menstruation and secundine:
Sia fayta de veyre o de eram.	It is made of brass or iron.
E sia pausada la extremitat subtil en le conh e la extremitat ampla sobre le foc, e la sub-fumiguacio sia pausada sobre las brazas del foc.	And the end be made thin in the cavity and the end wide over the fire, and the sub-fuming be done over the embers of the fire.
E tengua aquela entro que sia consumida aquela sub-fumiguacio e itera·n autra.	And hold that so that the sub-fuming is consumed and alternate it with another.
De curacio del cul del enfant no-perforat.	Of cure of the child's anus not perforated.
Motz enfantz naysso e les culs de lu no so perforatz, les quals ya ciphac subtil e opilat.	Infants who are not yet weaned and whose anuses are not perforated, for whom the tongue is very thin and swollen.
Adonc cove a la matrona que perfore am le sieu dit aquel ciphac; e sino, perfora aquel am spatum agut, e guarda se que no toque le lacert.	And then let the midwife pierce with her finger that swelling; and if not, pierce it with a sharp spatula, and beware that it does not touch the tendon.
E aprop pause sobre aquel lana enfusa en vi e oli; e aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia senat.	And then apply wool soaked in wine and oil over that area; and let that wound heal naturally.
Mays si temes que sia opilat, lahoras pausa en le trauc una canula per motz dias, e osta la quan le enfant voldra degerir.	But if you fear it has become infected, then insert a cannula into the wound for several days and leave it in place until the patient feels the urge to urinate.
E ja accideys oppilacio del cul per consolidacio de plagua o de apostema; adonc cove que aquela consolidacio sia inscidida, e aprop sia curada am aquo que avem dit de la curacio e del plom.	And it sometimes happens that the anus becomes obstructed by a blood clot or abscess; then when this obstruction has been removed, let it be treated with the medicine and lead plaster as we have said above.
De curacio de las fistulas que endeveno dejos.	Regarding the treatment of fistulas which develop subsequently:
Las fistulas que endeveno en la partida dejos pus bassa so nodacio e grossetut las quals endeveno prop del cul defora o en l’espazi de la una partida.	Fistulas which occur near the anus and produce pus and a thick discharge are found near the anus or in the space between the buttocks.
E es una fistula o motas.	There is either one fistula or several.
E cum aquela nodacio es antiquada e corr de la humiditat aygosa blanca o poyridura subtil, e alcunas veguadas so de aquestas fistulas alcunas penetrantz.	And when this nodule becomes old and discharges thick, white or yellow pus, sometimes these fistulas penetrate deep into the body.
E aquelas penetrantz so conogudas per aquo que es eyssit de aquelas per la egressio e per ventosetat; e alcunas vetz use le malaute de egressio, e fort leu es eyssit de aquelas verm.	And those that penetrate are known by what comes out of them through the exit and by their flatulence; and sometimes the patient suffers from an exit, and often worms come out of them.
E so de aquelas fistulas alcunas veguadas en l’espazi penetrantz entro a la vesica, e entro al meat de la vergua; e so de aquelas penetrantz entro la junctura de la coyssa e entro al notz de la coeta.	And sometimes these fistulas penetrate into the bladder and into the vagina; and sometimes they penetrate into the joint of the thigh and into the knee.
E aquo en que es conoguda fistula penetrant entro al cul e no-penetrant, es que tu metas le tieu dit endic en le cul, e entrometas tenta subtil de eram o de ferr en la fistula quan no y es turtuositat.	And the way to know whether a fistula has penetrated into the anus or not is to put your finger into the anus and try to gently push a needle or piece of iron into the fistula when there is no pain.
Mays si en aquela es turtuositat, lahoras entromet en aquela tenta subtil de plom o de pels de caval entro que tu sentas la tenta o le pel en le tieu dit.	But if it hurts when you do this, then gently push in a needle or a piece of lead or horsehair until you feel the needle or hair against your finger.
E si no sentas aquela de tot ni no procezeys del trauc alcuna causa de egestio ni verm ni ventositat, ayssi cum havem dit, lahoras sapias que es no-penetrant, e lahoras coyta te a la curacio.	And if you don't feel anything at all and there is no discharge of pus or worms or flatulence as we have said, then know that it has not penetrated, and then proceed with the treatment.
E quan la fistula es penetrant entro a la vesica o entro al meat de la vergua, lahoras la significacio de lu es eyssiment de urina de aquela e prohibicio de lu ad aysso que·l loc am medicina sia consolidat.	And when the fistula has penetrated into the bladder or vagina, then the sign of this is the discharge of urine from it and the prohibition of this from that, so that the wound is allowed to heal.
Mays si es penetrant entro la junctura de la coyssa o entro al os e envencio de dolor en le circuit, lahoras senhal de lu es que la tenta perve entro aqui si en lu no es turtuositat entro al os, e envencio de dolor en le circuit de la partida; e que de lu yeys poyredura tostemps; e que no val en aquela medicacio, ni es consolidada am enguent.	But if it has penetrated into the joint of the thigh or into the bone and causes pain in that area, then the sign is that when you push a needle into it, there is no pain in the bone, but pain in the circuit of the joint; and that pus comes out of it occasionally; and that this is not helped by medicine nor healed by ointment.
E en totas aquelas fistulas penetrant no es curacio de tot, e la curacio de aquelas es trebalh e vanetat dels folyls metges sobre·l qual so fermatz.	And in all these penetrating fistulas, there is no cure at all, and their treatment is a laborious and vain task for foolish doctors who talk about it.
Mays en aquela que no es penetrant e no antiqua, sanacio am ferr es sperada segon que yeu a tu recomtare, e aquo que ja yeu e proat.	But in the one that is not penetrating and not ancient, healing with iron is expected according to what I have told you and what has already happened.
E es que le malaute jagua entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos e eleva las cambas de lu entro sus, las coyssas sian enclinadas al ventre de lu, e aprop entromet tenta de plom, o de eram si es en la fistula turtuositat, entro que sapias le loc on perve la tenta.	And it is that the patient should lie on his back with his head elevated and his legs raised up against him, with his thighs bent towards his stomach, and then gently push a needle or piece of iron into the fistula until you feel where the needle goes in.
E si aquela sent le malaute entorn le cuol, lahora cove que tu entrometas le tieu dit endic en le cuol.	And if he feels pain around his neck, then gently put your finger into his neck.
E si sentas en le tieu dit la tenta ja per si meteyssa descuberta penetrar, otra aquo que sentas entre le tieu dit e aquela siphac o carn, lahoras sapias certanament que aquela es penetrant; e adonc no trebalhes en aquela, quar no es en aquela sanacio, ayssi cum havem dit.	And if you feel the needle going in by itself without pain, or you feel something soft under your finger, then know for certain that it is penetrating; so do not work on this, because there is no healing in this as we have said.
Mays empero diyssero alcus que es sana en alcus homes tart.	But some say that it is healed in some people with vinegar.
E de la medicacio per la qual es sperat juvament en lu es que tu ignes cauteri subtil segon le ample de la fistula, ayssi cum es precedit, e intrometas aquel ignit en la fistula entro que pervengua entorn le cuol; e aprop itera aquel doas o tres vetz entro que sapias que ja son adhustas totas aquelas carns ajustadas fistuladas que so semblantz a cana de pluma de ausel.	And the medicine by which this is expected to heal quickly is that you apply a gentle cautery according to the size of the fistula, as it was preceded, and insert that hot iron into the fistula until it comes out around the neck; then repeat this two or three times until you know for sure that all those flesh-colored, fistula-like tissues which resemble a feather cane have been dried up.
E aprop cura aquela am calguas envolopadas en boder entro que en yescan totas aquelas carns que so adhustas, e aprop cura aquela am medicinas la carn engendrantz e consolidantz, e si es sanada, bo es; e sino, lahoras no es sana en degun temps per autra curacio.	Then cure that with water wrapped in wool until all those dried-up tissues are healed, and then cure it with medicines that generate and consolidate flesh, and if it is healed, well; but if not, then it will never be healed by any other treatment.
E si la tenta intra, e no penetra entro·l tieu dit le qual es en le cul, e entre aquel e la tenta que es velament spes de carn o de ciphac, e vezes la fistula en aquo que siec la superficia de la codena, lahoras secca la codena del comensament de la fistula, e tu ve seccan am la tenta, e sia en la fistula entro que la seccio pervengua al loc en le qual perve la extremitat de la tenta, e per la tenta es liberat e catz.	And if the needle goes in and doesn't penetrate your finger which is in the anus, and between that and the needle there is a hard, flesh-like substance or swelling, and you see the fistula where it breaks through the surface of the skin, then dry up the skin from the beginning of the fistula, and you will see that it dries up as the needle goes in and out at the place where the tip of the needle comes out; and so the flesh is freed and cut.
E aprop mundifiqua aquelas carns fistuladas las quals so asembladas a canula de pena de ausel e no romangua de aquelas alcuna causa.	Then cleanse those flesh-like tissues which are similar to a goose feather cane, from which nothing comes out.
Mays si flux de sanc vezes que vengua entre tu e la tua opperacio quan ensideysses aquelas carns, lahoras le milh que sia e del pus leugier instrument es cauterizar am foc o am medicina acuta, quar cauteri am foc ajusta bonas doas habitutz: so es adhustio de aquelas carns ajustadas, e abscizio del sanc exseccacio de las humiditatz.	But if blood flows out of it when you press on those tissues, then the millstone that is and the pus that comes out should be cauterized with fire or sharp medicine, for cautery with fire dries up those flesh-like tissues and stops the flow of blood by drying up the humors.
E aprop cura aquela am calguas envolopadas en boder o en caus trissat entro que·l loc geta brac, e aprop lahoras cura la plagua am enguentz carn dura engendran e consolidan.	Then cure that with water wrapped in wool or in clean linen until the spot turns black, and then cure the wound with a hard ointment that generates and consolidates tough flesh.
E so medicinas en las quals so stipticitat e exseccio; quan lahoras es restaurada ja es sanada e no temes iteracio.	And so are medicines which have astringency and drying power; when it is restored, it is healed and you need not fear relapse.
Mays si la fistula ja perve entro al preon del cul e es elonguada de lu superficia del cos, lahoras entromet le tieu dit en le cul e inquireys am aquel.	But if the fistula has already broken through into the perineum and is prolonged from there across the surface of the body, then put your finger in the anus and examine it.
E donc si centes la tenta e entre tu e ela es velament de ciphac o de carn, e es propda a la penetracio, lahora no es operacio en lu sino segon via di fiducia e de speransa.	And so if you feel the needle and between you and it there is a hard substance or flesh, and it is close to penetration, then it is not an operation on it but according to the way of trust and hope.
La qual causa es aministrar en lu una de tres manieyras: o que cauterize aquela ayssi cum havem dit; o que secces aquela entro que consieguas la conquavitat de lu per que sia a tu possible entrometre las qualcas e la curacio propdana; e no procesiscas mot am seccio per so que no inscidas le lacert contenent le cuol, e que accidisque sobre le malaute eyssiment de la egistio ses voluntat; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit quar fort leu sira sanat; o que elongues aquel velament e mondes aquel pus que seccas aquel entro prop le cul, ayssi cum havem dit, o am tenta o am autre instrument de aguda extremitat, e aprop mondifique aquelas carns fistuladas las quals so en la seccio entro la on podes am percrustacio; e aprop esforsa te a far la restauracio de tota la plagua am seccio, e si le orrifici pus desus no es consolidat, e romangua la fistula uberta en la partida del cul, e sira pus leugier per le malaute.	This can be done in one of three ways: by cauterizing it as we have said; by drying it up so that you can make the opening in the anus smaller and the cure more effective; or by not cutting into the rectum so that you do not pierce the membrane containing the rectum, but let the patient go about his business naturally; then cure him with what we have said for the wound will surely heal quickly; or by prolonging the swelling and draining out the pus which has accumulated under the skin as we have said, or with a needle or another sharp instrument, then cleanse those flesh-like tissues which are in the incision near where you can pierce it with pressure; then force open the wound so that the entire wound is healed, and if the fistula which breaks through into the anus has not been consolidated, and the pus drains out of the anus, and the patient suffers from a discharge, let him be cured with what we have said.
E alscunas veguadas la fistula es finida segon aquesta manieyra: es quan tu entrometas la tenta en la fistula, e es en le latz del cul entorn la superficia del cos am la codena e en le marge del cul, lahoras pren tenta de perforada extremitat, que es ayssi cum agulha de preparantz les coers segon aquesta forma:	And sometimes the fistula ends like this: when you insert the needle into the fistula, it is on the side of the anus around the surface of the body with the skin and at the margin of the anus, then take a needle of piercing extremity which is prepared in the shape of a needle as follows:
e entromet en aquela fiel envolopat de v fiels o entorn aquels; e aprop entromet tenta am fiel en la fistula entro que consiegua la conquavitat de lu.	and insert it into that with its wrapper or around it; and then insert the needle into the fistula until you reach the opening in him.
Mays si es penetrant en le marge del cul prop dedintz, lahoras tu extratz le fiel de aquel trauc ayssi que tu intrometas le tieu dit en le cul; e extraguas la extremitat del fiel e ajustes las duas extremitatz essemps, e estrenh cascuna, e leyssa aquo per un dia o per dos, e quan mays inscideys le fiel en la carn, estrenh be aquel entro que aquelas carns sian inscididas las quals so entre doas extremitatz del fiel e que cajan.	But if it has penetrated into the margin of the anus near inside, then pull out the needle from that hole as you put your finger in the anus; and when you have pulled out the end of the needle, press both ends together, and tie them together for a day or two, and when you have also inserted the needle into the flesh, press it until those flesh-like tissues are pressed in between the two ends of the needle which are tied together.
E aprop cura la plagua entro que sia consolidada e sanada.	And then treat the wound until it is healed and closed.
Mays si le orrifici de la fistula no es penetrant, lahoras fay aquel penetrar, en qualque manieyre sia a tu preparat, sino que sia mot en le preon, quar no es a tu que fassas aquo per que no inscidas le lacert; e aprop fay am aquela entro que sia sanada.	But if the opening of the fistula is not penetrating, then make it penetrate in any way you have prepared, unless there is motion in the wound, for it is not up to you to do so as not to injure the skin; and then treat it until it is healed.
La forma de spatum spinos am lo qual es fenduda la fistula: la curvitat del qual es mot aguda e l’autra partida es no-aguda, per so que no inscidas aquo que no es necessari, ayssi cum vezes.	The shape of the spathe is spiny where the fistula is split: its curvature is very acute and the other side is not acute, so as not to injure anything that is not necessary, as well as the skin.
De sutura de emorroydas en las quals corra sanc en la inscizio de aquelas.	On the stitching of hemorrhoids in which blood runs in the incision of those.
Emorroydas so segon dos manieyras, quar o so entre le cul semblantz aysi que es de carbos, o quays aquelas sian cum a gras de rasim.	Hemorrhoids are of two types, for some are between the anus like charcoal, or others that are like fat with hair.
E de aquelas so petitas e grans, e que le sanc corr de aquelas tostemps e es una, e so motas, e so fora·l cul, e en las extremitatz de lu.	And those are small and large, and the blood runs from them constantly and is one, and some are inside, and outside the anus, and at its ends.
Mays empero aquelas que so foro le cul so segon las mes de pauca humiditat, de las quals corr aygua citrina o un petit de sanc am cos continuabla, e so segon la color del cos.	But those that are outside the anus are according to the months of little humidity, of which yellow water or a little blood runs with a continuous body, and they are according to the color of the body.
E la curacio de aquela que es dedintz le cuol es que comandes al malaute que se assela e que se exprema entro que le cuol yesca e las emoroydas apparescan a tu.	And the treatment of that which is inside the anus is that you command the patient to sit and be compressed until the anus dries and the hemorrhoids appear to you.
Adonc tu te coyte e suspen am uncis o que tenguas aquelas am la tua ungla, e aprop incideys aquelas deves las suas razitz.	Then you cut and suspend them with your nails or what you have those by your fingernail, and then cut those according to their roots.
Mays si les uncis no so tengutz en aquelas per la humiditat de lor e mollificacio de aquelas, lahoras pren aquelas am drap aspre o am coto o am flassada de lana, e extratz aquelas am les tieus ditz, e aprop inscideys aquelas e polveriza sobre lor alcunas polveras caudas aprop la inscizio, per que sian ad aquelas en loc de cauteri; o cauteriza aquelas segon que es precedit en le capitol de cauterizar.	But if the nails are not held in those by their moisture and softening of them, then take those with rough cloth or a stick or woolen thread, and extract those with your fingers, and then cut those and powder some powders over them near the incision so that they are like cautery; or cauterize those according to what is preceded in the chapter on cauterization.
E aprop cura aquelas am l’autra curacio entro que sian sanadas.	And then treat those with the other treatment until they are healed.
E si le cul no obezeys a egressio, lahoras cristerisa le malaute am cristeri en le qual sia mordicacio petita, e sia lavat am aquel aquo que es en le cuol e que obezesca a egressio leugierament quan le malaute s’esprem.	And if the anus does not obey defecation, then anoint the patient with ointment in which there is a little biting, and let him be washed with that water that is in the anus and let him be compressed gently when he excretes.
Mays si las emorroydas so defora le cul, lahoras la causa de lor es leugiera, e es que tu prenguas aquelas am la tua ungla, o que prenguas aquelas am unci, e inscidas aquelas, e aprop cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit entro que sian sanadas.	But if the hemorrhoids are outside the anus, then the cause of them is slight, and it is that you take those with your nail or that you take them with a stick and cut those, and then treat those as we have said until they are healed.
E aquel que avoreys inscizio, cove que aministres sutura de lor segon aquesta manieyra: pren fiel envolopat e entromet aquel en agulha e aprop extratz las emorroydas a las partidas dessus, e fay aquel penetrar am la agulha en la razit del autra part, e envolveys las doas extramitatz del fiel en la partida pus dejos de la agulha, e so latitudinalment; e estrenh la emorroyda am strectura fort, e aprop noza le fiel e extratz la agulha.	And whoever does the incision, keep in mind that you administer suturing of them according to this way: take wax wrapped and insert that into a needle and then extract the hemorrhoids at their tops, and make the needle penetrate with the other part of the wax into the root of the other part, and wrap both ends of the wax in the part lower than the needle and tightly; and narrow the hemorrhoid with a strong compression, and tie off the wax and extract the needle.
E fay aquo a totas, e layssa de aquelas una e no la cozes, per so que la superfluitat del sanc corra de aquela.	And do that to all, and leave one and not sew it, so that the excess of blood runs from it.
E aprop pausa sobre le cul drap enfus en oli rozat o en cerot; e pausa aquel sobre·l cuol e comanda al malaute que·s repause.	And then place over the anus cloth soaked in rose oil or cerate; and place that on the anus and command the patient to rest.
E aprop layssa aquela entro que caja; e quan es casuda, cura aquelas am enguentz o am autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	And then leave it until it scabs; and when it is healed, treat those with ointment or other treatment until they are healed.
De curacio de fistulas.	Of the treatment of fistulas.
Motas veguadas accideys per exseccacio de fenda o per costriccio de natura.	Many times they happen due to dryness of the wound or due to constriction by nature.
E cum so antiquadas e no val en aquela medicina, lahoras cove que tu razas aquelas am la puncta de spatum o am la tua ungla entro que sian faytas humidas e sia hostada de aquelas la escorsa pus desus, la qual prohibeys aquelas de consolidacio; e aprop cura aquelas entro que sian consolidadas.	And if they are old and not healed with that medicine, then you should cut those with the point of a spathe or your nail until they become moist and let the scabs be above, which prevents them from healing; and then treat those until they are healed.
Lahoras tu osta aquelas am razio pus vehement que la primieyra entro que mot sancno e sian excoriadas; e aprop cura aquelas entro que sian sanadas.	Then you wound them more violently than the first time so that blood flows and they become excoriated; and then treat those until they are healed.
De curacio de almesamir, so es clau.	Of the treatment of ulcers, it is a key.
Sapias que alamermar, so es clau, e no es si no notz redon segon la color del cors semblant a cap de claviel, e es fayt en tot le cors e majorment en las partidas dejos les pes e als ditz, e endeve per aquels dolor deves le anament.	Know that an ulcer, it is a key, and it is not unless there is a round spot according to the color of the body resembling a head of a nail, and it occurs all over the body and mainly in the parts below the feet and on the fingers, and from there you should have pain.
E adonc cove que sia inscidit aquo que es en le circuit del clau, e sia tengut am les forfexs o am unci, e sia eradicat de la sua razit; e aprop cura aquel.	And then let it be cut what is in the circuit of the nail, and let it be held with forceps or a stick, and let it be uprooted from its root; and then treat that.
E si vols, cauteriza le segont que es precedit en le sieu capitol.	And if you want, cauterize the second as is preceded in its own chapter.
Mays de veruca es eminencia petita aspre fistulada redonda sobre la superficia del cos, e motas veguadas veno en las mas dels enfantz.	But a wart is a small, rough, round, fistulated eminence on the surface of the body, and many times it comes in the hands of children.
E curacio de lu es que estendas e inscidas aquela, o que estrenhas aquela am fiel o am pel entro que caja.	And its treatment is that you stretch and cut it, or narrow it with wax or hair so that it falls off.
E si vols, cauteriza aquo, segon que havem dit, am foc o am medicina acuta.	And if you want, cauterize it as we have said, with fire or acute medicine.
E ja so eradicadas enversas e no-enversas am le instrument le qual yeu diyre.	And they are uprooted forward and backward with the instrument which I will tell you.
Mays formica es eminencia petita feutrada o fistulada grossa sobre la superficia del cos anant mot en le preon, e quan le freg atroba aquela es centit en lu semblant de mordificacio de formigua, e es fayta entorn le cos.	But a mole is a small, felted or fistulated eminence on the surface of the body, which occurs around the anus, and when it is rubbed, it is centered in it like a bite of an ant, and it is made all over the body.
E curacio de lu es que prenguas una canula de pena de auca o de pena de voltor, e sia fort, e pausa aquela sobre la formigua entro que la contengua le cercle de la canula de las partidas de lu; e aprop revolveys la tua ma am la canula entro que inscidas aquo que es en le circuit de la formigua, e pauses aquela en le preon de la carn, e que eradiques la formigua de la sua razit.	And its treatment is that you take a reed of peacock feather or of bird of prey, and let it be strong, and place it on the mole so that it contains the circle of the reed from the parts around it; and then turn your hand with the reed so that you cut what is in the circuit of the mole, and let him narrow the mole at its root.
E si vols, fay aquo am canula de eram o de ferr segon aquesta forma:	And if you want, do it with an eraser or iron according to this form:
Sia la partida desus de la canulha trahent a subtilitat, sorda (so es no-perforada), envolopada per so que sobre le dit la aprencio de lu sia ablaviada e la revolucio de aquela.	Let the part above the reed be drawn out to thinness, soft (so that it is not perforated), wrapped so that over the finger the appearance of it is abraded and the revolution of it.
E si vols cauteriza la formiga segon que es denant dit en la cauterizacio de atheyl en le capitol de cauteri.	And if you want to cauterize the mole according to what is said before in the cauterization of atoms in the chapter on cautery.
De forma dels instrumentz que so aministratz a dar cristeri.	Of the form of the instruments that are administered to give cautery.
Alcunas veguadas es fayt cristeri de argent o de lato o de eram fondut o malleat; e alcunas veguadas es fayt de aquels instrumentz petit e gran segon aquels als quals so aministratz, quar aquel que es aministrat en la curacio dels petitz enfants sia petit; e de aquel dels quals los culs son freuls o doloyrozes, les cristeris de aquels sian petitz.	Some are made of silver or brass or melted lead or hammered, and some are made from those instruments small and large according to the ones that are administered, for that which is administered in the treatment of small children is small; and of those whose anuses are sore or painful, their cauteries are small.
La forma de cristeri gran e pauc:	The form of a large and few cautery:
Le cap de la canula de lu desus en le qual es liada la borsa sia ampla segon aquesta manieyra; e sia a lu distinacio la on la borsa es liada ayssi cum vezes.	The tip of the reed above in which the pouch is tied be wide according to this way; and let the distinction where the pouch is tied as well, thus many times.
E la extremitat de lu pus dejus, la qual es entromesa en le cul, sia sorda (so es no-uberta) mot leon, atrasent a subtilita; e en la un del latz de lu sian dos traucs, e en l’autre costat un trauc, e sia la amplesa del trauc segon la groseza dels rays e pus gros un petit.	And the tip below it, which is inserted into the anus, be soft  (so that it is not open), drawing out to thinness; and in one side of it there are two slits, and in the other side a slit, and let the width of the slit according to the thickness of the veins and more thick a little.
E sia la borsa en la qual sian pausadas las medicinas de vesica de bestia o de pel de ovelha, e la razit de lu sia un palm.	Let there be a bag in which are placed the medicines of animal bladder or sheep's wool, and its size should be a palm.
E sia perforada per motz traucs ayssi cum es revolvuda; e si l’espazi le qual es entre les traucs la grossetut del dit.	And let it be pierced with small holes as it is rolled up; and if the space between the threads, make it the thickness of the said finger.
E aprop entromet en aquels traucs fiel fort de fiel cru le qual sia de detz fiels, o enviro aquels; e ajusta am aquel la borsa; e quan es pausada en lu la borsa, sia streyt en le cap del cristeri entre dos distingentz am fort costriccio, e aprop cristeriza am aquel quascun trauc: Mays la qualitat de cristerizar am aquel es que tu omples la borsa de la medicina, que sia escalfada segon la quantitat de la tolleransa del malaute; e guarda te que no sia trop cauda ni trop freja.	And then insert into those threads strong gall of raw gall which is of the galls; and apply with that bag to it; and when the bag is applied to it, let it be tightly bound at the top of the chest between two fingers with a strong constriction, and then cauterize each thread with it: But the quality of cauterizing with it is that you fill the bag with medicine, which should be warmed according to the amount of the patient's tolerance; and beware that it is not too hot nor too cold.
E aprop le malaute sia resupinat sobre le sieu dos, e eleva las suas cambas en sus e pausa dejos lu un cuer sobre le qual ja so les homes o un lansol; e aprop unta la extramitat del cauteri am oli o am album de huou o am mucellage de fenugrec o de semblantz; e aprop entromet aquel en le cul am facilitat, e aprop le ministre prengua la borsa e exprema aquel am doas mas e essemps am vehemencia entro que sia evacuat en le budelh tot aquo que es en le cristeri; e aprop extra le cristeri e le malaute leva las suas cambas a la paret.	And then the patient should be reclined on his back, and his legs raised up and place under them a board on which there are men or a plank; and then anoint the end of the cautery with oil or egg white or mucilage of fenugreek or similar; and then insert that into the anus with ease, and the minister should squeeze the bag and press with two fingers and empty with force into the intestine everything that is in the chest; and then pull out the cautery and let the patient raise his legs to the wall.
E si la medicina forsa aquel a eyssiment, tengua le tant quant poyra; e si dorm am aquel per tota una nueyt, es mays derier en juvament.	And if the medicine forces that to come out, let it as much as possible; and if it sleeps with that for a whole night, it is better for healing.
Mays si tu cristerizas aquel en las malautias de solucio de ventre e l’eyssiment de lu le coyta, lahoras tu itera le cauteri entro que sia sanat.	But if you cauterize that in the illnesses of a swollen belly and its output is bloody, then repeat the cautery until it is healed.
E si en le cul so emorroydas o apostemas ledens, lahoras sia le cristeri mot subtil e leon, dels cristeris am les quals les enfantz so criterisatz.	And if in the anus there are hemorrhoids or painful sores, then let the cautery be very subtle and thin, of those cauteries with which children are cauterized.
De curacio de las plaguas.	Of treatment of sores:
Yeu ja e dit en la divisio de la curacio de las plaguas aquo que convenia al libre, e yeu dic assi la curacio de aquelas am ma e am medicinas segon le conpliment.	You have already said in the division of the treatment of sores what was convenient for the book, and I say thus the treatment of those with hand and medicines according to their kind.
Donc dic que las plaguas son diversificadas segon aquo en que son faytas las plaguas e segon le loc sobre le qual cazo las plaquas.	Therefore I say that sores are varied according to that by which the sores were made and according to the place on which they occurred.
E las causas per que motas vetz son faytas las plaguas so ayssi cum getament de peyra, o inscisio d’espaza o de cotel, o percussio am lansa, o am fustz, o am sageta, o semblantz ad aquels de motas causas.	And the causes for which many times sores are made are thus with stone, or incision of a sword or dagger, or blow from a spear, or staff, or arrow, or similar to those of many causes.
Mays las plaguas que so en les locz del cos so ayssi cum plagua la qual catz sobre le cap, o·l col, o·l pietz, o·l ventre, o·l fitge, e semblantz ad aquels dels membres.	But the sores that are in parts of the body are thus with sore which falls on the head, or neck, or feet, or belly, or thigh, and similar to those of the limbs.
E yeu so recomtant la curacio de alcunas plaguas per que pauses aquela ratiocinacio e regla sobre las autras plaguas.	And I have recounted the treatment of some sores so that you pause on that reasoning and rule for other sores.
E yeu comensare de las plaguas del cap simplas, quar la rememoracio de las compostas vindra al comensament del tertz capitol.	And I will begin with simple sores of the head, because the recollection of the composite ones will come to the beginning of the third chapter.
Donc dic que quan accideys en le cap plagua simpla e no es fractura, lahoras considera: si es per getament de peyra o de semblant, e ja ha trinquada la codena tant solament e es gran plagla e temes sobre aquel malaute havinement de apostema caut, lahoras tu te coyta e fleubotoma la cephalica tantost, e no tardas aquo; e extrats ad aquel del sanc segon la quantitat de la vertut de lu si no mes alcuna causa prohibent de fleubotomia, majorment si·l sanc que es eyssit de la plagua es pauc.	Therefore I say that when it happens in the head a simple sore and there is no fracture, then consider: if it is by blow of stone or similar, and the nerve has only slightly been struck and it is a large wound and you fear on that patient development of an ulcer, cauterize and flebotomize the cephalic vein immediately, and do not delay that; and draw from that blood according to the amount of the strength of him if there is no other prohibiting cause of phlebotomy, especially if the blood which comes out of the wound is little.
E sia la flaubotomia del contrari de la partida plaguada; e guardase le malaute de replecio e de vi e de viandas grossas.	And let the phlebotomy be on the opposite side from the wounded part; and keep the patient from repletion and from wine and heavy foods.
Mays si de la minuicio prohibeys alcuna causa, lahoras sia aminorat de la vianda e no apropinque a carn ni a vi.	But if any cause of diminishment prohibits you, then let it be diminished in food and not come near to meat nor wine.
E pausa sobre la plagua, si a lu accideys apostema caut, coto enfus en oli rozat solet o en vi en le qual es stipticat.	And apply over the wound, if it happens on him ulceration, cut garlic infusing it in rose oil or wine in which it is made stiff.
Mays si est segur de apostema caut, lahoras pausa sobre la plagua, si es recent am le sieu sanc e le ayre no ha mudat aquela la polvera la qual yeu recomtare aprop petit.	But if he is certain of ulceration, then apply over the wound, if it is fresh with its blood and the air has not changed that powder which I will soon recount below.
E si le ayre ja ha mudada aquela, lahoras pausa sobre alscus enguentz entro que sia sanada.	And if the air has already changed that, then apply some ointment until it is healed.
Mays si la plagua es gran o es per inscizio d’espaza e de semblantz, e no so ajustadas las labias de lu per puvils, lahoras ajusta aquelas am sutura segon que yeu recomtare de la sutura de lor.	But if the wound is large or it is from incision of sword or similar, and its lips are not brought together by pus, then bring those together with suture according to that which I will recount about their suture.
Mays si la plagua ja es discuberta del os e pen, e no es retencio de lu sino un petit suspensori, lahoras inscideys aquela e aprop cura la plagua am medicinas e restaura la carn aprop en loc de codena, e comanda al malaute que sia pescut de viandas en las quals es groceza: caps e formen coyt e semblantz a lor, entro que sia compost.	But if the wound is already uncovered of bone and pen, and there is no retention in it except for a little suspension, then insert into that and treat the wound with medicines and restore the flesh by applying on the nerve, and command the patient to abstain from foods in which there is heaviness: garlic and leeks and similar to them, until he is healed.
E si atrobas en la codena putrefaccio e no adhereys al os, lahoras tu inscideys tot aquo poyrit e geta aquo, e aprop cura aquo.	And if you see in the nerve putrefaction and it does not adhere to the bone, then insert all that rotten thing and cut it out, and treat that.
Mays si en aquestas plaguas es arteria o vena de la qual fluxs de sanc pot evenir, e no es abscindida per medicinas, lahoras tu inquier sobre la arteria, e si atrobas aquela no-inscidida, lahoras tu inscideys aquela am spatum, o lia aquela; e si necessitat te provoca que aquo que havem dit no comfereys, lahoras tu cauteriza entro que·l sanc sia abscidit.	But if in these sores there is an artery or vein from which blood might flow and it has not been stopped by medicines, then press on the artery; and if you find that not-incised, then insert into it with spatum or ligature; and if necessity compels you that what we have said does not suffice, then cauterize until the blood is stopped.
E si aquestas plaguas son simplas e petitas, lahoras la causa de lor es leugiere; enayssi que tu polverizas sobre aquelas aquesta polvera, quar consolidada aquela denant que l’ayre mude aquelas.	And if these sores are simple and small, then the cause of them is a wound; therefore you powder over those this powder, because it solidifies that before the air changes those.
E la manieyra de la polvera es aquesta: recipe oli de enses partida una, de sanc de drago partida doas, de caus no-extincta partidas tres; sia tot mot trissat e crivellat, e de lu sia la plagua omplida, e sia constrengida per bona constriccio entro que be sobre aquela aderesca, e sia coagulada am le sanc.	And the manner of the powder is this: take oil of unripe dates one part, blood of dragon tree two parts, gum not-extinguished three parts; let all be pounded and sifted, and of that let the wound be filled up, and let it be bound with good constriction so that it adheres to that, and let the blood coagulate.
E aprop strengeys aquela desus am pulvils e leyssa aquela, e no la deslias mentre esta ayssi que no es apostemada, quar no es eredicada de lu la medicina entro que sia sanada.	And then bind that above with powders and let it be licked by the tongue, and do not loosen it while it is thus until it is ulcerated, because the medicine does not work for it to be healed.
E alcuna vetz fa aquo sola cautz, quan no es a tu en present enses e sanc de drago.	And sometimes you make that alone with cautery when there is no dragon tree at hand or its blood.
E ja fa aquesta meteyssa operacio en las grans plaguas quan conveneys que sia pausada sobre aquelas e sian streytas, e so plaguas recentz am le lor sanc, las quals le ayre no ha alteradas.	And you make this operation on large sores when it seems that it should be applied to them and they are bound up, and they are recent wounds with their blood which the air has not changed.
E si le ayre las ha alteradas, e majorment quan es en temps d’estiu, lahoras no es entencio a la posicio de aquesta polvera, mays adonc cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit, enayssi que tu pauses sobre aquelas alcus enguents degistius, o que pauses sobre aquelas pols de la farina del ordi am aygua e mel entro que getan poyredura; e aprop cura aquelas am l’autra curacio entro que sian sanadas.	And if the air has changed them, and especially when it is in summer time, then there is no need for the position of this powder, but then treat those with what we have said, therefore you apply over those some ointments that are digested, or you apply over those poultices made of flour of the seed of wheat with water and honey until they are soft; and then treat those with the other treatment until they are healed.
Mays si accideys am la plagua fractura en os, e es petita, lahoras tu extratz aquo am gesti.	But if it happens with a wound of fracture in bone, and it is small, then you draw that out with a probe.
E yeu diyre la cura de las fracturas del cap en aquo que es envenidor.	And I will say the treatment for fractures of the head where it is pierced.
De las plaguas del col.	Of sores in the neck:
Mays si la plagua accideys en le col, lahoras no es en lu differencia en medicacio, e entre la plagua del cap quan es simpla.	But if the wound happens in the neck, then there is no difference in treatment, and it is between the wounds of the head when it is simple.
Mays si ja le nervi del col es inscis o arteria, lahoras si es nervi, no es en lu engen sino que sia evitada curacio de lu am aquo que fa vehement stipticitat, ayssi cum ziniar e zegi que es vetriol e semblantz a lor quar nozo als nervis e contrazo aquel.	But if the nerves of the neck are cut or an artery, then if it is nerve let it not be bound tightly with anything that makes vehement strictness, as with cinchona and cinchona-tree which is verjuice and similar to them because they hurt the nerves and contract that.
E no pauses sobre la plagua alcuna causa de tot freja, quar la sustancia dels nervis es freja e la continuacio de lu es am le cervel, le qual es le pus aut de totz les membres.	And do not put any pressure on the plague at all, because the substance of the nerves is fragile and its continuation goes to the brain, which is the source of all the members.
E si’ aquo am que es curat de medicinas leugieras, ayssi cum es caus lavada am aygua dousa, alcuna veguada enfusa en oli rozat o no-rozat, e thucia quan es lavada am aygua dousa e las autras peyras minarantz segon aquesta manieyra, e enguentz humitz.	And if it is healed by light medicines, such as when the wound is washed with warm water, or when there is an infusion of red or white oil, and when it is washed with warm water and the other stones are applied according to this manner, then let it be moistened.
Mays si la plagua es gran, lahoras aministra sutura, o coarta las labias de lu, e aprop cura aquela am pulvils entro que sia sanada.	But if the plague is large, then administer a suture or a bandage, and let it be cured with powders until it is healed.
Mays si a la plagua es profunditat o accideys en lu a la pus bassa partida poyredura, lahoras perfora aquela en le loc mays depremegut.	But if there is a depth or an abscess in the lowest part of the pus, then pierce it in the most depressed location.
Mays si en la plagua ja es inscisa arteria e es conseguit flux de sanc, lahoras separa o secca aquela, o lia aquela, o cauteriza aquela si necessitat te provoca ad aquo.	But if an artery is cut in the plague and bleeding ensues, then ligate or coagulate it, or cauterize it if need demands it.
Mays si ja ha insciditz les spondils del golayro o tot, e so salvadas las venas del col, lahoras tu ajusta las labias de la codena am sutura sobre la cana del golayro e no toques aquel; abantz egala aquel e reduzeys aquel sobre la sua figura natural, e aprop strenh aquel am strectura decent, e leyssa aquela per alcus jorns; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz en les quals es stipticitat e excitacio entro que sia sanat.	But if the vertebrae of the neck or all of it is cut, and the veins of the throat are spared, then you adjust the wound of the neck with a suture over the cane of the neck and do not touch it; before doing this, equalize that and reduce it to its natural figure, and then tightly bind it with a decent bandage; let it be treated with ointments in which there is stiffness and excitation until it is healed.
Mays si la plagua ja en le os a fayta enprecio, lahoras percuireys aquela, e lahoras si en lu ha fragmentz de hos, extratz totz aquels que podes de lor; e aquo que a tu no es apparelhat, leyssa aquo entro que la plagua se poyrisca, e sia separat e la egrecio de lu sia alleujada.	But if the bone has been fractured, then pierce it and extract all of the fragments that you can; let what is not apparent heal within, and separate it and the efflux from it be alleviated.
E si la plagua es recent lahoras polveriza sobre aquela polvera la qual t’e recomtada.	And if the plague is recent, then powder it with a powder for which you have been prescribed.
Mays si en la plagua es fayta fistula, lahoras cura aquela am aquo del qual la rememoracio vindra aprop en le sieu capitol.	But if a fistula is formed in the plague, then cure it with that which its recollection will come to you in due time.
De las plaguas del col o de semblantz quan fayta entre las spallas e es fayta am spaza o am cotel o am lansa o am semblantz.	Of the plagues of the neck or similar, when they are done between the shoulders and are done with a spear or lance or similar:
Si es percussio de lansa o de cotel, e vezes de lu la profunditat, lahoras considera mays si de la plagua yeys ventositat quan le malaute elena; lahoras sapias que la plagua es mortal.	If it is a blow from a lance or spear, and you see the depth of it, then consider that if there is windiness from the wound, then know that the plague is mortal.
E si en lu no es profunditat e la plagua es recent am le sieu sanc, lahoras tu pauses en lu de la primieyra horo polvera, e no strenhas aquel per que no sia le sanc retengut en la profunditat de lu e que retorne al cor e que aucigua le malaute, mays pausa en lu enguent atractiu, e deslia aquela doas veguadas le dia.	And if there is no depth to it and the plague is recent with its blood, then you put on a powder for the first hour and do not bind it so that the blood is not retained in the depth of it and that it returns to the heart and the patient is saved; instead, put on an attractive ointment twice a day.
E si l’enguent no es a tu present, lahoras tu pausa en le orrifici de la plagua coto viel per que sucque aquo que yeys de las humiditatz; e fay que le malaute dorma sobre la plagua per que corra aquo que es en lu ajustat.	And if the ointment is not available to you, then put on the orifice of the plague a piece of wool so that it sucks up what there is of humidity; and let the patient sleep on the plague so that what is in it flows out.
Mays si ja de la plagua son passatz tres dias o mays e no accideys al malaute spasme ni tremor de cor mal ni strictura de ale, e vezes las autras dispozicios bonas de lu, lahoras sapias que plagua es salva; e adonc cura aquela am calguas e am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanada.	But if three days or more have passed and no spasms or tremors of the heart nor mal-stricture occur to him, and you see the other dispositions as good, then know that the plague is saved; then cure it with cauterization and with the other cure until it is healed.
Mays si la sanacio de lu es excusada, e ja tot temps es uberta, lahoras sapias que ja es fayta fistula; cura donc aquela per le sieu capitol.	But if its healing is delayed and the wound stays open for a long time, then know that a fistula has been done; cure it therefore according to its chapter.
E si la plagua es per inscisio de spaza o de cotel, e es simpla en la superficia del pietz o del dos, lahoras cura aquela am aquo que es precedit de sutura, si es gran, o am polvera, si es petita.	And if the plague is done by a spear or lance and is simple on the surface of the foot or leg, then cure it with that which is preceded by a suture if it is large, or powder if it is small.
Mays si ja ha fayta enprecio en le os, e so ja de lu inscizas pessas, lahoras tu torqua la plagua e coyta ad extrayre aquelas pessas, si so separadas.	But if the bone has been fractured and there are only a few fragments in it, then you twist the wound and cut to extract those fragments, if they are separated.
Mays si no so separadas, lahoras leyssa las entro que se poyresca la plagua, que la extraccio de lor es alleujada.	But if they are not separated, then let them be until the plague is healed, for their extraction is alleviated.
E de las autras plaguas accidentz en les autres membres le juvament en curacio es le juvament de aquo que havem dit.	And of the other plagues of accidents in the other members the cure is the same as that which we have said before.
De las plaguas del ventre.	Of plagues of the belly:
L’indisposicio la qual accideys en le ventre es o gran, o pauc, o migiera.	The disposition by which it happens in the belly is either great or small or middling.
De la gran alcunas veguadas yeys le budel o nervi del budel, per que es fayta intromissio de lor e la sutura de lor esser pus vehement e pus subtil.	Of the great, some times there is intrusion of the intestine or nerve of the intestine, for which it is done and the suture of them is more vehement and more subtle.
E disrupcio petita es fayta dificil per autra manieyra, e siec se que la reduccio de lor es pus dificil, si no te coytes de la intromissio de lor al sieu loc tantost, quar se ubre e es engrossat per que le intrament de lu es fayt difficil.	And a small disruption is done difficultly in another way, and you see that the reduction of them is more difficult if you do not cut off the intrusion of them to their place at once, for it opens and is swollen because the insertion of it is made difficult.
E donc la milhor disrupcio es migiera, quar en aquela no es dificil la reduccio del budel, ayssi cum es dificil en las doas specias denant ditas.	And therefore the best disruption is middling, for in it the reduction of the intestine is not difficult, as it is difficult in both species mentioned before.
E sapias que sutura del ventre es segon quatre manieyras, mays doas suturas son comunas que conveneysso en suturas de las autras plaguas del cors.	And know that the suture of the belly is according to four manners, but two sutures are common which are used in sutures of the other plagues of the body.
E duas autras suturas proprias comunican a las autras plaguas, mays empero so mays proprias en la sutura del ventre.	And two other sutures are proper to the other plagues, but indeed more proper in the suture of the belly.
E yeu recomti a tu quascuna am exposicio e declaracio.	And I will count for you each one with exposition and declaration.
Donc dic que quan la plagua es petita e es eyssit alcuna causa del budel per aquela, e es fayt dificil a reduzir aquel, lahoras aquo es en una de doas manieyras: o per parvitat de la disrupcio ayssi cum havem dit, o quan al budel es venguda inflacio per la frigiditat de l’ayre.	Therefore I say that when the plague is small and some cause of the intestine comes out through it, and it is made difficult to reduce it, then it is in one of two manners: or by smallness of the disruption as we have said, or when there is inflation of the intestine by the coldness of the air.
E donc quan aquo es ayssi, lahora cove que tu scalfes aquel enayssi que tu submerges una sponga ho drap humit en aygua tebeza sola, o que coguas en aygua squinant, e cyperum, e spic, e embroques am aquela le budel entro que la imflacio sia resolvuda.	And therefore when that is so, then you must warm it so that you soak a sponge or cloth in tepid water only by itself, or boil in squinant water, and cyperum, and spic, and embrocations with it the intestine until the inflammation is resolved.
E alcunas veguadas fa aquo vi en le qual ha stipticitat, e es milhor que la aygua sola en resolucio de la imflacio.	And sometimes it does this in the thing which has been made stiff, and it is better than water only in resolution of the inflammation.
E donc cum tu vezes la imflacio esser resolvuda, lahoras tu humecta le budel am aygua en la qual es coyta altea e malvas, quar per aquo es alleujat le intrament de lu am pauca causa.	And therefore when you see the inflammation resolved, then you moisten the intestine with water in which is mixed honey and mallows, for it eases the insertion of it with a little cause.
Mays si es escusat le intrament de lu aprop aquesta curacio, lahoras scindeys la disrupcio un petit am strument am le qual so inscididas emorroydas.	But if the insertion of it is excused by this cure, then split the disruption a little with an instrument by which the hemorrhoids are split.
E la curacio primieyra es milhor, quan es propriada que no es seccio, e no sia occupacio a seccar aprop necessitat e defaliment.	And the primary cure is better when it is proper and not dry, and there is no occupation to dry near necessity and defalimentation.
Del instrument, sec se la forma de lu:	Of the instrument, know its form:
La una partida de lu torta aguda, e l’autra partida no-acuta, e la extremitat subtil, e no sia am la subtilitat de spatum, abantz sia obtusa un pauc.	One part of it is crooked acute, and the other part not-acute, and its extremity subtle, and may not be with the subtlety of a spatula, but rather obtuse a little.
E donc cum la plagua es amplificada e yeys fora le budel, lahoras cove que la sua reduccio sia segon la forma de lu natural, en le sieu loc propri, si es possible sobre aquo, quar milhor es.	And therefore when the plague is enlarged and goes out of the intestine, then you must make its reduction according to the form of it natural, in its proper place, if it is possible, for it is better.
Mays quan la disrupcio es ampla, e es en la partida pu bassa del ventre, lahoras cove que tu fassas jazer le malaute sobre le sieu dos, e pausa las suas cambas pus autas que·l sieu cap; e si es en la partida pus desus del ventre, lahoras tu pause le cap de lu e·l pietz pus autz que las partidas dejos.	But when the disruption is ample and it is in the lower part of the belly, then let the patient lie on his back, and put his feet above; and if it is in the upper part, then let him lie on his stomach and raise his head and feet.
E semblantment si la disrupcio es en una de las doas partz del ventre, lahoras pausa la tua entencio e la tua consideracio tostemps en aysso per que la partida en la qual es la plagua sia pus auta que l’autra.	And likewise if the disruption is in one of the two parts of the belly, then pay your attention and your consideration equally on both sides so that the part in which there is the plague be higher than the other.
E ayssi cove que tu aministres aquo en las plaguas grans e en las plaguas migieras.	And thus you must administer this in great plagues and middling plagues.
E en las plaguas petitas, pausa aquo que es a tu preparat, e aprop fay que·l ministre sia entre las tuas mas pyatados, le qual tengua la disrupcio tota am la sua ma e ajusta las labias de lu, e aprop descuebre de aquela ad aquel que siec la sutura alcuna causa aprop autra.	And in small wounds, apply what you have prepared, and ensure that the surgeon is between your thighs, holding the wound with his hand and closing its lips, and uncover from one to another any cause of the wound, or other.
E aquesta es la manieyra de sutura comuna: una que prenguas la agula, o comte de agula segon la cantitat de la amplitut de la plagua; e aprop layssa de la extremitat de la disrupcio del dit anular, e strenh la agula una, otre que tu no metas fiel en las doas extremitatz de la codena, am doas extremitatz del ciphac que es dejos la codena de las partidas dedintz, entro que fassas aquela penetrar de aquela partida; e tu ja has agreguadas doas extremitatz de la codena e doas extremitatz del ciphac, e so faytas quatre ordes.	And this is the common manner of suturing: you take the needle, or count of needles according to the quantity of the amplitude of the wound; and leave from the extremity of the disruption of the ring finger, and tighten the needle one, other that you put thread in both ends of the cord, with both ends of the thong which is below the cord of the parts within, so that you make it penetrate from that part; and you have already tied both ends of the cord and two ends of the thong, and there are four orders.
E aprop strenh am fiel doble en le circuit de la agula, e alcunas veguadas de doas partz ensemps, e aprop agregua las doas labias e la plagua per agreguacio decent; e aprop layssa la grossitut del dit e fiqua una autra agulha en aquela, e aprop lia aquela am fiel ayssi cum fiest am la primieyra agulha; e no cesses far aquo si es necessitat am las agulhas entro que ajas complida tota la contriccio de la plagua.	And then tighten with double thread around the needle, and some times from two parts together, and then tie both lips and the wound by decent tying; and leave the thickness of the finger, and take another needle in that, and tie that with thread as is tied with the first needle; and do not cease to do this if it is necessary with needles until you have completed all the contraction of the wound.
E sian las agulhas migieras entre groceza e subtilitat, quar las agulhas subtils mot leugierament insciden la carn; e las grossas so de dificil intrament en la codena, e donc per aquo cove que sian migieras en subtilitat e grosseza.	And the needles should be between thickness and thinness, because thin needles easily pierce the flesh; and thick ones are difficult to enter into the cord, and therefore that they may be easier in subtlety and thickness.
E no cove que la agulha sia ficada en doas extremitatz de la codena propdana mot, per so que la carn no sia inscidida leugierament e que la plagua se huebra devant la sua consolidacio.	And it should not be that the needle is tied in two ends of the cord near to each other, because the flesh would be pierced easily and the wound would open before its healing.
E no sian prolonguadas de sutura per que la plagua no sia prohibida de consolidacio.	And they should not be prolonged so that the wound is not prohibited from healing.
E aprop inscideys las extremitatz de las agulhas per so que no ledescan le malaute deves le sieu dormier; e pausaras sobre la sutura pulvils expanduts de tota partida, les quals tenguan las extremitatz de las agulhas; e layssa aquelas entro que sapias que la plagua ja es consolidada.	And then pierce the ends of the needles so that they do not hurt the patient while sleeping; and you shall put over the sutures powdered herbs spread from all parts, which have the ends of the needles; and leave them until you know that the wound is healed.
E aquestas specias de sutura am agulhas en cal manieyra es pus convenient en las plaguas petitas, quar habasta en la sutura de lor una agulha o doas o entorn aquelas.	And these species of suturing with needles in whatever manner are more convenient for small wounds, because they have in their suturing one needle or two or around them.
Mays la segonda sutura es cominal: e es que tu aministres am sutura las quatre extremitatz, de la codena e doas extremitatz del ciphac, en una veguada, am agulha en la qual sia fiel envolopat engual en subtilitat e grosseza.	But the second suturing is common: and it is that you administer suturing with the four ends, of the cord and two ends of the thong, in one go, with a needle in which thread is wrapped equal in thinness and thickness.
E aprop quan am la agulha auras penetrat aquestas quatre extremitatz, reduzeys la agulha de aquela meteyssa partida de la qual comensest, per so que le fiel retrayt caja de la pus subirana partida a la plagua, per so que la sutura sia segon sutura de drap am la qual les draps so strengutz.	And then when with the needle you have penetrated these four ends, reduce the needle from that meting part from which you started, so that the thread drawn box of the uppermost part to the wound, so that the suturing is according to suturing of cloth with which the cloths are tied tightly.
E pausa entre quascuna sutura la quantitat del gros del dit mendre.	And put between each suturing the quantity of the thickness of the little finger.
E aquesta sutura sabo les homes.	And this suturing is known to men.
E am tal sutura yeu cozegui la plagua la qual era accidida a un home en le sieu ventre le qual era stat plaguat am un cotel, e era la disrrumpcio de la plagua major de un palm, e era eyssit dels budels entorn dos palms del budel del mieg loc e era la disrupcio en le mieg del membre; e adonc yeu reduzegui aquel depus que le budel havia stat foro la plagua per xxiiii horas.	And with such suturing I healed the wound which was inflicted on a man in his belly, and it was wounded with a dagger, and the rupture of the wound was more than a palm, and it had come out from the intestines around two palms from the intestine of the middle place, and it was the disruption in the middle of the member; and then I reduced it after the intestine had been pierced by the wound for twenty-four hours.
E la plagua fo consolidada en le spazi de xv dias o entorn, e curegui aquel e es sanat; e aprop aquo visquec per motz ans, e es conversat en las suas disposicios.	And the wound was healed in the space of fifteen days or around, and he recovered and is well; and then he lived for many years, and is in his dispositions.
E les autres metges havian jutgat que no fora sanat; e per miracle foc, quar yeu no curegui aquel am enguent, quar era en loc en le qual enguent no era atrobat ni deguna medicina, mays pausegui sobre la plagua coto viel dos veguadas lo dia e ablucio assiduo am aygua de mel entro que foc sanat.	And other doctors had judged that he would not be healed; and by miracle it was healed, because I did not cure him with ointment, but put on the wound cut wine twice a day and frequent washing with honey water until he was healed.
Mays yeu diyre dos specias de sutura proprias segon narracio de Paraula.	But I will say two kinds of suturing proper according to the account of the Word.
E es que tu comenses am sutura de la codena, e entrometas agulha de la partida deforo a la partida dedintz.	And it is that you start with suturing of the cord, and interlace needle from the outside part to the inside part.
E donc cum la agulha penetra en la codena e en aquel meteys lacertz segon rectetut e en longetut de tot le cos, e layssa la extremita del ciphac en le qual has entromesa la agulha; e fay penetrar en la autra extremitat la agulha de la partida dedintz a la partida deforo en l’autra extremitat del mihat.	And so when the needle penetrates in the cord and in that part within according to straightness and in length of all the body, leave the end of the thong in which you have interlaced the needle; and make the needle penetrate in the other end from the inside part to the outside in the other end of the finger.
E don cum tu auras fayta aquela penetrar, lahoras tu fay aquela penetrar autra veguada en aquela meteyssa extremitat del mihat de la partida deforo a la partida dedintz; e leyssa la extramitat del ciphac que es en aquest latz, e fay penetrar la agulha en l’autra extremitat de la partida dedintz a la partida deforo.	And when you have done that penetration, then do it another time in that meting end of the finger from the outside part to the inside; and leave the end of the thong which is in this side, and make the needle penetrate in the other end of the inside part to the outside.
E fay penetrar am aquela la tua penetracio am la qual fas aquela penetrar en le ciphac en la extremitat del mirat la qual es en la partida de lu entro que tot aquel penetre.	And make the needle penetrate with which you are making it penetrate in the thong in the end of the finger which is in the part of him so that all that penetrates.
E aprop comensa de aquest meteys costat e cus aquel am la extremitat que es del ciphac en l’autra latz, e extratz la agulha de la codena la qual penetrec, e aprop redutz aquela en aquela codena e cos la extremitat del ciphac que es en l’autra costat am aquesta extramitat del mirat; e extratz aquela de la codena la qual es de part de lu.	And then start from that meting side and sew it with the end which is of the thong in the other side, and pull out the needle of the cord which penetrates, and then reduce it to that cord and sew the end of the thong which is in the other side with this end of the finger; and pull out it of the cord which is on the part of him.
E fay aquo una veguada e autra, e fay aquo una veguada aprop autre veguada entro que tu cozes tot aquo que es deforo segon aquel eysemple.	And do that once and another time, and do it one time after the other so that you sew all that is outside according to that example.
E la suma de aquesta manieyra de sutura es que tu cozes am sutura de pellicies am la qual cozo las pels, enayssi que tu cozes le ciphac una veguada de la part de la extremitat de la codena, e que leysses aquela autra veguada entro que la ajas complida.	And the sum of this manner of suturing is that you sew with suturing of hides with which hide is sewn, so that you sew the thong one time from the end of the cord, and leave it another time so that you have completed it.
Mays la segonda specia de sutura propria la qual dieys eyssament Gualia , e aquest es de sermo de lu e per lu recomtat, es que tu cozas aquela segon semilitut am la qual alcus medicantz cozo aquela, enayssi que agreguan tota partida a la sua compar partida a lu convenient per natura; e aplican la extremitat de autre de lu e la extremitat del mirat al autra extremitat de lu, e aquo es fayt segon que yeu a tu recomti.	But the second proper species which I say is the command of him and for him recomposed, is that you sew it according to semilitude with which all medicines are sewn, so that the ends of him are joined to each other in convenient nature; and apply the end of another of him and the end of the finger to the other end of him, and that is done according as I have recomposed it.
Cove que tu fiques la agulha en la extremitat del mirat a tu propdana de la partida deforo, e fassas aquela penetrar a la partida dedintz en aquel sol, e leysses dos extremitatz del ciphac; e aprop revolveys la agulha e fay aquela penetrar de foro a la dedintz en dos extremitatz del ciphac.	Because you put the needle in the end of the finger at your side from the outside part, and make it penetrate to the inside in that sole, and leave two ends of the thong; and then turn the needle and make it penetrate from the outside to the inside in two ends of the thong.
E aprop revolveys aquelas cascunas, e fay penetrar quascunas de la partida dededintz entro a la partida deforo en dos extremitatz del mirat autras que so en le latz contrari.	And then turn those ones, and make some of the inside part penetrate to the outside in two ends of the finger which are in the contrary side.
E aquesta manieyra de sutura es milhor de la sutura comuna leugiera, e es sutura de la qual precedic rememoracio.	And this manner of suturing is better than common suturing, and it is suturing of which prior memory precedes.
Aquest es le sermo de Gualia	This is the command of Gualia
E mays le diyssero alcus, sutura del ventre es rectificada am dos agulhas, so es que tu entrometas en aquestas a quascunas un fiel, e comensa am intromiccio de agulha de aquo que es deves tu, e fay aquela penetrar entro al autra latz segon sutura de aquels les quals cozo les cuers engualment.	And then they said some one, the suturing of the belly is straightened with two needles, so that you interlace in these ones a thread, and start with penetration of needle from what is on you, and make it penetrate within to the other side according to suturing of those whom hide is sewn equally.
E sapias que quan disrupcio es en le mieg loc del ventre, lahoras la sutura de lu es pus difficil que dels autres locs del ventre.	And know that when rupture is in the middle place of the belly, then the suturing of it is more difficult than in other places of the belly.
Mays le juguament de medicacio de plagua es jutgament de las autras plaguas.	But the judgment of medicine of wound is judgment of other wounds.
La qual causa es quar quan tu consieguas la plagua recent am le sieu sanc denant que l’ayre altera aquela, e reduses le budel e cozes aquela e aptas aquela decentment, lahoras pausa sobre aquela polvera encarnativa.	The which cause is that when you know the wound recent with its blood before that air alters it, and reduce the intestine and sew it and adapt it decently, then put over it powdery incarnative.
E si le ayre ja ha alterada la plagua, lahoras pausa sobre aquela alcus enguentz les quals so a tu presens entro que fassan peyra dura e cajan les fiels, e sian consolidatz ciphac e mirat; e aprop cura aquela ayssi cum es la curacio de las autras plaguas entro que sia sanat.	And if the air has already altered the wound, then apply some alum to that area so that it makes a hard stone and traps the bile, and let it solidify and heal; and treat it as you would any other wound until it is healed.
Mays si a tu no so presens las medicinas, lahoras pausa sobre aquela tantost, pus que comensa a getar brac, coto viel, e permuta aquel dos veguadas le dia, ayssi cum a tu e ensenhat, entro que sia sanat, quar tu no indigeysses de autra medicacio en motas disposicios quan las plaguas so simplas.	But if you do not have the medicines with you, then apply it immediately as soon as the wound starts to discharge pus, and change the poultice twice a day, morning and evening, as I have taught you, until it is healed, for you need no other treatment in various conditions when wounds are simple.
Mays si tu temes que la plagua comunique en lesio als membres principals, lahoras cove que tu submergas lana leon en oli de trempada qualiditat, o en oli rozat, e pausa aquela en le circuit dels locs que so entre les angonas e dejos las aysselas.	But if you fear that the wound might spread to the main limbs, then soak lamb's wool in warm oil of good quality, or rose oil, and apply it around the areas between the angles and below the ankles.
E si sent dolor o putrefaccio en les sieus budels, quar motas veguadas aquo s’endeve, lahoras cristeriza aquel am vi stiptic negre tebe, e majorment si la poyredura es pervenguda en le budel e es fayta exitura penetrant entro la conquavitat de lu.	And if he feels pain or putrefaction in his intestines, where many times it happens, then anoint that with black styptic vinegar, especially if the putrefaction is in the intestine and there is an open wound inside its cavity.
E sapias que aquela que es del budel gros es de pus leugiera sanacio que aquela que es en les budels subtils.	And know that a wound in the large intestine has a slower healing process than one in the small intestines.
E es de dificil sanacio quar le budel le qual es apelat “gegunu” no recep sanacio de plagua que caja en lu de tot; e aquo es per la gran multitut de venas que so en lu e per la magnitut de lu que so en aquelas, e per subtilitat del cos de aquel, e per propinquitat de aquel a natura de nervis.	And it is difficult to heal because the intestine called "gut" does not receive healing from a wound that occurs in it at all; and this is due to the great multitude of veins that are in it, and because of its size compared to those, and because of the subtlety of that organ, and because of its proximity to nerve nature.
Mays si aquo que procezeys de la plagua es la tela, e conseguas aquela recent, redutz aquela segon la tua rectetut am la qual reduzes les budels engualment.	But if what proceeds from the wound is the intestine, and you manage to get it out, return that according to your skill by which you reduce the intestines with equal measure.
Mays si es passat a lu spazi e ja es feyt vert o negre, lahoras que tu strenguas aquela am fiel sobre le loc que es denigrat de lu, per so que vengua fluxs de sanc, quar en la tela so venas e arterias.	But if it has passed into space and is already green or black, then that you strengthen that with bile on the spot where it has turned black, so that a flow of blood comes out, for there are veins and arteries in the tissue.
E aprop inscideys aquo que es otra aquel liament, e pausa dos extremitatz del fiel pendentz de la partida dejos de la plagua foro lu, per que sobre tu sia alleujada la atraccio de lu deves le cazement de la tela e emissio del brac de la plagua.	Then insert what is the other end of that intestine, and apply two ends of the bile hanging from the opening below the wound, so that on your side is relieved the attraction of it due to the cutting of the tissue and the emission of pus from the wound.
Rememoracio de las plaguas quan accideysso en le budel.	Remembrance of wounds when they happen in the intestine.
Quan accideys disrupcio en le budel e es petita, lahoras es possibla que sia resteurada en alcus homes, per aysso quar yeu vi aquel le qual era stat plaguat en le sieu ventre am percussio de lansa et era la plagua de la part dreyta del stomac, e la plagua era antiquada e fayta fistula, e eyssic de lu gestio e ventositat.	When disruption happens in the intestine and it is small, then it is possible that it be restored in some people; thus I saw a man who had been wounded in his belly with a spear thrust, and the wound was on the right side of the stomach, and the wound was old and had become a fistula, and he vomited and belched.
Adonc yeu pansegui la curacio de lu ja sia que no era confizat en la sanacio de lu, mays cessegui subtiliar aquel entro que foc sanat e le loc es consolidat.	Then I followed his treatment so that he was not confident in his healing, but continued to apply it gently until it was healed and the spot consolidated.
E yeu pus que vi le loc ja consolidat, timegui sobre le malaute que endevengues sobre lu accident de mal en le sieu ventre; e no endevenc alcu per aquo mal accident e romas en las suas milhos disposicios mangant e bevent, e aprop entrec en banh e es exercitat en sos ditz.	And I saw the spot already consolidated, and I directed that he eat on top of it foods suitable for him who had suffered an injury in his belly; and he did not suffer from any ill effects and remained in good health eating and drinking, and he bathed and exercised his limbs.
E ja diysero alcus experimentados que quan endeve plagua en le budel, e es petita, lahoras cove que sia liada segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu prenguas fromiguas de grans caps; e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua e pausa una fromigua de aquelas que aja la boca uberta sobre las doas labias de la plagua; donc quan pren sobre aquelas e strenh la sua boca, abscindeys le cap de lu, quar adhereys e no es dissolvut.	And some experienced people have said that when a wound occurs in the intestine and it is small, then it should be bound according to this manner: you take the leaves of large pods; and then close both lips of the wound and place one of those leaves whose mouth is open over both lips of the wound; then when he takes hold of those and tightens his mouth, cut off the pod, for it will adhere and not dissolve.
E aprop pausa autra formigua prop la primieyra, e no cesses aquo a far am formiguas una aprop autra segon la quantitat de tota la plagua.	Then place another pod next to the first one, and do not cease to do this with pods one after another according to the quantity of the whole wound.
E aprop reduzeys aquela e cos la plagua; e romanguan aquels caps annexces en le budel entro que·l budel sia sanat; e no accideys al malaute degun nocument.	Then return that and close the wound; and let those pods remain in the intestine until it is healed; and do not hurt the patient at all.
E ja es possible que·l budel sia liat am fiel subtil lo qual es fayt del budel de bestia annexs am lu, pus que es mes en agulha; e es que tu prenguas la extremitat de aquestz fiels de budel, e sia mot descarnat, e aprop lia la extremitat de lu am fiel de li, envolopat, e aprop entromet aquel fiel en agulhas e cos am aquel le budel, e areduzeys aquel en la disrupcio.	And it is possible that the intestine be bound with thin bile which is made from the intestine of an animal tied to it, since it is more flexible; and you take the end of those intestines and it is somewhat stripped, and then bind the end of it with bile, wrapped around, and insert that bile into needles and sew up the intestine with it, and return that disruption.
E aquesta manieyra de sutura am formiguas no es sino segon via de fiducia e d’esperansa.	And this manner of sewing with pods is not anything other than according to way of trust and hope.
Mays si la plagua es gran e ampla, majorment si es en un dels budels subtils, quar lahoras no es engen sino subtiliacio, e no es sanacio de lu de tot.	But if the wound is large and wide, especially if it is in one of the small intestines, for then it is only a subtlety and not its complete healing.
De curacio de zuchem e fistula.	Of the healing of ulcer and fistula.
Sapias que tota plagua e apostema quan se envilheseys e se Antiqua, e es fayt ulcus, e no es consolidat e geta braç tot temps e no es abscindit, lahoras, en qualque membre sia, universalment es nompnada fistula e nos la apelam aquela azukem.	Know that any wound and abscess when it becomes infected and is old, and an ulcer forms, and is not consolidated and discharges pus all the time and is not healed, then in whatever part of the body it may be, universally it is named fistula and we call it a ulcer.
E fistula segon veritat es nodacio feutrada, dura, blanqua am la qual no es dolor e a la qual es conquavitat ayssi cum es conquavitat de pena de ausel; e per aysso nompnat aquela alcus rizatz, id est pena.	And fistula according to truth is nodulated, hard, white with which there is no pain and to which is cavity as it is cavity of bone; and for that reason we name that some knob, i.e. nodule.
E es en alcus homes humida, la qual geta brac; e fort leu la humiditat es abscidida en alcunas horas.	And it is in some people moist, which discharges pus; and strongly the moisture is discharged in some hours.
E alcunas veguadas aquesta humiditat es mota, e es pauca, e es grossa, e es subtil.	And sometimes this humidity is increased, and it is little, and it is thick, and it is subtle.
E yeu ja he denant dit en la divisio, lahoras cum yeu diyssi las plaguas, que tot ulcus que no es sanat ni no es en lu nuda carn, no es aquo sino per una de ix causas: de las quals la una es o per pauquesa de sanc en le cos; o per malicia de lu; o quar entre lu e las labias es carn dura prohibent nativitat de carn; o quar es de mota legesa; o quar aquel ulcus en si meteys es poyrit e la materia que es a lu tramesa es de mala qualitat; o quar la medicina es enconvenient en la curacio de lu; o quan corrupcio catz en la regio, e es pestilencia; o per proprietat de regio ayssi cum endeve a Saragossa , en la qual es fayta difficil degestio de las malautias, e es tardada en aquela sanacio de apostema per natura; o quar en lu es os un, o motz osses.	And I have already mentioned in the division that when I discuss wounds, that any ulcer which is not healed or is not naked flesh, it is due to one of nine causes: the first is due to lack of blood in the body; the second is due to malice of it; or because between it and its lips there is hard flesh preventing growth of flesh; or because it is caused by excessive leges; or because that ulcer within itself is infected, and the matter which comes from it is of poor quality; or because the medicine is unsuitable in its healing; or when corruption happens in the region, and it is pestilential; or due to property of the region, thus it happens at Saragossa, where digestion of illnesses is difficult, and that healing of apostema is delayed by nature; or because there is bone in it, or bones.
Ja e mostrat totas aquelas causas, e·ls senhals de aquelas e la curacio de lor am medicinas en la divisio.	And I have shown all those causes, and their signs and the healing of them with medicines in the division.
E cove assi que yeu fassa a tu saber la curacio de fistula la qual es fayta per via de operacio am ma.	And thus it is necessary that I make you know the healing of fistula which is made by way of operation with the hand.
E sapias que fistula accideys en totz les membres del cos; quar de aquelas son fistulas que perveno a las venas grantz e arterias, o als nervis, o al ciphac, o al budel, o a la vesica, o ad alcuna de las costas, o ad alcu dels spondils del dos, o ad alcuna de las juncturas compostas per composicio ayssi quo de la ma e del pe; e de aquelas so que dan a lu propinquitat del membre principal e de semblantz.	Know that fistula happens in all the parts of the body; for from them there are fistulas which come to large veins and arteries, or nerves, or the brain, or the intestine, or the bladder, or any of the ribs, or some of the joints of the hand, or foot; and they give proximity to the main member and its likes.
E donc aquela de aquestas fistulas que es segon aquesta manieyra es de las malautias de dificil sanacio, e no recep curacio, e occupacio am aquela es trebalh e ignorancia.	And thus those of these fistulas which are according to this manner are of illnesses of difficult healing, and do not receive healing, and occupation with it is labor and ignorance.
E si es de las fistulas alcuna la profunditat de la qual no perve ad aquestz locs que e dit, e esperas e confizas en la curacio de lu, e vols pervenir a cognicio de lu, lahoras pren tenta de eram o de ferr, e si la fistula va segon rectetut, e perquireys aquela am lu.	And if there is any fistula whose depth does not come to these spots which I have said, and you wait for it and believe in its healing, and wish to come to knowledge of it, then take a test of lead or iron, and if the fistula goes according to skill, then examine it with him.
Mays si la fistula es tortuissitat, lahoras investigua aquela am tenta de plom subtil, quar plom am la levitat del sieu cors es alleujat e curvat deves la tortuositat.	But if the fistula is tortuous, then investigate it with a test of subtle lead, for lead by the lightness of its body is drawn away and bent from the tortuosity.
E si la fistula es havent motz horrificis, no es a tu possible que signifiques sobre lu am tenta.	If the fistula has horrifying words, it is not possible for you to say anything about it with a tent.
Adonc cristeriza le orrifici per sos orrificis, quar la humiditat per la qual clisterizas aquela va deves las autras orrificis e corr de lor.	Therefore, christen the horrifying orifices for them, as the moisture by which you cleanse that one comes from the others and flows from them.
E aprop inquier exquisitament, segon qual manieyra a tu es possible que conoguas si aqui has os o nervi, e es la conquavitat de la fistula longinqua o propdana, o es una fistula a la qual so motz orrificis e esta sobre aquo tot am la suma de la tua fortaleza, am la tua enterroguacio, am la qual enterroguas le malaute, e la invencio de la dolor deves la tua compressio am la ma sobre le loc, e semblantz de las significacios e de las causas accidentz al apostema.	And then inquire closely, according to whatever manner it is possible for you to know whether here you have bones or nerves, and whether the fistula's cavity is distant or near, or whether it is a fistula whose horrifying words are above all at the top of your strength, with your tenting, and the invention of the pain comes from your compression with your hand over the place, and of the significants and of the accidental causes.
E cum tu auras stat sobre totas aquelas causas am stacio veraya, lahoras ve a la curacio segon confidencia: e es que tu consideras lahoras si es fistula apparent propinqua o en loc sal, longinqua de junctura, o de nervi, o de arteria, o de vena, o de un dels locs les quals yeu a tu e ditz.	And when you have considered all those causes with true knowledge, then go to the cure according to confidence: and it is that you consider if the fistula appears nearby or in a salty place, distant from a joint, or of nerves, or of an artery, or of a vein, or of one of the places which you know.
Lahoras tu secca la fistula segon que denant es dit de la naracio de lu, e osta aquo que es en aquela filtracio e de carns corrumpudas, e aquo que es nascut en le orrifici de la carn, o de theil e de semblantz, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	Then dry the fistula according to what is said before of its description, and stop up that which is in that filtration and of rotten flesh, and that which is born in the orifice of the flesh, or of thorns and of resemblance, and cure that within which is to be healed.
Mays si la fistula es de longinqua profunditat, e es segon rectetut, lahoras cove que inscidas aquela en le preon atant quant a tu sira possible, e aprop mondifica aquela de totas las suas carns corrompudas; e aprop administra calguas envolopadas en medicinas acutas, e intromet aquelas entro a la conquavitat de la fistula, la qual has conprenduda am ferr.	But if the fistula is of great depth and is according to rectitude, then you must understand that you immerse it in the preon as much as you can, and then cleanse it of all its rotten flesh; and then administer hot waters wrapped in sharp medicines, and insert them into the cavity of the fistula which you have understood with iron.
E fay aquo am aquela alcunas veguadas entro que la medicina acuta corroda tot aquo que es romas en la conquavitat de la fistula de la corrupcio.	And do this several times until the sharp medicine corrodes all that is rotten in the cavity of the fistula.
E aprop restaura aquela am enguentz les quals engendran carn sana entro que sia sanada.	And then restore it with ointments which beget healthy flesh within that is to be healed.
Mays si no es sanada per aquo, lahoras tu cauteriza aquela segon que havem recomtat.	But if it is not healed by that, then you cauterize it according to what we have recommended.
Mays si la causa de fistula es os e es deves tu certificat aquo, lahoras tu inquireys aquela e secca aquela segon que havem recomtat, si tu no prohibeys alcuna causa de vena o de nervi o de membre principal ayssi cum havem dit.	But if the cause of the fistula is bones and you have certified that, then you inquire and dry it according to what we have recommended, unless you prohibit any cause of vein or nerve or main member as we have said.
Mays si le os es a tu descubert e es en lu alcuna corrupcio e negror, lahoras tu ratz aquel entro que la corrupcio sia hostada tota; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que lu encarne entro que sia sanat.	But if the bone is revealed to you and there is corruption and blackness in it, then cut that away until all the corruption is stopped; and then cure that with that which will cause flesh to grow within that is healed.
E si no es sana e gieta brac ayssi cum fazia, lahoras sapias que tu no est pervengut a la eradicacio tota de la corrupcio; e adonc tu descuebre sobre lu segondanament e exquisitament fay la razio de lu e la mundificacio de lu am la deriera fortalasa tieua, e aprop restaura aquel.	And if it is not healed and the flesh grows as it did before, then know that you have not attained to the total eradication of the corruption; and then uncover it again and do the reason for it and the purification of it with your greatest strength, and then restore it.
E donc si es sanat, bo es; e sino, lahoras sapias que aquela corrupcio es en la profunditat longinqua del cors, la qual no ha conseguida, e adonc a tu en aquel no es engen sino laysar aquela.	And so if it is healed, well then; but if not, then know that the corruption is in the distant depth of the body, which has not been conquered, and then to you it is not possible to do anything with that.
E si le os corromput es petit, o es a tu possible atirar aquel, lahora tu le atira am forceps subtils las quals conveno ad aquo.	And if the rotten bone is small or it is possible for you to pull it out, then you pull it out with subtle forceps which are suitable for that.
E si so motz osses, lahoras exquisitament fay la extraccio de totz aquels, e de aquels no laysses denguna causa am la tua fortaleza.	And if there are many bones, then you do the extraction of all of them with your greatest strength and of none do you leave any cause.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat alcuna causa de las humiditatz, e en lor inscizio no ha temor ni error, lahoras inscideys aquelas liaments o carns si so aqui, e deliura les osses.	But if you are opposed by any cause of the moistures and in them there is no fear nor error, then cut away those limbs or flesh if they are here, and release the bones.
Mays si a tu no es preparacio de ostar les osses de la tua hora, lahoras pausa sobre la plagua aquo que poyresca la plagua aquela, e layssa aquela entro que aquo es al enviro de aquels osses de carns e de liamentz, e guarda la plagua que no sia consolidada, e sia constrengida la seccio la qual tu has inscidida en la tua operacio.	But if you are not prepared to stop the bones of your hour, then pause over the wound that it may suppurate, and leave that within so that it is in the environment of those bones of flesh and of limbs, and keep the wound from being consolidated, and the section which you have cut in your operation be constricted.
Habantz, si temes, pausa sobre lu coto submers en sopre trissat am oli, o coto submers en anguent egipciac, o en alcu dels enguentz vertz, quar quan poyriran aquelas liaments, e les osses son de lor seperatz la ablacio, e de aquels atraccio es alleujada.	Habbants, if you fear, pause over it a cloth dipped in oil, or a cloth dipped in Egyptian ointment, or in one of the green ointments, for when those limbs suppurate and the bones are separated from their cavity, and from that attraction is driven away.
Mays si es un gran os ayssi cum le os de camba o de coyssa o semblantz ad aquels, e aquo que de lu es corromput es la facia de lu tant solament, lahoras ratz aquela am resio tant solament derriera entro que sia ostada aquela negror e corrupcio, e aprop restaura la plagua.	But if it is a large bone like the bone of the leg or the thigh or like that, and that which is rotten is only its face, then cut away that only behind so that the blackness and corruption are stopped, and then restore the wound.
Mays si aquo que de lu es corrumpyt es gran partida, e la corrupcio ja ha conseguida la medulla del os, lahoras es causa necessaria cerrar aquel e aquel tot inscidir entro al loc on es pervenguda la corrupcio, e lahoras cura aquel entro que sia consolidada.	But if that which is rotten is a great part and the corruption has already conquered the marrow of the bone, then it is necessary to close that and to cut all into that place where the corruption has come, and then cure that within so that it is consolidated.
E yeu recomti a tu aquo que endevenc ad un home en la sua coyssa per que pausez aquela a eyssempli e adjutori sobre la tua operacio.	And I have recommended to you that one who lies on his back so that he pauses as an example and helper over your operation.
Foc un home jove per etat entorn xxx ans, al qual accideys dolor en la sua cueyssa, e de las partidas dedintz mauguda es sobre la materia dedintz le cors entro que la materia es pervenguda a la cueyssa, e es materia de apostema am gran apostema, e no foc a lu causa extrinseca.	A young man about 30 years of age, to whom happened pain in his head, and from the parts within maugula is upon the matter within the body within which the matter has come to the head, and it is matter of pustule with great pustule, and there was not to him extrinsic cause.
E adonc foc extendut le temps am aquela per la error dels metges entro que l’apostema es hubert, e acorrero de lu materias motas, e la sua curacio foc aprop pausada entro que la camba foc fistulada, e faytz son en lu motz orrificis les quals totz getavan poyredura e las humiditatz del cos.	And then the time was extended by that through the error of the doctors until the pustule was opened, and many matters arose from it, and his cure was then paused within so that the leg was fistulated, and he had in him many orifices which all discharged pus and the moistures of the body.
E adonc le curec multitut de metges entorn dos ans, e no foc en aquels savia ma en la art, entro que yeu fu appelat.	And then he was cured by many doctors for about two years, and there was not in those wisdom but in the art within which I was called.
E vi la camba de lu e las materias que corrian de lu aquels orrificis per gran cors; e ja le cos de aquel home era tot stabozit e la color de lu era citrina.	And I saw his leg and the matters which ran from him those orifices through great pain; and indeed that man's body was totally emaciated and his color was yellow.
E adonc yeu intromesi la tenta ad un de aquels orrificis e pervenguec la tenta al os.	And then I inserted the tent into one of those orifices and it came to the bone.
E aprop yeu e perscrutat tostz les orrificis e trobegui aquels pervenir a lor de totas partidas de la camba.	And then I probed all the orifices and found that they came from all parts of the leg.
E adonc yeu me coytegui e inscidegui sobre un dels orrificis aquels entro que descrobegui una partida del os, e atrobegui aquel corromput, e ja era terros e corrumput e denigrat; e era ja corrumpuda una partida de la camba entro que havia penetrat entro a la mezola.	And then I cut and entered into one of those orifices within which I discovered a part of the bone, and found it rotten, and indeed it was earthy and rotten and black; and a part of the leg was already rotten where it had penetrated within the membrane.
E adon yeu serregui aquo que a mi era discubert e preparat del os descubert.	And then I stopped that which to me was revealed and prepared of the uncovered bone.
E yeu cujegui que no fos en le os sino aquela corrupcio la qual abscidigui e serregui, e yeu ja havia derraziguada.	And I found that it was not in the bone but that corruption which I had cut and stopped, and indeed I had already removed it.
E aprop pausegui la restauracio de la plagua am medicina consolidativas per lonc temps, e no es consolidada.	And then I paused the restoration of the wound with consolidaing medicine for a long time, and it was not consolidated.
E aprop yeu iteregui e descubregui sobre le os segondament sobre le descubriment primier, e atrobegui continua corrupcio am le os.	And then I iterated and discovered upon the bone secondarily over the first discovery, and found continued corruption with the bone.
E serregui aquo que a mi apares de aquela corrupcio, e aprop yeu fo perforsat fayre la curacio de lu e restauracio, e no es restaurat.	And I stopped that which to me appeared from that corruption, and indeed I had performed the cure of it and restoration, and it was not restored.
E adonc yeu descubri sobre lu autra veguada e no cessegui inscidir le os petit a petit particuladament e perforsa la restauracio de lu, e no es restaurat entro que inscidigui entorn un palm de lu, e aquel extraxi am la medula sua, e aprop restauregui aquel am medicinas, e es consolidat leugierament e sanat.	And then I discovered upon him another time and did not cease to enter the bone little by little particularly and to probe the restoration of it, and it was not restored until I had cut around a palm from it, and that extracted with its marrow, and then I restored it with medicines, and it was lightly consolidated and healed.
E no es necessaria iteracio en la operacio de lu e seccio de lu sino per la disposicio de la freulesa de lu e per la paucitat de la tollerancia de lu e paor de lu de mort, quar a lu accidia en totas horas per superfluitat de evacuacio sincopi mala.	And it was not necessary to iterate in the operation of it and section of it except for the disposition of its fever and because of the scantiness of his toleration and fear of death, for he suffered at all times from excess of evacuation and syncope ill.
E donc sanat es per sanacio entiera, e nada es en loc de os carn dura; e es fayta bona la disposicio de lu en le sieu cors e retornec la vertut de lu; e es conversat en las suas disposicios e no fec a lu contrarietat en ambulacio ni nocument en denguna causa.	And so he is healed completely, and there is nothing in place of his hard flesh; and the disposition of him in his body is made good and the virtue of him returned; and he is conversed in his dispositions and does not make contrary to him in walking nor harm in any cause.
Mays si es os eminent en loc del cors ja trauquat, lahoras cove que tu secces aquel segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu prenguas liament e strenh aquel en la extremitat de aquel os eminent, e comanda ad alcu que extenda aquel en sus; e pausa aquel liament de lana pus gros del primier liament; e aprop lia aquel sobre la carn que es dejos le os, e exten la extramitat de lu per que atires la carn a las partidas dejos, e tu descuebras la carn sobre le loc le qual voles serrar per que la serra no leda la carn.	But if the bones prominent in the place of the body are drawn out, then it is necessary that you succeed according to this manner: and it is that you take a ligament and strengthen that at the extremity of that prominent bone, and command someone to extend that upon him; and pause that ligament of wool thicker than the first ligament; and apply that upon the flesh which is below the bone, and extend the extremity of it so as to draw the flesh to the parts below, and you uncover the flesh over the place which you wish to sew up so that the needle does not harm the flesh.
E pausa fust o taula dejos le os decentment, quar quan tu fas aquo no es prohibida la serra que no secce la carn corrumpuda.	And pause the wood or table below the bone decently, for when you do that it is not prohibited that the needle does not cut the corrupted flesh.
E cove que sia la serradura sobre le loc corrumput petit a petit, quar si es en la concavitat del os corrupcio e no appar en la sua apparicio al sentiment, e forssa a serratura de lu autra veguada.	And it is necessary that the sewing be over the corrupted place little by little, for if there is corruption in the cavity of the bone and does not appear in its appearance to sensation, and force to sew another way.
E si le os es corrumput e no-eminent, abantz es la una partida continuada am la autra, e la corrupcio es al mieg loc o en partida de lu, lahoras tu descuebre la carn de totas partz tota; e aprop pausa fust dejos, e aprop serra aquel de la primiera partida la on es la corrupcio entro que sia continuada la serratura del autra partida.	And if the bone is corrupted and not prominent, before it is one party continued with the other, and the corruption is in all of its place or in part of it, then you uncover the flesh from all parts entirely; and then pause wood below, and then sew that of the first party where the corruption is so that the sewing of the other party be continued.
E sia la serradura segon le loc de la corrupcio un petit, segon que havem dit.	And the sewing be according to the place of the corruption small, according as we have said.
E si la corrupcio es en la junctura, inscideys aquela junctura corrumpuda, e serra le os la on es continuat del autra part.	And if the corruption is in the joint, cut that corrupted joint, and sew the bone where it is continued from the other part.
E si de la corrupcio es en la continuacio de doas juncturas, lahoras no es en lu razio sino engen.	And if the corruption is in the continuation of two joints, then it is not in it reason but skill.
E si la corrupcio es en le pecte de la ma o del pe, es mot dificil; empero cove que tu inquieras la corrupcio en qual manieyra appareys a tu, e que abradas aquela, e mondes aquela segon quascuna disposicio la qual es a tu possibla, e am cascum engen sia rectificat a tu, quan no fa a tu contrarietat vena o nervi.	And if the corruption is in the palm of the hand or the foot, it is very difficult; however it is necessary that you inquire into the corruption in what manner it appears to you, and that you open that, and mend that according to every disposition which is possible to you, and with every skill be rectified to you, when not doing to you contrary coming or nerve.
E sapias qual es inscididors e las serras a inscidir aquestz osses son motz segon le situament dels osses, e la preparacio de aquels, e la grosseza de aquels, e la subtilitat e la grandeza e la parvitat de aquels, e la duricia e la lor raritat; per que cove que tu prepares a tota specia de operacio estrument convenient ad aquela opperacio.	And know that the cutters and the saws to cut these bones are very according to the situation of the bones, and the preparation of those, and the thickness of those, and the subtlety and the greatness and the smallness of those, and the hardness and their rarity; so that you prepare for every kind of operation convenient instrument for that operation.
E sapias que aquela operacio significa a tu sobre la specia del strument del qual indigeysses; quan am tu es gran studi e lonc e conoyssensa de las manieyras de aquesta art, e testimoni de manieyras de malautias, quar lahoras ja tu las avias per tu meteys aquo que es convenient a lu dels sturmentz a tota malautia.	And know that that operation signifies to you on the kind of instrument of which you were in need; when with you is great study and long and knowledge of the ways of this art, and witness of ways of illnesses, for then you already had through your methods that which is convenient to it of the instruments to every illness.
E yeu so a tu formant en la fi de aquest capitol le nombre dels instrumentz les quals pausaras cum eyssimples am les quals proceziras a la tua prohibicio la qual experimentaras sobre las autras.	And you see to you forming at the end of this chapter the number of the instruments which you will pause with simples with which you will proceed to your prohibition which you will experiment upon the others.
Forma de serra:	Form of saw:
Forma de autra serra:	Form of another saw:
Forma de autra serra:	Form of another saw:
Forma de autra serra gran:	Form of another great saw:
Forma de ray:	Form of a chisel:
Sia le cap de aquest ray segon la forma de cap de clau stellat, e les puntz de lu sian segon la forma dels puntz alstefegi.	Let the head of this chisel be according to the shape of a star-shaped key, and its points according to the shape of the points of a claw hammer.
E no conveneys sino que am aquel sian confricadatz les caps de las juncturas quan so corrumpudas, o es la boca gran ampla.	And it is not convenient except that with that are rubbed the heads of the joints when they are corrupted, or is the great mouth ample.
Forma de razori major dels autres:	Form of a greater razor than the others:
Forma de razori menor:	Form of a smaller razor:
Forma de razori lat:	Form of a broad razor:
Forma de serra autra decentment fayta: sia fayt arc de lu pus sobira e la acuitat de lu de ferr, e le membre de lu de boys punhal descentment fayt.	Form of another saw decently made: let it be made of iron and the sharpness of it of steel, and the handle of it of wooden staves decently made.
Forma de lu:	Its form:
Forma de razori en la qual ha concavitat:	Form of a razor in which there is a concavity:
Forma de razori autra subtil:	Form of another subtle razor:
Forma de autra razori de curvada extremitat:	Form of another razor with a curved extremity:
Forma de rasori petit semblant a tenta:	Form of a small razor resembling a tent:
Forma de incisori am le qual so inscidit les osses:	Form of an incisioner with which the bones are cut:
Forma de inscisori autra minor:	Form of another smaller incisioner:
Forma de un autra inscissori; aquest semblant a ray, e la extremitat de lu es cum serra, e es exhibit en motz locs en la razio dels osses:	Form of another incisioner; this one resembling a saw, and the extremity of it is like a saw, and it is used in many places in the reason of the bones:
Forma de ray lo qual conveneys a rasio de aquel que es perforat dels osses:	Form of a chisel which is convenient to reason of that which is perforated of the bones:
E la extremitat de lu es triangulada e de aguda extremitat.	And the extremity of it is triangular and of acute extremity.
E es fayt de ferr de India , e semblantment cove que totas las causas que havem ditas de rasoris e de inscissoris e de serras.	And it is made of Indian iron, and similarly let all the causes which we have said of razors and of incisioners and of saws.
De inscizio extremitatz e de la serratura dels osses.	Of incisioning extremities and of the sewing of bones.
Las extremitatz se poyresso o per causa intrinseca o per causa extrinseca, o cum tu auras medicat aquela corrupcio per curacio de aquelas medicinas e la curacio no comfereys, o vezes la corrupcio anar deves le membre la qual no percuteys denguna causa, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquel membre entro aquo la hon acossec la corrupcio, per que le malaute evasesca per aquo de mort o de malicia que es major defeliment del membre.	The extremities can be affected by either an intrinsic or extrinsic cause, or after you have treated that corruption with cure of those medicines and the cure does not confer, or when the corruption is in the member which does not bear any cause, then let you incise that member within where lies the corruption so that the patient may escape from it by death or by evil which is greater defect of the member.
E le senhal de aquel al qual accideys, es que·l membre es fayt negre entro que sia cujat que foc la ja comburit, o se poyreys aprop la negror entro que la poyredura aquela ane entro aquel membre que siec lu e que prengua tot le cors; e donc coyta te am inscizio de aquel.	And the sign of that to which it happens is that the member is made black within as though fire had burned it, or it becomes black within as though that burning had entered that member and had entered all the body; and therefore cut at it with incision of that.
E semblantment si es causa de la corrupcio percussio de alcunas causas venenosas ayssi cum de scorpio mari o de vupera o de rutela e de semblantz.	And similarly if the cause of the corruption is percussion from certain venomous causes such as from sea scorpion or from viper or from adder or from similar.
E si la corrupcio o la percussio es en la extremitat del dit, lahoras tu inscideys le dit e no dones spazi a la corrupcio per que ane entro a la ma.	And if the corruption or the percussion is in the extremity of the finger, then let you incise the finger and do not give space to the corruption so that it enter into the hand.
E semblantment si accedeys a la ma, lahoras tu inscideys aquela de la razit del focil, e no dones spazi a la corrupcio entro que prengua en le focil del bras.	And similarly if it has accessed the hand, then let you incise that of the joint of the fire-stick and do not give space to the corruption so that it enter into the fire-stick of the arm.
E si envezeys aquel, lahoras inscideys le bras entro al coyde en la junctura.	And if you have it, then let you incise the arm within in the joint.
E si passa otra la corrupcio e la vezes enviro le coyde, lahoras en aquel es la mort del malaute; e aministrar autra causa otra aquo en curacio es quantitat de vertut.	And if another the corruption and it turns around the head, then in that is the death of the patient; and administer other cause in cure is quantity of virtue.
E semblantment fay del pe quan corrupcio envezeys le dit del pe, lahoras tu inscideys aquel entro ad un dels nozes.	And similarly make of the foot when corruption instead of the finger of the foot, then let you incise that within one of the toes.
E si pren en la pente del pe, lahoras tu inscideys tot le pe.	And if it takes in the sole of the foot, then let you incise all the foot.
Mays si pueja entro al denol, lahoras tu inscideys la camba entro a la junctura del denol.	But if it enters into the tooth, then let you incise the gum within at the joint of the tooth.
E si la corrupcio ja es pervenguda sobre le denol, lahoras en lu no es engen sino dimissio, e layssar le malaute a la mort.	If corruption has already occurred in the brain, then there is no remedy but to release the patient and let him die.
E la manieyra de inscidir le membre o de serrar lu es que tu strenhas le liament en la partida pus dejos la qual voles inscidir, e strenh autre liament sobre le loc; e extenda le ministre un liament a las partidas dejos, e extenda le ministra autra liament en sus; e tu separa la carn la qual es entre dos liamentz ain spatum lat entro que sia descuberta tota la carn; e aprop sia inscidit o serrat.	And the manner of cutting off a limb or of tying it is that you should tighten the ligament in the area where it is desired to be cut, and tighten another ligament above the site; and extend one ligament towards the lower parts, and extend the other over it; and you separate the flesh which is between two ligaments so that it may be completely exposed, and then let it be cut or tied.
E cove que sia pausat drap de li de totas partidas per so que no toque le loc sa, e que vengua al malaute lesio ajustada e apostema caut.	And make sure that a cloth is placed under all parts so that it does not touch the wound, and that the patient receives an appropriate bandage and poultice.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc quan obras, lahoras tu cauteriza le loc coytadament, o pausa sus lu alcunas polveras restrenhentz le sanc; e aprop retorna a la tua medicacio entro que sia complida.	But if blood flows from the wound, then cauterize the site with cautery, or apply some powders which will constrict the flow of blood; and return to your treatment until it is complete.
E aprop lia le membre plaguat am liament al u convenient, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And then bind the infected limb with a bandage in a suitable way, and treat it until it is healed.
E yeu recomti a tu aquo que endevenc a un home en le sieu pe, aquest meteys accident le qual yeu e a tu recomtat, le qual es quar accidic a lu negror en le sieu pe am adustio que era asemblada a combustio de foc.	And then he told you that once a man had a dark spot on his foot, and you and he agreed to treat it with a burn which resembled the charred remains of a fire.
E aquela corrupcio accidic primierament en le sieu dit entro que tendec tot le pe.	And this corruption first occurred in his toe, then spread to the rest of his foot.
E adonc aquel home preparec per si meteys pus que vic la curacio anar al membre am la vehemencia de lu que atrobec de dolor e de adustrio de lu, e el inscidic aquel pe entro a la junctura, e foc sanat.	And then that man prepared remedies himself as the treatment progressed and his foot became more swollen with pain and the burn, so he cut off the foot at the joint, and it healed.
Lonc temps accidic a lu aquela meteyssa corrupcio en le dit de la ma indic.	A long time ago that man had that corruptive disease in his left toe.
E adonc venc a mi, e so me perforsat repercutir aquela superfluitat am aquo que pausegui sobre la ma de las medicinas, aprop la mundificacio del cos de lu; e no es repercussa la superfluitat e comensec anar al autra dit entro que comensec en la ma.	And then it came to me and I was forced to remove that surplus with the medicine which I applied to his hand, so that the cleansing of his body would occur; but the surplus was not reduced and started to go to the other toe as it began in the hand.
E el apelec me a inscidir la ma de lu, e yeu no volgui far aquo sperant sobre la repercussio de aquela superfluitat, e mays que temegui deves la inscizio de la ma de lu mort, quar la vertut del malaute era sobre cazement.	And he asked me to cut off his hand, but I did not want to do this hoping for the reduction of that surplus, and fearing the cutting off of his hand which would result in death, because the strength of the patient was great.
E pus que el se desperec de mi, es retornat en la sua terra e pervenguec a mi que aquel home preparec e inscidic la sua ma tota, e es sanat.	And when he lost hope in me, he returned to his land and found that this man prepared and cut off his entire hand, and it healed.
E no he adhuzida aquesta narracio sino per que sia adjutori sobre aquo que catz de aquesta malautia, e que sia significacio per la qual sia significada e segon la qual sia obrat.	And I have not written this narrative except to be an aid for those who suffer from this disease, and that it be a sign by which it is understood and according to which it occurs.
De cura sinuum et qualitate clisterizationis cum medicinis.	Of the treatment of ulcers and the quality of enemas with medicines.
Quan accideys apostema en alcus membres carnozes e·l spazi de l’apostema es prolonguat entro que fa colleccio de sania, e aprop es romput e perforat, e es eyssida de lu la sania, e roman le loc vuoyt quays cum si era vayssel, e la codena que es desobre lu ayssi cum drap subtiliat, e no es pervengut a deriera corrupcio, e no inprimeys en le os o en nervi ni en liament, es apelat sinu, e no es nompnat fistula.	When an ulcer occurs in the fleshy parts and the space of the ulcer is prolonged so that it makes a collection of pus, and then it is broken and perforated, and the pus is discharged from it, and the site becomes hollow as if it were a vessel, and the cord which is above it is like a veil with a thin cloth, and there has been no subsequent corruption, and it does not impress upon the bone or nerve or ligament, it is called an ulcer, and is not named a fistula.
Mays empero si le spazi es prolonguat entro que la corrupcio enprema en alcun membre, lahoras es appelada fistula e no zukem.	But if the space is prolonged so that corruption occurs in some member, then it is called a fistula and not an ulcer.
E la cura de lu es que inscidas aquela codena tota ayssi cum es revolvut, e majorment quan es subtiliada e es fayta cum drap, e comfizas que no adhereys al loc per la sua corrupcio.	And the treatment of it is that you cut off the whole cord as it is turned over and most especially when it is thinned out and made with a cloth, and bandages which do not adhere to the site by its corruption.
Mays si tu speras que la codena adheresca e que aquela corrupcio no aja conseguit per deriera consecucio, e en la codena ha spassitut de cara, lahoras tu cura aquel am clisteri.	But if you expect the cord to adhere and that corruption has not been accomplished by subsequent consequence, and there is passage in the cord of pus, then you should treat it with an enema.
E es que consideras al sinu, e lahoras si es gran, e·l brac que yeys es de fetent odor, lahoras clisteriza aquel am medicament egipciac le qual es de oli e vi agre e ziniar recebent partidas enguals, e sian ajustadas en un vayssel, e sian coytas sobre le foc entro que’l medicament se fassa rog e pervengua a specitut de mel.	And consider the ulcer, and if it is great and the arm which you see gives off a fetid odor, then enema that with an Egyptian medicine which is of oil and sharp wine and linseed received in parts equalized in a vessel, and let them be heated over fire until the medicine becomes thick as honey.
E aprop tu pren de lu aquo que es necessari e dissolveys lu am aygua e mel; e clisteriza am aquel le sinu, e strenh le orrifici de lu, e layssa la medicina en lu per la quantitat de doas horas.	And then take from it that which is necessary and dissolve it with water and honey; and enema with it the ulcer, and tighten the orifice of it, and let the medicine remain in it for the quantity of two hours.
E aprop extratz aquela am sprecio; e fay aquo per tantz dias entro que sia mundificat le sinu e sia remauguda la pudor.	And then remove that with discretion; and do this for so many days until the ulcer is cleansed and the pain abated.
E alcunas veguadas es clisterizat am aygua de cendre, quan no es a tu prezent aquest medicament; e es que tu prenguas la cendra de vitz, e met sobre lu aygua; e aprop cola aquela e clisteriza aquel am ela entro que te confizes que·l sinu lahoras es ostat.	And in some cases it is enema with water of ashes when that medicine is not available to you; and take the ashes of wood and put on it water, and then boil that and strain it, and enema that with it until you are certain that the ulcer has been relieved.
E si le malaute no ha tollerancia sobre le medicament egipciac ni l’aygua de la cendre, lahoras clisteriza aquel am aygua e mel e quays sia mesclat ziniar trissat, e clisteriza aquel am vi e mel mesclat, quar de proprietat de mel es que mondifique e lave, e le vi fa adherir le sinu, e majorment quan en le vi ha superfluitat de stipticitat e de siccitat.	And if the patient has no tolerance for the Egyptian medicine or water of ashes, then enema that with water and honey mixed with linseed pounded into powder, and enema that with wine and honey mixed because of the nature of honey is to cleanse and wash, and wine makes the ulcer adhere especially when in the wine there is surplus of astringency and dryness.
E cum tu fas aquo alcunas veguadas e te comfizes que·l sinu ja es remaugut, lahoras clisteriza aquel am aquo que fa naysser la carn en lu.	And when you have done this several times and you are certain that the ulcer has abated, then enema that with that which makes the flesh grow on it.
E es que prenguas de enguent dyafinicon e dissolveys aquel am oli rozat e vi stiptic; o que clisterizas aquel am alcunas medicinas e enguentz autres que hajan las proprietatz les quals ja he yeu scritz en le tractat dels enguents.	And take the ointment of daphnoides and dissolve it with rose oil and astringent wine, or enema that with some other medicines and unguents which I have written about in the treatise on unguents.
E si le orrifici del sinu es streyt en le qual no es recebuda la canula del clisteri, lahoras tu le amplifique aquel am ferr petit a petit, e pausa en lu calgua envolopada en enguent egipciac o en enguent basilicon entro que sia amplificat.	And if the orifice of the ulcer is narrow so that the cannula of the enema cannot be received, then you should enlarge it with a small iron little by little, and put on it cotton wrapped in Egyptian ointment or in balsamic ointment until it is enlarged.
E semblantment si le orrifici es ample, lahoras tu agregua las labias de lu am sutura e layssa de lu quantitat en la qual intre le clisteri ses addicio.	And likewise if the orifice is wide, then you should close it with a stitch and put on it quantity in which between the enema is added.
E si le orrifici de lu del qual corr le brac es elevat a las partidas desus, lahoras secca aquel en le pus bas loc que es en lu per que le brac corra entro dejos, quar quan le brac es coartat en la preondeza de sinu la carn esser en lu engendrada.	And if the orifice from which the arm hangs is elevated to the parts above, then dry that in the pus base of it so that the arm does not run into it below because when the arm is constricted in the depth of the ulcer the flesh engendered in it.
E si no es a tu possible seccar le sinu entro al enviro del os pus bas segon que voles, lahoras te perforssa que prepares le membre am preparacio per la qual corr de lu le brac leugierament segon que es a tu apparelhat e que no sia en lu retengut alcuna causa del brac.	And if it is not possible for you to dry the ulcer in the surrounding of the bone of pus base according as you wish, then be assured that you prepare the member with preparation so that from it the arm runs longer according as it appears to you and that there is no cause for the arm in it.
E pren medicinas consolidativas que sian pausadas sobre le sinu convenientz ad aquo que vols exxten aquelas sobre drap de li.	And take consolidating medicines which are placed over the ulcer conveniently according to what you wish, they are extended on cloth of linen.
E le drap sia de tan gran quantitat cum fa la comunicacio de tot le sinu; e aprop inscidey am las forfexs en le dreyt del orrifici del sinu un trauc pus ample un pauc que l’orrifici del sinu; e aprop exten sobre autre drap de li dels enguentz leons segon la quantitat del trauc, e pausa le sobre aquel per posicio longinqua del orrifici del sinu per que sia aleujat le eyssiment del brac de lu e no ostes le drap gran sino aprop alcus dyas una veguada.	And the cloth be of such great quantity as makes the communication of all the ulcer, and then cut with the forceps in the right of the orifice of the ulcer a wound more ample than the orifice of the ulcer; and then extend over another cloth of linen of the unguents lion’s according to the quantity of the wound, and put on it that for position distant from the orifice of the ulcer so that it is drawn away the running of the arm from it and do not touch the cloth great unless after some days once.
Mays aquel que es sobre le orrifici del sinu, le qual remauguas en tota hora per so que yesca aquo que es ajust en lu del brac.	But that which is on the orifice of the ulcer, which abates in every hour because it draws what is constricted in it of the arm.
E per que sapias si aquo que corr de lu del brac es mot o pauc, o es digest, o es no-digest.	And so that you know whether what runs from it of the arm is pus or little, or is digested, or is undigested.
E am aysso tu considera le loc de aquel sinu, si en lu sent le pacient dolor o no, e si es en lu apostema.	And you consider the site of that ulcer if in it the patient feels pain or not, and if there is pus in it.
E cum la tua medicacio es prolonguada en la tal manieyra, e vesas la matiera que es gitada sobre le orrifici del sinu ja adhereys, o se apropria adherencia, lahoras le mayti tu le deslia o le tertz dia, e quan deslias la plagua, lahoras muda le drap per autre e renova le enguent.	And when your medication is prolonged in this manner, and you see the matter that has exuded through the orifices of the sinus already adhered, or with its own adhesion, then on the third day, loosen it with a poultice, and when you loosen the plague, then change the dressing with another one and renew the ointment.
Mays si del sinu aprop lon spazi yeys virus subtil, lahoras no te desperes de la adherencia de li, quar la sanacio de lu se apropria, quar so alcus homes en les quals tarda generacio de carn en las lors plaguas, e de aquels so en les quals es fayt le contrari de lu.	But if from the sinus there exudes a subtle humor, then do not despair of its adhesion, because its healing is proper, for there are some men in whom the generation of flesh occurs in their plagues, and of those in whom the contrary occurs as well.
E si del sinu aprop motz dias es yssit brac indigest, lahoras sapias que·l sinu no adhereys; e si es tardada la adherencia del sinu e es la causa prolonguada, lahoras tu ajusta en exsiccacio de las medicinas, e si las medicinas so humidas en lor substancia e en la sua vertut, son seccas ayssi cum enguent dyafinicon, quan es en lu ajustada superfluitat de addicio de zegi.	And if a bad indigestion has exited from the sinus for several days, then know that the sinus is not adhered; and if its adhesion is delayed and its cause prolonged, then you should reduce the quantity of medicines, and if the medicines are wet in their substance and in their efficacy, they are dried as well as a defying poultice when there is excess addition of zegi.
E le mays derier am le qual es curat, es que prenguas de enguent dyafinicon e sia dissout en oli rozat, e sia sobre lu vojat vi antic engual en la sua substancia, e aprop comfeys aquel am lu, e usa de aquel.	And the most posterior one that is treated is to take a defying poultice and dissolve it in rose oil, and over it apply honey wine equal in its substance, and then comfort him with that and use it.
E ja fa semblant en aquela accio, quan no y a brac, enguent dyafinicon, mel quan es coyt entro que sia engrossat, e usa de lu; o que prenguas mirra e aloen e enses, e trissa tot e polveriza sobre le mel quan es sus le foc, e aprop lineys aquo sobre drap e strenh aquel sobre le sinu; e lineys aquel am le mel le qual has cuoyt entro que es engrossat, e polveriza sobre drap e strenh aquel.	And already make a demonstration in that action when there is no humor, by taking a defying poultice and honey when it is cut into that it becomes thickened, and use it; or take myrrh and aloe and mix them together, and grind everything and pulverize it over the honey as it is over the fire, and then line it over the fabric and press that over the sinus; and line with the honey which you have cut into so that it becomes thickened, and pulverize it over the fabric and press that.
E alcunas veguadas so administratz am lu aristologia longua e razitz de lili celesti (e es lili celesti) e farina de errs e centaurea, e usa de aquels simples o ajustatz, trissa aquels e cribela e polveriza sobre le mel le qual he recomtat; e husa de lu.	And sometimes they are administered with it a long aristology and roots of the heavenly lily (and that is the heavenly lily) and farina of err and centaurea, and use those simples or adjust them, grind them and sift them and pulverize them over the honey I have recommended; and use it.
E si es prolonguat le sinu, e no es sanat per aquesta curacio, lahoras sapias que la corrupcio es en le preon de lu, e ja fa enquisicio en les osses o en les autres membres durs o als liaments; lahoras tu le cura am curacio fistular, ayssi cum desus es dit.	And if the sinus is prolonged and not healed by this cure, then know that the corruption is in its preon, and already make inquiry into the bones or other hard members or into the ligaments; then you should cure it with a fistular cure as has been said above.
De curacio de panarici et unguis attritae et incisione digiti additi et sectione.	Of the cure of panaricus and nail abrasion and digit addition incision and section.
Panarici es apostema le qual nays dejos la ungla del dit pous de la ma o del pe, e fort leu nays en les autres ditz, e cum es prolonguat e la sua curacio es mens prezada, o es apostemat de apostema caut, o es corrumput, e gieta brac entro que corrodeys la razitz de la ungla, e fort leu corromp aquela tota, e fort leu perve la sua corrupcio al os entro que es a lu odor fetent, e es fayta la extremitat del dit lada, e la color de lu es fayta fusca.	Panaricus is an apostema that occurs under the nail of the toe of the hand or foot, and seldom under the other toes, and as it is prolonged and its cure is less valued, it becomes apostematized from cauterization, or it becomes corrupted, and it exudes humor within that corrodes the roots of the nail, and it corrupts all of that, and its corruption very much pervades the bone within which has a fetid odor, and its extremity becomes lumpy, and its color becomes dusky.
E donc quan tu auras aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu inscidas am ferr tota la superfluitat que es romasa de la ungla e aprop cauteriza la plagla aprop aquo, quar cauteri mot es juvatiu en aysso.	And therefore when you have that from which we have spoken in the division and do not comfort your cure, then know that you must cut away with iron all of the excess that is rotted from the nail and then cauterize the wound accordingly, for the cautery is beneficial in this.
Mays si le os es sa e la ungla es sana, e las addicios de la ungla vuoydas ja compremen las carns a las partidas dedintz, e comensan lu punger e ledeysso aquela, lahoras cove que tu pauses ray subtil dejos le angle de la ungla que pungeys la carn, e impelleys aquela sus e inscideys aquela carn am facilitat, e pausa sobre aquo que roman de la carn de las medicinas comburentz corrosivas entro que sia tot remaugut; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	But if the bone is sound and the nail is healthy, and the additions of the nail are pushing inwards on the flesh between the parts of the nails, and it begins to sting and irritate that, then know that you should pause a fine needle beneath the angle of the nail which is pricking the flesh, and dislodge that upwards and insert that flesh with ease, and apply upon that which rises from the flesh medicaments that burn and corrode within so that everything is cleaned; and then cure it with ointments once it is healed.
Mays si la corrupcio ja enprem en le os, lahoras cove que tu inscidas le os aquel e le extraguas, car nul temps no es sanat que sia en lu le os corrumput.	But if the corruption is already within the bone, then know that you must cut out the bone and extract it, for it will not be healed as long as the rotten bone remains in it.
E si vezes la corrozio e la corupcio anar en le dit, lahoras tu inscideys aquel en un dels nozes segons que es premesa la sua rememoracio, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if the corruption and rot extend into the finger, then you should insert it into one of the knuckles according to which is preselected by its memory, and then cure that once it is healed.
Mays si a la ungla endeve percussio o atricio, e endeve en aquela dolor vehement, lahoras cove que tu al comensament fleubotomes le malaute, e aprop secca la ungla am spatum agut am seccio transversa desus en jus, e guarda te que la seccio no pervengua entro a la carn que es dejos la ungla, quar tu faras accidir al malaute dolor vehement, e sira causa a nativitat de la carn ajustada superflua en le loc; e aprop cura aquel loc am aquo que ceda dolor.	But if there is percussion or abrasion upon the nail and subsequently violent pain in that, then know that you must at the beginning bleed the patient, and then dry the nail with a pointed spatula with a transversal section above it, and beware that the section does not pervade into the flesh that is beneath the nail, for you will cause violent pain to the patient, and its cause will be the generation of excess flesh in the place; and then cure that place with what relieves the pain.
Mays dit ajustat, le qual es nat en las mas de alcus homes, fort leu es carnos tot, e fort leu so en lu osses, o fort leu es en lu ungla.	But a finger that is born in the hands of some men is very seldom all flesh, and rarely within it bones, or rarely within it nails.
E alcus de lu son natz en la razit de la junctura, o es la nativitat de lu en alcus nozes dels ditz.	And some of it are born from the root of the joint, or its generation is from some knuckles of the fingers.
Mays aquel que es nat en alcus nozes del dit no se mau, e aquest que es nat en las juncturas fort leu es maugut.	But that which is born in some knuckles of the finger does not become sick, and that which is born from the joints is very much sickened.
E de aquels que son natz carnoses, la seccio es leugiera, e es que tu inscidas aquel deves la sua razitz am spatum lat.	And of those which are born fleshy, its section is easier, and you should insert that behind its roots with a broad spatula.
Mays de aquel que es nat en la razitz de la junctura, la curacio es dificil; e donc guarda te de la abscizio de lu.	But of that which is born from the root of the joint, its cure is difficult; and therefore beware of its incision.
Mays en aquel que es nat en dit deves les nozes, cove que tu inscidas al comensament la carn de lu am inscizio redonda entro al os, e aprop serra am una de aquelas serras convenientz ad aquo, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	But in that which is born in a finger from the knuckles, know that you must at the beginning insert the flesh of it with a round incision into the bone, and then cut with one of those convenient saws for that, and then cure it once it is healed.
Mays consolidacio la qual accideys als ditz entre lor motas veguadas o per nativitat del home que nays enayssi, o per consolidacio de plagua o per combustio de foc, o per semblantz, adonc cove que secces aquela consolidacio entro que les ditz retorno a la sua forma natural.	But consolidation which occurs in the fingers between their motions many times or from generation of the person who has it, or from consolidation of plague, or from burn of fire, or from similar things, therefore know that you should dry that consolidation so that the fingers return to their natural form.
E aprop pausa entre lor draps de li enfuzes en oli rozat per que no sian consolidatz leugierament, e separa entre aquels, o pausa entre aquels una lamina de plom subtil entro que sia consolidat segon que cove.	And then place between their bands of them soaks in rose oil so that they are not consolidated too easily, and separate those or place between them a thin sheet of lead within which is consolidated according to what it should be.
E semblantment si accideys consolidacio en alcus ditz am la palma, lahoras tu secca aquela consolidacio segon que es preparada e conveneys a la figura del membre.	And similarly if consolidation occurs in some fingers with the palm, then you should dry that consolidation according to how it is prepared and convenient for the form of the member.
De inscizio de vices, so son varicas.	Of incision of veins, these are varicose.
Vices so son varicas, e so venas envolutas grossas plenas de superfluitatz melencolicas las quals veno en motz dels membres del cors, e le major adveniment de lor en las cambas, e majorment en las cambas dels itinerantz e dels laborantz e dels portantz.	Varicose are veins, and they are grossly rolled vessels full of melancholy humors which flow in the motions of the members of the body, and their greatest occurrence is in the legs, and mostly in the legs of travelers and laborers and carriers.
Adonc cove que tu administres purguacio del cors de colera negra alcunas veguadas am expulcio fort, e aprop sangna le pacient de la vena basilica.	Therefore know that you should administer purgation of the body from black cholera several times with strong expulsion, and then bleed the patient from the basilic vein.
Mays la curacio de lor am ferr es segon dos manieyras: la una es que sia inscizas e sia atirat aquel sanc negre, e l’autra manieyra es que sia elevada la vena e sia extrayta tota.	But their cure by iron is according to two methods: one is that it be cut and that the black blood be drawn out, and the other method is that the vein be raised up and all of it drawn out.
La seccio de lu es segon aquesta manieyra: embroca al comensament la camba am aygua cauda mot entro que le sanc gros sia resolvut, que es feculent de la camba, e aprop strenh la camba del malaute a la partida pus sobirana de la coyssa entro a la partida dejos del denol am una benda, e aprop secca la vena en un loc, o en dos, o en tres am seccio ampla, e aprop eleva le sanc negra am la tieua ma de la partida dejos de la camba entro en sus, e desus en jus, entro que del sanc sia yssida la quantitat que voles e que vezes habastar, e la qual tollera la vertut del malaute.	Its incision is according to this method: at the beginning moisten the leg with warm water so that the gross blood is dissolved which is feculent of the leg, and then press the leg from above on the part pus uppermost of the thigh into the part below the groin with a bandage, and then dry the vein in one place, or two, or three with broad incision, and then raise up the black blood with the sole of the hand from the part below the leg within upwards so that of the blood is expelled the quantity which you desire and which the strength of the patient will bear.
E aprop lia aquela, e comanda a lu que abstengua de las viandas colera negra engendrantz.	And then lead them away, and command that they abstain from foods engendering black bile.
E itera la curacio per fleubotomia quan las venas so umplidas e aquo notz al malaute.	And repeat the treatment by phlebotomy when the veins are full and this is noticed in the patient.
Mays la elevacio de lor es segon aquesta manieyra: tu que razas la camba del malaute, si en lu so motz pels, e aprop met le en banh e embroca la camba de lu am aygua cauda entro que s’enrogesesca e las venas sian exuberadas; o que sia exercitat per exercici fort, si banh no es a tu present, entro que·l membre sia scalfat.	But the elevation of them is according to this manner: you raise the leg of the patient if in it there are veins, and then put him into a bath and rub his leg with warm water until it reddens and the veins are dilated; or he be exercised by vigorous exercise, if a bath is not available, so that the limb is heated.
E aprop secsa la codena en le dreyt de la vena per seccio en le lonc o en le derier de lu deves le denol, o en le pus bas de lu deves lo talo.	And then cut the tendon in the direction of the vein either along its length or behind him below the pain, or at the very bottom of him near the ankle.
E aprop uobre la codena am uncis e excorja la vena de tota part entro que appara al sentiment, e es deves la appericio de lu que vezes aquela roga declinant a negror.	And then open the tendon with nails and gouge out the vein in every part where it appears to the sense, and one must observe the appearance of it that turns black at times.
E donc cum evazeys e de la codena tu vezes aquela blanca quays sia corda.	And so when you have evacuated and from the tendon you see it white like a cord.
E aprop tu met dejos aquela le ray entro que sia elevada e sia gitada de la codena, e sospen aquela am onci orp leon.	And then put that under the leg so that it is elevated and is supported by the tendon, and suspend it with a silk thread from an iron hook.
E aprop secsa autra seccio aprop aquela seccio per tres ditz, e aprop excorja la codena de la partida desus de la vena entro que apparia.	And then cut another section just above that section by three fingers, and gouge out the tendon from the part above the vein where it appears.
E aprop eleva aquela e inscideys aquela en deriera seccio deves le talo, e aprop extratz aquela e eleva aquela entro que sia yssida per la seccio segonda, e aprop extratz aquela de la seccio que es sobre aquela.	And then elevate that and insert it into the posterior section below the ankle, and then extract it from the second section above it, and then extract it from the section above it.
E fay aquo entro que extraguas aquela de la seccio que es pus sobirana o pus auta de totas las seccios, entro que tota es yssida; e lahoras inscideys aquela.	And do this until you extract it from the section that is most superior or highest of all the sections, so that all is evacuated; and then insert it.
E si no obezeys a tu ad extrayre e elevar, lahoras intromet una agulha am fiel fort doble e ligua aquela e extratz la, o intromet dejos lu le ray e revolveys la tua ma a tota part entro qu’en sia getada.	And if he does not obey you and does not allow himself to be extracted and elevated, then insert a strong bent needle into him and ligature it, or put under him the edge of your hand and move your hand around to every part where there is an abundance.
E guarda te que no sia inscidida; quar si es trencada, es fayt a tu dificil elevar aquela mot e es vengut sobre le malaute per aquela nocument.	And beware that it is not incised; for if it is cut then it has become difficult for you to elevate the part and it has come upon the patient through that injury.
E cum aquela tota auras fora-gitada, lahoras pausa sobre le loc de la plagua lana submerssa en vi e oli rozat e oli no-rozat, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And when all of it has been evacuated out, then place on the site of the wound wool soaked in wine and rose oil, and cure it until it is healed.
E si la vit es contrayta havent tortuositat a la qual sia envolucio a las partidas, e no es segon rectitut segon que havem dit, lahoras cove que tu fendas sobre aquela a tota partida de tortuositat de lu e als locs de envolucio de lu, e aprop suspen aquela am uncis entro que eleves aquela tota.	And if the vein is contracted having tortuosity in which there is an envelope of its parts, and it is not according to rectitude as we have said, then you must split that at every part of its tortuosity and the sites of its envelope, and then suspend it with nails so that you elevate all of it.
E guarda te deves la tua seccio que no inscidas la vena e que no plagues aquela, quar dificil sira a tu elevar aquela; e serva la tua prudencia en aquela.	And beware that you do not incision the vein and that you do not harm it, for it will be difficult for you to elevate it; and exercise your prudence in that.
Forma del inscident am le qual es seccada vit:	Form of the incision with which the vein is dried:
Forma de unci orp:	Form of a nail hook:
No es a lu accuitat ayssi cum als uncis ni es de aguda extremitat per so que no plague la vena; e es de grossa flexibilitat leon, quar si era subtil, inscidira la vena per la sua subtilitat; habantz es en lu superflua grosseza ayssi cum havem dit.	It is not made of iron nor is it of acute extremity so that it does not harm the vein; and it has great flexibility of the thread, for if it were subtle it would cut the vein through its subtlety; there is in it superfluous thickness just as we have said.
De extraccio venae cruris.	Of extraction of the leg vein.
Aquesta vena es engendrada en las cambas en terras caudas ayssi cum al- Ategi en terra de Arabics e en las terras de India caudas e aridas de pauca teneritat e en las quals no nays erba ni aybre.	This vein is engendered in the legs in hot lands just like Al-Ateji in the land of the Arabs and in hot and arid lands of little tenderness, and in which there is no herb or grass.
E fort leu es engendrada en autres locs del cors otra las cambas.	And it is engendered strongly in other parts of the body besides the legs.
E la gestacio de lu es de putrefaccio que ve dejos la codena ayssi cum venen dedintz le cors serpentz e vermps e scarides e verms engendrantz entre la codena e la carn.	And its gestation is from putrefaction that comes beneath the tendon just as venomous snakes and worms and insects and worms engendered between the tendon and flesh.
E senhal de la suscepcio de l’adveniment de lu es de aquesta vena que accideys en la camba enflammacio vehement; e aprop le loc es vesicat; e aprop comensa la vena yssir del loc de aquela vesicacio quays sembla razit de planta.	And sign of the occurrence of its coming is that vein which inflames violently in the leg, and then the site becomes blistered; and then the vein begins to emerge from the site of that blister as if cut from a plant.
E adonc cum appar de lu la extremitat, lahoras cove que tu envolvas sobre aquela una pessa de plom del qual sia le pes de una drac. entro a ii drac., e noza aquela e layssa le plom suspendut de la camba.	And then when you see the end of it coming out, you must wrap around it a piece of lead weighing two drachmas, and hang it suspended from the leg.
E tantas veguadas cum yeys de lu alcuna causa a las partidas defora, envolveys aquo em plom e noza aquel.	And as many times as you see it go forth for some cause to its parts, wrap that around it in lead and suspend it.
E si mot es prolonguat, lahoras tu inscideys una partida de lu e envolopa le romanent; e no inscidas aquela de razit entro que sia fora yssida, quar si inscideys aquela es contrayta e intra en la carn e fa accidir apostema e poyredura en le loc e ulceracio mala.	And if the vein is prolonged, then you insert a part of it and wrap around the remainder; and do not incision that from cut so that it is drawn out, for if you incision it it is contracted and goes into the flesh and causes an abscess and swelling in the site and bad ulceration.
Per que cove que sia tractada suaument e sia extrayta petit a petit, entro que sia fora-gitada del derier de lu e no remangua de lu alcuna causa en le cors.	Because it must be drawn out slowly and extracted little by little so that it is evacuated from its end and does not draw back into the body for any cause.
E de aquesta vena es yssit en alcus homes que es en la sua longitut de v palms e de detz e ja es pervengut a mi que yssic un de xx palms.	And from this vein it emerges in some men who are in its length of five or ten palms, and I have seen one emerge twenty-palms.
E si es inscidida en la hora de la sua medicacio, lahoras intromet lo ray en le trauc de lu e perfora aquela am lonc trauc am le cors, entro que sia evacuat tot aquo que es en la materia, e administra putrefaccio del loc per alcus dias am medicinas; e aprop cura aquela per la curacio de apostemas.	And if it is incised at the hour of its treatment then insert your finger into the hole in him and bore it with a long hole through his body so that everything that is in the matter is evacuated, and administer putrefaction of the site for several days with medicines; and then cure that by the cure of abscesses.
E aquesta vena alcunas veguadas ha motz ramps, e majorment quan apar a la junctura del pe o en le pe, e veno a lu motz orrificis, e es yssit de quascu orrifici ram.	And this vein sometimes has wounds, and especially when it appears at the junction of the leg or in the leg, and comes to him wounds of orifices, and is emerged from each orifice.
E donc cura aquela ayssi cum havem dit en la divisio e am aquo que es desus dit.	And so cure that as we have said in the division and with what is above it.
De sectione super vermes generatos sub cute et dicitur aegritudo bovina.	Of the section of worms generated under the skin, and it is called bovinine disease.
Aquesta malautia es nompnada en alcuna terra deves nos malautia bovina per so quar motas veguadas endeve als bious e es verm pauc un le qual es nat entre la codena e la carn, e va en tot le cos pujan e devalan, e es mostrat al sentiment deves le sieu anament de membre en membre entro que disromp la codena e yeys fora.	This disease is named in some land due to bovine disease because it sometimes attacks oxen and is a worm few of which is born between the tendon and flesh, and goes throughout all the body pushing and pulling and is revealed to the sense due to its movement from member to member so that it tears the tendon and goes out.
E la generacio de lu es per putrefaccio de alcunas humors ayssi cum accideysso verms e serpentz e lombrics e ascaridas en le ventre.	And its generation is by putrefaction of some humor just as occurs to worms and snakes and roundworms and tapeworms in the belly.
E es temut per la malicia de lu, quar quan el va en le cors e es elevat al cap, e es pervengut al huel, lahoras fort leu uebre en lu e intra e destruzeys le huel, e aquo endeve motas veguadas.	And it is dreaded for its malice, for when it goes through the body and is elevated to the head, then it strongly pierces him and goes inside and destroys the brain, and this while it moves many times.
E donc quan tu voles curar aquel e extraire lu, lahoras no se fa si no deves la sieua ambulacio e apparacio de lu al sentiment, e adonc cove que tu strenhas aquo que es sobre lu e aquo que es dejos lu am liament e constriccio fort, e aprop secca sobre lu e extratz aquel.	And so when you want to cure it and extract it, then it is not done if there is no movement of him and appearance to the sense, and then you must tighten what is above it and what is below it with ligature and strong constriction, and then cut what is above it and extract that.
E si es preondat en la carn e no le atrobes, lahoras tu pausa cauteri am foc sobre le loc entro que mora, e la major causa que es temuda es corrupcio de lu am la qual corrump le loc ayssi cum havem dit.	And if it is sunken in the flesh and not open then you must pause cautery with fire over the site where it remains, and the main cause that is dreaded is putrefaction of him by which he corrupts the site as we have said.
May si tu vezes aquel esser pervengut al cap prop del huel, lahoras strenh sobre le sobrecil am fort strictura, e aprop secsa sobre lu, e extratz aquel; e cove que·l malaute use de mondificacio del sieu cors am medicinas evacuantz humors putridas malas, e guarda se de viandas generantz putrefaccio.	And if you see him pervening to the head near the brain then tighten around the forehead with a strong constriction and cut what is above it, and extract that; and let the patient use cleansing of his body with medicines evacuating putrid bad humors, and beware of foods engendering putrefaction.
De sectione super aegritudinem nafir.	Of the section for the disease of children.
Aquesta malautia es nompnada en nostra terra nafir, e es dolor la qual ve en alcus membres, e aprop es permudada de membre en membre.	This disease is named in our land nafir, and it is pain that comes in some members, and then is transferred from member to member.
E yeu ja e vista aquela segon que yeu te recomtare.	And you know well and see that according as you relate.
Yeu fu apelat a una femna malauta ad una vila, e descubric le sieu bras e vi una imflacio petita en la vena funis del bras, e pus que fu romas per una hora, vi aquela imflacio anar ayssi cum va verm pujan ad aquest, mays pus leugierament que esser por, ayssi cum si fos argent viu quan corr de loc en loc.	I was called to a sick woman in a village, and I discovered her arm and saw a small inflammation in the vein of the arm, and since it was broken for an hour, I saw that inflammation go like worms pushing towards this, but more lightly than being afraid, as if it were living silver when it flows from place to place.
E adonc anet s’en la dolor de aquel loc e fiquet se en le muscle, e aprop aqui stec per una hora.	And then he went into the pain of that place and pierced in the muscle, and there he stayed for an hour.
E aprop correc en l’autre cors entro que pervenc al autre bras.	And then it ran through the rest of the body until it reached the other arm.
E aprop recomtec a mi que revolvia se per tot le cors sieu segon que yeu vi; e fo trop meravelat de la permutacio de lu e de la velocitat de membre en membre.	And I was astonished that it was winding through all her body, as I saw; and I was very amazed at its change and the speed from member to member.
E yeu ja havia vist denant aquo en les mieus huels segon aquela manieyra, empero yeu he vistz motz les quals atroban dolor esser permutada de membra a membre.	And I had seen this before in my own eyes, although I have seen pains which cause the pain to be transferred from limb to limb.
Mays no vi aquo am les huels ayssi cum en la femna.	But I did not see it with my own eyes as I did in the woman.
E yeu no cogiti esser aquo sino que es per aquo quar la femna era de viela, on so de secs cors e de venas descubertas, e en aquesta apparec al sentiment aquela ventositat permutada.	And I did not think that it was because the woman was old, from her being of two bodies and of exposed veins, and in this she appeared to me that windiness transferred.
E es necessari que no apparesca segon aquesta retro-curacio en aquels que son delicioses e am cors humitz de venas ameguadas.	And it is necessary that it does not appear according to this back-cure in those who are delicate and have moist bodies with hidden veins.
E cum tu voles la curacio de lu, e le pacient sent aquela dolor, lahoras no es a tu aparent al huel ayssi cum havem dit, lahoras tu strenh sobre aquel e dejos lu leugierament e secse sobre aquel entro que sia yssida aquela ventositat coartada, e cauterize le loc.	And when you want to cure it, and the patient feels that pain, then it is not up to you to appear in this way as we have said, then you press strongly on that and release it lightly and dry it over that area where that windiness constricted, and cauterize the location.
Mays si tu no la vezes am los tieus huels, alhoras tu cura aquel am excussio del cors e am aquo que expelleys ventositatz, e carmina aquelas am pillulas fetidas e am pillulas de serapi e semblantz.	But if you do not see it with your own eyes, then you cure that with expulsion of the body and with that which expels windiness, and those carminatives with foul pills and serapium-like pills and similar.
De extraccio de sagetas.	Of extraction of arrows.
Sagetas son diversificadas segon las specias, e segon les locs dels cors en les quals cazo, quar la lor diversitat es que de aquellas so que han grans puntas, e petitas, e concavas, e sordas, so es solidas; e de lor so que han tres angles, e de aquelas a las quals so que han lenguas; e de aquelas a las quals so astelas.	Arrows are diverse according to their species, and according to the parts of the body in which they are found, for their diversity is that some have great points, and small, and concave, and blunt, some are solid; and of them there are those that have three angles, and of those that have tongues, and of those that are stars.
E aquela que es segon les membres e las pessas en las quals cazo es segon dos manieyras: quar les membres o so membres principals concaus, ayssi cum le cervel, le cor, e·l fitge, e le pulmo, e les ronhos, e les budels, e la vezica, e a lor semblantz; e donc quan catz en alcu de aquestz membres e aparo a tu senhals de mort, la qual causa yeu recomtare aprop, lahoras cove que tu evites extraccio de aquela sageta en aquels quar la mort siec aquel en le qual en las majors disposicios, e quan a tu no appareysso aquestz mals senhals, e la sageta no es amaguada en la profunditat del membre, lahoras tu extratz aquela e cura la plagua.	And that which is according to the limbs and the feet in which it occurs is according to two manners: for the limbs or they are principal limbs concavus, such as the brain, the heart, the liver, the lung, and the intestines, and their likes; and thus when you pierce one of these limbs and a sign of death appears to you, which cause I will recount soon, then beware that you avoid extraction of that arrow in those where death is certain in the greatest dispositions, and when this evil sign does not appear to you, and the arrow is not lodged deeply in the limb, then you extract it and cure the wound.
E dels senhals del servel es quan catz en lu sageta, e trespassa le os, e es yssit del cyphac le qual es sobre le cervel, quar accideys per lu soda vehement, e scotomia, e vertige, e rogor en les huels, e imflamacio e rogor de la lengua, e spasme e permixtio de entendament e vomi de colera, e fort leu es abscindida la paraula e es destruida la votz, e es yssit del loc de la plagua humiditat blanca semblant a pols, e yeys de lu semblant ad aquositat de la carn.	And the signs of the soul are when an arrow pierces it, and breaks the bone, and is lodged in the cyphac which is above the brain, for then occurs violent soddening, and scotomia, and vertigo, and heat in the holes, and inflammation and heat of the tongue, and spasm and mixture of understanding, and vomiting of bile, and strong pain is abscinded, and the word is destroyed, and the voice broken, and moisture white like powder exits from that spot, and the eyes are like water.
E donc si appareyso a tu aquestz senhals, lahoras tu abste de la curacio e de la extraccio de la sageta, si non es fora.	And therefore if these signs appear to you, then refrain from curing and extracting the arrow if it is not outside.
Mays les senhals de la sageta quan catz en le cor, so que ela es prop de la mamila senestra, e sent am aquela quays sia ficada en causa dura, e no es causa vueda; e fort leu le movement de la sageta es semblant a movement del pols, e corr de la plagua sanc negra, e siec aquel fregiditat de las extremitatz, e suzor freja, e sincopi; e donc sapias que la mort descen ses tot dopte.	But the signs of the arrow when it pierces the heart are that it is near the left nipple, and that its point is lodged in a hard cause, and it is not a hollow cause; and very quickly the movement of the arrow is like the movement of the pulse, and flows from the wound black blood, and causes chilling of the extremities, and sweating chill, and fainting; and therefore know that death descends with certainty.
E les senhals quan la sageta ha plaglat le pulmo so eyssiment de sanc spumos de la plagua, e les vayssels que so prop del col so apostematz, e es mudada la color del malaute, e expira sperit gran aut, e demanda atraccio de ayre freg.	And the signs when the arrow has wounded the lung are spuming of blood from the wound, and the vessels that are near the throat are swollen, and the color of the patient is changed, and he exhales great spirit, and demands drawing in of air quickly.
E si catz la sageta en le velament le qual es en le pietz, e la dolor lahoras es prop de las costas petitas, e es fayt le ale gran am vehement dolor e am sospir, e no so maugutz totz les membres dels muscles.	And if the arrow pierces the membrane which is in the feet, then the pain will be near the little ribs, and it is made great by violent pain and by sighing, and all the limbs of the muscles are not weakened.
E si catz la sageta en le stomac, lahoras fort leu yeys de la plagua vianda alcuna indigesta.	And if the arrow pierces the stomach, then quickly you will see from the wound some undigested food.
E si catz la sageta en le ventre, e es ficada en lu, yeys alcuna fenda de la plagua, o la tela, o budel le qual es disromput, e no es speransa en la curacio de lu extraccio de la sageta.	And if the arrow pierces the belly and is lodged in it, then you will see some opening of the wound or the membrane or intestine which is broken, and there is no hope for curing it by extraction of the arrow.
E si la sageta catz en la vesica, e es yssida defora urina, e procesesca de lu alcuna causa a las partidas defora, e fort leu es dolor sobre le malaute, lahoras sapias que es mortal.	And if the arrow pierces the bladder and exits urine outside, and processes from it some cause to the parts outside, and very quickly there is pain upon the patient, then know that it is mortal.
Mays les autres membres ayssi cum es la cara, le col, e·l golayro, e las spallas e le adjutori, e les spondils del dos, e la furcula, e la coysa, e la camba e a lor semblantz dels membres, son salvatz segon las majors disposicios quan la sageta no atroba vena ni arteria e no es sageta venenosa.	But the other limbs such as the face, the neck, and the throat, and the shoulders and the helper, and the spine of the back, and the breastbone, and the groin, and the hip, and their likes of the limbs, are saved according to the greatest dispositions when the arrow does not hit a vein or artery, and is not a poisonous arrow.
E yeu recomtare aquo a tu que he vist del esser de aquestas sagetas, per que signifiques per aquo sobre la curacio tieua.	And I will recount this to you that I have seen of the nature of these arrows so that you may know about your own cure.
La qual causa es, quar en un home cazec sageta en le lacrimal del huel de lu en la razitz del nas, e yeu extrayssi aquela a lu del autra partida, dejos le grays de l’aurelha de lu, e es sanat, e no accidic en le huel de lu nocument.	The reason for this is that in one man an arrow pierced the lacrimal of his eye in the root of his nose, and I extracted that from him to the other side, leaving the bones of his ear, and he was healed, and did not suffer harm in his eye.
E extrayssi autra sageta a un Juzeu la qual cazec en lu en lo grays del sieu huel, dejos la palpebra pus dejos, e la sageta ja era occultada e no so conseguit de aquela sino una petita extremitat am la qual adhereys al sieu fust, e era gran sageta de las sagetas agudas dels Turcs , am ferr leon en la qual no havia aurelhas.	And I extracted another arrow from a Judean who it pierced in his in the bones of his eye, leaving the eyelid underneath, and the arrow was already concealed and had not reached it except for a little end with which it adhered to its stalk, and it was a great arrow of the sharp arrows of the Turks, with lion iron in which there were no eyelids.
E senat es le Juzieu , e no accidic en le sieu huel mal accident.	And the Judean was healed, and did not suffer harm in his eye badly.
E extrayssi una autra sageta a un home Crestia la qual era cazuta en le golayro, e era sageta arabica, e es aquela a la qual so aurelhas; e adonc yeu inscidegui sobre aquela entre doas guidegi, e ja era submersa en le golayro de lu; e adonc yeu so subtiliat am aquela, e aprop extraxi aquela, e es sanat le Crestia .	And I extracted another arrow from a Christian who it pierced in the throat, and it was an Arabic arrow, and it was that to which there were eyelids; and therefore I entered into that between two guides, and it was already submerged in his throat, and I made it thin with that, and then extracted it, and the Christian was healed.
E extraxi autra sageta a un home la qual era cazuta en le sieu ventre, e cogitegui que moris per aquela; e donc, pus que foro passatz xxx dias e no es mudat sobre lu alcuna causa de las suas disposicios, inscidegui sobre la sageta e engenagui sobre aquela, e es sanat, e no accidic a lu accident mal.	And I extracted another arrow from a man who it pierced in his belly, and I thought that he would die from it; and therefore, since xxx days had passed and there was not changed upon him any cause of his dispositions, I entered into the arrow and I felt around it, and it was healed, and did not suffer harm badly.
E vi mays un home en le qual cazec una sageta en le dos de lu, e consolidada es la plagua sobre lu, e pus que foc aprop set ans, yssic la sageta en la razitz de la coyssa.	And I saw a man in whom an arrow pierced his back, and the wound was consolidated upon him, and since proper fire seven years, exited the arrow from the root of the groin.
E vi una femna a la qual cazec sageta en le sieu ventre, e la plagua es consolidada dedintz lu, e no es mudada en las suas disposicios en re, e la femna no atrobec nocument en alcunas de las suas opperacios naturals.	And I saw a woman in whom an arrow pierced her belly, and the wound was consolidated within her, and was not changed in any of her natural dispositions, and the woman did not suffer harm in any of her parts.
E vi un autre home al qual cazec sageta en la sua cara e consolidada es la plagua e romas la sageta, no atrobant aqui mota dolor, e motz semblantz ad aquestz.	And I saw another man in whom an arrow pierced his face and the wound was consolidated, and the arrow exited, not causing any pain here, and similar things to these.
E extrayssi la sageta del home dels princeps del rey que era cazuda en le mieg loc del nas sieu e ja havia declinat a la partida dreyta un petit, e occultada era tota la sageta.	And I extracted the arrow from the man's head of the king who was stuck in his nose and had already tilted towards the right a little, and all the arrow was hidden.
E yeu fu appelat a la curacio de lu aprop le cazement de la sageta entro a tres dias.	And I was called to cure him after the arrow was taken out within three days.
E adonc yeu atrobegui la plagua de la sageta mot streyta; e adonc yeu inquirigui aquela am tenta subtil, e no sentigui aquela; mays el la sentia puncio dejos la aurelha dreyta, e adonc speregui que aquela punccio era per la extremitat de la sageta.	And then I discovered the wound of the arrow very tightly; and then I inquired that with a subtle probe, and did not feel anything; but he felt a prick under the right ear, and then I perceived that this prick was from the end of the arrow.
E amplastregui le loc am emplaustre en le qual es vertut atrectiva e digestiva, confizant de mi que·l loc se apostemes per que appares a mi le loc de la sageta, per que secces sobre aquela.	And I plastered the area with an ointment in which there is attractive and digestive virtue, believing from myself that the location is put for me the location of the arrow, for it dries over that.
E no accidic en le loc accident significant que la sageta hagues conseguit aquel loc; e yeu continuegui am le emplaustre sobre lu per motz dias e no accidic accident; e consolidada es la plagua entretant, e romas le malaute de la extreccio de lu per spazi de motz dias entro que un jorn sentic la sageta dintz le sieu nas e recontec aquo a mi.	And I did not see in the location an accident that the arrow had achieved that location; and I continued with the ointment over him for several days, and no accident happened; and the wound consolidated meanwhile, and he recovered from the extraction of him within a period of several days until one day he felt the arrow inside his nose and informed me about it.
E adonc yeu pausegui sobre la plagua medicina acuta corrosiva per motz dias entro que foc ubert, e am la tenta yeu assagegui aquel, e atrobegui la extremitat de la sageta subtil, la qual adhereys al fust.	And then I paused on the wound an acute corrosive medicine for several days until fire opened, and with a probe I probed that, and discovered the end of the arrow subtly, which was adhered to the wood.
E aprop yeu ajustegui en la apersio de la plagua per aquela medicina acuta entro que apparec a mi visiblament la extremitat de la sageta, e passec a mi temps am aquo per le spazi de temps entro quatre meses.	And then I continued with the appearance of the wound by that acute medicine until the end of the arrow appeared to me visibly, and it took me time with it for a period of four months.
E aprop pus que la plagua foc amplificada, e foc a mi possible entrometre las forfexs en lu, e remaure aquela, e no obezic ad eyssiment, lahoras yeu no cessegui subtiliar e ingeniar sobre aquela am manieyras de engen, entro que comensegui un dia sobre aquela am manieyras de engens pendre lu am forceps descentment faytas, segon que vindra la forma de aquelas en la fi del capitol, entro que extraxi aquela; e aprop restauregui aquela plagua.	And then after the wound was enlarged, and it was possible for me to insert the tongs in him, and grab that without resistance, I did not cease to probe and work on that with methods of skill until one day about that with methods of skills taking it by forceps downward-facing as the form of those in the end of the chapter, and I extracted that; and then I restored that wound.
E alcus metges jutgavan que la cartillage del nas no es restaurada, e yeu restauregui aquela e la plagua es consolidada, e sanat es le malaute per sanetat entiera, e no noguec en lu en deguna causa.	And some doctors judged that the cartilage of the nose was not restored, and I restored that and the wound is consolidated, and the patient healed with complete health, and he did not suffer in him on any cause.
E yeu recomti a tu la qualitat de extraccio de alcunas sagetas per que pauses aquo regla e significacio sobre aquo que no he dit, quar las partidas de aquesta art e las difinicios de aquela no so conprehendudas am narracio ni no comprehen aquelas le libre.	And I recommend to you the quality of extraction of some arrows that you pause this rule and significance over what I have not said because the parts of this art and the definitions of that are not comprehended by narration nor understand those the book.
E le artifexs savi compara am pauc sobre mot; e am aquo que es present sobre aquo que es absent; e atroba operacio novela e instrument novel deves le descendement de las causas extranhas del art quan accideysso.	And the wise artisans compare a few about motion; and to that which is present about that which is absent, and discover new action and new instrument they depend on the descent of strange causes of the art when it happens.
E donc yeu dic que sagetas no son fora-gitadas dels membres en les quals son ficadas sino segon dos manieyras: o per atraccio del loc en le qual intrec; o per le contrari de la autra partida.	And therefore I say that arrows are not cast out of the members in which they are stuck but according to two ways, either by attraction of the location in which they enter or by the contrary of the other part.
E aquela que es gitada per le loc don es intrada, o es sageta procedent en loc carnos, e es atirada e fora-gitada.	And that which is cast out from the location where it enters is an arrow proceeding in a fleshly location, and it is thrown out and cast out.
E si no obezeys a eyssiment de la hora en la qual catz, lahoras cove que tu la laysses per alcus dias entro que poyresca la carn que es al enviro de lu, e sia alleujada l‘atraccio de lu e la sua egressio.	And if it does not obey the exit of the hour in which he catches, then you must leave it for some days until the meat that is around him swells and be separated the attraction from him and his exit.
E semblantment si es ficada en os e no obezeys a tu a eyssiment, lahoras layssa aquela per alcus dias e itera aquela am atraccio e mocio en quascun dia, e ja es fora-gitada.	And similarly if it is stuck in bones and does not obey you to exit, then leave that for some days and repeat that with attraction and motion on each day, and it will be cast out.
E si no obezeys a tu eyssiment aprop alcus dias, lahoras cove que tu perforas en le circuit de la sageta en aquel os de tota partida am taravel subtil entro que·l loc sia amplificat de la sageta, e aprop extratz aquela.	And if it does not obey you after some days, then you must perforate in the circuit of the arrow in that bone of every part with a subtle bore until the location is enlarged by the arrow and then extract that.
E si la sageta es ficada en le os del cap e ja ha procezit en un dels ventres del cervel, e apparo en le malaute alcus de aquels accidentz les quals yeu e ditz, lahoras abste de la extraccio de la sageta e layssa aquela entro que·l sieu esser sia equat aprop alcus dias; quar si la sageta perve al ciphac, lahoras la mort no es a lu prolonguada.	And if the arrow is stuck in the bone of the head and has already progressed into one of the ventricles of the brain, and appears in the patient some of those accidents which I and said, then abstain from the extraction of the arrow and leave that for some days until his being is equalized for several days; because if the arrow pierces to the head, then death is not prolonged for him.
E si la sageta no es ficada sino en le cors del os tant solament e no passa entro al ciphac, e roman le malaute per alcus dias, e no accideys a lu denguna causa de aquels accidentz, lahoras tu engenia en la atraccio de la sageta e en la atraccio de lu.	And if the arrow is not stuck but in the core of the bone only and does not pass within the head, and the patient remains for some days, and no cause happens to him of those accidents, then you work on the attraction of the arrow and his attraction.
Mays si es mot ficada e no obezeys a tu a extraccio, lahoras tu aministra taravels en le circuit de la sageta ayssi cum havem recomtat, e aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat.	But if it is deeply stuck and does not obey you to extract, then you minister bores in the circuit of the arrow as I have recommended and then cure the location until it is healed.
Mays si la sageta ja es amaguada en le loc del cors, e es amaguada del sentiment, lahoras tu inquireys aquela am tenta, e si tu sentas aquela, lahoras atira aquela am alcus sturmentz les quals so convenientz a la atraccio de lu.	But if the arrow is already hidden in the location of the body and it is hidden from feeling, then you probe that with a probe, and if you feel that then you throw that with some tools which are convenient to the attraction of that.
E si no podes sobre lu per la constriccio de la plagua e per la longitut del preon, e aqui no es os ni nervi ni vena, lahoras tu fen sobre la plagua entro que sia amplificada e que sia possible extrayre la sageta.	And if you cannot over that by the constriction of the wound and by the length of the arrow, and here there is no bone nor nerve nor vein, then you work on the wound until it is enlarged and it is possible to extract the arrow.
E si so a lu aurelhas am las quals sia tenguda, lahoras tu deliura la carn en la qual es ficada de tota partida am tot le engen que poyras far; e ingenia sobre aquo, si no podes sobre la evasio de la carn en la fractura de las aurelhas e en torssio de aquelas entro que obezesca.	And if it is held by the ears in which he is held, then you loosen the meat in which it is stuck from every part with all that you can do; and work on that if you cannot over the exit of the meat in the fracture of the ears and in twisting those until it obeys.
E quan tu administras la extraccio de la sageta en quascun loc on sia, lahoras tu usa am torcio de la tua ma am forceps a totas partidas entro que fassa aquela obezir; e subtilia am deriera subtilitat que la sageta no sia trencada e que sia fayta a tu dificil atraccio de lu e de aquela extraccio.	And when you administer the extraction of the arrow in whatever location it is, then you use with twisting your hand with forceps at all parts until he makes that obey; and probe with a subtle probe that the arrow is not broken and that it is difficult to make you attract and extract that.
E si no podes sobre aquela de la tua hora, lahoras tu layssa per alcus dias entro que se poyrescan las partidas que so en le circuit de lu, e aprop itera aquela quar lahoras es alleujada.	And if you cannot over that from your hour, then leave that for some days until the parts which are around him swell and then repeat that because by the hour it is separated.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat flux de sanc, lahoras tu administra aquo que havem dit de curacio en le sieu capitol.	But if you have contrary flow of blood then you administer that which we said about cure in his chapter.
E guarda la tua vertut de inscizio de vena o de nervi, o de corda, e aministra engen en tota manieyra a tu possibla de la evasio de la sageta; e fay aquo am facilitat e tranquillitat e tarditat e fermetat ayssi cum yeu e a tu recomtat.	And guard your virtue of incision of vein or nerve, or of string, and work skill in every way to you possible for the exit of the arrow; and do that with facility and tranquility and slowness and firmness as I and to you recommended.
E donc que fassas contrayre la sageta per so que·l malaute sia segon la figura segon la qual foc deves le cazement de la sageta en lu, quar es mays juvatiu.	And therefore that you contract the arrow so that the patient is according to the form according to which there must be the setting of the arrow in him because it is more useful.
Mays si aquo no es a tu possible, lahoras tu aministra aquo que es a tu possible per las figuras.	But if that is not possible for you, then you minister that which is possible for you by the figures.
Mays las sagetas que son fora-gitadas per le contrari del autra partida, o que ja de lu procezeys alcuna partida a las partidas de fora, o fa gilbositat la extramitat de la sageta per sentiment de la partida pus desus de la codena propdana e vezes aquela eminent; adonc tu secsa sobre aquela; e sia la seccio segon la quantitat en la qual prenguan las forceps; e aprop atira aquela, quar ela es fayta leugiera a eyssiment.	But the arrows which are cast out by the contrary of the other part or that he has already proceeded from some part to the parts outside or makes gileziness the extremity of the arrow by feeling of the part above the tendon membrane and touches that eminently then you touch that, and let the section be according to the quantity in which they take the forceps and then pull that because it is easier to exit.
Mays si es retenguda en le os, lahoras tu tortz lama segon contrarietat entro que la sageta enprema en le os, e amplifique a si meteys, e aprop extratz aquela.	But if it is retained in the bone then you twist the saw according to contrary way until the arrow presses into the bone and widens itself and then extract that.
E sino, layssa aquela per alcus dias, e aprop itera aquela entro qu’en yesca.	And if not leave that for some days and then repeat that until it is soaked in the vinegar.
E si le fust de la sageta es en aquela, lahoras tu impelleys aquela am lu.	And if the shaft of the arrow is in that then you push that against him.
Mays si le fust es cazut e voles aministrar inpulsio, lahoras tu intromet e aquela, si es sorda, sturment concau per so que intre la concavitat de lu en la coa de la sageta e aprop impelleys aquela am lu.	But if the shaft is broken and you want to administer impulse then you enter that and that in such a way that between the concavity of it in the hole of the arrow and then push that against him.
Mays si la sageta es concava, lahoras tu impelleys aquela am sturment fort intrant en aquela, quar la sageta es alleujada per aquela.	But if the arrow is hollow, then you should push it in with a strong instrument, because the arrow is eased by that.
E si la sageta es entoxiguada, lahoras cove que tu concaves tota la carn en la qual es le vere, si es a tu possible aquo, e aprop cura aquela am aquo que si conveneys.	And if the arrow is poisoned, then you should draw out all the flesh in which the poison is, if it is possible for you to do so, and then heal that part with whatever is appropriate.
E si la sageta catz en le pietz, o en le ventre, o en la vesica, o en le costat, e es propinqua per so que tu tocas aquela am la tenta, e es a tu possible secsar sobre aquela, lahoras secsa sobre aquela e guarda te de inscizio de vena o de nervi, e extratz aquela, e aprop cos la plagua si indigeys, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	And if the arrow pierces the foot, or the belly, or the bladder, or the side, and is close enough for you to touch it with your finger, and it is possible for you to incise over that part, then cut over it and be careful not to cut into a vein or nerve, and take out the arrow, and if necessary stitch up the wound so that it may heal.
Forma de forceps am las quals so atiradas las sagetas:	Form of forceps with which arrows are pulled out:
Sian las extremitatz de lor cum a bec de ausel que son faytas cum serra quan prendon sobre la sageta per so que no la layssen.	Its ends are like the beak of an osprey, serrated when they grip the arrow so it does not slip away.
E de aquelas son faytas motas specias, grans, paucas e migieras, segon la quantitat de la grandeza de la sageta e de la sieua pauqueza, e de la amplitud de la plagua, e de la constriccio de lu.	And from these are made various kinds of forceps: large and small, few or many, according to the size of the arrow and its depth, and the width of the wound and the tightness of it.
Forma de impellent concau de aquesta extremitat conquava ayssi cum pena de ausel per so que sia alleujat le intrament de la sageta en lu, e impulcio de aquela sorda:	Form of the hollow tip is like an osprey's feather, so that the instrument of the arrow may be eased out of it, and of pushing it in:
Forma de impellent de sorda extremitat:	Form of forceps with hollow tips:
ayssi cum ray per so que sia alleujat le intrament de lu en la sageta concava e es impellida am aquel.	like a reed, in order that the instrument may be eased out of it and pushed in by that.
De fleubotomia de las venas.	Of phlebotomy of veins:
Las venas de fleubotomia de las quals corr costuma de fleubotomar so .xxx., de las quals so en le cap .xvi., so es doas venas pulsatils las quals so aprop las aurelhas, dic alhasisain; doas herbas que so en les dos templars apparentz; e doas venas que so en dos lacrimals de dos huels que son appeladas aspicientz; e la vena preparada en le mieg loc del front, e la vena que es en la extremitat del nas; e doas guidegi que so al col; e doas venas que so en la labia desus; e doas venas que so en la labia dejos; e — aquestas so las venas que so appeladas algelic —; e so doas venas que so dejos la lengua.	The veins from which phlebotomy is usually performed are .xxx., of which there are in the head .xvi., there are two pulsating veins which appear close to the ears, some call them alhasisain; two veins that appear on both temples; and two veins that are in the two tear ducts of the eyes that are called aspicientz; and a vein in the middle of the forehead; and a vein in the tip of the nose; and two guidegi that are on the neck; and two veins that are in the upper lip; and two veins that are in the lower lip; and — these are the veins that are called algelic —; and there are two veins below the tongue.
Mays las venas que so fleubotomadas en les brasses so .v.; quar de aquelas es una cephalica, e es deves le latz silvestre; e le poble appela “la vena del cap”, e sorda, e es vena migiera, e es composta de un ram de la basilica, e de autre ram de la cephalica; e nomna aquela le poble “vena de tot le cors”, e basilica es vena la qual es pausada en le latz domestic, e es nomnada “citillar”, e nompnan aquela les vulguars “vena del ventre”; e funis del bras, e es pausada sobre le focil, e es aquela en la qual es fleubotomat, e es aquela que appar sobre le poutz per apparicio manifesta; e salvatella, e es la vena que es entre lo dit auricular e·l pus petit dit, e so en lu dos ramps.	But the veins which are phlebotomized in the arms are 5; because one of those is a cephalica vein, and it comes from the wild side, and the people call it “the vein of the head”; and it is hollow; and it is a small vein, and it consists of one branch of the basilica, and another of the cephalic; and they call that the people “vein of the whole body”, and the basilica is the vein which is found on the domestic side, and is called “citillar”, and the commoners call it “the vein of the belly”; and it is the funis of the arm, and is found above the elbow, and it is the one that appears prominently; and salvatella, and it is the vein between the small ear and the little finger, and in it are two branches.
E en le pe e la camba so tres venas; la una de aquelas es que es dejos la curvatura del denolh del latz silvestre; e la segonda es sophena, e·l loc de lu es dejos la camba del latz domestic; e la vena sciatica, e·l loc de lu es dejos la camba del latz silvestre; e en la camba son autras venas semblantz ad aquelas.	And in the foot and leg there are three veins: one of these is below the curve of the jaw on the wild side; and the second is sophena, and its location is below the ankle of the domestic side; and sciatic vein, and its location is below the ankle of the wild side; and in the leg are other veins similar to those.
Le juvament de las venas que so aprop las aurelhas es a cataris antics e emigranea e sahafati e ulceracios del cap malas antiquas.	The phlebotomy of the veins which are close to the ears is for ancient cataracts and for old-age migraines and for bad ulcers of the head.
E la qualitat de sagnar aquelas es segon que yeu recomti a tu: es que sia ras le cap del malaute, e sia freguat le cap del malaute en le occipiti en le loc de amdoas las venas am drap ample am bona fricacio; aprop strenha le malaute le sieu col am una benda entro que apparan las doas e les locs de lor so aprop las aurelhas en dos locs depremegutz del cap; e quereys aquela am le tieu dit, e si tu sentes le pols de aquelas am le dit tieu, aqui senha am tenta.	And the quality of bleeding them is according to how you see: it is that blood should be drawn from the head of the patient, and his head should be rubbed on the occiput in the places of both veins with a broad cloth with good friction; then tighten the neck of the patient with a bandage so that they appear the two and their locations are close to the ears at two depressed spots on the head; and feel those with your finger, and if you feel the pulses of them with your finger, here is the sign with the tent.
Aprop tu pren la lancea cutellar, e es aquela que es inscident, e aprop tu intromet aquel dejos la vena en la codena entro que·l fleubotomi vengua al os.	Then you take the lance cutlass, and it is that which is inserted; then you immerse it below the vein in the codina so that the phlebotomy comes to the bone.
E aprop eleva la tua ma am la vena e la codena a las partidas desus e inscideys la vena am inscizio inscident.	And then lift your hand with the vein and the codina up to the parts above, and insert the vein with an incision that is inserted.
E sia la longitut de la inscizio la quantitat de dos ditz ajustatz o entorn de aquo; e fay yssir del sanc atant quant voles.	And the length of the incision should be the amount of two finger joints or around that; and let blood out as much as you want.
E aprop strenh am pulvils e layssa aquela entro que sia sanada.	Then tighten it with a ligature and let that heal.
E ja e precedit en le comensament del libre la inscizio de aquelas e de lor la cauterizacio.	And so I have preceded in the beginning of the book, the incision of those and their cauterization.
Mays de las doas venas arterias que so als templars le juvament de la fleubotomia es a emigranea antiqua e sode malvada e obtalmia assidua e cors de superfluitatz acutas effusas als huels.	But the phlebotomy of the two arterial veins which are in the temples is for old-age migraines and bad blood, and for eye pain that is always present, and sharp pains in the eyes.
E la qualitat de fleubotomar aquelas es segon que yeu recomti a tu: constrengua le malaute le sieu col mot entro que apparan las doas venas al sentiment per appericio manifesta e sia demonstrat le pols de lor dejos le tieu dit; e lahoras tu senha am tenta.	And the quality of bleeding them is according to how you see: tighten the neck of the patient so that they appear the two veins at the feeling by appearance, and let the pulses of them be felt below your finger; then you sign with a tent.
E aprop tu eleva la codena desobre la vena a las partidas desus am le tieu dit indic, e intromet le fleubotomi inscident dejos, e eleva la vena en sus; e inscidey aquela ayssi cum has fayt en las doas venas autras; e fay correr del sanc segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	Then you raise the codina above the vein to the parts above with your finger, and insert the phlebotomy below it, and raise the vein above it; and insert that as you have done in the other two veins; and let blood out according to the amount of your need.
E aprop deslia la coartacio del malaute, e pausa le tieu dit sobre la vena per una hora, e aprop pausa sobre aquela coto e pulvils e strenh aquela desus am fort constriccio, e layssa aquela entro que sia sanada.	Then loosen the constriction of the patient, and place your finger on the vein for an hour; then place cotton and ligature over it, and tighten that above with strong constriction, and let that heal.
E ja es precedida la rememoracio de lor, e de aquelas la inscizio, e la atraccio en le comensament del libre.	And so I have preceded the remembrance of them, and their incision and attraction in the beginning of the book.
E donc le juvament de fleubotomia de la vena del front es aprop la fleubotomia de la cephalica a las malautias antiquas de la cara e a emigranea e rogor e ulceracios fetidas.	And so the phlebotomy of the vein in the forehead is for old-age pain in the face, and for migraines and heat and bad ulcers.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es segon que yeu recomti a tu; so es que·l malaute strenha le sieu col am una benda entro que apparesca la vena; e aprop pren le insturment le qual es nompnat fossori del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And the quality of bleeding it is according to how you see: it is that the patient tightens his neck with a bandage so that the vein appears, and then take the instrument which is named fossor, and this is its form:
Pausa la puncta eminent la qual es al cap del fossori sobre aquela vena e percuteys sobre lu am penche o am autre causa en la manieyra de lu, e layssa lo sanc correr segon la quantitat la qual voles; e aprop deslia la perforacio del malaute e strenh aquela entro que sia sanada.	Place the prominent point which is at the end of the fossor over the vein, and pierce it with a needle or with another instrument in the manner of it, and let blood out according to the amount you want; then loosen the perforation of the patient and tighten that so that it may heal.
E alcunas veguadas es uberta am fleubotomi lat, empero no cove que·l fleubotomi sia de acuta extremitat ayssi cum les autres fleubotomis, abantz sia de lada extremitat, e fleubotoma aquela segon le tranvers, quar le os es propda e fort leu trencaria en lu le fleubotomi quan es subtil.	And sometimes it is opened by phlebotomy at the side; but do not let the phlebotomy be of acute end as well as the other phlebotomies, before it is of the lateral end, and phlebotomize that according to the transverse, because the bone is close and would break it in it if it were subtle.
Mays le juvament de las duas venas que so als lacrimals de dos huels per scabia del huels per rogor e sebol en les huels, e a las malautias de la cara.	But the phlebotomy of the two veins that are in the tear ducts for pain in the eye, and heat and weeping in the eyes, and for the ailments of the face.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia es que·l malaute strenha le col sieu am una benda, e aprop fleubotoma aquelas, e tu sias stant sobre le cap de lu.	And the quality of bleeding them is that the patient tightens his neck with a bandage, and then phlebotomize those; and you should stand over him while doing it.
E sia fayta la fleubotomia segon le transvers a longitut un pauc am fleubotomi pauc, quar en le loc no es carn; e si le fleubotomi es subtil, fort leu la extremitat de lu es trencada.	And the phlebotomy should be done according to the transverse at length a little with few phlebotomies, because there is no flesh in the place; and if the phlebotomy is subtle, then its end will be broken.
E aprop fay correr del sanc atant quant es a tu necessari, e pausa sobre aquelas coto, e strenh aquelas per una nueyt, e aprop deslia aquelas.	And then let the blood flow as much as is necessary, and tie those [veins] and tighten them for one night, and then untie them.
Mays le fleubotomi de la vena del nas es conferent a febre acuta e a soda vehement, e a las malautias de la cara e emigranea e rogor que accideys en la cara, e majorment quan es antiqua.	But the bloodletting of the vein in the nose is applicable to acute fever and violent headache, and facial disorders and migration of the eyes and redness that occur in the face, especially when it is chronic.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute strenha le sieu col e aprop te le sieu nas am la tua ma sinistra, e pren le fleubotomi subtil lonc e fica aquela en le mieg loc del cap del nas segon rectitut, quar la vena no appar al sentiment aqui, e quar le sanc comensa a fluir tantost.	And the nature of this bloodletting is that the patient should tighten his neck and then hold his nose with your left hand, and take the bloodletting instrument and insert it in the appropriate place on the head of the nose according to its exact location, because the vein does not appear sensitive here, and because the blood will begin flowing immediately.
Cove que tu ultimes la tua ma am le fleubotomi petit a petit e fassas correr del sanc segon la tua necessitat; e aprop lia aquela per una nuoyt, quar aquela es restaurada leugierament.	Then you finish by using the bloodletting instrument little by little and make the blood flow according to your need; then tie that [vein] for one night, because it is restored quickly.
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de las doas guidegui a constriccio de ale e a comensament de lepra e a motas malautias e inpetige e malas ulceracios corrosivas ayssi cum herpotromeno.	But the bloodletting of the veins in the ears leads to constriction of the throat and the beginning of leprosy, and many disorders, impetigo, and malignant corrosive ulcers like herpes.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquelas es que el malaute strenha dejos quascuna en le sieu col am liament; e estia le artifexs sobre le cap del malaute, e le malaute sia sezent sobre una sezela.	And the nature of this bloodletting is that the patient should tighten each one in his neck with a ligature; and the operator stands above the head of the patient, who sits on a stool.
E aprop fleubotoma la vena al lonc am fleubotomi ample petit a petit; e aprop extratz de sanc segon temprada quantitat o segon aquo que vezes de necessitat que es ad aquo; e aprop fay semblant del autra vena.	Then bloodlet the vein along its length with a small, broad bloodletting instrument little by little; and extract blood according to a moderate quantity or according to what you see is needed, doing the same for the other vein.
E aprop deslia le liament e strenh las doas venas am strictura migiera per so que·l malaute no sia prefocat, e laysa entro al mati quar la plagua es sanada.	Then untie the ligature and tighten both veins with a moderate ligature so that the patient is not suffocated, and lay him on his back when the plague has been healed.
E le juvament de la fleubotomia de las venas algerich, comfereys a petitas apostemas e pustulas de la boca e corrupcio de las gengivas e malas ulceracios e fissuras, e a malas ulceracios que so en le nas e en le circuit de lu.	And the bloodletting of the veins in the ears, like those of the tongue, brings about small blisters and pustules in the mouth, corruption of the gums, and bad ulcers and fissures, and bad ulcers that are around the nose and the whole face.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquelas es que fases cezer le malaute denant tu, e strenh le col de lu am una benda, e aprop revolveys las labias de lu e reguarda a doas venas de las quals la una es de la dextra de la labia e la segonda de la senestra; e la demonstracio de quascuna es per la negror de quascuna de amdos, e aquo mays es quar en le circuit de aquelas so venas menudas negras; e adonc inscideys cascuna per inscizio inscident.	And the nature of this bloodletting is that you make the patient bend his head towards you, and tighten his neck with a bandage, then open his lips and look at two veins, one on each side: their demonstration is by the darkness of both of them, and more so because in the circuit of these there are small black veins; therefore cut into each of them.
Mays si dubitacio es dejos tu, e no sabes qual es de aquelas, lahoras tu enten a inscisio de la major de aquelas, e de la pus manifesta de aquelas.	But if there is doubt in you and you do not know which one it is, then proceed with the incision of the largest of them, and of the most obvious pus.
E fay le semblant de las doas venas que so en las labias desus.	And do the same for the two veins that are in the upper lip.
Mays costuma corr mays a inscidir las doas venas que so en la labia dejos.	But it is better to cut into only the two veins that are in the lower lip.
Mays de doas venas que so dejos la lengua le juvament es aprop la fleubotomia de la cephalica a prefocacios que so en le guolayro, a la malautia de la uvula, e a malautias de la boca.	But the bloodletting of the two veins that are below the tongue is applicable to diseases of the head that are in the throat, to disorders of the uvula, and to disorders of the mouth.
E la qualitat de fleubotomar aquelas es que segue le malaute entre las tuas mas denant le solel, e eleva la lengua de lu, e reguarda dejos la lengua, de la un latz de lu vena e del autre latz vena, e la color de quascuna es declinant a negror.	And the nature of bloodletting them is that you follow the patient's nose with your eyes in front of the sun, and lift up his tongue, and look beneath the tongue, from one side to the other: the color of both of them is declining towards blackness.
E adonc fleubotoma quascuna; e guarda te que no ultimes la tua ma en fleubotoman aquelas, quar dejos aquelas so arterias.	Then bloodlet each one: and be careful that you do not cut into your hand in bloodletting them, because beneath these are arteries.
E las tuas venas que so fleubotomadas en le coyde so en las quals corr costuma en totz les homes, e la fleubotomia de lor es fayta segon dos manieyras, o pongen am le fleubotomi mirtilat o olivar a subtilitat declinant; o secsar am fleubotomi cutellar, e apelha si alnessil, e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And the veins that are bled in the back are those in which blood usually flows in all men, and the bloodletting of them is done according to two methods: either with the mirtilat or olive-wood at a declining subtlety; or they are cut with a scalpel, and it is called if anessil, and this is its form:
E aquest alnessil es que conveneys a seccio e de aquels so specias latz e subtils segon la amplitut de las venas e segon la strictura de aquelas.	And this anessil is that which leads to incisions and of those there are special types according to the width of the veins and according to the tightness of them.
Forma de fleubotomi mirti:	Form of mirtilat bloodletting:
sia le latz de lu ayssi cum vezes, e conveneys a obrir las venas concavas plenas procedentz apparentz grossas, e ad aquelas que conteno sanc gros torbat.	Be it the side of him as with what happens, and it leads to opening concave veins that are full and appear thick, and to those that contain gross, tortured blood.
E aquesta es la forma de fleubotomi olivar:	And this is the form of olive-wood bloodletting:
E aquest fleubotomi es de menor latitut e de pus subtil extremitat, e conveneys a fleubotomia de venas subtils que conteno sanc subtil citri.	And this bloodletting is of lesser width and more subtle extremity, and it leads to bloodletting of subtle veins that contain subtle, citric blood.
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de la vena basilica la qual es una de tres venas: quar extratz le sanc de las malautias que so dejos le guolayro e·l col, e de aquo que siec le pietz e·l ventre.	But the bloodletting of the basilic vein, which is one of three veins: because by extracting blood from disorders that are below the head and neck, and that affect the feet and belly.
E conveneys al fleubotomador, quan fleubotomia aquela, que guarde be aquela e sia sobre-temor en aquela, quar dejos lu ha arteria, e si erra e ajusta en la punctura del fleubotomi, inscidira aquela arteria e accidira fluxs de sanc, per so que cove que no fleubotomes aquela am fleubotomi pungent, abantz sia sectant cum alnessil.	And it leads the bloodletting operator to guard well against this, and to be very careful in this, because beneath is an artery; and if he err and adjust in the puncturing of the bloodletting, he will cut that artery and cause flows of blood, therefore let him not bloodlet that with a sharp bloodletting instrument, but rather cut it with anessil.
E si no appar la basilica per apparicio manifesta, lahoras cove que tu laysses aquela e que tu mudes a la autre, o que cerques alcun ram sieu; o que fleubotomes en loc de lu finis del bras, quar aquela es manifesta; e secsa aquela am fleubotomi alnessil ayssi cum havem dit.	And if the basilic does not appear by manifest appearance, then let him leave it and move to the other, or seek some branch of it; or bloodlet in the end of the arm, because that is manifest; and cut it with anessil as we have said.
Mays si tu voles la fleubotomia de lu meteyssa, lahoras cove denant la strictura del bras que toques le loc entro que conogues le loc dels pols, e aprop senha sobre lu am tencha; e aprop lia le bras e secsa la vena am seccio concava am fleubotomi alnessil ayssi cum havem dit; e guarda te que caja la percussio per alcu spazi del loc de la arteria.	But if you want the bloodletting of the arm, then let him strike in front of the tightness of the arm that he touches the place between which he knows the location of the pulse, and let him press upon it with a bandage; and let him tie the arm and cut the vein with a concave incision with anessil as we have said, and be careful that the percussion does not hit any space in the location of the artery.
E quan tu vezes, cum strenhes le liament, imflacio en le loc que has senhat am tencha, lahoras aquela inflacio es inflacio de la arteria, e donc squiva aquela.	And when you see, as you tighten the ligature, swelling in the place that you have pressed with a bandage, then that swelling is of the artery, and therefore untie it.
E si vezes le sanc fluir en la fleubotomia ayssi cum aurina de enfant, e·l sanc es subtil rog, lahoras sapias que es del sanc de la arteria; e lahoras tu coyta e pausa le tieu dit sobre aquel per lonc spazi; e aprop osta le tieu dit, e si lo sanc es abscindit, quar motas veguadas es abscindit, lahoras tu strenh le bras e layssa aquel.	And if you see the blood flow in the bloodletting as with a flow of child's milk, and the blood is subtle red, then know that it is of arterial blood; therefore you press and place your finger over it for a long space, and then let him cut off his hand, and if the blood is stopped, because many branches are stopped, then you tighten the arm and leave him.
E guardes le malaute de la moccio de lu, e sia sobre-temor de lu e no maugua aquel per alcus dias entro que sia sanat.	And watch over the patient of the sick for several days until he is healed.
Mays si le sanc no es abscindit, e vezes que deves tu no es present medicina ad aquo, lahoras tu inscideys la arteria, si appar a tu; quar la extremitat de lu es contrayta, e es abscindit le sanc; o que prenguas scorsa de fistic, e fen aquela, e pren la una maytat e strenh aquela sobre le loc de la vena am strictura descent am liament e am pulvils entro al autra dia.	But if the blood is not stopped and you see that there is no medicine present to it, then let him cut the artery, if it appears to you; because its extremity is contracted and the blood is stopped: or take a sharp blade, and open it, and take the one hand and tighten it over the location of the vein with a descent pressure using a bandage and powder between the other day.
E lahoras si le sanc es abscindit, bo es; e sino, lahoras cura aquel am aquo del qual es precedit a la rememoracio del loc de las polveras abscindentz flux de sanc.	Then if the blood is stopped, well and good; but if not, then heal him with that of which he has preceded in the remembering of the location of the powders: flow of blood.
E la abscizio del sanc de lu es dificil en motas disposicios per le loc petit de la plagua e la possibilitat del liament del bras.	And the stopping of the blood from him is difficult in many dispositions because of the small location of the plague and the possibility of the arm's ligature.
Mays de la vena fusca la fleubotomia es juvament que extratz lo sanc de la partida subirana del cap e a la partida dejos del cors; per aquo quar es composta de ram de la basilica e de ram de cephalica, ayssi cum havem dit.	But of the dark vein is bloodletting that extracts blood from the superior part of the head and from the inferior part of the body: because it is composed of a branch of the basilic and of the cephalic as we have said.
E cove al fleubotomant aquela que sia sobre-temor en la fleubotomia de lu, quar dejos aquela es un nervi; e adonc si ajusta en la punctura del fleubotomi e atroba le nervi, accidira a lu stupor, e es difficil la sanacio de lu, e fort leu no es sanat de tot, E aquest nervi motas veguadas apar al sentiment; e si es ocultat ad alcus homes e es subtil e no es monstrat, lahoras cove que tu pauses le fleubotomi am le qual tu fleubotomas am seccio de alnessil, e evita le nervi am la tua fortalesa.	And let him be wary in bloodletting it because beneath it is a nerve; and then if he adjusts in the puncturing of the bloodletting and hurts the nerve, stupor will come to him, and it is difficult for him to be healed at all: and this nerve many times appears in sensation; and if it is hidden in some men and is subtle and not shown, then let him pause the bloodletting with the one by which he bloodlets with a concave incision, and avoid the nerve with his strength.
E si la vena es entre dos nervis, lahoras tu fen la vena en la longitut.	And if the vein is between two nerves, then you cut the vein in length.
Le juvament de la fleubotomia de la vena cephalica es que atratz le sanc del cap e comfereys a las malautias dels huels.	The benefit of phlebotomy on the cephalic vein is that it draws out the blood from the head and alleviates maladies of the brain.
E cove en aquest propriament, si vols que la fleubotomes pungen am fleubotomi olivar o am fleubotomi mirti; quar es la pus salva de totas las venas, quar no es dejos lu arteria ni nervi.	And in this regard, if you want to phlebotomize with olive or myrtle, for it is the safest of all veins because there are neither arteries nor nerves underneath it.
Mays empero conveneys a tu deves la fleubotomia que guardes que am le fleubotomi no punguas le cap del lacert tant solament, e cerques le loc pus leugier, e no notz a lu, si no es atrobat am la percussio primieyra que sia sobre aquela am fleubotomia alcunas veguadas.	However, whenever you perform phlebotomy, be sure to avoid puncturing the head of the ulna, seek the spot that is slightly closer, and do not touch it if it is sensitive to pressure when tapped first with your finger.
Mays empero fort leu es apostemat en alcus homes, quan no es fleubotomat en la primieyra percussio, mays no notz en re aquel apostema.	However, very rarely does this happen in some people when it is not phlebotomized on the first tap, but do not worry about that aposteme.
Mays la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquela e les accidentz de lu so motz, en les quals te cove cogitar en lor rectificacio.	However, the quality of phlebotomy in those individuals and their accidents are many; you should consider correcting them.
Le primier de lu es del qual cove que sapias que fleubotomia no es aministrada sino en conservacio de sanetat e per speransa de lu e cautela de aveniment de malautias, e que sia fayta fleubotomia en la una de las venas que so en le coyde, so es: cephalica, fusca e basilica; e que sia fayta fleubotomia al comensament de primaveyra, sobre dejun en primaviera e autunppne, e en invern aprop la comestio, quan apparo significacios de replecio.	The first of these is that you know phlebotomy is not administered only in the preservation of health and for hope, and precaution against the advent of maladies; and that phlebotomy be done at the beginning of spring, after breakfast in spring and autumn, and in winter after dinner when there are signs of fullness.
E sia fayta fleubotomia e le tertz dia o al primier pus que del jorn siran passadas tres horas.	And phlebotomy be done on the third day or the first that three hours have passed since dawn.
Mays fleubotomia que es aministrada, mays quan provoca convenencia e necessitat ad aquo, o de nuoyt o de dia, en tota hora e en tot temps.	However, phlebotomy that is administered, if it provokes convenience and necessity at that time, or night or day, at any hour and at all times.
E cove que efant no sia fleubotomat entro que aja xiiii ans, e femna que sia prenhs no sia fleubotomada sino del quart mes entro al sete, e les viels no sian fleubotomatz les quals ja han passatz lx ans.	And children should not be phlebotomized until they are 12 years old; and pregnant women should not be phlebotomized except from the fourth month to the seventh; and the elderly who have passed 60 years should not be phlebotomized.
E cum alcu vol esser fleubotomat per qualque manieyra sia, cove que mondifique les sieus budels denant la fleubotomia am clisteri leon, si en aquels ha mota fenda retenguda, per so que las venas no atiro las superfluitatz en la fleubotomia dels budels, que son puridas, e que no noguan als membres principals.	And when someone wants to be phlebotomized for any reason, it is necessary that they cleanse their bowels before phlebotomy with a lion's enema, so that if there is any retained split in them, the veins do not push out the superfluities into the phlebotomy of the bowels, which are purified and do not harm the main members.
E no sian fleubotomatz les pascientz naucea sacertiva e crapula, ni evasent de malautia ni de ebretat entro que aquo sia remaugut aquo de lor, ni malaute de ydropici, e mays que fleubotomia sia temuda aprop colica passio e aprop vomit, e aprop cos de ventre, e aprop multiplicacio de coyt e de trebal e de exercici de dejunis o de vigilias e de tota causa que dissolveys la vertut, o sia corpore28 o animal.	And those who are nauseous and sick from drunkenness or sickness that has just passed, or from the heat of illness or from excessive vomiting, or a body that is weak or animalish; and phlebotomy be avoided when colic pain or vomiting occurs, or a belly ache or multiplication of cough or fever, and any cause that dissolves strength.
E aprop considera en subtiliacio de humos denant aquo si le sanc es gros, am viandas e beures, e am medicinas si aquo es a lu possible ad aquo.	And consider subtle exudation of humors before it if the blood is thick, with foods and drinks and medicines if that is possible for it.
E aprop intre en banh si alcuna causa no prohibeys, o sia excersitat per alcun exercici per so que·l sanc sia subtiliat.	And enter into a bath if there are no causes to prohibit it, or it is exercised by some exercise so that the blood is subtleized.
E pausa la fleubotomia de lu en le pietz del dia, so es enviro la hora de tercia, ayssi cum havem dit.	And pause phlebotomy on him during the third hour of the day, for as we have said before.
E perforsa te que·l pietz de aquel sia guardat en aquel dia de totz mals accidentz animals, ayssi cum es angustia, ira, temor, e de totz accidentz corporals, ayssi cum es trebal e pena superflua e coyt e semblantz a lor.	And be sure that the feet of him are guarded during that day from all evil accidents in animals, for as there is distress, anger, fear, and all bodily accidents, for as there is cough and excessive pain and like accidents to them.
E a la sua sezelha fassa esser presentz las causas en le us de la qual corr costuma dels homes am aromaticitat e odorament e am bals e semblantz ad aquels segon la cantitat de possibilitat.	And in its own way, make the causes in the use of which they usually use aromaticity and odor and balms and like to them according to the amount of possibility.
E segua le fleubotomador sobre un coyssi que sia pus aut que·l coyssi de aquel que deu esser fleubotomat.	And follow the phlebotomist on a cushion that is higher than the cushion of him who must be phlebotomized.
E aprop extragua le sieu bras, e fregue aquel am la sua ma le fleubotomador doas o tres veguadas; e aprop strenha le liament am correia e involva aquel doas veguadas.	And then pull out his arms, and the phlebotomist rubs him with his hand two or three times; and then tighten the bandage around it two times.
E sia la strictura temprada, quar la strictura quant no es engual, o la strictura es am superfluitat, lahoras prohibeys de fluxs del sanc; o es am mollificacio, e lahoras prohibeys le cors del sanc eyssament.	And the compression be moderate, for when the compression is not equal, or the compression is on superfluity, then phlebotomy of blood is prohibited; or it is on softening, and then phlebotomy of the body is prohibited.
E aprop la strictura, cove que aquel que deu esser fleubotomat fregue las suas mas ensemps entre lor entro que las venas sian imfladas, e sian declaradas al sentiment.	And then compression, so that him who must be phlebotomized rubs his hands in between them while the veins are swollen and declared to feeling.
E aprop le fleubotomador unte le sieu fleubotomi am un pauc de oli antic propriament; e aprop pausa le sieu di indic de la ma senestra sobre aquela vena, dejos le loc del qual vol la fleubotomia, per que la vena fuja un pauc, e la percussio sia sessada quar de las venas es la qual atrobas ayssi cum corda fugent deves la fleubotomia, e de aquelas es que es plena de ventositat e quan pauses le fleubotomi sobre aquela es contrayta deves le fleubotomi, e es desceubut le fleubotomador; e le fleubotomi no uobre la vena, e si uobre, aquela es streyta.	And then the phlebotomist smears the phlebotomy with a little old olive oil properly; and then pauses his right hand's finger on that vein from which he wants the phlebotomy, so that the vein escapes a little, and the compression is relaxed because from those veins from which you press as with a string, phlebotomy should be done, and from those that are full of windiness when you pause the phlebotomy over it, and it is pressed down by the phlebotomist; and if the phlebotomy opens the vein, then that vein is squeezed.
E donc, per aquo cove que·l fleubotomador sia fermat e sia sollicit en totas aquestas causas.	And so, for this reason, it is necessary that the phlebotomist be firm and be solicitous in all of these causes.
E aprop depause le fleubotomi, mays si la vena es huberta en una veguada, lahoras bo es; e sino, tu itera aquo autra vaguada dejos aquel loc un pauc, o sobre lu am festinacio, si le loc no es apostemat.	And then pause the phlebotomy, but if the vein is open in one go, it is well; and if not, you iterate that again another go over that spot a little, or over it with compression, if the spot is sensitive.
Et si le loc es apostemat, o le malaute se spauresca, lahoras tu le layssa per un dia o per dos, e no strenha le liament, quar fort leu atirara apostema caut, ni no intre en banh.	And if the spot is sensitive or the patient feels discomfort, then you leave it for a day or two, and do not tighten the bandage, for fear that it will certainly attract an aposteme cauter, nor enter into a bath.
E aprop itera la fleubotomia si la ama.	And then iterate the phlebotomy if she has no love.
E si la apercio es petita e corr sanc subtilment, e temes que non yesca sanc la cantitat que voles, lahoras tu itera le fleubotomi en aquel trauc segon rectitut e ajusta en la appercio un pauc, e fay aquo am festinacio denant que·l loc sia apostemat, quar le loc es apostemat en motz homes deves pauca apercio.	And if the impression is small and the blood flows subtly, and you fear that it will not draw the amount of blood you want, then you iterate the phlebotomy in that vein according to rectitude and adjust a little in the impression, for fear that the spot be sensitive in many people there should be a small impression.
Mays si vezes aquel ja apostemat, lahoras no iteres sobre lu, quar no escusa a tu alcuna causa; e pausa sobre aquel alcuna partida de la fenda de oli, quar alleuja le cors del sanc.	But if he is sensitive, then do not iterate over him, for there is no cause to you; and pause over him any part of the split of oil, for it soothes the body of blood.
E es milhor en aquest loc que oli e que les autres olis.	And this is better in that spot than other oils.
E semblantment aministra fenda de oli en tota fleubotomia am la qual fleubotomes las venas deves la prohibicio de cors de sanc, e fan aquo tyriaca alfadoc e sagzenea quan es pausat de la una de aquelas sobre le loc, quar le sanc es subtiliat e es revolvut quan es gros.	And similarly administer split of oil in all phlebotomy by which phlebotomizes the veins must be the prohibition of body of blood, and do it tyriaca alfadoc and sagzenea when it is paused over the spot, for the blood is subtle and is agitated when it is thick.
E si en le loc de la fleubotomia es engendrat gran apostema, quar motas veguadas accideys, e majorment ad aquel que no es stat sangnat sino aquela veguada, o en la apercio de la vena pauca, e lahoras tu coyta, e pausa sobre le loc sponja infuza en aygua e sal, un pauc scalfada, e strenh aquela per una hora, quar es dissolvut.	And if in the spot of phlebotomy a great aposteme is engendered when many goings occur, and especially to him who has not been bled except that go, or in the impression of the vein little, and then you cut, and pause over the spot sponge infused with water and salt, a little scorched, for it is dissolved.
E cove que fassa aquo aprop le yssiment del sanc de aquela vena am compliment de lu o de autra vena.	And so that he does that then phlebotomize the blood of that vein with compliment to him or another vein.
E si roman en le loc per alcus dias alcuna negror o viriditat, no notz aquo; e si voles, pausa sobre aquel alcuna causa de aloen e de mirra dissolvut, o alcuna causa de suc de mentastre o de calament o semblant de lu.	And if it turns black or green in the spot for several days, do not worry about that; and if you want, pause over that any cause of aloes and dissolved myrrh, or any cause of juice of mallows or of powder or like to it.
E motas veguadas accideysso apostemas e eminencias deves fleubotomia de la basilica.	And many times so apostemes and eminences must be phlebotomized on the basilic vein.
E donc pausa la tua ma sobre aquela, e si lahoras tu atrobas mollicia deves la tua compressio sobre aquela, lahoras aquela eminencia es malvada e mala; e adonc guarda te que pauses sobre aquela alcuna causa de aquo que havem dit, quar fort leu fluira de la arteria sanc.	And then pause your hand over it, and if you press suavity then over it, then that eminence is ill and bad; and therefore be sure to pause over it any cause of what we have said, for fear that the blood of the artery flows out strongly.
E fay emplaustre am aquo en que es stipticitat, per que le loc sia endurat, e aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	And make an ointment with which it is stiffened, so that the place is hardened, and then cure it with another cure until it is healed.
E cove que extraguas del sanc a tot hom segon la quantitat de la sua vertut e segon la color vencent sobrc le sanc segon que appar.	And you should draw out blood from everyone according to the quantity of its virtue and according to the color prevailing over the blood, according to what appears.
Quar si le sanc es negre, lahoras tu le layssa yssir entro que sia rog; e semblantment si tu le vezes gros, lahoras tu le layssa yssir entro que sia subtiliat; e semblantment si es agut, entro que sia ostada la acuitat de lu.	For if the blood is black, then you must let it out until it becomes red; and similarly, if you see that it is thick, then you must let it out until it becomes thinner; and similarly, if it is sharp, then you should stop the acuteness of it.
E cove ad aquel que es ple e fort e ha necessitat de extraccio de sanc en una veguada, que sia amplificada la fleubotomia de la vena e le fleubotomi sia lat.	And for those who are full and strong and need bloodletting in one session, the phlebotomy of the vein should be enlarged and the phlebotomies should be wide.
E en aquel que es freul, sia fayt le contrari de aquel, e cove que extragua aquel en tropas veguadas, e que le trauc sia streyt.	And for those who are weak, it should be done in the contrary way; and if blood is to be extracted from them in many sessions, then the incision should be narrow.
E le milhor que es administrat en fleubotomia de vena es que sia la seccio transversa, no punctura.	And the best method for phlebotomy of a vein is that the section be transverse and not a puncture.
E aquesta manieyra de fleubotomia es salva de flux de sanc e de inscizio de nervi, e es pus lausabla e pus salva que fleubotomia segon latitut e longitut.	And this method of phlebotomy is safe from blood flow and from cutting of nerves, and it is more praiseworthy and safer than phlebotomy according to width and length.
E a la qual es acostumat sobrevenir sincopi deves la fleubotomia, e cove que tu cures aquel denant la fleubotomia am un petit de pa infus en vi de milgranas o de oximel simple scalfat; e extratz a l u del sanc en tres veguadas o quatre.	And to those who are accustomed to having syncopes due to phlebotomy, you should cure it before the phlebotomy with a piece of bread soaked in wine of pomegranates or of simple oxymel warmed up; and extract from them blood in three or four sessions.
E si es enfregiditat de compleccio, lahoras prengua denant la fleubotomia pa infus en eyssarop de mirra o en eyssarop de mel aromatizat am specias ayssi cum am pebre, canela, gingiebre e semblantz, o en eyssarop aromatizat e mot odorant.	And if it is a fainting of the complexion, then before the phlebotomy take bread soaked in myrrh syrup or in scented honey syrup with spices like pepper, cinnamon, ginger and the like, or in scented syrup and very odorous.
E si accideys sincopi deves la fleubotomia, e es causa de lu issiment de mot sanc, lahoras cove que prengua en beure aygua de carn e eyssarop mot odorant subtil; e use de aromaticitat am algualea, e sia linit le sieu pietz am aquela.	And if syncopes occur due to phlebotomy and the cause of it is loss of a lot of blood, then one should take a drink of wine and scented syrup very subtly; and use aromatics like aloe, and tie around their feet with that.
E usa de las autras causas que havem ditas en la divisio en le capitol de sincopi per evacuacio.	And use the other causes which we have spoken of in the division in the chapter on syncopes due to evacuation.
E qui vol eventar le sieu bras e dissolver le sieu sanc segonda veguada, cove a lu del qual la fleubotomia es per mota evacuacio, e la vertut de lu es freol, que evacue le sanc petit a petit, so es segon la quantitat de la vertut en les dias continuables.	And he who wants to open his veins and dissolve his blood in the second vein, from which phlebotomy is due to great evacuation, and whose nature is cold, should evacuate blood little by little according to the quantity of its virtue on consecutive days.
Mays qui vol eventar le sieu bras, e gitar lo sieu sanc segonda vetz, e le sieu cors es fort, lahoras fassa aquo aprop vii horas o ix de la primieyra fleubotomia.	But he who wants to open his veins and extract blood for the second time, and whose body is strong, should do so at seven or nine hours after the first phlebotomy.
Mays qui vol atirar le sanc del cors sieu al contrari de la partida a la qual declina, cove que sia eventat en le segon dia o le tertz.	But he who wants to draw blood from his body in the contrary direction of that to which it inclines, should be phlebotomized on the second or third day.
Mays aquel cors en le qual es mot sanc ja scalfat e es acuit e fa accidir febre, cove que sia gitat de lu sanc en una veguada e sia de lu gitada gran cantitat e sia amplificada la apercio entro que accidesca sincopi, pus que tu auras conservadas totas las condicios de fleubotomia; e que pauses la tua ma sobre le pols de lu deves le cors del sanc, per que no endevengua mort en loc de sincopi, quar motas veguadas endeve aquo quan le fleubotomador es ignorant e negligent.	But a body in which blood has been extracted and which is acrid and causes fever, should have blood taken from it in one session and have a large quantity extracted and the opening should be enlarged so that syncopes occur, because you will have kept all the conditions of phlebotomy; and hold your hand over the pulse of him because of the flow of blood, lest he die due to syncopes when the phlebotomist is ignorant and negligent.
E no cove quan tu voles desliar le bras e evacua le sanc segonda veguada, cum ja sia claus le orrifici de la vena e sia fayt difficil issiment del sanc, que tu premas subre aquel am vehemencia e encurvat sia extendut leugierament, quar aquo es trop mal.	And when you want to open the veins and extract blood in the second session, if the orifice of the vein is already closed and it is difficult for the blood to flow, do not press on it with vehemence and have the extended arm slightly bent, for that is very bad.
Habantz le layssa entro que sia fleubotomat segondament; o remau aquo am la acuitat del fleubotomi que es coagulat del sanc en le orrifici de la vena; o pausa sobre aquel de tyriaca alfarach, o de sagzenea, e comprem aquel am compressio leugiera entro que·l sanc sia fora yssit.	And you should not let it be phlebotomized a second time unless the orifice of the vein is open; or else if the blood coagulates in the incision of the vein, pause over that with alfarach terychium, or with sagzenea, and compress it lightly until the blood flows out.
E si la vena es apostemada, lahoras layssa aquela e no la toques entro que·l apostema sia sedat.	And if the vein is inflamed, then do not touch it until the inflammation has subsided.
E si necessitat te provoca a evacuar le sanc segondament, e no es excusacio, lahoras tu sagna aquel sobre aquel loc o en l’autre bras en autra vena.	And if you are compelled to evacuate blood a second time and there is no excuse, then phlebotomize it over that spot or on the other arm in another vein.
E la vena apelada “funis del bras” es fleubotomada en loc de la fusca o de la basilica, quan no so atrobadas o so amaguadas, quar es composta de aquelas.	And the vein called "the strings of the arm" is phlebotomized in place of the cubital or basilic vein when they are not found or hidden, for that is composed of them.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute intrometa la sua ma en aygua cauda entro que·l focil se enrogezesca e que la vena apparia manifestament.	And the quality of its phlebotomy is that the patient immerses his hand in warm water so that the vein swells and appears clearly.
E aprop sia strengut sobre aquel am liament am strictura migana; e aprop fleubotoma segon le tranvers petit, no latitudinalment ni segon la longitut.	And then it is tightened over that with a ligature with a small string; and phlebotomize according to the small transverse, not longitudinally or according to length.
E sia la apercio ampla e sia la tua fleubotomia am la qual tu fleubotomas aquela sobre la junctura de la ma un petit.	And let the incision be wide and phlebotomize that over the joint of the hand a little.
E si es prohibit le fluxs del sanc, lahoras tu itera la ma en l’aygua cauda e layssa le sanc correr en la aygua entro que consieguas la tua necessitat.	And if the flow of blood is prohibited, then you should immerse the hand in warm water and let the blood flow in the water until you know your need.
Mays si tu eras en les dias d’estiu, lahoras tu yest excusat de la iteracio de la ma en l’aygua cauda, e le mes es pausat le cors del sanc en aygua cauda en temps de yvern.	But if you are in the summer days, then you will be excused from immersing your hand in water, and it is sufficient to have the body of blood immersed in warm water during winter time.
E la fleubotomia de aquesta vena es pus salva que de totas las autras venas, quar dejos lu no ha vena pulsatil, ni nervi.	And phlebotomy of this vein is safer than of all other veins, because there is no pulsating vein or nerve beneath it.
E la fleubotomia de la savatella de la ma dreyta es conferent a las malautias del fetge.	And phlebotomy of the crook of the right hand corresponds to diseases of the liver.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que tu strenguas la ma am liament o am la tua ma, pus que tu l’as mesa en ayga cauda, entro que la vena sia imflada e sia be demostrada al vezement; e aprop fleubotoma aquela transversan; e si inscidas aquela de tot no nozera aquo en re.	And the quality of its phlebotomy is that you tighten the hand with a string or with your hand, because you have placed it in warm water, so that the vein is inflamed and it is evident with movement; and phlebotomize it transversely; and if you insert it from all sides, then it will harm it.
E conserve que no ultimes la tua ma am la fleubotomi, quar dejos lu so les nervis dels ditz denudatz de carn.	And take care not to finish the phlebotomy with the incision, for beneath there are nerves of the teeth, stripped of flesh.
E aprop itera la ma en l’aygua cauda e laysse correr le sanc en aquela, quar si tu no iteras aquela en l’aygua cauda, le sanc sira coagulat en lo orrifici de la vena, e es prohibit de flux.	And then immerse the hand in warm water and let blood flow out of that, for if you do not immerse that in warm water, blood will coagulate in the incision of the vein and flow is prohibited.
E cum es extrayt le sanc segon la quantitat de necessitat, lahoras tu pausa sobre la vena oli e sal, per que no sia consolidada coytadament; e semblantment cove que tu fassas en tot ram streyt.	And when blood has been extracted according to the quantity of need, then you should anoint the vein with olive oil and salt so that it is not congealed firmly; and similarly, if you make an incision in any limb.
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de aquela de la ma senestra, es que es conferent a las malautias de la melsa.	But the youth of phlebotomy of that of the left hand corresponds to diseases of the brain.
E fay semblantment en la fleubotomia de lu ayssi cum has fayt en l’autra.	And do similarly in phlebotomy as you have done in the other.
E le juvament de la vena sephena de la fleubotomia es a las malautias que so en la partida dejos del cos, ayssi cum so malautias de la mayre, e a retencio de mestruas, et a las malautias dels ronhos e ulceracios de coyssas e de cambas antiquas, e a lor semblantz de las malautias.	And the youth of the vein septum of phlebotomy corresponds to diseases which are below in the body, like diseases of the mother, and to retention of menstruation, and to diseases of the knees and ulcers of thighs and arms, and to their likes.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute entrometa lo sieu pe en aygua cauda e fassa sobre aquel fricacio entro que be apparen las venas; e lia sobre la junctura del pe am correia; e le loc de la vena le talo apparent deves le dit pous, e de aquela so ramificatz en la facia del pe motz ramps.	And the quality of its phlebotomy is that the patient immerses his foot in warm water and makes friction over it so that veins appear clearly; and he ties a band around the ankle; and the location of the vein appears below the toe, and from there it branches into the fascia of the foot.
E donc fleubotoma le pus ample ram o dejos la camba deves le talo deves la agreguacio de lu, quar es milhor e pus sal.	And then phlebotomize the wider branch or below the leg from where the ankle is, for it is better and safer.
E si fleubotomas aquela en la facia del pe, lahoras tu te guarda dels nervis que so dejos aquela sobre la facia del pe, e pausa la tua fleubotomia am la qual tu fleubotomas per le travers, quays cum si tu la volias inscidir.	And if you phlebotomize it in the fascia of the foot, then be careful of nerves which are below that on the fascia of the foot, and make your incision according to how you want to make it.
E sia le fleubotomi vosil.	Let there be a phlebotomy.
Mays si es prohibit le issiment del sanc; lahoras tu itera le pe de lu en l’aygua cauda e layssa correr le sanc en aquela entro que sia evacuat.	But if blood-letting is prohibited, then you should repeat the foot bath and let the blood run into that area which has been evacuated.
E si le fleubotomador erra en la primieyra veguada, lahoras itera am le fleubotomi en sus un pauc, quar le loc es sal; e no temes de lu malician, mays que te guardes dels nervis ayssi cum havem dit.	And if the phlebotomist makes a mistake in the first attempt, then repeat the phlebotomy in another vein, for the site is salty; and do not worry about maliciousness in him, but rather be careful of nerves as we have said.
E semblantment fay de la sophena del autre pe engualment.	And similarly do with the other foot, identically.
E de la vena sciatica, le loc ayssi cum havem dit es deves le talo dejos la cavilha de la partida silvestra.	And of the sciatic vein, the site as we have said is due below the ankle of the wild party.
E le juvament de la fleubotomia de lu es a dolo de anca quan es per sanc caut.	And the youth of phlebotomy to him is to pain in the hip when it is from blood cauterization.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute intre en banh, e festine e strenha la cueyssa de lu del latz de la ancha entro desus le talo desus quatre ditz an una benda longua subtil, quar no appar sino per aquo.	And the quality of phlebotomy to him is that the patient enters a bath, and hastens and stretches his neck from the side of the broad space above the ankle above four fingers in one long slender bandage, for it does not appear except through it.
E donc quan appar, lahoras tu fleubotoma aquela segon cascun engen que es a tu possible e segon le tranvers, e es milhor; o inscidas aquela per inscizio o secces aquela per seccio, quar le loc de lu es sal.	And therefore when it appears, then you phlebotomize that according to each device that is possible to you and according to the cross, and it is better; or insert that through incision or cut that through section, for the site of him is salty.
E ela es en motz homes mot ameguada; e si atrobas aquela, e no appar al sentiment de tot, lahoras fleubotoma alcun ram de lu, e es aquel que appar en le dos del pe enves le dit auricular e le anular.	And it is in most men very hidden; and if you find that, and it does not appear to the sense of touch at all, then phlebotomize some ram of him, and it is he who appears on the back of the foot opposite the little finger and the ring finger.
E guarda te dels nervis, e fay correr del sanc la quantitat que voles.	And beware of nerves, and let run of blood the quantity that you wish.
E aprop deslia la strictura e pausa sobre le loc de la fleubotomia coto e strenh le loc, quar leugierament es sanat.	Then loosen the tightness and place a bandage over the site of phlebotomy tightly and strengthen the site, for quickly it is healed.
De ventozacio e de las qualitatz de uzar de aquelas.	Of wind-making and of the qualities of use of those.
Ventozas so de corns, o de eram, o de veyre.	Vents are of horns, or of ram, or of skin.
E ventozacio es fayta segon doas manieyras: la una de lor es am scarificacio e extracio de sanc, e l’autra es ventozacio ses scarificacio.	And wind-making is done according to two methods: one of them is with scarification and extraction of blood, and the other is wind-making without scarification.
E aquesta ventozacio que es ses scarificacio es segon doas manieyras, quar o es am foc o ses foc.	And this wind-making which is without scarification is according to two methods, for it is with fire or without fire.
E a las ventozas que so administradas am scarificacio e extraccio de sanc son xiiii locs del cors, dels quals la un en lo qual so pausadas ventozas es alnocrati, e es la deriera partida del cap; e le mieg loc d’el de doas partz del col ensemp; e ventozas del mento dejos la mandibula pus dejos de la boca; e ventozas de doas spatulas; e ventozas de alohoster, e es sobre la fi de la coeta; e ventozas de dos focils, e so de dos brasses; e ventozas de doas cavilhas; e ventozas de doas cuoyssas.	And the vents which are administered with scarification and extraction of blood are xii sites of the body, of which one in which vents are paused is alnocrati, and it is the hinder part of the head; and the middle location of him from two parts of the neck together; and vents of the chin below the mandible further down from the mouth; and vents of two spatulas; and vents of alo-hoster, and it is upon the end of the breastbone; and vents of two little holes, and they are of two arms; and vents of two ankles; and vents of two buttocks.
E ventozacio no extratz le sanc sino de las venas menudas sparssas en la carn, e per aquo no catz la vertut per aquelas, ayssi cum es cazement per fleubotomia; ni no cove que ventozacio sia fayta am foc o ses foc en alcuna malautia fayta per replecio entro que le cors tot sia evacuat.	And wind-making does not extract blood except from the small veins scattered in the flesh, and for that it does not have the virtue through them as cauterization through phlebotomy; nor believe that wind-making be done with fire or without fire upon any sickness made by repletion within which the whole body is evacuated.
Mays si necessitat provoca a ventozacio per malautia o per continua, aministrem aquela en tota hora al comensament del mes e en la fi de lu, e en le mieg loc de lu e en qualque temps sia.	But if necessity prompts to wind-making for sickness or for continued, administer that in every hour at the beginning of the month and in its end, and in the middle location of it and in whatever time it is.
La qual causa es quar dels homes es en les quals es sanc multiplicat entro que indigeys de extraccio de lu per ventozacio e atroba en le sieu cap graveza e soda; e de aquels es que atroba replecio e rogor en la sua cara e en le sieu cap, e en le sieu col; e de aquels es que atroba pruziment en la sua cara e en le sieu front e tenebrositat e hebetut en les sieus huels; e de aquels que gieta le loc de la sua ventozacio; e de aquels es que le lor ris es multiplicat; e de aquels es que atroba gustament de sanc en la sua boca, o que la lengua es apostemada e escup sanc; e de aquels es que lor dormir es multiplicat, e de aquels que vetz sanc en lo dormir rogor e antics e plaguas e autras causas a lor semblantz.	The which cause is because of men it is in those in whom there is blood multiplied within that indigestion from extraction of him through wind-making and thickening in his head and heat; and of those it is who have repletion and heat in their face and in their head, and in their neck; and of those who have prolapse in the face and front and darkness and fainting in their eyes; and of those whose risings are multiplied; and of those whose sleep is increased, and of those who see blood in sleep heat and age and ulcers and other causes to them similarly.
E donc quan vezes en alcuna causa de aquelas, e propriament si es en le tertz o miga del mes, lahoras comandam ventozacio esser fayta pus que so passadas del dia dos o tres horas.	And therefore when you see any cause of those, and particularly if it is in the third or middle of the month, then command wind-making be done after that two or three hours have passed of the day.
E juvament de ventozacio de la nuca es que quan aquela confereys a gravitat en le cap e ad aquo que es efondit als huels; mays cove que aquo sia aprop evacuacio de tot le cors.	And youth of wind-making at the nape is that when it confers weight in the head and to that which is bent down into the eyes; but beware that that be proper evacuation of the whole body.
E aquesta ventoza es en le loc de fleubotomia de la cephalica.	And this wind-making is at the site of phlebotomy at the head.
E no es legut que use de lu aquel que es de frega complecio, o en le qual es catarr, quar dona ad aquel gran nocument.	And it is not lawful to use that which is of sharp complexation, or in whom there is catarrh, for it gives to him great harm.
E per aquo no cove que uso de aquela les vielhs, e en les caps dels quals so malautias frejas.	And for that do not use that by the elderly, and in the heads of which there are cool sicknesses.
Mays ad aquel que sobre aquela es continuant sobre lu es fayta oblivio; e per aquo cove que tu comandes al ventozador que depause la sua ma un petit am la ventosa a las partidas dejos, temen de la generacio de oblivio.	But to him upon whom that is continually done there is made oblivion; and for that do not command the wind-maker that he pause his hand a little with the ventouse at the parts below, fearing the generation of oblivion.
Mays ventozacio de alkehel es en loc de fleubotomia de la vena fusca e de la basilica: e per aquo confereys a asma, e a la constriccio de ale e a la scissura del sturment de ale, e a tos, e a replecio.	But wind-making of alkehel is at the site of phlebotomy of the vein fusca and of the basilica: and for that it confers asthma, and to the constriction of ale and to the splitting of ale-making instrument, and to coughing, and to repletion.
E cove que sia enpellida la ventoza alkehel un petit, quar si es pausada dejos, engendra debilitat en le cors e en le stomac.	But beware that the ventouse of alkehel be wrapped a little, for if it is paused below it breeds weakness in the body and in the stomach.
E la ventozacio de alhagdahan confereys a las dolors accident en le cap e a obtalmia, e emigranea, e prefocacio, e a dolors en las razitz de las dentz; e es en loc de fleubotomia de la basiliqua.	And wind-making of alhagdahan confers accidental pains in the head and to ophthalmia, and hemorrhoidal bleeding, and prepuce, and to pains in the roots of the teeth; and it is at the site of phlebotomy of the basilica.
E cove que comandes al ventozador que no prema la sua ma am scarificacio per que no inscida la arteria e accida fluxs de sanc.	But command the wind-maker that he not press his hand with scarification so that it does not insert the artery and ignite blood flow.
E ventozacio dejos le mento comfereys a alcola en la boca, e a corrupcio de la gingiva, e a semblantz a lor de las malautias que so en la boca, e stan en loc de fleubotomia de aliheric que so en las doas labias.	And wind-making below the chin confers halitosis in the mouth, and corruption of the gums, and similarly to them of the sicknesses that are in the mouth, and they stand in the site of phlebotomy of aliheric which is in the two lips.
Mays la ventozacio que es fayta sobre las doas spatulas confereys a caphatan, le qual es fayt per replecio de caliditat.	But wind-making that is done upon the two spatulas confers caps, which is made by repletion of heat.
E la ventosacio de las doas partidas dedintz dels focils confereys juvament de la fleubotomia de tres venas, so es de la basilica, fusca e cephalica, quar aquela atratz le sanc de totas aquelas venas pus manudas que so en la carn, e aquelas venas menudas de las autras venas pus grossas entro que pervengua la atraccio a las tres venas.	And wind-making of the two parts within the little holes of the fingers confers youth of phlebotomy of three veins, namely of the basilica, fusca and cephalica, for it draws blood from all those veins more slender than are in the flesh, and those veins more slender from the other veins more gross within which comes attraction to the three veins.
E comanda al ventozador que trop no procezesca en scarificacio, quar le loc es denudat de carn, e dejos lu so nervis e arterias.	And command the wind-maker that he does not overdo in scarification, for the site is stripped of flesh, and below it are nerves and arteries.
E es una ventoza am la qual es ventozat sobre alshosses e confereys a las emorroydas del cul e a las ulceracios pus dejos.	And it is a wind-making with which is wound around the hip and confers to hemorrhoids of the anus and to ulcers further below.
E cove que comandes al ventozador que sia gran ventoza, e que sia de eram, quar le loc indigeys de fort seccio; e fort leu so traucadas ventozas subtils e sia scarificat am scarificacio.	But command the wind-maker that it be a large wind-making, and that it is of ram, for the site indigests of strong section; and strongly he has had wound wind-makings slender and let him be scarified by scarification.
Mays ventozas de las cambas minueysso per minuicio manifesta, quar atiran le sanc de tot le cors, e comfereysso a dolors antiquas dels ronhos e de la mayre, e de la vesica; e provocan las mestruas, e comfereysso a bothor e ademil; e stan en loc de fleubotomia de doas sophenas, e alahorcoben, e de doas cavilhas.	But wind-makings of the thighs are made smaller by diminished manifestation, for they draw blood from all the body, and confer to ancient pains in the hips and in the uterus, and in the bladder; and they provoke menstruation, and confer to bothors and ademils; and they stand at the site of phlebotomy of two sophenas, and armpits, and of two ankles.
Enpero mot debelitan tot le cors e fan accidir sincopi en motz homes.	Nevertheless, they weaken the whole body and cause fainting in many men.
E de las ventozas alahorcoben le juvament es propda al juvament a las ventozas de doas cambas.	And from the armpits to the groin is near to the groin to the armpits on both sides.
E la qualitat de la posicio de las ventozas es que pauses la ventoza al comensament vueda e sucguas per succio temprada, e no prolongues la posicio de las ventozas, mays pausa aquelas leugierament, e reman aquelas coytadament, e que las humors venguan al loc per adveniment engual.	And the quality of the position of the wounds is that you stop the wound at the beginning bleeding and sucking by a tempered suction, and do not prolong the position of the wounds, but rather pause them lightly, and let those remain tightly, and let the humors come to the place by accident equally.
E no cesses iterar aquo e continuar entro que veja le loc ja enrojezir e inflar e que appara la rogor del sanc.	And do not cease to iterate this and continue until you see the place already reddened and inflated, and that the blood appears.
E lahoras tu scarifiqua e itera la succio pauc a pauc, e aprop considera en la dispozicio dels cors.	And then you scrape and iterate the suction little by little, and then consider in the disposition of the body.
Quar aquel home que es de tendra carn de rars pors, cove que tu le scarifiques una veguada e no pus, per que le loc no sia ulcerat.	Because that man who is of tender flesh of few parts, beware that you scrape him once and not more, so that the place is not ulcers.
E comanda al ventozador que amplifique la scarificacio e pronde un pauc, e atempre la succio am facilitat.	And command the wound-maker to enlarge the incision and take a little, and temper the suction with ease.
E si en le sanc es grossitut, lahoras cove que scarifiques doas veguadas, quar en la primieyra veguada es uberta la via de subtiliacio al sanc e a la aquositat de lu.	And if in the blood there is thickness, then beware that you scrape twice, because in the first incision the way of subtlety to the blood and its moisture is opened.
Mays en la segunda a la perscrutacio aquisida de la extraccio del sanc gros.	But in the second one, to the examination acquired from the extraction of the thick blood.
E si le sanc es mot feculent, lahoras sia fayta scarificacio la tersa veguada per que consiegua le derier.	And if the blood is very foul, then let the third incision be done so that the dregs are achieved.
E derierament, quan volem extrayre le sanc pauc a pauc o un petit, abasta a nos una scarificacio.	And finally, when we want to extract the blood little by little or a little, it is enough for us with one incision.
E si volem extraccio de mot sanc, scarificam am mota scarificacio; e si nos conoyssem que·l sanc es gros, lahoras cove que scarifiquem per scarificacio preonda.	And if we want to extract a lot of blood, we scarify with a shallow incision; and if we know that the blood is thick, then beware that we scarify with a deep incision.
E le terme de scarificacio en la qual es la profunditat de la codena tant solament.	And the term of scarification in which is the depth of the vein just so much.
E si aquel del qual la codena es grossa, dura, fusca, e les sieus pors so streytz, cove que les locs de las ventosas sian untatz lenitius, apertius resolutius; si es en temps d’estiu, ayssi cum es oli de aloen o oli de violat, o oli de amellas dossas, o oli de cemensa de coja; e si es en temps ivern, lahoras oli narci, o oli de liri, o oli de camamilla, o de sanc, e ad aquels semblantz.	And if the one of whom the vein is thick, tough, dark and its parts are tight, let the places of the wounds be anointed gently, widely, liberally; if it is in the summer season, like so with oil of aloe or violet oil, or almond oil, or camphor oil; and if it is in the winter season, then oil of nard, or lily oil, or camomile oil, or blood, and to those similar.
E si la superfluitat es grossa, freja, lahoras le oli sia amaranti, o oli de balsamita, o oli de aloen, o oli aneti, e a lor semblantz.	And if the superfluity is thick, rough, then let the oil be of myrrh, or oil of balsam, or oil of aloe, or oil of anise, and to their similar.
Mays si le ventozador es de amples pors de tendra carn, lahoras cove que sia prohibit de oli, e cove que ad aquest les locs de ventozas de lor aprop la ventozacio sian lavatz am ayguaros o am aygua freja de solatrum, o am aygua de coja, o am aygua de bordolaguas, e semblantz ad aquelas.	But if the wound-maker is of ample parts of tender flesh, then beware that there be no oil, and beware that to them the places of wounds of their woundings are washed with water or with warm water of salt, or with water of camphor, or with water of aloes, or with similar.
E aquel del qual le sanc es de mota humiditat, lava las suas ventozas am vi agre, o am aygua de mirt e sumac e semblant ad aquels.	And that one of whom the blood is of great humidity, wash his wounds with sharp wine, or with water of myrtle and sumach, and similar to those.
E de aquel del qual las superfluitatz son grossas, lava las suas ventozas am vi antic, o am aygua de sansuc, que es majorana, o de decoccio de anet, o de camamilla, e a lor semblantz.	And of that one of whom the superfluities are thick, wash his wounds with old wine, or with water of sage, which is marjoram, or of fennel, or of camomile, and similar to those.
E cove que la ventozacio sia guardada denant de banh; habantz cove que sia aministrada aprop issiment del banh per una hora o per doas, e cove que dorma aprop la ventozacio.	And beware that the wound is guarded against bathing; have beware that it be administered close to bathing for one hour or for two, and beware that he sleeps close to the wound.
Quid est quo oportet ut regatur ventosandus aus phlebotomatus ante ventosationem.	What is necessary in order to be bled after being bled before bleeding?
Cove que consideras al comensament: lahoras si le ventozador o aquel que·s deu fleubotomar es coleric e ventz sobre lu sanc agut e imflamacio, lahoras cove que prengua causas infrigidantz, ayssi cum milgranas acetosas, e endivia an vi agre e laytuguas, e secanabin, e julep, e a lor semblantz.	Beware that you consider at the beginning: if the wound-maker or one who is to be bled is choleric and his blood hot and inflammation, then beware that he take causes of frigidity, thus with milky acetic milk thistles, and endivia in sharp wine and leeks, and sesamum, and juice, and similar.
E pausa a lor viandas ayssi cum poletz, e carns de auzels serbiges, e viandas conditas am agras, e a lu semblantz.	And let him eat foods thus with pulses, and meats of birds served, and seasoned foods with acids, and to them similar.
E de aquel del qual la compleccio es freja, cove que prengua en beure eyssarop almiva, o eyssarop de alsecanabin de semensas, e sumac, e vi mot odorant migier entre viel et noel; e que a lu sia comendat que use de paucitat de beure e de mangar, e pausa las viandas de lu poletz e canabir e pissers e petitz auzels e colombat.	And of that one of whom the complexion is rough, let him take in drinking essarabon of mallow, or essarabon of sesame seeds, and sumach, and very odorous wine between Viel and Noel; and that he be commanded to use little in drinking and eating, and let his foods be pulses and cabbage, and pigeons, and small birds and colombat.
E cove que en lo dia de ventozacio e de fleubotomia le beure sia major que la vianda.	And beware that in the day of bleeding and phlebotomy his drink is greater than his food.
E cove que sia donat en beure en alcunas horas ad alcus homes tyriaca alpharac, o medicamentz de musc, so es muscada, o alcelita denant la ventozacio o denant fleubotomia o aprop, per so que·ls membres principals sian confortatz e que·l sanc sia subtiliat; e no cove que prenguan aquela scalfatz.	And beware that he be given in drinking at certain hours to some men theriaca alpharac, or medicines of musk, so it is muscade, or alcelita before bleeding or phlebotomy or afterwards, so that the principal members are comforted and that the blood is subtilized; and let no one take those scalds.
Mays las ventozas que so ses scarificacio sian ventozas que so pausadas sus le fetge, e sobre la melsa e podagra, e sobre le umbelic, en les locs dels jonolhs, e la pixida del ancha, quar aquestz membres no suffertan scarificacio sobre si.	But the wounds that are after scarification let them be wounds that are paused on the liver, and on the navel and the podagra, and on the umbilical area, and on the areas of the joints, and the pixida of the broad one, because these members do not suffer scarification on themselves.
E no es querit per aquelas sino atraccio de sanc de membre, ayssi cum pausam ventosa sobre mamilha en malautia de flux de sanc del sanc de las nars; e usam de aquela per que sia dissolvuda ventositat freja inviscade del membre, ayssi cum pausam sobre le ventre e l’umbelic; quar aquela rarifique le membre e scalfa lu e ramau la dolor quar resolveys ventositat.	And it is not desired by those but attraction of blood of member, thus with pause wound on the breast in flux of blood from the nose; and use that to dissolve thick roughness of member, thus with pause over belly and navel; for that rarifies the member and scrapes it and eases the pain as it resolves the thickness.
E ja es pausada sobre les ronhos quan accideys en lor opilacio o poyra, quar per vertut de atraccio fort leu huobre opilacio e erradica le poyra de son loc.	And then it is paused over the eyelids when they happen in their opening or poultice, because by force of attraction strong their eye is opened and eradicates the poultice from its place.
E semblantment fa quan es pausada sobre le fetge e la melsa deves ventositat en aquels enclausa.	And similarly it does when it is paused over the liver and navel if there is need of wound in those inclosed.
E aquestas ventozas so administradas vuedas amb succio tant solament; e alcunas veguadas so administradas am foc.	And these wounds are administered seen with suction just so; and some wounds are administered with fire.
E alcunas veguadas so administradas plenas de aygua tebeza en las malautias de la melsa.	And some wounds are administered full of tepid water in the illnesses of the navel.
E aquo es per que la ventoza sia umplida e sia pus gran, so es aygua cauda sola o aygua en la qual sian cuytas herbas ad aquo convenientz.	And this is why the wound is filled and pus great, so it is water tail alone or water in which herbs are boiled to that which is convenient.
Forma de ventoza aministrada am foc: sia la amplitud del orrifici de dos ditz, segon que nos la havem formada; e la quantitat del preon sia la maytat de un palm; e sia en lo latz de lu, en le loc que es en le circuit, la maytat de lu, le trauc sia petit segon la quantitat que intre en lu una agulha.	Form of wound administered with fire: let the aperture of two fingers, according to that which we have formed; and the quantity of the cup be the measure of a palm; and be in its breadth, in the place that it is in the circuit, the measure of him, the burn be small according to the quantity that enters into him an awl.
Sia fayta de eram rog o citri, de grosses marges, leon, enguals e terses per so que no leda le membre deves la sua posicio sobre lu.	Let it be made of oil of rose or citron, of thick margins, lion, galls and thorns so that it does not lead the member let its position over him.
E sia al mieg de lu vergua transversa de eram o de ferr, on es pausada candela am lo foc.	And be at the middle of him a crossbar of oils or of iron, on which is paused candle with fire.
E ja sia aquesta ventoza gran major de aquela la qual havem recomtat; e la pauca mendre de aquela segon las malautias e la etat de aquel que usa de aquela.	And this wound be great major of that which we have recommended; and the small less of that according to the illnesses and the condition of him who uses it.
E las ventosas dels efantz e extenuatz so autres que las ventozas dels joves e de grosses corssas.	And the wounds of children and exhausted others be different from the wounds of youths and great bodied ones.
E la qualitat de pausar aquesta ventoza am foc sobre le membre es que extenda la meca am foc de lenha decentment denant una pauca candela de cera, e pausa aquela sobre le mieg de la vergua transversa en le mieg loc de la ventoza, per que le foc sia accendut enviro la partida dejos per que no sia comburit le cors del malaute.	And the quality of pausing that wound with fire over the member is that it extends the arm with fire of wood decently before a little candle of wax, and pause that over the middle of the crossbar in the middle place of the wound, so that the fire be kindled around the bottom of the member so that the body of him not be burnt.
E aprop sia pausada sobre le membre del malaute, e le dit sia sobre le trauc que havem dit, entro que quan tenem las ventozas e non indigem que osten le dit e que yesca la vapor sobre aquel trauc, lahoras la ventoza sira tantost dissolvuda.	And then be paused over the member of him, and the finger be over that trauc which we have said, between that when we hold the wounds and do not touch the finger and that the vapor rises over that trauc, then the wound melts so fast dissolved.
E prop igneys la meca segon la sua manieyra, e itera aquela si indigeyssas de aquela.	And then light the candle according to its nature, and repeat that if you need to.
Mays en ventosa que es aministrada en la malautia de plauressi, am aygua, en la qual no ha vergua transversa ni trauc, e no es aministrada sino que sia umplida de aygua, e es pausada sobre le membre tant solament.	However, in cupping therapy which is administered for the illness of pleurisy, with water, there is no cross vein or wound, and it is not administered unless it is filled with water, and it is placed on the affected part only.
E aquesta es la forma de lu: E aquesta ventoza quant plus es gran, tant es milhor, per que puya recebre gran quantitat de aygua.	And this is the shape of it: And this cupping vessel, the larger it is, the better, so that it can receive a large quantity of water.
Capitol .xcvii.	Chapter .xcvii.
Sanguissuguas no so administradas en motz membres sino en les membres en les quals non es possible posicio de ventosas, per la parvitat de aquels, ayssi cum le pot e gingiva e semblantz a lor; o en membre denudat de carn, ayssi cum le dit e·l nas e lors semblantz.	Leeching is not administered on small parts of the body unless it is possible to place cupping vessels there due to their size, as well as on the tongue, gums, and similar areas; or on bare flesh, such as the fingers, nose, and similar areas.
E la qualitat de usar de aquelas que si has trobadas sanguisugas que so en las ayguas dossas de poyredura mundas.	And you shall use those leeches that are found in clean water ponds.
E aprop sian layssadas le dia e la nueyt en aygua dossa entro que sian famolentas, e que no romangua alcuna causa en le ventre de aquelas; e aprop sia evacuat le cors en le comensament am fleubotomia e am ventozas; e aprop fregua le membre del malaute entro que s’enrojezesca; e aprop sian pausadas sobre lu.	And they shall be left in the water for one day and night, until they become hungry, and nothing else shall happen to them in that time; and the body shall be evacuated at the beginning through phlebotomy and cupping; and then the affected parts of the patient shall be rubbed until they turn red; and then they shall be placed on him.
E cum son umplidas e caso.	And when they are filled, and it is done.
E si es possible succio del loc am ventoza, es mays derier en juvament.	And if it is possible to suction the affected area with cupping vessels, it is better to do so afterwards in order to draw out the humor.
E sino, lahoras lava le loc am vi agre e aprop am mota aygua; e sia freguat e expremut.	And if not, then wash the affected area with pleasant wine and then with warm water; and it shall be rubbed and squeezed.
E si es prolonguat le cors del sanc aprop le cazement de las sanguissuguas, e es aquo resudan, lahoras tu enfon un drap de li en aygua freja, e pausa aquel de sobre entro que sia abdida la resudacio.	And if the flow of blood is prolonged due to the action of the leeches, and it sweats, then you shall dip a cloth in warm water and place it over the affected area so that the sweating is absorbed.
E si le sanc es multiplicat, lahoras polveriza sobre lu vitriol trissat, o guallas e semblantz a lor de las causas stipticas, entro que·l sanc sia abscidit; o sian pausadas sobre le loc las maytatz de favas excocicadas, e sian layssadas entro que las favas aderescan al loc, e es le sanc abscidit.	And if the blood is profuse, then you shall sprinkle powdered vitriol, or gallnuts and similar astringent substances over the affected area so that the bleeding stops; or place cooked broad beans over the wound and leave them there until the beans adhere to the wound, thus stopping the bleeding.
E cove, si es necessaria, iteracio de sanguissuguas, quan es possible mudar aquelas.	And indeed, if it is necessary to repeat the use of leeches, when possible change them.
E si las sanguissuguas son prohibidas de suspenssio, lahoras sia freguat le loc am sanc recent o fique una agulha en les locs entro que yesca sanc; e aprop sian pausadas, quar aquelas quan sento alcun sanc tantost adarysso.	And if the leeches are prohibited from being suspended, then rub the affected area with fresh blood or insert a needle into the affected areas so that it draws out blood; and then they shall be placed over those areas, for when they feel some blood they will immediately adhere.
E quan voles que cajan, polveriza sobre aquelas un pauc de aloen trissat, o sal, o cendre, e cazo tantost.	And when you want them to fall off, sprinkle a little powdered aloe, or salt, or ashes over them, and they will soon do so.
Ayssi comensa lo prolec de la tersa partida: de restauracio.	Thus begins the third part: on restoration.
Aquest capitol es motas veguadas necessari en la art de medicina; e es restauracio de fractura e de dislocacio accident en les osses.	This chapter is many times necessary in the art of medicine; and it is about the restoration of fractures and accidental dislocations of bones.
O, filh, sapiatz que jactan se de aquest capitol les fols metges e les vulguars e aquels que degun temps no reguardero les libres dels Antics ni legiro de aquels una letra.	Oh son, you will understand that this chapter is mocked by foolish doctors and the vulgar, and those who have not read the works of the Ancients nor understood a letter from them.
E per aquesta causa es fayt que aquesta manieyra dels scients in terra nostra es privat; e yeu no ho e obliat en aquo degun temps be de tot; e no he adhibit aquo que apres, sino per longitut de lectio dels libres dels Antics e studi sobre le entendement de aquels, entro que extrayssi la sciencia de aquels.	And for this reason, the manner of science in our land is hidden; and I have not been obliged to do so at any time up until now; and I have not used what I learned, but rather through long study of the works of the Ancients and understanding their wisdom, from which I extracted their knowledge.
E aprop adirigui a experiment e studi en la longitut de la mieua vida.	And indeed, I have added to it through experimentation and study throughout my life.
E yeu ja he de aquo descrit en aquest capitol tot aquo que conte la mieua sciencia e sobre le qual es passat lo mieu experiment; pus que agui abreujat aquo a vos autres e deliuregui aquo de occupacio de elonguacio; e abreujegui aquo en la fi de abreujacio; et e monstrat aquo en la fi de declaracio; e formegui en aquo motas formas dels sturmentz que so administratz en aquel, cum es fayt per addicio de declaracio, ayssi cum he fayt en dos capitols precedentz.	And I have already described in this chapter everything that my knowledge and experience have taught me, and I have shortened it for you as much as possible so that it does not tire you out; and I have simplified it at the end of its explanation; and shown it at the end of its demonstration; and formed many forms of instruments which are administered in it, as has been done through the addition of explanations, just as I did in two previous chapters.
Capitol primier.	First chapter.
Summae et collectiones ex esse fracturae ossium, ex eis quarum praemissio necessaria est, antequam incipiamus rememorationem membrorum fraftorum et diversorum si uniuscuiusque.	Summary and collections from the existence of fractures of bones, from which their premise is necessary, before we begin to address the healing of broken and diverse members.
Cove donc que diguam en le prohemi de aquest capitol las summas del sermo; e les capitols al entendament dels quals en le comensament es forsat le artifexs e a stacio sobre la veritat de aquels; so es vos e aquels que so promptz que sapian o aprenguan aquesta art nobla autres de vos.	And therefore, we shall begin this chapter with summaries of speech; and the chapters at the understanding of which in the beginning are perhaps the artisans, and they stand on the truth of those who speak them; so may you and those who understand or learn this noble art from you.
E donc dic que quan accideys a alcu fractura o dislocacio o torcio o cazement, lahoras cove que tu te coytes al comensament am fleubotomia o aleyar aquel, o quascu ensemps, si no prohibeys alcuna causa, ayssi cum debelitat de vertut, o es aquel al qual accideys effant, o viel en decrepitat, o es temps de vehement calor, o de vehement freg.	And therefore I say that when there is a fracture or dislocation or twist or hernia, then you shall first apply phlebotomy or poultice to it, or any other treatment if no counterindication exists, as well as in debility of strength, or if it happens to an infant, or elderly person, or during hot weather or excessive rubbing.
E aprop sia content en vianda sieua de erbas frejas e de carns de auzels e de crabotz; e prohibem carns grossas e umplir si de viandas e de tota vianda que umple las venas de sanc, entro que siras segurat de apostema caut, e si no temes efusio de materia al membre.	And indeed, let them eat a meal of fresh herbs and poultry and crab, and avoid fatty meats and anything that fills the veins with blood, so as to guard against the occurrence of pus in the affected member; and if you do not fear effusion of matter into the member.
E lahoras retorne le malaute al sieu regiment primier am le qual corr costuma de lu.	And then return the patient to their usual diet.
E donc cum le os trencat comensa esser restaurat, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia pascut de viandas nutritivas de nutriment mot e gros e greu en les quals sia viscositat, ayssi cum so viandas faytas de froment cueyt am aygua, e ris, e caps, e pes, e ventres de vacas, e huous, e peys fresc, e vi gros e semblants ad aquels, e am aquest regiment es fayta coagulacio de fractura pus leugierament e miels.	And indeed, when the broken bone begins to be restored, then let the patient eat nourishing foods that are light and easy to digest, such as meals made from wheat cooked with water, rice, and peas, and fish, and fresh meat, and gross foods, and anything similar which is easy to digest; and with this diet, the healing of fractures occurs more easily and gently.
E sapias que les osses trinquatz quan so en les homes que so en la primiera vilura e en los decrepitz, no es possible que sian continuatz e sian consolidatz segon lur natura per la exsiccacio dels membres de lor.	And indeed, you shall know that broken bones when they are in elderly or weakened men, it is not possible for them to be continued and consolidated according to their nature due to the drying of their members.
E son consolidatz e continuatz segon lor natura tot temps per la exsiccacio de aquels membres, e so continuatz e consolidatz aquels que so de lor en la fi de la lenitat, ayssi cum les osses dels petitz effantz.	And they are consolidated and continued according to their nature at all times due to the drying of those members; and indeed they are continued and consolidated according to their nature at the end of their fragility, just as the bones of young children are.
Mays empero natura ajusta e amnecteys sobre le os trencat de tota partida alcuna causa semblant a glut en le qual es grossitut que adhereys e strenh aquel entro que so ensemps conglutinatz e liatz ensemps, entro que venen la fi de fortitut e de fermesa, ayssi cum foc al comensament, entro que denguna causa no prohibeys aquel de las suas obres.	But indeed nature adjusts and connects the broken bone of any part, similar to glue which adheres and binds together, until it comes to an end in strength and firmness, just as fire does at the beginning, so that no counterindication exists for it from its works.
E per aquesta causa es necessari que pauses las viandas del malaute, viandas en las quals so gravitat e viscozitat e grosseza, ayssi cum havem dit.	And for this reason, it is necessary to restrict the patient's diet, and let them eat foods which are heavy and viscous and fatty, just as we have said.
Mota diversitat de fractura segon diversitat del membre.	Many varieties of fractures according to the variety of the member.
E sapias que las specias de fractura son diversas segon la diversitat dels membres, quar fractura del os de la camba es diversa de la fractura del os del cap; e la fractura del os del pietz es divers de la fractura del os del dos; e semblantment totz les autres membres son diverses entre lor.	And indeed you shall know that the species of fractures are diverse according to the variety of members, for a fracture of the bone of the leg is different from a fracture of the bone of the head; and a fracture of the bone of the foot is different from a fracture of the bone of the toe; and likewise all other members are diverse among themselves.
E yeu venc am rememoracio de tota specia de fractura, expausada en le sieu capitol distincta del autre.	And indeed I have remembered all species of fractures, explained in their own distinct chapters from others.
Mota diversitat de fractura en si meteyssa.	Many varieties of fractures within themselves.
E son diversificadas las specias de fractura del os en lor meteyssas; quar es fayta fractura arcuada otra aquo que accidan en lu stellas; e alcunas veguadas es fayta fractura segon la longitut del os: e so las fracturas de lu satagia e astelhas e addicios procedentz e no-procedentz, ayssi cum es fayt en la pena quan es preparada a escriure, e es fractura am plagua e disrupcio en le cap, e es fractura fissura petita.	And the species of fractures of bones are diverse in their joints; for an arched fracture is different from one which occurs in the stars; and some times there are fractures according to the length of the bone: and indeed they are fractures of the satagium and astragali and adjacent parts, just as it happens when writing is prepared, and a fracture is fissure small.
E a tota specia es engen o turment propri en restauracio de lu segon que vindra rememoracio de lu distincta en les sieus locs.	And indeed each species has its own pain or discomfort in its healing according to the distinctness of its location.
Mota senhal de fractura del os.	This indicates a fracture in the bone.
E per aquo es conoguda fractura del os: es tortuositat de lu, e de aquel eminencia e appericio de lu al sentiment, e so de lu quan compremes aquel am la tua ma.	And by this it is known that there is a fracture of the bone; namely, when you feel its crookedness and appearance with your hand and when you press on it with your hand.
E donc quan no es en le loc tortuositat apparent ni so no es feyt deves le tieu tocament quan toques le os am agitacio e le malaute no atroba gran dolor, lahoras no es aqui fractura.	And if there is no crookedness evident in the spot, nor any discomfort when you touch it with your hand and move it, and the patient does not feel much pain, then it is not a fracture.
Habantz es possible que sia tortuositat o petita fissura, adon no cove que tu mauguas aquel am la tua ma e am compressio de tot; habantz pausa sobre lu de las medicinas de las quals ve rememoracio aprop aquel moment le qual conveneys al loc; e aprop sia streyt per strictura subtil.	Sometimes it is possible that there is crookedness or a slight crack, but you should not worry about this if when you press on it with your hand and move it, the patient does not feel much pain; instead, place over it some medicines of which you have a reminder that is appropriate for the spot; and then it will be tight because of a subtle constriction.
E sapias que·l loc quan es arcuat e no es scindit en dos o otra aquo que no accidan en lu satagie, cum es remauguda tota partida de la sua compar, lahoras cove que comenses de la tua hora a rectificacio de lu habantz que a lu accida apostema caut.	And know that if the spot is bent and not split in two or otherwise affected so that it does not become gangrenous throughout its entire surface, then you should begin to correct it with cauterization after an hour has passed; and if anything happens to it, then a cautery should be used.
E si a lu accida apostema caut, lahoras layssa aquel per alcus dias entro que cesse le apostema; e aprop engualha aquel segon quascuna manieyra que podes de levitat e de engen.	And if gangrene does occur, then let it remain for several days until the gangrene subsides; and then heal it in whatever manner you can that is suitable and effective.
E sapias que restauracio de lu e agulacio de lu es pus leugiera que del os en le qual accideysso sathagie.	And know that the restoration and piercing of it is more dangerous than the bone in which gangrene occurs.
E aprop strenh aquel segon que vindra la rememoracio de lu.	And strengthen it according to what will be remembered about it.
Mays si en le os so satagias, lahoras es necessaria extencio de aquest membre trencat de doas partz, si es la ma o le pe; o am la tua ma si le membre es petit; o am doas cordas o am una corda e la ma.	But if in the bone gangrene occurs, then extension of the broken member from two parts is necessary: if it is the hand or the foot; or with your hand if the member is small; or with two cords or one cord and the hand.
E sia la tua posicio am la qual pauses le membre loc engual segon la sua figura natural, mentre que las partidas so extandudas del membre trenquat, lahoras te perforsa que fassas retornar aquelas addicios am engen e segon quascuna manieyra que poyras en lor locs.	And hold the member in its natural position while the broken parts are extended, then you will have to return them by artifice and in whatever manner you can in their places.
E guarda te segon la tua forssa que no accida sobre le malaute per la tua operacio delor ni lesio; e perforsa te segon le tieu poder que tu appliques la un os am l’autre son companho segon lors milhors formas.	And beware according to your strength that you do not cause pain or injury to the patient through your operation; and according to your ability apply one bone to another in their best forms.
E cove que en aquela hora aprofitablament tu toques am la tua ma aquel, e si vezes aqui alcuna causa diversa, rectifiqua aquel e enguala aquel per la quantitat de la tua vertut.	And so that in that hour you may beneficially touch it with your hand, and if you see any different cause, correct it and heal it according to the amount of your skill.
E exquiva vehement extenssio e compressio, ayssi cum fan mots fols metges que motas veguadas fan accidir apostema caut per la sua operacio, o fan accidir contraccio en le membre ayssi cum havem vist aquo per la operacio de lor motas veguadas.	And avoid violent extension and compression, for there are foolish doctors who often cause gangrene cauterization through their operation or cause contraction in the member as we have seen it many times because of their operation.
E aprop annecteys, aprop equacio e decent operacio e strictura de aquel membre, e repaus e tranquilitat; amoneste le malaute sobre aquo e fay le squivar que no maugua aquel en la hora de las suas vigilias e del sieu dormir, e ves la sua revolucio e agitacio, e deves la sua egestio, e deves totz les sieus movementz am tota la sua vertut; e aguarda se que la posicio del membre sia posicio am la qual sia asegurada la dolor, la qual causa es quar quan sent en la disposicio de la posicio del membre delor o lesio; lahoras cove que permutes aquel ad autra disposicio de aquela am la qual non senta dolor; e guarda am aquo que la posicio de lu aquela sia dreyta e engual, per so que al membre non accida tortuositat quan es restaurat.	And then attach it, and equaling and decent operation and constriction of that member, and rest and tranquillity; admonish the patient about this and make him avoid hurting himself in the hour of his vigils and sleeping, and observe his revolution and agitation, and attend to his excretion, and attend to all his movements with all your skill; and beware that the position of the member be a position by which he is secured from pain, for its cause is when there is disposition towards that position in the member's pain or injury; then change it to another disposition by which he does not feel pain; and beware of this so that the position of it is straight and healed, so that no crookedness occurs in the member when it is restored.
E la qualitat de la strictura del membre tranquat es aquela que yeu recomti; per que sapias que·ls membres trencatz so diversificatz en lor parvitat e en lor grandeza e en la forma de aquels.	And the quality of constriction of the broken member is that which you see; for you should know that broken members are different in their smallness and in their greatness and in the shape of them.
E de aquels que son petits ayssi cum le bras e·l dit e·l focil e semblantz ad aquels, lahoras cove que la envolucio sia de drap mol subtil.	And of those that are small like the arm and the finger and the wrist and their like, then let the wrapping be of very soft cloth.
Mays aquels que so grosses ayssi cum la cuoyssa o la camba, cove que en aquels sia envolucio lada e dura, quar la liadura lada connecteys le membre gran e strenh aquel de tota part am strictura engual, enayssi que en lu no intre macula.	But those that are large like the thigh or the leg, then let the wrapping be hard and laced, for the laced binding connects the large member and strengthens it all around with even constriction, so that no ulcer occurs in it.
E aprop comensa, aprop la tua evacuacio de equacio, pausar liament convenient ad aquo, sobre le loc de aquela fractura am tres envolucios o quatre segon que·l membre mereys; e strenh la tua ma un petit am le liament.	And then begin, and then your operation of equaling, pause binding convenient to that, over the spot of that fracture with three or four wrappings according to how much the member deserves; and strengthen your hand a little with the binding.
E aprop ve am aquel a la partida pus sobirana del loc de la fractura, e strenh mens que no foc la tua strictura am la qual has strengut le loc de la fractura.	And then go to that at the highest part of the spot of the fracture, and strengthen your hand so that you do not loosen the constriction with which you have strengthened the spot of the fracture.
E aprop elongua te am envolucio del loc de la fractura un pauc, e mollifiqua la strictura petit a petit, entro que prenguas del loc sa una gran partida.	And then lengthen it with wrapping of the spot of the fracture a little, and loosen the constriction a little by little, while you take from it one great part.
E aprop pren una autra benda e envolveys aquela autra veguada sobre le loc trenquat am envolucio, e aprop ve am las envolucios a la partida pus dejos de la fractura; e sia la tua operacio en la strictura de la envolucio e en mollificacio de aquela segon que havem dit en la envolucio primieyra desus.	And then take another bandage and wrap that other part over the broken spot with wrapping, and then go to the wrappings at the lowest part of the fracture; and let your operation be in the constriction of the wrapping and in loosening it according as we have said above in the first wrapping.
E aprop pausa entre las volucios de stopa leon o drap am le qual sia engualada la tortuositat de la fractura, si en lu es tortuositat; e sino, no pauses en lu alcuna causa.	And then pause between the wrappings of hemp or cloth with which the crookedness of the fracture is evened out, if there is crookedness in it; and if not, then do not pause for any cause.
E aprop pausa sobre lu autra benda, e aprop enguala sobre aquestas envolucios stelhas decentment faytas tantost, si en le loc no es imflacio o apostema caut, e lahoras pausa sobre lu aquo que sede le apostema aquel e que oste la imflacio; e layssa aquela per alcus jorns; e lahoras tu strenh sobre lu las stelhas.	And then pause another bandage over those wrappings decently done as much, if in the spot there is no inflammation or gangrene cauterization, and then pause over it that which soothes the gangrene and stops the inflammation; and let it remain for several days; and then strengthen over it the splints.
E sian las stelhas de la maytat de canna lada raza, e be formada saviament; o sian de fust de pi; o de ramps de palma ; e sia le ample de quascuna stelha segon aquesta forma e aquesta figura:	And let the splints be of the thickness of a split cane that is well formed, or be of wood, or of reed, and let the width of each splint be according to this form and figure:
Empero cove que la astelha que es pausada sobre aquela fractura sia pus grossa e pus lada un petit que las autras astelhas, e la longitut de la stela segon qu’es legut al membre en magnitut e parvitat; e aprop strenh sobre las astelhas am autra benda segon la tua primieyra strictura; e aprop lia desus am fiel decentment segon que havem dit de strictura, e es que sia la tua strictura segon le loc de la fractura mes, e quant mes es alonguat de la fractura, es mendre la strictura.	However, let the splint that is paused over that fracture be thicker and a little longer than the other splints, and the length of the splint according to how long it has been over the member in greatness and smallness; and then strengthen over the splints with another bandage according to your first constriction; and then lace over it with decent wire according as we have said about constriction, and let your constriction be less, and how much longer is the fracture, so much less is the constriction.
E cove que les fils sian migiers en grossesa e subtilitat, e sian de li mol; e si les fils so grosses, ayssi cum yeu he vist per la operacio de alcus fols pausantz les lors fils de cordas de li tort, e es error gran, quan catz la strictura fora equalitat.	And let the threads be middling in thickness and fineness, and be of soft wire; and if the threads are thick, as we have seen by the operation of some foolish doctors who tie their threads with strings of linen, and it is a great error when the constriction is not equal.
E eyssament fils subtils no so convenientz, quar tu no consaguiras per strictura am aquels aquo que voles, e no cove que entre astela e astela haja mens de un dit.	And very thin threads are not convenient, for you will not achieve by constriction with them what you want, and let there not be the space of a finger between splint and splint.
E si le malaute es ledit per las extremitatz de las stelas aprop la strictura en les locs sas, lahoras pausa dejos aquelas de stopa leon o lana carmenada entro que aquo no li fassa lesio.	And if the patient is hurt by the ends of the splints, then pause under those hemp or wool that does not harm it.
Alcunas veguadas fractura es am plagua, e accideys disrupcio en la codena, e yeu vindre am rememoracio en aquela en le capitol segon singularitat.	Some times the fracture is in a vein, and occurs rupture in the sinew, and we come to remember it in that in the head according to its singularity.
E sapias que ges tot membre trencat no es streyt am stelhas al primier dia; la qual causa es quar le membre, quan es gran, no cove que pauses sobre lu stelhas sino aprop v dias o vii o mays, segon la tua seguratat de adveniment de apostema caut.	And know that not every broken member is tightened by splints on the first day; and the cause of it is when the member is large, then you should not pause over it splints unless after several days or a week or more according to your certainty of the occurrence of gangrene cauterization.
E aquesta es la manieyra dels emplaustres am les quals les Antics restauravan, les quals so pausatz sobre fractura e dislocacio e torcio.	And this is the manner of the bandages with which the Ancients used to heal, which were paused over fracture and dislocation and twist.
Manieyra de emplaustra comu abruejat de restaurament de fractura, convenient a motas compleccios e majorment a las femnas e als efantz, quar es de aquo sobre le qual no ventz calor ni freg: e es que prenguas de polvera de moli, e es la medula de la farina que pen deves le movement de la mola en las paretz del moli.	Way of bandage as a bath for healing of fracture, convenient to many complexities and especially to women and children, for it is that over which there does not go heat nor friction: and take from powdered bran, and it is the meal of the wheat that remains after the movement of the mill in the walls of the mill.
E comfeys aquel ayssi cum es, sino que cribelles aquel am album de huou, e pausa la comfeccio de lu no-spessa ni subtil; e aprop usa de aquela.	And cook it as it is, but strain the liquid through a cloth and let it thicken; then use it.
Autra manieyra de emplaustre restaurant fractura e dislocacio e torcio: recipe de assafetida, de lapdanum, de acacia, de enula, e migrach, que es razit de milgraner salvage, de totz ana drac. x; de mirra e aloen ana drac. v; alochil ana drac. xx; totz sian trissatz e cribellatz e sian mesclatz am aygua alichil o am album de huou si la compleccio del malaute es scalfada; e aprop usa de aquest emplaustre, quar es de bona composicio e restaura les osses trencatz leugierament, e confereys a motz homes.	Another method of healing fractures and dislocations: take assafetida, ladanum, acacia, enula, and myrrh, which is ground from wild pomegranates, all in equal amounts of one drachma; also five drachmas each of myrrh and aloe; twenty drachmas of aloes, all to be mixed together with honey or egg white if the patient's complexion is cold; and then use this plaster, for it has a good composition and quickly restores broken bones, and confers health to many people.
Autra manieyra de emplaustre le qual comfereys a fractura e torcio: recipe migrach e met de altea blanca ana drac. x; de mirra e de aloen ana drac v; de acacia drac. vi; de bol armenic drac. .xx.	Another method of plaster which confers health to fractures and dislocations: take myrrh and met with white poplar in equal amounts of one drachma each, also five drachmas each of myrrh and aloe, six drachmas of acacia, and twenty drachmas of armenian bole.
Totz sian trissatz en mortier am mota contricio, e sian cribellatz, e sian comfitz am aygua o am album de huou e sia administrat.	Let all be ground in a mortar with a pestle, then strained and thickened with wine or white wine, and let it be applied.
Manieyra de emplaustre a juncturas e osses separatz de lors locs, e seda dolor accident en aquels e a fissuras e fractaduras: sia presa lana sutza e sia submersa en vi agre e oli cuyt e sia pausat sobre le loc.	Method of a plaster for joints and bones separated from their sockets, and for pain in them, and also for cracks and fractures: let fine wool be saturated with sweet wine and oil, and let it be applied to the affected area.
Mays en aquest emplastre no es vertut de restauracio, de apostema caut e expelleys dolors propriament.	Perhaps in this plaster there is no virtue of restoration, nor of pustules or boils, but it does indeed expel pains properly.
Autra manieyra de emplastre que restaura os trancat: pren fuelas de figuier sort e fuelas de papaver salvatge; contereys tot e fay emplastre de lor.	Another method of a plaster which restores broken bones: take leaves of the fig tree and leaves of wild poppies; grind them all and make a plaster from them.
Manieyra de emplastre abreujat aministrat deves la restauracio de fractura de os e quan tu voles resolucio del romanent de apostema: recipe razitz de altea, de camamilla e flors de violes, de farina de ers, de totz ana partida .i.; sian totz trissatz e sian cofitz am vi, si·l membre no es scalfat.	Method of a plaster which aids in the restoration of broken bones and when you want resolution of the residue of pustules: take ground myrrh, chamomile and violet flowers, and flour of linseed, of all these an equal part .i. Let all be strained and thickened with wine, if the member is not damaged.
Mays si es scalfat, lahoras comfeys aquel am aygua de coliandre humit o am aygua e usa de lu.	But if it is damaged, then cook it in water scented with coriander or water and use it.
Autra manieyra de emplastra pus fort en resolucio que aquest primier, quan accideys apostema dur deves la restauracio del membre: recipe de razitz de altea e de semensa de li, e de balaustia, e mellilot, majorana, flors de viol, de camamilla, de totz ana partida i engual; totz sian trissatz e sian cofitz am aygua de sauze o am aygua dousa o am vi, tot aquo segon la qualitat del membre e le repaus de la color de lu.	Another method of a very strong plaster in resolution, when pustules occur with the restoration of a member: take ground myrrh and licorice root, and caraway seeds, and melilot, marjoram, violet flowers, chamomile, all these in equal parts i drachms; let all be strained and thickened with water or wine, all according to the quality of the member and its color.
Mays Ypocras no diyssec en le sieu libre que sia pausat sobre le membre trenquat deves la restauracio de lu sino cerot fayt de cera e de oli e no autre causa; e recomtec que sia migier entre grossitut e subtilitat.	But Hypocras does not dry on its own, it should be applied to the broken member for its restoration unless a poultice is made of wax and oil and nothing else; and let it be between thickness and thinness.
Mays a Gualia es vist que sian pausatz sobre le membre trencat deves la restauracio de lu e las causas en las quals es exsiccacio am petit de caliditat so ayssi cum mirra, enses e semblantz a lor de aquelas causas que havem recomtadas.	But it is seen that they are applied to the broken member for its restoration and the causes in which there is dryness with little heat are similarly as myrrh, onions and their likenesses of those causes which we have recounted.
Manieyra de emplastre que comfereys a lesio e dolor: recipe migat, de cezes, de pels de home inscizes o pena de auzel, e de altea, e sal, partidas enguals; sian trissatz e cribellatz e sian cofitz, e sia fayt emplastre.	Method of a plaster which is beneficial for injury and pain: take ground mace, and nuts, and human hair or bird feathers, and myrrh, and salt, all in equal parts; let them be strained and thickened, and let a plaster be made from it.
Mays la quantitat segon la qual cove que romangua la liadura e aprop sia disliada, es que consideres si no es accidit dolor ni pruziment ni le os es trencat no es maugut de son loc, lahoras tu no deslies de motz jorns.	But the amount according to the quality which covers the ligature and let it be bound, is that you consider if there is no pain nor swelling nor the bone broken not drawn from its place, then do not loosen for several days.
E si accideys al loc dolor vehement o prusiment o imflacio, lahoras tu te coyte o deslie aquel en la hora, e osta le emplastre de lu.	And if there occurs at the location violent pain or swelling or inflammation, then you cut it or loosen it in that hour and stop the plaster from it.
E pren drap de li e spongia marina leon humida, e submergeys aquela en aygua tebeza, e am aquela lava le loc entro que cesse aquel pruziment e la dolor sia sedada; e aprop layssa repausar le membre per una hora; e aprop pausa sobre lu lana sutza submersa en vi agre e oli o oli rozat, e lia sobre lu per una nuoyt entro que sias segur de apostema caut, e que repause la imflacio del membre, e sia remauguda la dolor de lu.	And take a ligature of linen and sponge the sea-lion which is moistened, and let that be soaked in tepid water, and with that wash the location until that swelling and the pain are stopped; and then let the member rest for an hour; and then apply to it fine wool which is saturated with sweet wine and oil or rose oil, and let it lie upon it for a night unless you are certain of pustules cauterized, and that the member's inflammation is abated and its pain relieved.
E aprop itera aquela strictura subtil e emplastre petit e no·l strenhas per la tua constriccio primieyra, e subtilia am aquel entro que sia sanat.	And then repeat that subtle binding and small plaster and do not tighten it by your first constriction, and let it be subtle with that until it is healed.
E si vezes que le apostema e la rogor e la dolor e la imflacio e tots les accidentz ja so remaugutz de tot, e indigeysses de emplastre e de strictura, lahoras tu itera aquel ayssi cum has fayt al comensant engualment.	And if the pustules and heat and pain and inflammation and all the accidents are now abated entirely, and you have stopped using the plaster and binding, then do so as you did at the beginning equally.
E si no accideys al membre alcuna causa de aquelas que havem ditas, lahoras no deslies aquel sino aprop tres dias o quatre o v o .vii.; e alcunas veguadas tot aquo es layssat per xx dias segon que a tu appar per la desliadura del membre, ayssi cum havem dit, entro que la fractura adhereys, e se acosta a la coagulacio de la carn sobre aquel.	And if no cause occurs in the member of those which we have mentioned, then do not loosen it but let it be bound for three or four days or five or six. and some times let it be bound for 20 days according to what you appear by the loosening of the member, as we have said, until the fracture adheres and the flesh comes together over that.
E lahoras ajusta en la strictura mays que en la tua strictura primieyra tota, e ayusta en la engrossacio de la vianda del malaute, segon que es precedida la rememoracio de lu.	And then tighten the binding but not as in your first constriction entirely, and let there be less thickness of the bandage of the patient's body, according to what precedes its memory.
Mays si tu vezes le loc de la fractura ja desiccar e extenuar mays que no cove, lahoras sapias que·l nutriment es prohibit pervenir ad aquel; e donc embroca aquel am aygua tebeza deves tota veguada que delias aquel; e sia aquo en totz tres dias; e alleuja la strictura un petit, e per aquesta operacio corr al membre le nutriment, e es sanat leugierament.	But if you see the location of the fracture dry and exhausted but not closed, then know that nourishment is prohibited from coming to it; and therefore soak it with tepid water for three days in total, and loosen the binding a little, and through this operation the member will receive nourishment, and it will be healed little by little.
Mays aquo que fan les fols restauradors de la fractura del membre autra veguada quan no es restaurat al comensament, segon que cove, e es restaurat segon tortuositat, es error segon la operacio de lor, e temor gran, e si fos dreyturier aquo agrandit les Antics en lors libres e agueran am aquo obrat.	But that which the restorer of the broken member does another inspection when it is not healed at the beginning according to how it was, and is healed according to crookedness, is error according to their operation and great fear, and if they were right in their free limbs and bent upon them.
E yeu no he vist ad alcu de lor aquo far, per que es pus razonable que aquo no fassa.	And I have not seen any of them do that, because it is more reasonable that it does not happen.
Capitol segon: De fractura quan accideys en le cap.	Chapter according to: Of fracture when it occurs in the head.
Las specias de fracturas son motas, e las figuras de lor son diversas, e las causas son distinctas, quar de fracturas alcuna es fayta per percussio de spaza, e la percussio osta tot le os entro al ciphac, le qual es dejos le os, ayssi cum fay ayssa en le fust, e per aquo aquesta specia es nompnada ascial; o la spaza inscideys alcuna partida del os, e inscideys la carn de lu e no passa la inscizio entro al derier de lu; e aquesta specia de fractura es nompnada levatio absoluta.	The kinds of fractures are many, and their shapes are diverse, and the causes are distinct; for some fractures are done by blow with a club, and the blow strikes all the bone within the head, and that is under the skull, as it would be in the trunk, and through this this kind of fracture is named asial; or the blow goes into any part of the bone, and goes into the flesh of it and does not go inside to its end; and this kind of fracture is named absolute elevation.
E la plagua de aquestas doas fracturas o es gran o pauca, e de fractura que es contricio o atricio; e causa de lu es percussio am poyra o cazement sobre peyra, e a lor semblantz.	And the amount of these two fractures is great or small, and the cause of it is blow with club or stone, and to their likenesses.
E aquesta fractura o es penetrant que ja apropinqua al pannicol le qual es dejos le os; o es en la facia del os, e la plagua de aquestas doas fracturas o es gran o pauca.	And this fracture is penetrating so that it approaches the membrane which is under the bone; or it is in the membrane of the bone, and the amount of these two fractures is great or small.
E de fractura es que es ameguada en le os, en la subtilitat del cabel petita, e per aquo es nompnada aquesta specia fractura capillar.	And in fracture it is split in the bone, in the thinness of the hair small, and because of that this kind of fracture is named capillary fracture.
E es fractura que es fayta o per cazement o per percussio de peyra e a lu semblantz, que fa intrar alcuna lamina del os a las partidas dedintz, e es fayta en le loc concavitat ayssi cum accideys als payroles de eram quan accideys a lor percussio e es partida de lor intrada a las partidas dedintz.	And it is fracture that is done or by blow with stone or by blow of club, and which makes inside any lamina of the bone to its splits fingers, and it is done in the location bent so that it happens to the nails when there occurs to them blow and it is split of their splits fingers.
E majorment es fayt aquo en les cors de osses humitz, ayssi cum so caps de efantz.	And this happens mostly in bodies with wet humors, as well as in children's heads.
E so a totas aquestas specias fracturas satagias, so son pessas ayssi cum stelhas separadas.	And after all these kinds of fractures have been set, they are bound like separated stars.
E yeu vindre am reremoracio de tot aquo en son loc.	And then he will have a memory of everything in its place.
E conoyssem totas aquestas specias de fractura per deteccio sobre aquelas e per inquisicio de lor am tentas e ostament de carn corrumpuda que es sobre lor.	And know all these kinds of fractures through detection on them and through inquiry with feelers and the appearance of rotten flesh that is upon them.
E specia capillar es conoguda per aysso que es descubert sobre le os, e es abstergit, e linit sobre lu am tentha, quar la fractura appar negra.	And hairline fracture is known by what is uncovered on the bone, and cleaned, and felt with feelers, for the fracture appears black.
Mays en la curacio de fractura considera al comensament les accidentz del malaute, e lahoras si tu vezes per los accidentz que signifique per significacio manifesta sobre paor, ayssi cum es vomit de colera, e extencio, e perdement de entendament, e abscizio de votz, e sincopi, e febre acuta, e eyssiment dels huels e rogor de aquels, e semblantz a lor dels accidentz en las majors disposicios, ses dopte no es sanat.	In the treatment of fractures, consider first the accidents of the patient, and then if you see through the accidents that indicate by obvious sign over fear, as in vomiting of cholera, extension, loss of reason, loss of speech, fainting, acute fever, discharge from orifices, and redness of these, and their likeness to them in the major dispositions, it is not healed.
E si vezes accidentz no-correntz tu speras salut, lahoras tu comensa la curacio de lu.	And if you see non-current accidents you expect health, then you begin his treatment.
La qual causa es quar si es vengut a tu le plaguat en le comensament cum es plaguat e aquo es en les dias de ivern, lahoras cove que tu studias en le ostament del os denant le dia xiiii segon tota disposicio.	The reason is that if the sick person came to you in the beginning as he was sick and it is in the days of winter, then consider that you study in the appearance of the bone before the day fourteen according to all dispositions.
E si es en les dias d’estiu, lahoras cove que te coytes ostar le os denant le vii dia, habantz que aquo que es dejos le os sia corromput del pannicol, e que accidescan les accidentz que havem recomtatz.	And if it is in the days of summer, then consider that you cut off the bone before the seventh day, having that which is below the bone be rotted by the pannicle, and that the accidents we have counted occur.
E si la fractura ja es pervenguda al pannicol cubrent le cervel, e es am partidas menudas e atricio, lahoras cove que inscidas la partida conminuta e atrita, segon que yeu recomtare a tu.	And if the fracture has already reached the cerebrum, and is in small pieces and crushed, then consider that you cut off the crushed and ground-up piece, according to what I will count for you.
E es que tu razas le cap del malaute plaguat, e descuebres sobre le os segon costuma e manieyra a tu possible segon la figura de la plagua, e que sia leugier sobre le malaute.	And it is that you raise the head of the sick person and uncover over the bone according to your custom and manner possible according to the figure of the plague, and that he is lighter on the sick person.
E si accideys a tu deves la deteccio del os, fluxs de sanc o apostema caut, lahora tu te oppausa a lu am aquo que cove, e es que huemplas le loc de draps infuzes en vi e oli rozat, e fassa repausar la plagua entro que sia sedat le apostema, e sies segur de fluxs del sanc; e aprop comensa en la circuicio del os e en la ablatio de lu.	And if it happens to you to do the detection of the bone, blood flow or cauterized pus, then you oppose it with what is appropriate, and it is that you apply the place with cloths infused in wine and rose oil, and let the plague rest until the aposteme is calmed, and be secure from the blood flow; and then begin in the circulation of the bone and in its ablation.
E aquo sia segon una de dos manieyras de operacio.	And it is according to one of two manners of operation.
E la una manieyra es que tu inscidas le os am inscisori de streyt tal, e aquesta es la forma de lu: E aprop administra un autre inscissori aquest, un pauc pus lat que aquel; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And the one manner is that you cut into the bone with a narrow scalpel, and this is its form: And then administer another scalpel this, a little wider than that; and this is its form:
E aprop administra mays le inscissori pus lat que·l segon.	And then administer the scalpel wider than the second.
E cove que sia deves tu nombre de inscissoris diverses, dels quals alcus so pus latz que alcus autres; e alcus de lor so pus breus que·ls autres e sian en le derier de acuitat de las suas extremitatz, e sian de ferr indi o felod.	And consider that it must be due to you a number of different scalpels, of which some are wider than others; and some of them are shorter than others and are in the last of acuity of their extremities, and they are of iron or steel.
E usa de lor am facilitat en percussio sobre le inscissori per so que no concutesca le cap e leda aquel.	And use them with ease in percussion on the scalpel so that it does not disturb the head and lead that one.
E si le os es fort, dur, lahoras cove que perfores en le circuit de lu denant que tu administres los inscissoris am les taravels, les quals so nomnatz taravels no-profundantz.	And if the bone is strong and hard, then consider that you bore into its circulation before you administer the scalpels with the trepans, which are named non-deepening trepans.
E no so nomnatz ayssi sino quar aquels no pausan le terme de l’os del test ad aquo que es aprop lu, per so quar al taravel es redonda extremitat o marge sobre aquel que es dejos le cap de lu agut semblant a marge o a cercle petit, le qual prohibeys esser submergit e passar la spissitut del os.	And they are not named thus but because those do not stop the end of the bone from it that is under it, for so that to the trepan there is a rounded extremity or margin on that which is below the head of it pointed like margin or small circle, which prohibits being submerged and passing the thickness of the bone.
E es convenient que tu prenguas de aquestz taravels gran nombre dels quals quascu convenesca a la spicitut de quascun os, entro que sia a tu present en tottz testz del cervel la extremitat del qual sia aguda, la quantitat en longitut e brevitat sia segon la quantitat de spicitut de aquest test.	And it is convenient that you take of these trepans great number of which each one suits the thickness of each bone, while it is present to you in all heads of the brain, the extremity of which is acute, the quantity in length and brevity is according to the quantity of thickness of this head.
E aquesta es la forma de tres specias de teravels: La qualitat de perforar en le circuit del os trencat es que pauses le teravel sobre le os e revolvas aquel am les tieus ditz entro que sapias que l’os ja es penetrat; e aprop permuda le terevel ad autre loc, e pausa aquo que es entre tot trauc la quantitat de la grosseza del ray o enviro aquo.	And this is the form of three species of trepans: The quality of boring into the circulation of the broken bone is that you pause the trepan over the bone and turn it with your fingers while you know that the bone has been penetrated; and then replace the trepan at another location, and pause what is between all trauma the quantity of the thickness of the groove or environment that.
E aprop inscideys am inscissoris aquo que es entre quascun trauc del os, e fay aquel pus subtil que podes sobre aquo en fi de levitat, ayssi cum havem dit, entro que erradiques le os, o am la tua ma, o am alcuna autra causa per alcus sturmentz les quals auras apparelhatz ad aquo, ayssi cum tanalhas e forceps subtils.	And then insert with scalpels what is between each break of the bone, and do that more subtly that you can upon its end in thinness, as we have said, while you irradiate the bone or by your hand or by any other cause by any tools which you will have apparelled for that, as tweezers and subtle forceps.
E cove que tu guardes am tota cautela que l’inscissori no toque alcuna causa del ciphac.	And consider that you keep with all precaution that the scalpel does not touch any cause of the brain.
E donc cum auras circuit le os perforan, e sira separat del ciphac si es continuat am lu, e auras aquel extrayt, cove que razas e enguales aquel en la asperitat de lu de aquo que es en le os am autra sturment semblant a inscissori, mays empero cove que sia pus teon e pus subtil que les autres inscissoris.	And when you have circulated the bone and saw it separated from the brain if it is continued with it, and you have extracted that, consider that you raise and gnaw that in the asperity of it of what is in the bone by other instrument similar to scalpel, but however consider that it is more thin and more subtle than the other scalpels.
E si roman alcuna partida dels osses petitz e satagias, lahoras pren aquela am facilitat am aquo que es deves tu dels sturmentz; e aprop aquo cura la plagua am lichinis e enguentz les quals havem ditz.	And if a little piece of the small bones and fragments are raised, then take that with ease by what is due to you of the instruments; and then cure the plague with poultices and ointments which we have said.
E l’autra manieyra de operacio es leugiera, longinqua de paor, la qual diyssec Gualia e la lauzec per gran lausor; e aquest es le sermo de lu: necessari es a tu en le comensament que comenses descobrir la partida del os del loc en le qual es la fractura pus vehement e pus manifesta, entro que quan auras descubert aquela partida e auras pausat dejos lu la extremitat de aquest inscissori lent e alegre del qual aquesta es la forma:	And the other manner of operation is lighter, farther from fear, which says Gualia and is praised by great praise; and this is its speech: it is necessary for you in the beginning that you begin to uncover the piece of the bone of the place in which is the fracture most violent and most manifest, while you have uncovered that piece and you have paused below it the extremity of this scalpel sluggish and gentle of which this is the form:
E es que la partida lenticular es leon e no inscideys alcuna causa, e la partida aguda es de lu en dos latz avantz en longitut, ayssi cum vezes; que la partida lenticular sia ajustada al ciphac am la facia de lu inscident aguda en le os.	And that the lenticular piece is lion and does not insert any cause, and the acute piece is of it in two sides forward in length, as you see; let the lenticular piece be adjusted to the brain with the membrane of it incident acute into the bone.
E aprop percuteys sobre le inscissori de una partida am un petit malhet entro que inscidas tot le os am facilitat ayssi cum es revolvut, e tu sias segur del pannicol que no accida en lu accident que temas en denguna manieyra, e si le medicant14 era le pus fol de totz les homes e le mays ignorant de lor; certament, e si era dorment.	And then percute upon the scalpel of one piece with a small mallet while you insert all the bone with ease as it is turned, and you are secure of the membrane that does not occur in it accident which you fear in any manner, and if the patient was the most foolish of all men and the most ignorant of them; certainly, and if he was sleeping.
Lahoras si romania alcuna causa annexa al os del pannicol en alcus locs de os, inscidira aquel de lu am la extremitat del inscissori aquel lenticular, e deliuraria aquel de lu am facilitat, quar es deliurat de lu ses nocument e ses paor.	Then if it raised any cause annexed to the bone of the membrane in some places of bone, insert that of it with the extremity of the scalpel that lenticular, and loosen that of it with ease, for it is loosened from it its harm and its fear.
E si fractura del os no penetra entro al pannicol, e aquo que es abscidit o es ostat del os es la facia de lu, e roman en lu asperitat e satagias subtils, lahoras cove que razas aquela asperitat e erradiques aquelas satagias am razoris subtils per les quals tu has preparat le nombre, de diversas quantitatz per que sia a tu possible administrar de aquels en tot loc les pus convenientz de lor e le pus dreyt de aquels segon aquo en que te perduzeys la tua operacio aquel os trencat e la figura de lu.	And if the fracture of the bone does not penetrate within the membrane, and what is cut off or remains of the bone is the membrane of it, and raised in it asperity and small fragments, then consider that you raise that asperity and loosen those fragments with subtle razors by which you have prepared their number, of diverse quantities so that it is convenient for you to administer them in every place most conveniently and rightly according to what you become involved in your operation on the broken bone and the figure of it.
E cove que administres en la tua razio am la qual razes le os al comensament le pus lat de aquels razoris, e aprop usa aprop lu del pus subtil de lu, e no cesses far aquo segon continuitat entro que pervenguas ad aministrar le pus teon e·l pus subtil de totz aquels.	And consider that you administer in your reason with which you raise the bone at the beginning the widest of those razors, and then use it of the most subtle one, and do not cease doing that according to continuity while you come to administer the most thin and the most subtle of all those.
Mays en quascuna de las autras fracturas petitas capillars e fractura subtil, cove que administres cura segon aquo que perduseys ad rectificacio de lu.	May each of the other small capillary fractures and subtle fractures, that you administer care according to what you have lost for his correction.
E es causa que no es ameguada sobre totz les quals han studi en aquela art.	And it is a cause that is not wiped away above all those who have studied in that art.
E stec sobre aquo que nos scriut havem mostrat en grans fracturas.	And this on that which we written have shown in great fractures.
E si le pannicol es retangut quan tu erradiques le os, lahoras cove que prenguas drap de li segon la quantitat de la plagua, e submergeys aquel en oli rozat, e pausa aquel sobre le orrifici de la plagua; e aprop pren autre drap doblat o triplicat e submergeys lu en vi e oli rozat e pausa aquel sobre drap prim e fay aquo al pus leugierament que podes sobre aquel, que no graves le ciphac; e aprop administra sobre aquel liament lat, e no strenhas aquel sino per quantitat que tengua la plagua tant solament.	And if the skin is stretched when you draw out the bone, then take cloth according to the amount of the wound and soak it in rose oil and place it over the opening of the wound; and take another piece of folded or doubled cloth and soak it in wine and rose oil and place it over the first cloth and do this gently on the pus so that you do not harm the head; and then administer on it lard, and do not tighten it but according to the amount that the wound has so much only.
E layssa aquel am aquesta cura per un dia o per dos entro que sias segur de apostema caut; e aprop deslia aquel e aprop aministra medicinas am las quals es superflua siccitat, ayssi cum razitz de lin e farina de errs, e polvera de enses e de aristologia, e de semblantz ad aquels.	And let him have this treatment for a day or two until you are sure of the cauterized wound; and then loosen it and administer medicines with which there is superficial dryness, as well as lint root and wheat flour, and powder of onions and of aristology, and of like things to those.
E es que tu fassas de aquestas medicinas polvera que sia pulverizada sobre la plagua, ayssi cum son secas; e universalment, administra en aquel tota medicina de proprietat de la qual es que abstergesca e no mordique.	And it is that you make of these medicines powder that is sprinkled over the wound, as they are dried; and universally, administer in that all medicine of property of which is that it cleanses and does not bite.
E guarda te segon la tua vertut que la plagua en la tua curacio sia neta; e no sia en lu surdicia de enguent ni autra; ni no layssas agreguar virulencia en lu; quar quan es ajustada sobre le pannicol del cervel, corromp aquel e poyreys aquel, e accideys sobre le malaute aprop aquo malicia maligna.	And beware according to your virtue that the wound in your cure be clean; and let there not be in it surdiness of ointment or other; nor let you leave to aggregate virulence in it; for when it is applied to the skin of the brain, it corrupts it and poisons it, and malignancy occurs on the patient accordingly.
E accideys en le ciphac del cap, cum de lu es mondificat le os e majorment quan es menspresada la cura de lu, e es negror en la superficia de lu; e donc considera lahoras si accideys al malaute les accidentz que havem ditz, sapias que es parnicios ses tot dopte.	And it occurs in the head, as of it is cleansed the bone and mostly when the cure of it is diminished, and there is blackness on its surface; and therefore consider then if it happens to the patient the accidents which we have said, know that they are all deadly.
E si no accideys negror sino de la medicina que es pausada desus, e es en vertut de aquela medicina que fassa aquela negror, lahoras cove que tu prenguas de mel una partida e de oli rozat partidas .iii., e am aquels linieys un drap, e aprop pausa aquel sobre le ciphac; e aprop cura aquel am las specias de curacio que conveneys entro que sia sanat.	And if blackness does not occur but of the medicine which is applied to it and it is in virtue of that medicine that makes that blackness, then take honey one part and rose oil parts 3. and soak those lines in cloth, and then place it on the head; and then cure that with the spices of cure which are convenient until it is healed.
Capitol .iii.	Chapter .iii.
De restauracio del nas quan es trincat.	Of restoration of the nose when it is broken.
Sapias que no es trencat del nas sino doas partidas ensemps pus sobiranas, o una de aquelas alcunas veguadas, per so quar en lu has dos osses, quar la partida dejos es cartillaginosa, e no es trencada e no accideys a lu sino atricio e tortuositat e sinuitat.	Know that the nose is not broken except in two places, the upper and lower, or one of those which are seen, because there are two bones in it, as the lower part is cartilaginous, and is not broken and does not occur to it except contraction and tortuosity and sinuitat.
Mays si es trencada la una de las doas partidas de lu, lahoras cove que tu intrometas le dit petit en le sieu nas, e que engualhas aquela fractura dedintz am le tieu dit indic, e am le dit pous defora, entro que retorne le nas segon la sua figura natural.	But if one of the two parts of it is broken, then take your thumb and stick it in your nose, and hold that fracture with your index finger and with the tip of your thumb, within until the nose returns to its natural figure.
E sia fayt aquo per tu am facilitat, e guarda te que no caja per aquela tua operacio sobre le malaute delor.	And let this be done by you with ease, and beware that pain does not occur to the patient through your operation.
E si la fractura es en la pus sobirana partida del nas, e le dit no perve ad aquela, lahoras cove que sia equat am la extremitat del ray en le qual sia petita grossitut.	And if the fracture is in the upper part of the nose, and the finger does not reach it, then let it be made equal with the tip of the bone in which there is a small thickness.
E si la fractura es en doas partidas, lahoras tu fay le semblant de aquo.	And if the fracture is in two parts, then you do likewise.
E coyta te am restauracio de lu en le primier dia de la fractura, si es possible; e sino, lahoras aprop le vii o·l x deves le repaus del apostema caut.	And cure it with restoration on the first day of the fracture, if possible; and if not, then let him have rest for the cauterized wound.
E aprop entromet en la extremitat del nas una meca de drap de li, si la fractura es en una partida, o metz doas calguas, si la fractura es en doas partidas, e sia en la calgua grossitut de tanta quantitat que umpla le trauc del nas.	And then insert into the tip of the nose a piece of cloth if the fracture is in one part, or put in two calques if the fracture is in two parts, and let there be thickness in the calque of so much quantity that it fills the crack in the nose.
E diysso alcus dels antics restauradors que las calguas sian enfundudas en boder, e sian permudadas en tot dia, mays no es vist a mi; habantz cove que la meca sia enfunduda en album de huou comfit am polvera de moli; e aprop layssa la qualgua entro que l’os sia fermat e sia endurazida la cartillage.	And some of the old restorators say that the calques be lined in wax, and changed every day, but I have not seen this; they have let the cloth be lined in honey comfit with powder of millings; and then leave it as the bone is firmed and the cartilage hardened.
E alcunas veguadas sia entromes en le nas, en loc de calgua, pena de auca pus que es envolopada de drap de li leon; e sia que ja te la fractura del nas pus vehement e que le malaute no sia prohibit de inspiracio.	And sometimes let the nose be inserted into it, instead of the calques, a reed of hollow reed more than it is wrapped in cloth of lion; and let the fracture of the nose be more violent, and that the patient not be prohibited from inspiration.
E aquesta causa no es a tu necessaria; e si voles, fay aquo, e si voles, fay calguas.	And this cause is not necessary to you; and if you want, do it, and if you want, do calques.
E si accideys autra veguada apostema caut, emplastra le nas am cerot o am coto enfus en vi agre e oli rozat, o am diaquilon.	And if another wound occurs, cauterize the nose with cerate or with a plaster infused in wine and rose oil, or with diaquilon.
Mays si no accideys apostema caut, lahoras cove que emplaustres aquel defora am farina de sizami e am polvera de enses cofitz am album de huou; e aprop pausa sobre lu stopa leon, e no lies le nas am alcuna causa.	But if it does not occur to the cauterized wound, then let you plaster that on the outside with sesame flour and onion powder mixed with honey; and then place over it a piece of lion skin, and do not tie the nose for any cause.
Mays si so trencats les osses del nas am fractura petita o so conminuitz, lahoras cove que scindas sobre aquels, e extraguas aquels am insturmentz que conveno ad aquels; e aprop cos la scissura, e cura aquela am aquo que encarna e consolida, e am emplastres ad aquo convenientz.	But if the bones of the nose are broken with a small fracture or are crushed, then cut them and pull them out with instruments appropriate to them; then sew up the wound, and cure it with that which causes flesh and makes firm, and plaster it with that which is convenient.
E si accideys plagua dedintz le nas, lahoras cove que cures aquela am calguas e administra canulas de plom entro que sia de tot sanat.	And if a wound occurs within the nose, then let you cure that with calques and administer lead canula so that it is entirely healed.
Capitol .iiii.	Chapter .iv.
De restauracio de la mandibula quan es trincada.	Of restoration of the mandible when it is broken.
Quan la mandibula dejos es rompuda e la fractura de lu no es am plagua, reguarda lahoras si la fractura es deforas tant solament, e no es trencada en dos e es curvada a las partidas dedintz, lahoras la sua cognicio es leugiera.	When the mandible is broken and its fracture does not have pus, beware then if the fracture is only outward and is not broken in two and bent inward at the parts within, then its understanding is easier.
E cove donc, si la fractura es en la part dreyta, que tu intrometas le tieu indic senestre en la boca del malaute; e semblantment si la fractura es an la mandibula senestra, lahoras intromet le dit indic de la ma dreyta; e impelleys am aquel la gilbositat de la fractura dedintz am facilitat a las partidas defora, am la tua autra ma de la partida defora del os; am aquel decentment equa aquelam.	And therefore, if the fracture is on the right part, let you insert your left index finger into the mouth of the patient; and likewise if the fracture is in the mandible on the left side, then insert your right index finger; and press it with that at the flexibility of the fracture within by your other hand from the outside of the bone; by that decently equal it.
E si la fractura de la mandibula ja es separada en doas, lahoras cove que administres extensio de doas partz segon rectitut entro que sia possibla la equacio de lu.	And if the fracture of the mandible is already separated in two, then let you administer extension of two parts according to rightness so that its equalization is possible.
E si accideys conmocio de dentz a disrupcio, lahoras strenh aquelas de las quals speras que romandran am fil de aur o de argent o de ceda; e aprop pausa sobre la mandibula trencada cerot, e aprop pausa sobre lu drap duplicat, e pausa sobre le drap gran stelha decentment fayta, o una pessa de sola engual a la longitut de la mandibula; e aprop lia aquela desus segon que a tu es apparelhada la liadura de lu e que conveneys la applicacio, entro que no es destruida.	And if it occurs knocking of teeth with destruction, then strengthen those of which you hope will break with wire of gold or silver or silk; and then place cerate over the broken mandible and then place doubled cloth over it, and place over the cloth great star decently made, or a piece of wood alone to the length of the mandible; and then tie that above according to how you are equipped with its application so that it is not destroyed.
E comanda al malaute que use de repaus e tranquilitat, e pausa la vianda de lu sorbicios leons.	And command the patient that he have rest and quietness, and give him food of him sorbing cool drinks.
E si extimas que ja es alterada la figura en alcuna manieyra, lahoras tu te coyta e deslia aquel al tertz dia; e aprop rectifica aquo que ja es alterat de lu e emplaustra aquel am polvera de moli, am album de huou, o am farina de cisami, pus que tu auras ostat le cerot de lu, e pausa sobre le emplastra lana leon.	And if you judge that the figure is already changed in some manner, then let you hold and loosen it on the third day; then rectify what has been changed of it and plaster it with powder of millings, with honey, or sesame flour, after you have removed its cerate, and place over the plaster lion skin.
E adonc cum sta annex e ajustat aquel emplastre sobre lu, e la disposicio del os no es alterada, layssa aquel, que no le deslies entro que sia sanat e strenh la fractura; quar motas veguadas aquesta fractura es streyta en tres sempmanas.	And when you have seen that and adjusted the plaster over it, and the disposition of the bone is not changed, let it be, that you do not loosen it until it is healed and the fracture made firm; for many times this fracture is tight in three weeks.
E si autra veguada accida apostema caut, lahoras administra aquo que havem dit motas veguadas en la sedacio de lu entro que sia sanat, e sia remaugut aquel apostema.	And if another boil occurs in a different place, then administer what we have said many times in the sedative while he is sleeping so that it heals and that boil goes away.
E si la fractura es am plagua, lahoras considera si es pessa del os separada o satagias, lahoras tu te subtilia que ostes aquelas satagias am aquo que conveneys ad aquo en la remocio de aquelas dels sturmentz.	And if the fracture is with a wound, then consider whether it is a separated bone or crushed bones, then you subtly put those crushed bones in place with what is convenient for that in removing them from the tools.
E si le orrifici de la plagua es streyt, lahoras tu le amplifique am le fleubotomi segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	And if the opening of the wound is narrow, then you widen it with bloodletting according to the quantity of your need.
E aprop quan tu auras ostat aquelas satagias, e de aquelas no sira remaugut re, lahoras tu cos le orrifici de la plagua si es ampla; e sino, pausa sobre aquela un dels emplaustres que conveneysso ad aquo e encarnan aquela, entro que sia sanada.	Then, when you have put those crushed bones in place and if they do not heal by themselves, then you cover the opening of the wound if it is wide; and if not, place one of the dressings that are convenient for that over it until it heals.
Capitol .v.	Chapter 5.
De restauracio de la furcula quan es trinquada.	Of the restoration of the collarbone when it is broken.
Motas veguadas es trencada la furcula de la partida denant deves le muscle, e aquela fractura es fayta en una de tres manieyras.	Many times the collarbone is broken from in front of the chest, and that fracture is done in one of three ways.
Quar o es trencada, o seperada, o es seperada en doas partz otra que no accidan satagias; e es leugier a la restauracio de lu; o es ayssi que accideysso en lu satagias, e es dificil a restauracio de lu; o es ayssi que la fractura es am plagua.	Because it is either broken, separated or separated into two parts without crushed bones; and it is easier to restore it; or it happens that there are crushed bones in it, and its restoration is difficult; or the fracture is with a wound.
E la operacio en aquela, quan la fractura es ses plagua, es que tu fassas esser present dos ministres, per so que la un tengua le adjutori e siegua la furcula trencada, e l’autre extenda le col ves aquela partida.	And the operation on it, when the fracture is without a wound, is that you have two ministers present, so that one holds the helper and follows the broken collarbone, and the other stretches the neck towards that broken part.
E aprop enguala la fractura am les tieus ditz entro que sia fayta la forma de lu segon que cove, e no sia en lu eminencia pauca ni concavitat.	Then, align the fracture with your fingers while it is done in the shape of it according to how it used to be, and there should be no small protuberance or hollow in it.
E si indigeysses mes de extencio, lahoras cove que pauses dejos le titillic del malaute spera de drap o de lana, e sia la grandesa de lu segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat; e exten e eleva la furcula e coarta la spera am la tua ma entro que enguales la frectura segon que cove.	And if you need more extension, then put a pillow made of cloth or wool under the patient's shoulder, and its size should be according to the quantity of your need; and extend and elevate the collarbone and hold the pillow with your hand while you align the fracture as it used to be.
E si no podes atirar la extremitat de la furcula a las partidas defora, per so quar es pervenguda al preon, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sua cervitz, e pauses sobre le muscle de lu un coyssi migier en grandeza.	And if you cannot pull the end of the collarbone to the outside parts because it has come to the chest, then let the patient lean back on his neck, and place a cushion half in size over the muscle of it.
E le ministre prema le muscle de lu a las partidas dejos entro que l’os de la furcula sia elevat que es en le preon en sus, e lahoras tu rectifique la fractura e enguala aquela am les tieus ditz.	And the minister presses the muscle of it to the outside parts while the bone of the collarbone is elevated up towards the chest, and then you straighten the fracture and align it with your fingers.
Mays si sentes satagias de la furcula e so maugudas, lahoras cove que fendes sobre aquela e extraguas aquelas satagias am facilitat.	But if you feel crushed bones in the collarbone that are not healed, then split it open and pull out those crushed bones easily.
E si es retenguda en le os, lahoras tu ingenia inscisio de lu am un dels inscissoris les quals has apparelhatz ad aquo, pus que havias pausat dejos la furcula le sturment que serve le ciphac; e es sturment de fust o de ferr del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And if it is retained in the bone, then you invent an incision of it with one of the knives that you have prepared for that purpose, after you have placed under the collarbone the tool that serves the head; and it is a wooden or iron tool of which this is the shape of it:
E es semblant a culier del qual aquesta es la concavitat; e sia la sua latitut segon aquo que has necessitat de lu, segon la grandeza del os o la pauqueza de lu.	And if the fracture is with a wound, then invent an incision of it according to the edge of the wound, and place over it a dressing that is convenient for that; and if the wound is made in one of the parts of the bone, then you split that part with the tool.
Mays la longitut de lu sia segon que es a tu possible a la operacio; que haja doas extremitatz ayssi cum vezes, e la una extremitat sia ample e l’autre streyta.	But the length of it should be according to what is possible for you in the operation; let it have two ends, one end broad and the other narrow.
E si la disrupcio de la plagua la qual has inscidida quan has extraytas la satagia del os es ampla, e yest segur de apostema caut, lahoras tu ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura.	And if the opening of the wound that you have split when you have pulled out the crushed bone is wide, and there is no danger of an abscess, then you close the two lips of the wound with stitches.
E si la disrupcio es pauca, o temes apostema caut, lahoras tu uemple la plagua am draps e pulvils segon la quantitat de la scissura de la plagua.	And if the opening is small, or you fear an abscess, then you fill the wound with cloth and powder according to the quantity of the split in the wound.
E si accideys apostema caut, lahoras infon drap en vi agre e oli rozat e vi, e pausa sobre aquel.	And if an abscess occurs, then soak a cloth in warm vinegar and rose oil and place it over that.
Mays la strictura del os quan es ses plagua e ses seccio, es que pauses emplastre fayt de farina de moli am album de huou, e pausa sobre lu stopa leon, e aprop pausa la spera dejos le titillic de lu, si indigeyssas de aquela, e aprop pren humemate, so es torca la qual teno les Sarrazis , que sia mot longua, e sia latitut de lu de un palm o entorn aquel; e aprop pausa pulvils duplicatz sobre la stopa e l’emplastre; e aprop pren una stela de taula subtil de la qual la latitut d’ela sia de tres ditz e en longitut semblantment; e aprop envolopa aquela en drap, e aprop envolopa aquel drap am la stela en lo loc sobre le loc de la fractura; e aprop pausa humemati ayssi cum es revout, e revol aquela sobre le col de lu e dejos le titillic de lu sa e dejos le titillic de lu malaute, e reduzeys aquela sobre tota partida, e quan vezes que la strictura de la fractura am strictura descent, e es aquo que no es occultat sobre tu.	But the constriction of the bone when it is without a wound and without a split is that you place a dressing made of flour of wheat with white of egg, and place over it stopa of linen, and then place the pillow under the shoulder, if it needs it, and then take humamate, which is the one that the Saracens hold, let it be very long, and its breadth be of one palm or around that; and then place powder doubled over the stopa and the dressing; and then take a slender stake of wood of which the breadth is of three fingers and in length similarly; and then wrap that in cloth, and then wrap that cloth with the stake in the place over the site of the fracture; and then place humemati as it is wound around, and wind that around the neck of him and under his shoulder, and reduce that to every part, and when the constriction of the fracture with constriction descends, and that is what is not hidden from you.
E tot, que no sia mauguda la stelha desobre le os trencat; e per so cove que tu vejas le malaute quascun dia, que quan le liament es mollificat o vezas la stela ja esser remauguda, lahoras tu rectifica aquo e strenh la liadura.	And all of this, that the stake is not healed over the broken bone; and therefore see the patient every day, because when the binding is softened or you see the stake already healed, then you straighten that and tighten the binding.
E aprop pausa le dormir del malaute sobre le col de lu, e pausa dejos le titillic de lu deves le dormir de lu en la nueyt un petit coyssi; per so que am aquel sia elevat le adjutori de lu del latz de aquel, e donc es elevada la la fractura de la furcula a elevacio del muscle; o sia le bras de lu liat al col de aquel.	And then place the pillow under the neck of him, and place under the shoulder on which he lies a small cushion; so that with that the helper of it is elevated from that side, and therefore the fracture of the collarbone is elevated to elevation of the muscle; or his arm is bound around the neck of him.
E no deslies le liament si no accideys en le loc prusiment o apostema, entro a xii dias.	And do not loosen the binding unless an abscess occurs in the site or pus, within twelve days.
E aprop renovelha le emplastre si has vista la facia de lu ad aquo, e ajusta en la strictura e restaura aquel e layssa entro que sia restaurat e sia coagulat la fractura de la furcula.	And then renew the dressing if you have seen the face of it to that, and adjust in the constriction and restore that and leave it until it is restored and the fracture of the collarbone is coagulated.
E es strenguda e comfortada segon le mes en xxviii dias, e alcunas veguadas en alcus homes es fayt en mens de temps de aquel.	And it is strengthened and comforted according to the month in 28 days, and sometimes in some people it is done in less time than that.
Capitol .vi.	Chapter 6.
De restauracio de fractura de la spalla.	Of the restoration of a fracture of the shoulder.
Spatula tart es trencada en le loc lat de lu e no so trencatz de lu sino les marges.	The spatula is broken at the broad end of it and not broken of it except at the edges.
E donc quan es trencat le loc de lu — e es trencat en le mieg loc de lu — e no es conogut sino per tocament, lahoras segon que es la figura de la fractura sforsa te la preparacio de lu e reduzir aquela segon la figura natural en tota manieyra de engen la qual es a tu possible.	And therefore when it is broken at the site of it — and it is broken in the middle end of it — and it is not healed except by touch, then according to how it is the figure of the fracture split you prepare it and reduce that according to the natural figure in every way of skill which is possible for you.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc polvera de moli am album de huou e stopa leon; e aprop pausa pulvil de drap duplicat; e aprop pausa sobre lu stela lada de taula subtil segon la quantitat de la spatula tota o mays un pauc.	And then place over the site powder of flour with white of egg and stopa of linen; and then place doubled cloth; and then place over it a slender stake of wood according to the quantity of the spatula or more.
Mays si dejos la stela es concavitat en alcu dels locs de la spatula, lahoras tu enguala aquela concavitat am stopa leon, e aprop pueja la stela segon equalitat.	But if under the stake is hollow in any of the sites of the spatula, then you align that hollow with stopa of linen, and then place the stake according to equality.
E aprop strenh desus am humemati longua ab constriccio decent e am fermesa de la stela entro que no sia remauguda del sieu loc.	And then tighten above it with a long humamate with decent constriction and with firmness of the stake until it is not healed in its site.
E considera le liament en quascun dia; e totas veguadas que sia mollificat, lia autra veguada e stren le e equa la stela si es remauguda del sieu loc.	And consider the binding every day; and all times that it is softened, bind another time and tighten it and wind the stake if it is healed in its site.
E jagua le malaute sobre le sieu latz sa.	And watch the patient on his side.
E la spatula es restaurada en xx dias o en .xxv.	And the spatula is restored in 20 days or in .25.
E donc quan es complit aquest nombre, lahoras tu dissolveys le liament, e que tu scias ensegurat quar aquela es dels osses dels quals la cominicio no es temuda ni lor dissolucio.	And when you have completed this count, then dissolve the ligament; and know that it is of the bones whose beginning is not feared nor is their dissolution.
E si procezeys del loc del os pessa e pongeys dejos la codena, lahoras tu scindeys sobre lu, e osta le, e fay segon que havem dit en la fractura de la furcula de sadacio de apostema caut si accideys aqui.	And if you proceed to the spot of the bone's weight and place below it the chain, then split it there, and ostler it, and do according to what we have said in the fracture of the furcula of suppuration of an abscess if it happens here.
Capitol .vii.	Chapter .VII.
De restauracio de la fractura del pietz.	Of restoration of the fracture of the foot.
Le pietz alcunas veguadas es romput en le mieg loc de lu e aquo tart endeve; mays las extremitatz de lu mot endeve que so ciccadas e comminuidas.	The foot is sometimes broken in its middle part and that hurts there; but its ends are more painful because they are crushed and broken.
E dels accidentz de lu quan es trencat le mieg de lu es que declina a las partidas dedintz e accideys a lu gran dolor, e dificultat en lo hale, e tos, e fort leu e vomeys sanc; e es declarada en lu cavitat en le os trencat e no es occulta al sentiment.	And of its accidents when its middle is broken it declines to the parts within and there happens to it great pain, and difficulty in breathing, and cough, and strong vomiting and blood; and a cavity is revealed in the broken bone and not concealed from sensation.
E la restauracio de lu es que sia resupinat le malaute sobre le sieu dos, e pausa entre las spallas de lu un coyssi; e aprop prem als muscles de lu, e ajusta las costas de lu am las mas de dos costatz, e subtilia te en la operacio de lu e en la equacio segon tota manieyra que es ad aquo possibla e que conveneys ad aquo, entro que retorne la figura del os segon que cove.	And its restoration is that the patient is laid on his back, and place under him a cushion; and press upon his muscles, and adjust his ribs by the hands of two men, and apply to the operation and to the adjustment according to all manner that it is possible and convenient, until he returns the figure of the bone according as it should be.
E aprop pausa sobre lu emplastre e estopa e pausa desobre astela de taula subtil de sauze o de caligi e de a lor semblantz en levitat, pus que tu envolopas aquela en drap; e aprop subtilia te en lian aquela sobre le os trencat que no sia maugut; e vay am liadura segon retonditat al dors alcunas veguadas, e strenh aquel am strictura decent; e aprop considera la liadura en tota hora, e quan es mollificada strenh aquela.	And then place upon it plaster and wadding, and pause over it a board of subtle deal or of cypress, or of a wood similar to them in lightness, after you have enveloped that in cloth; and then subtilise in binding that over the broken bone so that it is not hurt; and go with lacing according to roundness to the back sometimes, and strengthen that with decent stricture; and consider the lacing every hour, and when it has been loosened, strengthen it.
E si necessitat provoca a desliament de aquela deves corrossio o pruziment, o dolor, o apostema que accideysso en le loc, lahoras tu coyta e deslia aquela e erradica le emplastre e rectifique aquo que accideys per aquo am manieyra de curacio de lu; e aprop reduzeys le emplastre, si vezes ad aquo la facia; e ajusta a lu strictura entro que sia sanat.	And if necessity requires that the bandage be loosened or pricking, or pain, or suppuration happens in the place, then you cut and loosen that and remove the plaster, and rectify what happens for that by means of cure of it; and then reduce the plaster if you see to it the face; and adjust stricture upon him until he is healed.
Capitol .viii.	Chapter .VIII.
De restauracio de las costas quan son trincadas.	Of restoration of the ribs when they are cracked.
Sapias que fractura de las costas no catz sino en locs grosses que siegon le dos; e de las extremitatz de lor de la partida denant no accideys ad aquelas contricio sino per aquo quar so cartillaginosas.	Know that fracture of the ribs does not happen except in large spots which follow the back; and of their ends of the part before, it does not happen to those a contraction except by reason that they are cartilaginous.
E cognicio de lu no es amaguada al sentiment deves la inquisicio de lu am les ditz.	And cognition of it is not concealed from sensation on account of the inquiry of it with the fingers.
E la restauracio sia ayssi que enguales la fractura am les ditz segon la manieyra possibla, entro que sia engulhat segon que cove, e aprop emplastre e strenh le os trencat am stela, si indigeys de aquel.	And the restoration is that you grip the fracture with the fingers according to possible manner, until he is swallowed according as it should be, and then plaster and strengthen the cracked bone with a board, if it is needed by him.
E si la fractura de las costas es declinant a las partidas dedintz, lahoras accideys al malaute dolor vehement e punctura, ayssi cum punctura que accideys ad aquel que ha pleureci, e per aquo quar le os ponh le velament; e accideys a lu difficultat de hanelit, e tos, e vomit de mot sanc; e aquesta es de dificil curacio.	And if the fracture of the ribs is declining to the parts within, then there happens to the patient vehement pain and pricking, as well as pricking that happens to that which has been punctured, and by reason of that the bone places the veilment; and there happens to him difficulty in handling, and cough, and vomiting blood; and this is of difficult cure.
E ja les Antixs so engeniatz en aquela am motz engientz.	And then the phlegm is generated within it by cold things.
E de lor so que diso: cove que pauses viandas del malaute que engendro imflacio e ventositat, per que le ventre sia imflat e sia extendut, e la fractura sia impellida a las partidas defora.	And of them is that which I say: place upon him viands which generate inflammation and bloating, so that the belly be swollen and be extended, and the fracture be driven to the parts without.
Mays nos avoreyssem aquo per so que no sia causa leugiera a generar apostema caut, si no accideys; e si ja accideys, lahoras ja ajuda ad aquo.	But we ought to avoid that it be cause to generate an abscess by suppuration, if it does not happen; and if it has happened, then help it.
E diyssero alcus de lor que sia pausada desus ventoza e aprop que sucque am fortitut; e es semblant a ratiocinacio, mays empero es temut que la ventoza atire las superfluitatz al loc per la debilitat.	And some of them say that wind should be poured upon him and that it suck with strength; and this is similar to reasoning, but indeed it is feared that the wind will throw the superfluities to the spot by weakness.
E diyssero alcus de lor: cove que·l loc sia cubert am lana que ja es submersa en oli caut, e sian pausatz pulvils entre las costas entro que sia umplida, que sia la liadura engual quan envolopas aquela segon retonditat; e aprop sia curat le malaute am curacio de pleuresi de vianda e de medicina.	And some of them say: cover the spot with wool which has been already submerged in hot oil, and place powders between the ribs until it is filled, that the bandage be made round when you envelop it according to roundness; and then let the patient be cured for pleurisy of viand and medicine.
E si causa vehement constrenh le malaute la qual no sufferta, e le os punh le velament am punctura ledent, temem sobre le malaute, lahoras cove que fendam sobre le loc, descubram de la costa trencada, e aprop pausem desobre aquela instrument que conserve le ciphac, la rememoracio del qual es precedida, e que inscidam le os am facilitat, e extraguam aquel.	And if it causes vehement constriction to the patient which he does not endure, and the bone punctures him painfully, fear for the patient; then cover the spot, uncover the cracked rib, and then place upon it an instrument which conserves the head, the remembrance of which precedes; and pierce the bone with ease, and extract that.
E aprop que ajustem las doas labias de la plagua, si es gran, am cozidura, e curem aquela am emplastres entro que sia sanada.	And then adjust the two lips of the wound if it is large by sewing, and cure it with plasters until it is healed.
E si accideys dedintz apostema, lahoras tu coyta e enfon pulvils en oli rozat e pausa sobre le loc, e que sia curat le malaute am aquo que cove a la apostema dedintz.	And if suppuration happens within, then you cut and pour powders in rose oil and place over the spot, and let the patient be cured for that by what is said about suppuration within.
E sia ressupinat sobre le latz sobre le qual dorm, entro que sia sanat.	And let him be laid on his side upon which he sleeps until it is healed.
Capitol .ix.	Chapter .IX.
De restauracio de fractura del spondil del dos e del col.	Of restoration of fracture of the spine of the back and of the neck.
Alcunas veguadas endeve fractura als osses del col, e tart endeve a lor atricio, e semblantment als spondils del dos.	Sometimes fracture happens to the bones of the neck, and they hurt there at their attachment, and similarly to the spines of the back.
E cum aquo accideys ad alcu e voles saber si sara sanat o no, lahoras considera, quar si vezes las sieuas mas ja mollificadas e stupefaytas e mortas e no pot maure aquelas ni extendre ni strenher aquelas e quan constrenges aquelas am les tieus ditz o punges aquelas am agulha e no sent en aquelas dolor, lahoras sapias que no es sanat, e en las mes de disposicios es mortal.	And if it happens to someone and you want to know if he will be healed or not, then consider, for if you see that his hands are already loosened and stupified and dead and he cannot move those nor extend nor strengthen them when you pinch them with your fingers or pierce them with a needle, and he does not feel pain in them, then know that it is not healed, and in the midst of dispositions it is mortal.
E si mau aquelas e sent en aquelas constriccio am les ditz e punctura, lahoras sapias que la nucha de l’os es salva e que le malaute guereys am curacio.	And if he feels constriction in them with the fingers and piercing, then know that the bone's nut is saved and that the patient will be cured.
E si ve als spondils del col le semblant ad aquo e voles saber si sira sanat o no, lahoras considera als pes de lu.	And if you see the spines of the neck like that and want to know if it will be healed or not, then consider his feet.
Lahoras si tu vezes que so ja mollificatz, accideys ad aquels aquo que es accidit en las mas, e aprop quan jatz sobre le sieu dos, yeys ventozitat e egestio ses la sua volontat, e alcunas veguadas es resupinat sobre le sieu dos e vol urinar e no pot, lahoras sapias que es mortal, e adonc no trebales en la curacio de lu.	Then if you see that they are already loosened and it happens to them what happened in the hands, and then when he lies on his back he feels windiness and urination against his will, and sometimes is laid upon his back and wants to urinate but cannot, then know that it is mortal, and so do not trouble yourself in its cure.
Mays si no accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, la causa es milhor e pus leugiera.	But if none of those happens to him, the cause is better and less distant.
E la curacio de lu es que te perforses a la sedacio del apostema caut que pauses sobre le spondil atrissat oli rozat sol, o am mugols de huous asatz; pausa sobre aquela aquel alcunas veguadas le dia entro que sia sedat le apostema caut.	And its cure is that you pierce with a syringe the suppuration of abscess which you place over the cracked spine with hot rose oil, or with balls of hellebore prepared; place upon it sometimes during the day as long as the abscess lasts.
E lahoras pausa un dels emplastres confortantz e exsitans, e strenh sobre aquel am liament; e comanda al malaute que use de repaus e de tranquillitat e que no dorme sobre la partida am la qual atroba dolor entro que sia sanat.	And then place upon it one of the comforting and dry plasters, and strengthen over it with lacing; and command the patient that he take rest and tranquility and not sleep on the part from which he receives pain until he is healed.
E si accideys deves la atricio del os satagias o alcuna causa que ja es seperada de lu, lahoras cove que secces sobre la codena e que ostes aquel os; e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua, am sutura si es gran; e aprop cura aquela am alcu encarnatiu dels enguentz, entro que sia sanat.	And if suppuration happens on account of the bone's attachment or for any cause that it has been separated from him, then cover that with a bandage and hold that bone; and then adjust the two lips of the wound with sewing if it is large; and then cure it with something incarnating from the gums, until it is healed.
Mays si es trencat le derier del os alhoses, e es la fi de la coeta, lahoras cove que tu entrometas le dit pous de la ma senestra en le cul, e que enguales le os trencat am l’autra ma segon que es possible per equacio segonda; e aprop pausa sobre lu emplastre e astelha, si indigeysses de aquels, e aprop strenh aquel.	But if the tip of the bone of the bones is cracked and it is the end of the coccyx, then place your left finger in the hole, and grip the cracked bone with the other hand according to what is possible by second adjustment; and then place upon him plaster and a board if it needs that; and then strengthen that.
E si sentes satagias trencadas en lu, lahoras tu fen sobre aquela, e osta aquel, e cura la plagua am la curacio que es precedida entro que sia sanada.	If you feel broken bones in him, then you put a splint on it and bandage it, and treat the wound with the medicine that is prescribed until it heals.
Capitol .x.	Here is the translation of the provided text:
De restauracio de la ancha.	Here is the translation:
Les osses de las anchas tart so trencats, e si trencan, lahoras la fractura de lor no es sino communicio en las extremitatz de aquelas e son inscidas en la longitut e declinan a las partidas dedintz; e accideys al malaute dolor en le loc e punctura, e la camba es stupefacta quan es fractura.	Here is the translation:
E la restauracio de lu es que tu extendas la tua ma sobre aquel entro que sia sobre la fractura qual es la figura de lu.	Here is the translation:
E si fractura es en la extremitat de lu tant solament, lahoras tu enguala aquela segon que a tu es apparelhat per equacio engual entro que sia asemblat a la sua figura natural.	Here is the translation:
Mays si la fractura es en le lonc o que ja declina a las partidas dejos, lahoras tu fay jaser le malaute sobre le sieu ventre entro que sia preparada a tu la restauracio de aquela fractura.	Here is the translation:
E donc quan auras engualada aquela, pausa sobre lu emplastre, e aprop pausa sobre aquel astela de fust o de codena, e strenh per strictura sobre la qual no temas punctacio de fractura ni remocio de la stelha.	Here is the translation:
E enguala la concavitat am aquo que uempla aquela entro que aquela prengua la strictura segon equalitat, e comanda al malaute que dorma sobre le sieu dos o desobre le sieu costat sa.	Here is the translation:
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras tu cessa de extencio de lu e de la sua restauracio entro que sia sedat le apostema caut, e pausa sobre lu aquo que sede aquel segon que es precedit; e aprop retorna a la restauracio de lu, e strenh aquel ayssi cum cove.	Here is the translation:
E si accideysso en le os satagias o son comminuidas, lahoras tu las tratz.	Here is the translation:
Capitol .xi.	Here is the translation:
De restauracio de la fractura del adjutori.	Here is the translation:
Adjutori es aquo que es entre le coyde entro al cap de la spalla.	Here is the translation:
E si es trencat, lahoras la restauracio de lu es en una de doas manieyras, de las quals es la una que tu prenguas fust pla de migiera groceza segon aquesta forma:	Here is the translation:
E sian liatz en doas extremitatz dos liamentz, e aprop sia suspendut del loc elevat.	Here is the translation:
E segua le malaute sobre una sezela; e aprop gieta fora le sieu bras trencat sobre le fust entro que pervengua al titillic de lu en le mieg loc del qual sia annexa la curvitat del fust.	Here is the translation:
E aprop suspen sobre aquel alcuna causa greu, o·l minestre extenda aquel a las partidas dejos; e aprop le metge eque la fractura am las sieuas mas ensemps, entro que la fractura retorne segon que cove.	Here is the translation:
E l’autra manieyra es que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sieua cervitz e suspen la ma del col de lu am liament; e aprop comanda a dos ministres que la un de lor tengua aquo que es desobre la fractura am las suas mas; e l’autre tengua le pus dejos de lu; e quascu de lor extenda a la sua partida.	Here is the translation:
E si voles que la extencio sia pus fort, lahoras tu strenh sobre la fractura am liament e sobre aquela am autre liament, e quascu dels dos ministres extendan a doas suas partidas.	Here is the translation:
E donc si la fractura es propinquada a la extremitat del muscle, lahoras cove que sia pausat la mitat del liament sobre le citillic e l’autre dejos la fractura deves le coyde.	Here is the translation:
E semblantment si la fractura es propdana al coyde, lahoras cove que sia pausat le liament sobre aquel loc e sobre aquel coyde.	Here is the translation:
Enguala aquela am facilitat e ses trebal, e aprop quant sira engualada segon que cove e es applicada per bona applicacio, lahoras strenh aquela si no accideys apostema caut.	Here is the translation:
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras layssa la strictura entro al vii dia, e pausa sobre lu lana sutza enbeguda en vi agre e oli rozat entro que repause le apostema, e lahoras tu stren aquela.	Here is the translation:
E la manieyra de strenher aquela es que pauses emplastre sobre la fractura, e aprop pausa envolopament de drap nau sobre le emplastre; e aprop ajuste le bras sobre aquel adjutori, e pause la sua ma uberta sobre le sieu muscle.	Here is the translation:
E pausa le drap e strenh sobre le adjutori le bras per so que·l bras sia en loc de stelhas, si no prohibeys de aquo alcuna causa del os trencat.	Here is the translation:
E lahoras usa de stelhas.	Here is the translation:
E es que pauses sobre la fractura aquela stela que sia pus lada e pus fort de las autras stelas; e pausa entre quascuna stela la latitut del dit, e sia la longitut de las stelas segon la trencadura am addicio de tres ditz de tota partida.	Here is the translation:
E aprop strenh sobre las stelas am la strictura la qual he dita al comensament del capitol.	Here is the translation:
E es que la tua strictura sobre le loc de la fractura sia pus streyt.	Here is the translation:
E quant pus es alonguada la fractura sia la strictura menor.	Here is the translation:
E donc si vezes le situament de las stelas e la strictura ayssi cum havem dit en la hora en la qual restauras le membre al sieu assituament, lahoras tu fay.	Here is the translation:
E si temes apostema caut, lahoras tu layssa la strictura e las stelas entro al dia vii ayssi cum havem dit.	Here is the translation:
E aprop considera le liament en totas partidas per tres dias per so que no accida en le loc pruziment o imflacio; o es prohibida la vianda pervenir al membre per disposicio de superfluitat de strictura; e donc rectifiqua tot aquo segon que havem dit.	And then consider the ligament in all parts for three days so that no inflammation or swelling occurs; or food is prohibited from coming to the limb due to an excess of tightness; and thus rectify all that according to what we have said.
Mays si tu yest sobre confizanssa que no accida alcuna causa de aquo, lahoras no deslias la liguadura sino aprop tres dias o mays.	But if you are confident that nothing will happen, then do not loosen the ligament but rather wait for three or more days.
E sia la sua dormicio del malaute sobre le sieu dos, e las sieuas mas sian sobre le stomac.	And let the patient's sleep be on his back, and his hands be on his stomach.
E pausa sobre le adjutori cocena plena de lana engualment, e considera en tota hora de la nueyt o del dia que no sia deliada ni dissolta la figura del membre trencat, o que sia le liament mollificat, donc rectifica aquo tot am la tua vertut.	And place on the buttock a poultice full of wool, and examine throughout the night or day that the shape of the broken limb is not changed, or that the ligament becomes soft; thus rectify all with your skill.
E pausa la vianda del malaute segon le orde le qual havem denant mes, enayssi que la vianda sia subtil en le comensament entro que es comensat strenher; e lahoras cove que egrossas la vianda de lu.	And give food to the patient according to the order we mentioned earlier, so that the food is thin at first and then gradually made thicker; and then let him swallow it.
Quar de constuma del adjutori e de la camba de lu es que sian strengutz en xl dias; e lahoras cove que sian desliatz e sia administrat banh e sia medicat am enguentz los quals rectifican aquel.	Because it is customary for the buttock and leg to be bound up for forty days, then let them be loosened and a bath administered, and medicine applied with ointments that rectify this.
E si la fractura es layha atrita, lahoras tu no deslies de aquela le liament e las stelhas entro a l dias o entro a dos meses.	And if the fracture is weak, then you must not loosen that ligament and the splints for one month or two months.
Capitol .xii.	Chapter 12.
De restauracio de fractura del bras.	On the restoration of a broken arm.
Bras es compost de dos osses les quals so appelatz dos focils; dels quals la un es petit, e es aquel que siec le dit pous, e l’autre es gran e es aquel le qual es pausat dejos le petit dit, de la partida pus dejus.	An arm is made up of two bones, which are called two rays; the first is small and is that which supports the finger, and the other is large and is that which is placed below the smaller one, at the part lower down.
E fort leu es trencat le focil major solament, o le petit, e fort leu son trincatz ensemps.	And usually the larger ray is broken alone, or the smaller one, and seldom are they both broken together.
E quan es trencat le focil petit desus, lahoras la restauracio de lu es leugiera, e la sanacio de lu es pus leugiera.	And when the smaller ray is broken on top, then its restoration is easier, and its healing is even more so.
E quan es trencat le focil de lu dejos la fractura de lu es mala, e la sanacio de lu es dificil.	And when it is broken on the bottom, the fracture is worse, and its healing is difficult.
E pus mala de aquela es quan son trencatz dos osses essemps.	Worse than that is when both bones are broken together.
Donc si l’os le qual es trencat es le focil petit desus, lahoras es convenient al metge, deves la restauracio de lu, que pauze petita extencio am facilitat entro que aquel sia engualhat.	Therefore, if the bone that is broken is the smaller ray on top, then it is convenient for the doctor, in order to restore it, to apply a small extension with ease so that it may be splinted.
Mays si le focil gran es aquo que es trincat, lahoras cove que pause extencio pus vehement.	But if it is the larger ray that is broken, then one must apply a more forceful extension.
E si les dos focils so ensemps trincatz, lahoras cove que tu pauses la extritura mot pus fort.	And if both rays are broken together, then you must apply an even stronger extension.
E cove que pauses la figura de la ma deves la restauracio de lu e la extencio de lu estenduda sobre un coyssi, e sia le pols de la ma a las partidas desus, pus aut que totz les autres ditz, e le dit auricular sia pus bas dels autres ditz, e le malaute sia cezent sobre una cezela cayrada.	And you must apply the shape of the hand for its restoration and extension spread out over a cushion, with the palm at the parts on top, above all the others, and the finger joint be lower than the others, and the patient lying on his back on a raised pillow.
E sia un coyssi denant lu en la altetut o endreyt de lu, per so que·l malaute no encorra trebalh.	And there should be a cushion beneath him for height or leaning, so that the patient does not strain himself.
E aprop le ministre extenda le bras de la partida pus dejos am la sieua ma o am liament, e autre ministre extenda desus semblantment.	Then the assistant extends the arm at its lower part with his hand or a ligament, and another assistant extends it similarly above.
E aprop le metge engualhe le os entro que redugua aquel segon la milhor figura que pot.	And then the doctor splints the bone so that it is reduced according to the best shape possible.
E si en la factura del os so satagias, lahoras te perforsa raduzir tota pessa en le sieu loc am la tua vertut.	And if in the setting of the bone there are protrusions, then you must push back all swelling into its place with your skill.
E si appar en lu satagia separada que punh la codena e no es a tu speransa en la restauracio de lu, lahoras tu fen sobre lu e osta aquela segon la manieyra la qual havem dita desus.	And if there appears in it a separate protrusion that pushes against the tendon and you do not have hope in its restoration, then you must cut it off and treat it according to what we said earlier.
Mays si la fractura es am plagua, yeu ja he fayt ad aquo capitol singular, e donc pren la curacio de aquel.	But if the fracture is with gangrene, I have already written about that in this chapter, and thus take its cure.
E si accideys apostema caut al comensament de la tua restauracio, lahoras tu lineys un drap am cerot fayt de oli rozat e cera blanca, e sia migier entre specitut e subtilitat, e strenh drap sobre aquel am strictura subtil entro que le apostema sia cedat; e lahoras remau le cerot e pausa emplastre preparat de polvera de moli am clayre de huou, e aprop pausa stelhas; e sia la stela la qual es pauzada sobre aquela fractura pus lada e pus fort.	And if there occurs an abscess after the beginning of your restoration, then you must cut a cloth with a cerate made of rose oil and white wax, and let it be in between medium and thin, and strengthen the cloth over that with subtle tightness so that the abscess gives way; then remove the cerate and apply an ointment prepared from powdered mullet with honey, and then apply splints; and let the splint that is placed over that fracture be more firm and strong.
E sapias que·l nombre de las stelas del bras so vi en las majors disposicios, o sia la fractura en un focil o en dos focils ensemps.	And know that the number of arm splints are seen in greater dispositions, or let it be in one ray or both rays together.
E aprop pausa la tua strictura sobre le loc de la fractura pus fort e pus vehement, e quan mays sira la extrictura a las partidas desus de la fractura o a las partidas pus bassas de lu, pausa la strictura un pauc pus molh segon que es precedida la rememoracio de lu en le comensament del capitol.	Then apply your extension over the site of the fracture more firmly and strongly, and when you are more relaxed at the parts on top of the fracture or at its lower parts, relax the extension a little according to how it was preceded in the beginning of the chapter.
E les draps que so envolopatz sobre la fractura sian draps mols humitz, e no sian durs ni aspres, e·l fiel am le qual es strenhut sia de li propriament migier entre subtil e gros, ayssi cum havem recomtat.	And the cloths that are wrapped over the fracture should be soft and moistened with water, not hard or rough; and the thread by which it is tied should be between medium and thick, just as we have recommended.
E considera le membre e·l liament aprop alcus dias.	And then examine the limb and the ligament after a few days.
E si accideys alcuna causa de la qual rectificacio es necessaria, ayssi cum prusiment le qual accideys al membre, e lahoras cove que tu enbroques le membre am aygua cauda entro que cesse aquel pruziment.	And if there occurs some cause for which rectification is necessary, just as it happened to the limb, and then let you bathe the limb with warm water so that that swelling ceases.
E leysses le membre no costreyt entro que repause, e aprop torna la strictura.	Let the limb not be bound while resting, and then return the extension.
E si la extrictura ja es mollificada e l’os ja es remaugut e semblantz ad aquels, lahoras rectifiqua tot aquo am la tua vertut.	And if the extension is already loosened and the bone is healed and similar, then rectify all that with your skill.
E considera mays si le nutriment es prohibit pervenir al membre per superfluitat de strictura, quar lahoras cove que mollifiques aquel un petit e laysses aquel per alcus dias entro que corra ad aquel le nutriment, e aprop strenh aquel.	And consider if the food is prohibited from coming to the limb due to an excess of tightness, then loosen it a little and leave it for several days so that food comes to it; then strengthen it again.
Mays si al malaute no accideys alcuna causa de aquelas que havem ditas, lahoras no cove que sia desliat entro aprop xx dias o enviro de aquels.	But if the patient does not have any cause for which we mentioned earlier, then do not loosen it until after about 20 days or around that time.
E aprop sia suspenduda la ma del malaute per la sua vertut de movement agitatius, e fay aquel dormir sobre le sieu dos.	Then let the patient's hand be suspended by its strength of active movement, and let him sleep on his back.
E sapias que aquesta fractura es restaurada en xxx dias o en xxxii dias, o fort leu es restaurada en xxviii dias, e tot aquo es segon la disposicio de las compleccios e las disposicios de la vertut.	And know that this fracture is restored in 30 or 32 days, or most often it is restored in 28 days, and all that is according to the disposition of the complications and the dispositions of the skill.
Capitol .xiii.	Chapter 13.
De restauracio de fractura de la pinche de la ma e dels ditz.	On the restoration of a fracture in the palm and the fingers.
Sapias que a la pinche de la ma e als nuzes dels ditz tart endeve fractura, e no accideys a lor sino atricio motas veguadas.	Know that the palm and the knuckles of the fingers often have a fracture there, but nothing happens to them except for many protrusions.
E quan accideys a la ma fractura o atrissio, lahoras cove que·l malaute segua cayrat e denant lu lies cezent segon equalitat, e aprop pausa la ma de lu sobre aquela extenduda.	And when there is a fracture or a tendon in the palm, then let the patient lie on his back and let him be inclined according to equality, and then apply the hand over that extended.
E aprop le ministre extenda les osses trencatz e·l metge engualhe aquels entro que sian congongitz am bona congoncio.	Then the assistant extends the broken bones, and the doctor splints them so that they are brought together with good joining.
E lahoras cove que pause emplastre e estopa, si no accideys apostema caut; e aprop pausa stela desus segon la quantitat del loc, e tu ja has envolopada aquela en drap de li.	Then let you apply ointment and bandages; if there is no abscess, then loosen that and place a splint above according to the quantity of the site, and you have already wrapped that in a cloth.
Mays si la trincadura es en las partidas dedintz deves le ventre de la palma, e lahoras fay semblant de spera de drap, e comanda al malaute que strenha aquela am la sua palma trincada; aprop sia strenguda am drap lonc.	But if the fracture is in the parts of the fingers below the belly of the palm, then do likewise as for a torn cloth, and command the patient to strengthen that with his palm which is torn; then let it be strengthened with a long cloth.
E sia la stelha de cuer am drap en le qual sia levitat, per so que le cuer sia aplicat a la palma; e strenh aquela segon que cove.	And let the finger splint be with a cloth that is elevated so that the finger is applied to the palm; then strengthen it according to how you can.
Mays si la fractura es a las partidas defora, lahoras cove que pauses desus stela e autre estela de la partida dejos en la palma, per so que la ma sia uberta e dreyta; e aprop pausa la strictura, ayssi cum es revolvuda la ma a la rateta entre les ditz am liamentz.	But if the fracture is to the outer parts, then let you place above it a splint and another splint from the part below in the palm so that the hand may be opened and straight; then apply the extension, just as the hand is turned around between the fingers with ligaments.
E si accideys fractura a alcu dels nozes dels ditz, lahoras si es le dit pous, sia engualat segon que cove e aprop sia strenhut am la palma e si·t voles, pausa a lu astela petita dreyta per so que sia elevada la fractura e no sia mauguda.	And if there is a fracture to one of the finger joints, then if it is the finger joint that pushes, let it be splinted according to how you can; and then let it be strengthened with the palm, and if it wants, place on it a small straight splint so that the fracture is elevated and not bent.
Mays si la fractura es en les autres ditz, ayssi cum en aquel del mieg loc, o en le indic, o en le auricular, o en le anular, lahoras sia engualhat e liat am le dit sa le qual siec aquel; o sian totz liatz segon continuacio, e es milhor; o pausa sobre aquel stela petita, ayssi cum havem dit en le pous.	If the fracture is in one of the other fingers, such as the middle, index, auricular, or little finger, then it should be wrapped and bound with the said finger; or they should all be bound according to continuity, and that is better; or place a small splint over it, as we have said regarding the toes.
E considera, en la tua restauracio, e aprop aquela, la disposicio de apostema caut e oppose — am la tieua operacio — am aquo que cove quan accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, segon que es iterada la narracio de lu.	And in your restoration and approach to that, consider the disposition of suppuration and opposition — through your operation — to whatever causes those, according to what is repeated in its narrative.
Capitol .xiv.	Chapter 14.
De restauracio de fractura del os de la coyssa.	On the restoration of a fracture of the thighbone.
Le os de la cueyssa motas veguadas es trencat e es declarat al sentiment segon que es convertit a la partida denant e a la pus sobirana.	The thighbone is often broken and is revealed to the senses according to what it converts into the front and the highest pus.
E la restauracio de lu se fa enayssi que·l liament es strenhut sobre la fractura e autre liament dejos la fractura, e le malaute sia prostrat sobre le sieu ventre e sobre la cara.	And its restoration is done in such a way that the ligature is strengthened over the fracture and another ligature below the fracture, and the patient lies on his stomach and on his back.
E aprop le ministre extenda tot le liament a la sua partida segon la qualitat, quan la fractura es en le mieg loc del os.	And then the minister extends all the ligature to its end according to its quality, when the fracture is in the middle part of the bone.
Mays si es propdana a la razitz de la cueyssa, lahoras sia le liament propda al denolh a la partida del pentenilh, per so que la extencio caja en sus, e le autre liament dejos la fractura.	But if it is near the root of the thigh, then let the ligature be near the buttock at the end of the hip, so that the extension goes up over it, and the other ligature below the fracture.
E semblantment si la trencadura es propdana al denolh, lahoras sia fayt le liament propda al denol, e sia la extencio a las partidas dejos.	And similarly, if the break is near the buttock, then let the ligature be made near the buttock, and the extension to the parts below.
E aprop le metge enguale le os am amduas las sieuas mas entro que reduzesca aquel segon la semblansa natural e l’os es conjungit per bona conjunccio; lahoras cove que pauses emplastre e strictura, si no accideys al membre apostema.	And then the doctor should join the bone with both hands until it is reduced according to its natural appearance and the bone is joined by a good conjunction; then when the member has paused plaster and constriction, if suppuration does not occur in it.
Mays si accideys en lu apostema, lahoras tu layssa aquel per alcus dias entro que l’apostema caut sia cedat, e aprop retorna a la tua curacio.	But if suppuration occurs in it, then you should leave it for several days until the suppuration has subsided, and then return to your cure.
La strictura de lu sia ayssi fayta: cove que envolopes sobre la fractura una benda dura, e dobla aquela dos o tres veguadas, e remaugua de lu superfluitat; e aprop envolopa la camba entro que pervengua al talo e a la razitz de la cueyssa.	The constriction of it should be done thus: have a bandage wrapped over the fracture, a hard one, and fold it two or three times, and remove the superfluity from it; then wrap the leg so that it extends to the heel and to the root of the thigh.
E intromet lonc fiel entre la cueyssa e la camba prop del denol a las partidas dejos, e venguan las extremitatz del fiel de la partida pus sobirana de las doas partz, e aprop revolveys sobre la camba e la cueyssa aquo que superflueys de la benda.	And insert a long needle between the thigh and the leg near the buttock at the ends below, and let the extremities of the needle come from the highest part of both parts; then roll over the leg and the thigh whatever superfluity there is in the bandage.
E aprop pausa sobre la cueyssa en le loc de aquela fractura astelhas, e pausa de aquelas una stela sobre le os de la camba.	And then place a splint over the thigh at the site of that fracture, and of those, place a splint over the shinbone.
E aprop uempli las vacuitatz entre la camba e la cuoyssa am draps mols, per so que sia coagulada la extrictura.	And then fill the vacuities between the leg and the thigh with soft rags, so that the constriction is coagulated.
E aprop comensa am strictura fort del mieg sobre le loc de la fractura am tres envolucios o quatre, e quant mays tu te alonhas am liament del loc de la fractura, la tua strictura sia menor e pus leugiera e pus molha.	And then begin with strong constriction over the site of the fracture with three or four wrappings; and as you go further away from the ligature at the site of the fracture, your constriction should be lesser and looser and more moist.
E aprop exten a doas extremitatz del fiel a las partidas dejos entro que pervengua a la cavilha del pe, e strenh amdoas las extremitatz de las stelhas del autra part per so que·l liament no sia remaugut del sieu loc.	And then extend the two extremities of the needle to the ends below so that it reaches the ankle of the foot; and strengthen both extremities of the splints on the other side so that the ligature is not loosen from its place.
E aprop leyssa la strectura sobre aquel, don esta ayssi que no accideys al membre corrosio ni apostema caut ni emflacio e semblantz ad aquels; e si accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, adonc cueta te am desliament de lu, e rectifica aquo que accideys tot aprop, segon que havem dit motas veguadas.	And then leave the constriction over it, where it is in such a way that suppuration or apoplexy does not occur in the member or inflammation and similar to those; and if any of those things occur, then treat it with removal of the ligature, and rectify what has occurred altogether, according to what we have said many times.
Mays si en le os es pessa del os la qual pongua, lahoras cove que tu engualhes aquel segon que a tu es possibla; e sino, fen sobre lu e remau aquel, e cura am aquo del qual es precedida la rememoracio entro que sia sanat.	But if in the bone there is a piece of the bone which has pushed out, then let you join it according to what is possible for you; and if not, then open it and remove it, and cure with that from which its memory is preceded until it is healed.
E alcunas veguadas es strenhuda aquesta fractura de la coyssa otra aquo que sian ajustadas a lu stelhas, ayssi cum havem dit en le adjutori e·n le bras.	And some times this fracture of the thigh is strengthened with splints in addition to being bound as we have said regarding the leg and arm.
Mays empero en la restauracio de lu en tal manieyra fayta no accideys al malaute claudicacio; e si es restaurada sola, otra aquo que li sia applicada l’autra camba, lahoras es necessari que claudique aquel del qual es tostemps.	But however in its restoration if it is made in such a way that suppuration does not occur in the patient; and if it is restored alone, or the other leg is also bound, then it is necessary for him to limp from which it has always been.
E sapias que la coyssa es strenhuda en xl dias o un pauc mes o un pauc mens, e tot aquo es segon la diversitat de las compleccios e de las autras dispozicios.	And know that the thigh is strengthened in 40 days or a few months, or a few weeks, and all of that is according to the variety of complications and other dispositions.
Capitol .xv.	Chapter 15.
De restauracio de la fractura de la rodela del denolh.	On the restoration of the fracture of the hip joint.
Sapias que fractura de la rodela del denol tart endeve, mays accideys a lu motas veguadas atrissio.	Know that the fracture of the hip joint is painful, but it occurs in many ways with tension.
Mays si accideys a lu fractura, lahoras no es sino fissura o trauc en las suas partidas, e aquo es am plagua o ses plagua, e sobre aquo tot es estat am le sentiment.	But if suppuration occurs in it, then it is not just a fracture or crack in its parts, and that is with pus or blood, and over that all is felt by the senses.
E la restauracio de lu es enayssi que sia engualat aquo que es romput de las partidas de lu am les ditz entro que sia agreguat e conjongit segon que es possible per equacio e facilitat e fabricacio.	And its restoration is done in such a way that what is broken in its parts is joined with the fingers within so that it is aggregated and conjoined according to what is possible by position and facility and fabrication.
E aprop pausa emplastre e pausa sobre aquel stela redonda, si indigeysses de aquela; e strenh desus am strictura ad aquo convenient.	And then place plaster and place over it a round splint if suppuration occurs from that; and strengthen it with constriction as is convenient.
E aprop considera totas las disposicios las quals havem recomtadas en las autras fracturas, ayssi cum es apostema caut e semblant ad aquels enaissi que se oppause a tot accident am aquo que a lu es convenient entro que sia sanat.	And then consider all the dispositions which we have mentioned in other fractures, as suppuration and similar to those in which you oppose any cause of them with what is suitable for it until it is healed.
Capitol .xvi.	Chapter 16.
De restauracio de la fractura de la camba.	On the restoration of a fracture of the leg.
Sapias que en la camba so dos osses dels quals la un es gros, e es le nompnat per nom de la camba; e l’autra es subtil, e es nompnat focil.	Know that in the leg there are two bones of which one is thick and is called by the name of the leg; and the other is slender, and is called the shinbone.
E accideys a quascus de las specias de fractura aquo que accideys als dos osses del bras, e per aquo es fayta restauracio de lu ayssi cum restauracio del bras engualment, e la operacio de lu es una.	And suppuration occurs in each of the kinds of fracture as it occurs in both bones of the arm, and for that reason its restoration is done in such a way, and its operation is one.
E si so trincatz dos osses ensemps, la camba es convertida a totas partidas.	And if they are both broken, then the leg is converted into all parts.
E si es trinquat le os pus subtil, la camba es convertida a las partidas Denant.	And if only the more slender bone is broken, then the leg is converted into the front parts.
E si es trincat le os pus gros, atrobas aquel dejos, e es de aquelas causas que no so a tu ameguadas.	And if only the thicker bone is broken, then it is converted below; and it is from those causes that they are not bound to you.
E aprop aministra extencio e equacio e liguacio de las astelas segon aquel engualment.	And then administer extension and position and binding of the splints according to that joining.
Mays empero cove, si la fractura de la camba es laja havent motas satagias, que la extencio sia mendre e pus leugiera, e alleuja am la tua vertut.	But however if the fracture of the leg is a crack having many splinters, then let its extension be lesser and looser, and draw it away with your strength.
E en la camba es alcuna causa de operacio sobre le bras, e es quan tu engualas las stelhas e que comples tota la tieua operacio, lahoras tu prendras pessas de fustz de pi le qual es pausat dejos las cauzas las quals so pausades en solies, e so faytas eyssament de brancas de palma; aligeys de aquelas a las quals es petita groceza, e no sia ges de las manudas, e sia la longuesa de aquelas segon la longuesa de la camba, e del denol entro al pus dejos.	And in the leg there is some cause of operation on the arm, and it is when you join the splints and complete all your operation, then you will take pieces of wood of the poplar tree which is paused below the causes which are paused alone, and they are made a binding of white palm fibers; gather them to those to which there is a small thickness, and let it not be of the fingers, and let its length be according to the length of the leg from the buttock to the most below.
E aprop envolopa sobre quascuna drap en doas envolucios segon la longitut de lu, e pausa la una sobre la partida de la camba de la una part e l’autra del autra part, e sian del denol entro al pus bas loc del pe.	And then wrap over each one a bandage in two layers according to the length of it, and place one over the part of the leg on one side and the other on the other side, and let them be of the hip from the most below to the ankle of the foot.
E aprop lias las doas stelhas en tres locs de doas extremitatz e al mieg loc, quar am aquesta strectura la camba es prohibida de clinar a la partida dextra e sinistra, e sta per bona stacio.	And then join the two splints in three places of the two extremities and at the middle place; by which with this constriction the leg is prohibited from bending to the right and left side, and stands in good position.
E ja es aministrat un brasset de fust segon la longuesa de la camba; e sia pausada en lu la camba per so que conserve aquel de movement.	And a board has already been administered according to the length of the bed, and the bed should be placed on it so that it maintains its position.
E majorment cove que tu fassas aquo en fractura, e quan am aquela es plagua propriament.	And most importantly, you must do this in a fracture, and when there is an infection as well.
E aprop considera en quascun jorn la camba e studia am aquel per derier studi, e tu le guardes de apostema e de imflacio o de autres causas semblantz; e cum accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, lahoras opausa te a lu am aquo que cove entro que sia sanat.	And carefully consider the bed each day and study it from behind as well, and you should protect it from pustules and inflammation or other similar causes; and when one of those causes happens, then apply to it that which is appropriate for healing.
Capitol .xvii.	Chapter XVII.
De la fractura del talo e dels osses del pe e dels ditz.	Of the fracture of the talus and bones of the foot and toes.
Al talo no accideys fractura de tot; mays als osses del pe accideys fractura alcunas veguadas; e als ditz del pe pauc accideys fractura, e no accideys a lor sino atricio en las mes de disposicio.	The talus does not often suffer a fracture; but fractures of the bones of the foot are quite common; and fractures of the toes of the foot are rare, and they usually only suffer dislocation in the joints of their phalanges.
E si als osses del pe endeve fractura e vezes aquels osses esser elevatz sobre si entre lor, lahoras le malaute pause le sieu pe sobre la terra preparat ayssi cum anant.	And if there is a fracture of the bones of the foot and you see those bones protruding upwards, then the patient should place his foot on the ground prepared in this way.
E aprop pausa la un pe sobre aquo que es elevat de aquels osses, e aprop calca aquels, e prem, e engualha aquels entro que torno en los locs.	Then put your weight on that which is elevated by those bones, and press and wring them until they return to their places.
E aprop pausa emplastre e stopa desus, e pausa dejos le ventre del pe una petita taula a la qual sian dos caps plas.	And apply plaster and a pad on top of that, and place beneath the arch of the foot a small board with two edges.
E aprop strenh aquela am le pe am strectura descent, pus que tu has envolopada aquela am draps e am autres causes de las quals indigeys.	And strengthen that by applying pressure on the foot with traction, as you have wrapped it in bandages and other remedies.
E cum a lu passan tres dias o quatre, lahoras tu deslia le liament, quar tu atrobaras les osses engualatz, o sian trincatz o sian dislocatz, e la operacio en aquels es ayssi co coneysses.	And when three or four days have passed, then you can loosen the bandage, for you will find that the bones are set, or they are cracked or dislocated, and the operation in those cases is as follows.
Mays si alcus ditz son trincatz, lahoras restaura aquels, e enguala aquels ayssi cum yeu e recomtat a tu en la restauracio dels ditz de la ma.	But if any toe is cracked, then restore it, and wring it in the same way as you were instructed to restore the fingers of the hand.
E aprop pausa al dit trincat stela segon la longitut del dit, e sia pus lada de lu un pauc; e aprop dejos le pe aquesta taula la qual e a tu recomtada, e strenh aquela am strictura decent.	And put a splint on the cracked toe according to its length, and have it slightly higher than the others; then place beneath the foot that board which was recommended to you, and strengthen that by applying pressure with traction.
Mays si aquo que es trincat dels osses so dos o tres o mays, lahoras tu pausa sobre quascun dit astela de la sua quantitat envolopada en drap leon, e strenh la taula en le pus bas del pe, e sia stant sobre la un dels caps de la taula foro le ventre del pe per que la tengua am bona retencio.	But if that which is cracked of the bones is two or three or more, then you put on each toe a splint of its own quantity wrapped in lion's skin, and strengthen the board at the bottom of the foot, and let it stand on one of the edges of the board so that it has good retention.
E es convenient a tu que no oblides que no consideres totas las causas las quals que e ditas a tu en las autras fracturas dels accidentz que havem dit; e opausa te a tot accident am aquo que cove.	And it is convenient for you not to forget that you do not consider all the causes which we have told you about in the other fractures of accidents which we have mentioned; but apply to every accident that which is appropriate.
Capitol .xviii.	Chapter XVIII.
De fractura del conh de la femna e del os del pentenilh e de la vergua del home.	Of the fracture of the bone of the thigh and of the os of the patella and of the pubic bone of a man.
Quan le conh de la femna es trincat, lahoras fay aquela ceser en cezela cayrada, e aprop enclina aquela a la partida del dos un petit, e sia tenguda detras.	When the bone of the thigh is cracked, then make that drop into a small hole, and then tilt it towards the front at the top of the thigh, and let it be held behind.
E aprop la matrona umpla le conh de coto, e sia fayt en le conh de lu ayssi cum spera; e aprop la femna sia concutida, e eleva le dos de lu petit a petit, quar tot aquo es fora-getat entro que sia denant la partida del conh ayssi cum spera e l’os trincat retorna.	And the midwife fills the crotch with cotton, and let it be done in the bone of him just as he hopes; and then let the woman be cut, and elevate the small thigh gradually, for all that is forgotten about when the bone is before the crotch just as he hopes and the cracked bone returns.
E aprop pausa pulvils sobre le dos de lu, e quan vol urinar remaugua le coto am facilitat e aprop urine, e reduzeys e retorna aquel segon la manieyra segon la qual mezist aquel al comensament, e aprop retorne al sieu pulvil primier.	And then put powder on the thigh, and when he wants to urinate, let him move the crotch with ease and urinate, and reduce it and return it according to the manner in which he measured it at the beginning, and then let him return to his first powder.
E fassa ayssi per vii dias o enviro aquels, quar aquel es restaurat.	And do this for seven days or around that, for that is restored.
E si voles, pren una vezica de ovela e strenh sobre le trauc de lu una canula de canavera; e entromet tota la vesica en le conh de lu, e aprop ensuffla en la canula am vertut entro que la vesica sia imflada dedintz le conh, quar la fractura retorna.	And if you want, take an ovine bladder and strengthen it over the fracture with a straw of reed; and insert the whole bladder into his bone, and then inflate the bladder within the bone by breathing through the straw, for the fracture will return.
E aprop sia umplida de coto e estia per alcus dias segon que havem recomtat, entro que sia sanat.	And then let it be filled with cotton and stay like that for a few days as we recommended so that it is healed.
E quan le os del pentenil de home o de femna es trincat, lahoras aministra en la restauracio e agulacio de lu aquo que havem recomtat en l’os del anca.	And when the patellar bone of a man or woman is cracked, then administer in its restoration and piercing what we recommended for the bone of the hip.
E aquo que es dreyt no es occultat en aquestas fracturas proprinquas e que pauc endeveno, majorment ad aquel al qual es alcun studi e us e enten aquest meu libre mot; quar aquela fractura significa a tu en las majors disposicios via dreyturiera en la restauracio e en la strictura de lu, e donc enten be.	And that which is straight is not hidden in these nearby fractures and which hardly happens to anyone, especially to one who has some study and knowledge of this my book; for that fracture indicates to you in the major dispositions the way that is direct in its restoration and in its stricture, and therefore understand well.
Mays en la vergua del home quan es trincada, pren guarguamela de auca, e met la vergua en aquela; e aprop pausa sobre lu envolucio de drap, e sia envolopada, e aprop sia layssada per tres dias o enviro aquels, e sia sanada.	But in the pubic bone of a man when it is cracked, take the membrane of an ox, and put the bone in that; then put on it a covering of linen, and let it be wrapped, and then let it be left for three days or around that, and let it be healed.
Capitol .xix.	Chapter XIX.
De restauracio de fractura dels osses quan es am plagua.	Of the restoration of the bones when they are infected.
Convenient es ad aquel al qual accideys fractura am plagua, e majorment si le os es gran ayssi cum es le os de la cuoyssa o de l’adjutori, o semblant ad aquel, que tu te cuoytes e fleubotomes aquel tantost si las condicios de fleubotomia a tu o testifican ayssi cum desus havem dit.	It is convenient for him to whom a fracture occurs with infection, and especially if the bone is large like that of the thigh or of the adjutor, or similar to that, that you take care and phlebotomize it as soon as the conditions of phlebotomy testify to you as we have said.
E si la plagua eflueys sanc, lahoras cove que tu te coytes a la retencio de lu enayssi que tu polverizes sobre lu zegi trissat, si a tu autra causa no es present.	And if the infection and swelling bleed, then you must take care to retain it in that way as you pulverize over it powdered triphytum, unless another cause is present.
E aprop comensa restaurar la fractura en aquel meteys dia, e no prolongues aquo, si no accideys apostema.	And then begin the restoration of the fracture in that same day, and do not prolong it if there is no infection.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras tu layssa la restauracio de lu entro al ix dia, entro que sia cedat le apostema, e no apropinques a lu en le tertz dia e·l iiii de tot, quar tu faras accidir mals accidentz.	But if an abscess occurs, then you should cease the restoration of it until the ninth day, while the abscess has subsided, and do not approach it on the third day or the fourth of all, for you will cause evil accidents.
Mays si le os trencat es eminent sobre la codena descubert, lahoras cove que te perforses reduzir aquel e engualar aquel am las tuas mas am facilitat e am pauca extencio.	But if the cracked bone is prominent over the exposed tendon, then you must see that you reduce it and wring it with your hands with ease and with little extension.
Mays si extencio no es a tu preparada e la equacio de lu am las tieuas mas, lahoras tu reduzeys aquel am las tuas mas am aquest sturment; e es sturment le qual es fayt de ferr, la longitut del qual es de vii ditz o de viii e la latitut del qual es segon la quantitat de la plagua; e per aquo es necessari al metge que prengua de aquels tres o quatre segon la quantitat que indigeys ad aquo en la curacio en tota specia de fractura.	But if extension is not prepared for you and the position of it with your hands, then you reduce that with your hands with this instrument; and this instrument is made of iron, the length of which is seven or eight digits, and the width according to the amount of the infection; and it is necessary for the physician to take three or four of these according to the amount that he requires for the cure in every kind of fracture.
E sia redon, e sia en lu pauca groceza per so que no sia doblat deves la comprecio sobre aquel en la hora de la operacio.	And let it be round and smooth with little roughness so that it is not bent because of the compression upon that in the hour of operation.
E sia de aguda extremitat al qual sia marge en las sieuas extremitatz; e sia le desus de lu a grossetut tendent, e de la maytat de lu entro a las partidas.	And let it be of acute extremity whose margin is in its extremities; and let the top of it be thick, and the middle of it within the splits.
E aquesta es la forma de lu:	And this is its shape: [illustration]
E es nompnat en grec “labre volentz atelarem”, so es paleta pauca.	And the top of the instrument of iron according to the shape of the bone.
Per que cove que sia pausada la extremitat de lu acuda elevada sobre la extremitat del os eminent.	So that its acute extremity be elevated and placed on the prominent extremity of the bone.
E inpelleys aquel en una veguada entro que retorne le os, e sia engualat am alcuna equacio.	And press it into a slit so that the bone returns, and let it be wrung with some extension.
E donc esforsa te engualar las extremitatz de la fractura entre lor, e si la extremitat de lu trencada es subtil, e no pren aquela le sturment per bona axcepcio, lahoras cove que tu inscidas la extremitat de aquel os entro que l’insturment haja poder de aquo.	And therefore force you to wring the ends of the fracture between them, and if the end of the cracked bone is thin, and it does not take that instrument with good extension, then see that you insert the extremity of that bone so that the instrument has power of that.
Mays si no podes reduzir le os de tot am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras enscideys aquel am aquo que coveneys a lu dels inscizoris les quals havem ditz; o serra aquel am una de las serras en qualque manieyra sia a tu possible.	But if you cannot reduce the bone at all with what we have recommended, then insert it with whatever is convenient to him of the tools of which we have spoken; or saw that with one of the saws in whatever way it is possible for you.
E aprop ratz aquel que roman en le os de asperitat e de scorsas menudas.	And then rub in that which is written on the bones of roughness and minute scars.
E cum le os es reduzit, e aprop la reduccio le malaute atroba dolor vehement ledent, lahoras sapias que le os no es retornat al sieu loc natural; e adonc fay aquo quar tu confereyses al malaute gran juvament.	And when the bone is reduced, and then the patient feels great pain from being bent, then you should know that the bone has not returned to its natural place; and so do that which will bring great relief to the patient.
Cum es complida la tua restauracio la qual fas al os, e lahoras submergeys drap en vi stiptic negre, e propriament si es en estiu, e no pauses sobre la plagua cerot ni autre causa en la qual sia oli, per so que no fassa en lu accidir poyredura e corropcio.	When you have finished the restoration which you do to the bone, then immerse a bandage in black styptic wine, and particularly if it is summer; and do not apply to the wound plaster or any other thing in which there is oil, so that no putrefaction and corruption should arise therein.
E aprop aministra stelas en la hora del tieu compliment de la restauracio de l’os, e layssa la plagua descuberta enayssi que inscidas le trauc am forfexs e uses de envolucios segon la quantitat de la plagua.	And then administer stars in the hour of your completion of the restoration of the bone, and let the wound remain uncovered until you have inserted the splinter with forceps and used bandages according to the amount of the wound.
E guarda te am tota cautela que no strenhas la plagua am la fractura, quar motas veguadas an fayt aquo les fols metges, e fero accidir sobre les sieus malautes mort o malautia corrodent o zuthement, so es sania.	And take all care that you do not tighten the wound with the fracture; for many times foolish doctors have done this and brought about death or illness by corrosion or putrefaction in their patients.
E si la tieua strictura leugiera, molli, diversa de la strictura de las autras fracturas.	And if its tightness is lighter, softer, and different from the tightness of other fractures.
E si la plagua es gran o es plagua mala, e temes sobre aquel alcus accidentz mals les quals havem recomtatz, e atrobas dolor en le loc, lahoras no cove que pauses sobre aquel astelas, mays fay ad aquel envolucio de draps durs en loc de stelas e strenh lu am aquelas.	And if the wound is large or bad, and you fear those evil accidents which we have recounted, and feel pain in the spot, then do not put stars on that, but apply a bandage of tough cloth there instead of stars and tighten it with those.
E cum aprop un dia o dos vezes ja la plagua comensar, que en lu sia engendrat brac, lahoras tu osta desus le drap le qual havias pausat sobre aquel am vi, e aprop aministra calguas, enguentz am les quals de nostra constuma es que mediquem las plaguas, ayssi cum enguentz tetrafarmacon e semblantz ad aquel.	And when about a day or two days have passed and the wound has begun to heal, and pus has been engendered therein, then remove above the bandage which you had applied over that with wine, and then administer poultices, with which according to our custom we medicate wounds, thus with tetrafarmacon and similar things.
E conveneys a tu que deslias le liament e considera la plagua en quascun dia mati e vespre entro que sia consolidada e fermada, e cove que·l membre sia preparat en tal manieyra que la poyredura corra de lu a las partidas dejos am facilitat.	And it is fitting for you to loosen the bandage and consider the wound every day morning and evening until it is consolidated and closed, and that the member be prepared in such a manner that the putrefaction runs from it into the parts below with ease.
si a la plagua passan motz dias, e no es consolidada ni es abscindit de lu le brac, lahoras sapias que aqui so satagias de las petitas per que cove enquieras la plagua am tenta.	If many days have passed and the wound is not consolidated nor has the pus been discharged from it, then know that here are small wounds for which you should probe the wound with a tent.
E de aquelas satagias aquelas que so separadas remau e extratz, aquelas que de lor no so separadas e pongen le membre e fan accidir dolor, perforsa te a inscidir aquelas segon que a tu aquo es possibla.	And of those small wounds those which are separated and removed, those from which the member is not separated and cause pain, pierce these according to what you can do.
E si accideys a la plagua zuchem o eluchen, so es stiomenios, o autra specia de corrupcio e de putrefaccio, lahoras cove que pauses a quada un de aquels am aquo que conveneys a lu de la curacio del qual es precedida narracio en le sieu capitol.	And if pusches or blisters occur to the wound, thus is it a phlegmon, or another kind of corruption and putrefaction; then do for each of these what befits its cure, of which there is description in its chapter.
E de aquo en le qual cove que stia lo mieu sermo e tu fassas present la tua pessa: quan os gros es trincat, emineys sobre le membre ayssi cum le os de la coyssa e del ajutori e semblantz ad aquels dels membres grans, e que no presumas atraccio de lu, ni la extraccio de lu quar motas veguadas accideys per aquo la mort; habantz layssa aquel entro que poyresca, quar fort leu cayra per si aprop xx dias o .xxx.; e lahoras cura la plagua si a tu es vist, e si no layssa aquela.	And of that in which you should place your hope and do for yourself: when a bone is broken, it protrudes over the member thus as the bone of the thigh and of the helper, and likewise of those of the great members; and do not presume to draw it out, nor to extract it, since many times death has occurred thereby; leave that until it putrefies, for often it will fall off by itself after about 20 or 30 days. And then cure the wound if you see it; but if not, leave it.
Capitol .xx.	Chapter .XX.
De la curacio de nodacio que accideys en le vestigi de alcuna fractura.	Of the cure of a nodule which occurs in the track of a fracture.
Motas veguadas accideys aquesta nodacio en le vestigi de sanacio de fractura, e majorment que es prop de las juncturas, e es orrasada per lu la figura del membre; e fort leu prohibeys le membre de la sua operacio natural.	This nodule often occurs in the track of healing of a fracture, and more commonly it is found near joints, and it disfigures the member; and very often it prevents the member from its natural action.
Adonc considera si la nodacio es recent e aministra en aquela medicinas que han stipticat ayssi co es aloen, e enses, e mira, e sercacollo, e acrassia, e semblantz ad aquels; enayssi que prenguas de aquela alcunas o totas, e comfesiys aquelas am vi stiptic, o am album de huou, o am vi agre, e pausa aquela sobre la nodacio en estopa, e constringeys aquelas sobre lu per bona constriccio.	Then consider if the nodule is recent and administer to that medicines which have dried thus as aloe, and fennel, and mithridate, and ser�קק, and acrasium, and similar things; in such a way that you take of those some or all, and apply them to the nodule in a poultice, and bind those around it with good tightness.
E leyssa extrictura que no deslies aquela per motz dias; e aprop deslia aquela e itera autra, entro que sia remauguda la nodacio; o strenh sobre aquela lamina de plom descentment, quar plom ha proprietat de remaure tot aquo que es imflat en les membres.	And let the tightness not be loosened for several days; and then loosen it and repeat another, until the nodule is soaked; or tighten over that a lamina of lead descendingly, since lead has property to soak up all which is swollen in the members.
Mays si nodacio ja es en peyra convertida e streyta es e nessessitat provoca a ostar aquela coytadament, e lahoras scindeys aquela per la partida pus sobirana de lu, e inscideys la superfluitat e eminent, o ratz aquela am alcus rezoris entro que sia remauguda; e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	But if the nodule is already turned to stone and tight, and necessitates causes osting it, then split that through the part which rises above it, and insert the superfluity and prominent, or cut that with some resors within until it is soaked; and cure that within until it is healed.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter .XXI.
De restauracio de fractura quan es restaurada e aprop aquo roman le membre subtil e freul no segon la sieua natura.	Of restoration of a fracture when it is restored and then that occurs to the member subtle and frail, not according to its nature.
Quan fractura de os es restaurada, e aprop aquo roman le membre subtil e freul, lahoras aquo no es fayt sino per motas causas: de las quals la una es multitut de solucio del liament e de la liguacio de lu fayta no segon que cove; o per superfluitat de strictura dels liamentz entro que·l nutriment sia prohibit correr al membre; o per multitut de embrocaccio superflua; o per movement superfluent no en la sua hora; o per pauquesa de sanc en le cors del malaute e per debelitat de lu.	When a bone fracture is restored, and then that occurs to the member subtle and frail, then that is not done except for several causes: one of which is excess of soluation of the ligament and of its binding not according as it should; or by superfluity of tightness of the ligaments within which the nourishment is prohibited from running to the member; or by excess of embrocation superfluous; or by superfluous movement not in its time; or by lack of blood in the body of the patient, and by debility of him.
E curacio de aquo es dar a mengar al malaute e far le cor de lu tendre entro que·l sanc sia multiplicat en lu; e aministra banh; e entromet gaug e leticia sobre lu.	And cure of that is to make the patient eat and to make his heart tender within until the blood is multiplied in him; and then administer a bath, and apply warm water and leechdoms over him.
E aprop pausa pegua sobre le membre, per so que la pegua atire a lu mot nutriment, o continua embrocacio de lu am aygua tebeza, entro que·l nutriment corr e retorne a la sua figura natural.	And then apply plaster over the member, so that the plaster draws to it much nourishment; or continue embrocation of it with lukewarm water, until the nourishment runs and returns to its natural figure.
Capitol .xxii.	Chapter .XXII.
De curacio dels osses trincatz quan so restauratz tortuozament e prohibeys la operacio de lor de aquo que cove.	Of cure of broken bones when they are restored tortuously and prevent the action of them from what should be.
Quan accideys al membre ja restaurat aprop la sanacio de lu de tortuositat e eminencia al os trincat e nodacio, e es per aquo fededa de forma del membre, mays empero le membre no es prohibit de la sieua operacio natural, lahora no cove que tu recipias la paraula de aquel que exsistima aquel membre sia de novel trincat.	When it occurs to the member already restored that in its healing of tortuosity and eminence of the broken bone and nodule, and it is thus deformed in figure of the member; but yet the member is not prohibited from its natural action, then do not receive the word of him who examines that member that it is newly broken.
Mays ja so statz motz fols metges e restauradors les quals han fayt aquo en nostra tera; e aquesta operacio es mot vituperable perduzent a gran temor le senhal de la qual es mortal.	But already there are many foolish doctors and restorers who have done this in our land; and that operation is very blameworthy, presenting great fear the sign of which is mortal.
Mays si claudicacio e nodacio son recentz, lahoras cove que sian enbrocatz am aygua tebeza en la qual so coytas erbas mollificantz, ayssi cum son fuelas de altea e razitz de lu, e mellilot, e semblantz ad aquels; e sia fayt a lu emplastre am emplastre mollificatio ayssi cum dyallaquilon ben fayt; o que sia preza mucillage de razit de altea e sia contucida am gray de gualina o am oli de cirami, e sia emplastrat am aquel; o que sian prezes figuas grassas e sian trissadas am fems de colom, e semblantz ad aquels de las medicinas que son nompnadas amermans consolidacio.	But if the claudication and nodule are recent, then let them be embrocated with lukewarm water in which are infused herbs which soften, thus as the leaves of alder and its bark, and mallow, and similar things; and let a poultice be made on it with mollifying emollient, thus with dill-seed oil well prepared; or that it be smeared with mucilage of alder-bark and let it be bound up with lint of linen, or with oil of ceruse, and let it be plastered with that; or that they are made into fat figures and let them be bound on with woolen threads, and similar things to the medicines which are named amerman's consolidations.
E alcunas vetz es dissolvuda am assidua fricacio leugiera que sia am las mas humidas, e sia administrat movement del membre a tota partida en totas horas.	And sometimes it is dissolved by frequent gentle friction which should be with the moistened hands, and let the member have motion to every part in all hours.
Mays si tortuositat ja es anada denant e es fayta fort e convertida es en peyra e provocada es necessitat a curacio de lu am ferr, lahoras cove que sia le pus desus cecsat e la continuacio del os sia dissolvut, e sia inscidit aquo que superflueys de nodacio de aquel meteys am le os am inscissoris subtils, e sia aministrada facilitat en aquel am sollicitut e studi.	But if the tortuosity is increased before and is made strong and turned to stone, and necessitates cure of it with iron, then let the pus be above dried up and the continuity of the bone be dissolved, and that which superabounds of nodule of that members by means of subtle instruments, and let facility be administered in that by solicitude and study.
Capitol .xxiii.	Chapter 23.
De sermo en dislocacio.	Of speech in dislocation.
Dislocacio es eyssiment de alcuna de las juncturas del sieu loc, per que es prohibida de movement, e es orrezada la figura del membre, e fa venir sobre le malaute dolors e lesios grans.	Dislocation is the displacement of one of the joints of its place, by which it is prohibited from moving, and the shape of the member is distorted, and it causes great pain and injuries to the patient.
Donc quan accideys ad alcu dislocacio, lahoras cove tantost perforsar que sia reduzit, e no tarde aquela reduzir, quar si es tardada, le loc es apostemat e fort leu am aquo es fayta dificil la reduccio de dislocaccio.	Therefore, when dislocation occurs, one should immediately attempt to reduce it and not delay in doing so, for if it is delayed, the place will become inflamed and much more difficult to reduce.
E per aysso no cove que sia maugut ni stendut en la hora de la apostemacio, quar motas veguadas fa venir spasme e dolors ledentz.	And for this reason, one should not allow the patient to be angry or tense during the inflammation, for many times it causes spasms and pain.
Mays quan aquo accideys, lahoras cove que tu te coytes a la flaubotomia del malaute, e aprop sia layssat entro que repause le apostema; e aprop le membre sia embrocat am aygua cauda e oli, e aprop sia reduzit am facilitat.	But when this happens, one should apply the flebotomy to the patient's body, and let him lie down so that he may rest the inflammation; and the member should be rubbed with warm water and oil, and then reduced with ease.
E tot membre sia curat am aquo del qual la rememoracio vindra en son loc.	And every member should be cured with that which will bring memory back to its place.
E yeu ja e ordenatz les capitols de dislocacio segon que es precedit en fractura; de la partida del cos pus sobirana entro a la partida pus dejos.	And now I have arranged the chapters on dislocation according to what is preceded in fracture: from the upper part of the body to the lower.
Capitol .xxiiii.	Chapter 24.
De curacio de dislocacio de la mandibula dejos.	Of the cure for the dislocation of the lower jaw.
So dislocadas las doas mandibulas si no tart; e la dislocacio de amdos es fayta segon una de dos manieyras: que o son remaugudas de lurs locs per pauca remocio, e so mollificadas un petit; o so dislocadas per entiera dislocacio e complida, entro que sian mollificadas a la partida de la junctura entro que corro saliva del malaute e que no puesca tenir aquela ni puesca claure la sua boca, e la lengua de lu sia envolopada en sa paraula.	So dislocated are the two jaws if they do not grind; and the dislocation of both is done in one of two ways: either they are pushed out of their places by a little movement and are slightly softened, or they are completely dislocated and filled out, so that they are softened at the joint where saliva flows from the patient's mouth and he cannot hold it closed nor can he close his mouth, and his tongue is wrapped in his speech.
Mays quan la dislocacio de lu es pauca, lahoras en las majors disposicios retorna per si an pauca causa.	But when the dislocation of him is little, then in the major dispositions it returns by itself for a little cause.
Mays si la dislocacio es entiera e complida, lahoras cove que sia administrada reduccio de lu leugierament, e no sia tardada de tot.	But if the dislocation is entire and complete, then it must be administered reduction of him quickly, and not delayed at all.
E es que·l ministre tengua le cap del malaute, e entrometa lo metge le dit pous de la una sieua ma en la razit de la dislocacio de la mandibula dedintz la boca de lu, si la dislocacio es de la una part; o que entrometa les sieus dos pouzes ensemps, si la dislocacio es de doas partz, e les autres ditz de las mas de lu sian defora am les quals enguale; e comanda al malaute que cesse las suas mandibulas e absolva aquelas anar de quascuna partida; e le metge engualhe la mandibula e enpellisca la mandibula entro que retorne al sieu loc.	And it is that the minister hold the patient's head, and the doctor put his finger of one hand into the root of the dislocation of the jaw within the patient's mouth if the dislocation is on one side; or he puts his two fingers together, if the dislocation is on both sides, and the other fingers outside with which he grips; and he commands the patient to stop his jaws and relax those from any side; and the doctor grips the jaw and slides it back into its place.
E si dificil es la reducio de lu, e majorment si amdos las mandibulas so essemps dislocadas, lahoras aministra evoporacio am aygua cauda e oli, entro que sia fayta leugiera la reduccio de amdos e no tardes la reduccio de amdos de tot, ayssi quo havem dit.	And if the reduction is difficult for him, and especially if both jaws are completely dislocated, then administer evaporation with warm water and oil, so that the reduction of both is made easier and do not delay the reduction of both at all, as we have said.
E donc cum retornam e so engualadas, e es clausa la boca del malaute e no es mollificada, lahoras pausa sobre aquelas polvils de drap am cerot, e sia fayt de cera e oli rozat; e aprop sia liat am facilitat am liamens mols.	And so when they return and are gripped, and the patient's mouth is closed and not softened, then pause upon it powdery linen with cerotum, and let it be made of wax and rozated oil; and then bind it with ease with mild ligatures.
E sia le dormir del malaute sobre le sieu dos, e·l cap de lu sia stant entre dos aurelhes, per so que no maugue aquel a la partida dreyta ni a la sinistra; e no li fassas per forsa masteguar alcuna causa; habans la sieua vianda sia forbicio leon, entro que quan las dolors sian remaugudas e las mandibulas so nozadas, lahoras maugue aquo que vol.	And let the patient sleep on his back, and his head be standing between two pillows, so that he does not grind to the right or left; and do not force him for any cause to chew anything; let his food be lean meat, so that when the pains are pushed back and the jaws are numbed, then he may chew what he will.
E aquo sia aministrat am facilita, e no trebalhe sobre la apercio de la boca deves la comestio e beure e ocitatio, entro que la mandibula sia nozada e sanada.	And that should be administered with ease, and do not work on the opening of the mouth after eating and drinking and waking, so that the jaw is numbed and healed.
E si es dificil la reduccio de duas mandibulas quan so dislocadas en alcuna hora e no so convertidas als lors locs, lahoras motas veguadas accideysso febres e soda assidua, e fort leu es alerguat le ventre del malaute, e fort leu e vomeys colera pura.	And if the reduction of two jaws is difficult when they are dislocated at any time and not returned to their places, then many times it happens that fever and constant soddeness occur, and very often the patient's belly is irritated, and very often he vomits pure cholera.
E quan tu vezes aquo, lahoras sapias que es perdicio; e motas veguadas mor aquel al qual accideys aquo en x dias.	And when you see this, then know that it is perilous; and many times he dies who experiences this within seven days.
Capitol .xxv.	Chapter 25.
De reduccio de la dislocacio de la furcula e de la extremitat del muscle.	Of the reduction of the dislocation of the collarbone and of the extremity of the muscle.
Furcula no es dislocada del latz dedintz per la sua continuacio am le pietz; e alcunas veguadas es dislocada a la partida defora, e aquo es declarat al sentiment.	The collarbone is not dislocated from within through its continuation with the shoulder; and sometimes it is dislocated outward at its outer end, and that is declared by feeling.
E la restauracio de lu es que·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu dos e extenda les sieus brasses.	And the restoration of it is that the patient holds his head down and extends his arms.
E aprop coarta le loc am la tua palma am fort coartacio, quar ela retornara.	And then grip the place with your palm with strong compression, for it will return.
E aprop pausa sobre aquela emplastre e pulvils e strenh aquela.	And then pause upon it plaster and powdery linen and strengthen that.
Mays la extremitat de aquel que siec le coyde e·s continuat am aquel, no es dislocada en alcun dia; lahoras cove que sia reduzida e engualhada segon que havem dit e segon que es a tu aparelhat.	But the extremity of that which has its head and is continued with that, is not dislocated on any day; then it must be reduced and gripped according to what we have said and according to what your apparatus is prepared.
E aprop pausa sobre aquela emplastre, e pulvils, e extrictura, e comanda al malaute adherir a trenquilitat e a repaus entro que sia sanat.	And then pause upon it plaster and powdery linen and compression, and command the patient to adhere to tranquility and rest until he is healed.
E am aquesta meteyssa curacio es reduzida la extremita del muscle quan es separada del sieu loc.	And with this medicine the extremity of the muscle is reduced when it is separated from its place.
Capitol .xxvi.	Chapter 26.
De la reduccio de la dislocacio del muscle.	Of the reduction of the dislocation of the muscle.
Sapias que·l muscle no es dislocat sino segon tres manieras, de las quals es la una que sia dislocat a la partida del titillic a la partida dejos.	Know that the muscle is not dislocated except in three ways, of which one is that it is dislocated at the end of the tendon at the lower part.
E la segonda es que sia dislocat a la partida desus del muscle, e aquo es fayt tart; e no es dislocat a las partidas detras per la spalla; e no es dislocat a las partidas denant per les nervis.	And the second is that it is dislocated at the upper part of the muscle, and that is done quickly; and it is not dislocated at the sides behind the shoulder; and it is not dislocated at the front by the nerves.
E majorment es dislocat e defora eyssit a las partidas dejos deves le titillic, e majorment en aquels dels quals las carns son paucas, leugierament es dislocat; mays en aquels en les quals so motas carns, es eyssit fora am dificultat.	And mostly it is dislocated and outside at the lower parts after the tendon, and mostly in those of which there are few meats, it is dislocated quickly; but in those in which there are many meats, it is pushed out with difficulty.
E fort leu accideys ad alcus homes percussio o cazement, e le muscle de lu es apostemat de apostema caut, e es cujat per aquo que ja sia dislocat.	And soon after some men experience impact or injury, and their muscles become inflamed with an inflammatory swelling, and are believed to be dislocated by this.
Adonc cove que tu sproes aquo entro que estias sobre-sertetut de lu, e lahoras procesiscas en la curacio de lu.	Then when you examine him lying on his back, and then proceed with the treatment for him.
E es conoguda la dislocacio de lu quan es a las partidas dejos deves le titillic; per so que distingescas entre le muscle dislocat e·l muscle sa, quar tu atrobas entre aquels diversitat manifesta; e atrobas en le cap del muscle concavitat e dejos le titillic deves le tocament del cap del muscle ayssi quo un huou, e al malaute no pot redusir la sua ma a la sieua aurelha, ni maure aquela per totz movementz.	And you know that the dislocation is in the limbs when, after you touch it, it feels ticklish; so that you distinguish between the dislocated muscle and the healthy one, for you will find a clear difference between them; and you will find a hollow in the head of the dislocated muscle and it feels ticklish when you touch its head like an egg, and the patient cannot bring his hand to his ear on that side, nor move it at all.
Si es dislocat deves le pietz o ensus, e tu lahoras atrobas manifest tocament, e no es amaguat.	If it is dislocated in the foot or ankle and you feel this clearly by touching, and it isn't hidden.
E de aquesta dislocacio es fayta leugiera reduccio quan es fresca e le malaute es enfant.	And this dislocation has an easier reduction when it is fresh and the patient is a child.
E la reduccio de lu es que·l ministre eleva la ma de lu a las partidas desus; e aprop pause les tieus pouses dejos le titillic de lu, e eleva la junctura am fortaleza en sus al sieu loc, e·l ministre eleva la ma de lu, e extenda aquela en sus; e aprop pausa aquela dejos quar ela retorna leugierament.	And the reduction of it is that the minister raises the patient's hand above him; and he places his fingers below the ticklish spot, and lifts the joint with strength to its place, and the minister raises the patient's hand, and stretches it above, and he places it below because it returns more easily.
Mays si per aquo que havem dit no retorna, e so del comensament que accidic la dislocacio, motz dias, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia banhat en aygua cauda e sia aministrada enbrocacio que mollifique e liniesca ayssi cum si so coytz razitz de altea, e fenugrec, e melillot en aygua, e sia administrada.	But if it doesn't return after what we've said, and so from the beginning that the dislocation occurred, many days later, then the patient should be bathed in warm water and a poultice should be administered to soften and open it as if his feet were frostbitten, with aniseed, fenugreek, and mallows in water, and it is applied.
E aprop le malaute sia ressupinat sobre le sieu dos e sia pausat dejos le titillic de lu espera de lana que sia engual entre levitat e strictura, e aprop le metge pause le sieu talo sobre la spera, e eleva le cap del muscle am vertut, e atire la ma del malaute per que no sia mauguda a las partidas dejos, e autre ministre tengua le cap del malaute, que no sia maugut a las partidas dejos, quar aquela tantost retorna al sieu loc.	And then the patient should be laid on his back and placed below the ticklish spot he should have a pad of wool that is halfway between being loose and tight, and then the doctor puts his heel on the sphere, and lifts the head of the muscle with strength, and pulls the patient's hand so that it isn' t pulled to the sides, and another minister holds the head of the patient so that it isn't pulled to the sides, for then it will return to its place immediately.
E si voles, reduzeys aquel segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu fassas esser prezent un home le qual sia pus lonc que·l malaute, e estia de la part de aquel latz, e entrometa le sieu muscle dejos le titillic del malaute e eleve le titillic de lu a las partidas desus entro que·l malaute sia suspendut en ayre, e autre ministre tire la ma del malaute de las partidas dejos del sieu ventre.	And if you want, reduce it in this way: and it is that you have a man present who is taller than the patient, and he stands on that side, and inserts his finger below the ticklish spot of the patient and lifts the ticklish spot of him to the sides above while the patient is suspended in air, and another minister pulls the patient's hand from the sides of his belly.
Mays si le malaute es leugier, lahoras cove que am lu que autre causa sia suspenduda, per so que grave aquel, quar la dislocacio retorna tantost.	But if the patient is light, then it should be suspended by another cause, to weigh it down, for the dislocation returns immediately.
E es reduzit eysament segon autra manieyra: e es que sia ficat en terra un fust lonc le cap del qual sia redon de figura, ayssi cum pilo de mortier, que no sia gros ni subtil, e aprop sia pausat dejos le malaute; pus que so pausatz sobre·l cap del fust draps leons, e·l malaute sia stant segon la longitut del fust, e aprop sia extenduda la ma de lu a las partidas dejos del autra part; e sia extendut le cos de lu del autre part am fortaleza, quar la junctura retorna al sieu loc am velocitat.	And it is reduced in the same way: and it is that a long pole is placed on the ground, the tip of which is round in shape, like mortar, neither thick nor thin, and then the patient is placed below it; after he's placed on top of the tip of the pole, linen sheets, and the patient stands according to the length of the pole, and then his hand is stretched to the sides from the other side with strength, for the joint returns to its place quickly.
E si es dificil reduccio de lu per totas las causas que havem ditas, lahoras usa de aquesta cura: e es que tu prenguas un fust la quantitat del qual sia en le lonc de dos brasses, e latitut de aquel sia de quatre ditz, e la grossetut de lu sia aleujat en le preon del tittilic segon aquesta forma:	And if it is difficult to reduce it for all the causes we' ve said, then use this treatment: and it is that you take a pole whose length is two yards, and its width is four digits, and its thickness is removed according to the size of the ticklish spot in this way:
E aprop sobre le cap redon sian liatz drap leons per so que·l fust no ledesca le malaute.	And then on the round tip are tied linen sheets so that the patient doesn' t slide down the pole.
E aprop sia pausat dejos le titillic del malaute, e sia extenduda la ma o le bras sobre·l fust entro a las partidas dejos, e sia liat le fust sobre le adjutori e le bras e la extremitat de la ma.	And then the ticklish spot of the patient is placed below it, and his hand or arm is stretched above the pole to the sides, and the pole is tied over the assistant's shoulder and arm and the end of his hand.
Aprop sia pausat le bras sobre un scalo de scala segon la latitut, e la ma sia extenduda a las partidas dejos, e l’autre cos sia suspendut de l’autre part, quar la junctura intra tantost.	Then the arm is placed over a rung of a ladder according to its width, and his hand is stretched to the sides, and his other body is suspended on the other side, for the joint enters immediately.
E cum le intrament de lu es complit segon quascuna maniera que es a tu possibla, e lahoras cove que tu pauses dejos le titillic spera de lana de engual quantitat; e aprop pauza emplastre perparat de polvera de moli am enses e album de huou sobre tot le muscle, ayssi quo es revolvut desus, e aprop strenh dejos le titillic am strictura decent; e le liament sia revolvut sobre le emplastre, e la ma de lu sia annectida al col de lu, e sia leyssat, e no sia mauguda la ma de lu per vii dias.	And when the treatment of it is completed according to any manner that is possible for you, and then you place below the ticklish spot a pad of wool in equal quantity; and then apply a plaster prepared from ground moly with egg white over all the muscle, as if it were rolled over it, and then tightly press down on the ticklish spot with decent pressure; and the bandage is rolled over the plaster, and his hand is attached to his neck, and he is left for seven days, and his hand is not pulled.
E cove que sia pausada la vianda del malaute pauca, entro que·l membre sia confortat, quar es pus leugier a la sanacio de lu.	And it should be abstained from food for a little while, so that the limb is more comfortable, for it is easier to heal.
E aprop la vianda sia donada major aprop vii o v e sia exercitat un movement; e donc si es fermat e no es mollificat, lahoras ja es sanat.	And then food should be given more frequently, and exercise should be done, and if it is firm and not softened, then it is healed.
Mays si la junctura es dislocada motas veguadas per humiditat que accideys a lu o per autra causa, lahoras cove que en aquela sia administrat cauteri am tres traucs, segon que denant es dit en le capitol de cauteri.	But if the joint is dislocated many times due to moisture that occurs with it or for another cause, then cauterization should be done in three spots, as mentioned earlier in the chapter on cauterization.
E si tot aysso es fayt e aprop vii dias es desliat le liament e la junctura no es fermada, e le emplastre e la strictura son reduzitz sobre lu alcunas veguadas, e no es fermada e catz e no pot elevar aquel bras a las partidas desus, lahoras sapias que·ls nervis de lu, les quals so al cap del muscle, ja so inscizes o extendutz o mollificatz, e sapia que la junctura nul temps no sira ficada en loc sieu.	And if all of that is done and then seven days later the bandage is removed and the joint isn' t firm, and the plaster and pressure are reduced on it several times, and it isn' t firm, and there are cat bites and he can't lift his arm to the sides above him, then know that its nerves, which are at the head of the muscle, are cut or stretched or softened, and know that the joint will never be placed in its place.
De la dislocacio de aquela qu’es fayta deves le pietz e la mamilha o las partidas detras, la reduccio es fayta am impulcio e extencio am las mas, entro que retorne.	The reduction of that which is dislocated at the foot and ankle, and behind, is done with pushing and stretching by hands, so that it returns.
E sia administrada en aquela l’autra strictura, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	And then the other pressure is administered on it, and that treatment within so that it is healed.
E si accideys aprop la sanacio gravitat en le membre e tarditat en le movement de lu, lahoras le malaute uze de banh motas veguadas entro que aquela gravitat sia alleujada e que retorne a la natura de lu primiera.	And if after the healing, gravity increases on the limb and delay in its movement, then the patient should use a bath several times so that the gravity is lessened and it returns to its first nature.
Capitol .xxvii.	Chapter 27.
De curacio de dislocacio del coyde.	On the treatment of dislocation of the elbow.
Sapias que la junctura del coyde es dislocada am difficultat e semblantment retorna am difficultat; e aquela es dislocada a totas partidas, e majorment a la partida denant a la partida detras, e la dislocacio de lu no es amaguada a tu quar es cazent dejos le vezement o dejos le tocament segon qualque figura sia dislocat, e quan ajustes le coyde disloguat am le sa, aquo es a tu declarat manifestament, quar la junctura es concavada e no pot doblar le bras, ni tocar am aquel le sieu muscle.	Know that the elbow joint is dislocated with difficulty and returns with difficulty; and it is dislocated to all sides, and most to the front side from the back side, and its dislocation is not hidden from you because when you bend the elbow outward or downward according to whatever shape it is dislocated in, if you adjust it, then it is clearly declared to you that the joint is concaved and can't bend the arm, nor touch with it his muscle.
E cove que·t coytes, e reduzescas la dislocacio tantost denant que vengua a lu apostema caut, quar si ve a lu apostema caut, dificil es la reduccio de lu, e fort leu no es sanat de tot; e majorment quan es a las partidas detras, quar pus mala es de totas las autras specias de dislocacio, e de major dolor, e motas veguadas deyssen am aquela la mort.	And know that if you bend your elbow and reduce the dislocation immediately before it comes to an inflammatory swelling, for if it comes to an inflammatory swelling, it is difficult to reduce, and very quickly it isn' t healed at all; and especially when it is behind, for it is worse than any other kind of dislocation, and most painful, and often results in death.
E la restauracio de lu, quan es aquela que es possibla reduzir, es que la ma de lu sia extenduda am doas mas, e le bras de lu sia expandut, e las mas del metge sian sobre le coyde e dejos lu, e el empellisca la junctura am les pouzes de las suas mas ensemps, o am la razit de la sua palma entro que torne en son loc.	And its restoration, when it is possible to reduce, is that his hand be stretched by two men, and his arm spread out, and the hands of the doctor are on the elbow and below him, and he pushes the joint with the tips of his fingers of his hands inwards, or with the edge of his palm so that it returns to its place.
Mays si la dislocacio es a las partidas denant, lahoras retorna ayssi que dobla la ma am la sua ma, entro que percuta le coyde am la razit de la sua palma.	But if the dislocation is at the front side, then it returns as he bends his hand with his hand, so that he pierces the elbow with the edge of his palm.
E si la dislocacio no obezeys a la reduccio, lahoras aministra vehement extencio e mot fort.	If the dislocation does not obey reduction, then administer violent extension and strong motion.
E es que dos ministres extendan le bras, e tenguan aquel eyssament dos ministres per so que no sia remaugut deves la extencio.	Two ministers should extend the arm, and two ministers should hold that joint so that it is not twisted during extension.
E aprop sia revolvut le bras deves tota part, pus que es envolopat drap doblat lonc sobre la ma de lu, o liament.	Then the arm should be rotated all around, since it is wrapped in a long folded cloth on their hand or ligament.
E quant le metge toca la junctura am la sua ma, unte aquela am alcun oli per so que aquo sia aquelas causas las quals ajudan en lubricitat de la junctura am facilitat; e aprop empellesca la junctura am empulcio vehement entro que retorne.	And when the doctor touches the joint with his hand, he should anoint it with some oil so that it is made smooth by the cause that helps in lubricating the joint with ease; and then forcefully push the joint until it returns to its place.
E aprop la reduccio de lu cove que sia pausat sobre aquela empastre en le qual sia stipticitat e excequacio am album de huou, e sia extrenhut am strictura descent, e·l bras sia suspendut del col, e sia layssat per alcus dias.	And then the reduction of it should be stopped on that plaster in which it was stipitated and exequated with white egg, and tightened with a decent bandage, and the arm suspended from the neck, and left for several days.
E aprop sia desliat; e donc si la junctura es formada en le sieu loc, lahoras tu deslia le liament de lu e layssa aquela.	And then it should be released; and therefore if the joint is formed in its place, then you should release the ligament of it and leave that.
E si vezas la junctura no be strenher, lahoras tu itera le emplastre e·l liament, e layssa aquela per alcus dias entro que sia extrenhuda; e aprop deslia aquela.	And if you see the joint is not stronger, then you should iterate the plaster and the ligament, and leave that for several days while it is tightened; and then release that.
Mays si accideys a lu gravitat aprop la reduccio de la junctura, e la disposicio de lu es en movement, lahoras aministra humectacio en banh e fricacio subtil, e comprecio, entro que sia aleujat; o pausa sobre la junctura aleliati, so es coyssa de moto grassa; e aprop sia liada, e layssa aquela sobre le os le dia e la nueyt.	But if there is a great difficulty in reducing the joint and its disposition is in motion, then administer moistening in bath and subtle friction, and compression while it is elevated; or pause over the joint all-night, since it is a place of quick movement; and then let it be bound, and leave that over the bone for the day and night.
E aprop osta aquela, e met aquel en banh; e quan suza, lahoras tu fregua la junctura am fricacio temprada, e aprop itera sobre aquela aleliati, so es ronhonal de moto, una veguada, e la segonda, e la .iii.a.,	And then stop that, and put that person in a bath; and when he is sweat, then you should rub the joint with temperate friction, and then iterate over that all-night, since it is rosemary of quick movement, one time, and the second, and the third.
corrupcio ja es pervenguda sobre le denolam intrament de banh, entro que sia linit.	Corruption has already occurred in the innermost lining of the brain, where there is a membrane.
E si voles, pausa sobre aquela fenda de vaca humida e scalfada am boder e stren sobre aquel; e fay aquo alcunas veguadas, quar aquela es humida e reduzeys a la sua disposicio.	And if you want, pause over that cow's udder that is wet and heated with a bowl and stretched over that; and do that several times, because that is wet and reduced to its disposition.
Capitol .xxviii.	Chapter .XXVIII.
De curacio de dislocacio de malassen, so es de la junctura que es entre·l bras e la ma.	Of cure for dislocation of the malasse, which is of the joint that is between the arm and the hand.
Malassen de la ma alcunas vetz es deslocada, e la reduccio de la dislocacio de lu es leugiera, e·l contrari es de las autras juncturas, mays empero cove que sia velocitat en la reduccio de lu en la hora en la qual es deslocada, denant que le loc sia apostemat o que accida en lu apostema caut.	Malasse of the hand sometimes is displaced, and the reduction of its dislocation is easy, and the contrary is of the other joints, but however there must be swiftness in the reduction of it in the hour in which it is displaced, lest that the place be apostoematized or that apostemation occur in it.
E la reduccio de la dislocacio de lu es que tu pauses la junctura de la ma del malaute sobre una taula e le ministre extenda la ma de aquel, e le metge pause la sua ma o o la sua palma sobre la iminencia de la junctura, e empellisca aquela entro que retorne al sieu loc.	And the reduction of its dislocation is that you place the joint of the hand of the patient on a table and the minister extends the hand of that one, and the doctor places his hand or the palm of his hand over the eminence of the joint, and pushes it back into its place.
Mays empero cove que sia considerat si la palma ja es ostada al ventre de la ma, lahoras le malaute pause le dos de la sua ma sobre una taula deves la extencio e la reduccio; e si la dislocacio es precedent deves le dos de la ma, lahoras sia la posicio de la ma de aquel intrinicequement sobre la taula, per so que la ma del metge caja sobre aquela iminencia de la junctura.	But however one must consider if the palm is already extended to the belly of the hand, then the patient places the back of his hand on a table against extension and reduction; and if the dislocation is previous to the back of the hand, then let the position of the hand of that one be intrinically over the table, so that the hand of the doctor presses over that eminence of the joint.
E donc si retorna tantost, bon es; e sino, lahoras strenh aquela am empastre cedant le apostema e layssa aquel; e no iteres aquo, quar sino, no soferta ni no podes sobre la reduccio de lu pus que passan a lu dias.	And therefore if it returns immediately, then it is good; but if not, then strengthen that with plaster yielding to apostemation and leave that; and do not iterate that, for unless one passes several days on the reduction of it.
Mays empero la junctura roman segon la sua tortuositat; e no notz al malaute alcuna causa, sino que la ma es mollificada e no pot strenher alcuna causa; lahoras sapias que les nervis son trincatz o trissatz, e lahoras no es engen en lu sino que sia strenhuda am cauteri prop le cazament de lu e fort leu aquo confereys alcuna causa.	But however the joint is bent according to its tortuosity; and not know the patient any cause except that the hand is weakened and can't strengthen any cause; then you should know that the nerves are cut or torn, and then there is no use in it except that it be strengthened with cautery near the break of it and strongly do that some cause.
Donc cum malassem es retornada, lahoras pausa sobre lu empastre le qual havem recomtat, e sia layssat e strenhut per v dias; e aprop sia desliat e sia layssat e la ma de lu sia excercitada.	Therefore when the malasse is returned, then pause over it plaster which we have recommended, and let it be left and bound for 5 days; and then let it be released and let his hand be exercised.
Mays si le movement de lu es ostat e accideys en lu alcuna gravitat, lahoras leniys aquela am aygua cauda e am fricacio alcunas veguadas, entro que sia alleujat.	But if the movement of it is hindered and any difficulty occurs in it, then moisten that with warm water and with friction several times, while it is elevated.
Capitol .xxix.	Chapter .XXIX.
De la curacio de dislocacio dels ditz.	Of the cure for dislocation of the fingers.
Alcunas veguadas so dislocatz les ditz a tota partida.	Sometimes the fingers are dislocated completely apart.
E quan es dislocat alcun dit de aquels al dos de la palma o al ventre de lu, lahoras sten le dit e impelleys la dislocacio de lu am les tieus pouses, entro que retorne.	And when any of those fingers is dislocated from the back of the palm or from its belly, then stretch the finger and push the dislocation of it with your fingers, while it returns to its place.
E aprop sostenta le cap del dit, e suspen aquel deves la part a la qual es dislocat, e layssa aquel per dos dias.	And then hold the tip of the finger, and suspend that from the part to which it is dislocated, and leave that for two days.
E aprop suspen aquel e exten aquel entro que dreyt sia engualhat en aquel sieu dia.	And then suspend that and extend that until straight while it is greased in that its day.
E quan sira noyt, lia aquel segon aquela narracio, e no cesses desliar aquel en le dia e exercitar am movement, e lia aquel en la noyt; e fay aquo per alcus dias entro que sia streyt.	And when evening comes, loosen that according to that narration, and do not stop releasing that in the day and exercising with movement, and loosen that at night; and do that for several days until it is tight.
E fay semblant am aquo, si es dislocat al ventre de la ma, e lia aquel ad aquela partida e fay am aquo la tieua primiera operacio, entro que sia sanat.	And make it seem like that if it is dislocated from the belly of the hand, and loosen that to that part and do with that the first operation, while it is healed.
E semblantment fay am aquo quan es dislocat a las autres partidas.	And similarly do with that when it is dislocated at the other parts.
Capitol .xxx.	Chapter .XXX.
De la curacio de dislocacio dels spondils del dos.	Of the cure for dislocation of the spine of the shoulder.
Quan accideys ad alcun dels spondils del dos o del col dislocacio complida, e so remaugutz motz spondils de lors locs, lahoras en aquela no es curacio, quar la mort se coyta al malaute.	When it occurs to any of the spine of the shoulder or neck complete dislocation and only the spines remain in their places, then there is no cure in that, because death approaches the patient.
E senhal de aquo es que la egestio del malaute es fora-eyssida ses voluntat, e no pot retenir aquela; e motas veguadas so mollificatz alcus membres de lu o doas cambas de lu o dos brasses de lu, o un de aquels; o es remaugut un spondil de son loc, quar motas veguadas es remaugut e motas veguadas es fayta la remocio de aquels a quatre partidas.	And sign of that is that the excretion of the patient is outside without his will, and he can't retain that; and sometimes some members of him are weakened or two arms or two legs, or one of those; or it is weakened one spine from its place, because sometimes it is weakened and sometimes the removal of those is to four parts.
Donc aquela ja es remauguda a las partidas detras e es nompnada gelbozitat.	Then that is already weakened at the back parts and is named dislocation.
Mays la curacio de lu es que lahoras consideras si la gelbozitat accidey de puerissia, quar lahoras en aquela no es curacio ni de aquela no es sanacio de tot.	But the cure of it is that you consider if the dislocation occurs from puerperal fever, because then in that there is no cure nor of that there is healing of all.
Mays en aquela que ve per cazement o per percussio o per semblant ad aquels, ja diyssero les Antics las manieras de curacio am sermo prolixs, del qual lo mays retorna am profieyt; mays yeu ja e abreujat de aquel del qual lo pauc escusa del trop de lu, per la mieua propinquitat a la entencio mieua exposicio, am la qual he aquo expausat et format ex instrument divers de aquel am le qual mostrero aquo e espausero aquel.	But in that which comes from settlement or from percussion or similarly to those, the Ancients already stated their ways of cure with prolix speech, of which the most returns with profit; but I and abbreviated that which is not excused by the amount of it, because of its proximity to my intention expose, I have expounded and formed that with diverse instrument from that by which I showed that.
E dic que en gelbosita que accideys de la partida denant en le pietz, no es engen ni sanacio de aquela; e semblantment en aquela que es fayta a dos latz.	And I say that in dislocation that occurs from the front part in the feet, there is no use nor healing of that; and similarly in that which is made to two sides.
E de aquelas no es curada sino aquela que accideys en le dos propriament am aquo que yeu recomti.	And those are not healed except that which occurs in the shoulder properly by that I recommend.
E es que·l malaute sia extendut sobre la sua cara sobre pug engual prop de paret, e sia extendut dejos lu esturment molh per so que no sia lidit le pietz de lu.	And it is that the patient is extended over his face on the ground, and is extended under him instrument moist so that he isn't stretched the feet of him.
E aprop un fust dreyt sia pausat, ficat en la terra en la extremitat del pug entorn le cap de lu, e autra fust en aviro les pes de lu en l’autra extremitat del pueg.	And then a straight staff is placed, fixed in the ground at the end of the wall around the head of him, and another staff in air under his feet at the other extremity of the wall.
E·l ministre tengua le fust, e no sia fermat en fossa; e autre ministre tengua l’autre segon aquela forma.	And the minister holds the staff, and it is not stopped in a pit; and another minister holds the other according to that form.
E aprop envolopa sobre le cap del malaute e dejos les titillic liamen leon ferm; e exten la extremitat del liamel al fust le qual es deves le cap de lu, e lia aquel en lu; e aprop strenh l’autre liament sobre las ancas de lu les denols de lu, e deves las cambas de lu; e aprop ajusta totz les liamentz e lia aquels en l’autre fust le qual es deves les pes de lu.	And then wrap a bandage around the patient's head and let the servants pull firmly on it; and extend the end of the bandage to the staff, which is placed behind the patient's head, and tie that around him; and then tighten the other bandage around his hips and the servants' hands, and tie those around his legs; and then adjust all the bandages and tie them to the other staff, which is placed by his feet.
E aprop le ministre cascu extenda le liament a la partida del fust, e no sian remaugutz les dos fustz e les liamentz dels sieus locs en les quals son ficatz, mays empero no so fermatz ayssi cum havem dit.	And then each servant should extend the bandage to the end of the staff, and the two staffs and the bandages in their places where they are tied should not be loosen, but rather tightened as we have said.
E le metge pause las suas palmas sobre le spondil am fortaleza entro que retorne, o que pause sobre aquela una taula, e aprop que ajuste sobre la taula les sieus pes entro que retorne.	And the doctor should place his palms on the patient's spine and press firmly down as he returns, or he may also lie on a table with his feet elevated above him.
Mays si no retorna per aquesta forma, lahoras pren una taula de la qual la latitut o la longitut sia en aviro de tres brassas, e cava en la paret de la qual havem dit que es prop le malaute un loc en le qual intre la extremitat de la taula.	But if he does not return in this way, then take a table whose length and breadth is about three yards, and cut into the wall near where we said the patient was lying, a space big enough for the end of the table to fit through.
E aprop pausa la maytat de la taula sobre le spondilh, e·l metge pause les sieus pes sobre l’autre extremitat, e estrenha be entro que le spondil sia coartat e que retorne al sieu loc.	Then place half of the table on the patient's spine, and have the doctor stand on the other end, and press firmly down as the spine is straightened and forced back into its proper place.
E si tu voles, obre am torn le qual es revolvut am la ma; e es que tu fiques en terra deves le cap del malaute en le derier del pug dos fustz, la longitut dels quals sia d’un bras, e deves le cap de lu en le derier del pug eyssament dos fustz; e sia la longitut que es entre quascun fust un palm, e ja es fayt en quascun fust trauc en le qual corr torn, e quascun sia mot fermat en terra per so que no sia maugut.	And if you wish, open the turn which is wound around his hand; and then place on the ground in front of the patient's head, two staffs whose length is about one yard, and in front of his head, another two staffs, so that there is a palm' s distance between each staff; and there should be a cut in each staff through which a rope can pass, and each staff should be firmly secured to the ground so that it does not loosen.
E sia mes un fust redon en le qual es le torn, e sia revolvut en les dos traucs dels dos fustz.	And there should also be a vertical staff in which the turn is wound around, and it should be secured between the two cuts in the two staffs.
E en la extremitat de lu es un trauc en le qual es format le fust, la longueza del qual es un palm am aquo que es revolvut; e en les dos autres fustz es semblant de aquel.	And at its end there is a cut through which the staff passes, the length of which is one palm long where it is wound around; and the other two staffs are similar to this one.
E aprop strenh les liamentz que has streyt en le pietz del malaute en le trau le qual es deves le cap de lu, e les liamentz que has streyts en las coyssas de lu en le torn le qual es deves les pes de lu.	Then tighten the bandages that you have wrapped around the patient' s feet and the ones around his thighs with the turn that is tied to his feet.
E aprop deves quascun torn e stia un ministre que torssa le torn am la sua ma, e le metge engualhe le spondil segon que havem dit.	And then secure each turn and have a servant twist it with their hand while the doctor bends the spine as we have said.
E aquesta es la forma del torn:	And this is the form of the turn:
E aprop pus que le spondil es retornat, e le loc es engualhat, lahoras cove que pauses empastre exciccatiu am album de huou, e aprop estopa; e aprop pause sobre le empastre astela de taula de la qual la latitut sia de tres ditz o enviro aquels, e la longitut de lu sia quantitat que prengua le loc de la gelbositat, e sobre la partida del spondil sa.	And when the spine has been straightened and the wound covered, then apply a plaster made of honey and wax; and then place a splint made of wood whose length is three digits or more, depending on the size of the swelling, and its breadth should be as much as it takes to cover the area of the gelbositat and the upper part of the spine.
E aprop sia liat am liament le qual havem dit, e uze le malaute de nutriment subtil entro que sia sanat.	And then tie it with a bandage as we have said, and let the patient take nourishing foods until he recovers.
E si roman alcuna iminencia en le loc en la fi de la sanacio, lahoras cove que sian aministradas medicinas que moilifico e liniscan am aministracio de la taula per lonc temps, la qual havem recomtada; e ja es aministrada en aquel loc lamina de plom.	And if there is any swelling left in the area after the healing process is complete, then apply medicines that soften and smooth it out through the application of the table for an extended period of time as we have recommended; and a lamina of lead should also be applied to that area.
E alcunas veguadas accideys imminencia en le derier dels spondils del dos, e es cujat per aquela dislocacio; e es aquel os le qual ja imineys per que no cove que sia fayta prosompcio a lu am aquesta medicina, quar fort leu fara a tu accidir mort.	And sometimes it happens that there is swelling in the back of the spine's joints due to dislocation; and this bone, which causes great pain, does not respond well to this medicine, so be careful when using it.
Capitol .xxxi.	E si tu voles, obre am torn le qual es revolvut am la ma; e es que tu fiques en terra deves le cap del malaute en le derier del pug dos fustz, la longitut dels quals sia d’un bras, e deves le cap de lu en le derier del pug eyssament dos fustz; e sia la longitut que es entre quascun fust un palm, e ja es fayt en quascun fust trauc en le qual corr torn, e quascun sia mot fermat en terra per so que no sia maugut.
De curacio de anca dislocada.	On the treatment of a dislocated hip.
Sapias que la junctura del ancha e la junctura del muscle no endeve sino dislocacio tant solament, e no accideys ad aquelas aquo que accideys a las autras juncturas de petita remocio e concavitat.	Know that the joint of the hip and the joint of the muscle do not become dislocated except by complete dislocation, and it does not happen to them what happens to other joints of small displacement and concavity.
E la junctura de la ancha es dislocada segon quatre manieyras, quar es dislocada a las partidas dedintz, o a las partidas defora, o a las partidas denant, o a las partidas detras.	And the joint of the hip is dislocated in four ways, for it is dislocated at the inner parts, or at the outer parts, or at the front parts, or at the back parts.
E majorment es dislocada a las partidas dedintz, e pauc a las partidas denant o a las partidas detras.	And most often it is dislocated at the inner parts, and seldom at the front or back parts.
E senhal de la dislocacio de lu a las partidas de dintz es quar, quan tu ajustas la camba del malaute sana am la malaute, es pus longua e·l denolh es pus heminent que de la sana, e·l malaute no pot doblar le sieu pe deves le lenguonar, e es le loc que siec le lengonar apostemat de apostema caut, per so que·l cap de la coyssa ja es pervengut aqui.	And the sign of its dislocation at the inner parts is that when you move the patient's healthy leg with the sick one, it is longer and the heel is higher than the healthy one, and the patient cannot bend their foot because the joint of the hip is dislocated, and there is a swelling in front of the hip joint due to cauterization, so that the head of the hip has already come here.
E·l senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio es a las partidas defora, es que les accidentz de lu so contraris ad aquest accident.	And the sign of dislocation at the outer parts is that its accidents are contrary to those mentioned above.
E senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio a las partidas denant es quar expan la camba sieua segon compliment, mays empero no dobla aquela ses dolor que es en le denol, e si se perforsa ad anar e no pot sobre aquo a las partidas denant; e la urina de lu es retenguda e l’engonar de lu es apostemat, e deves la ambulacio de lu sobre le talo.	And the sign of dislocation at the front parts is that when they try to extend their leg, it does not bend at all without pain, and if they force themselves to walk, they cannot put any weight on the front part of the foot; and their urine is retained and there is swelling in front of the hip joint.
E senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio a las partidas detras es que no expande le denol, ni no puesca doblar aquel denant que doble le engonar, e la camba de lu es pus breva que l’autra, e l’engonar es mollificat, e·l cap de la coyssa es deves aquel loc.	And the sign of dislocation at the back parts is that they cannot extend their leg or bend it forward due to pain; and their leg is shorter than the other one, and there is swelling in front of the hip joint.
Mays reduccio de las specias de aquesta dislocacio es que tu consideras, lahoras, si la dislocacio es vetusta et antiqua, que ja es anticada am le havent aquela aprop tu aministras reduccio de lu e roman segon la sua disposicio, lahoras no es en aquela curacio de tot; e adonc no cove que en aquela sia fayta prosompcio.	But the reduction of this dislocation is that you consider, then, if the dislocation is old and ancient, having already been treated with the proper reduction, then it does not need treatment at all; so there should be no cauterization performed on it.
Mays en aquel del qual la dislocacio es recent, e es una de las quatre specias de dislocacio, lahoras te coyta ad aquo que volvas la junctura e extendas aquela a las partidas dedintz e a las partidas defora, e mau aquela a la dextra e sinistra, quar fort leu retorna e no indigeys de autra cura.	But if the dislocation is recent and one of the four types of dislocation, then you may proceed to return the joint by extending it at its inner and outer parts, and also to the right and left side, for it will quickly return on its own without needing any further treatment.
Mays, si no retorna en aquesta manieyra, lahoras cove que tu prepares ministre fort e extendas la camba de lu de la partida pus dejos, o am las suas mas, o am liament lo qual es liat sobre la camba desus le denol; e autre ministre extenda la ma de aquel desus enayssi que meta las suas mas dejos les titillics de lu; e aprop strenha am liament leon sobre la razit de la coyssa, e tengua autre ministre ters le extremitat del liament.	But if it does not return in this way, then you should prepare a strong servant and extend the patient's leg from its lowest part, or by his hands, or by a bandage tied around the leg above the heel; and another servant should hold the patient's hand up high so that they can press down on the heel; and another servant should tighten a pointed cautery against the root of the hip joint.
E sia extencio de lu o de la partida dedintz a l’angonar a la partida de la furcula, o de la partida detras a la partida del dos.	And its extension is either from the inner part to the outer part, or from the back part to the front part.
E sia la extencio de totz aquels en una veguada entro que·l malaute sia elevat am le sieu cos de terra e que romangua pendent.	And they are all extended in one motion while the patient is lifted up by their body from the ground and hangs down.
E aquesta specia de extencio es specia cominal a totas quatre.	And this type of extension is common to all four types.
E donc si la dislocacio retorna am aquo que havem dit, sira bo; e sino, lahoras es necessari a tota specia aquo que dire de la propria curacio.	And so if the dislocation returns as we have said, then all is well; but if not, then it is necessary to use any of the following remedies for its treatment.
En la reduccio de lu propria, quan es dislocada, e la dislocacio es a las partidas dedintz, cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre le sieu latz sa; e aprop pausa les liamentz sobre la razit de la coyssa en aquel loc le qual entre le cap de la coyssa e·l loc que es dejos le langonar; e aprop exten le liament en sus de la part del angonar a la pus auta partida de la furcula.	In the reduction of dislocation, when it is located in the joints within, the patient should be laid on their side; then pause the ligaments over the root of the hip at that spot between the head of the hip and where the psoas muscle is located below; and extend the ligament upwards from the part of the iliac bone to the highest part of the furcula.
E aprop autre ministre fort prengua les brasses de lu, e amerme le loc gros de la coyssa malaute e extenda a las partidas deforo per extencio vehement, quar aquela retorna en le sieu loc.	Then another assistant should strongly pull the patient's arms, press on the large part of the hip joint and extend outwards with great force, for this will return to its place.
E aquesta specia es de pus leugiera curacio am la qual aquest membre es reduzit que las autres specias.	And this species is the quickest cure through which this member is reduced compared to other species.
Mays si es excusat sobre tu e no obezeys al entrament am aquesta specia de curacio de tot, lahoras cove que sian liatz les dos pes del malaute ensemps am liament fort, leugier, sobre amdos les talos e amdos les denols.	But if you are excused and do not obey this species of cure completely, then the two feet of the patient should be bound together with a strong ligature, lightly, around both heels and both toes.
E sia la longitut de quascun de son par la quantitat de quatre ditz, e sia la camba malaute extenduda mays que l’autre per quantitat de dos ditz.	And the length of each of its pairs should be the quantity of four fingers, and the ill leg should be extended more than the other by a quantity of two fingers.
E aprop le malaute sia suspendut sobre le cap del fust, e que sia en la mayso; e sia la longitut de lu de la terra la quantitat de dos brasses.	Then let the ill leg be suspended over the head of the bed, and let it be in the middle; and its length from the ground should be the quantity of two arms.
E aprop comanda a un jove fort que minuesca le cap de la coyssa, e sia suspendut am le malaute autre jove, e l’autre jove minuent la coysa am fortaleza empellesca, quar la junctura retorna al sieu loc am velocitat.	Then command a strong young man to push down on the head of the hip joint, and let another young man suspend the ill leg, while the other young man, pushing with strength, pulls up on the hip, for the joint will return to its place quickly.
Mays en la reducio propria, quan es dislocacio a la partida defora, cove que·l malaute jaga sobre pug segon que havem recomtat en le havent gelbozitat; e sia strenhut le liament sobre la camba malauta propriament e sobre le pietz de lu.	But in the reduction of dislocation, when it is located on the outside, let the patient lie on his back as we have recommended for those who have stiffness; and tighten the ligament over the ill leg properly and over its foot.
E aprop dos fustz sian pausatz, la un als pes de lu, e l’autre al cap; e aprop sian pausatz fustz ajustatz al mieg del pueg ficat sobre·l qual draps humitz sian envolopatz, per so que·l malaute no sia dampnajat per que·l fust sia entre las coyssas de lu, per que deves la extencio a las partidas dejos no sia atirat.	Then two beams should be placed, one under the patient's feet and another under his head; and beams that are adjusted to the middle of the beam should be placed on which dampened cloths are wrapped, so that the ill leg is not damaged by the beam being between the patient's thighs, for when the extension is made downwards, it should not be pulled.
E aprop quascun ministre extenda a la sua part, e·l metge am la sua ma enguala la reduccio segon l’art.	Then each assistant should extend to his part, and the doctor with his hand will guide the reduction according to the article.
Donc, si obezeys a revercio, sira bo grandament; e sino, pausa sobre aquela diligentment e ayssi quo havem dit en gelbozitat per aquela engualment.	Thus, if you obey this reversal, it will be very good for you; and if not, pause on that diligently and also as we have said in stiffness by that equalization.
Mays cove que·l malaute jagua sobre les sieus latz sa quetament.	But let the ill leg lie on its side quietly.
E quan la dislocacio es a las partidas denant, lahoras cove que la camba sia extenduda leugierament, e es segon aquesta meteyssa narracio sobre pueg; e le metge pause la palma de la sua ma dreyta sobre·l langonar malaute, e aprop coarte aquel am l’autra ma, e am aquela coartacio pausa aquel extendut a las partidas dejos a la partida del denol.	And when the dislocation is in front, then let the ill leg be extended lightly, and it is according to this narrative on the psoas muscle; and the doctor pauses the palm of his right hand over the iliac bone of the ill leg, and then tightens that with his other hand, and with that tightening, he extends that to the parts below to the part of the toe.
E si la dislocacio es a las partidas detras, lahoras no cove que·l malaute sia extendut a las partidas dejos, e es elevat sobre la terra; habantz cove que sia pausat sobre causa dura, ayssi cum cove le eyssament si l’ancha de lu es dislocada a las partidas defora, segon aquo que havem dit del jasement de lu sobre dos anchas; e es sobre la sua cara e les liamentz sian extendutz, segon que havem dit, no ha guayre.	And if the dislocation is in the back, then let the ill leg not be extended to the parts below and it is elevated above the ground; but let it be paused on a hard cause, just as it would be if the ankle of the ill leg were dislocated outwards, according to what we have said about its setting upon two axes; and it lies on its side and the ligaments are extended, according to what we have said, not much.
E cove que sia aministrada compressio am taula sobre le loc al qual yeys la junctura.	And let compression be administered with a board over the place where the joint is dislocated.
Donc cum la reducio es complida segon que cove — e·l senhal de la reduccio de lu no es amaguat a tu, e es que tu extendas del malaute doas cambas, e quan tu vezes aquelas enguals e le malaute extrenh la sieua camba e expandeys aquela ses excusacio, lahoras sapias que·l membre segon que cove es retornat — e lahoras tu ajusta doas coyssas e pausa empastre e extrenh am benda ayssi que la ancha no sia mauguda en alcuna de las partidas; e adheresca le malaute a repaus per tres dias o per quatre.	Thus, when the reduction is done according to what you have — and the sign of the reduction of the leg is not hidden from you, and it is that you extend both legs from the ill leg, and when you see those equalizations and the ill leg extending its leg and expanding without excuse, then know that the member according to which it has returned — and then you adjust two thighs and pause plaster and tighten with bandage so that the joint is not damaged in either part; and let the ill leg rest for three or four days.
E aprop deslia le liament e l’empastre, e compara la una camba am l’autra.	Then release the ligament and the plaster, and compare one leg to the other.
Lahoras, si vezas aquelas enguals en vustament, lahoras sapias que la dislocacio ja es fermada, e adonc layssa le malaute anar.	Then, if you see those equalizations in appearance, then know that the dislocation is already closed, and then let the ill leg go.
E si vezas alcuna causa de mollificacio, lahoras tu retorna e emplastra aquel, e extrenh aquel segon la tua primiera strectura, e layssa aquel en tres dias.	And if you see any cause of softening, then return and plaster that, and tighten that according to your first tightening, and leave it for three days.
E aprop deslia aquel, e fay aquel tardar en ambulacio sobre quascu per alcus dias, entro que sia confortat.	Then release that and make that delay in walking on each leg for several days, while it is comforted.
Capitol .xxxii.	Chapter .xxxii.
De curacio de dislocacio del denolh.	Of the cure of dislocation of the toe.
Le denolh es dislocat segon tres manieyras, quar es dislocat a las partidas defora, e a las partidas dedintz, e a las partidas dejos mays a las partidas detras; e a las partidas denant no es dislocat.	The toe is dislocated according to three manners, for it is dislocated on the outside, and within, and at the bottom most towards the back; and in front it is not dislocated.
E le senhal de dislocacio de lu es que comandes al malaute que aplique la sua camba am la coyssa; lahoras sapias que·l denol es dislocat.	And the sign of its dislocation is that you command the ill leg to apply its leg against the hip; then know that the toe is dislocated.
E la restauracio de totas las manieyras de lu es que fassas cezer le malaute dreyt, enayssi que ja extenda la sieua camba, si pot sobre aquo; adherir le tieu dos a la cara de lu, e pausa le pe de lu entre les tieus pes; e aprop fay adherir le denol de lu am las tuas palmas, e rete aquelas entre les tieus ditz sobre le denolh de lu am fortaleza, e autre ministre extenda le sieu pe entro que·l denol retorne a son loc.	And the restoration of all its manners is that you make the ill leg straight, in such a way that it already extends its leg, if it can over that; adhere the toe to the hip, and pause the foot between your feet; then let someone else adhere the toe with their palms, and pull those between your fingers onto the toe with strength, and another assistant extend the foot while the toe returns to its place.
E senhal de reddicio de lu es que la sua camba adharesca am la coyssa am levitat no-laboroza.	And the sign of its reduction is that its leg adheres to the hip with non-laborious elevation.
E aprop emplastra aquel e fay adhirir la camba am la coyssa, e aprop lia aquelas emsemps am una benda per tres dias o per quatre, e aprop deslia aquelas.	Then plaster that and make the leg adhere to the hip, and then tie those together with a bandage for three or four days, and then release those.
E no uze le malaute de ambulacio per alcus dias, entro que sia sanat e cofortat.	And do not use the ill leg for walking for several days while it is healed and comforted.
Mays si la reduccio de lu a tu es excusada, lahoras aministra fort extencio am liamentz dels quals en la curacio de la hancha precedit narracio.	But if the reduction of the leg to you is excused, then administer strong extension with ligaments of which in the cure of the hip preceding narrative.
Capitol .xxxiii.	Chapter .xxxiii.
De la curacio de la dislocacio del talo.	Of the cure of the dislocation of the ankle.
Le talo alcunas veguadas es remaugut per petita remocio, e alcunas veguadas es dislocat segon compliment, e la dislocacio de lu es fayta o a las partidas dedintz o a las partidas deforo.	The ankle some times is bruised by minor removal, and some times it is dislocated according to compliment, and its dislocation is made either within or outside.
E le senhal de la dislocacio de lu es que vezes le talo imflat procedent a la partida a la qual es dislocat.	And the sign of its dislocation is that you see the ankle swollen proceeding from the part to which it is dislocated.
Mays la curacio de la remocio de lu es de leugiera reddicio, e es que sia extendut am facilitat am las mas e sia engualhat entro que retorne.	But the cure of its removal is of easy reduction, and it is extended with facility with hands and is equalized while it returns.
Mays en la curacio de lu quan es dislocat segon compliment, cove que fasses cezer le malaute dreyt, e tengua aquel un ministre fort e valent de la partida detras del dos de aquel en le mieg loc de lu.	But in the cure of it when it is dislocated according to compliment, let the ill leg be straightened and a strong and valiant minister of the part behind the two of that in the middle place of it.
E aprop te tu am la tieua ma dreyta le pe de la pus sobirana part, e am la tua ma sinistra de la part pus dejos del pe en le loc de la cavilha.	Then you with your right hand the foot of the highest part, and with your left hand the part lowest of the foot in the place of the ankle.
E aprop atira le pe a tu am la tua ma dreyta, e aprop am la sinistra per dos veguadas, e aprop exten am la sinistra; e empelleys le pietz del pe am la dreyta deves la camba ses trebalh.	Then pull the foot to you with your right hand, and then with the left twice, and then extend with the left; and push the foot of the leg with the right because the leg has its work.
E fay aquo doas veguadas segon que havem comtat.	And do that two times according to what we have counted.
E aprop empelleys le pietz del pe a la camba la tersa veguada, e tu es a la cavilha.	Then push the foot of the leg to the leg on the third attempt, and you are at the ankle.
Donc si retorna en una veguada o en dos segon aquesta manieyra, e si vezes le pe engualhat, es bo; e sino, lahoras sobre lu itera la operacio, quar aquel retorna.	Thus if it returns on one or two according to this manner, and you see the foot equalized, it is good; and if not, then repeat the operation upon it, for it will return.
Mays si a tu es prohibida la reduccio de lu am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras fay jaser le malaute sobre le sieu dos sobre terra, e estrenh un paysel mot en terra fermat, e que caja entre las coyssas de lu, e tu ja has envolopat sobre lu drap per so que no ledesca le malaute.	But if you are prohibited from reducing it with what we have recommended, then let the patient lie on his back on the ground, and spread a cloth on the ground beneath him, and place a pillow between his thighs, and you have already wrapped a cloth around him so that he does not catch cold.
E aprop le ministre de lu tengua las suas coyssas, e aprop autre ministre extenda le pe am las suas mas o am liament que lie sobre le col del pe; e aprop extenda aquel quascun ministre contre extencio del sieu par, e le payssel sia extant entre las coyssas del malaute retinent aquel, per so que·l cos de lu no sia atirat a las partidas dejos deves la sua extencio.	Then the minister should have his thighs, and another minister should extend the foot with his hands or with a bandage that lies on the neck of the foot; and each minister should extend according to the direction of their side, and the pillow should be placed between the patient's thighs so that the body is not pulled towards the lower parts due to its extension.
E aprop le metge enguala la dislocacio am las sieuas mas, e autre ministre tengua la coyssa sana a las partidas dejos, quar la dislocacio retorna am la facilitat.	Then the doctor should dislocate it with his hands, and another minister should hold the healthy thigh at the bottom, for the dislocation returns with ease.
E donc cum retorna la dislocacio e es declarada a tu la sanetat de la reduccio de lu, lahoras pausa emplastre e extrenh aquela am liamentz fortment, e ligua le pe am liament a la camba.	And when the dislocation returns and you are shown the health of its reduction, then place an ointment and tighten it with strong bandages, and bind the foot to the leg.
E cove que temes o te guardes dels nervis les quals so detras sobre le talo, per que le liament sobre aquel no sia vehement e leda aquel fortment.	And beware of the nerves that are behind on the instep, so that the bandage over them is not violent and does not hurt him strongly.
E aprop layssa aquel per dos dias o per tres; e si le liament es mollificat, extrenh aquel.	Then leave it for two or three days; and if the bandage softens, tighten it.
E aprop deslia aquel en le ters dia o en le quart, e prohibeys le malaute de anament per xl dias.	Then loosen it on the third day or fourth, and forbid the patient from walking for 40 days.
Mays si es forsat de anar denant aquel spazi, no es fayta segurtat que la dislocacio no sia sobre lu dissolvuda e corrumpuda, e aprop aquo que no recipia curacio.	But if he is forced to walk within that space, it is not safe that the dislocation is not dissolved and corrupted, and then that which does not receive cure.
E si accideys a lu apostema caut, lahoras cove que tu aministre en la cedacio de lu aquo en lo qual precedic la nostra narracio, en autre loc de curacio e de embrocacio, entro que sia remauguda.	And if an ulcerous wound happens to him, then you should administer in the healing of it that which we preceded in our narration, in another place of cure and brooding, until it is healed.
Capitol .xxxiiii.	Chapter 34.
De curacio de dislocacio dels ditz dels pes.	Of the cure of dislocation of the toes of the feet.
Cove que aquel qu’es dislocat sia engualhat am pauca extencio ses trebal; e aquo que no es dificil, abantz es leugier.	Let him who is dislocated be stretched with a little extension without difficulty; and that which is not difficult, before it is easier.
Mays si la dislocacio es en alcus nozes del dos del pe, lahoras cove que fassas cezer le malaute le sieu pe sobre loc engual de la terra o sobre taula, e sia estant ayssi cum si anava.	But if the dislocation is in some bones of the instep of the foot, then let him sit with his foot raised above the ground or on a table, and let him remain thus as if he were walking.
E aprop tu sta de pes, e pausa le tieu pe sobre aquo que imineys de las juncturas, e aprop calca aquel am le tieu pe am vertut entro que retorne, e que vejas aquel ja engualhat e no aparesca en le loc eminencia.	Then you stand on your feet, and place your foot over what is beneath the joints, and then press that with your foot with strength until it returns, and see that it is already stretched and there is no prominence in the location.
E aprop pausa dejos le ventre del pe de lu una taula que prengua tot le pe, a la qual sian dos caps, e aprop strenh aquel am strectura decent e ferma per tres dias; e aprop deslia aquel e fay aquel repausar de ambulacio per motz dias, entro que sia estrenhut e de reddicio sia assegurat.	And then place below the belly of his foot a table that takes up the whole foot, which has two ends, and then tighten it with decent and firm pressure for three days; and then loosen it and let him rest from walking for several days, until he is healed and assured of recovery.
Capitol .xxxv.	Chapter 35.
De las specias de dislocacio que sian faytas am plagua o am fractura o am quascuna ensemps.	Of the kinds of dislocation that are made with a blow or with a fracture, or with any other impingement.
Quan accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, e tu te perforssas en la curacio de aquela e en la restauracio de lu, motas veguadas succezeys la mort.	When one of those happens, and you persevere in the cure of it and in the restoration of him, many times death ensues.
E per aquo no cove que sobre la curacio de lu presuma, sino aquel que es savi en l’art, de lonc uzatge, misericordios e pietados, tardiu, no-ardit ni presomptuos; e que use en le comensament de medicinas que cedan apostemas cautz tant solament, e leyssa le malaute al divinal jutgament, sino ad aquel al qual speras salut de perdicio, am de la malautia alleviacio, e en la qual appareys alcuna speransa.	And for that, one should not presume on the cure of him, but let him who is wise in the art, with long experience, compassionate and pity, be tardy, not hasty or presumptuous; and let him use in the beginning of medicines that yield ulcerous wounds only so much, and let the patient rely on divine judgement, unless he to whom you hope for salvation from destruction, with relief from sickness, and in which some hope appears.
E adonc esforsa te tantost far de lu la reduccio en le comensament de la causa, denant que endevengua apostema caut.	And so endeavor to reduce it at the beginning of the cause, before he incurs an ulcerous wound.
E adonc si le membre retorna segon que volem, lahoras aministra regiment le qual ceda apostema caut e cura la plagua am aquo que conveneys a lu dels enguentz desiccatius.	And so if the member returns according to our will, then administer medicine which yields ulcerous wounds and heals the plague with that which is appropriate for him of the dry ointments.
E si dislocacio es am fractura e accideys en le os satagias separadas, lahoras tu perforsa le stement de lor, e fay en aquo so que havem dit en las malautias simplas de aquo que es precedit en les locz de aquels.	And if the dislocation is with a fracture and the bones are separated, then you persevere in their setting, and do what we have said in the simple sicknesses of that which precedes them in those locations.
E guarda e esquiva segon la tua vertut aquel del intrament en las vias de temor segon que a tu es precedida la mia predicacio; quar aquo es milhor a tu deves le tieu Creator, e mays permanent a la tua gloria, e mays saludos al tieu cos verays aquels en le tieu temps.	And guard and avoid according to your ability that which is within the ways of fear, according to what my prediction precedes you; for that is better for you towards your Creator, and more permanent to your glory, and healthier to your true body than those in your time.
Ayssi fineysso las paraulas de Albucasim perfieytament de las quals Dieus ne sia benezeyt.	Thus end the words of Albucasim perfectly, from which God be blessed.
Amen.	Amen.
