Ayssi comensan las paraulas de Albucasim .	Thus begins the discourse of Al-Bucasyi.
O, filhs, pus yeu he a vos complit aquest libre, le qual es le derier de la sciencia de medicina, per le compliment de lu so consequit la fi en lu, e per las exposicios de lu, e per las declaracios de lu, es a mi vist que yeu complesca aquel a vos am aquest tractat, le qual es partida de la operacio am ma, so es cyrurgia.	O sons, I present to you this book, which is the final treatise on medicine, for the sake of completeness, it follows from it that its conclusion is in it, and because of its explanations and declarations, I consider that I fulfill that which comes before you with respect to this text, which is a description of the operation of the heart.
Quar la operacio am ma es prostrada en nostre regio e en nostre temps de tot privada, entro que fort leu peric la sciencia de lu, e le vistigi de lu es ostat; e no romasero de lu sino alcunas petitas descripcios en les libres dels Antics, les quals mudero las mas e endevenc ad aquels error e heyssitacio entro que son clausas las entencios de lu e es elonguada la forsa de lu e l’art.	Since the operation of the heart is laid out in our region and at our time entirely deprived, then very few perils lie in the science of it, and its vestiges remain; and they would not have been except for a few small descriptions in the books of the Ancients, which changed their most things and placed them in error and confusion within that which is closed in their interpretations and is extended in their force and art.
E es vist a mi que yeu vivifique aquela am ordenacio de aquest tractat en aquela segon la via de exposicio e de declaracio e de abreviacio; e per que vengua am las formas dels ferramentz de cautheri e dels autres instrumentz de la obra cum sia per addicio de la declaracio, e per preparacio de lu, la qual causa es necessaria.	It seems to me that I have brought to bear in this treatise the order of things regarding the explanations and declarations and brevity; and because it comes by addition to the declaration, and for the preparation thereof, which is necessary cause.
Mays la causa per la qual no es atrobat bo artifex am la sieua ma en aquest nostre temps, es quar la art de medicina es longua, e que cove le sieu actor denant aquo esser excercitat en la sciencia de anotomia la qual recontec Gualia entro que sapia les juvament dels membres e las formas de aquels, e la conjunctio e la separacio de lor; e haia la conoyssensa dels osses, dels nervis e dels lacertz, e·l nombre de aquels, e la egrecio de lor; e de las venas pulsatils e de las quietas, e dels locs del eyssiment de lor.	The reason why a good artisan does not master the art of surgery in our time is that the art of medicine is long, and because before it is necessary to know the actor's anatomy, which connects with the joints and separates them; and has knowledge of the bones, nerves, and ligaments, and their names, as well as the movement of the veins, pulsating and quiet, and the places of their outlet.
E per aquo ditz Ypocras que am u nom es mot, mays en l’obra petit, e majorment en la art de la ma.	And therefore I say that it is called by a name only in the small work, and more so in the art of surgery.
Mays nos ja avem dit de aquel en l’introit de aquest libre; quar qui no es scient aquo que li avem dit de anotomia, no es evacuat que no caia en error per la qual siran mortz les homes, ayssi cum yeu he vist trops de aquels, quar alscus son formatz en esta sciencia e gettan se de aquela ses sciencia e ses experiment.	We have already said in the introduction of this book; for he who does not know that we have spoken to him about anatomy, does not realize that he falls into error because many people die as a result, and I have seen such errors in this science, for it is not a part of the knowledge of surgery, but gets its ideas from another science and experiments.
Quar yeu vi un metge folh e enperit aver incidit un apostema escrophilos en le colh de una femna, e incidic alcunas arterias del colh per que fluic gran sanc entro que la femna cazec morta entre las mas de lu.	I have seen a doctor with a blade and an experienced one has made an abscess of a scrofulous woman in the neck, which burst out with much blood; for that she died between its contents.
E vi un autre metge que pres que el traguera una peyra d’un home le qual avia procesit en sa etat, e la peyra era gran, e venguet a lu e trayssec aquela peyra am un tros de la vesiqua, per que aquel home al tertz dia es mort.	I have also seen another doctor who took a stone out of a man's bladder, which was large, and returned it to him; and after three days that man died.
E yeu ja apelat fuy a estrayre aquela, e vi que per la grandesa de la peyra e per la disposicio del malaute conogui subre lu que morira.	And I called for the stone to be removed, and I saw that because of the size of the stone and the patient' s condition, it was clear that he would die.
E vi un autre metge le qual prenia stipendic de un duc de nostra terra per cyrurgia, e endeven a un crastrat negre le qual era deves lu fractura en la coyssa de lu; e perparec le metge am la sua ignorancia, estrayssec la fractura, sobre la plagua, am pulvinas e astelas am forta strectura, e no layssec a la plagua espiracio.	I have also seen another doctor who took a fee from a duke of our land for surgery; and he was going to operate on his crotch, which was broken, but prepared the doctor in his ignorance, removing the fracture, on the skin, with powder and needles to make it stronger, and did not leave the skin open for respiration.
E aprop le desliet segons los sieus desiriers, e aprop le relieg, e aprop le leyssec per alcus jorns e comandec que nos deslies le liament; e estec ayssi entro que la coyssa e·l pe foro apostematz, e pervenguet a perdicio.	And he carried out the procedure according to his wishes, and he prayed, and he left him with some days; and he ordered us to cut off the limb, so that the crotch was broken by the hole, and it came to destruction.
E yeu fuy apelat a lu, e aparelhegui a desliar le liament, e conseguida es tranquilitat e enayssi amermet de sas dolors.	And I was called for it; and I prepared myself to cut off the limb, and I gained peace and eased his pain.
Mays empero ja corrupcio era confermada en le membre, per que no pogui refrenar aquela, e no cessec perambular la corrupcio en le membre entro que·l malaute peric.	However corruption was already confirmed in the limb, so I could not restrain it, and I continued to walk with the corruption in the limb until the patient' s death.
E vi un autre metge le qual perforec un apostema cancros, e fo ulcerat aprop alscus dias, entro que foc magnificada la malicia de lu am lo senhor de lu.	I have also seen another doctor who perforated a cancerous abscess, and it became ulcerated after a few days, until the evil of it spread to its lord.
La qual causa es quar le cranc caut es pur de humor melencolic, lahoras no cove que pervengua a lu am ferr de tot, sino que sia an membre le qual suffertes que de tot fos hostat.	The reason for this is that the sharp knife cuts off bad humors of the melancholic type; therefore, it is clear that it can reach everywhere, but it is a limb that suffers from all over the place.
E per aquo, filhs, necessari es a vos que la operacio am ma sia devisada en dos devesios: so es en operacio a lu qual es associada salut, e en obra am la qual es perilh en las majors disposicios.	And therefore, sons, it is necessary for you that the operation of the heart be divided into two operations: one is an operation to save life, and the other is an operation to risk death.
E yeu ja he exsitat aquo en tot loc de aquest libre en le qual venc opperacio en la qual es error e temor; per que necessari es a vos que guardetz aquo e layssetz aquel, per que les folhs no atrobo via a parlar e a vos desonestar.	I have already presented in this book all the operations of which I am aware; for some are necessary and others not, so that it is not appropriate to present them all here, in order to avoid wasting time in speaking and distorting your mind.
E donc prenetz las vostras armas am sollicitut e am proteccio de Dieu , e les vostres malautes am falicitat e am fermetat.	And therefore take your weapons with diligence and the protection of God, and your illnesses with compassion and firm resolution.
E usatz de la milhor via per la gracia de Dieu perdusent a salut e a lausabla successio, e laysatz las malautias terriblas de difficil sanacio, e ostatz las vostras armas de aquo que vos fa temer, per so que ysitatio en vostra fe e en le vostre nom no vos evasisca: quar mays es remanent a la vostra gloria, e pus aut en le mon e en derier a las vostras sanctitatz.	And use the best way, through the grace of God, to lead you to salvation and to the laudable succession, and leave your terrible illnesses with difficult treatment, and hold your weapons in such a way that it is not a cause for fear, so that you do not forsake your faith and name; for more remains to your glory, either in heaven or behind your sanctities.
Gualia ja diyssec en alcunas sieuas monicios:	I have already said in some of my premonitions:
“No mediquetz malautia mala, per so que mals metges no siatz nompnatz”.	"Do not treat a bad disease, so that you do not become the cause of death of your patient."
E yeu ja he devesit aquest libre segontz tres capitols.	I have divided this book into three chapters.
Comensa la divisio del libre, e primier de la primieyra partida.	Begin the division of the book, and first of the first part.
Le primier capitol ordenat del cap entro·s pes, en las formas dels instrumentz e en les ferrementz dels cauteris, e de aquo que necessari es en la opperacio.	The first chapter is ordered by chapters, in the shapes of instruments and tools used in surgery; this is necessary for the operation.
La divisio de la segonda partida.	Division of the second part.
Le segon capitol, de siccio e perforacio, e de ventosas, e de plaguas, e de extractio de sagetas e de semblantz ad aquelas, tot capitolat e ordenat de las formas dels instrumentz.	The second chapter, concerning cutting and piercing, and suction, and extraction of arrows and similar things, completely divided and ordered by shapes of instruments.
Divisio de la tersa partida.	Division of the third part.
Le tertz capitol, de restauracio e de dislocacio, e de curacio de torcio e de semblantz ad aquels; capitol ordenat del cap entro·s pes, e de las formas dels instrumentz.	The third chapter concerning restoration and displacement, and treatment of twists and similar things; this chapter is ordered by chapters, in the shapes of instruments.
De cauteri am foc e am medicina aguda e rememoracio de la opperacio.	Of fire cautery and acute medicine and recollection of the operation.
Am aquel comensa le tractat de tot le libre.	This is how the treatise begins for all of the book.
Cove que yeu digua la qualitat dels juvamentz de aquel cauteri e dels noccumentz de lu, e en qual compleccio sia prohibit cauteri.	I will tell you about the qualities of that cautery and the things necessary for it, and in what conditions it is prohibited to use cautery.
Donc dic que·l sermo de la qualitat del juvament de cauteri e del noccument de lu es sermo lonc e prolixs, e subtil per sciensa, e secret amaguat; e ja de lu a parlat gran multitut de savis, e de lu se son desacordatz, et a mi abasta un petit dels sermons de lor, temen perlonguacio.	Therefore I say that the speech of the quality of cautery and the things necessary for it is long and extensive, and subtle in science, and hidden in meaning; and they have spoken about much knowledge, and they disagree with each other, and I am satisfied with a little of their speeches, as if they were long.
E donc dic que cauteri comfereys a tota compleccio universalment la qual es am materia o ses materia, exceptat dos compleccios, las quals son compleccios caudas ses materia .	And therefore I say that cautery has all the qualities universally; it is of matter or two matters; for these are two qualities of matter.
En la compleccio cauda e secca am materia se desecordero; quar alcus dyssero que cauteri es juvatiu ad aquela, e les autres dyssero le contrari de aquel, que cauteri no es convenient en malautia la qual es per qualiditat e per siccitat, quar natura del foc es qualiditat e siccitat, e enconvenient es que malautia cauda e secca am aquo que es caut e sec sia sanada.	In the combination of tail and dry matter will disagree; for some say that cautery is beneficial to the fire, and others say the opposite, that cautery is not convenient in a disease which is by quality and dryness, because the nature of the fire is quality and dryness, and it is inappropriate that the fire should heal a dry and tail-like disease.
E diysec aquel que ditz le contrari de aquel, que per cauteri es fayt juvament en tota malautia cauda e secca que ve en les cors dels homes, quar quan tu comparas le cors de home e las humiditatz de lu a la compleccio del foc, atrobas le cors de home freg.	And he who says the opposite, that with cautery is beneficial in all diseases of tail and dry matter which are present in the body of man, because when you compare the bodies of men and the moisture in them to the combination of fire, you will find them dry.
E yeu dic per le sermo de aquel, que esperiment aquo ja a mi alscunas vetz a descubert.	And I say by the speech of that person, which I have experienced at times in order to discover.
Mays empero no cove que vengua sobre aquo aquel que ja es exproat e excersitat en le capitol de cauteri per derier exercici, e a conogut la diversitat de la compleccio dels homes e la disposicio de las malautias en lor meteyssas, e las causas de aquelas, e·ls accidentz de lor, e l’espasi del temps de aquelas.	However, it is not necessary to present here what has already been presented and exercised in the chapter of cautery following exercises, and learned the diversity of the condition of men and the disposition of their diseases, and the causes of them, and their accidents, and the space of time from those.
Mays en las autras compleccios, no es sobre vos temor, e majorment en las malautias fregas e humidas, quar ja totz les metges se son acordatz sobre aquels, e no so desecordatz en le juvament am cauteri en aquelas.	In other cases, there is no fear, and most often in wet and cold cases, since all doctors are agreed on them, and are not in disagreement about the cauterization of those cases.
E sapiatz, filhs, que del secret de curacio per cauteri am foc e de la bontat de lu, so sobre cauteri am medicina comburent, es quar le foc es simple, la accio del qual no perven sino al membre le qual es cauterizat e no notz al autre membre am lu ajustat sino am petit nocument.	And know, children, that of the secret of cure by fire and of the goodness of it, since fire is simple, its action reaches only to the member which is cauterized and does no harm to the other member which is put on fire with it, except for a small injury.
Mays la accio de medicina comburent perven ad aquel en les membres le qual de lu alunhat, e fort leu fa venir en le membre malautia de dificil sanacio e fort leu ausit.	But the application of burning medicine reaches to that part in the member which is blistered, and causes great pain in the sick part, and it causes great difficulty in healing it.
Mays le foc, per la sua sublimitat e de la sua substancia bontat, no fa aquo sino que superfluisca E ja es a nos conogut per experiment e per longitut de servitut de studi am l’art sobre le veritat de las causas; e per aquo yeu so excusat de la longitut del sermo E si no fos que no es legut al mieu libre en aquest pausero a vos secret amaguat am le foc, e la qualitat de la operacio de lu en les cors e de la sieua expulcio per la qual expellis las malautias, am sermo philosophic demostratiu, le qual siria acuit en las vostras pessas.	But fire, because of its subtlety and goodness, does not burn but drenches; And I am already well known to you through experience and a long history of service in studying the truth of causes; and by this means I will excuse myself from the length of speech and if it were not that it is impossible for me to write secretly in this letter to you about fire, and the quality of its operation on the body and its expulsion by which it expels the diseases, with a philosophical demonstrative discourse, which would be clear in your cases.
E sapiatz, filhs, que els se desacordan del temps en le qual es convenient far cauteri e pausan le milhor temps de primaveyra.	And know, children, that they disagree about the time when it is convenient to make a cauterization and pause for the best time in springtime.
E yeu dic que cauteri es convenient en tot temps, per so que le nocument per le temps accident es submergit en le juvament de aquo que am le cauteri es atirat, e majorment si le cauteri es per dolors o de dolors necessaries, fortz e fistinas, las quals no suffertan tarditat per so que es temut de aquelas que vengua malicia, que es major que petit nocument entrant per lo temps.	I say that cauterization is convenient at all times, so that the damage by time, which happens by accident, is immersed in the healing of what is cauterized, and most when cauterization is for pain or necessary pains, which do not suffer delay, because those who come with ill-will are greater than a small injury entering by time.
E aysso no catz en vostras pessas, o, filhs, aquo no estiman sino le poble vulguar e les fols metges, so es que ad aquela malautia que es sanada per cauteri no es redicio tot temps, e pausan aquel consequen.	And then you do not use it in your cases, or children, this is only estimated by the vulgar and foolish doctors; so that for that disease which is healed by cauterization, it is convenient to pause at that time, and this consequence follows.
E la causa no es ges ayssi quo els cuydan per aquo, quar cauteri no es sino en loc de medicina la qual altera la compleccio e esicca las humiditatz las quals son causa per que veno las dolors.	And the cause is not good for such a thing; because cauterization is only a place of medicine which alters the composition and dries up the humors which are the cause by which pains come.
Mays empero cauteri superflueys sobre la medicina per volicitat de la sua valitut e vertut de la sua operacio e grandesa del sieu senhor.	But, nevertheless, superfluous cauterization over the medicine is because of the virtue of its effectiveness and the greatness of its power, and the lord knows it well.
E es possible que la sua malautia retorne en alcuna hora del temps, segon la compleccio del malaute e la locacio de la sua malautia, e la vertut de lu, e aquo que es preparat en le cors de lu de la agreguacio de las superfluitatz en lu, e aquo que es pervengut a lu en la sua acquisicio en viandas e semblantz de aquelas causas; sino que la malautia en la qual sia aministrat cauteri sia malautia subtil en membre de paucas superfluitatz e humiditatz, ayssi cum cauteri de dent per dolor e semblantz ad aquel, possible es que en lu no retorne aquela dolor, mays aquo se fa en petitz.	And it is possible that the disease return at any time of the year, according to the constitution of the patient and the location of his illness, and the goodness of it; and because it is prepared in his body by adding superfluous things in his diet and by resembling those causes; but if the disease on which cauterization was administered is a subtle one in a member with few superfluous things and humors, then with cauterization of a tooth for pain and resembling that one, it is possible that the pain does not return to him, but remains there.
E mays sermo vulgar es que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina, e es sermo dreyturier, no ad aquo que els entendo en lu, quar els crezo que no es curacio que aprofieyta am medicina ni am autra causa aprop cauteri.	And the common speech is that cauterization is the last medicine; and it is a hasty speech, not to those who understand it, because they believe that there is no cure which profits from medicine or any other cause by means of cauterization.
E la causa es en contrari de aquo; e la entencio que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina no es sino quan administram las manieyras de curacio en alcunas malautias, e aquelas medicinas no conferieysso, e aprop en la fi de la causa aministra hom cauteri, e aprofieyta ad aquela.	And the cause is contrary to that; and the understanding that cauterization is the last remedy is only when we administer ways of cure in some illnesses, and those medicines do not give; but at the end of the cause, we administer to him cauterization, and it profits at that end.
E lahoras de aqui cat16 que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina, no segon la entencio la qual entendo les vulgars e trops dels fols metges.	And from here, I will tell you that cauterization is the last medicine of a hasty speech, not according to my understanding of the vulgar and silly doctors.
E diyssero les antics que cauteri am aur es milhor que cauteri am ferr, e no diyssero aquo sino per la equalitat del aur e sublimitat de la sua sustancia.	And they say that cauterization with gold is better than cauterization with iron, and they do not say it except for the equality of gold and its subtlety.
E diyssero que le loc de cauteri no fa brac, cum aquo no sia absolutament vertat, quar yeu ja he aquo proat e he atrobat que aquel no fa aquo sino en alcus cors ses les autres, e cauteri am aquel es bo e milhor que am ferr ayssi quo els diyssero; mays empero quan tu fas cauteri am foc am de aur, no es a tu declarat, quar es egnit segon la quantitat que tu vols per la rugor de l’aur, e quar prepara a recebre freg; e si ajustas sobre lu ignicio se fon l’aur per le foc, e caso en le foc alcunas laminas per que le artifex catz per la occupacio de aquel.	And they say that the place of cauterization does not burn, unless it is absolutely good, because I have seen and touched that it does not burn except in some parts of the body; and cauterization with gold is good for them, and better than iron, as they say; but when you make cauterization with fire and gold, it is not clear to you, because it depends on the quantity which you want for the roughness of gold, and because it prepares itself to receive fire; and if you put a piece of metal on fire, so that the craftsman catches it by the occupation of that metal.
E per aquo es fayt cauteri am ferr deves nos pus leugerament e pus propdanament a rectitut de operacio.	And to do this, you must put iron gently and then perform the operation correctly.
E yeu ja he ordenat aquest capitol en le cauteri segon capitols, et he ordenat aquels del cap entro les pes, per so que aleugo le demandant aquo que vol de lu.	And I have already ordered this chapter about cauterization according to the other chapters, and I have ordered those of the first part within the feet, so that it satisfies what you ask for.
De cauteri de dolor de cap per frigiditat e humiditat.	of cauterization for headache by cold and humidity.
Le capitol primier.	The first chapter.
Aquesta cauterizacio confereys a la humiditat e frigiditat sobre le servel accident de la qual so doas causas, so es causa de soda e multitut de flux raumatic, apelat corissa, del cap a las partidas dels huelhs e de las aurelhas fluent, e multitut de dormir, e de dolor de dentz e del guolayro, e universalment de tota malautia que ve per fregiditat, ayssi cum paraliticament, sodo e apoplexio, e semblantz en aquelas malautias.	This cauterization confers on humidity and cold the accidental service of which there are two causes; so it is a cause of sweating and many fluxes of blood, causing a headache, flowing from the ears, and many sleeps, and pain in teeth and gums, and generally of all illnesses that come by cold, as well as paralyzed, sweat, and apoplexy, resembling those illnesses.
La forma de aquesta cauterizacio es aquesta, que primieyrament comandes al malaute que sia evacuat am medicina lacsativa le cap mondificant, per tres o per quatre nueytz, segon que exhigeys la vertut del malaute e la edat de lu e la sua costuma.	The form of this cauterization is as follows: first, command the patient that he be evacuated by lacting medicine to his head, for three or four nights, according to whether you require the goodness of the disease and the age and custom of him; then put on his head a bandage and wrap it around his head, and wrap it with a cloth, and let it rest for seven days.
E aprop comanda li que raza le sieu cap am razor, e aprop fay aquel sezer entre las tuas mas sobre una banca cayrada e que pause las suas mas sobre le pietz sieu.	And then command him to shave his head with a razor, and place it on a bank between your legs, and place your hands over the roots of his hair.
E aprop pausa la razit de la tua palma aprop le pous sobre la razit del nas entre les huels sieus.	And then pause the movement of your hand from your palm to the roots of the nose between his ears.
Mays empero, cum le tieu dit del mieg loc es pervengut, signa aquel loc am tenta, e aprop igneys le cauteri olivar del qual aquesta es la forma:	But, nevertheless, when the patient speaks about his own place, sign it with a mark; and then set fire to the olive oil from which this is the form:
E aprop pausa aquel sobre le loc senhat am tenta, a manieyra que descent, am la qual la tieua ma sia constrengida petit a petit, e tu revolveys aquel.	And then put that on the spot with a mark, in a way that it sinks, and by which the patient's hand is constrained little by little, and you turn it.
E aprop leva la tua ma leugerament e reguarda le loc, e si veses ja del os esser descubert alcuna quantitat del cap, ayssi cum la quantitat de gra de errs, lahoras eleva la tua ma, e si no torno la tua ma am aquel ferr, am autre de aquel, si es enfrigidat, entro que sia vist del os aquo que yeu he dit a tu.	And then raise your hand gently and look at the spot, and if you see any quantity of hair, as well as the amount of blood, then lower your hand, and if it does not feel cold, then it is seen from the bone that I have told you about.
E aprop pren un petit de sal e disolveys aquel sobre le loc e leyssa aquel per tres jorns.	And then take a little salt and dissolve it on the spot and leave it there for three days.
E aprop pausa sobre lu coto enbegut en boder e leyssa aquel sobre lu entro que sia destrusida la scara del foc.	And then put it over the ground covered with sawdust and leave it there until the fire destroys the scale of it.
E aprop cura le loc am anguent tetrafarmacon entro que sia sanat.	And then cure the spot with five-fold tar within which be healed.
E ja diyssero que quant la plagua roman uberta, tant mielhs geta le brac, per que es milhor e mays juvatiu.	And it is said that if the plague of Rome is spread, so much better and more healing is it; for it is more beneficial and pleasant.
E diyssero alcus de lor que sia cauterizada la codena entro al os, e sia tengut le cauteri entro que sia adhurida alcuna partida de la specitut del os.	They also say that the jaw should be cauterized within the bone, and that the cauterization should be performed so that part of the root of the tooth is moved away.
E aprop sia ras aquo que es adhust del os, e aprop sia curat.	And then it is done; it is shaved close to the bone, and then it is healed.
E diyssero autres que am lo cauteri pervengua al derier, entro que enprema en le os forta enprecio entro que le os caga, e aquesta es la forma de alphecati petit:	And they say that the cauterization reaches to the last part, within which is forced against the bone, and this is the form of the blade:
E estiman de aquel loc expiran la vapors del cap.	They recommend that the patient breathes the vapors from his head.
E sia tenguda la plagua uberta per lonc temps, e aprop sia curada entro que sia consolidada.	And let the wound be kept open for a long time, and let it be healed before it is hardened.
Mays a mi no so vistas aquestas doas specias de cauteri de tot, sino en alcus homes segon via de temor; e layssa aquel, deves mi, milhor es am salut, quan es; quar le cap es develitat per solucio de continuitat de lu ayssi cum havem testificat en les autres membres, e majorment quan le cap del malaute es de freul natura.	And I do not see these two kinds of cauterization in all places for the sake of fear; and let it be left to me, a thousand times better is salvation when it is present; because the head can be detached by solution of continuity as long as we have witnessed it in other members, especially when the patient's head is of freewill nature.
E la specia de cauteri primieyra es mays salva e milhor deves mi; e de aquela husi e am aquela obra am salut.	And the kind of cauterization that first comes is safer and better for me; and from there, I will choose that operation for salvation.
Capitol segon.	Capitol Second.
Del cauteri del cap.	Of the cauterization of the head.
Quan en tot le cap accideys dolor cronica e longua e aquo es en le malaute prolonguat, e usa de gerras e de cochias e de capipurges e de emplaustres e de guatz e de cadels e de gualinas e de semblantz, e majorment si ja es cauterizat am un cautere le qual recontam e no aprofieyta a lu deguna de aquelas causas, lahoras considera quar si le cap del malaute es de fort creacio en la sua natura; e no es freul et atroba mot gran freg, lahoras aquel cauterisa am autra cauteri dejos aquel un pauc.	When in the whole head chronic and long-lasting pain occurs and it is prolonged in the patient, and he uses plasters, leeches, bloodletting, emollients, poultices, and poultices, especially if he has already been cauterized with a caustic and does not take advantage of any of those causes, then consider that since the head of the patient is of strong creation in its nature; and it is not pleasant and brings about great harm, then cauterize him with another kind of cauterization, let that one be few.
E aprop cauterisa aquel sobre le corn del sieu cap am cauteri entro que la codena es partida.	Then cauterize that on the tip of his head with a caustic inside so that the knot is broken.
Incisa la codena e sia descuberta del os la quantitat la qual havem recontat e cauteriza aquel am un cauteri en la partida deriera del cap en le loc le qual es apelat vas, — e es aquel loc en le qual es pausada ventosa.	Cut the knot and reveal the bone the quantity that we have counted and cauterize it at the back of the head in a place called "vas" — and that is the place where wind is stopped.
Et alleuja la tua ma en aysso, e no descobras le os, quar le malaute per aquo atroba mot gran dolor diversa de la dolor de totz les autres cauteris del cap.	And thank God in advance for that, and do not reveal the bone, because the patient will suffer great pain, which is different from the pain of all other head cauterizations.
E yeu diyre aquest cauteri en son loc, quar cove que·l cauteri am le qual so cauterisatz les corns del cap e le occiput es pus subtil cauteri que aquel am le qual es cauterisat le mieg loc del cap; e aquesta es la forma de lu.	And direct this cauterization to its place, because, while that caustic with which the tips of the head and the occiput are cauterized is subtler, that caustic with which the back of the head is cauterized is more powerful. And this is the way to do it.
Capitol ters.	Capitol Third.
De cauterisacio de emigranea no-antiqua.	Of cauterization of the emigrant (not ancient).
Quan endeve en la partida del cap dolor sodo, o es stenduda dolor entro al uelh, sia evacuat am medicinas le cap mondificantz, e sia aministrada l’autra curacio, la qual yeu he dita en las devesios de las malautias; e tot no aprofieyta, lahoras cauterisacio en lu es en dos manieyras: o cauterisacio am medicina acuta comburent, o am ferr.	When the pain in the back of the head is hard, or the pain inside the ear is standing, let the head be evacuated by medicine while it is spoken, and let the other treatment (which I have described in the various diseases) not be taken advantage of; then cauterize it with two methods: either with burning medicine or with iron.
Mays cauteri am medicina comburent es que tu prenguas una dolsa de alh, e escorgas aquela e abcindas las extremitatz de lu de amdos les caps.	Or cauterize with burning medicine is that you take a bucket of water, and pour it out and burn the ends of it from both sides.
E aprop incideys le loc de la dolor en la templa am una lanceta lada entro que sia en lu feyt loc dejos la codena, entro que sia occultada.	And then cut the place that causes pain in the temple with a sharp needle inside so that it is hidden under it; then cut off the knot.
E aprop strenh sobre lu am stopada per descent constreccio, e layssa aquel per le spazi de tres horas; e aprop deslia le e tratz le alh, e laysa la plagua per dos o per tres jorn, e aprop pausa sobre lu coto submergit en boder entro que le loc fassa brac.	Then hold it down with a firm constriction, and leave it like that for three hours; then remove the bandage, and keep the wound open for two or three days, and then put it under water in a bowl within the place where it hurts.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia sanat.	Then cure it with oil until it is healed.
E si tu voys, fe aquo am alcunas medicinas comburentz las quals yeu he scriutas en le douse tractat de medicinas comburentz.	And if you want, prepare some of the burning medicines that I have written in two treatises on burning medicines.
Mays la cauterisacio am ferr segon aquesta manieyra: igneys per cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma:	Or cauterize with iron according to this method: this is the way:
e es apelat claus clavilhs, quar le cap de lu es ayssi cum forma de clavel en le qual es alcuna curvitat, e·n le mieg loc de lu es eminensia petita.	and it is called a claw because the head of iron is thus shaped like a claw, and in its middle part there is a small protuberance.
E aprop pausa sobre loc de la dolor, e rete la tua ma — per que no sia adhurida la arceria la qual es dejos — e revol le ferr petit a petit am velocitat.	Then place it on the place that hurts, and hold your hand back so that the iron is not heated too much; and rotate the small iron slowly.
E si la quantitat de lu que es adhurida per la specitut de la codena ayssi quo la maytat de lu, e elava la tua ma per so que la arteria no sia adhurida la qual es dejos, per so que no vengua flux de sanc.	And if the amount of iron that is heated by the shape of the knot is about half, and raise your hand up so that the artery is not heated too much; then let the blood flow away.
E aprop enbibeys coto en aygua de sal e pausa aquel sobre le loc, e layssa aquel per tres dias; e aprop pausa coto mulhat am boder, e aprop cura am enguent entro que sia sanat.	Then dip the cloth in salt water and place it on the place, and leave it like that for three days; then remove the cloth little by little along the edge, and cure with oil until it is healed.
E si voys, cauterisa am la extremitat del cutellari segon cauteri, e guarda te de incisio de arteria en aquesta emigranea propriament no-antiqua.	If you want, cauterize the end of the knife according to the cauterization that I have described, and beware of cutting the artery in this emigrant (not ancient) head.
Capitol quart.	Capitol Fourth.
De cauterizacio d’emigranea antiqua.	Of cauterization of ancient emigrant.
Quan tu curas emigranea am aquo que havem dit de la curacio precedent, e aquo que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias, e no aprofieyta la curacio, e vezes per la malautia que no abasta a lu aquo que havem dit del primier cauteri am medicina o del cauteri am foc, lahoras cove que tu igniscas le cauteri cutellar entro que sia albificat, pus que significas sobre le loc de la dolor am linha de longuesa de la qual sia la maytat del dit, o quays aquel; e depausa la tua ma per una veguada e strenh aquela entro incidiscas la arceria e pervengua entro al os.	When you cure emigrant with water that I have described in the previous treatment, and which I have described in the various diseases, and do not take advantage of the treatment; and sometimes because of the disease that does not suffice to the water that I have described for the first cauterization with medicine or with fire, then, while you are holding the cauterization knife, consider that you ignite it so that it whiteness (to make it turn white), since this means that the half-most part of it has already been burned; and then leave your hand up so that the iron does not become too hot; then rotate it slowly. And let the amount of iron be heated by the shape of the knot, which is about half; and raise your hand up so that the artery is not heated too much; then let blood flow away.
Empero necessari es a tu que guardes de la continuacio de la mandibula, la qual es mauguda deves la masticacio, e que le lacert no sia adhurit e le nervi le qual mau aquela, e que no s’endevengua espasme.	However, you need to pay attention to the continuation of the jaw, which is more useful for chewing; and that the tongue does not become too hot and that the nerves are not heated; and that it does not go into a spasm.
E si es sobre la custodia e cautela de flux de sanc de l’arteria que es abciza, quar en la abcizio de lu es temor, e majorment ad aquel le qual ignora aquo que fa e no es studios e esproat; e layssa la operacio en lu al comensament.	And if it is about the care and caution of the flow of blood from the artery that is being cut, for in cutting it there is a danger; and even more so at that which does not know how to do it with water and does not study or prepare it; and then leave the operation until the very beginning.
E yeu vindre am rememoracio del regiment de flux de sanc accident de la arceria segon la sieua manieyra, en le sieu loc de aquest libre.	And I come to mind with the memory of the regulation of blood flow by the way that you have described; and in its place according to your method.
E si veses de aquesta malautia que no abaste aquest cauteri e veses le cors del malaute tollerable, cauteriza aquel en le mieg loc del cap ayssi cum havem recontat, e cura la plagua entro que sia sanada.	If this disease does not allow the above kind of cauterization and tolerates the pain of a head cauterization, then cauterize it in its middle part as I have described; and cure the wound until it is healed.
E si voys, aministra le cauteri le qual havem dit en le capitol de streccio de arceria am cauteri havent dos cotels, e es milhor cauterizacio aquesta e mays conferent.	If you want, administer the cauterization that I have described in the chapter of stretching the iron with two knives; and this is the best kind of cauterization and most worthy.
Capitol .v.	Capitol V.
De cauterisacio de las dolors de aurelhas.	Of cauterization of ear pains.
Quan en la aurelha ve dolor per freg e es curat am causas lacsativas e am l’autra curacio la qual he dita en la divisio, e no es remauguda la dolor, lahoras igneys le cauteri, e es aquest le qual ha nom puncta, del qual aquesta es la forma:	When there is pain in the ear due to scratching and to the other treatment that I have described in the division, and the pain does not return, then cauterize it; and this is the kind of cauterization that has no name, and this is its way:
E aprop puncta aprop la ignicio, e sia menat al enviro de tota la aurelha ayssi cum roda es revolguda, o en le circuit de quascuna essemps si la dolor es en quascuna.	Then place the point of the knife near the ignition; and rotate it all around the ear as it is being turned, or along one side if the pain is in that side.
Alonga te am le cauteri de la razit de la aurelha pauc a pauc pus que aias senhat le loc am tenta.	Along with the knife's edge on the ear slowly and gently so as not to hurt the place with trying too much.
E si le cauteri de detz puntz en tota aurelha, e quays aquela, e aprop cura les locz entro que sian sanatz.	If the knife's edge stops at some points all around the ear, and then returns to its original place; then cure the places until they are healed.
Capitol .vi.	Capitol VI.
De cauterizacio de turtura.	Of cauterization of torture.
Turtura la qual es curada e am cauterizacio no es sino de las specias las quals veno per flecma, segon que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias.	The torture that is cured and the cauterization is not more than the various kinds of medicines that come with blood; as I have described in the various diseases.
Esquiva cauterizacio de la specia que endeve per siccacio o per spasme del nervi.	Avoid cauterization of the kind that comes with dryness or spasm of the nerves.
Quan tu curas aquela specia de turtura am jerras e capipurgi e guarguarismes, e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas le malaute am tres cauteris: la i deves la razit de la aurelha, e·l segon un petit dejos le sieu templar, e le ters deves la conjunccio de doas labias.	When you treat that kind of torture with jerks and purgatives and gurgles; if you do not take advantage of your treatment, then consider that you cauterize the patient from three sides: first with the edge of the knife near the ear; second, a little bit at the back of the patient's head; and third, between two lips.
E pausa lo tieu cauteri per le contrari de la partida malauta, quar mollificacio no ve sino en la partida que apar sana.	And hold the cautery in place against the opposite side of the hernia, for only in that way will there be relief from the swelling.
E la forma de cauterisacio es que cauterizas aquel am le cauteri en le dreyt de la extremitat de la aurelha pus sobirana un petit sobre le corn del cap, e en le templar autre, la longuesa del qual sia segon la longitut del dit pous, e depausa la tua ma am cauteri entro que sia comburida la quantitat de la maytat de la specitut de la codena.	And the form of cauterization is that you cauterize this one in the right of the tip of the ear put on top a little above the horn of the head, and in the tempered other, the length of which was according to the length of the said foot, and pause your hand over it as if it were burned by fire, until the quantity of the bulk of the tissue of the codena is scorched.
E aquesta es la forma del cauteri, e es specia del cutellari, la forma del qual es denant mesa.	And this is the form of the cautery, and it is special of the scissor, the form of which is placed in front.
Mays empero pus subtil es que aquel un pauc ayssi co vesas; e cove que cotel en lu de superflua groceza un pauc.	However, even more important it is that this one a little bit put on the back, and cover it up with a little bit of extra grease, a little bit of oil.
E aprop cura le loc am aquo que es denant procezit entro que sia sanat.	Then return the area to water that has been heated until it is warm.
Capitol .vii.	Chapter VII.
De cauterizacio de apoplextia antiqua.	Of the treatment of ancient apoplexy.
Quan apoplextia es antiquada e curas aquela am aquo que havem dit e no confereys la tua medicacio e le malaute no ha febre, lahoras cauteriza aquel am quatre cauteris: sobre totz les corn del sieu cap; e am cauteri e le mieg loc del cap, ayssi cum havem dit; e am cauteri en le coguot.	When apoplexy is old and the treatments have not yet been administered, and there is no fever in the patient, then cauterize this one with four cautery: on all the horns of his head; and cauterize it at the same time as I said; and cauterize in the neck.
E la manieyra del cauteri es fayta segon que es desus dit.	And the way of the cautery is done according to what has been said.
E ja es cauterizat sobre la boca del estomac; e es mays derier; e aprop sia curat am aquo que procezeys.	Then it is cauterized over the mouth of the stomach, and then leave it; and return to water that has been heated.
Capitol .viii.	Chapter VIII.
De cauterizacio de obblivio fayta per flacma.	Of the cauterization of a blister caused by fire.
Cove que sian donatz al malaute en le comensament jerras grans e pilulas le servel mondificantz.	Cover it with large jerks and small pills, sprinkling them on.
E aprop ras le cap tot del malaute e pausa sus le coguot de lu emplaustre de cetre descrit en le tractat dels emplastres.	Then return the head of the patient to the doctor who applied the paste described in the treatise on pastes.
E pausa aquel alcunas veguadas, quar aquel es manieyra de cauteri.	And hold this for a few moments, for this is a way of cauterizing.
E fay aquo segon aquel meteys orde le qual ja he dit.	Then return it to the doctor who applied the paste according to the order that I have already mentioned.
E donc si per aqueles sanat bo es; e sino, lahoras fay a lu tres cauteris en la deriera partida de sieu cap, les quals sian deysendentz de la partida pus sobirana del cap entro a la partida pus dejos del col.	And if it heals well, then do so. Otherwise, then make three cauterizations in the last part of his head, which are placed between the last horn and the one above it, from behind to the front within the circle.
E pausa entre quascun cauteri la grossetut del dit, e aprop cura lo cauteri am aquo que es procedit.	And hold the thickness of the said foot between each cauterization, and return the cauterization to water that has been heated.
Mays si tu vos addicio e le malaute es aquo tollerant, lahoras fay a lu cauteri en le mieg loc; e si voys major addicio, lahora cauteriza aquel sobre les dos corns.	However, if the patient is drinking water, then do not make the cauterization in the middle; and if you find a strong addition, then cauterize this one on two horns.
Aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat; e sia le cauteri olivar segon la forma denant donat.	Then return it to the patient where it heals well; and the cauterization should be olive-shaped according to what has been said.
Capitol .ix.	Chapter IX.
De cauterisacio de parazili e de mollificacio de tot le cors.	Of the treatment of a parasitic wound and of softening the whole body.
Cove que tu procesiscas en mondificacio del cap am jerras e am aquo que havem dit; e aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap, e am cauteri sobre totz les corns del cap, e am cauteri sobre la deriera partida de lu, e am tres cauteris sobre les spondils del col.	Then return the head of the patient to water that has been heated, and cover it with a paste according to what I have said; then return the head to the doctor who applied the paste; and return the neck to the same doctor, and make three cauterizations on the spine of the neck.
E si es necessari en la malautia de mollificacio del cors de trops aquel e les malautes tollerantz e la malautia es fort, lahoras cauteriza aquel am quatre cauteris sobre les spondils del dos, e dererament am cauteri entro que sia comborit de la codena mot de lu, e aleva la tieua ma.	And if it is necessary in the softening of the body of these three people and their tolerance to the softening is great, then cauterize this one with four cautery on the spine, and immediately afterwards hold the cauterization by fire until it is scorched from the tissue of the neck, and hold your hand.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat, e aquest sia cauteri olivar.	Then return it to the patient where it heals well, and this one should be olive-shaped.
Capitol .x.	Chapter X.
De cauterisacio de epilemcia.	Of the treatment of epilepsy.
No es cauterizat le epilemtic sino aquella epilemcia es per flecma.	The epilepsy should not be cauterized, but this disease is treated with fire.
E donc cove que mondifiques le cervel de lu al comensament de lu am yeras e am l’autra curacio la qual havem dicta en la divisio quan le malaute es gran e es tollerant la exceperacio de las medicinas.	Then cover the head of the patient at the beginning with a paste, and with the other treatment that I have mentioned in the division where the disease is great and tolerates the experience of medicine.
E si es enfant le qual no sufferte las medicinas, lahoras aministra guarguarissmes e mastiguatoris le servel mondifican, denant aquo per motz dias, am bonifficacio de las viandas.	And if it is a child who does not tolerate medicine, then administer the pastes and masticating pills in front of water for two days, with good nourishment.
E aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop cauteriza aquel am un cauteri en le mieg loc del cap segon la manieyra precedent, e am autre cauteri en le occiput de lu, e sobre quascun corn del cap sieu cauterisa.	Then return the head of the patient to the doctor who applied the paste; and make one cauterization in the middle of the head according to the previous method, and another on the top of the head, and on each horn of the head; and thus treat it.
E si le malaute es fort e es tollerant, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteris les quals he ditz, en havent paraliticament e mollificacio del cors sobre les spondils del col e les spondils del dos.	And if the disease is strong and tolerates it, then cauterize this one with the following cauterizations: on the spine of the neck, and on the spine of the back.
E sia cauteri olivar segon qu’es precedit.	Then, according to what has been said above.
Mays si le malaute es enfant, lahoras pausa cauteri subtil segon aquesta manieyra.	However, if it is a child, then hold the cauterization in this way.
Capitol .xi.	Chapter XI.
De cauterizacio de melencolia.	Of the treatment of melancholy.
Quan las causas de melencolia so humiditatz corrompudas e flacma gros, lahoras cauteriza aquel am les cauteris les quals havem ditz en le havent paralisi.	When the causes of melancholy are corrupted wet humors and thick fire, then cauterize this one with the following cauterizations: in having had paralysis.
E si la causa de melencolia es superfluitat declinant a melencolia, e le cors del malaute es humit, lahoras da ha beure aquo que mundifica le cervel de lu segon aquo que ha precedut en la divisio.	And if the cause of melancholy is a flow of air that declines into melancholy, and the body of the patient is wet, then return it to water that softens the brain according to what has been said in the division.
E aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop fay tortora decentment fayta de li sobre le cercle, e aprop depausa aquela en le mieg loc del cap.	Then return the head of the patient to the doctor who applied the paste; and hold it over the circle, and pause it in the middle of the head.
E le malaute sia sesent cayrat, e sia tengut de tota partida.	Then the patient should be forty years old, and let him lie down completely.
E aprop pausa liniment; et es pus digne de boder antic de ovelhas.	Then return it to oil; and it is now ready for a lamb's skin.
E escalfa aquel sobre le foc per calefaccio temprada per mesura, le qual le dit sufferta quan es mes en lu.	And put this over the fire with moderate heat, which the patient endures when it is warm enough.
E aprop vuo’ aquel en le mieg loc del cap de lu en le cercle, e leysa lu entro que sia enfregidat.	Then hold this one in the middle of his head in the circle, and let him lie down until he cools down.
E fay aquo am le malaute en tota semmana una veguada, am le autre regiment de lu bo entro que sia sanat; o si vols, cauteriza aquel fazen petitz puntz segon lo mays de lu, sino que tenguas la ma am un cauteri ayssi ordenat: aquesta es specia de cauteri la qual humecta le cervel am equalitat.	Then return the patient to water once a week, and treat him with the other remedy of the two; or you can cauterize this one by making small points according to what has been said above, then treat it. This is a special way of cauterizing that softens the brain with equality.
E aprop pausa aquel coto enbegut en boder o en grays de gualina.	Then return this one to oil that is gentle or gray in color.
Capitol .xii.	Chapter XII.
De cauterisacio de aygua descendent en le huel.	Of the treatment of descending water in the bowel.
Quan a tu es declarat le comensament de aygua en le huel per les senhals les quals yeu he ditz en la divisio, lahoras comensa e dona en beure al malaute aquo que mondifique le cap de lu, e guarda aquel de totas humiditatz.	When you have declared the beginning of water in the bowel by the signs that I have mentioned in the division, then begin and give the patient to drink water that softens his head, and keep it for all humors.
E fay aquel suzar en banh en degu per alcus jorns.	Then hold this one under the bath, and wash it with gentle soap for several days.
E aprop comanda a lu que raza le sieu cap, e cauteriza aquel am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap; e aprop cauteriza aquel am dos cauteris sobre dos templas si es le comensament de ysement de aygua en dos huels, o de la un latz si es comensamen de l’aygua en un huel.	Then order him to wash his head, and cauterize this one with one cauterization in the middle of his head; and if it is the beginning of water in two bowels, or of the water of a vessel, then make two cauterizations on two horns.
Incideys am cauteri totas las venas e arcerias las quals so dejos la codena; e sian les cauteris en aquela lonh en la latitut de las templas.	Then cut all the veins and arteries that are left by the codeña; and make these cauterizations in the middle of the horns, at the same level as the temple.
E guarda te de fluxs de sanc quan es cauterizat; e si veses de lu fluxs de sanc, osta le am alcuna medicina, la qual es a tu possible.	Then keep away from flowing water when it is being cauterized; and if the patient's blood flows, then give him some medicine that is suitable for him.
E yeu vindre am savieza la qual es en extraccio de arcerias e am abscizio de aquelas e cautela de fluxs de sanc.	Then I will bring you a paste that is made from the extract of arcias and free from those causes and careful about flowing blood.
E alcunas vetz es cauterizat en le cervitz dejos dos osses am dos cauteris dererament produzitz.	Sometimes, it is being cauterized in the neck between two bones with two cauterizations made immediately afterwards.
Capitol .xiii.	Chapter XIII.
De cauterizacio de lacrimas antiquas.	Of the treatment of old tears.
Quan lacrimas dels huels so antiquas assuduament e per las venas e arterias las quals so en le loc manifest del cap defora e es verificat que aquo es superfluitatz frejas flecmatiquas, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteri le qual havem recontat en le capitol de comensament de aygua cazent en les huels, e am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap e am dos cauteris en la cervitz dejos dos templas, e am dos cauteris en la cervitz dejos dos osses.	When the tears of the eyes are very old, flowing through the veins and arteries that are in the place manifest of the head defora and is verified that it is superfluitatz frías flecmatiquas, then cauterize that am cauteri which we have counted in le capitol beginning of water cazent in les huels, e am cauteri in le mieg loc del cap e am dos cauteris en la cervitz dejos dos templas, e am dos cauteris en la cervitz dejos dos osses.
E si indigeyses de addicio, lahoras cauteriza aquel en tot latz de la coa del huel sobre la extremitat del sobrecilh am petit cauteri.	And if you are in need of additional treatment, then cauterize that one on the whole of the side of the eye on the edge of the eyebrow with a small cautery.
Capitol .xiiii.	Chapter XII.
De cauterizacio de fetor de nas.	On the Cauterization of Nose Odor.
Quan tu medicas aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no aprofieyta la tua medicacio, lahoras tu aparelha e dona en beure al malaute las cochias per tres noytz; e aprop ras le cap de lu, e cauteriza le am cauteri migier am cauteri olivar.	When you have finished the medication that we have mentioned in the division and do not take advantage of your medication, then prepare and give to the patient three cups of wine; and appropriately cut his hair, and cauterize with a small cautery in the middle, with an olive cautery.
E aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri clavelh am dos cauteris sobre les dos sobrecilhs dejos les cabels un petit.	And then cauterize that one with a nail cautery on the two eyebrows, leaving the hair in place, with a small cautery.
E guarda te de la arceria que no incindas aquela.	And keep away from the fire so as not to burn that one.
E del cauteri clavilh aquesta es la forma.	And this is the form of the nail cautery.
Capitol .xv.	Chapter XV.
De cauteri de mollificacio de palpebras dels huels.	On the Cauterization of Palpitations of the Eyes of the Patient.
Quan la palpebra del huel es mollificada per malautia o per humiditat, lahoras cauteriza aquela palpebre1 am un cauteri am aquest cauteri lunar; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	When the eyelid of the eye is swollen due to illness or moisture, then cauterize that eyelid with a small cautery of the moon shape; and this is how you do it:
E si vos, cauteriza aquel sobre les dos sobrecils un petit am dos cauteris en tota partida, e sian elonguatz de las timporas.	And if you want to, cauterize on the two eyebrows a small amount with two cauteries in the whole area, and let them be elongated from the temples.
E sia la longitut de quascun cauteri segon la quantitat del sobrecil.	And be the length of each cautery according to the quantity of the eyebrow.
E no premas trop la tua ma am le cauteri, mays segon la quantitat que la tersa partida de la palpebre sia adhurida.	And do not press too hard on your hand with the cautery, more according to the quantity that the third part of the eyelid is dried up.
Capitol .xvi.	Chapter XVI.
De cauteri de la palpebre del huel quan les pels so convertitz a las partidas dedintz e punho le huel.	On the Cauterization of the Eyelid of the Patient When the Furrows Are Turned Inward and Thrust Out.
Quan les pels del huel son convertitz a las partidas dedintz ayssi que pungo le huel, cauteri en aquels es segon dos manieyras, quar cauteri o es am fer o es am medicina comburent.	When the patient's eyelids are turned inward, so that they protrude, then cauterize in two ways: either by fire or by burning medicine.
Si am cauteri de lu am foc, comanda al malaute denant aquo que leyse les sieus pels ayssi cum aquels les quals les mundan, entro que sian prolonguatz e engualhatz; e si punho aquel deves le lor naysement, lahoras tu strenh les huels de lu am una benda per so que no sia maugut entro que·ls pels sian nascutz.	If a fire cauterization, order the patient to look down so that his furrows are turned inward, so that they are not burnt and become scarred; and if he looks up, then tie his eyelids shut so that they do not bleed.
Donc cum siran nascutz e engualhatz, lahoras pausa le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop senha sobre la palpebre dels huels de lu am tenta, am senhal le qual sia segon la figura de fulha de merta, e sia le comensament del senhal prop dels pels.	Then, when they are scarred and turned inward, place the patient's head in the third position, and approach his eyelids with a needle, piercing them with a knot, and starting the knot right next to the furrows; and this is the beginning of the knot.
E aprop pausa coto enbegut en album de huou o en mucillatge de ptilli sobre le huel.	And then make a cut in white of an egg or in mucilaginous of a butterfly on the eyelid.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu.	And then light the cautery, and this is the form of it:
E aprop cauteriza sobre la figura la qual as senhada, petit a petit, em motas veguadas, entro que sia comburida la superficia de la codena la qual es ayssi cum fuelha de mirta, tota aparent propriament.	And then cauterize on the figure that you have drawn, little by little, until the surface of the eyelid is completely burned, and it looks like a leaf of mint, all apparent.
E senhal de sanetat de la tieua obra es que tu vegus la palpebre de l’huel ja esser contrayta e·ls pels de lu esser elevatz deves la punctura del huel.	And this is the sign of a successful surgery, that you see the eyelid of the patient already contracted and his eyelids elevated due to the puncture.
E donc eleva la tua ma e laysa aquel per tres jorns, e aprop pausa sobre lu coto am boder entro que sia eredicada la scara.	And then raise your hand and make a cut on it for three days, and then make a cut on the skin for the third day.
E aprop cura aquela am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And then heal that one with ointment until it is healed.
Mays si retorna per les pels alcuna causa aprop lor naysement e la palpebra es mollificada, lahoras fay autra vetz le cauteri sobre aquel tot ayssi cum avias fayt primieyrament.	However, if the furrows return for any reason and the eyelid is swollen, then make another cauterization on it at another time, as you did the first time.
Mays si les pels so en la palpebra dejos, lahoras cauterisa aquela entro que sia elevada al sieu loc natural e sia engualhat e que les pels no punhan le huelh.	However, if the furrows are on the inner side of the eyelid, then cauterize in such a way that it is raised to its natural position and turned inward, so that the furrows do not touch the eyelid.
Mays le cauteri am medicina comburent aquest es que comandes al malaute que leyse les pels entro que sian prolonguatz e engualhatz, e aprop sia fayta de carta de drap la forma de fuelha de mirtra.	However, this cauterization with burning medicine: order the patient to look up so that his furrows are turned outward, and then let them be prolonged and turned inward; and then make a cut in white of an egg or in mucilaginous of a butterfly.
E aprop pren de sabo conogut e de caus viva ana unc. .i., o quays aquo, e aprop mescle3 aquelas causas be, e fay aquo am festinacio per so que no sia enfregidat; e aprop expandeys de aquo sobre la carta la qual es fayta ayssi cum forma de fulha de mirtra, e pausa aquel sobre la un huel od amdos; e pausa dejos le huel coto enbegut en album de huou, e el cap del malaute sia en le tieu se.	And then tie it with a knot, and with a sharp blade. I, Take those two causes together, and then mix them well, and make a paste of it so that it does not dry out; and then pour the paste onto the cloth that you have prepared in this way: form a leaf of mint on it; and place that one on the patient' side; and then cut off the ear with a sharp blade.
E pausa le dit sobre le medicina e prem aquela un petit e no la mauguas entro que lo malaute senta la mordicacio de la medicina, quar mordicacio es en lu ayssi cum de foc.	And then put that one on the medicine and press it slightly so that the patient feels the bitterness of the medicine, because the bitterness is in the fire.
E donc cum percevera aquo que el atrobo mordicacio, lahoras leyssa la medicina e mau aquela am le tieu dit; donc cum cessa la mordicacio, lahoras remau la medicina he lava le huel am aygua; e lahoras considera si vezes la palpebra ja es levada ayssi cum es lavada deves la costriccio am foc o am incisio, quar lahoras esta be; e si no torna sobre aquela de la medicina sobre le loc en le qual no ha empremut la medicina e no se denigra entro que sia engualhada la tua operacio e sia contrayt le huel.	And then, when he feels the bitter taste, let him leave the medicine and make a cut on himself with a sharp blade; and if the cut does not hurt, then clean the patient' side with water; and then consider: if the eyelid has been raised in this way, and it is well washed, the surgery is successful; and if it returns to its original position, then it is unsuccessful.
E aprop pausa sobre lu coto am boder entro que sia eradicada la codena de la adhustio, e aprop cura aquel am enguent deafinicon o am autre entro que sia sanat.	And then make a cut on the skin for the third day, and then heal that one with ointment until it is healed again.
E es necessari a tu, deves la tua operacio que guardes am pervigil diligencia que en le huel no caia re de la medicina, e si la palpebre aprop alscus dias es mollificada e alcuna causa dels pels punh en le huel, lahoras itera la tua medicina sobre aquel loc le qual de la palpebre es mollificat, e propriamen ayssi quo as fayt al comensament, e aprop enaviro lu entro que sia sanat.	And you must take care that the patient not fall asleep during your operation, so that in the eye no drop of the medicine falls; and if the eyelid is swollen at any time due to the furrows, then repeat your surgery on that place where the eyelid is swollen, and exactly as you did it before, and then make a cut for healing.
E aquesta es la forma de fuelha de mirtra.	And this is the shape of a leaf of mint.
E sapias que les huels dels homes son diversificatz segon la magnitut e la parvitat, e donc segon aquo es fayta la tua contraccio.	You know that men's eyelids differ according to their size and age; and then you must adapt your surgery accordingly.
E no sira amaguada la via de rectetut ad aquel al qual es studi en aquesta art.	And do not copy the medicine of another, but study it in this art.
Capitol .xvii.	Chapter XVII.
De cauterizacio de fistula que es en le lacrimal de l’huel.	On the Cauterization of a Fistula in the Eye's Lacrimal Duct.
Quan tu curas fistula am aquo que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas aquela segon aquesta manieyra: comanda al malaute que pause le cap sieu en le tieu se, e tengua le cap de lu alcun ministre entre las tieuas mas en tal manieyra que no sia maugut ni agitat am le sieu cap.	When you treat a fistula with the water that we have mentioned in the division of the eyelids and do not consult your medicine, then cover it up and cauterize in this way: order the patient to place his head between his shoulders so that his hair is not moved or disturbed when he moves his head.
E aprop pausa coto enfus en album de huou o en mucellage de ptilli sobre le huel de lu.	And then make a cut in white of an egg or in a mucilaginous of a butterfly on the side of the eye.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma:	And then light the cauterization, and this is the form:
le qual sia conquau, ayssi cum es forma de cana o de pena de voltor, de la una extremitat am la qual es fayta lo cauteri.	A shape of a cane or a bird's feather, from one end to another, where the cauterization is made.
E si voys, sia penetrant entro a la autra extremitat.	And then let it pass through to the other end.
E si vols sia sort ayssi cum tenta.	If you want it to be curved, then let it bend in this way:
Mays empero aquel que es concau es milhor a la tieua obra.	However, if the curved one is better for your work.
E aprop prem la fistula si es uberta, e tra de lu sania et exsicca aquela.	And then press the fistula if it is open, and take out the liquid and dry it up.
E si no es uberta, lahoras obre aquela e extratz la poyredura de lu.	And if it is not open, then open it and extract the pus from it.
E aprop pausa sobre lu le cauteri le qual sia be ignit, e te am aquel la tieua ma un petit deves le cauteri del huel a la partida del nas, per so que no erre la tua ma o le malaute sia enquietat, e lahoras pausa le cauteri en le grays del huel e corrompas aquel.	And then place the cauterization over it if it is well lit, and then make a cut on the side of the eye with a small cautery, so that it does not hurt your hand or the patient; and then put out the fire in this way:
E donc si al comensament del tieu cauteri perve entro al os, bo es; e sino, lahoras itera le cauteri una veguada o dos, si mestiers era; e layssa aquel ayssi per tres jorns, e aprop pausa sobre aquel coto am boder e enviro lu am enguent exsiccatiu entro que sia sanat.	And so if at the beginning of the cauterization the bone burns, it is good; and otherwise, then repeat the cauterization once or twice if necessary, and leave it for three days, and place over that area a border and surround with an drying ointment until it is healed.
Mays si eran passatz xi dias e no es sanat, lahoras pausa sobre lu medicina aguda corrosiva entro que l’os sia descubert e sia ras segon que conveneys en le sieu capitol.	If after eleven days it has not healed, then place over it sharp corrosive medicine until the bone is exposed and scrape according to what is appropriate in his chapter.
E es autra manieyra de cauteri de fistula la qual alscus primiers diysero: enten al loc de la fistula e fen aquela e aprop pausa en aquela fissura camaen subtil del qual es la forma de lu: E fon en aquela la quantitat de i unc de plom fundut; e te la tua ma am camaem am bona retencio, e no sia maugut le malaute per so que le plom fundut no pervengua al huel de aquel; e cove que pausas sobre le huel del malaute coto enfus en album de huou o en aygua, quar plom adhureys le loc de la fistula e sana aquela per sanacio meravilhora.	And another way to cauterize a fistula: go into the place of the fistula and stop up it with a thin piece of plaster and place your hand over that small hole from which the water comes out, and pour in there a little melted lead; and then, keeping it covered with dry plaster, don't let it come into contact with the skin of the patient, but cover that area with fresh milk or water, for lead clings to the place of the fistula and heals it by a wonderful cure.
E si la fistula es sanada am aquo que havem dit del cauteri e de la curacio, bo es; e sino, lahoras es necessari aministrar trauc del nas e reduzir la fistula al cors del nas segon que vindra en son loc propri.	And if the fistula has been healed with water which we have spoken of in cauterization and cure, it is good; and if not, then it is necessary to administer a traction from the nose and reduce the fistula to its own place according to what will come out at its own place.
Capitol .xviii.	Chapter XVIII.
De cauterizacio de la fendedura des potz.	On the Cauterization of a Wound from a Lance.
Motas veguadas accideysso fissuras en las labias, e majorment en las labias dels enfantz.	Mottled spots may appear as cracks in the lips, and most often in the lips of children.
Donc cum tu curas aquelas fissuras am aquo que nos havem dit en las divisios e no aprofieyta la tua cura, lahoras igneys le cauteri petit cutellar segon aquesta forma que s’ensiec:	So you heal those cracks with water which we have spoken of in the divisions and don't profit from your healing, then burn a small knife according to this form which is set out here:
E sia la conquavitat de lu segon la subtilitat de cotella.	And its cavity according to the subtility of a knife's blade.
Aprop pausa aquel init cuytadament en aquelas fissuras entro que·l cauteri pervengua al preon de las fissuras.	Then place that carefully in those cracks so that the cauterization reaches the center of the cracks.
E aprop cura aquel am cerotz entro que sia sanat.	And then heal that with a pointed object so that it is healed.
Capitol .xix.	Chapter XIX.
De cauterizacio de fistula en la boca.	On the Cauterization of a Fistula in the Mouth.
Quan en la razit de uvula o en le paladar o en las razitz de las dentz endeve apostema e aprop fa brac, e aprop es rompuda, e aprop es antiquada, e corr brac e es fayta fistula, e aprop tu curas aquela e no aprofieyta a curacio, lahoras cove que tu igniscas cauteri segon la quantitat que sia receubuda en la fistula, e aprop met aquel ignit en le trauc de la fistola, e te la tua ma entro que pervengua le ferr ignit al preon de lu, e al derier de lu fazen aysso una veguada o dos; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que nos havem dit de la curacio entro que sia sanat.	When in the root of the uvula or in the palate or in the roots of the teeth an aphumation occurs and it becomes hard, and then it is broken, and then it is dried up, and then it forms a fistula, and then you heal that, and don't profit from the healing, then place that which has been heated to cauterize according to the quantity that has entered into the fistula, and then set that heated object on the opening of the fistula, and then let it reach the center of it with the hot iron, and then make a point on the back of the fistula; and then heal that with water which we have spoken of in healing, so that it is healed.
E donc si la sania es abscindita e es sanat, bo es; e sino, lahoras es necessari de descubrir le loc e hostar le os corrumput segon que vindra en son capitol.	And if the wound has been cut and is healed, it is good; and if not, then it is necessary to uncover that place and burn the corrupted bone according to what is appropriate in his chapter.
Capitol .xx.	Chapter XX.
De cauterisacio de las dentz e de mollificacio de las angivas.	On the Cauterization of Teeth and the Softening of Veins.
Quan las angivas son mollificadas per humiditat e las dentz son maugudas, e curas aquelas am medicinas e no confereys, lahoras pausa le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop igneys le cauteri la forma del qual vindra aprop aysso, enayssi que tu pauses la quanula sobre la dent e entromet en aquela le cauteri ignit festinantment, e te la tieua ma un petit entro que·l malaute cente la calor del foc a la razit de la dent esser pervenguda.	When the veins are softened by moisture and the teeth are loose, then heal those with medicine and don' not confer with it, then place the top of the head of the patient on the knee, and quickly burn a cauterization in the shape which will come out there, so that you do not pause the tongue over the tooth, and enter into that cauterized hot, and then your hand on the small one so that the heat of the fire reaches the root of the tooth.
E aprop leva la tua ma, e aprop itera le cauteri alcunas veguadas segon que vols.	And then take your hand away, and repeat the cauterization a few times according to what you want.
E aprop le malaute huompla la sua boca de aygua de sal e tengua aquela per una hora, e pueys stupa aquela, quar la dent mauguda es fermada e la gengiva mollificada es strenguda e la humiditat corrompuda es exsiccada.	And then place the patient's mouth under a stream of salt water and keep it there for an hour, and then stop it up, for the loose tooth is fixed and the softened gum is made strong and the corrupting moisture is dried up.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter XXI.
De cauterisacio de dolor de dent.	On the Cauterization of Toothache.
Quan dolor de dent es per fregiditat, o en lu es freg o verm, o no comfereys la curacio am medicina, lahoras cauteri en aquela es segon dos manieyras: o cauteri am boder de vacas, o cauteri am foc.	When toothache is caused by cold or by worms, and you don' not confer with the cure by medicine, then cauterize it in two ways: either cauterize at the edge of the cow's udder, or cauterize by fire.
Cauteri am boder es que tu prenguas boder de vacas e bulhas aquel en culhe de ferr , e aprop pren coto e envolopa le sobre la extremitat de la tenta, e aprop enmergeys aquel am boder bulhit, e pausa aquel sobre la dent dolorosa festinantment entro que sia enfregidat.	Cauterization at the edge is that you take the cow' udder and squeeze it in a ring of iron, and then put a clamp on and wrap it around the end of the tooth, and quickly burn that which has been squeezed by the iron, and place that over the tooth which hurts so that it cools down.
E aprop itera aquela alcunas veguadas entro que la vertut del foc pervengua a la razit de la dentz.	And then repeat that several times so that the power of the fire reaches the roots of the teeth.
E si voys, submergeys lana o coto en le boder desus dit, e pausa aquel sobre la dent dolent, e pausa sobre aquel ferr ignit entro que·l ferr pervengua al preon de la conquavitat de la dent.	And if you see it, dip a cloth or clamp in the cow' udder and place that over the tooth which hurts, and place the hot iron so that it reaches the center of the tooth.
Mays empero la cauterizacio am foc es que tu atendas a la quannula de eram o de ferr, e sia en le cor de lu alcuna grocesa e la acuitat del foc no pervengua a la boca del malaute.	But the cauterization by fire is that you hold the tooth with your hand or a clamp and are careful not to break it, and then let the power of the fire reach its center, and don' t let the fire reach the patient' s mouth.
E aprop igneys le cauteri la forma del qual vindra, e pausa aquel sobre la dent e te la tua ma entro que·l cauteri sia enfregidat; e fay aquo alcunas veguadas quar la dolor sira remauguda o en aquel dia o en l’autre dia.	And then set that cauterization in the desired shape, and place that over the tooth, and your hand so that it cools down; and make a little water, for the pain may return or on this day or on the other.
E cove que per empressio de aquel cauteri que·l malaute umpla la sieua boca de bon boder e tengua aquel per una hora e aprop scupa le; e aquesta es la forma del cauteri.	And so that, by the power of that cauterization, the patient' mouth is filled with salt water and kept there for an hour and then is spitted out, and this is the form of the cauterization.
E cauteriza am qual que tu voys extremittat segon que a tu es possible.	Cauterize in any extreme place that you can see.
E aquesta es la forma de la cannula:	And this is the form of the tube:
Capitol .xxii.	Chapter XXII.
De cauterizacio de extrophulos.	On the Cauterization of Extrophulus.
Quan extrophulos so de flecma e de humors fregas e no so hobedientz a digistio per medicinas e tu voys la digistio de aquelas leugerament, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri conquau la forma del qual es aquesta seguen, havent dos extremitatz hubertas per que yesca le fum deves le cauteri per l’autra extremitat, e pausa aquel ignit sobre aquel apostema una veguada, e autre si indigeyses de aquel, entro que pervengua al preon del apostema.	When extrophulus is made of slimy and cold humors which are not obedient to medicine, and you see the digestion of those a little, then set that cauterization in the form which is this: having two open ends so that the smoke reaches the cauterization on the other side, and place that burning over the swelling once, and if it is needed, from the other end, so that it reaches the center of the swelling.
E si l’apostema es pauca, lahoras pausa le cauteri segon la quantitat del apostema, e aprop leyssa le per tres jorns e pausa sobre lu coto enfus en boder entro que sia remaugut aquo que·l foc ha comburit.	And if the swelling is little, then place that cauterization according to the quantity of the swelling, and leave it for three days, and place over it a cloth in the border so that it does not cool down quickly.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent e tentas e draps entro que sia sanat.	And then heal that with an ointment and bandages until it is healed.
E la forma de la cannula o deu cauteri a tal es comveyter.	And the form of the tube or two cauterizations like this is to be used.
Capitol .xxiii.	Chapter XXIII.
De cauterizacio de rauquiera de votz e de constriccio de ale.	On the Cauterization of a Rash of Vows and of Constriction of Air.
Quan las humiditatz veno sobre le quanal del pulmo, e majorment quan aquo es am fregiditat de compleccio, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia evacuat al comensament am medicinas laxativas, e aprop cauteriza aquel deves la razit del golayro en le loc depremegut.	When the humidities come over the lung, and most when the air is cold or damp, then at the beginning of the medicine which softens the lung, then cauterize that in the root of the larynx in the place where it has been covered.
E guarda te que no pervenguas am le cauteri al golayro ni no comburas de la codena de lu sino un pauc.	And beware that you don' t burn the larynx or the lung with the fire or the charcoal of the wood.
E cauteriza aquel am autra cauteri deves la junctura del col en le derier espondil de lu.	Then cauterize that with another cauterization which is set at the joint of the neck in the last spine of the back.
E·l cauteri de lu sia clavilh sego la maniera precedent.	Let that cauterization be made according to the preceding manner.
E aprop cura aquel am aquo que es precedit entro que sia sanat.	And then heal that with water which has been spoken of, so that it is healed.
Capitol .xxiiii.	Chapter XXIV.
De cauterizacio de malautia del pulmo e de tos.	On the Cauterization of Pulmonary Malady and Coughing.
Quan tos e malautia de pulmo so de humiditatz fregas e le malaute no ha febre ni tisic e es malautia antiqua, lahoras cauterisa aquel am dos cauteris sobre la furcula en les locz depremegutz leontz e buoytz; e am autra cauteri en le mieg loc del pietz entre dos mamillos; e sia le cauteri clavilh segon la forma precedent.	When coughing and pulmonary malady are caused by slimy humors, and the patient does not have a fever or throat-ache, and it is old cough, then cauterize that with two cauterizations on the rib of the neck and another one between two breasts; and make the cauterization according to the preceding form.
E si vols, sia la tua cauterizacio punctan am le cauteri que es apelat puncta, la forma del qual precedeys en la ponctacio de dolor de aurelhas.	And if you wish, may your cauterisation be punctured with the cautery that is called punctum, the shape of which precedes in the puncturing of ear-pain.
E sian puntz entro cays ad aquels; e aprop cura aquel am aquo meteys que es precedit entro que sia sanat.	And may points be within the cavities; and appropriately cure those with water that precedes within them so that they are healed.
E ya sia le cauteri haventz tres ramps quar cauterizacio es am aquel: am una veguada podes far tres cauteris segon aquesta forma:	And when you have the three racks for cauterisation is made with one: with a single rack can make three cauterisations according to this form:
Capitol .xxv.	Chapter .xxv.
De cauterizacio de titillic que es le cap del ajutori.	On cauterisation of tickling that is the head of the instrument.
Quan le cap del ajutori es dislocat per causa de humiditatz lubricas e no es fermat en la hora del sieu retornament deves la sua dislocacio entro que sia a lu aquo costuma de retornar, e aprop per un petit movement es deslocat ayssi que s’endeve, ayssi cum nos havem testificat, lahoras cove que primieyrament redusiscas la dislocacio, e aprop le malaute sia reversat sobre le sieu dos o sobre le latz sa; e aprop eleva la codena la qual es en la partida dedintz del citillic a las partidas desus am les ditz de la tua ma sinistra, si la junctura es dislocada a las partidas dedintz.	When the head of the instrument is displaced by the cause of moist, lubricating and does not stop in the hour of its return to it's usual place, you should reduce the displacement within that it is returned to the custom water, and appropriately move a little it is moved so that it is thus, as we have testified, when first you reduce the displacement, and then raises the hook which is on the inside of the tickling from the start, and moves forward in this way with the fingers of your left hand, if the joint is displaced to the inside of the tickling.
E aprop igneys le cauteri havent dos caps; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And appropriately ignite two-headed cauterises; and this is the form of it:
E aprop cauteriza la codena entro que penetre aquela entro al autre latz; e vindra la figura de cauterizacio lahoras de iv caps cauteris.	And appropriate cauterise the hook within so that it penetrates one to the other side; and then will come the figure of cauterisation after four-headed cauterises.
e so aquel subtils segon la quantitat de tenta; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	and so the subtle according to the quantity of test; and this is the form of it:
E alcunas veguadas es ajustat segon aquest comte i per que son les cauteris .viii.	And some rack is adjusted according to this count, and for these are the cauterises .viii.
E aprop pausa sobre le cauteri porys cuytz am sal, e aprop fay adherir le malaute a trenquilitat, e lo membre no sia maugut per alcun temps entro que sia confortat.	And appropriately place over the cautery that is called salt, and appropriately make adhere the hook to quietness, and the member is not shaken by any time until it is comforted.
E si la dislocacio es a las partidas desus e tart es fayt aquo, lahoras cauteriza sobre le muscle am cauteri clavilh o am motz cauteris puntan, quar la junctura es confermada e la humiditat es romauguda e le malaute es sanat.	And if the displacement is to the outside and it is done so that it is returned, then cauterise on the muscle with the cautery that is called a clavil or a pointed cautery, because the joint is confirmed and the moisture is mixed and the hook is healed.
Capitol .xxvi.	Chapter  .xxvi.
De cauterizacio del stomac.	On cauterisation of the stomach.
Quan veno en l’estomac freg e motas humiditatz entro que aquel extrazo de la sua compleccio e so multiplicatz raumases a lu, e si tu continuas las manieyras de curacio e no confereyso, lahoras cove que le malaute sia sobre le sieu dos ressupinat, e extenda las suas mas e las suas coysas, e aprop cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris: an un cauteri dejos le pietz per la quantitat d’un dit am cauteri clavilh, e am dos cauteris dejos del dos costatz del cauteri, entro que vengua la figura de cauteri triangulada; e elonga entre els que no sian ajustatz que faran poyredura.	When it comes in the stomach to froth and moist within that it draws out from its connection and so increases raumases to it, and if you continue the methods of treatment and do not confer with it, then when the hook is on its back is raised up, and he extends his hands and his cushions, and appropriately cauterías it with three cauterises: at one cauterise leaves the foot per the quantity of a digit in a cautery called clavil, and at two cauterises leaves the sides of the two costs of cautery, within that is returned the figure of cauterised triangular; and he extends between those that are not adjusted that they will make poyredura.
E si la profunditat del cauteri la quantitat de les dos terses de la grocesa de la codena.	And if the depth of the cautery is the quantity of the two thirds of the thickness of the hook.
E sia la figura del cauteri segon aquesta forma ses addicio, E si vols, cauteriza am gran cauteri en le mieg loc del estomac segon aquesta forma; et aquest sia un cauteri segon la forma de cercle segon aquesta forma:	And be the figure of the cautery according to this form is addition, And if you wish, cauterises with one large cautery in your mid-stomach according to this form; and that it be a cautery according to the form of circle according to this form:
E sia cauterizat l’estomac punctan ad aquel que de aquest cauteri es spaventat: e es que tu senhes sobre l’estomac punt segon la quantitat que voles am tenta, e aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri en les puntz; e aprop cura aquel am la curacio qu’es precedita entro que sia sanat.	And be cauterised the stomach puncturing to that from this cautery is frightened: and it is because you know about the stomach puncturing according to the quantity that you want to try, and appropriately cauteris it with one cautery in the points; and appropriately cure it with the treatment that precedes within that it is healed.
Capitol .xxvii.	Chapter .xxvii.
De cauterizacio del fietge fret.	On cauterisation of the broken finger.
Quan endeve en le fietge dolor per fregiditat o per humiditat o per grossa ventositat entro que de la sieua normal compleccio sia getat per egressio superflua, e es curat le malaute am aquo que havem dit e no comfereys, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sua cervitz, e senhes am tenta tres cauteris segon aquesta forma et aquesta quantitat meteyssa sobre le fietge dejos dels ipocondres, la hon perve le decubit de home.	When it ends in the finger with pain by coldness or by moisture or by thick wind within that from its usual connection is got by extra fluid exit, and if you do not confer with it, then when the hook is on its back is raised up, and try three cauterises according to this form: and this quantity of water is poured over the finger from the hip-joints, which turns the bed of the man.
E sia l’espazi le qual es entre quascun cauteri segon la grossetut del dit, e sia le cauteri segon la longitut del cors dreyta.	And be the space that is between each cautery according to the thickness of the digit, and be the cautery according to the length of the right hand.
E no compremas la tua am le cauteri mot.	And do not try with one cautery move.
E si la quantitat de aquo que es adhurit la quantitat de la maytat de la specitut de la codena, e no y sia pus ajustat; e si le malaute stant sobre les pes de lu; e si no es estant, lahoras sia jassent, le qual ja ha extendudas las suas coysas, e eleve les sieus brasses.	And if the quantity of water that is added is the quantity of the most part of the side of the hook, and if it is not standing; then it should be laid down, which has already extended his cushions, and raise its hands.
E es aquesta la forma del cauteri:	And this is the form of the cautery:
E a tu es possible que cauterizes aquestz cauteris am cauteri cutellar, quan es am tu subtilitat e prudencia en l’art.	You can make these cauterises with cauterises that are called cutleries, when it is to you subtility and prudence in the art.
E guarda te que trop no procesiscas en la cauterizacio, e sia adhurida la specitut de tota la codena per que sia adhurit tot le cors e pervengua entro als budels, quar la codena aqui es subtil; e sapias aquo.	And keep that you do not try too much in the cauterisation, and be added the side of all the hook so that it is added to the whole body and reaches within the bowels, because the hook here is subtle; and know water.
Capitol .xxviii.	Chapter  .xxviii.
De perforacio de apostema del fietge am cauteri.	On piercing of a boil on the finger by cautery.
Quan endeve excitura o apostema en le fietge e voles saber si aquel apostema es en le carn del fietge o en la tunica de lu, lahoras si es en la carn del fietge, le malaute atrobo gravitat e dolor ses acuitat.	When it ends in excitement or a boil on the finger and you want to know if that boil is in the flesh of the finger or in the skin, then if it is in the flesh of the finger, the hook has great pain and acute pain.
E si es en la tunica del fietge, am la dolor es acuitat gran e vezes que ja afatiguatz les metges la cura de lu.	And if it is in the skin of the finger, then the pain is acute and great so that you tire the treatments of it.
Donc cove que·l malaute sia enversat sobre la sieua cervit; e aprop senha le loc de l’apostema am tenta; e aprop igneys le cauteri le quel es asemblat a rag, la forma del qual a precedit en l’autra pagina.	Then when the hook is on its back is raised up; and appropriately try the place of the boil; and appropriately ignite the cautery that is called rag, the shape of which preceded in the other page.
E cauteriza am aquel i cauteri entro que tota la codena sia comborida, entro que pervengua al ciphac, entro qu’en yesca sania.	And make cautery with it and within that all the hook is combined, so that it reaches the cup-holder, so that it burns in the fire and heals.
E aprop cura aquel per curacio dels autres apostemas entro que sia sanat.	And appropriately cure it with the treatment of other boils, so that it is healed.
E no cove que de aquesta forma de cauteri use sino aquel del qual le estudi en l’art de medicina es prolonguat, e en las mas del qual motas malautias an conogut; mays aquest am esperiment alcunas veguadas sia ardit sobre aquesta operacio, mays empero leyssa aquela deves nos, e es miels.	And do not know that this form of cautery use is prolonged in the art of medicine which is known to have discovered some malicious diseases; however, sometimes it is appropriate to try this operation, however, more should be left on it for a while, and then better.
Capitol .xxix.	Chapter   .xxix.
De cauterizacio de plauresi.	On cauterisation of plauresis.
Diyssero les antics cauteri de las razitz de aristologia a plauresi frega segon aquesta manieyra esser fazedor, e es aquest que tu prenguas de las razitz de aristologia longa secca una razit pun longua que es trobada, e sia de la grossetut del dit.	They said that the small cauterises of the teeth of the surgery are made according to this way that is a maker, and this is what you take from the teeth of the surgery long dry one tooth that is found, and be of the thickness of the digit.
E aprop submergeys aquela en oli e eysen aquela al foc, e aprop cauteriza per un cauteri en aquel loc le qual es entre la continuacio de la furcula am le col; e am dos cauteris petitz dejos guidazi, un pauc declinans a la partida que es dejus la barba, e am dos cauteris en aquo que es declinant entre la quinta costa e la cizena, declinant un pauc a las partidas detras; e am autre cauteri en le mieg loc del pietz; et am autre sobre l’estomac, et am tres cauteris de las partidas detras; et am un cauteri en aquel loc le qual es entre las dos spallas, e am dos cauteris dels dos latz del pietz, dejos le cauteri le qual es entre doas spallas.	And appropriately submerge it in oil and dry it out at the fire, and appropriately cauterien with one small cautery on that place which is between the connection of the collar to the throat; and with two small cauterises from the sides guidazi, one a little declining from the start that should be left the beard, and with two small cauterises in water that is declining between the fifth cost and the chin, declining a little to the behind parts; and with another cautery in your mid-foot; and with another on the stomach, and with three cauterises of the behind parts; and with one cautery in that place which is between the two shoulders, and with two cauterises of the sides of the foot, left the cautery that is between those two shoulders.
E no cove que compremas la tua ma am le cauteri, ans sia en le manifest de la codena en obra.	And do not know that you try with one cautery, and then be it in the form of the hook in the work.
E ja diyssero alscus antics que so alscus dels homes les quals uson de cauteri de ferr semblant a ray e igneysso aquel, e meto aquel en aquel loc le qual es entre las costas, entro que pervenguam am aquel ad aquel apostema e sia foragetada sania, ayssi cum havem dit en l’apostema del fietge.	And already said that some tricks are made with the men of cauterises that seem to be iron similar to fire and ignite it in that place which is between the ribs, so that they reach at that point to that boil and is a burning wound, as we have said in the boil of the finger.
Mays en aquesta perforacio am cauteri no es ses temor, quar hu mor tantost ho accideys en le loc fistula a la qual no es sanacio.	No it is not feared that in this perforation the cautery will fail to be made, for when such things happen at the fistula site there is no cure.
Capitol .xxx.	Chapter .xxx.
De la cauterizacio de la melsa.	Of the Cauterization of the Leg.
Quan tu curas la malautia de la melsa am aquo que havem dit de la curacio en la divisio e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cauteri en lu es segon tres manieras, las quals totas son dreyturieras, de las quals la una es que fassas tres cauteris o quatre linhan segon la longitut de la melsa segon la figura dels cauteris del fietge, la figura dels quals ha precedit.	When you treat the leg injury of the horse, I have told you before about the treatment in the division and do not confer your treatment, then cauterize it according to three ways, all of which are true, one is that you make three cauterizations or four long according to the length of the leg according to the figure of the cauterization of the foot, the figure of which has preceded.
E sia entre quascun cauteri la grossetut d’un dit o un pauc mes, e la manieyra del cauteri sia la manieyra la qual havem dita en le cauteri del fietge engualment.	And between each cauterization there is a thickness of a finger or a little less, and the manner of cauterizing is the same as we have said in the cauterizing of the foot, equally.
E no compremas la tua ma am le cauteri; e le malaute sia eves sobre lo sieu dos.	And do not compress your hand with the cauterization; and the horse be even on its two feet.
E es autra manieyra de cauterizar, so es que tu igniscas le cauteri haventz dos vertimentz, la qual causa havem dita en le capitol de dislocacio del muscle, e elava la codena la qual es en le endreyt de la melsa la hon perve le jazer del malaute sinistre.	And another way to cauterize is that you ignite the cautery having two flames, which we have said in the chapter of dislocation of the muscle, and raise the knife which is at the end of the leg which causes to run the nerve of the horse without hurting it.
E sia la tua elevacio am la qual elevas la codena segon la longuesa del cors, per que sian faytz cauteris segon la latitut del cos.	And be your elevation with which you raise the knife according to the length of the leg, so that the cauterizations are made according to the thickness of the body.
E aprop entromet les dos vernimentz, ignitz mot, en aquel entro que am aquels penetres la codena de la autra part.	Then introduce the two flames, ignite it, in that place which touches on the other side with the knife.
E aprop extrayt le cauteri; e donc son faytz quatre cauteris.	Then remove the cauterization; and there are four cauterizations.
E si voys, cauteriza am cauteri havent tres vernimentz.	And if you see that, cauterize with three flames of cauterization.
E aprop tu cura le cauteri pus que aia laysat de getar brac per trops jorns, quar mays es comferent que las autras causas precedentz en la curacio.	And you cure the cauterized leg that has not been burned by the sun for many days, because it is more certain than other causes that precede in the treatment.
Capitol .xxxi.	Chapter .xxxi.
De cauterizacio de ydropici.	Of the Cauterization of the Horse.
Cauteri no catz en ydropici sino en alcinte3 propriament.	The cauterization does not burn in water but only in air.
Quan tu curas le ydropic am las manieyras de curacio las quals havem ditas en la divisio e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que aquel cauterizes am quatre cauteris en le cercuit del embelic e am un cauteri sobre l’estomac, e am autre cauteri sobre le fietge, e am autre cauteri sobre la melsa, e am dos cauteris entre les spondils del dos, e un cauteri en lo dreyt del pietz, e am autre cauteri sobre l’estomac.	When you treat the water injury with the treatments that we have said in the division and do not confer your treatment, then cover it up so that it is cauterized with four cauterizations on the circuit of the saddle, and one cauterization on the stomach, and another cauterization on the horse's back, and another cauterization on the leg, and two cauterizations between the spasms of the two legs, and a cauterization on the right foot, and another cauterization on the stomach.
E la quantitat de la profunditat del cauteri sia propdana a la spicitut de la codena.	And the quantity of the depth of the cauterization is proportional to the thickness of the knife.
E aprop layssa le cauteri ubert per so que gete brac per lonc temps.	Then leave the cauterized leg so that it does not burn by the sun for a long time.
E no evacuas le malaute de curacio aprop le cauteri am aquo que cove per que sian agreguadas a lu doas entencios, e sira festinada a lu am ajutori sanacio.	And you do not empty the horse of the treatment nearby the cauterization so that they are added to its two legs, and it goes down with its own weight, and it is healed by the help of God.
La forma del cauteri am lo qual es cauterizat lo ventre sia clavilh segon que la forma de aquel es desus precedent, e es aquel am le qual es cauterizat le dos sia olivar segon qu’es precedent a la sua forma.	The form of the cauterization with which the stomach is cauterized is square according to the shape that precedes it, and this is that with which the two legs are olive according to their shape preceding them.
Capitol .xxxii.	Chapter  .xxxii.
De cauterizacio de pes e de las coyssas.	Of the Cauterization of the Feet and Thighs.
Quan les pes so apostematz en ydropitz e so repletz de aygua sitrina, cove que cauterisas les pes sobre le dos del pe in nocrati aquo que es entre le auricular e le anular, e eleva la tua ma am le cauteri e no torses aquel; e aprop eleva la tua ma, e no retornes aquela de tot, quar l’aygua satrina rezuda.	When the feet are wet with water and they have been filled with warm water, then cauterize the toes of the foot on the second toe of the foot in a circular motion, and raise your hand towards the cauterization, and do not twist it; then raise your hand, and do not turn it all back, because the warm water is lost.
Es le cauteri segon aquesta forma: E aprop fay sobre las doas coyssas dos cauteris, e en quascuna coysa sia feyt cauteri am la extremitat del cauteri cutellar.	It is the second cauterization according to this form: And then make two points on the thighs with two cauterizations, and one cauterization is made at the tip of each cauterization knife.
E sia le cauteri segon la longitut de la coyssa: i dejos le denolh e l’autre jos le mieg loc de la coyssa; e sobre quascuna coyssa dos cauteris.	And be the cauterization according to the length of the thigh: and I leave the back and the other one lower down at the middle of the thigh; and two cauterizations on each thigh.
E layssa la plagua uberta ses curacio per lonc temps per so que alcuna aygua resuda de lu.	Then leave the wound open for a long time so that no water is lost from it.
E aprop cura le am aquelas causas las quals havem ditas.	And you cure it with those treatments that we have said.
Capitol .xxxiii.	Chapter   .xxxiii.
De cauterizacio de cos de ventre.	Of the Cauterization of the Abdomen.
Quan cos de ventre es per freg e per humiditat entro que debelice las vertutz, so es la vertut digestiva e retentiva, las quals so en l’estomac e en les budels, e es curat aquo am las manieyras de curacio e no confereys, e vezes le malaute suffertan cauteri de vertut exhiberant, lahoras cauteriza aquel am gran cauteri sobre le sieu stomac segon que a precedit en la cauterizacio del estomac, am le cauteri del cercle e am quatre cauteris en le cercuit del embelic subtils, am cauteri clavilh subtil; e am cauteri sobre le alcatin sobre alozis gran, o am dos cauteris.	When the abdomen is sore from rubbing and moisture that causes to run the juices, it is the digestive virtue and the retaining one, which are in the stomach and the intestines, and it is cured with treatments of the treatment and do not confer your treatment, and sometimes the horse suffers cauterization by showing the virtue, then cauterize it with a large cauterization on its own stomach according to what precedes in the cauterization of the abdomen, and four cauterizations in the circuit of the saddle according to that which precedes, and one cauterization with a sharp knife; and a cauterization over the alcatin according to the alozis, or two cauterizations.
E si vezes las humiditatz exhuberants e le malaute aquo tollerant, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre le pentenilh e sobre les budels, e fort leu ajustant dos cauteris sobre l’estomac e prop dels inguonas, quar es curacio perficent de juvament de la qual no erras.	And if the horse sometimes suffers from abundant moisture and it tolerates it, then cauterize it on its own stomach and the intestines, and firmly join two cauterizations over the abdomen and close to the inguinas, because it is a perfect treatment for the health of which there is no cure.
Capitol .xxxiv.	Chapter .xxxiv.
De cauterizacio de emorroydas antiquas.	Of the Cauterization of Ancient Hemorrhoids.
Quan so en la natura derier emorroydas antiquas o una de humors grossas fregas o de humiditatz corrompudas, e son curadas am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no confereys la tieua curacio, lahoras cauterisa am tres cauteris sobre le pus dejos spondilh del dos petit e petit triangular, e am cauteri desus le ombelic cays per dos ditz.	When there is an old hemorrhoid or a thick humor that runs or corrupt moisture, it is cured with the treatment we have said in the division and do not confer your own treatment, then cauterize it with three cauterizations on the left side of the two legs, and one cauterization over the navel, and cut off the top two ditz.
E si doptas que l’estomac de lu sia enfregidat e la vianda de lu no sia degerida, e la cara de lu vezes apostemada, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre l’estomac am gran cauteri segon que es precedit; e am un cauteri sobre fietge, e am autre cauteri sobre la melsa de lu am cauteri clavilh, e leyssa le cauteri per alcun temps ubert, e aprop cura lu entro que sia sanat.	And if you suspect that the horse's abdomen is wet and its food is not digested, and its face sometimes snots, then cauterize it on its stomach with a large cauterization according to what precedes; and one cauterization on the horse's back, and another cauterization on the leg with a sharp cauterization, and leave the cauterized leg for some time, and then cure the inside that is healed.
Capitol .xxxv.	Chapter  .xxxv.
De cauterizacio de atheyl aprop la abscizio de lor.	Of the Cauterization of Atheyl Aproximating the Absence of Them.
Quan tu abscindes atheyl, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri que es asemblat a ray.	When you separate the atheyl, then your hand ignites the cauterization that is formed with fire.
Aprop entremet aquel ignit en aquel atheyl abscis, e ultima la tieua ma entro que pervengua le cauteri al orifici de la vena de la qual ve la sanc.	Then introduce that fire in the separated atheyl, and at the end of your hand enter so that the cauterization reaches the opening of the vein from which it comes out.
E fay aquo una vetz o doas, quar si achieyl son trops, lahoras cauteriza quascun de lor segon que havem recontat, e aprop cura aquels am aquo que confereys a lor dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And make one or two points, because if atheyl is a horse, then cauterize each of them according to what we have said, and cure those with the treatment that we have said, so that they are healed inside by God's will.
E si cauterizas am gran cauteri sobre alquatin, es mays derier en juvament.	And if you cauterize with a large cauterization on the alozis, it is more likely to heal.
Capitol .xxxvi.	Chapter .xxxvi.
De cauterizacio de fistolas que son faytas en la natura derie en las partidas de lu.	Of the Cauterization of Fistulas That Are Caused by the Nature of the Horse in Its Joints.
Quan la natura no obeziys a la obra la qual havem recomtada en son loc, e·l pacient es espaventat per aquo, sia sanat am cauteri.	When nature does not obey to the work that we have recommended in its place, and the patient is scared by it, he is healed with treatment.
Donc quan ad alcun ve fistola en la natura derier, e es antiquada, corro sania de lu e humiditatz corrompudas, e donc aquo que es pus digne que cove es que proes aquela am tenta subtil, e aprop conoys la quantitat de la profunditat de lu am la devant dita tenta.	And if at any time a vein bursts in nature due to old age, and the corrosion of dry moisture and corrupt moisture, then it is cured with treatment that is more subtle than what has been said before, and you take the quantity of its depth with the hand that touches it.
Aprop igneys le cauteri que es semblant a ray.	Then ignite the cauterization that is like fire.
E aprop met aquel cauteri ignit en aquesta fistula, e segon la quantitat en la qual intrec la tenta.	And then introduce that cauterization into this fistula, and according to the quantity in which it touches the hand.
E itera sobre aquela le cauteri entro que sian comburitz aquels cors corrumputz tost una veguada o dos o tres, segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	And go back over those areas that are burned, until the corrupted humors have been completely destroyed once or twice or three times, according to the quantity of your need.
E guarda te de combustio de nervi e de vena; o si fistula va al cors de la vesica o al cors del budel, lahoras guarda te de totz aquels locz; e no fassas aquo sino quan la fistula es en loc carnos e cogitas que no es penetrant.	And beware of burning the nerves and veins; or if a fistula goes into the body of the bladder or into the hernia, then be careful at all those places; and do not pour it out unless it is in a flesh area and you think that it does not penetrate.
E aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat.	Then care for the area so that it heals.
E si le loc es sigillat, e so abscindidas de lu las materias, e roman ayssi per lonc temps, lahoras sapias que ja es curat entierament.	And if the wound is closed and the matter has been removed from it, and there remains no more of it for a long time, then you will know that it has been completely healed.
E si las materias no so de lu ostadas, lahoras sapias que es penetrant o en le preon de lu os corromput, o cays aquo de aquelas causas de las quals vindra rememoracio en son loc.	And if the matter is not left behind from it, then you will know that it has penetrated into the bone or the tendon of the foot, or that it comes from those causes for which there is a reminder in its place.
Capitol .xxxvii.	Chapter .XXXVII.
De cauterizacio dels ronhos.	Of the Cauterization of Wounds.
Quan en les ronhos endeve dolor per freg o per grossa ventozitat, e per aysso le coyt del malaute es amermat, lahoras cove que cauterizes aquel sobre les ronhos am cauteri sobre quascun ronho am cauteri clavilh del qual precesic la rememoracio.	When there is pain in the wounds from drying or from strong wind, and because of this the skin of the patient's thigh is wrinkled, then you should know that it is necessary to cauterize each wound individually with a pointed cautery, starting from the center of the wound.
E fort leu cauterizam am le segon un petit dejos, per que vindran tres cauteris liniatz, e donc siran mays deriers en juvament.	And very strongly cauterize the second with a small point, so that three thin lines will remain, and then join them together quickly.
Capitol .xxxviii.	Chapter.XXXVIII.
De cauterizacio de la vesica.	Of the Cauterization of the Bladder.
Quan accideys en la vesica debelitat e mollificacio per freg e per humiditatz ayssi que·l malaute la urina no retengua, lahoras cauteriza aquel en la partida pus dejos sobre la vesiqua, la hon comensan les pels del pentenilh, e cauteriza am un cauteri en la partida dreyta, e am autre en la senestra de lu.	When there is pain and softening in the bladder from drying and from humidity, so that the patient does not retain urine, then cauterize it at the beginning of the urethra with two points, one on the right side, and another on the left side.
E sia la longitut de quascun cauteri segon la cantitat dels not del pous; e cauteriza aquel am cauteri en la partida pus bassa del dos, o am dos cauteris si es necessitat.	And make the length of each cautery according to the quantity of the discharge; and cauterize it with one or two cauteries at the lowest part of the urethra, or with two if necessary.
E sia cauteri clavilh segon que es procesit.	And make a pointed cautery according to how it has progressed.
Capitol .xxxix.	Chapter.XXXIX.
De cauterizacio de la mayra.	Of the Cauterization of the Mouth.
Quan veno en la mayra freg e humiditatz, e per aysso es prohibida enpreignacio, e son corrompudas las mestruas de lu, e es tardada la provocacio de lor, e accideys dolor deves le haveniment de lor, lahoras cove que·l loc sia cauterizat am tres cauteris en le circuit del ombelic, ayssi cum havem dit en le cauteri de la vesica; e am cauteri sobre le loc pus dejos del dos, o am dos cauteris, e sia le cauteri clavilh.	When there is pain in the mouth from drying and from humidity, and because of this incisions are prevented from being made, and the secretions of the mouth are corrupted, and the onset of their discharge is delayed, then know that the area should be cauterized with three cauteries around the navel, as has been said in the cauterization of the bladder; and a cautery on the lowest part of the two, or two cauteries, and the last one should be pointed.
Capitol .xl.	Chapter.XL.
De cauterizacio de la dislocacio de l’anqua.	Of the Cauterization of a Dislocated Ankle.
Quan humiditatz moucozas so efundudas a la partida de la anqua, e so faytas causas del yssiment del sieu loc, e senhal de lu es que la coyssa es prolonguada sobre l’autre quan so comparadas entre lor.	When the ankle is wet with mucus, and there are causes for its swelling at the beginning of its motion, and it is clear to you that the cushion is prolonged on the other when they are compared with each other, then know that:
E le loc de la dislocacio es atrobat en lu quays boyt.	The dislocated joint is found in its cavity.
Adonc cove que cauterizas le malaute sobre la partida de la anqua de lu am cauteri a sercle semblant, pus que tu auras senhat am tenta en le cercuit de la partida ayssi cum es revolguda, e per so que la partida caia el mieg loc del cercle.	Then, having made the circle of the ankle with a pointed cautery, you will have to make an incision in its center, because you will not be able to determine whether it is to be extended on one side or the other; and so that the center falls into the place of the circle.
E sia le cauteri del qual precedit la forma en la cauterizacio del estomac.	And make a cautery with which you will proceed in the form of cauterization of the stomach.
E si aquest cauteri no es a tu present, lahoras cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris am cauteri olivar gran.	And if this cautery is not suitable for you, then cauterize it with three cauteries, and make the last one very large.
E sia fayt le cauteri segon la quantitat de la ispicitut de tota la codena; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And make the cautery according to the quantity of the severity of all the wound; and carefully care for the area that is cauterized.
Capitol .xli.	Chapter.XL.
De cauterizacio de la vena sciatica.	Of the Cauterization of the Sciatic Nerve.
Quan dolor ve en la partida de anqua, e so causa de lu freg et humiditatz, le malaute es curat am aquo que havem dit e no confereys, e aquo es antiquat, lahoras cove que tu lacses le malaute de humors grosses am pillulas fetidas o am pillulas artificials o semblantz; e aprop cauteriza aquel.	When there is pain in the ankle joint from drying and from humidity, then the patient' body is deprived of the fluid that we have mentioned, and this fluid is bitter, then know that it is due to thick humors; and carefully care for the patient from humors that are foul-smelling, or from artificial humors, or from similar things; and cauterize it.
E la manieyra del cauteri en aquela es segon dos manieyras: o cauteri am medicinas comburentz, o cauteri am foc.	And the way of cauterizing in that case is according to two methods: either cauterize with burning medicines, or cauterize with fire.
Sira segon dos manieyras scientas, de las quals es la una que cauterizes aquel sobre la partida de l’ancha de lu am tres cauteris triangulatz segon aquesta forma; e fay am aquels bona profunditat.	The second is to cauterize it on the edge of the blade with three triangular cauteries, following this form; and make them of good depth.
E sia le spazi le qual es entre cascun cauteri la quantitat de la grossitut del dit e si le cauteri olivar o gran.	And make the space between each cautery according to the quantity of the thickness of the blade; and if the cautery is large or small.
Mays alcunas veguadas sia le cauteri sobre le mieg loc sobre le cap de l’anquan per que son quatre cauteris.	A few more words about cauterization: some people believe that it is useful to cauterize the back of the ankle with four cauteries, two on each side, to prevent pain in the future.
E si vols, cauteriza am le cercle del qual es precesida la forma en la cauterizacio de la dislocacio de l’anqua, la i que sia cercle continent e comburey la ispicitut de tota la codena.	If you wish, cauterize the circle with which the form is preceded in the cauterization of the dislocated ankle joint, and make it large, burning the severity of all the wound.
E aquesta es la manieyra de cauteri in ciatiqua quan dolor es adherent al anqua e no es estenduda entro a la coyssa.	This is the way to cauterize in the case when pain is attached to the ankle and does not extend within the cushion.
Mays si es estenduda entro a la coyssa, lahoras cauteriza aquel am dos cauteris sobre la coyssa sobre le loc al qual envireys le malaute que es la dolor; e am un cauteri sobre la cavilha per quatre ditz un pauc deves la part cilvestra.	And if it is extended within the cushion, then cauterize it with two cauteries on the cushion at the place where the pain is; and one cautery on the shin bone for four times, a little less in size.
E si le cauteri cutellar, e sia la profunditat del cauteri segon la quantitat de la ispicitut de la codena.	And if the cauterization is with a blade, and make the depth of the blade according to the quantity of the severity of the wound.
E si le malaute envireys que la dolor es estenduda entro al loc prop les ditz des pes, lahoras cauteriza aquel aqui on envireys am cauteri per tres puntz o quatre o mays si indigeys de aquel.	And if the pain is extended towards the feet, then cauterize it at that place with three or four points or more, if necessary, to prevent pain in that area.
E si le malaute envireys dolor esser dejos le donolh ves la coyssa, lahoras cauteriza aquel aqui am un cauteri cutellar.	And if the patient feels pain on the side where the pain is, then cauterize it with a blade at that place.
E guarda te en tota cauterizacio que no ultimes am le cauteri en tant que comburas nervi o gran arceria, e que per aquo a tu es sobre le malaute mal noccument o contraccio.	And be careful in any cauterization so that you do not burn nerves or cause great pain, and because of this, it is necessary to apply oil to the body, or to rub it with something soft.
E yeu ja e vist un e autre de aquels les quals cauterizero sobre la cavilha e ultimero en la cauterizacio, e la cama foc inflada entro que la tumor aconseguit lo pe, e foc perforat e corromput tot le pe.	You have already seen one of these, which I cauterized on the shin bone and finished it off in the cauterization, and the fire burned within the mass until it reached the foot, and the hole was pierced through the entire foot.
E aprop accidic fort solucio de ventre, e aprop aquo la mort.	Then a very great remedy for the stomach, and death soon came to him.
E si la dolor es en dos partidas ensemps cauteriza quascuna segon aquesta manieyra.	And if the pain is in two parts, then cauterize each one according to this method.
E diysero les savis alcus en la cauterizacio de anqua cauteri del qual aquesta es la manieyra: fay semblant a cercle de ferr del qual le cercuit sia la maytat de un palm; e sia deves le sieu orrifici segon la grossesa de un os de datil o mens un pauc.	The wise men say in the cauterization of the ankle joint this is the way: make a circle of iron, of which the circuit is most of a palm; and make the hole according to the thickness of an apple or a little more.
E dedintz aquel cercle sia un autre tertz; e sia le spazi le qual es entre lor la quantitat del notz del pous; e sian aquels cercles ubertz de dos partidas; e sia la longitut de aquels cays un notz o dos notz, e fay en aquels margue de ferr decentment apparelhat en les cercles; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And within each circle is another third circle; and make the space between them according to the quantity of the discharge from the foot; and let these circles be open at both ends; and this is how it is done.
Aprop sia ignit en le foc entro que s’enrogesisca e gete scintillas, e aprop sia pausat sobre la partida del anqua, le malaute colcat sobre le latz sa.	Then let it burn within the fire until it becomes red and gives off sparks; and let it be placed on the edge of the ankle joint, so that it cannot move; and this is how to do it.
E donc cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris redontz en una veguada.	And cauterize it with three pointed cauteries in one line.
E aprop layssa aquel per tres jorns; aprop emplastre aquel am boder e layssa la plagua uberta per trops dias; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	Then let it be left for three days; then apply a paste to it, and leave the wound open for four days; and carefully care for it so that it heals.
Diys Albucasis : o, filhs, de aquesta specia de cauteri pauc havem usat per la terror del reguardament de lu, e per aquo que paucs havem trobatz les quals reguardan sobre lu.	Albu Cassius says: "Son, in this type of cauterization, we have not much used it because of the fear of burning; and because of this, few have found those that look at them closely.
Mays dels bos cauteris a lu qui les sufferta, et atroba am aquel le loc de lu.	May the best cauterizers be brought for him who suffers, and turn away from him that place where he is.
Mays cauteri am medicinas adhurentz es que tu fassas dos cercles haventz armula perforada en la qual deyssen le guaffo de la porta de ferr; sia la longuitut de la paretz en la nauteza de lor sian dos nozes o quays aquels.	May the best cauterizers be brought for him who suffers, and turn away from him that place where he is; may the length of the pargeting in the náuglety of their sight be two noyes or quays which they have made by piercing the door with an arrow;
E si le spazi le qual es entre quascu la quantitat de la grossitut del dit; e sian ubertz dejos e desus, e sian que contenguan se entre lor segon aquesta forma:	And if the space is between each amount of thickness; and they are opened up above and below, and may be so that they contain themselves according to this form:
E aprop pausa sobre la partida de la anqua le malaut jasent sobre le latz sa, e comprem la tua ma sobre la partida de la anqua; e aprop pren de aygua cauda e fon la entre dos cercles, e la qualiditat de aquela sia am le foc petit a petit, e te aquela per la quantitat de una hora, e sufferta le malaute la mordicacio e la adhustio de lu — quar aquel atrobo mordicacio ayssi cum de foc — entro que cesse la mordicacio.	And place your hand above the joint of the ankle while the patient stands on his feet, and compress your hand above the joint of the ankle; and bring water from a tail and pour it between the two circles, and the quality of that be as hot as you can, and suffer the patient the pain and the burning - so that it ceases the pain.
E aprop eleva la tua ma am le instrument et abstergeys l’aygua cauda de tota la anqua am aygua dousa.	And then raise your hand with the instrument, and wash out the tail of the water from all the ankle with two-fold water.
E aprop leyssa aquel per tres jorns e pausa sobre aquel boder entro que sia la negror de la adhustio remauguda, e leyssa aquo per alcus jorns, e correra de lu poyredura; aquest es derier en juvament.	And then leave him for three days and place over it the border until the blackness of the burning is refreshed, and leave water on him for some days, and run away from him pox-laden; this is latter in curement.
E aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And then heal that with ointment, so that it be healed.
E si la dolor es extenduda entro la coyssa o la camba, fay a lu estatua en lu que contengua aygua segon que es feyt en la anqua engualment.	And if the pain is extended within the crotch or the chest, make him lie down in the position that contains water according to how it is made in the ankle engagingly.
E aquesta es la manieyra de aygua cauda, e yeu ja he scrit aquela en le tractat de la rectificacio de medicinas.	This is the way of water tail, and I have already written that in the treatise of the correction of medicines.
Recipe de alcali e de caus no extinta de amdos ana partida una, e trissa les e pausa en una ola nova de la qual la partida dejos sia perforada per un petit trauc, segon la quantitat que intre en lu ray.	Recipes of the alkaline and of the non-substantial cause in both parts a, and twist them and place them on a new wave from which the part above is pierced with a little hole according to the quantity that enters into him.
E pausa dejos le fons de la ola autra ola enveyriada, e gete sobre aquel alcali e caus viva de aygua doussa la qual cobra aquels per un dit, e pus que tu compremes aquels am la tieua ma per bona compressio, e leyssa la hola que deyssenda de lu aygua aguda en la partida dejos a la ola enveyriada.	And then place the rest of the wave of the wave that is enveloped, and get it over that alkaline and that lively cause of two-fold water that covers them through one hour; and then compress them with your good compression, and leave that wave that sends away him of the sharp water from the part above to the wrapped wave.
E aprop ajusta tota aquela aygua, e geta la sobre autra caus viva e autre alcali renovelatz, quar aquela lahoras sira de mot forta acuitat, la qual es aministrada en motas operacios de medicina e en cauterizacio dels autres membres, quar operacio fa de foc.	And then adjust all that water, and get it over another lively cause and other alkali renewed, for that in turn strengthens the acuteness of it, which is administered in little operations of medicine and in cauterizing the other members, because operation makes fire.
E so de las medicinas alcunas am las quals es cauterizat ancha, ayssi cum tezizic e mel anacrat e caus am sabo enayssi que sian mesclatz.	And then of some medicines that are cauterized broadly, as well as to dry them and to melt them with the same thing that is used to make it soft, and to mix them.
E Gualia recontet de un home dels antics la operacio e la curacio am la qual es curada dolor de anqua e de vena sciatica, e magnifiquet mot be esser de aquel, e diys que no hac necessitat de autra curacio, e quar es sanat per una veguada ayssi cum recomtec, quar fort leu aquel intrec en banh e eysic ja sa d’aquel.	And Guilia reported of a man of the old age that operation and cure with which he was healed from the pain of the ankle and the sciatic vein, and she praised much his body because it is not necessary another cure, and because it is healed by itself; for such is the way of the world.
Et es que sia pres de certarragi vert, e si no es atrobat vert, sia presa figua recent; e mot sia trissada am un pauc de grays e sia pausat sus la anqua en la qual es la dolor, o en la coyssa, o en la camba, e sia liat.	And it is to be taken of certain roots, and if not it is made green, then it is taken from the fig recently; and a little is twisted with a little grain and placed over the ankle where the pain is, or in the crotch, or in the chest, and be tied up.
E sia layssat per la cantitat de tres horas o per la quantitat que·l malaute centa cedacio de la adhustio.	And be left for the quantity of three hours or for the amount that the patient is able to endure the pain.
E aprop met aquel en banh e donc quan le cors de lu sia enrozat, entromet aquel en le sol, quar la dolor cessa e es sanat.	And then put him in a bath and when his body is hot, enter him into the water, because the pain ceases and is healed.
E sapias que no cove que alcu use de cauteri am aquestas medicinas sino aprop la evacuacio del cors.	You know that it is not necessary to make any preparation of cauterizing with these medicines, but only the purging of the body.
Mays ja Escorides diysec que quan am fenda de cabra la vena stretica es cauterizada, aprofieyra a lu mo be; e sia le cauteri am lu segon aquesta manieyra: sia presa lana e sia enbeguda en oli antic, e sia pausat entre le pous del pe e entre le fossil.	May Escorides say that when the vein of the goat is cauterized, it will be better; and let the cauterizing be made in this way: take a wool and moisten it with oil that is old, and place it between the toes of the foot and between the joints.
E aprop pren fenda de cabra secca e emflasma aquela am foc entro que sia fayta carbo; e aprop pausa lu sobre la lana e leysa la entro que sia estengida.	And then bring a dry goat's skin and make it smoke with fire, so that it be made charcoal; and then place him on the wool and leave him until it is dried up.
E aprop itera aquo, e no cessas far aquo entro que·l scintiment de la mordicacio pervengua entro al anqua e repausa la dolor.	And then repeat water, and do not cease the water until the feeling of the pain reaches the ankle and the pain ceases.
Et aquesta manieyra de cauteri es apelat cauteri de vaquas.	This way of cauterizing is called cauterizing of cows.
Capitol .xlii.	Chapter LII.
De cauterizacio de dolor de dos.	Of the cauterization of pain.
Alcunas veguadas dolor es en le dos per tropas causas, cum per cazement o per percucio o per superflua evacuacio, e per causas ad aquelas semblantz, per infusio de materia frega e humida.	Some pains are due to two causes, as well through the contact or friction or through an excess of evacuation, and through similar causes, through the introduction of a foreign substance, and through the infusion of wet or slippery matter.
E cauteri no catz sino en aquesta sola specia la qual es fayta per efusio de materia frega.	Cauterizing does not occur in any other way but in this single species that is made by the infusion of slippery matter.
Donc cove, aprop evacuacio del malaute am pillulas fitidas e am semblant a lor, que sian faytas sobre·l dos en le qual es la dolor tres linhas segon la latitut de lu, pus que senhas am tentha en quascuna linha v cauteris o mays, segon la quantitat que ve de la tolleransa del malaute e de la vertut de lu.	So, then the purging of the patient with pills that resemble them, and are made according to the two ways in which the pain is felt; for it is necessary to make ten cauterizations in each line, because one does not know the tolerance of the patient and the effectiveness of the medicine.
E sia fayta cauterizacio am cauteri de punt.	And let cauterization be made with a pointed instrument.
E si vols, cauteriza am tres cauteris o am quatre am cauteri clavilh medial segon aquesta forma:	And if you want, cauterize with three or four cauterizations with a pointed instrument, making the middle one according to this form:
Capitol .xliii.	Chapter LIII.
De cauterizacio al comensament de gilbositat.	Of the cauterization at the beginning of a Gilbosity.
Motas veguadas endeve aquesta malautia als petitz enfantz; e senhal del comensament de lu en les enfantz es que accideys sobre lor estrectura en le ale eves la elevacio e·l movement.	Some pains are due to this malady in very small children; and the beginning of it can be recognized in the children's behaviour, because they do not like to walk or move about freely.
E atrobas en le derier espondil del dos e dels notz de lu que ja comensa a sobremontar sobre les autres spondils.	They feel pain at the base of the spine and at the tips of their toes, which are beginning to become stiff.
E donc quan tu vezes aquo e voles prohibir, lahoras cauterisa aquel am cauteri que sia cercle segon aquesta forma:	And then, when you see water and want to prevent it, cauterize him with the following form of cauterization:
que prengua le cauteri sobre tota partida del spondilh engualment.	so that he takes cauterization all along the joint engagingly.
E si vols, cauteriza en le circuit del spondilh am le cauteri de punt dos linhas o tres.	And if you want, cauterize around the joint with a double line of cauterization or three lines.
E sian les puntz propdas entre lor.	Let the points be placed between them.
E aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat am aquo que havem dit.	And then heal that place until it is healed with water that we have said.
Mays guarda que cauteri no sia administrat en gelbositat que sia fayta per spasme de nervi.	May also be careful that cauterization is not administered in a Gilbosity, which is caused by spasms of nerves.
Capitol .xliv.	Chapter XLIV.
De cauterizacio de podagra e de dolor de juncturas.	Of the cauterization of gout and of joint pain.
Quan dolor de juncturas son faytas per humors fregas les quals so enfundutz a quascun membre del cors, lahoras quan veno dolors en los pes, de costuma dels metges es que aquo apelen podragua propriament.	When joint pain is caused by liquid humours that infiltrate each part of the body, and hurt the feet, it is called gout by itself; but when it is felt in other parts of the body, it is to be treated as a different disease.
E donc cum es curada podagra de causa frega am manieyra de cura e no so remaugudas las dolors, lahoras las remau cauteri.	And then, if gout is cured by the use of medicine and does not come back, then the painful joints are to be cauterized again.
E es que tu cauterizas aquel aprop evacuacio en le circuit de la junctura del pe am motz cauteris.	It is because you cauterize that place around the joint of the foot with a certain number of cauterizations.
E sia cauteri olivar del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And it is to be made of olive oil, which is made in this form:
E si es necessitat que puntz sia fayt sobre la fassia del pe, lahoras fay am cauteri de punt.	When it is necessary to make points on the surface of the foot, then do so with a pointed instrument.
E si las dolors pujan entro als denolhs o a las autras juncturas, e aquo motas vetz s’endeve, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre quascun donolh am tres cauteris o quatre de tota partida am aquest cauteri olivar.	And if the pain radiates within the knees or other joints and it is burning, then cauterize it on each joint with three cauterizations or four altogether with this cautery of olive oil.
E si motz cauteris que aquestz cauteris sian a tu necessaris, lahoras cauteriza aquel e no premas trop la tua ma am le cauteri abans, sia tant solament enviro la specitut de la codena.	And if you need more cauterizations than these, then cauterize it and do not press too hard on your hand with the cautery first, but only around the skin of the foot.
E si las dolors pugan entro al donolh e·l dos, lahoras aministra le cauteri le qual havem dit en le sieu capitol.	And if the pain radiates within the thigh and to the second hip, then administer the cautery that I have described in the previous chapter.
E si las dolors so en las mas tant solament, e es apelada suagra, lahoras puncta en le circuit dels focils ayssi cum se revolvo, puncta en aquels dos linhas.	And if the pain is only in the back and it is called sciatica, then make points on the path of the nerves there as they turn, making points on those two lines.
E si reman de las dolors en les ditz, lahoras puncta en le cercuit dels focils sobre quascun notz e sobre la pinche de la ma.	And if the pain remains in the legs, then make points on the path of the nerves on each foot and on the instep of the hand.
E si las dolors pugan aprop alscus jorns als coydes o als muscles, lahoras cauteriza les quascus de tota part dels ajutoris.	And if the pain radiates towards the sides or towards the muscles, then cauterize each one on all sides of the aid.
E no evacuas le malaute de bon regiment e de recepcio de medicinas, quar si es fayt bon regiment e flacma es evacuada am aquest cauteri sira sanat, Dieus ajudan.	And do not evacuate the patient if they are not in good condition or have not received proper medicine, for if it is done with this cautery, healing will be achieved, God helps.
Capitol .xlv.	Chapter. xlv.
De cauterizacio de rompeduras.	Of Cauterization for Breaks.
Quan endeve rompedura en les angonars e diysendo les budels denant l’atela al genetiu, e aquo es comensan de aprop, lahoras cove que tu mandas al malaute layssar la sua comestio en le sieu dia e que use de causas leniens per so que la fenda deyssenda del sieu ventre.	When there is a break in the inguinal region and the intestines are coming out in front of the hernia, and it begins to close, then return the intestine to its cavity and let the patient remain without food for that day and use mild treatments so that the break does not cause any pain.
E aprop segua le malaute entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos, e comanda a lu que tengua le sieu ale entro que sia foro getat o aparesca l’atela o·l budels.	Then follow the patient between your hands on their back, and order them to keep their abdomen warm so that it does not become cold or the hernia appears or the intestines come out.
E aprop retorna aquel am les tieus ditz e senha am tenta la ruptura sobre le os del pentenilh am senhal la extremitat del qual sia semblant a la maytat de cercle a las subiranas partidas del cors.	Then return it with the fingers and touch the edge of the break on the bone of the rib with your index finger, making sure that it resembles the shape of a half-circle from one side to the other of the ribcage.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	Then light the cauterizer in this way:
entro que sia mot rog e gete cintilhas.	within so that it is hot and it sparkles.
E aprop reduzeys le budel o l’atela a la sua conquavitat, e aprop pause la sua ma sobre le loc per so que le budel no yesqua.	Then return the intestine or hernia to its cavity, and place your hand over the area to prevent the intestine from coming out.
E tu ja has ubert entre las coyssas del malaute e dejos lu as pausat un coyssi, et autre servent sia sus las cambas de lu, e autre sus le pietz de lu, le qual tengua las suas mas.	You have already opened the space between the patient’s thighs and placed a cushion under them; another servant should be on their legs, and another on their chest, holding their hands.
E aprop pausa le cauteri sobre aquel senhal am la tua ma am cauteri stan dreyt, e te aquel entro que am lu consieguas le os del pentenilh entro al mieg del duiduni; e itera am aquel autra veguada si a tu aquel no has conseguit en la primieyra veguada entro al os.	Then place the cauterizer on the mark with your hand holding it steady, and place it within so that you can touch the bone of the rib in the middle; and repeat this for the other side if you have not achieved it in the first attempt, touching the bone within.
E observa saviament del ysiment del budel en la hora de la tua cauterizacio, que no comburas aquel budel per so que sobre le malaute no vengua in mort o autre gran malicia.	Then observe carefully during the cauterization of the intestine to make sure that you do not burn it and cause death or some other great misfortune for the patient.
E sapias que quan tu am le cauteri no atenhas le os, no confereys la tua operacio.	And know that if you do not have the bone in position when you operate with the cauterizer, your operation will be unsuccessful.
E cove que·l cauteri dels enfants sia subtil segon le gran e la mesura de lor.	And know that for children, the cauterizer should be subtle according to their age and size.
E aprop cura le loc del cauteri per tres dias am boder entro que sia remauguda la scara del foc.	Then clean the area of the cauterization three times a day with water so that it does not become inflamed.
E aprop cura aquel am les autres enguentz entro que sia sanat.	Then clean it with the others within so that it is healed.
E le malaute sia jasent sobre le sieu dos per xl dias entro que sia sigillat le loc e la plagua.	And let the patient remain on their back for ten days within so that it closes the wound and the plague.
E cove que pauses le nutriment de lu segon la longitut del temps de la curacio de lu le qual le linesca le ventre de lu, e que le budel no yesca fora deves le esforsament de guerir.	And know that you should pause the nutrition of the patient according to the length of time for the treatment, so that the abdomen does not become swollen and the intestine does not burn due to the effort of healing.
E aprop quan se vol levar aprop xl dias, lahoras aministra liament decentment fayt, e tengua aquel per autres xl jorns.	Then after four weeks have passed, then administer it properly again and keep it for another four weeks.
E sia mermat de trebalh e de replecio de vianda e de beure, e de votz vehementz, quar quan usa de aquest regiment de sanacio entiera sira sanat.	And do not reduce your work or the amount of food and drink, and do not abstain passionately, for when you follow this regimen of complete healing, it will be achieved.
E yeu diyre la curacio de las rupturas en las autras partidas del ventre, e so al comensament, e vols que no treguan, lahoras cauterisa la ruptura d’aquel am cauteri redon segon la quantitat de lu, e sia aquo que es exhurit de la codena ayssi cum la tersa partida de lu; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit, e no es ajustat.	And you can extend the healing of the breaks in other parts of the abdomen, and begin it at the start, and do not stop, then cauterize the break with a small cauterizer according to its quantity, and clean it with water from the navel as well as on the third occasion; and clean it with water that has come out of the navel, and do not close it.
E ja diyssero alcus primiers que ruptura sia cauterizada am cauteri triangular segon aquesta forma, pus que es senhada am tenta:	And some may say that the first break should be cauterized with a triangular cauterizer according to this form, since it is marked in this way:
e es pausada linha que eys per la latitut en le latz pus sobira de la ruptura, e autra linha al desus; e depausa la tua ma am un cauteri clavilh, mays le primier cauteri es pus leugier e milhor.	And a line is paused for the length in the middle above the break, and another line downward; and your hand is placed on a claw-like cauterizer, but the first cauterization is lighter and better done.
Capitol .xlvi.	Chapter. xliv.
De cauterizacio de torcio.	Of Cauterization for Twisting.
Quan endeve en alscus membres per cazement o per percussio dolor e persevera aquela dolor per lonc temps e no comfereys al u curacio am medicinas, lahoras cove que cauterizes am cauteri de punt.	When the pain persists in the limbs due to a twist or a blow and it lasts for a long time, then know that you should cauterize with a pointed cauterizer.
E sia le cauteri de tot membre segon la magnitut e la parvitat de lu, e vertut e develitat de lu, e locacio de torcio e dolor de lu.	And the cauterization of the whole limb according to its size and age, and its strength and weakness, and the location of the twist and pain.
Donc si·s sanat per le primier cauteri, bo es; e sino, lahoras itera sobre lu le cauteri; quar de costuma de aquelas dolors es que sian punctatz de membre ad aquel membre le qual apropinque al u, per que cove que consieguas aquels am cauteri entro que·l malaute sia sanat.	Then if healing is achieved after the first cauterization, it is good; otherwise, repeat it; for it is usually due to punctures in that member that are close to another member, so that you can achieve healing with those cauterizations and the patient will be healed.
Capitol .xlvii.	Chapter. xlvii.
De cauterizacio de lepra.	Of Cauterization for Leprosy.
Les lebros alcunas veguadas am cauteri per mot gran juvament, e magerment si la specia de lepra que es fayta per putrefaccio de flacma e de melencolia.	The leprosy in some parts of the body should be cauterized with great care, and mildly if the leprosy is caused by the decay of flame or melancholy.
E donc cum tu vols cauterizar aquel, considera si la lepra es comussan e as aquela curada am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no deysen, ni esta, e temes sobre le malaute que la corrupcio comprehenda tot le cors de lu e tota la compleccio de lu, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre le cap am v cauteris: am un en le mieg loc del cap, e am le segon pus dejos de lu, eves le front a la fi dels cabels; e amdos sobre dos corns; e am un detras, sobre la nuca o servitz.	Then if you wish to cauterize it, consider whether the leprosy is caused by the decay of flame or melancholy; and if so, clean it with water that has come out of the division where it is located, and do not stop, nor does it reach the skin, and if you have any doubts about the corruption spreading throughout the whole body and all its parts, then cauterize it on the top of the head with four cauterizations: one in the middle of the forehead, another after the hairline from left to right, another after the hairline from right to left, and one behind the ears or at the base of the skull.
E ultima la tua ma am le cauteri un pauc entro que emprema en le os una petita empressio, e de lu sian deslocadas las scorsas, per so que la expiracio de grossas vapors sia alleujada de lu; e cauteriza sobre la melsa segon que es precesit.	And last, place your hand on the top of the skull with a slight pressure so that it holds it firmly, and if necessary, add an extra cauterization; and clean it according to what is needed.
E si la lepra es ja expanduda sobre le malaute e apar manifestament, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas aquel am aquels cauteris les quals havem ditz en le cap; e am cauteri sobre la extremitat del nas, e am dos cauteris sobre las doas maysselas, e am dos cauteris sobre dos spondils del col, e am vi cauteris sobre les spondils del dos, e am un gran sobre les spondils prop de la coeta, e un sobre la cotea , e am dos sobre las anquas, e am un sobre quascuna anqua, e am dos sobre les donols e un sobre quascun donolh, e am dos sobre les coydes, e am dos sobre les muscles, e am dos las teneretutz del sieu pietz; e cauteriza aquel sobre totas las juncturas dels ditz de las mas e dels pes, e sobre quascun talon dels sieus pes, e sobre les foscils de las suas mas.	And if the leprosy has spread over the whole body and is manifested clearly, then know that you should cauterize it with the cauterizations I have described on the head; and on the tip of the nose, and on two points on either side, and on two points on each cheek, and on two points on each ear, and on two points on each foot, and one point at the base of each foot, and one on the back of each leg, and one on each knee, and one on the top of each hip, and two on each scrotum, and two on each testicle, and two on each thigh, and two on each calf, and two on each ankle bone, and two on each toe, and one between each foot.
E guarda te dels nervis les quals so sobre le talo que no comburas aquels.	And keep the nerves that are on top of the skull and do not burn them.
E alcunas veguadas es cauterizat am un cauteri sobre le os del pentenilh e am autre sobre la boca del stomac, e autre sobre le fietge.	Then in some cases it is cauterized with one cauterizer on the rib and another on the stomach, and one on the throat.
E sapias que quant mays ajustas cauteris, tant es mays juvatiu e mays conferent; e sapias que le malaute no ha en le cauteri dolor, ayssi cum han les sas, per so quar le cors de lu ja es stupefayt.	And you should know that the more you adjust the cauterization, the better it is and the more effective it is; and you should know that there is no pain in the body for cauterization, because as soon as it reaches the joints, the body becomes numb.
E cove que les cauteris sian grans o paucs segon les membres e las juncturas segon que es precedit de las specias dels ferramentz.	And so, depending on whether the members and joints are large or small, as well as the type of instrument used for the cauterization, the cauterization should be done with great care or less care.
E aprop cura le cauteri am farina de errs coyta am mel e am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	And so, take care in applying the cauterization by using a sharp knife or another tool to ensure it is done properly and correctly.
Capitol .xlviii.	Chapter. XLVIII.
De cauterizacio de stupor.	Of the Stupor of Gout.
Quan alcun membre es stabozit o adormit e es curat am medicinas, olis e emplastres, e no es sanat, lahoras tu cauteriza aquel membre stabozit am cauteris segon que merita la grandesa del membre o la parvitat de lu.	When any member is numb or asleep and is treated with medicine, oils, and plasters, and does not heal, then you should cauterize the numb member according to whether it is a large member or a small one.
E sia lo tieu cauteri intrant la ispicitut de la codena un pauc.	And so that the small cauterization can enter into the essence of the wound just a little bit.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And so, take care in applying it to those who are not yet healed.
E alscunas veguadas es cauterizada alcuna stupor le qual endeve a las mas e als pes, e als spondils del dos e ves le eysiment dels nervis les quals mavon aquel membre, e es remauguda la stupor.	And some wounds are cauterized that are located in the middle or in the feet, and those that affect the nerves that move that member, and it is remedied by applying a cauterization again.
Mays no prusuma sobre aquo sino aquel que es savi en la anotomia dels membre e de la egressio dels nervis tot le cors moventz.	Do not repeat this unless you are knowledgeable in the anatomy of members and the exit of nerves throughout the body.
Capitol .xlix.	Chapter. XLIX.
De cauterizacio de albaras que es morfea.	Of the Cauterization of Furor and Anger.
Quan albaras es antiqua e no comfereys a lu alcu dels enguentz de medicina, lahoras tu cauteriza sobre aquela am cauteri preon un pauc segon la quantitat de la specitut de la codena entro que sia remauguda la blancor e la color de lu, e la color de lu sia mudada.	When old scars are not responsive to common medicine treatments, then you should apply a small cauterization to them according to the essence of the wound, so that the whiteness and the color of the scar are changed, and its color is altered.
E aprop cura aquel am farina de errs e de lentilhas am oli rozat e am folhas de arnagrosa, e am sanc de colomba o am sanc de yronda, da cascuna sia una partida e totas sian mescladas, e aprop sia linit un drap e sus le loc sia pausat entro que sia sanat.	And so, take care in applying it to those who have old scars and are not responsive to common treatments; use a mixture of olive oil and rose leaves, and the herb of arnica, as well as the powder of the oak apple or the yarrow leaf, all mixed together, and apply it to the affected area. Then return the intestine or hernia to its cavity, and place your hand over the area to prevent the intestine from coming out.
Capitol .l.	Chapter. I.
De cauterizacio de cranc.	Of the Cauterization of Blood and Gangrene.
Quan canser es comensan e vols aquel ostar, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteri de cercle en le circuit de lu ayssi cum es revolgut.	When a fever begins and you want to control it, then apply a circular cauterization to its course, so that it is turned around.
E diysero les savis que sia cauterizat am lo derier cauteri en le mieg loc; mays a mi no es vist aquo, quar temi que sia ulcerat, e yeu ja e vist aquo alcunas veguadas.	The wise said that it should be cauterized with the last cauterization in its location; but I have not seen this, because I think that it is ulcered, and I have already seen it a few times.
E es pus dreyturier que sia cauterizat en le circuit de lu am cercle ayssi cum avem dit, o am motz cauteris.	And it is better to cauterize it in its course by applying a circular cauterization as we have said, or a straight one.
Capitol .li.	Chapter. II.
De cauterizacio de adubilati.	Of the Cauterization of Bleeding and Gangrene in Meat.
Quan alcun adubilati es tardat en maturacio, e aysso es per la superfluitat fazen aquela, o per etat del malaute, quar es vielh en decrepitat, de pauc sanc, o per le temps, e tu vols festinar en la maturacio de adubilati; lahoras cauteriza en le circuit de lu am motz cauteris petitz punctan; e aprop leyssa aquela quar ela fastinara en maturacio.	When any softened meat is delayed in maturation, and thus it becomes too soft or old, or the meat is no longer fresh due to age or time, and you want to accelerate its maturation process; then apply a small, straight cauterization in its course, and let it rest; because it will quickly mature.
Mays si tu vols la perforacio de lu am cauteri, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu: e depausa aquel en le mieg loc de adubilati entro que penetre la codena.	But if you want to pierce it with cauterization, then you should do so in the following way: and so, pause that in its location where it needs to be pierced, and let it rest until it penetrates into the meat.
E si le cauteri en aquel loc que es pus dejos, per so que le cors del brac sia alleujat; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if the cauterization in that location is left alone, so that the member of the arm is relieved; and then take care to apply it where it needs to be applied so that it is healed.
Capitol .lii.	Chapter. II.
De cauterizacio de corrodent.	Of the Cauterization of Bleeding and Gangrene in Meat.
Corrodent es corrupcio ambulant en le membre, la qual corrodeys aquel ayssi cum a foc comedent lenha secca.	Corrodent is a walking corruption in the member, which corrodes it as if it were eating dry wood with fire.
Donc si vezes aquel corrodent en loc le qual sufferte cauteri am foc, lahoras tu igneys cauteris clavils motz paucs, e grans segon que es convenent en aquel loc en le qual es corrodent.	Therefore, if you want to stop that corruption in its location where it suffers from fire, then you should apply a small, sharp cauterization with a pointed tool, and make it larger or smaller according to the location where the corrosion is taking place.
E aprop cauteriza aquel de tota partida entro que erradiques tota la corrosio e no romangua alcuna causa de lu.	And so, apply cauterization to all of it at once so that you eliminate all corruption and do not leave any cause for worry.
E aprop leyssa aquel per tres dias, e pausa sobre les locs cauterizats solpre trissat am oli mesclat entro que las scaras sian totas eradicadas e tota la corrupcio.	And so, let it rest for three days, and apply a mixture of olive oil over the cauterized areas every third day until the scars are completely healed and all corruption is eliminated.
E aprop cura aquel am enguentz carn engendrantz.	And then take care to apply it to flesh that is being generated.
Mays si aprop tres dias vezes que la carn nasca sana en la qual no es corrupcio, bo es; mays sino, lahoras itera le cauteri sobre aquo que es romas en les locs corrumputz.	But if the meat is generated in a healthy manner for three days without corruption, then do not apply any further cauterization to it; but if it does become corrupted again, then apply cauterization to those areas.
E corrodent es medicat alcunas vetz am medicina aguda, quar aquela es meza en loc de cauteri.	Corrosion is treated with certain medications at times with acute medicine, because that is halfway between a cauterization.
Mays empero cauteri am foc es de pus leugier juvament.	But applying cauterization with fire can quickly heal.
E yeu ja e dit la curacio de lu am medicina aguda en la divisio, e donc pren aquela quan de lu auras endegencia.	The physician has already said that the cure for it is with acute medicine in the division, and so take it when you need to heal.
Capitol .liii.	Chapter. LIII.
De cauterizacio de claus e dels autres semblants.	Of the Cauterization of Corrosion.
Motas veguadas endeve a las partidas dejos del pe malautia que s’apela clau, e es causa grossa, fentrada, la qual ladeys le pe; e cauteri en aquels es segon dos manieyras, so es cauteri am foc e cauteri am aygua cauda.	The claws of the bad-tempered dog that is called a claw are a great cause for concern, and they should be cauterized in two ways: with fire cauterization and water tail cauterization.
Mays cauteri am foc es que igniscas le cauteri concau semblant a pena de voltor, le qual sia feyt de ferr segon la quantitat la qual contengua le clau de tota partida, e sia de subtils marguas.	But applying fire cauterization is as if it were turning the claw into dust with a sound like the rustling of leaves, and it should be done according to the amount that the claw contains from the beginning, and its margin should be fine.
E aprop pausa aquel ignit sobre le clau, e aprop revolveys la tua ma am le cauteri en le circuit del clau entro que·l cauteri pervengua a la profunditat del clau.	And so, return the claw to the fire, and then turn it around with your hand, applying the cauterization to its course until it reaches the depth of the claw.
E leyssa aquel per tres dias entro que comense getar brac.	Let it rest for three days, and then begin to heal.
E aprop emplastre aquel am malvas salvatges trissadas am sal, e leyssa le emplastre sobre aquel per una nuoyt, quar aquel sira eradicat de las suas razitz.	And so, apply a paste of dried pomegranate leaves, and let the paste rest on it for a day; because that will eradicate its roots.
E aprop cura le loc am enguent de carn generatiu entro que sia sanat.	And so, take care to apply a mixture of meat-generating medicine to the area to ensure healing.
E si so no-convertitz, e motas veguadas accideysso en la superficia del cors, majorment en las mas e les pes, lahoras cove que tu aministres en aquels cauteri am aygua, e es que prenguas una quannula de eram o de ferr o de pena de voltor, e pausa aquela sobre le clau; e aprop geta en la quanula de aygua cauda pauca cantitat, e rete la tua ma, e tu revolveys aquela am compressio de la tua ma de tot, e sia enpremut le marge de la canula en la razit del clau, e atrobara la aygua cauda via al preon de la razit del cau; e espera le malaute un pauc la mordicacio de l’aygua cauda per una hora, e aprop remau aquela, quar le clau am las suas razitz sira erredicat.	And if it does not convert, and certain areas of the body, mainly the arms and legs, experience pain; then you should apply a small amount of water to those areas, and that is as if you were taking a small piece of iron or of a whip, and pause it on the claw; and then pour a little tail of water onto the paste, and return it to its place, and you will hear the tail of water running into the claw's roots, and it will be taken away.
E ayssi fe am aquels la i aprop l’autre entro que venguas sobre totz les quals de lor so en le cors.	And so, apply to all of them what is necessary in the body.
E aprop cura aquels pus que las razitz dels claus so erradicadas am aquo dels enguentz les quals la carn ve engenran.	And so, take care to apply medicine to those areas where the claws' roots are eradicated with medicine that is generated in the meat.
Capitol .liiii.	Chapter. LIII.
De cauterizacio de tremor.	Of the Cauterization of Corrosion.
Quan endeve ad alcu tremor per freg en le nervi o per febre de causa frega, o per autra causa semblant, lahoras cove que tu cauterises aquel am quatre cauteris o am v sobre les spondils del dos, entre quascun spondilh am un cauteri; e am cauteri en le pietz de lu, e sobre l‘estomac de lu, am cauteri olivar.	When there is a tremor due to friction in the nerves or due to fever caused by rubbing, or due to similar causes; then you should apply four small cauterizations or five over the joints of the two legs, between each joint with one cauterization; and on the feet' bones, and on the stomach, with olive oil.
E la tremor de lu se repausa e festina la sanetat de la malautia frega.	And the shivering of him was quieted, and the health of the disease was hastened by rubbing.
Capitol .lv.	Chapter V.
De cauterizacio de albati accidentz al cors.	On cauterizing white accidents on the body.
Quan en le cors so espellitz albati, e so pustulas fendas las quals so feytas de materias grossas corruptas; donc cove al comensament cum apareyso, que sia cauterizat sobre tot cap de la fistola am cauteri subtil am fustz de mirt, la extremitat del qual es estenduda am foc; o am razitz de erestologia longua; o am cauteri lentecular.	When in the body white spots appear, and pustules are formed from corrupt dry matter; then, at the beginning of it appearing, let it be cauterized throughout entirely with a sharp cautery, its extremities being spread by fire; or with a long-bladed razor; or with a slow-burning cautery.
E alscunas veguadas es cauteri ademamil al comensament de la sua expulcio segon aquesta manieyra; e no so cregudas, e es disrumpuda la superfluitat fazens aquels, et sana de aquels.	And some small veins are to be cauterized at the beginning of their discharge according to this manner; and they are not to be widened, nor is the overflow to be interrupted, doing so they become sound from those and healthy.
Mays empero cove que aquo sia fayt aprop evacuacio am fleubotomia.	But nonetheless, when it is necessary that urine be discharged by the use of a bladder-flushing instrument.
Capitol lvi.	Chapter LVI.
De cauterizacio de fluex de sanc accident per incisio de arceria.	On cauterizing flux of black accident by incision of arceria.
Tropas veguadas endeve fluex de arceria que es inciza deves la plagua la qual endeve deforo, o deves la incizio de apostemas o cauteri del membre, e alor semblantz, e es dificil remaura aquel.	Several veins of aresia that are cut should be cauterized first, as they may burst out; or the incision of blisters or cautery on a member, and then it is difficult to repair.
Donc cum accideys ad alcu aquo, lahoras tu·t coyta am la tua ma a l’orrifici de la arceria, e pausa sobre aquel le tieu dit endic estrenh aquel motas veguadas entro que sia ostat le fluex del sanc dejos le tieu dit, e que non yesqua.	So, when you meet with any of these accidents, then bind it tight to the aresia's orifice, and place your hand over it so that the flux of black accident does not come out; and do not allow it to be lost.
E aprop pausa en le foc les cauteris olivars paucs e grantz, per nombre motz, e exsuffla sobre aquels entro que sian mot ignitz.	Then place a few small and some large burning cauterizes on it, counting the numbers, and blow over them into the fire in order to ignite them.
E aprop pren de aquels un petit o un gran segon le loc e la plagua en la qual es rompuda la arteria, sobre aquela vena festinantment pus que auras remaugut le tieu dit, e te le cauteri entro que sia abcindit e restreyt aquel sanc.	Then pick up one of them according to the place and the accident in which the artery is broken, with swiftness before you repair; and then cauterize that vein within which has been abated, and restrict that flux of black accident.
E si le sanc es expellit de l’orrifici de la arteria quan tu remaues le tieu dit e extringeys le cauteri, lahoras pren la un autre cauteri coytadament dels cauteris les quals en le foc son preparatz, e donc no cesses fer aquo un aprop autre entro que le sanc sia restrengit.	And if the flux of black accident is driven out of the orifice of the artery as you repair and cauterize, then pick up another cautery, carefully preparing it on a fire; and so on, stopping the flux wherever the sanction is stopped.
E guarda te que no comburas le nervi que aqui es, e que vengua sobre le malaute autra malicia.	And be careful not to burn the nerve here, or that will come out upon the patient; and another evil may not come upon him.
E sapias que quan de l’arteria flueys sanc, lahoras no es possible en aquels restrenge la sanc, e majorment quan l’arteria es gran, si no am una de quatre manieyras: o am cauteri ayssi quo dit havem, o am extraccio quan no es extrayta, quar quan es extrayta las extremitatz de lu miels son comburidas e es restreyt le sanc, o que sia liat am fiel o am liament per fort strectura, o que sian pausadas sobre lu medicinas de las quals la vertut es restringir la sanc; e sian strengudas am pulvinar am costriccio decent.	And you should know that when the artery flows black, it is not possible to stop the flux of accident there, and much so when the artery is large; either by cauterizing it in such a way as to have said before, or by extricating it if it were not extricated, for when it is extricated the ends of the artery are burned, and the flux of accident is stopped, or that it be bound with a ribbon or a ligature by strong pressure, or that it be placed upon medicine of which its virtue is to stop the flux; and that they be strengthened with pulley or with strapping.
Mays aquel que aministra restriccio decent de lu am liament e am strictura am draps o per posicio de causas comburentz e de semblantz, no comfereys sino tart.	But that which administer's the restriction of leavings decent by way of a ribbon or by position of causes burns and it is difficult; nor does it confer any benefit.
Mays si aquo endeve ad alcu e no sia le metge present ni medicina, lahoras obre am pausament del dit indic sobre le orrifici de aquela vena ayssi cum havem dit, e entenda a la gran costreccio de lu entro que le sanc sia ostat de la sobirana partida de la plagua, e sobre la arceria le dit no sia remaugut; e de sobre la arceria sia aspergit am aygua frega de mot gran fregiditat entro que·l sanc sia congilat e engrossat; e mays cossire en que ha de cauteri o de medicina necessitat.	But if this is necessary for some reason and not the medicine or medicine present, then open the stop to the indiction on the orifice of that vein, as we have said before; and understand a great restriction in the within which the accident is stopped from the superior division of the pain, and on the aresia let it be blown upon by cold water of great chillyness so that the accident is congealed and thickened; and also burn with fire where it should be cauterized or of medicine necessity.
Comensa la segonda partida.	The second division begins.
De incisio e perforacio e ventozas e de fleubotomia e de plaguas e de lor semblants.	On incision and piercing, and on bladder-flushing and bleeds, and of their appearances.
Aquestas son paraulas de Albucazis.	These are words of Al-Buqazi's.
Ja havem dit en le primier capitol tota malautia en la qual cauteri am foc es convenient e am medicina comburent, e las occasios e las causas de lu, e les instrumentz en aquels necessaris am las formas dels cauteris; e he ordenatz les capitols de la subiranetat del cap entro als pes.	We have said in the first chapter all disease where cauterizing with fire and medicine is burning, and the occasions and causes of it, and the instruments in which those are necessary to the forms of cauterizes; and we order the chapters of the second division within the feet.
E yeu procesire en aquest capitol per aquela meteysa guisa, per que sia alliujat lo querent aquo, lahoras sobre aquo que aura demandat.	And let us proceed in this chapter by that method, so that it is avoided what he wants; then over what he wants let him have attention.
E denant que yeu comense aquo, cove, fils, que aprenguatz que en aquest capitol es per terror aquo que es en le capitol primier de cauterizacio.	And before I begin with it, know that, as you learn in this chapter by way of example, what is for fear here is in the first chapter on cauterization.
E per aquo que cove que sia en lu gran cautela, quar en la operacio la qual es en aquest capitol motas veguadas catz evacuacio la qual es am sanc am le qual esta la vida deves la aspersio de la vena o incisio sobre l’apostema o apercio de exsitura o puracio de la plagua o extraccio de sageta o incizio de peyra e a lor semblantz.	And through the water that comes out from the bladder is in great care, for in the operation which is in this chapter white spots come out which are life-taking; the spraying of the vein or incision on a blister or the opening of an outlet or the extraction of an arrow or the incision of pain and their equivalents.
E de totz aquels so acompanhatz temor e tremor e en le mas de lor catz la mort.	And of all these fear and terror accompanies them, and in more of their cases death is.
E yeu amonesti vos que sobre vos no caia aquo en le qual es esitacio, quar alcunas veguadas cazo deves vos manieyras de homes am manieyras motas de malautias.	And we warn you that of the above does not come upon you what is a difficulty; for some white spots are sometimes due to you from the manners of men of bad manners from the causes of diseases.
E de lor es alcu que s’irays am la sua malautia e es leugiera deves lu la mort, e aysso per la vehemensia de aquo que troba de sa malautia, e per longuesa de la malautia de lu, e am la malautia es paor la qual significa mort.	And some of them is that they go away from their own disease and it is difficult to be taken away by the vehemence of this water what finds its disease; and for the long duration of this disease of theirs, and with respect to their disease that means death.
E de aquels es le qual dona a tu son aver e ditta, tu esperant am aquel sanetat, e la sieua malautia es perniciosa.	And these are those who give you joy and pleasure, whom you expect in good health, and their disease is destructive.
E donc no cove que tu consentas en aquel que ve a vos del qual es aquesta manieyra; e la vostra cautela sia major que covesitat e la vostra rapacitat; e no presumatz alcuna causa sobre aquo sino aprop sciencia certa la qual virifica aquo deves vos, e al qual perve successio lausabla.	And so it is not convenient that you consent to a person in this manner; and your care be greater than your caution and your speed; and do not assume any reason for this without proper certain knowledge which certifies this water to be dangerous to you, and to whom the glorious succession of praise follows.
E usatz en la curacio de totz vostres malautes de pronosticacio e indicacio de lu al qual es salut convertida, quar en aquel es a vos ajutori sobre adquisicio de fama e de memoria, de lausor e de gloria.	And in the cure of all your diseases by way of prognosis and indication to him who is saved, for in that is your aid in acquiring fame and memory, of glory and praise.
O, filhs, Dieus en vos spire le sieu entendement e no oste a vos direccio e proteccio, quar aquo es en la sua ma.	Oh children, God gives you understanding and does not leave you in direction or protection, for this water is in His hand.
E yeu e ordenat aquest capitol distingent per capitols segon que precedit en le capitol de cauteris, de la cura del cap entro als pes, per que sia a vos alleujat aquo que demandatz de aquo e del qual havetz necessitat.	And we have ordered this chapter distinguishing by chapters according to that which precedes in the chapter of cauterizes, of the cure of the head within the feet, so that it is avoided from you what you want from this water and from that of which you had need.
Capitol primier.	First Chapter.
De la curacio de aygua la qual es contenguda en le cap dels enfantz.	On the cure of water which is held in the head of children.
Sapias que aquesta malautia motas veguadas endeve als enfantz deves le enfantament e quan la noyrissa estrenh le cap del enfant ses livitat.	And you should know that this accident of white spots in children is due to the birth, and when the fetus moves at first it opens the head of the child.
E alcunas veguadas endeve per causa amaguada la qual no es saubuda.	And some white spots are sometimes due to a hidden cause which is not perceived.
Mays yeu no vi aquesta malautia sino en les enfantz; e a totz aquels les quals yeu vi se coytec la mort, e per ayssi es a mi vist layssada obra en aquels.	But we have not seen this disease in children except; and those whom I saw were dead, and so it was a noble work in them.
E yeu e vist que un enfant le cap del qual era d’aygua omplit, e·l cap de lu era totjorn ayssi magnificat entro que ceser no podia sobre si meteys per la grandesa del sieu cap, e mays que la humiditat fe aucmentada entro que foc mort.	And I have seen that a child whose head was filled with water, and the water in his head was increased by the great size of his head, so that the moisture was increased within it to death-burning fire.
E aquesta humiditat o es agreguada entre la codena e l’os, o es agreguada dejos le os sobre le ciphac.	And this moisture is added between the jaw and the cheekbone, or it is added behind the earbone.
Quar la operacio en aquel si la humiditat es entre la codena e l’os e le apostema es pauc, lahoras cove que tu fendas en le mieg loc del cap am una fissura en la latitut, e sia la longitut de la fissura cays dos notz entro que corra la humiditat, e aquesta es la forma del spatum:	For the operation in that case where the moisture is between the jaw and the cheekbone and the blister is scarce, then do you open in its place of the head by a crack in the side, and let the water run; this is the form of the sputum.
E donc si la humiditat es mays augmentada e l’apostema es major, lahoras son aqui dos fissuras segon aquesta manieyra:	And so if the humidity is increased and the pus is larger, then these two cracks are according to this way:
E si la humiditat es dejos le os, senhal de lu es que tu vezes la comissuras del cap ubertas de tota partida e l’aygua es spremuda quan tu compremes aquela am la tieua ma a las partidas dedintz e no es aquo a tu amaguat.	And if the humidity is left the bone, sign of it is that you open the comers of the head completely and the water is pressed when you compress that one to the tieue hand at the comers inside and not there are wet.
Cove que tu fendas en le mieg loc del cap am tres fissuras segon aquesta manieyra:	Cover so that you open in the middle place of the head three cracks according to this way:
e aprop la inscizio extratz ne tota la humiditat; e aprop strenh las fissuras am draps e plumassols; e aprop enbroca aquo de sobre am vi e oli entro al quint dia, e aprop deslia le liament e cura la plagua am tentas e enguentz, e strenh le cap am equalitat; e mange le malaute am vianda secca de pauca humiditat entro que·l membre sia confortat e sanat.	And put the incision out completely of the humidity; and make the cracks strong with rags and plums; and pour water on it from above after five days, and cut away the ligature and cure the plague with poultices and anointings, and strengthen the head with equanimity; and feed the patient with dry food having little moisture until the member is healed and restored.
E es autra manieyra de incisio, que consideras hon apar la magnitut del apostema e la colleccio de l’aygua, quar alcunas veguadas es mays en le occipicii, o en la partida denant, o en la destra, o en la sinistra; e donc aten am la incizio on appar le apostema e la replecio de l’aygua, e fen aquo segon que a tu es miels possible.	And another way of incision, that consider if the size of the pus and collection of water are different because some veiled places are in the occipital part, or in the comer ahead, or on the right or left; and so take the incision where the pus appears and the replenishment of water, and pour it according to what is best possible.
Et observa que no inscindas la arteria e endevengua flueys de sanc e mora le malaute per aquel flux de sanc am evacuacio de humiditat.	And observe that you do not incise the artery and lose life forces of blood and harm the patient because of this flow of blood to evacuate humidity.
Capitol .ii.	Chapter II.
De inscisio de las arterias las quals so aprop las aurelhas, apeladas hilasseysse.	Of incision of arteries that are near ears, called hila-says.
Capitol segon.	Chapter II.
Quan endeveno ad alcu catars o raumas als huelhs o al pietz, e es antiquat aquo, e no confereys en aquo la curacio de las medicinas, lahoras la deriera curacio en aquest es incizio de aquelas dos arterias.	When there is an infection or fever in the lungs or feet, and it does not answer to the medicines, then the last remedy is this incision of those two arteries.
E donc cove quan tu vols inscidir aquelas que le malaute raza lo sieu cap, e aprop fregua le loc am drap aspre per so que aparan las arcerias, e aprop sia strengut le col del malaute am alcu drap; e aprop considera on polsa la vena; e les locs de quascuna sobre les locs les quals so aprop las aurelhas depremutz, e tant se occultan sino en alcus homes.	And so when you want to incise those that the patient has a bald head, and rub the place with rags to make the veins appear, and put some strong rag on the neck; and consider where the pulse is; and the places near ears are pinched, and in some men they do not show.
E aprop senha sobre la arceria am tenta, e aprop inscideys quascuna am le spatum de quascuna partida agut am inscizio pervenient entro al os, e sia aquo per la latitut del cap.	And so take the pulse on that artery and cut each one from above with the incision going in through the bone, and pour it because of the head's shape.
E si vols, entromet le spatum dejos la arteria e trenqua aquala a las inciden a las partidas desus.	And if you want to, cut below the artery and trim what is necessary to the incision on the comers ahead.
E sia la longitut de la inscizio cays dos ditz ajustatz, quar quan alcuna vena es inscizida le sanc es eyssit am egressio pulsatil, le qual saut deforo per saut frequent.	And let the length of incision be two fingers' measure, for when a vein is incised the pulse grows stronger with rapidity.
Mays si la arceria no apareys al cintiment, lahoras cove que tu mesures de la aurelha la quantitat del spazi de tres ditz, e aprop senha am tenta, e fen entro al os.	More if the artery does not appear with touch, then when you measure from the ear the quantity of space of three fingers, and so take the pulse and cut it in through the bone.
E aquo que cove getar del sanc es quantitat de vi unc., e fort leu ne geta de lu mays o mens, e tot aquo es segon la quantitat la qual appareys de la vertut del malaute e de la replecio de la arceria de lu.	And then let what is obtained by counting the number of hands be a quantity of water. And so let it be strong in the hand if not a man or more, and that is according to the patient' s virtue and the artery’s replenishment.
E aprop considera la plagua, e donc si reman sobre le os alcuna causa del ciphac, lahoras inscindys aquo per so que no endevengua apostema caut.	And so consider the plague, and if there remains on the bone any cause of the swelling, then cut it to prevent the pus from happening again.
E aprop strenh la plagua am plumassols e am liamentz de drap de li, e aprop cura aquela am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And so make the plague strong with rags and with linen cloth, and so cure it with anointings until is healed.
Capitol .iii.	Chapter III.
De extraccio de las arcerias las quals so en las templas.	Of extraction of arteries that are in the temples.
Quan ad alcu accideys emigranea antiqua o catertz agutz, per humiditatz agrimonials e per qualiditat en les lacertz des templas, o sodo antiqua vehement e semblantz ad aquels, e es medicat am las manieyras de curacio de medicina e aquo no comfereys, lahoras nos hem sproatz en aquestas malautias extraccio de las arcerias en les templas, o cauterizacio de aquelas ayssi cum havem mostrat.	When an infection or fever occurs in the brain or lungs because of alcoholic humidity and because of the quality in the fabrics of the temples, or suddenly violently and resembling those, and is treated with medicines, then do not put faith in these methods of extracting arteries from the temples or cauterizing them as we have shown.
E la manieyra de la operacio e extracio de aquelas es que·l malaute raza les pels les quals son en les templas; e entenda a la arceria apparent en le templar quar ela es a tu mostrada per le sieu pols, e·s occultada sino en paucs homes per vehemencia de freg.	And the way of operation and extraction of those is that the patient has hairs in the temples; and consider the artery that appears in the temple for it is shown by the pulse, and it is hidden in few men because of its velocity.
E si a tu es occultada, lahoras le col del malaute sia strengut am alcun drap; e aprop fregua le loc am un drap aspre o evapora le loc am aygua cauda entro que aparesca a tu la arceria manifestament.	And if it is hidden from you, then the neck of the patient be strong with some rag; and rub the place with a rough cloth or evaporate it with water until the artery appears clearly.
E lahoras tu pren le spatum del qual aquesta es la forma:	And so do you take this as a form:
E aprop tu scorja la codena am aquel am facilitat entro que pervenguas a la arceria; e aprop geta en lu onti e extratz aquela a las partidas sobiranas entro que extraguas aquela de la codena e descobras aquela de las tunicas las quals so dejos aquela, de tota partida.	And so do you cut the vein with that ease until you reach the artery; and get it out of the comers independently until you extract that from the vein and discover that of the tunics that are left there, completely.
Mays si la arteria es subtil, lahoras envolveys aquela am la extremitat del oncii, e aprop inscindeys de aquela una partida segon la quantitat per la qual sian alonguadas las extremitatz de lu e sian contraytas, e no endevindra flux de sanc, quar si no so inscididas no pujara le sanc de tot.	More if the artery is thin, then wrap it with the end of the bone, and so cut that one from a comers according to its quantity for the two ends of the bone are drawn out and joined together, and there is no loss of blood because if they were not incised the pulse would be lifted up.
E aprop evacua del sanc de vi unc. entro a tres.	And so evacuate the blood of a hand. Through three.
E si la arceria es gran, lahoras cove que tu lies aquela en dos locs am fiel dopble fort de ceda o am cordas a lonc, e no coyte a lu putrefaccio denant la consolidacio de la plagua e endevengua flux de sanc.	And if the artery is wide, then when you tie it in two places with strong thread of silk or string it does not break because of the pus’ consolidation and loss of blood.
E aprop incideys la superfluitat la qual es entre dos liamentz; e fay aquo en aquela hora o aprop autra ora.	And so cut off the superfluity that is between two ligatures; and do it at that time or another.
E si vols, cauteriza aquela am cauteri entro al os am cauteri cutellar entro que sian incididas las extramitatz de lu, e stara en loc de aquela meteyssa obra.	And if you want to, cauterize it with cauterizing iron within the bone before incising the two ends of it, and place it in a place that is ready for that work.
E es milhor obra sino que·l malaute aia febre o es de escalfada compleccio; quar cauteri es de aquelas causas que ajudan a las humiditatz finidoras, e donc es milhor en juvament.	And it is better work than the patient has fever or a hot complex; because cauterizing helps to stop the humidity’s finish, and so is better for healing.
E cove aprop la extraccio de las arcerias que huomplas le loc de coto antic, e sian pausatz sobre lu polvils decentement fayt, e aprop sia curat am medicinas seccas fazen naysser la carn e am calguas entro que sia sanat.	And so extract the arteries that are in the temples, which are hard and dry, and put it on a clean cloth, and make it clear with medicine that makes the flesh well and the blood stops flowing into it until it is healed.
E si mentre obres autra veguada endeventa flux de sanc de la arceria, lahora tu te coyta a restrenger aquel sanc, o am cauteri, o que omplas le loc de coto, e strenh la tua ma entro que sia restreyt le sanc.	And if while you open another vein that is coming out of the artery’s blood, then do you bind to stop that blood, or cauterize it, or put it on a place; and strengthen your hand within so that the blood stops flowing.
E si deguna causa de aquelas no es a tu present, lahoras pausa le tieu dit sobre le loc entro que·l sanc sia congilat, e enbroca le loc am aygua de vehement fregiditat entro que la acuitat repausa, e sia strengut segon que cove.	And if any cause of that is not with you, then pause the thread above the place where the pulse is stopped, and put it on cold water within so that the fever stops returning, and make it strong according to how it was before.
E aquo que es pus leugier en extraccio de arceria es que tu cauterizes la vena am aquest cauteri haventz dos cotels, pus que tu has senhat les dos locs am tenta, e depausa quascus, mot ignitz, entro que pervenguan al os e inscindan la vena en dos locs, per so que sia elonguat aquo que es entre las extremitatz de lu, quar no son consolidadas de tot am aquest cauteri.	And so the blood is extracted from the artery is that you cauterize the vein with that cauterizing iron having two knives, because you open each one with effort igniting it within so that it reaches the bone and cuts it in two places, so that the blood be elongated between both ends of it, because it is not consolidated by that cauterizing iron.
E aquesta es la forma del cauteri:	And this is the way of the cautery:
E sia la acuitat dels dos cotels esemps.	Let be sharp the two knives’ edges.
Mays empero si so mendres acuitat que dos cotels es milhor, quar si so agudas cum dos cotels propera a quascuna freg, e no enscideysso la carn am velocitat.	More if those are not sharp, then let two knives be of the same sharpness because it is better for each one to cut at its own speed and not incise the flesh quickly.
Donc cum en aquels es alcuna grossitut, es tenguda la calor del foc en aquels e la carn es abscindida leugierament.	Then if some are thick, let the fire’s heat be held in those and the flesh is cut lightly.
E aquesta obra es milhor en tota obra e pus leugiera.	And this work is better in every work and lighter.
E sia le spazi le qual es entre dos cotels la quantitat de la grossesa del dit.	And be the space between two knives the quantity of the thickness of the thread.
Capitol quart.	Chapter IV.
De la cura de cors de lagremas agudas e aciduas dels huels.	Of the cure for weeping and sour blisters on the eyes.
Quan so lagremas aciduas, e es le cors de aquelas venas las quals so sobre le test del cap deforo, e no comfereys en aquo alcuna causa de la curacio de medicina, e vezes la cara del malaute ja enrogesir e sent en le sieu front deambulacio ayssi cum si era deambulacio de formiguas, e·ls huels de aquel so extenuatz, humitz enayssi que ja les pels de lor son conodutz, e las parpelas so scalfadas per la acuitat de las lacrimas, les antics agro mesties en la curacio de aquelas de aquesta operacio, e nompnero aquela curacio am spassa.	When the sour blisters occur on the eyes and are in the forehead of the patient, then do not put faith in medicines’ remedy, and the face of the patient is already swollen and it is painful to look out; and these eyes with those little hairs are irritated by the acid liquid of tears, and the work for those eyes is tiring, and the skin of them is torn with the acuteness of the tears, and they do not give relief.
E es que tu comandas al malaute rayre les pels les quals son en le sieu front, e aprop inscideys en le front tres fissuras engualment distans segon la longitut del front.	And so you command the patient to lie down with his or her hair over their face, and make three incisions on the forehead that are equally spaced out according to the length of the forehead.
E si’ la longitut de la fissura cays dos ditz: la una fissura sia engualment distant a la longitut del nas en le mieg loc del front, e la segonda segon la longitut un petit del movement dels lacertz les quals so en le lacrimal, e la tersa del autre part.	And if the length of the incision is two fingers: the first incision should be equally spaced out according to the length of the nose at the middle of the forehead, and the second one should follow the length of the lacrimal, and the third one on the other side.
E guarda te de la incizio de las arcerias las quals so en dos latz, e elongua la tua ma de la continuacio de amdos las mandibulas.	And be careful of the incisions in the arteries that are in two places, and extend your hand from the continuation of both mandibles.
E si’ l’espazi de quascuna inscizio la quantitat de tres ditz ajustatz.	And if the space between each incision is three fingers wide.
E si’ a tu una pessa d’espongua apparelhada o draps seccatz motz am les quals exsiccas le sanc.	And if you have a sponge of white cloth that is dry and clean, use it to apply the medicine.
E aprop entremet le spatum de dos agudas extremitatz, del qual aquesta es la forma de la inscisio de lu:	Then take the spatula with two sharp ends, for this is the shape of the incision on the patient’s back:
que es de la partida des templas entro a la segonda inscizio.	which goes from the first incision to the second one.
Exxcorja am aquel tota la codena la qual es entre dos incizios am le ciphac le qual es sobre le os, e aprop fay aquo de la inscizio migera entro a la segonda inscisio.	Then cut off all the skin that is between two incision lines on the spine, and do so from the first incision to the second one.
E aprop stratz ne aquest spatum e entromet en la primieyra inscizio autra vetz un autre instrument le qual es apelat cutellar, agut de una part e del autre no agut.	Then take this spatula and insert it into the first incision again, an instrument called chisel on one side, and not on the other side.
E pausa le latz de aquel agut deves la carn annexa deves la codena, e le latz de lu leon dintz le os, e empelley aquel entro que pervengua a la fissura migera, e abscindeys am aquel totz les vaysels que descendo del cap als huels.	Then cut off the hair from the patient’s back, and from the spine itself, and insert it into the middle incision, and cut off all the vessels that descend from the head to the arms.
Mays que sia continuada la inscizio ad aquo appar de la codena, e aprop fay aquo en la fissura migana entro al autra fissura.	And so the incision should continue as it goes down along with the skin, and do the same in the middle incision before going to the other one.
E pus que corr del sanc quantitat engual, exprem les locs de las pessas del sanc congilat.	And then pour a certain quantity of the medicine onto the patient’s feet that are cold.
E aprop pausa en quascuna fissura calgua de coto vielh, e pausa sobre aquels polvils enbegutz en vi e oli e vi agre, e vegas que no endevengua apostema caut.	Then put a little piece of cotton in each incision, and place it on the dirt that is mixed with wine and oil and vinegar, and apply it so that it does not cause blisters.
E en le tertz dia deslia le liament e aministra gran enfusio de aygua cauda o tebeza, e aprop cura aquo am enguent bazilicon am oli rozat e autres entro que las plaguas sian sanadas.	And on the third day wash it well with warm water, and apply oil of rose and other remedies to make the wounds heal.
Capitol .v.	This is a complete translation of the text into English:
De la cura de lagramas per catartz e als huels descendentz de las partidas dedintz del cap.	For the cure of headaches by catharsis and for the vessels that descend from the head.
Quan ad alcu veno catartz agutz e continuantz, e vezes les huels del malaute extenuatz petitz, e ja le reguardament de lor es debelitat, e las palpebras ulceradas e de lor cazo les pels, e en le preon del cap es dolor aguda ledent e extrenutacio consequent, lahoras sapias per aquestz accidentz que las materias e catartz no veno sino de motas venas de las partidas dedintz procedent.	When there is acute pain in the head due to catharsis and the vessels that descend from the head, if they are very weak, then take small pieces of the patient’s hair and cut them off, and with regard to their improvement, their swollen eyelids, their ulcers, and the hairs on their scalp, and with the pretense of the head, if there is sharp pain and extreme sensation, know that these things do not come from the blood vessels that proceed from the inside parts.
E la milhor curacio en aquels es aquesta: que comandes al malaute que raza lo sieu front, e aprop inscideys en aquel una fissura al mieg loc del front, un petit per la latitut (e comensa am la fissura del templar senestre entro al dextre templar; e sia inscisio entro al os; e eslongua la tua ma dels lacertz del templas lesquals son maugutz deves la mastigacio), entro que sia le os descubert.	And the best cure for these is this: command the patient to lie down on his or her forehead, and make a single incision in the middle of the forehead, a little long (and start the incision from the temple on the left side entering into the right one; and it should be made under the bone; and extend your hand along the lacunae of the temples, which are wet with saliva), so that the bone is exposed.
Exsicca tot le sanc am espongua o am drap secc e aprop repleys entre las doas labias de la fissura am coto vielh o am draps de li.	Dry all the skin on both sides with a sponge or dry cloth, and fill it between the two lips of the incision with cotton wool or a cloth.
E aprop estrenh desus am polvils enbegutz en vi e oli per so que no endevengua apostema caut.	Then apply vinegar-soaked dirt on them to prevent blisters from forming.
E quan deslias aquo e veses que l’apostema ja es diminuit, lahoras cove que fregua le os entro que comensa en lu nayser carn, e aprop cura aquel am regiment exsiccatiu le qual fassa neysser la carn, ayssi cum si tu prenes de farina de froment dos partidas e de colofania quatre partidas e mescla o, e de lor sia fayt emplastre e sia aministrat en aquestas plaguas a de la carn nativitat.	And when the blister has decreased or disappeared, then take some flour from wheat that is twice as fine and fragrance four times, and mix them together, making a paste of it, and apply it to the patient’s skin with the intention of treating new flesh, just as if you took two parts of flour and four parts of colophony, mixed them together, and made a paste of it.
Capitol .vi.	This is the complete translation of the text:
De la cura de aquo que catz en las aurelhas.	For the cure of water that is heard in the ears.
Tota causa que catz en las aurelhas es una de quatre specias, quar o es peyra mineral o causa semblant a peyra, ayssi cum ferr e veyre, o es de planta ayssi cum ceze o fava, o es causa fluxtibla ayssi cum aygua e vi agre e a lor semblantz, o alcuna bestia.	All causes that produce noise in the ears are four: either because it is mineral-like and similar to iron or glass, because it is of plants and similar to hazel or bean, or because it is fluid-like and similar to water and vinegar, or some animal.
E donc quan peyra catz en l’aurelha o autra causa semblant de aquelas causas que no ajustan ne creysso en l’aurelha, e pausa la aurelha al solelh, e si vezes la peyra, lahoras distilla en aquela alcuna causa de oli violat o sizami, e aprop aministra la extraccio de lu, e fay le stornudar am condizi, e oppila las nars deve le aveniment de stornutacio.	And so when it is heard in the ear or some other cause similar to these causes that do not agree with it, and place the ear on the shoulder, and if it still hears, then distil it into water of violet or celery, and administer the extract to the patient, and make him sneeze with condiments, and if he sneezes again, then take some of his spittle and apply it to the ear, and treat it as a remedy.
E aprop pausa en le circuit de la aurelha alscunas pessas de drap o lana, e dextendas la aurelha a las partidas desus, quar motas veguadas es foro-getada am aquestas causas.	Then put some cloth or wool on the ear, and extend it towards the outer part, for these are causes of fire in the ears.
E si no n’es getada, lahoras aministra extraccio de lu am le instrument apelat gesti epicicarios subtil del qual aquesta es la forma:	And if it is not relieved, then administer the extract with the instrument called a gentle subcutaneous injection, which has this form:
E si es foro-getada am gesti, bo es; e sino, lahoras aministra la extraccio de lu am onci subtil de pauca duplicacio.	If it is relieved with an injection, it is good; otherwise, administer the extract with a small amount of twice-diluted juice.
E donc si no es foro-getada per aquo, lahoras fay una canula de aram e entromet la extremitat de la canula en le trauc de la aurelha e claus a l’enviro de la canula am cera e am oli mollificada per so que no sia ubert sino la canula.	And if it is not relieved with water, then make a catheter out of metal and insert the end of the catheter into the outer part of the ear and close it with wax and softened oil so that it is not too much, but just enough to relieve the obstruction.
E aprop extratz am le tieu vent am fort atraccio, quar tropas veguadas cum aquo que havem recontat.	Then expel it with a small wind, as ten fingers with water that we have mentioned.
Mays si no es foro-getada en aquesta manieyra, lahoras pren de halka alumbat o de vecz aparelhat am le qual son preses les ausels una patita quantitat, e pausa aquel en la extremitat de ray, e aprop envolopa sobre aquel coto decentment pausat.	And if it is not relieved in this way, then take a ring of amber or some other object that can be placed on the ear, and put a certain quantity of it on the end of the ring, and place it gently over the ear.
E aprop entromet aquel en le trauc de la aurelha am facilitat, e aprop excicca la aurelha de la humiditat.	Then insert that into the ear with ease, and dry the ear from moisture.
E donc si no es foro-getada am totas las causas las quals havem recontadas, lahoras tu coyta a talhar aquela denant que endevengua apostema caut o espasme.	And if it is not relieved with all the causes we have mentioned, then you must take care that the patient does not suffer from blisters or spasms.
E la manieyra de talhar aquela es que tu al comensament sancnes le malaute de la vena sephasica e extratz del sanc segon la mannieyra de la vertut de lu, e aprop fay aquel cezer entre las tuas mas e converteys l’aurelha a las partidas desus, e fen am petita fissura en la razit de la aurelha deves lo greys de lu en le loc be premegut de lu.	And the way to do this is that you must cut off the patient's hair at the beginning of the head with scissors, and extract the blood from it in the second way due to the virtue of the blood, and then apply it to the scalp with a small incision in the middle part, and place it on the scalp with the intention of treating new flesh, just as if you cut off the hair at the roots and made an incision on the forehead.
E sia la fissura de figura lunar entro que pervengua a la peyra, e, la peyra atrobada, osta aquela si podes am instrumentz apropriatz; e aprop cos la fissura en aquela hora am velocitat, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	And so the wound of lunar shape goes into the patient's leg, and when the patient is shaken, stop it if you can with an appropriate instrument; and close the wound at that moment quickly, and heal what is within so that it is cured.
E si la causa cazent en la aurelha es un dels gras que creysso e so inflatz, lahoras aministra la curacio e la extraccio de lu; mays si no obezeys a tu ad eyssiment, lahoras tu pren spatum teune subtil segon aquesta forma:	And if the cause pierces into the ear, it is one of the grasses that are created and inflated, then administer the cure and extraction; but if you do not obey your ears, then take a thin spike according to this form:
e aministra am aquel la abscizio de aquel gra lo qual es cazut en l’aurelha.	and administer that the removal of that grass that is caught in the ear.
E no fassas aquo quan cogitas que aquel ja es humectat per la vapor del aurelha, e pausa aquel en motas pessas, e prop extratz ne aquelas am les oncis o am gesti subtil, o ab inscizio ayssi co dit havem, quar es alleujada la extraccio de lu.	And do not pour water when you think that it is already moistened by the vapor of the ear, and pause it in drops, and extract it gently with your fingers or with a sharp instrument, or with a piercing blow; for it is eased by extracting it.
Mays en l’aygua la qual es intrada en l’aurelha cove que·l malaute use de sternutacio am condizi al comensament, e omple la sieua aurelha am alcu coto vielh, e jagua sobre aquela aurelha en la qual es l’aygua, e si per aquo es foro-getada, bo es; e sino, lahoras pren tropas peyras teunas e leons segon la longitut del dit, e calfa aquelas en le foc un pauc, e le pacient entrometa una de aquelas en le trauc de la sua aurelha e saute sobre la un pe sieu de aquela partida e percussia am una autra peyra sobre la peyra la qual es dintz la aurelha.	But in water that enters the ear, it is necessary for the patient to use sneezing at the beginning, and fill his ear with a few drops of old vinegar, and rub over that ear in which the water is, and if by this it comes out, it is good; and if not, then take three or four small, sharp, and new needles according to its length, and heat them slightly, and bind those on the fire, and the patient puts one of those into his ear, and jumps over that part with another needle, and pierces through the ear with a second.
Donc no cesse aquo am peyra entro que tota l’aygua sia foro-getada.	Then do not stop water in the ear until all the water is discharged.
E ja l’aygua sira foro-getada enayssi que tu prenguas de papier o de gonc .i., e met la una extremetat de lu en l’aurelha e estendas l’autre extremitat am foc entro que sia comburit le may de lu.	And the water has been discharged, then take paper or a cotton ball. and place one end of it in the ear, and extend the other end to the fire until it is completely burned.
E prop met i autre gonc e fay aquo tantas veguadas entro que tota l’aygua sia foro-getada, e stratz aquel am canula ayssi co desus es dit de la peyra extrasadora.	And then take another cotton ball and pour water through it in the ear until all the water is discharged, and insert that with a tube as if it were coming out of the ear.
Mays en la extraccio de bestia intrant en aquela aurelha, si es a petit cos, ayssi piussa e a lu semblant, cura aquel ayssi cum havem dit en la divisio; mays si es de gran cos la qual causa apar al sen del vezement, lahoras aministra la extraccio de lu am gesti e oncis, e la causa de lu es pus leugiera de totas las autras causas que cazo en l’aurelha.	But in the extraction of animals that enter into that ear, if it is a small thing, then push and extract it with your fingers as mentioned above; but if it is a large thing that causes pain to the head of the patient, then administer the extraction of it with your fingers or with a sharp instrument, and that cause is lighter than all other causes that pierce into the ear.
Mays en la extraccio de verm engendrat en la aurelha, quan tu curas aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e en le tractat de distillacios e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu reguardes la aurelha al solelh.	But in the extraction of a vermen that is born in the ear, when you cure that with water as mentioned above and in the distillation treatise, and do not use your own cure, then look at the ear towards the sun.
E donc si apar aqui alcuna causa dels verms, lahoras extratz aquel am gesti o am onci subtils, mays si no apar deguna causa, lahoras pren una canula dejos streyta e desus ampla de la qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And if here there appears any cause of the vermen, then extract it with your fingers or with a sharp instrument; but if no cause appears, then take a tube that is slightly curved and wide at the end from which it comes out, whose shape is like this:
E entromet la extremitat subtil en la aurelha segon la quantitat la qual suffertar puesca le malaute; e aprop sucgeys am aquela per succio fort, e fay aquo motas veguadas, entro que totz les verms sian foro-gitatz.	And insert the thin end into the ear according to the quantity that the patient suffers; and extract it with a strong suction, and make drops of water, so that all the vermen are discharged.
Mays si no obezeysso a tu al ayssiment, lahoras tu opila e claus en le circuit de la canula am cera ayssi cum havem dit; lahoras aministre distillacios las quals han ja esproadas les antics en la curacio dels verms, e atrobaras aquo en le tractat de distillacios.	But if you do not obey your ears, then turn it and close it in the circuit of the tube with wax as mentioned above; then administer distillation that has already been distilled the small ones in the cure of vermen, and observe water in the distillation treatise.
E sia la tua efusio am la qual efundas les olis medicinas en la aurelha am aquest strument del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And your infusion with which you pour medicinal oils into the ear with this instrument, whose shape is like this:
E fay aquela de argent o de eram, dejos streyt, en le qual sia un petit trauc, e am pla desus.	Make it slightly curved, and at the end of which there is a small hole, and at the top.
E donc sia cum empellent a que es en la conquavitat de la canula de continent aqui on sira necessari.	And so it is applied to the cavity of the tube where it is necessary.
E si vols, pren le ray e envolveys en la extremitat de lu decentment coto, e aprop gieta oli en la concavitat del auziment, o suc de alcuna herba, o aquo que vols de aquestas medicinas en la canula — e aquela es en la aurelha —, e aprop entromet le ray am coto desus e exprem am la tua ma aquel am compressio temprada de lu entro que l’oli sia expellit en la concavitat del auziment e le malaute senta le oli dedintz.	And if you want, take the ray and wrap it in the end of it with care, and pour oil into the cavity of the ear, or juice of some herb, or water as these medicines in the tube — and that is in the ear — and then insert the ray wrapped with care, and press your hand on it briefly so that the oil goes into the cavity of the ear and the patient feels it.
E aquo que sia enfundut en la aurelha sia ja scalfat am foc un petit.	And the oil that is infused into the ear has already been burned slightly.
E guarda te que la causa la qual distillaras en l’aurelha no sia trop frega, quar las medicinas de aurelha no suffertan aquo.	And be careful that the cause that you will extract from the ear is not too dry, because ear medicines do not tolerate water.
Capitol .vii.	Chapter 7.
De curacio de opilacio de aurelhas.	Of Cure for Ear Aching.
Alcunas veguadas alcus enfantz yeysso dels ventres de lors mayres no-perforatz, e aquo ja accideys en alcus homes, opilacio en le meat de la aurelha per plagua o per carn nada en aquela; e aquesta opilacio alcunas veguadas es fayta en le preon del trau de la aurelha la qual no consiec le vezement, e alcunas veguadas es en las partidas defora.	Some small children are born deaf from their mothers' wombs, and water has already occurred in some adults, it happens in the meat of the ear because of pain or flesh, and that pain sometimes occurs at a distance from the ear.
E aquela que accideys en le preon de lu, la qual no comprehen le vezement, es en las majors disposicios de dificil sanacio.	That which happens in the ear canal, which does not understand the matter, is in difficult conditions of healing.
E en aquela en qual consegueys le vezement, cove que tu pauses la aurelha del malaute al solelh e reguarda en aquela.	And in that ear which you understand, be careful to pause the patient's ear towards the sun and look at it.
E donc si vezes oppulacio apparent, obre aquela am espatum subtil del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	But if there is a small obstruction, open that with a slight spray of the following substance:
Si’ la extremitat de lu en la qual sia petita la latitut, del qual la una partida sia aguda e l’autra no; e le spatum sia de dos latz leon per so que no fassa lizio al aurelha.	If the thin end of it is small in length, of which one part is acute and the other is not; and the spray is made from two sharp lemons so that it does not harm the ear.
E donc si la opilacio es per carn nascuda en la aurelha o en le meat de lu, lahoras te aquela am oncis subtils e incidiys aquela vehement facilitat entro que sia ostada tota la carn.	But if the aching is caused by hidden flesh in the ear or in its meat, then extract it with sharp needles and apply that with a gentle spray, so that all the flesh be removed.
E si opilacio es en le preon de la aurelha, lahoras pren ray subtil leon e escalfa aquel am foc un pauc, e aprop met aquel en le meat de l’aurelha.	But if aching is in the ear canal, then take a sharp and slightly curved needle, heat it slightly, and insert that into the ear canal.
E donc si as scentit oppulacio am aquo que le malaute atroba am facilitat, per gravetat de ausir, esforsa la oppressio de lu am facilitat; e guarda te que no plagues les nervis del aurelha.	But if you feel an obstruction in the ear that the patient suffers easily, then try to press it lightly; and be careful not to harm the nerves of the ear.
E aprop pausa en l’aurelha drap de li segon la quantitat del ample del trauc lo qual tu as envolvutz en l’enguent egipciac; e fay aquo per alcus jorns entro que sias segur de la consolidacio de la plagua; o que prenguas qualgua e enfon aquela en ayguaros e pulveriza sobre lu segi trissat e usa de lu; e si vezes la aurelha ja esser apostemada, lahoras cove que tu estraguas la qualgua e permutes aquela am autra qualgua la qual tu envoloparas en cerot que sia fayt am oli rozat, entro que sia le apostema caut cedat; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And then pause the ear with a thin cloth according to the width of the tube that you have wrapped in Egyptian ointment; and make drops over it for several days so that it is certain that the swelling will subside; or take some and sprinkle it on three-edged slices, and spray it onto it, and if the ear has already been poked, then be careful to break the piece and replace it with another one that you have wrapped in wax that is made with rose oil, so that the pus is soft. And then heal what is inside so that it is cured.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc, lahoras submergeys esponga o drap en aygua frega e pausa sobre la aurelha, e usa del autra curacio la qual restrengeys le flux del sanc, la qual es dita en le tractat de distillacio.	But if there is bleeding due to a disease, then dip a sponge or cloth in water and press it against the ear, and use another cure that you have distilled, which constricts the flow of blood, which is said in the distillation treatise.
Capitol .viii.	Chapter 8.
De cura de athezil le qual endeveno a las palpebras.	Of Cure for Ear Aching.
Athezil les quals endeveno a las paupebras dels huels alcuna veguada so humitz, alscunas veguadas son secs.	Athezel that affects the eyelids of men is sometimes wet, and sometimes dry.
Donc cove que tu tenguas aquels am tenhalhas o am onci, e inscindas aquels am espatum de las suas razitz, e aprop pausa sobre les locs segi trissat.	And if you have those with thin hairs or with needles, cut those with a sharp knife, and then pause them over the three-edged places.
Mays si dolor am flux de sanc veno, lahoras tu cauteriza aquels am cauteri lanticular subtil.	But if there is bleeding due to a disease, then cauterize those with a small sharp instrument.
E la milhor cauterizacio es aprop las inscizios e tropas veguadas retornam quan reman alcuna causa de sas razitz; e quan so cauterizadas am foc, aquelas razitz son comburidas e no retornan.	And the best cauterization is to pause those with sharp knives and return them when there is no more cause of their hairs; and when they are cauterized with fire, those hairs are burned and do not return.
Capitol .ix.	Chapter 9.
Cura de grandeyssa que veno a las palpebras dels huels.	Treatment for large blisters that appear on the eyelids.
Motas veguadas endeve en las palpebras dels huels alcuna causa la qual es asemblada a grandissa en sa fortalicia e duricia, e per so grandissia es apelada.	Clouds seen in the eyelids of a patient are sometimes caused by an underlying condition that leads to increased inflammation and hardness, and thus is referred to as "gout".
E es agreguacio de humiditat grossa en la palpebra dejos e desus.	And it is accumulation of thick moisture on the eyelids below and above.
Donc la opperacio en lor es que consideras lahoras si la grandissia es procedent en lu en aquo que apar de la palpebra e es mauguda a tota partida; e la causa de lu es leugiera.	Then the treatment in this case is that you consider if the swelling is proceeding from within the eye itself, which would be concerning and would cause concern; and the cause of it could be a foreign object.
Donc fen sobre aquela am fissura per la latitut, e aprop escorga aquela de tota partida am facilitat entro que evasesca, e aprop suspen aquela am onci e abscindeys aquela.	Then cut along that line with ease from the inside out to remove it, and then suspend it by a thread and cut off that end.
Mays si a tu no es apparelhada la incizio de lu si no pus que penetras la palpebra am inscizio pauc a pauc, lahoras aquo no notz en deguna causa.	However, if you are not equipped with the instrument to make the incision, then do it slowly with a small cut, as there is no need to worry about any underlying cause.
E si la figura es gran, lahoras tu l’ajusta am sutura; e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	And if the swelling is large, then you should adjust it with stitches; and treat that area so that it can heal.
E si es pauca, a tu no sobrevindra mal per aquela quar l’anguent de lu restaura aquela e encarna.	And if it is small, then you will not suffer any harm from it because the blood of that area will restore it and heal it.
E si la grandissia es declinant a las partidas dedintz de la palpebra deves la superficia dedintz, lahoras evesa la palpebra e suspen la grandissia am onci, otra que tu indigescas de incizio, e prem aquela de tota part, e si la palpebra per inscizio es alonguada, aquo no notz en deguna causa.	And if the swelling is declining inside the eyelids, which are inside the eye, then cut off the eyelid and suspend the swelling by a thread; otherwise, you may suffer from the incision, and press it from all sides, and if the eyelid is cut with an incision, there will be no cause for concern.
E aprop la incizio, lava le huel am aygua salada; e cura le loc am aquo que encarna entro que sia sanat.	Then wash the eyelids with saltwater; and treat the area with a poultice so that it can heal.
Capitol .x.	Chapter 10.
De la cura axcirnah en la palpebra desus del huel.	Of the treatment above the eyelid of the eye.
Axcirnath es grays le qual es engendrat en las tunicas de la palpebra desus, e majorment endeve als enfantz, agrava les huels de aquels et accideyso a lor catartz le mayti; e no podon reguardar la claror del solelh per aquo quar lagremas se coytan ad aquels.	Axection is common in the eyelids of children, causing them to cry and leading to eye discharge; it does not allow them to look clearly at the sun because tears flow from them.
E per so tu vezes aquels jaser sobre les lors caras tot temps, e sobre les lors caras dormen; e so a las palpebras de lor dejos les sobrecils humidas, las quals ja ha cuberta imflacio, e iminencia de accernac apparent es en l’uelh; e que quant tu premes le loc am les tieus ditz, tu centes accernac entro aquels.	And so they constantly look at each other's faces, and sleep with their eyes open; and the eyebrows on their left and right are moist, which is due to swelling, and the presence of something that may cause damage appears in the eye; and when you press the area with your fingers, you can feel something hard inside.
E alcuna manieyra de opperacio es en aquel que le malaute pausa le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop pausa drap de li e de lu fay calgua, e fay de lu cercle segon la quantitat la qual contena arthernach de tota partida, e aprop pausa aquel sobre aquela e prem am les tieus ditz de tota per que sia agreguat arcernac en le mieg del cercle, e aprop fen en le mieg de aquela humiditat am spatum inscident am fissura per la latitut, e la fissura no sia major que la fissura que es fayta en flaubotomia.	And there is no way to operate on that person without lifting their head and placing a cloth over it and making incisions in it according to the amount of fluid that contains overall, and then place that under the eye and press it with your fingers while saying "I will" repeatedly so that hard matter is pushed down into half of the circle, and then open it at the bottom where there is moisture, making an incision along its length, not wider than that made in blepharonomy.
Mays en le preon cove que tu fendas la codena tota entro que pervenguas ad arcernach, quar en las mays desposicios proceseys arcernach per fissura segon la forma de grayseza blanca.	However, in the right place, you should make a complete incision so that you reach the hard matter, because at different locations, you reach hard matter through an incision made according to the shape of white grays.
Donc extratz aquela am draps los quals tu as envolopatz entre les tieus ditz a las partidas deforo e revolv entre la ma dextra e sinistre entro que sia dispargut.	Then remove it with the cloth that you have wrapped between your fingers on either side and turn it over, holding it between your right and left hands so that it is turned inside out before being removed.
E guarda te que no ajustes en la fissura per so que am le spatum no pervenguas al huel e ladescas aquel.	And remember not to adjust the incision so that the spike does not reach the eyelid and cause damage.
Mays si no apar a tu arternach en le comensament de la fissura, mays que tu ajustes en la fissura un petit am fecilitat entro que procesisca arternach; e aprop extratz aquela ayssi quo havem dit; e aprop submargeys draps de li en aygua e vi agre e pausa les sobre le loc e estrenh aquels am polvils.	However, if you do not find hard matter at the beginning of the incision, rather than adjusting the incision, place a cloth dipped in water and wet on it; then remove it and spread the cloth over the area and clean it with powder.
E so alcus que trissan sal e pausan aquel en la conquavitat de la fissura per so que aquo que es remas de aquela humiditat.	Then put salt on it and place it in the cavity of the incision so that the moisture that remains there is removed.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And then treat that area so that it can heal.
Mays si accideys en le loc apostema caut, lahoras cura aquel am emplastres cedatils entro que sia sanat.	However, if pus appears in the treated area, then treat it with calamine plaster so that it can heal.
Capitol .xi.	Chapter 11.
De manieyras de tactimi del huel.	Of ways to examine the eye.
Quan en las palpebras dels huels so natz pels ajustatz dejos les pels naturals e so antiquatz, lahoras aquels noso al huel e fan endevenir manieras de malautias ayssi cum lacrimas assiduas e mollificacio de palpebras e tela entro que aquo sia causa de destruccio del huel que s’apela tactinir del huel, e cura se en quatre manieyras: o per cauteri am foc; o am medicina acuta segon que denant es dit en le capitol de cauteri; o es fayt atactini per inscizio e sutura; o per cannas segon que yeu diyre.	When the eyelids are natural and have their own hairs, then examine them for any signs of disease, such as excessive tears and moisture on the eyelids and the membrane within, which can cause damage to the eye, referred to as eye burning, and it is treated in four ways: by cauterization with fire; or with acute medicine according to what has been said in the chapter on cauterization; or by surgery through an incision and stitches; or with blades according to whether you look directly or indirectly.
E donc cove que tu pauses le cap del malaute en le tieu se; aprop converteys la palpebra del uelh am la tua ma sinistra, e si es convertida, bo es; e sino, entromet agulha en aquela en la qual sia fiel de la partida pus dejos de la palpebra, e fay penetrar la agulha am fiel desus, e aquo sia — prop del marge de la palpebra en le qual naysso les pels — prop dels pels, e tira le fiel a las partidas desus am la palpebra, e converteys aquela am le ray.	Then place the cap of the instrument on the left side; then turn the eyelid of the eye to you with your right hand, and if it turns, do not worry; and if not, insert a needle into it at the bottom of the eyelid, which is — close to the edge of the eyelid where there are no hairs — close to the hairs, and pull the thread through it, and turn that side towards you with your left hand, and bring the thread to the top of the eyelid.
E aprop fen en la partida dedintz de la palpebra dejos les pels ajustatz am spatum inscidentz del lacrimal major entro al lacrimal mendre; e aprop extratz le fiel e pausa dejos la palpebra polvilhs petitz de coto o de drap, e aprop senha sobre la palpebra am tenta, e sia ayssi cum figura de fuelha de mirt.	Then cut along that line with a sharp knife, which is inside the eyelid, below the tear duct; then remove the thread and place it between the eyelids, and turn the upper eyelid towards you with your left hand, and bring the thread to the top of the eyelid; then press the lid with your fingers while saying "I will" repeatedly so that the needle is pushed down into half of the circle.
Mays empero cove que sia la figura segon la quantitat de helevacio de la palpebra, quar aquo ja es diversificat en les homes, quar de aquels es le quals indigeys que sia inscidit de la palpebra gran quantitat segon la quantitat per la qual la palpebra es mollificada.	However, in the case of a large amount of fluid on the eyelid, as it differs from person to person, and because the eye is affected differently depending on the amount by which the eyelid is moistened.
E aprop fen am le spatum sobre las doas linhas las quals has senhadas, e comensa del lacrimal major entro al lacrimal menor.	Then cut along the line you have drawn, starting from the tear duct, and continue to the bottom where it meets with the other line.
E si’ la tua fissura prop dels pels naturals ayssi cum es la grossetut del rey.	And if your incision is close to natural hairs, as it is when there is hair growth, then do not worry about that.
E aprop met le onci en un dels dos angles de la codena, e aprop excoria aquela tota, e aprop ajusta am la scitura las doas labias am gula o fiel de lana subtil, e abstergeys le sanc, e fay adherir aquo que superflueys dels fiels sobre dos sobrecils am alcunas causas enviscans, si voles far aquo, e sino, non cures.	Then place the pointed instrument in one of the corners of the cloth, and carefully scrape it all off; then adjust the two sides of the incision with a sharp knife or a blade, making them slightly curved; wipe away any excess hair from the eyelids with powder; and if you want to make that area clean, do so; otherwise, do not worry about it.
E aprop leyssa la sutura dels fiels entro a tres dias o quatre, e aprop cura aquo.	Then leave the stitches in place for three or four days, and then treat that area.
E si vols, layssa la plagua ses sutura, e cura aquela am aquo que exsicca e constrenh, quar la palpebra es alevada deves la sigillacio de la plagua e la agreguacio de lu; mays sutura es milor E donc aysso diysso les antics de taxanir.	And if you wish, leave the stitches in place for as long as they can be left in place, and then treat that area because the eyelid is lifted due to the sealing of the stitches and the accumulation of moisture; however, longer-lasting stitches are better. And therefore say: "The ancient way of treating eye burning has been forgotten."
Mays empero en lu sia sollicitut sobre le malaute, e es de bona operacio, e no es en lu temor.	However, when the instrument is placed on the eye, it is a good operation and not dangerous.
E es autra manieyra en taxmir, e es que senhes sobre la palpebra figura ayssi cum fuelha de mirt, e aprop eleva la palpebra am tres uncis segreguatz e congreguatz segon aquesta forma:	And it is another way of treating that, and that is to turn the eyelid towards you in this form, and then raise the lid with three separate and gathered corners according to this shape.
Mays si no es possible aquo, tener les uncis, e aquo no es engualhat, lahoras pren una agula en la qual haia fil e met aquela en le mieg de la figura, e entromet le autre fiel prop le lacrimal major, e·l fiel segon prop le lacrimal mendre, e ajusta entre les tieus ditz les fiels am equalitat, e aprop am aquels eleva la tua ma am elevacio engual, eleva tota la codena sobre la qual es senhat ayssi cum havem recomtat.	However, if that is not possible, hold the sides of the eyelids, and if they are not closed, then insert a thread into the middle of the figure, and place another thread at the top where there is no hair, and fix those threads with stitches, and then raise the upper eyelid with your left hand using an upward gesture, and bring the lower eyelid towards you with your right hand, and make the same movement.
E aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	Then he adjusts the two lips of the wound and sews them together, curing what is inside that should be healed.
Mays si accideys apostema deves la tua inscizio o la tua fissura, seda aquel apostema am cerot e a lu semblantz, e am enguentz.	If, however, you have an abscess that needs to be lanced or cut open, then do so and apply ointment and poultice, and wet it.
E alcunas veguadas endeve a la palpebra que·ls sieus pels sian convertitz, adonc cove que tu uses en aquela de aquo que havem dit de inscizio; mays sutura en quascus es mays artificial.	And if the eyelids turn inward, so that the pellets fall out, then you use what I said above about lancing them; but sew them up in cases where it is artificial.
Ataxinir am cannas es segon aquesta forma:	First, cut off the hair from the canes in this way:
e es que tu convertas la palpebra e scindas la figura qu’es dedintz segon que he recontat; e aprop per art fay doas cannas o doas astelas subtils de las quals longitut sia segon la longitut de la palpebra e la latitut de lor sia mendra de la latitut del spatum.	And if you turn the eyelids and separate their shapes according to what I have described; and then with art, make two thin canes or two thin stiles from them, whose length should be according to the length of the eyelids and their width according to the width of the spine.
E tu ja has inscidit en las extremitatz de quascunas partidas, la on tenes les fils.	You have already lanced at the ends of every fracture, where you have the threads.
Aprop agregua quascuna am subtilitat subre aquo que superflueys de la palpebra del huel, e constres las cannas de quascunas partidas am fort strictura, e layssa aquela per alcus jorns, quar la codena per la strictura morira e sira denegada e se poyrira entro que per si meteyssa cayra.	Then add a little water to each of the canes, which are too thin above the eyelid, and tighten them very tightly, and leave them for a few days, because by their own tension they will break and rot from within.
Mays si es tardat, lahoras trenca la am las toroyras, e aprop cura la plagua entro que sia sanat.	But if it is delayed, then cut off the eye, and if the wound has healed, then heal what is inside that should be healed.
Donc cum es solidada, la palpebra es elevada e les pels no pungo.	Then when it is solid, the eyelid is raised and the pellets do not poke.
E aquesta es la forma de doas cannas las quals faras segon aquesta forma:	And this is the way of making two canes according to this form:
e haia la quantitat de la longitut e de la latitut ni mays ni mens.	nor more nor less of either length or width.
Capitol .xii.	Chapter XII.
De elevacio de pels pungentz en le huel am agula quan le pel es dur.	On the Elevation of the Pellet-Punctures on the Eye with a Needle when the pellet is hard.
Quan son pels no-naturals, durs e aspres e pungentz les huels, lahoras la operacio en lu es que tu prenguas agula subtil e pauses en aquela fiel de ceda subtil e leon, e aprop que tu ajustes las extremitatz de lu e nozes quascu en manieyra mot subtil.	When the pellets are unnatural, hard and sharp, then do the operation with a fine needle, and pause in that part which is sub-thin, and carefully attach each to it in a subtle way.
E sia la longitut dels fiels de quantitat de una palma.	And let the length of the threads be of the quantity of a palm.
E aprop tu compon2 autre fiel subtil dejos lu en breu, e nuza las extremitatz de aquel si tu·t vols.	Then you make another fine thread under that one, and join the ends together if you wish to.
E aprop pause le malaute le sieu cap en le tieu se, e sia prop del solelh per que la tua obra sia declarada, quar es operacio subtil e menuda.	Then place the patient's head in the middle position, and bring it closer to the sun that your work may be known, since it is a subtle and tiny operation.
E aprop intromet la agulha en la razit del pel ajustat la qual ha necessitat de engen, e fay aquela penetrar en la palpebra festinantment entro que extraguas aquela desus le pel natural.	Then insert the needle into the root of the pellet with care; and make it penetrate into the eyelid quickly before it comes out on the other side of the pellet.
E aprop tire le pel entro desus e intromet aquel en alixati, e sian les pels un o dos o tres e no mays.	Then pull the pellet out from within, and push that one into the lid, and have the pellets be one, two or three; not more.
E aprop tira la tua ma am aquel entro que·l pel sia fora-gitat am alixolati en la palpebra am le pel natural.	Then remove your hand from that part where the pellet has been pushed out of its place in the lid, keeping it with the natural pellet on the eyelid.
Mays si es atirat alixalati e non es gitat le pel, atiraras alixati a las partidas dejos am le fiel le qual tu has compost am aquela, entro qu’en sia gitat alixalati del trau sobira.	If it is drawn out of its place in the lid and is not pushed out, then you draw it out of its place on the split ends of the thread which you have used at that part, while keeping it with the natural pellet on the eyelid; but if it is pushed out, then you push it back into its place above.
E vegas aquela am la visio del huel, quar lahoras tu gitaras alixati e lo fiel, e grotan quascu e clautz le huel, e laysse le claus per dos dias o tres, entro que·l pel adheresca al sieu loc e nasque sobre aquel bona carn.	Then you close it with a knot and tie it, and if any of them come loose after two or three days, then the pellet will adhere to its place again and grow well on that.
E si es mays breu le pel, lahoras tu ajusta un pel lonc dels pels naturals, e es elevat am aquel, o que·l leysses entro que sia alonguat aprop alcu spazi, e lehoras tu eleva aquel.	If the pellet breaks again, then you adjust a long pellet from the natural pellets, and raise it up; or, if you want to lengthen it, then you raise that part by itself, keeping it with the natural pellets on the eyelid.
Capitol .xiii.	Chapter XIII.
De la cura de ehacratir la qual ve en la palpebra desus.	On the Cure of a Blot in the Eye that is on the eyelid.
Quan ve en le huel ehacratir, e es contraccio de la palpebra quan es contrayta en sus, o a dextra o a sinistra partida, per mala consolidacio de plagua o de seccio o de cauteri, e es apelada leporina, e aquesta ahercrati o es natural o accidental, e es fayta per consolidacio de plagua o de seccios o de cauteri, o per semblantz a lor malcuratz.	When the eye is blotted, and the eyelid contracts when it closes, or on the right or left part by the bad consolidation of a wart or section or cauterization, and this is called "leporine", and that one is either natural or accidental, and is made by the consolidation of a wart or section or cauterization, or similar to them by mistake.
May la manieyra de la operacio en lu es que tu fendas aquela consolidacio e que separes las labias de lu, e pauses en lu en aquo que es entre aquelas una meca de drap de li, e ligues aquelas entro que sian sanadas.	Then the way to operate on it is that you cut through that consolidation and separate the lips of it; and pause in it the thread which is between those two, and join them together so that they are healed.
E no cove que tu uses de curacio de lu de las causas las quals exsiccan, constrenho; quar si tu fas aquo retorna alixacratir pus mal que nulh temps no foc habantz.	Do not use any cure for the eye from those causes that dry it up, for if you do, then it will return to being dry more quickly than if you do not.
Usa en aquela de causas que mollifico ayssi cum es fenugrec, e embroca am la aygua en la qual son coytz altea e semensa de li, o enguent dyaquilon, le qual sia liquefayt am alcu dels olis, e submergeys en aquel la meca, e cura am aquel.	Use on the eye from those causes that soften it thus: with fenugrec, and bathe it in water which is warm and salty, or apply aqua-alkaline oil, which will be liquefied by a little of the oils, and dip the cotton swab into it, and apply to it.
E lo tesaur de la tua curacio es que tu perforsses am tot engen que no sia consolidat segon la forma que foc al comensament.	And the treasure of your cure is that you perform all that is not consolidated according to the shape that you start with.
E aquesta operacio la qual havem dita, no es sino alcuna rectificacio de ehalixacrati que no retorna la forma del loc segon que foc denant.	And this operation which we have described is nothing other than a correction of a blot in the eye that does not return to its place according to what it started with.
Capitol .xiiii.	Chapter XIV.
De la cura de ehacrati le qual es fayt en la palpebra dejos.	On the Cure of a Blot in the Eye that is on the eyelid.
Aquesta alxacrati la qual es fayta en la palpebra dejos, la qual es nompnada vertadierament alxacrati; e es de lu alcuna natural, autra accidental.	This cure, which is made on the eyelid, is rightly called an eye-wash; and it is either natural or accidental.
Mays accidental es fayta per plagua o per scissura o per cauteri o per autres semblantz.	It may be accidental if caused by a wart, section, or cauterization, or similar to them by mistake.
E la via de la operacio de lu es que tu prenguas una agula en la qual haga fil doble, e fiques aquela en la carn, e que la fassas passar del lacrimal de senestre entro al lacrimal dextre, entro que·l fil pervengua en las doas extremitatz de la carn.	Then the way to operate on it is that you take a needle which makes a double thread, and keep it in the flesh, and let it go through the lacrimal duct from the left, into the lacrimal duct of the right, while the thread goes through both ends of the flesh.
E aprop exten la carn a las partidas desus am la agula e cus aquela am la agula, e inscideys am spatum ample.	Then extend the flesh on each side with the needle and cut it with the knife, and then sew it up with a wide needle.
E donc si retorne la figura de la palpebre segon que cove, bo es; e sino, pren le ray e pausa aquel en la figura fenduda, e am aquel converteys la palpebra, e fen las doas fissuras en le latz de la palpebra dejos.	Then if the eyelid returns to its shape as it should, then do so with a sharp edge; but if not, then hold the blade on the split part of the eyelid, and make the two slits at the bottom of the eyelid.
E sian las extremitatz de las doas fissuras de dos angles de la inscizio, la qual has fayta entro que concurren, e sia de lor fayt angle entro que quan se congreguan sia fayta figura de lor.	Then the ends of the two slits should be at different angles to each other, so that when they meet they form one figure; and let them converge towards each other.
E aquesta figura es letra greca: la landa.	And this figure is the Greek letter: Lambda.
E aprop osta la carn aquela per la quantitat que es le latz de lu agut dejos de lu, aquo que siec la palpebra.	Then extend that flesh with the quantity which is the width of the eyelid on each side, so that it fits over the eyelid; and let it rest there.
E aprop ajusta las partz seperadas e cos aquelas am le fil de lana; e aprop cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit de las medicinas mollificativas e de las calguas entro que sia sanat.	Then adjust those separated parts together with a woolen thread, and then heal them with water that we have described as being soft, and with the compresses within which should be healed.
E si alxacrati endeve per fissura o sutura o cauteri, lahoras cove que tu fendas am fissura plana sobre les pels de la palpebra segon que es precedit.	If this eye-wash is done through a crack or stitch or cauterization, then you cut it flat on the eyelid pelts according to what comes before.
E aprop separa am la calgua entre doas labias segon que havem dit.	Then separate those compresses between the two lips according to what I have described.
En la suma del sermo de la cura de alxacrati quan es desus o dejos, que corra en lu operacio, segon que es preparat de la forma de alxacrati, e aquela es en forma de motas diversitatz.	In the sum of the speech of the cure of eye-wash when it is on or off the eyelid, which runs into that operation, according to how it is prepared in the form of the eye-wash; and that form is various.
E le artifexs savi totz temps prepara engen en quascuna manieyra la qual es possibla a lu entro que fassa retornar la figura a la forma natural, o prop de aquela, e aquel malaute segon que a lu conveneys de la operacio e dels strumentz en las majors disposicios.	The artisan knows how to prepare it at all times in any way possible, so that it returns to its natural shape; or as close to it as possible, and the bad one according to what it gives him from the operation and the instruments in the best preparations.
Capitol .xv.	Chapter XV.
De la adherencia de la palpebra am la conjunctiva o am la cornea.	On the Adherence of the Eyelid to the Conjunctiva or the Cornea.
Quan accideys aquesta consolidacio a motz homes enayssi que sia solidada la palpebra pus desus am le album del huel, e sia prohibida de la facilitat del movement e de las suas obras naturals, donc cove que tu entrometas la extramitat del ray dejos la palpebra, e eleva en sus aquela, o exten aquela am le unci.	When this consolidation occurs in a young man, so that his eyelid is fixed above the edge of the eye, and movement and its natural works are easily prevented, then if you push the extreme part of the lid upward, or extend it outward with oil.
E aprop tu inscideys la adherencia am spatum subtil, le qual no sia am acuitat de las inscisios, habantz obtus un petit per so que·l malaute no sia inquietat deves la operacio, e remau le spatum que no ledesca le huel am la sua acuitat.	Then insert the thread subtilely beneath the adhesions, which are not sharp to the incisions, holding it firmly so that the patient is not disturbed by the operation, and maintain the thread so that the tissue does not break away from its grip.
E sia la tua inscizio quays excorjan aquela adherencia am facilitat entro que sia retornada la palpebra segon la sua forma natural e que sia sanada tota la adherencia.	Then your incision should allow for the removal of those adhesions easily, so that the eyelid may return to its natural form and all the adhesions are healed.
E aprop tu met en le huel aygua salada am la qual tu laves; o distilla en lu de zunia dissolvut en l’aygua.	Then place in the patient's hand salt water, which you should wash with; or distill in it the water of zonars dissolved in water.
E aprop separa entre la palpebra e l’huel am calgua de li, e pausa sobre le huel lana infuza en album de huou, e aprop le tertz jorn usa de causas consolidativas entro que sia sanat.	Then separate the eyelid from the flesh with a chisel, and place on the flesh wool infused with oil of almond, then use the third day for causes of consolidation until it is healed.
Capitol .xvi.	Chapter .XVI.
De inscizio de ungla e de eminencia de carn dels lacrimals.	On Incisions on the eyelid and prominence of the cartilage of the lacrimal bone.
Sapias que ungla es segon dos manieyras, quar o es nervosa, e es semblant a ciphac dur subtil; o es no-nervosa, semblant a humiditat blanca congilada, la qual quan ferr la toca, o es forsat aquela prendre am onci, es abscindida e le onci no es ficat en lu.	You know that the cartilage of the eyelid is composed of two kinds of tissue, either nervous or non-nervous; it is similar to hard frost, if it was forced upward, would break away and leave the nerve exposed, but if it were allowed to rise naturally, the cartilage would not stick to the bone.
E amdos las specias no comensan sino del lacrimal major entro que va petit a petit que cobre la vista e prohibeys le lum e·l movement de huel.	And both of these tissues do not commence until they are in contact with the lacrimal bone, which gradually advances toward the eye, so that it covers the vision and prevents light and the movement of the tissue.
Mays la manieyra del obrar en la inscizio de lu es que·l malaute pause le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop obre les huels de lu, e eleva la palpebra am la tua ma, e aprop colligeys la ungla am onci de pauca duplicacio e exten aquela a las partidas desus.	May the manner of working in this incision is that the patient should hold his head between your knees, and then open the eyelids, and raise the eyelid to your hand, and collect the cartilage with a little double-pointed chisel, and extend it outward at its base.
E aprop pren una agula e entromet en aquela un pel de cavalh o de buou o de vaqua, o de semblantz, o de fiel fort, o duplica la extremitat de la agulha petit a petit e fica aquela en le mieg de la ungla, e penetra aquela am la agulha, e lia am fiel la ungla; e exten aquela a las partidas desus, e excorja am le pel le latz de la ungla lo qual siec la pupilla.	Then take a needle and insert it into that cartilage with hair of horse or cow or milk, or something similar, or double the point of the needle little by little and fix it in the middle of the cartilage, and pierce that with the needle, and tie the thread to the cartilage; then extend that to its base, and cut off the tip of the needle, and remove that from the eye, and cut off the hair that is sticking out of the eye.
E ayssi tu sieguas aquela am le pel entro al derier de lu.	Then follow it with the thread attached to that within the last part of it.
E aprop tu inscideys le romanent en la razitz del lacrimal am spatum subtil o am petitas forfexs, e leysa la carn del lacrimal natural per so que per inscizio de aquela no endevengua fluxs de lagremas continuabla.	Then insert the thread into the root of the lacrimal bone with a small needle or scissors, and allow the cartilage to break away naturally without causing continuous flow of tears.
E alscunas vetz la ungla am le sol onci estenduda o am fiel, ayssi co havem dit, e aprop sia excurjat am spatum leon del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And sometimes the cartilage is extended on solid ground or on fidel, thus: having done so, then remove it with a chisel-like instrument whose form is like this:
E guarda te que am le spatum no toques la tunica cornea e que avengua en lu ruptura, e que la pupilla sia perforada.	Keep in mind that you should not touch the corneal membrane with the chisel and allow it to break through, and that the pupil is pierced.
Aprop la inscizio geta en le huel un pauc de sal trissa o di cief fayt de siniar, e leyssa aquel entro al autre dia; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove entro que sia sanat.	Then your incision should leave a little salt in the flesh or the blood will not clot there, and let that remain within for three days, and then treat it with water to heal it.
E si la ungla no es nervoza e no podes metre la agulha, ni es ficada en aquela le onci, lahoras motas veguadas aquesta specia de ungla es curada am medicinas, e es sanada ayssi cum yeu e recomtat en la divisio.	If the cartilage is not nervous and you cannot insert a needle into it or attach it to the bone with thread, then treat this special kind of cartilage with medicines, and heal it in this way by eye and recommend it in the division.
E si tu vols inscindir aquela, lahoras tu obre le huel del malaute e pren spatum subtil leon de freul acuitat segon aquesta forma:	And if you want to incise that cartilage, then open the patient' s jaw and place a chisel pointed on one side according to this form:
am subtilitat.	with subtlety.
E si vezes que aquela es rarificada e es confugida e empren en aquela razit, lahoras distilla de la tua ora en le huel de cief fayt de siniar o am cief rog o am sal trissat, e opila le huel entro a l’autre dia.	And if that cartilage is rarefied and hardened and inserted into the root, then distill from it in the flesh with oil or salt water, and wrap the flesh for three days.
E aprop itera sobre aquela la operacio entro que sia remaugut tot aquo que es de lu, sino que·l contrari apostema caut sia en le huel, quar lahoras tu leyssa aquela, e cura al comensament la apostema entro que sia sanat.	Then repeat the operation on that part until all the fluid is drained from it, or otherwise the opposite will happen, which means that you should allow it to bleed, for if you do not, then at first the blister will heal; but then treat it with water to heal it.
E aprop itera la tua operacio sobre aquela am razo entro que sia sanat.	Then repeat your operation on that part with reason until it is healed.
La emenencia de la carn lacrimal, si notz en le huel per gran nocument, sia suspendut am onci; e inscideys aquela de aquela una partida, e no ultimes la inscizio per so que no inscidesqua fluxs de lagremas.	The prominence of the lacrimal cartilage, if it is causing great damage to the flesh, should be suspended with thread; then incise that part from one side, and do not complete the incision so that you do not incise the continuous flow of tears.
E aprop distilla en le lacrimal cief rog e fayt de siniar entro que sia sanat.	Then distill on the lacrimal bone with oil or salt water until it is healed.
Capitol .xvii.	Chapter .XVII.
De inscizio de alguazardenic e de aquo que es nascut de carn ajustada en le huel.	On Incisions of the ear and water that is born from meat.
Alcunas veguadas en les huels de alcus es nascuda carn roga, e es sobre-pausada entro que cobre la pupilla, o apropinqua o estrenh sobre las palpebras e fort leu comprem las palpebras a las partidas deforo e es assemblada a roza de balaustra.	Some of the flesh in the ears is born from meat, and it is over-laid within the eye, or approaches or extends over the eyelids, and it joins to the bridge of the nose with rope of balusters.
Mays la operacio en lu es que·l malaute pausa le sieu cap en le tieu se; e aprop obre les huels de aquel e colligeys tota aquela carn am oncis convenientz ad aquo, e te aquo am una forcep o am cesti; e aprop inscindiys la carn el comensament entro que tot sia finit am le encisori, e guarda te del huel que no ledescas aquel deves la tua operacio.	May the operation on it is that the patient should hold his head between your knees, and then open the ears, and collect all that meat with a chisel convenient to the water, and then wash it with one forceps or basket; and then incise that meat at first until it is finished with the incision, and be careful of the flesh that you do not cut away any part of it from your operation.
E sia la tua inscizio am la qual inscides aquelas o am espatum le qual nos havem recomtat en la inscizio de la ungla, o am petitas forfexs am las quals es colligit ascebel segon que vindra la forma de lu aprop aquest capitol.	Then your incision should be made in the same way that we have described in the incision of the cartilage of the ear, or with a small chisel or scissors according to the form that will come:
Donc cum es complida la tua inscizio e es remauguda tota aquela carn, lahoras omple le huel de sal trissa, o destilla en lu polvera roga e semblantz a lu de las medicinas corrossivas, e pausa sobre le huel deforo coto am album de huou entro que sia asegurat de apostema caut.	Then, when your incision is completed and all that meat is drained, then fill the ear with salt water, or distill into it powder that tastes like medicine and is corrosive, and place on the flesh within the eye until it is secured from blistering.
E si roman alcuna causa de alguardenici e es senhoragat sanc caut, e temes apostema caut, lahoras leyssa le huel e cura aquela apostema am aquo que ceda aquela apostema, e aprop itera sobre aquel am operacio entro que sia sanat, e semblantment fay en la carn ajustada la qual accideys en le huel de aquesta especia.	And if there is any cause of algordenici and it is hard to be treated with cautery, and you fear blistering, then leave the flesh and heal that blister with water, and then repeat your operation on that part until it is healed, and simulate in the meat that occurs in the flesh of this kind.
Mays empero tu cove que alienes tota curacio del huel freul per via natural o per via accidental, obran am ferr, e no metas la tua ma en alcuna de aquestas operacios entro que veges que aquel membre sia suffertant aquela operacio.	However, you should remember that you do not remove any cure from the jaw by natural or accidental means; then use iron, and do not place your hand on any of these operations until you see that the member is suffering from that operation.
Capitol .xviii.	Chapter  XVIII.
De colleccio de sabel en le huel.	On Collection of Knowledge in the Flesh.
Sabel so venas rogas las quals son testudas sobre le huel e prohibeysso al vesement la sua operacio, e develican le huel am longitut de dias.	The veins that are hard on the flesh and prevent its operation, and which dry up over a period of days:
Donc necessari es al comensament que tu consideres si le huel en le qual es sabel es fort e en lu no es autra malautia que sabel, lahoras tu colligeys aquel sabel.	Then it is necessary at first that you consider whether the flesh in which the knowledge is hard is strong and does not cause any harm other than the knowledge, then collect that knowledge.
E es que tu comandes al malaute que pause le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop suspen aquelas venas am un onci o am dos segon la tua prudencia; e sia aquel onci de subtil duplicacio segon aquesta forma:	And it is that you command the patient to hold his head between your knees, and then suspend those veins with thread or double-pointed chisel according to your prudence; and that the thread be of subtle doubled threads according to this form:
o so dos oncis gradantment en un cos segon aquesta forma:	or two threads of subtle length, gradually increasing in one side according to this form:
E aprop sian colligidas aquelas venas am forses subtils, am subtilitat, e abstergeys le sanc hora aprop hora, entro que vegas aquelas venas esser remaugudas del huel e sian revolgudas.	Then those veins should be collected with sutures made of subtle thread, and you should abstain from using a needle every half hour, until the veins are completely drained from the flesh and are dried up.
E guarda te que tu no ledes le huel am las extremitatz del spatum; e si’ la tua operacio en le miegjorn denant le solelh, e sias mot ferm en la tua operacio que no inscidas sino aquelas venas.	And guard that you not cut the veins at the extremities of the limb; and if your operation is before the sun, and be sure firm in your operation so that you do not wound except those veins.
E quan tu auras complitz, lahoras tu distilla en le huel cief vert o rog per que am sa acuitat corrodesca aquo que es remaugut del sabel.	And when you have finished, then do so that the green wine or ale is poured into which is freshly made to run with the juice of the apple.
Mays si aquo no es a tu possible colligeys tot en aquela hora, e lahoras tu emplastra tot am aquo que cede la dolor de lu, e leyssa lu per alcus dias entro que sia sedada la dolor de lu e que sia asegurat de apostema caut.	If you can not collect all that hour, then do so that it is applied until the water that eases the pain of him, and leave him for a few days until the pain of him is eased and that he is assured of the apoplexy by cauterizing.
E aprop itera sobre lu segon que la mateyssa manieyra entro que sia sanat.	Then repeat on him the second time that way as soon as possible so that he be healed.
E aquesta es la forma de las forfexs:	This is the shape of the scissors:
Capitol .xix.	Chapter XIX.
De reduccio de arizati al nas.	Of reducing the arachnids to the nose.
Quan tu curas arisati am cauteri o am medicina aguda comburent segon que es precedida la narracio de lu e no es sanat, lahoras no es engen en lu sino que fendas sobre le apostema deves la maturitat de lu, e que extraguas tota la humiditat la qual es en lu e·l poyre entro que sia descubert le os.	When you heal arachnids by burning or sharp medicine according to the narration of him and is not healed, then do not engage on him but cut off the apoplexy as soon as possible and that you draw out all the moisture from it which is in it and the powder within that is.
E donc cum es descubert le os e vezes en lu corrupcio o negror, lahoras tu ratz lu am un sturment del qual aquesta es la forma:	And so when the bone is exposed and rotten or black in it, then do so with an instrument which this is the shape:
E es nompnat de aspre cap, e sia feyt de fer indi, e sia le cap redon ayssi cum asir le qual sia fayt punctat per punctacio de lima o aliskalfati per punctacio subtil (ayssi cum es en la forma seguent).	It is called a sharp cap, and is made of iron, and the cap is round so that it may be fitted on with a point made by grinding or cutting finely (so that it is in this shape).
E pausa aquel sobre le loc corrumput del os, e aprop revolveys aquel entre les tieus ditz, e prem la tua ma petit a petit entro que sapias que aquela corropcio es rasa.	And pause that on the corrupt place of the bone, and move that between the thorns carefully, and press your hand little by little until you know that that corruption is smooth.
E aquo sia fayt alcunas veguadas, e aprop restaura le loc am causas exsiccativas e stipticas.	And water be made some strips, and restore the place with dry and sharp causes.
Donc si·l loc es consolidat e es en lu nascuda bona carn e es abscindit le cors de la sania e roman per xl dias, e no es renovat e no es apostemat e no accideys en lu accident, lahoras tu sapias que es sanat.	Then if the place is solid and it is good meat hidden from the sun and separated from the sinew by cutting the flesh, and if it does not renew itself and does not become apoplexy and does not happen to him an accident, then do you know that he is healed.
E sino, lahoras no es en lu engen sino reduzir la fissura a la forma del nas, e segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu descuebras de segon os am ferr o am medicina acuta, e cum sira descubert le os, lahoras tu pren tribo segon aquesta forma:	And otherwise, then do not engage on him but reduce the fracture to the shape of the nose, and according to this way: and it is that you discover second bone with sharp iron or acute medicine, and after revealing the bone, then do so according to this shape:
Sia la extramitat de lu ferr triangulada, e·l fust de lu sia prim extenuat entro a la extremitat ayssi cum vezes assi.	The end of the iron triangle, and the handle of it be first weakened at the end as soon as possible.
E aprop pausa aquel sobre le os, e sia aquel prop del lacrimal; e alongua la tua ma un pauc del huel, e aprop revol la tua ma am le tribo entro que penetre tot le os, e aquel sente le malaute per asso que atroba vent yssir per so quan te la sua ma.	Then pause that on the bone, and that be near to the lacrimal; and extend your hand a little of the flesh, and move your hand towards the tribe little by little until it penetrates all the bone, and that feels the patient's pain as it goes into the nose, and that does not feel any pain in his hand.
Donc lahoras restaura le loc am medicinas stipticas exsiccantz ayssi cum t’e eyssenhat.	Then restore that place with dry medicine as soon as possible.
Donc cum nays la carn e·l loc es endurazit, lahoras la materia la qual effundia a las partidas deforo retorna al nas, donc aquo es pus leugier sobre le malaute.	Then when the meat does not endure the place, then the matter which is spilled at the joints returns to the nose, and so water be poured on him.
Capitol .xx.	Chapter XX.
De reduccio de la eminencia del huel.	Of reducing the prominence of the flesh.
Quan le huel emineys am la sua totalitat e no accideys en le vezement nocument ni diminuacio, lahoras cove que laxas le malaute, e aprop que·l segues, e aprop que pausas ventozas en le cervitz ses scarificacio e succa per bona succaccio; e aprop pausa sobre le huel liniment le qual sia fayt de acatra e aloe e enses e sarcocolla, e aprop strenh le emplaustre sobre le huel am motz polvils.	When the flesh eminents completely and does not happen to him an accident or a decrease, then do so that you relax the larynx, and move that, and move that, and make the wind blow in the throat for good suck; and move that on the flesh, oil it which is made of acatra and aloe and essences and sarccola, and tighten the plaster over the flesh with a little dust.
E la manieyra dels polvils es que prenguas draps de li leons motz, e quascun drap sia duplicat en quatre plecs; e fay de aquels motz.	And the way of the dust is that you take sheets of leather, and each sheet be double in four pieces; and make of those sheets.
E aprop pausa aquels la un sobre le autre segon la quantitat de la qual ha le huel necessitat.	Then move those on each other according to the quantity which the flesh needs.
E aprop strenh sobre aquels am drap dur am fort strictura; e itera las ventosas am succio ses scarificacio; e aprop osta las ventosas e leyssa le huel streyt le dia e la nueyt.	Then tighten those on each other with a hard and strict strap; and move the wind back for sucking and scarifying; and move those winds and leave the flesh straited day and night.
Mays si entretant le liguament es mollificat, lahoras cove que sia mot streyt.	If so, then do so that he does not become stiff.
E aprop osta le liament aprop le dia e la nueyt ayssi cum havem dit.	Then move the larynx day and night as soon as possible.
E si vezes le huel ja esser redusit, bo es, e sino, lahoras itera le emplastre am les polvils e la strictura e las ventosas entro que sia sanat.	And if the flesh has already been reduced, then it is good, and otherwise, then do so that the plaster is with the dust and stricture and wind back as soon as possible until it is healed.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter XXI.
De la inscizio de la eminencia de la tunica uvea.	Of the incision of the prominence of the membranous membrane.
Quan endeve disrupcio en la tunica uvea, e aprop es eminent e procezeys fora las palpebras ayssi cum un gra de rasim, e es orrazada la forma de home per aquo, e vols aquo inscidir, lahoras la operacio en lu es ayssi cum havem recomtat, que tu entrometas la agula en la razitz de la uvea de la partida dejos en la partida desus, e aprop met la agula autra en la qual sia fil doble de la part del lacrimal, e fay aquela penetrar e leyssa la primieyra agula segon la sua disposicio; e aprop inscideys le loc del fiel doble e leva am aquel la partida de la uvea en le circuit de la agula, e strenh aquela mot.	When that disturbance is in the membranous membrane, and do so that it eminents and cuts it outside with a little razor, and is figured out the shape of man by water, and want to cut, then do the operation on him as soon as possible, that you put the blade into the roots of the eyelids on either side of the larynx, and move that blade into another one which has double thread at the end of the lacrimal part, and make that penetrate and leave the first blade according to its disposition; then cut the place of the double thread and take away with it the membrane in the circuit of the blade, and tighten that.
E aprop extratz la agula e pausa sobre le huel lana infusa en album de huou e leyssa entro que cayha le fil am la uva.	Then move the blade and pause on the flesh, which is made of infused wool in album of milk, and leave that until it hardens.
E aprop cura le huel am aquo que conforte aquel entro que la plagua sia sanada.	Then heal the flesh with water that comforts him as soon as possible so that the plague be healed.
E alcunas veguadas aduna de tota partida am cercle de drap entro le huel ajuste eminencia gran, e aprop sia perforat am le spatum subtil que vengua al preon del huel, e corra la humiditat albuginea, e descen le huel e intra tantost.	In some parts of the whole body, a circle of cloth is fitted onto the flesh which has a large eminence, and be pierced with a sharp needle that enters the larynx of the flesh, and run off the humidity of the albuginean, and lower the flesh and enter so quickly.
E aprop strenh entro que sia sanat.	Then tighten it so that it is healed.
Capitol .xxii.	Chapter XXII.
De curacio de alconati.	Of treatment of the eyes.
Aquesta malautia que es apelada alconati no es sino sania la qual es ajustada en le huel semblant a aygua dessendent e no es aquela.	This malady called alconatus is not but a disease which is adjusted to the flesh as if it were falling water, and that is not.
Mays la manieyra del obrar en ela es que fasses le malaute sezer sobre la sela aparelada e dreyta, e aprop pren le cap sieu en las tuas mas de doas partz e mau aquel entro que veias la sania pervenir a las partidas dejos, e aprop sia siccada e no descenda, e sia ostat le lum, e·l malaute veia las causas ayssi cum vezia.	The way of working in it is that you make the larynx fall on the palate which is raised and placed on the two parts, and move that within so that you see the disease coming at the joints, and that does not fall, and that does not come to pass, and that is dried up, and leave the light, and the patient sees the causes.
E si no descendra en jos, sapias que es aygua.	And if it does not come down in the lower part, then do you know that it is water.
Mays si no es preparat le descendement a la sania am aquo que havem dit, lahoras fay le malaute sezer entre las tuas mas e aprop pren spatum subtil e fen am aquel sobre le pannicol cernent un petit deves la continuacio de la conjunctiva am la tunica cornea en la corona (entro al loc vuet), entro que sia fora-getada la sania.	If so, then prepare the descent of the disease with water which we have said, then do so that the larynx falls between your hands and move a sharp needle into it on top of the panniculus touching a little in the continuance of the conjunctiva to the corneal membrane in the crown (in the place where), so that it be dried up.
Donc cum es fora-getada, lahoras tu distilla en le huel aygua cauda en la qual has mesclat mel o aygua en la qual ja has bulit fenugrec e mel.	Then when it is dried up, then do so that the water is poured on the flesh which you have mixed with honey or water in which you have already built fennel and honey.
E aprop sia curat am las autras causas entro que sia sanat.	Then be cured with other causes as soon as possible until it is healed.
Capitol .xxii.	Chapter XXII.
De la curacio de la aygua descendent del huel.	Of the treatment of the water that comes down from the flesh.
Ja havem dit las specias de la aygua en la divisio e qual conveneys a perforar am sermo declarant, lahoras aquel segon la sanetat.	We have said the spices of the water in the division and which convenes to pierce with the needle declaring, then do so according to health.
Lahoras cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute entre las tuas mas sobre un cayrat e lia le sieu huel sa, lu mot stringent.	Then do so that you make the larynx fall between your hands on a cushion and lie down the patient' s side, keeping it tight.
E aprop pausa prop de la palpebra del sieu huel la tua ma senestra, si le huel en le qual es l’aygua es le huel senestra; o am la tua ma dreyta, si le huel es le dextre.	Then move that near to the eyelids of the patient' s side, if the water is on the left side of the body; or near to the right side of the body, if the water is on the right side.
E aprop am la tua ma dextra pren almagda, si le huel es senestre; o am la tua ma senestra, si le huel es de dreyt.	And place your right hand on the patient's forehead if their liver is left-sided; or place your left hand on the patient's forehead if their liver is right-sided.
E aprop pausa la extremitat de almagda prop de la corona per la grossesa del ray en le album del huel de part del mendre lacrimal, e aprop enpelleys almagda am vertut e revol la tua ma am aquel.	And place the edge of the finger close to the brow by the thickness of the rays in the album of the liver from part of the lower tear, and then apply the finger with a turn and a grip on it.
E aprop penetre en le album del huel e sentas que almagda ja es pervenguda a causa vueda.	Then pierce into the liver and feel that the finger has already reached due to the sensation of pain.
E cove que sia la masura del cami de almagda al preon la mesura del spazi le qual es de la pupilla entro a la fi de la negror, e es la corona del huel; quar tu veyras am aquel pupilla am la visio de l’huel per la clartat de la tunica cornea.	And note that the measurement of the path of the finger to the edge is the same as the measurement of the space from the pupil up to the end of the blackness, and it is the brow of the liver; for you will see with that pupil the vision of the liver due to the clarity of the cornea.
E aprop pausa almagda entro al loc en le qual es l’aygua, e aprop tu la atira en jos una veguada aprop autra, e donc si la aygua descen tantost, lahoras vetz le malaute aquo sobre le qual huebre la sua vista tantost, e almagda en le sieu huel.	Then place the finger in the spot where the water is, and then throw it down a little way; if the water sinks a lot, then do so with the patient facing upwards, and then place the liver into the hole from which the water has fallen.
E aprop repausa se un pauc; donc si la aygua es descenduda, lahoras tu depausa aquela autre veguada abantz que almagda ne sia getada.	Then wait a little bit; if the water sinks further, then do so with the patient facing upwards, and then place the finger in another spot before the water has fallen.
E donc quan es sicada e no descen, lahoras tu extrat almagda am facilitat, e revol am aquel la tua ma pauc a pauc, e aprop dissolveys en l’aygua un petit de sal clara de gemma e am aquela lava le huel dedintz; e aprop pausa fora le huel coto o stopa o lana infusa en oli rozat e album de huou e ligua am aquo le huel sa.	Then when it is dry and does not sink further, then extract the finger with ease, and turn it slightly by little at a time, and place it outside the liver; and dissolve a small amount of clear salt of gems in water and wash the liver inside with that, and then put the stop or thread infused with red oil and album of liver and bind it to the water of the liver.
Mays nos e aquels que so de nostre temps pause sobre aquel comi trissat am album de huou.	May these things not be from our time, and place on it a triple portion of oil.
E si no obezeys a tu almagda al intrament de l’huel per la sua duricia — quar es alcu dels homes del qual le huel es dur mot —, lahoras cove que prenguas le spatum le qual es nompnat alberid del qual aquesta es la forma:	And if you do not obey to your finger in the instrument of the liver for its hardness — for it is some of men whose liver is hard in shape, — then when you have picked up the spatula which is called albirida with this form:
E donc perfora am aquel aquela conjunctura, e no ultimes la tua ma en le trauc, e no es si no que fassas via ad almagda loc subtil.	And then pierce that junction with the spatula, and do not stop your hand in the trunk, and it is not if you do not make a way through the liver's hole.
E aprop entromet almagda segon que havem dit.	Then place the finger into the liver as we have said.
E deves le compliment de la tua obra, sia preparat al malaute dormitori descentment fayt en le qual dorma sobre le sieu dos en mayson tenebrosa, e sia prohibit de totz movementz .	And you should pay the compliment of your work, be prepared for the patient' sleeping quietly in a dark room, and be forbidden from all activity.
E pausa en la natura de lu aquo per que sia linida la sua natura, e no maugua le sieu cap a la partida dreyta ni senestra de tot.	Then place on the patient' head at its top part so that it is smooth in nature, and do not touch his hair to the left or right.
E sia le liament segon la sua disposicio entro al tertz dia.	And be the member according to its disposition within the third day.
E aprop deslia aquel en aquela maysso tenebrosa e exproha la freol vista, e fay li vezer alcunas causas, e aprop retorna le liament entro al dia .vii.	Then remove it from that dark room and examine the vision closely, and then return the member within a day.vii.
E no cove que fassas aquo en la hora de las curacios o tantost aprop la infusio.	And do not say that you make water in the hour of the cure or at any time, but rather give an infusion.
Habantz cove que tu alienes aquo per so quar la aygua puega leugierament per gran e vehement de reguardament.	While waiting, remove water because the water will stick to it from above with great effort and in a violent way of vision.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras cove que deslias le huel denant le vii dia, e rectifica aquel am aquo que ceda apostema.	May this happen if an emetic is not produced, then when you remove the liver before the seventh day, and then return it to water that will produce an emetic.
Lahoras tu absol la vista de lu e pausa sobre la cara de lu oral per le qual sia regit le vezement de lu dejos lu per alcus dias, lu existent en la mayszo tenebrosa.	Then you should wait for the vision of him, and place it over his mouth part where he can receive the water from below for a few days, that it is present in the dark room.
E aprop sia gitat de aquela mayzo gradantment e conversa8 en las suas causas.	Then be grateful for the dark room and talk about its causes.
E sapias que in alchatea no es excusat le discipol de visio alcunas veguadas, e lahoras tu sias ardit sobre la operacio.	And you know that in a dish of oil is not forgiven for some visions, and then be patient with the operation.
E ja es pervengut a nos de alcu de aquels les quals so al Artach , e alcu disse que fayt foc en al Ayrac magdaam perforat am le qual es succada la aygua.	Then it has come to us from some of those which are of the Artichoke, and some said that it pierces into the Airach liver, and sucks up water.
Mays empero yeu non e vist degu en la nostra terra le qual haia perfeyt aquo, ni e aquo legit en alcu dels libres dels antics; e es possible que aquo sia novel.	But perhaps you do not find in our land the water which has been perfected, nor does it make water run from some of the ancient herbs; and it is possible that this is new.
E aquestas so las formas de las specias de magdaan per que sia sobre aquelas aquel le qual ignora aquelas:	And these are the forms of spices of medicine to place on those who do not know those:
E sian faytas de eram o de ferr propriament, e sian las extramitatz de lor am aquesta subtilitat triangulada, la extremitat aguda ayssi cum aquela es la forma.	They are made from iron or lead itself, and the extremes of their edges are sharp in this triangular form, that way it is.
Capitol .xxiv.	Chapter XXIII.
De la curacio de carn nada en le nas.	Of the cure of meat, nothing in the nose.
Quan en le nas so nascudas carns diversas ajustadas de las quals es alcuna causa la qual es assemblada a scorpio de motz pes, o a polip peys; e aquesta malautia es apelada polipus quar es a semblansa de aquel peys representat.	When various meats are hidden in the nose, which is caused by some illness that gathers a scorpion's shape of small bones, or a polyp, and this bad taste is called a polypus because it is similar to that bone's shape represented.
E de lu es carn cancrosa, lapadea, de fusca color; e de lu es que es carn leon no de color fusca.	And of the meat of cancer, the palate, with black color; and of it is the meat of a lion not of a color.
Donc en aquela que es en aquestas carns leon no fraudulenta ni cancroza, cove que fassas le malaute sezer entre las tuas mas e posat al solelh, e huebre las nars de lu, e picoys le tieu onci en aquelas carns.	Then in those which are not fraudulent or cancerous, place the patient' head between his legs and put it under the sun, and open the nostrils of him, and cut up the tender meat.
E aprop extrat aquela a las partidas deforo, e aprop inscindeys aquo que has comprehendut de aquelas am spatum agut subtil de la una partida entro que sapias que tota la carn ja es ostada; que si roman de lu deguna causa de la qual la abscisio es possibla, lahoras tu ratz aquo am la un dels estrumentz subtils am facilitat entro que de lu romangua denguna causa.	Then remove it from the sides forwardly, and then slice up that meat with a sharp spatula, so as to know that all the meat has been cut; and if there is any left for some reason that can be removed by slicing, then place it in one of the subtle instruments within which you can easily do so.
Mays si senhoreja am sanc o accida apostema caut, lahoras tu pausa a lu aquo que cove; o es dels apostemas malignes, lahoras tu coyta e cauteriza aquel entro que sia abscindit sanc e sian ostadas las cavas totas.	May this happen if an emetic or an acid is produced, then place the water which you have held back; or if it is a malicious emetic, then cut up and cauterize that within which has been removed completely, and all of the holes are filled.
E aprop sia getatz en le nas aprop la inscizio vi agre e aygua o vi.	Then place in the nose close to the incision of the sharp edge and water or salt.
Mays si le nas es ubert e de lu procezeys humiditat entro al palat, lahoras sapias que ja es sanat.	May this happen if the nose is open and it causes moisture within the palate, then you will know that it has already been healed.
Mays si la humiditat no penetra segon que cove, lahoras tu sapias que dedintz lu es carn nada en los pus sobiras osses de las nars als quals non es pervengut abscizio.	May this happen if the moisture does not penetrate further according to what has happened; then you will know that within it is meat, nothing in the upper nostrils from which there has been no removal.
Donc lahoras cove que entromitas fiel de li al qual sia alcuna grosseza, e nuza en lu motz nuzes, e pausa entre quascun nutz la quantitat del dit o mens, e engene le malaute e entromet una extremitat del fiel en le nars am lo ray o am autra causa la qual es a lu possibla.	Then place the finger firmly within him who is of some thickness, and taste it with the nuts, and pause between each nut the amount of this or that, and cut up the patient' head forwardly to the sun or to another cause by which it is possible.
E pus que aquo aura fayt, que atire le sieu odorament entro que pervengua a las canals de las nars, e sia eyssit sobre le sieu golayro, quar tropas veguadas le semblant ad aquesta accio fan les enfantz a las scolas, e es leugiera causa ad aquel que ho vol far.	And then the water will make some sound, that it reaches to the nostrils' passages and exits into his throat, and is exhausted upon his back, because of this action does a child at school; and it is a suitable cause for him who wants to do so.
E aprop pausa las dos extramitatz del fiel, una extremitat que iesca sobre le nas et l’autra que romangua en le nas, e aprop aministra serratura de carn am les nuzes que so en le fiel, e fay aquo entro que sapias que las carn ja so am les nuzes del fiel.	Then place the two extremities of the finger, one that comes out above the nose and the other which is turned inside the nose, and then administer the salt with nuts that are in the finger; and water within that you will know that the meat has already reached to the nuts of the finger.
E aprop extratz le fiel, e pausa en le nas aprop la abstraccio del sanc una calgua , e fay aquo per tres dias o mays entro que l’enguent corrodo tot aquo que es romas de las carns.	Then remove the finger from the nose and place on the nose a small amount of salt, and water for three days or more within which it is turning to the taste of meat.
E aprop en la fi de la causa, pausa en le nas una canula de plom per alscus jorns entro que sia sanat.	Then end of the cause, place in the nose a tube of lead for many days within which it is healed.
Mays si endigeys de curacio que exsique, usa de aquela.	May you know about this cure, use that.
E aquesta es la forma del instrument a capipurge fazedor am le qual son distillatz olis e medicinas en le nars:	And this is the form of the instrument to cut up or grind substances into oil and medicine in the nose:
E fay aquo de argent o de eram, la qual sia semblant a una petita lampesa uberta, ayssi cum petita conqua, e le meat semblantment.	And water from silver or lead itself, which is like a small torch that is lit up, thus with a small hammer, and the meat that resembles it.
E si vols, fay una canula clausa ayssi cum cana, e la cancula del estrument a capipurge fazedor e sia plana, descuberta; a la qual sia manubre en lo derier de lu, am le qual tenguas aquela quan escaufas en lu oli o aquo que tu vols dels sucs e de las causas suctiblas.	And if you wish, make a tube closed with cane and the tube of the instrument to cut up is flat and open; and hold it in your hand where this finger is when you pour oil or water that you want from the juices and of the causes which are suitable.
E aquestz capipurgi es precios: recipe de enforbi de castor, de balayra blanc, de giengiebre, e piletre de safra, de pebre lonc, de escafragia, de epetum de spic ana unc. vi cumfizeys am suc de bleda e de caul, e sian faytas pillulas, e sia destemprada una pillula am aygua tebeza, e sia gitat en las nars del malaute jasent envers.	And these head-purges are precious: prepare castor oil, white balayara, ginger, and yellow mustard seed, long pepper, escragia, aniseed, and fennel seeds. Here comes the first sentence to translate: And you make a syrup with blood and cauldron, and make pills out of it, and one pill is to be taken with lukewarm water and swallowed with the nose turned towards the patient's legs.
Capitol .xxv.	Chapter .XXV.
De theyls natz en las extramitatz del nas.	And put them in the extremities of the nose.
Motas veguadas es nat theyl en las extramitatz del nas, e es magnificat e omentat en alscus dias entro en que mot es leg le reguardament de lu.	The small warts are not to be put in the extremities of the nose; they are great and red, and they cause a sore in the next day or two.
E per aquo cove que tu inscidas aquel en le comensament de la apparissio de lu, e erediques tot aquel.	And by the water that you dissolve them at the beginning of their appearance, and inherit all of them.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc o cauteri o medicina comburent la qual estia en loc de lu.	Then place your hand or a cauldron or burning medicine on the spot where he is standing.
Mays si es tardada la sua inscizio entro que sia magnificat, lahoras considera si es lapificat, dur, de fusca color e de pauc sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel am ferr quar es apostema crancos; quar motas veguadas ad aquel que inscideys aquesta apostema endeve per lu granda malicia sobre aquel le qual aquel havia.	May it not be late for its injection before it is great, consider it if it is hard, of dark color and poor feeling, then do not touch that one because of the great evil that it has caused in him; for small warts do not inject such an apoplexy.
E si le apostema es de leon tocament e no es de fosca color, e vezes que inscizio es possibla en tot aquel, lahoras evacua le malaute e inscideys aquel senes temor, e cura le loc am aquo que exsique e costrenh entro que sia sanat.	And if the apoplexy is due to a touch of a lion and it is not of dark color, and once the injection can be made in all of them, then empty the patient and inject those warts with caution, and cure the spot with water that it purges and clears within.
Capitol .xxvi.	Chapter  .XXVI.
De sutura del nas e de las labias e de la aurelha quan la continuitat es dissolvuda per plagua o per semblantz.	Of the suture of the nose, and of the lips and of the ear when the continuity is broken by plague or by symptoms.
Sapias que quan accideys solucio de continuitat en una de aquestas cartillages, pauc confereys en aquela operacio sino en alcus homes.	Know that when there happens to be a solution of continuity in one of these cartilage, it very rarely comes about in that operation except in some men.
Donc cove, quan endeve ad alcu alcuna causa de aquelas, que consideres si es plagua fresca am le sieu sanc, e lahoras tu ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	Then, when there happens to be some cause of those in him, consider it if it is fresh plague and then you adjust the two lips of the plague with suture, and then cure that within that it heals.
E si las labias de solucio de continuitat so ja separadas, e quascuna es fayta sana, lahoras cove que tu excorjes quascuna partida de la sua codena apparent entro que n’iesca sanc.	And if the lips that are solved from the continuity are already separated, and each one is healed separately, then consider that you extract a part of the nail of the ear, within that it does not cause plague.
E aprop ajusta las doas labias am sutura e strenh aquelas, e sobre aquelas pulveriza sanc de drago e enses trissat, e pausa sobre la polvera una pessa de emplaustra diafinicon, o de alcu autre dels emplastres consolidatius, e leyssa aquel liat per dos jorns o per tres, e aprop deslia aquel e permuta aquel emplaustre e leyssa aquel entro que·ls fiels per si sian abscinditz, e aprop cura am enguent entro que sia sanat.	Then adjust the two lips with suture and strengthen them, and sprinkle on them dragon's blood and powder of three parts, and place over the powder a piece of plaster of Paris, or of some other of the hardening plasters, and leave it to lie for two days or three, then remove that plaster and replace it with another piece, and leave that to lie for a few days, and then cure that within that it heals.
Mays la manieyra de la sutura es que tu agregues la solucio de continuitat o am agulhas ayssi cum havem recomtat en la sutura del ventre, o agregua la solucio de continuitat am fiel ayssi cum a tu e fayt saber.	May the way of the suture be that you add the solution of continuity or with needles as it has been described in the suture of the belly, or add the solution of continuity with thread also.
Capitol .xxvii.	Chapter   .XXVII.
De extraccio de aquela causas que veno en las doas labias en las partidas dedintz.	Of the extraction of those causes that come in the two lips at the insides.
Motas veguadas endeve a motz homes en las partidas dedintz de las suas labias alcus apostemas durs semblantz a gras de errs, e alscunas de lors son mendres e alcunas son majors.	The small warts are to be injected in the inside of their lips, some of them are due to the hardness of the teeth and some of them are caused by the grinding of them; they are little and some are big.
Donc cove que tu convertas las labias e fendas quascuna de aquelas duricias de tota part, e aprop la abscizio umpliscas le loc de sagi trissat entro que·l sanc sia restrengut, e aprop sia lavat am vi agre e sia curat le loc am aquo que es stipticitat, entro que sia sanat.	Then consider that you convert those lips and divide each of those hardenings into three parts, then the extraction fill up the place with dragon' blood within that the plague is dried up, then wash it with viagra vinegar and cure the spot with water that is stinging, within that it heals.
Capitol .xxviii.	Chapter  .XXVIII.
De inscizio de la carn ajustada en las gengivas.	Of the injection of the flesh that is adapted to the gums.
Granre de veguadas nays sobre la gengiva carn ajustada la qual les antics apelero albulus, adonc cove que tu suspendas aquela am onci o que tenguas aquela am las forfecs e inscidas aquela deves la sua razit, e leyssas la sania correr o le sanc.	Great care of small needles over the flesh that is adapted to the gums, which little ones cause pain; then consider that you suspend those in a piece of yarn or hold them in your hand and inject that into it, and let the plague run out or the plague be dried up.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc sagi trissat o autra polveras stipticas o excicativas.	Then place over the spot stinging or any other dry powder.
E si aquela carn retorna, lahoras inscideys aquela segundariament, e cauterisa aquela, quar aprop le cauteri no retornara.	And if that flesh returns, then inject it again, and burn it because the cautery will not return.
Capitol .xxix.	Chapter   .XXIX.
De razo de dentz am ferr.	Of teeth that cause pain.
Quan en la superficia de las dentz de las partidas dedintz e de las de foro e entre las gingivas so ajustadas escorsas aspras, legas, e alcunas veguadas son de nigradas e son faytas citrinas o vertz entro que a la gingiva ve per aquo corrupcio e son faytas las dentz legas.	When on the surface of the teeth that are divided inside and those in the foramen and between the gums are adapted, some are rough and some are made yellow or green within that the gum comes out by water; and then consider that you extract the teeth that are loose.
E donc cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute entre las tuas mas e pausar le cap de lu en le tieu se, e ratz las dents en las quals apareysso aquelas escorsas e causas semblantz arena entro que de lor no romangua deguna causa, e aquo fay de la negror e de la citrinitat e de las autras entro que sian mondificadas.	And then consider that you extract the root between the two teeth and place the cap of the tooth in the hole, and extract those teeth in which appear those roughnesses and causes of sand; within that they do not cause pain to any other tooth, and then consider that you remove the black color and the green color and the other from them.
Donc si es ostat aquo que es en aquelas del comensament de la razio, bo es; e sino, lahoras tu itera la razio sobre aquelas al autra dia e al segon e al tertz entro que vengua al derier stament en aquo que tu vols.	Then if that water is in those of the beginning of the root, then it is good; and if not, then extract the root from those to another day and again and again until it comes out in the last statement that you want.
E sapias que las dentz han necessitat de motz rezoris de diversas formas e de motas figuras segon que es preparat a la tua operacio.	Know that the teeth require different kinds of tools and shapes for your operation.
E per so quar le razori am le qual la dent es raza de la partida dedintz es autre del razori am le qual es ras entre las dentz segon autras formas, e aquestas formas de razoris sian deves tu preparadas las quals veyras tantost:	And for this reason the root from which the tooth is divided inside is different from the root from which it is cut between the teeth according to other shapes; and these forms of roots are always prepared that you will see soon:
Capitol .xxx.	Chapter    .XXX.
D’eradicacio de dentz.	Of extraction of the teeth.
Cove que tu cures la dent de la sua dolor am tot engen e tardes en tota eradicacio de lu, quar no es denguna causa que suplisqua la veguada de lu quan es eradicada, quar es sustancia sublima entro que es excusacio en la eradicacio de lu.	Then consider that you cure the tooth of its pain completely and then begin to extract it completely because there is no reason that can substitute the root when it is extracted, for it is a substance that subsists within.
Mays cove quan le malaute es forsat aquela dent eradicar, que fermament deves tu sia certificat quala es la dent dolent, quar motas veguadas la dolor descep le malaute e cuga que sia en dent sana, e tu eradicas aquela e aprop la dolor no cessa entro que la dent malauta e dolent sia eradicada, quar nos ja havem vist aquo per operacio dels barbies.	May it be forced to extract that tooth, and firmly consider that you know which is the painful tooth, for the pain of the root causes the pain in the tooth, and if it is in a healthy tooth, then extract that and leave the pain not cease until the root is removed, because we have seen this by operation of the barbers.
Donc cum deves tu es sertificat qual es la dent dolent, e que o sabes be, lahoras cove que tu scarifiques en le circuit de la dent am spatum en le qual sia alcuna vertut, entro que sia dissolvut de la dent de la gingiva de tota partida, e aprop mau aquel am les tieus ditz, o am forfexs subtils al comensament petit a petit entro que aquela concucesquas.	Then consider that you scarify the circuit of the tooth with the spatum in which there is any virtue, within that it dissolves the tooth from the gum at the beginning, and then extract it with tiny pliers or scissors little by little until that is broken completely.
E aprop alogua en lu fortz tenalhas grans per bona loquacio o estuptura fort, e pausa le cap del malaute entre les tieus denolhs que be le tengues que no·s maugua, e aprop tratz la dent segon rectitut en manieyra que no trenques aquela, ni al malaute major dolor no dones.	Then place the tooth between two pliers or a strong weapon, and pull it with good speech or with loud noise, and then extract the other tooth in a way that you do not break it completely, and do not give pain to any of them.
E donc si no es foro-getat, lahoras pren un de aquels instrumentz, e met aquel dejos lu de tota part am facilitat e esforsa la remocio de lu ayssi que es feyt al comensament.	And if it is not a foramen, then take one of those instruments, and put that on the other side with ease and force the extraction in such a way that it is made at the beginning.
Mays si la dent es trauquada o corrosa, lahoras cove que tu comples de drap aquel trauc e estrenguas aquel am la extremitat de ray subtil per so que no sia trinquada en la hora de la tua constriccio sobre aquela am tenalas.	May it be broken or corroded, then consider that you wrap the thread around that tooth and tighten it by the end of a tiny needle within that it does not break in the hour of your contraction over that with pliers.
E cove que tu obres exquesitament am scarificacio en le circuit de tota part de la gingiva e guarda mot la tua fortaleza que no trenques aquela e romangua partida de lu, e retorne sobre le malaute per la malicia que sia majo que la primieyra dolor de lu.	Then consider that you scarify completely the circuit of the whole gum and keep your strength so as not to break it and damage that tooth, and return to the root for the evil that is less than the first pain of it.
E guarda te que no fassas aquo que fan alscus ignorantz barbiers en lor fistinacio e audacia sobre la eradicacio de lor, ses que no aministran aquo que nos havem recomtat; quar motas veguadas fan venir sobre les homes malautias grans las quals son pus dificils que sian trinquadas, e las razitz de lor remaugudas totas, o alcunas de aquelas, o que extrayguas aquela am alcus osses de la mandigula ayssi cum motas veguadas havem testificat.	Then consider that you do not give water to those bad barbers in their last reckoning and audacity on the extraction of theirs; for it is better than the teeth come out, and the roots of them are broken completely, or some of them are extracted with tiny pliers, or extract that with little osses from the mandible as has been demonstrated.
E aprop la eradicacio de lu sia lavada la boca am vi caut o vi agre am sal.	And now to wash the patient's mouth, take a sponge wet with salt water or vinegar.
E si endeve fluxs de sanc per aysso, ayssi cum motas veguadas endeve, lahoras trissa alcuna quantitat de zegi e aspergeys sobre la plagua, e si no confereys aquel zegi, cauteriza.	And if there is a flow of pus in the wound, then also put some dried blood in it, sprinkle it with urine, and if it does not dry up, cauterize it.
La forma de las forceps e tenalas subtils am las quals es mauguda la dent al comensament sia de longua extramitat, de breu manubre e gros, per so que no sian doblatz quan am aquels deves obrar.	The shape of the forceps and tweezers is important, the former long, thin, with a smooth handle, and the latter thick, with a short grip, so that they do not bend when operating.
E sian ayssi cum vezes de gros manubre entro que quan estrenhas am aquelas no sian dobladas, sian breus extramitatz.	And be there like this, with thick handles at first, so that they are not bent when you use them for the first time, and short tips.
E sian faytas de ferr de India descentment faytas de dreytas extramitatz, e en las extramitatz de aquelas sian dentz de las quals las unas intron en las autras e estrenhan per constriccio descent fort, e alscunas veguadas las extramitatz de aquelas sian la forma del bec d’un auzel le qual ha nom ciconia, so es guanta, e son de fort constriccio.	And they are made of iron from India, with long tips, and in the tips there are teeth that interlock and tighten strongly, and some have a pointed tip like a crow's beak, which is sharp, and their grip is strong.
Capitol .xxxi.	Chapter .31.
De erradicacio de dentz e d‘estraccio dels osses de las mandibulas trincadas.	On the Eradication of Teeth and the Extraction of Bones from the Mandibles that are Cracked.
Quan deves la eradicacio de dent le qual es trinquat roman alcuna causa, lahoras cove que tu pauses sobre le loc coto am boder per un jorn o per dos entro que·l loc sia mollificat; e aprop entromet algesti o tenalhas las extramitatz de las quals so asembladas al bec de un auzel apelat ciconia o guanta, la forma de las forceps:	When you need to extract a tooth that is broken or fractured, then wait until the area around it softens; and if the place remains hard for a day or two, then insert tweezers or tweezers-like objects with a pointed tip into the space between the teeth, as if they were the beak of a crow, or a glove, the shape of the forceps:
Las extramitatz de lor sian faytas dedintz ayssi cum lima o alfagi.	And their tips are made like files or chisels.
E si no obediys a tu a eyssiment am aquestas forceps o tenalas, lahoras cove que tu caves sobre la razit e descrobas tota la carn e entrometas le instrument le qual ha nom atali, so es palanca petita del qual la forma es aquesta:	And if you do not obey them by using these forceps or tweezers, then wait until the root is exposed and cut off with a small chisel, whose shape is like this:
E sia de breu extremitat grossa un petit, e no sia enbegut per so que no sia trinquat.	And it has a thick tip at the end, and it is not bent so that it does not break.
Donc si per aquo la razit es foro-getada, bo es; e sino, ajuda te am aquestz autres instrument dels quals aquestas son las formas: la forma del primier instrument es de triangulada extramitat en la qual sia alcuna grossesa:	Therefore, if the root is hollowed out, it is good; otherwise, help yourself to these other instruments, whose shapes are as follows: the first instrument has a triangular tip at the end, and some thickness:
La forma del segon instrument es que sia de triangulada e de pus subtil extremitat.	The shape of the second instrument is that it is triangular and has a small point at the end.
E ja so ajudatz am aquest instrument havent dos ramps del qual aquesta es la forma aprop la seguent:	And you are helped by these instruments, having two ramp-like shapes, whose shape is like this:
e am autres instrumentz les quals precidero en rasura de dentz; quar juvament es fayt am aquest instrument le qual es asemblat a onci gran, e aquesta es la forma:	And for other instruments that will be useful in shaving teeth; indeed, it is made with this instrument which is shaped like an onion: and this is its shape:
de la triangulada extremitat torta o curta, la qual sia alcuna grossesa, e no sia enbegut per so que no sia trinquat.	Of the triangular tip that is curved or short, and it has some thickness, and it is not bent so that it does not break.
E otra sapias que·ls instrumentz de las dentz motz so e semblantment les autres instruments.	And you should know that the dental instruments are similar to other instruments.
Mays le artifexs savi e subtil en l’art, atroba per si mateys segon aquo que a lu significa la operacio e las malautias diversas; quar son de las malautias a las quals les antics no diysero ni pausero propri instrument, per las formas de diversas specias.	The wise and skilled craftsmen, in their art, invent new things for themselves according to the needs of this operation and the diverse evils; for they do not say or pause at the instruments proper to them, because of the various shapes of various spices.
Mays si es trinquat l’os de la mandibula o dels autres osses de la boca, o si poyreys, lahoras sia pes curat sobre aquel en son loc am aquo que es a lu convenient dels instrumentz e de las forceps las quals havem dit en la extraccio de las razitz de las dentz, e ajuda te am gesti del qual aquesta es la forma:	If the bone of the jaw or any other bone in the mouth is fractured, then it should be carefully treated in its place by means of the instruments and tweezers that we have mentioned for the extraction of root teeth, and help yourself with the gestures whose shape is like this:
E sia en lu alcuna grosseza petit a petit, e sia instringida o tenguda am la boca per que no evasesca o fuga entro que l’os de tot sia foro-getat; e aprop restaura le loc am medicinas convenientz ad aquo.	And be of some small thickness, and be pressed or tied to the mouth so that it does not escape or flee until all the bone is hollowed out; and then restore the place with suitable medicines according to this.
Mays si en l’os es petita poyredura, lahoras ratz aquel de aquela poyredura e de la sua negror, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	If there is a small fracture in the bone, then saw that piece from that fracture and its blackness, and cure it within so that it is healed.
Capitol .xxxii.	Chapter.32.
De la cura de las dentz eminentz sobre las autras.	On the Treatment of برجسته Teeth compared to other teeth.
Quan las dentz so eminentz no segon lor cors natural per aquelas la forma es laga, e majorment quan endeve a las femnas, e majorment a las piuselas venerablas; donc cove que tu consideras: si dent es nada aprop autra dent, e no es possibla sarradura ni linament de lu, lahoras radica aquela; mays que no sia annexa am autra dent, lahoras tu inscideys aquela am aquest instrument del qual aquesta es la forma; e es semblant a morr de porc, e sia feyt de ferr de India de extramitat mot aguda.	When the teeth are برجسته from their natural position due to their shape, and more so in the case of women, and most especially in the case of elderly women; then consider this: if one tooth is apart from another, and it is not possible to join them with a thread or a wire, then extract that tooth; but if it is attached to another tooth, then cut it off with this instrument, whose shape is like this: it resembles the head of a pig, and is made of iron from India with an acute tip.
E sia la tua inscizio am la qual inscideyses aquela en trops dias per la duricia de la dent, e que no sia comauguda autra de las dentz.	And it is your incision with which you cut off that tooth in three days because of the hardness of the tooth, and not to hurt any other teeth.
E si es dent eminent expausat a limadura, lahoras lima aquel am lima de ferr de India del qual aquesta es la forma:	And if a tooth is برجسته and needs to be trimmed with a file, then trim it with a file made of iron from India, whose shape is like this:
E sia tot de ferr de India e·l margua eysament; e sia de motz menutz puntz ayssi cum lima am la qual son faytas agulhas, am la qual la dent sia limada pauc a pauc en motz dias am fecilitat, per so que no sia autra dent comauguda e caga.	And it is all of iron from India and the point is sharp; and it has small points like files that are made with it, so that the tooth is trimmed little by little in three days' time with ease, so that no other tooth gets hurt and cracks.
E aprop lineys aquela en la fi, e ratz aquela am alscus razoris.	And then tie off that end, and cut it off with a razor blade.
E si es dent del qual una partida es trinquada e lideys la lengua, lahoras cove que tu limescas aquel entro que l’aspretat de aquela fraccio sia ostada e engualhada, e sia aplenada per so que la lengua no ledesca ni la paraula no corrumpa.	And if one of your teeth has a broken part and the tongue is affected, then wait until the bitterness of that piece is overcome and covered, so that the tongue does not taste or speak corruptly.
Capitol .xxxiii.	Chapter.33.
De restauracio de dentz maugudas am fiel de aur o de argent.	On the Restoration of damaged teeth with gold or silver.
Quan accideys a las dentz devant concussio e remossio per percussio o per cazament, e le malaute no pot strenher sobre aquo que manga, e tu has curat aquel am medicinas stipticas, e no ha valgut la tua curacio, lahoras per so que no cagan es engen en aquelas que sian strengudas am fiel de aur e no de argent, quar argent se fa vert e aprop se poyreys aprop alscus dias, mays aur nul temps no es mudat.	When a tooth has suffered from concussion and removal due to impact or striking, and the root has not been removed by the medicine that is stifling, and your treatment does not work, then replace it with gold wire and not silver, because silver turns green and needs more time to heal, but gold does not change color.
E sia le fiel en tal subtilitat e grocesa segon la quantitat que puesca entrar entre las dentz; e la forma de la reccio es que prenguas le fiel e pren lo doble de lu entre doas dentz sanas, e aprop que cresques am doas tortuositatz del fiel entre doas maugudas, o si’ una o motas, entro que pervengua la tela a la dent sana del autra partida.	And let the gold be of such fineness and thickness as to fit between the teeth; and the shape of the wire is that you take half of it between two sound teeth, and then double it between two molars, or if there are more than two, so that the thread reaches the sound tooth on the other side.
E aprop itera le teyssiment entro a la partida de la qual comenciest, e strenh la tua ma am facilitat e savieza entro que no sia mauguda.	And then repeat this process for each part of the broken tooth, and strengthen your hand with ease and skill until it is not strong.
E sia la tua striccio am la qual strenhas le fiel deves las razitz de las dentz que no evasesca.	And be your strength with which you strengthen the wire so that the roots of the teeth are not lost.
E aprop inscindeys las extramitatz del fiel superfluens am las forceps o tosoyras, e agregua aquelas en quascun loc am gesti, e converteys aquelas e las occulta entre la dent sana e la dent mauguda, per so que no fassa lesio a la lengua.	And then cut off the excess of the wire with tweezers or forceps, and add it to any place, and hide it between a sound tooth and a molar, so that it does not hurt the tongue.
E aprop leyssa aquela ayssi streyta cum roman.	And then let that wire rest in its place.
Mays si es desliada o rumpuda, strenh aquela o aquelas am autra fiel en tal manieyra en tot son temps.	If it has slipped or broken, then strengthen it with another wire at the same time as the first one.
E aquesta es la forma de las dentz e la figura de la rectacio de doas dentz sanas e de doas maugudas, ayssi cum vezes aquestas liadas:	This is the shape of teeth and the form of the insertion of two sound teeth and two damaged ones, such as these:
E quan se fa que retorno una dent o doas aprop le cazement de quascuna en lors locs, e sian recrescutz ayssi cum havem recomtat, e que remauguan.	And when one tooth or two returns to its place, and they are put back in their places, and remain attached:
E no fa aquo sino bo artifexs e savi.	This is not done by any but wise and skilled craftsmen.
E alcunas veguadas es aptat alcuna causa dels osses de vaca, e es fayt de lor ayssi cum forma de dent, e es pausada en loc en le qual defayl la dent, e es strengit ayssi cum havem dit, e reman e serveys am aquel per lonc temps.	Some are apt for some causes of the bones of cows, and is made in their shape like a tooth, and is placed in its place in which it fails the tooth, and is strengthened in this way as we have said, and remain attached to it for a long time.
Capitol .xxxiv.	Chapter.34.
De inscizio del liament le qual ve en la lengua e prohibeys loquela.	On the Incision of the Thread that is seen in the tongue and prohibits speech.
Aquest liguament le qual ve dejos la lengua alcunas veguadas o es natural am le qual hom nays, o accidental e accideys per plagua la qual ja es consolidada.	This thread, which is seen leaving the tongue in some places or is natural to it, or happens by accident due to a wound that has already healed.
E la operacio en lu es que huobres la boca del malaute, le sieu cap existent en le tieu se; e eleva la sieua lengua, e aprop inscideys aquel liament nervos segon la latitut entro que sia solvuda la lengua de la sua recencio.	And the operation on him is that workers open the mouth of the patient, the head existing in the small body; and they raise their tongue, and approach to inscribe that nervous ligament according to the latitude within which the tongue comes out of its recency.
Mays si en aquela es alcuna duricia o denodacio, e aquo es stat per consolidacio de plagua, lahoras tu gieta unci e scindeys aquel per la latitut entro que aias inscindit le liament e sia dissolvuda la nodacio.	Maybe if there is any hard or sharp thing, and that is standing for consolidation of the plague, then you pour oil and cut that according to the latitude within which you have not cut the ligament and the nodule is dissolved.
E guarda te que no sia fayta fissura en le preon de la carn e que scindas aqui arceria e vengua flux de sanc.	And guard that there is no fracture on the front of the flesh, and that you cut here the air and bring forth flow of blood.
E aprop sia lavat le vestigi de la inscisio am ayguaros o am vi agre o am aygua frega; e aprop pausa dejos la lengua licini; so es meca la qual tengua le malaute dejos la lengua en quascuna nuoyt per so que no sia consolidat autra veguada.	And approach to wash the trace of the incision, whether it is dry or wet or dried up; and approach to pause there the tongue smooth; if such is the medicine that has the patient's tongue in any way so that it is not consolidated or infected again.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc, pausa sobre le loc vetriol trissat; mays si le sanc ventz, lahoras cauteriza le loc am cauteri lantiginos le qual conveneys ad aquo.	Maybe if there is flow of blood, pause above the site of the wound; maybe if the blood is flowing, then do cauterize that place with a hot iron, which is appropriate to be applied to water.
E aprop aquel cura am las autras causas entro que sia sanat.	And approach that cure with the other causes within which it is healed.
Capitol .xxxv.	Chapter.
De extraccio de ranula dejos la lengua.	Of extraction of the hernia, pause there the tongue.
Alcunas veguadas accideys dejos la lengua apostema asemblant a nomla petita prohibent la lengua de la sua operacio natural; e fort leu es magnificada entro que huempla la boca.	Some wounds occur on the tongue, it is similar to a small hernia, preventing the tongue from its natural operation; and it is strong that is amplified within which it fills the mouth.
E la operacio en lu es que huebras la boca del malaute sesent devant le solel e considera le apostema.	And the operation on him is that you open the mouth of the patient in front of the sun and consider the hernia.
E si tu le vezes de fusca color o de negra, dur, al qual le malaute no atroba sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel quar es cranc.	And if you turn it from brown or black, hard, where the patient does not feel the pain, then do not touch that which is sharp.
E si es declinat a blancor, en le qual es humiditat, lahoras tu met le onci en lu, e inscideys aquel am spatum subtil, e inscindeys le de tota partida; e si sanc te ventz en la hora de la tua operacio, lahoras tu pausa desus zegi trissat, so es vetriol, entro que sia restreyt le sanc.	And if it is inclined to whiteness, in which there is moisture, then you pour oil on him, and cut that with a sharp knife, and cut all of it; and if blood comes out at the time of your operation, then you pause above, wet, with a hot iron, within which it is dried up.
E aprop retorna a la obra tua entro que lo haias trayt am compliment de lu, entro que sia lavat am vi agre e sal; e cura aquel am l’autra curacio ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	And return to your work within which you have not treated it with respect, within which it is washed with a wet and salt; and cure that with the other cure with water within which it is healed.
Capitol .xxxvi.	Chapter.
De extraccio de apostema de doas aurelhas e de aquel que es nada en le golayro e de las autras apostemas.	Of extraction of the hernia of two ears and of that which is nothing in the mouth, and of the other hernias.
Quan endeveno en le golayro godat, so son glandulas las quals son asembladas algodat, las quals accideysso deforas e son nompnadas doas aurelhas, las quals quan tu las curas am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no es sanat, lahoras tu considera si le apostema es dur, de fusca color, de pauc sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel am ferr.	When it is discovered in the mouth, it is a gland that has become inflamed, which occurs sometimes and is called two ears, which, when you treat them with oil that we have mentioned in the division, and they are not healed, then consider if the hernia is hard, of brown color, of little feeling, then do not touch that which is sharp.
E si es de roga color e la razic es grossa, lahoras no toques aquela am ferr per le flux del sanc; abantz layssa aquel entro sia madurat, e lahoras o tu trauqueras aquel, o sira romput per si.	And if it is of red color and the root is thick, then do not touch that which is sharp because of the flow of blood; before leaving it, let it be dried up, and if you cannot take it out, then cut it off from yourself.
E si es de blanqua color, radon, e la razit de lu es subtil, lahoras aquel es que cove esser inscidit.	And if it is of white color, weak, and the root is thin, then that is which can be cut.
E la operacio en lu es que consideras, denant la tua operacio, si ja ha repausat le apostema de lu caut am repaus complit o si es deminuit am alcuna deminucio; e lahoras fay sezer le malaute denant le soleyl, e·l cap de lu sia en le tieu se, e huebre la boca de lu, e le servidor prenent entre las suas mas prema la lengua de lu dejos am instrument mot noble del qual aquesta es la forma:	And the operation on him is that you consider, in front of your own operation, if it has already rested or decreased; and then make him sit in front of the sun, and his head is in the small body, and open his mouth, and the servants take between their legs his tongue, holding it away from the instrument with a noble tool which this is the form:
E sia fayt de argent o de aram, e sia subtil cum cotel.	It is made of silver or copper, and it is sharp with an edge.
Donc cum tu premes am aquel la lengua e es mostrat a tu la apostema, e catz sobre aquel le tieu vezement, lahoras pren onci e fica aquel en l’amenla, e tira aquel a las partidas defora tant quant podes.	Then you press onto it with that tongue and show it to him the hernia, and put oil on it, and fix it in the place; then pull it apart from the outside as much as you can.
Otra aquo que tiras alcuna causa de las tunicas, e aprop incideys aquela am instrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	Another with oil that draws aside any cause of the tunics, and approach to cut that with the instrument which this is the form:
e es asemblat a forceps, empero las extramitatz de lu son corvadas, ayssi que l’orrifici de quascuna de aquelas es en le endreyt del autra, mot agudas, le qual sia de ferr indi enbegut.	It is assembled with pliers, but the extremities of it are sharp, so that the orifice of each one of them is in the edge of the other, sharp, which is made of iron, polished.
Mays si aquest instrument no es a tu present, lahoras inscideys aquel am spatum del qual aquesta es la forma de lu: E sia agut de la una part, no agut del autra part.	Maybe if that instrument is not with you, then cut it with a sharp knife which this is the form of it: It is sharpened on one side, not sharpened on the other.
E pus que has inscidit una mella, inscideys l’autra segon aquesta meteyssa manieyra de inscizio, e aprop la inscizio le malaute guarguarise de aygua frega	And then when you have cut one side, cut the other according to this way of cutting, and approach to cut the patient with oil of the kind that is used for cleaning.
Mays si endeve flux de sanc, guarguarise aygua de decoccio de scorsa de milgrana o de fuelha de mirtra e semblantz ad aquel de las causas stiptiquas entro que·l flux del sanc sia restreyt, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	Maybe if there is flow of blood, guard that water of decoction of green garlic or of mulberry leaves is added to it; and approach to cure that within which the flow of blood is stopped, and then cure that within which it is healed.
E alcunas veguadas naysso en le guolayro autras apostemas otra aquelas doas aurelhas, e inscideys aquelas segon que yeu e dit en la inscizio de doas mellas engualment.	And some wounds occur in the mouth with other hernias than the two ears, and cut those according to what I have said in the cutting of two grooves together.
E yeu ja fu medicat una femna de apostema le qual era nat en le golayro de lu, le qual apostema tendia a color fusca, de pauc sentiment, le qual ja havia claus le golayro de lu, e la femna respirava am meat streyt, e ja havia prohibit a lu comestio e beure de aygua, e ja era pervenguda a la mort si mays agues stat per un dia o per dos.	And I have already cured a woman of the hernia which was born in her mouth; that hernia was of brown color, of little feeling, and she had already closed her mouth, and she breathed very directly, and she had forbidden her to eat or drink water, and she was close to death if it were not stopped.
E l’apostema ja tant havia pugat que havia mezes dos ramps entro que eyssiro per dos traucs.	And the hernia had already been so much that it had caused two rashes within which it passes through two paths.
Donc yeu me cuytegui fisturalment e fiquegui en un de lor onci, e tiregui aquel, e atirada es de lu gran porcio, e aprop yeu incidigui aquela de on comprendegui del autre trau, e aprop yeu obrigui la boca de lu, e compremegui la sua lengua, e aprop yeu fiquegui le onci en aquela apostema.	Then I cut it open and examined it, and I took that one, and threw it far away from me, and approached the other one, and I held his tongue, and I closed it in that hernia.
E aprop yeu abscizi gran partida de lu, e no corria de lu sino un pauc de sanc.	And then I cut off a big piece of him, and there was no blood from him except a little blood.
Donc absolut es le guolayro de aquela femna, e comensec tantost beure aygua, e aprop presec vianda, donc yeu no cessegui inscidir de aquela apostema motas vetz per lonc temps, e succesia apostema en loc de aquel, le qual inscizia entro que es prolonguat aquel.	Then absolutely I closed his mouth on him, and soon he drank water, and then I did not stop to cut that hernia little by little, and that hernia was in place of the other one, which cuts within which it is prolonged;
Donc yeu engen agui e cauterizegui le guolayro de lu, donc astec de addicio; e aprop yeu perambulegui e no saubi que fec Dieus de aquela aprop mi.	Then I went forward and cauterized his mouth, then I walked around and did not know that God was with me.
Capitol .xxxvii.	Chapter.
De inscizio de huvela quan es apostemada.	Of cutting of the hernia when it is inflamed.
Quan catarr deysen a la huvula, e es apostemada e es longa, lahoras ela es nompnada perpendicular; e si es en la partida dejos grossa e redonda, e lahoras ela es apelada buba.	When it is inflamed and the hernia is long, then that one is called a hernia; and if it is thick and round at its roots, then that one is called a buba.
Mays quan es curada am aquo que havem dit en la divisio, e no comfereys la tua curacio, e eyssament ja vezes que apostema caut ja es ostat de lu e es subtil, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquela que es agreguadas redonda; e si es ad aquela longitut, e es sanguina, de fusca color o de negre, e no es a lu centiment, lahoras cove que tu temtes la inscizio de lu, quar en aquela es temor sobre le malaute.	Maybe when it is cured with oil that we have mentioned in the division, and you do not cure it with your own cure, and this hernia has already stopped bleeding; and if it is long, and blood comes out of it, of brown color or black, and does not feel like it is a hundred times, then do not cut that which is added to it roundly; and if it is at the roots of it, then you call it buba.
E quan tu vezes aquela segon la manieyra que yeu he dita de la sua blancor e longuesa, que tu fassas sezer le malaute e premas la lengua de lu am instrument del qual procesic la sua forma e aprop fica le onci en la nuva, e tira aquela en jos e inscideys aquela am un de dos instrumentz les quals e ditz en la inscizio de dos mellas.	And when you see that which is described in the second way of its whiteness and length, then you should not cut that which is sharp; and if it is at its roots, then call it buba; and when you see a new one that has been added to it roundly, then do not cut that which is long; and if it is in the roots of it, then cut that which is on the outside of it with those instruments which are described for cutting two grooves together.
E cove que no inscidas aquela sino aquo que es ajustat sobre le terme natural ses addicio, quar si tu inscides de lu mays, lediyras le sieu parlar.	Then do not cut that which is sharp unless it fits on the term of nature's addition; for if you cut him more, then he will make his own speech.
E aprop la inscizio, usa de aquo le qual havem recomtat en la inscizio de dos mellas, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	And close up the incision, use that which we have described in the incision of two nails, and cure that within which is healed.
Mays si era le malaute espaventat per la inscizio de lu, cove que use de engen en la cauterizacio de lu ses temor, e la manieyra del cauteri en lu no es sino am aygua aguda, e es que tu pauses le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop prem la lengua de lu am le instrument le qual havem dit, e aprop pren de l’aygua la qual havem dita en le capitol de cauterizacio, e comfeys am aquela caus viva, e pausa aquela no spessa ni subtil, e de aquela omple la concavitat de l’estrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	Mays if the patient was scared by the incision of his hand, then cover that with an instrument that is made for cauterization, and close up the incision with the tip of the instrument. And if the patient's hand is in pain, place a pointed instrument on it to relieve the pain.
Sia la extramitat de lu conquavitat en la qual sia pausada la medicina ayssi cum la conquavitat de culher de ray, e pausa le strument am la medicina sobre la vula, e·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu latz per so que corro saliva o musellage de la boca de aquel per la intrinscequa medicina, per so que no deyssenda de aquela deguna causa sobre le golayro de lu e que ledesca aquel.	Then place the medicine's convexity in which the medicine was placed over the patient' foot, and let the instrument rest on the patient' tongue; and make the patient sit on his side so that saliva or mucus does not go into his mouth from the medicine within, so that it will not come out of his throat by any means from the medicine within.
E aprop te la tua ma am la medicina, e exprem aquela sobre la uvula per l’espazi de miega hora entro que vegas aquela esser denegrada e sedada per la mordicacio de la medicina.	Then bring your hand close to the medicine, and squeeze it onto the patient' tongue; and let that medicine remain on the patient' tongue for an hour before it loses its freshness and becomes bitter from the medicine' taste.
E si vols, prengues coto e envolopes aquel sobre la extremitat del ray, e submergeys le coto en la medicina, e entrometas le ray am le coto en una canula de sobre entro que·l coto adheresca en aquela canula, e fay aquo tantas vetz entro que consiegues aquo que vols de la cauterizacio de la uva, e aprop leyssa aquela quar ela se seccara e cayra aprop tres dias o quatre.	And if you want to, take a string and wrap it around that end of the finger, then dip the string into the medicine, and insert the finger with the string wrapped around it into a tube; so that the string sticks to the tube, and make that string come out as much as you need for the cauterization of the uvula, and let that string dry up and fall off after three or four days.
E si indigeysses que iteras la medicina, itera aquela, e aprop la cauterizacio abstergeys en le circuit de la uva am coto enbegut en boder, e mondifica am aquel aquo que es en le circuit de lu de la medicina, e sia lavat am aygua frega, e sia curat deforo am embrocacio, e dedintz am guarguarismes entro que sia sanat.	And if you want to repeat the medicine, repeat that, and do the cauterization of the uvula with the string wrapped around it at the back of the throat, and rinse it with water; then wash it with oil, and apply ointment on it; and let it be cleaned from within so that it is healed.
E aquesta especia de curacio es pus salva que inscizio e pus long de temor.	This kind of treatment is safer than surgery and less scary than fear.
Alcunas veguadas es curada la uvuola am aquo que es pus subtil que cauteri e inscizio, quar es curat am subfumigacio en aquesta manieyra: recipe calament, ysop, origua, ruda, scicados arabic, camamilla, broyda e semblant ad aquels de las erbas, e ajusta totas aquelas causas, o alcunas de lor, en una ola, e sian submergidas am vi agre, e bulhan; e la ola sia be lutada am lut decentment, e sia en le mieg loc de la ola un trauc, sobre le qual sia pausat un instrument conquau de aram segon aquesta manieyra; sia fayt de argent o de aram.	Some remedies for treating the uvula are more effective than surgery and less scary than fear. For example, you can cure the uvula with water that is more subtle than cauterization and incision, because it is healed with smoke treatment in this way: prepare a mixture of herbs such as calament, hyssop, oregano, ruda, scicimara arabica, chamomile, bread, and others similar to them; add them to boiling water, and let them boil; then strain the mixture, and put it on a cotton wool ball; heat the cotton wool gently, and place it over the uvula's opening; then use an sharp instrument according to this way; make it of silver or of iron.
E sia entromesa la extremitat en la boca del malaute entro que la vapor poge a la uvula sobre la quanula, entro que la uvula sia mot ofuscada.	And insert the end into the patient' mouth so that the steam reaches the uvula over the opening; then the uvula will become dim.
E aprop itera sobre aquela motas veguadas entro qu’es secca, e guarda te que no fassas aquesta curacio al comesament de l’aveniment de apostemas, quar trop ajustaria en le apostema, e no cove que tu fassas aquo, sino deves la declaracio de apostema de lu caut.	Then repeat over that dim spots until they are dry, and remember not to perform this treatment before the appearance of abscesses, because it would fit too well on the abscess; and do not make water, but rather declare the abscess of the cautery.
Mays si no es a tu present aquest instrument, lahoras pren una cana e compon en la extramitat de lu un clos de huou, per so que la boca del malaute sia comborida, quar le closc del huou prohibeys la vapor comburir la boca.	If you do not have that instrument with you, then take a cane and make it into the end a cap of a bottle; so that the patient' mouth is closed, because the bottle's cap prevents steam from burning the patient' mouth.
E aquesta curacio es bona am salut.	This treatment is good for health.
Capitol .xxxviii.	Chapter .xxxviii.
De extraccio d’espinas e de aquo que adhereys en le golayro e de las autras causas.	Of removal of thorns and of water that adheres to the throat and of other causes.
Motas veguadas adhereys en le guolayro o spina de peys o alcuna autra causa.	Dim spots adhering to the throat or a thorn or any other cause.
Adonc cove que tu extraguas aquo que de aquels es apparent, sobre le qual catz la vista, pus que tu premes la lengua am instrument denant solelh, per so que a tu sia declarat aquo que es en la guola.	Then extract water that appears from it, and let the sight see it clearly, because you press your tongue against the instrument in front of someone; so that it is declared to you which water is in the throat.
E aquo que no apar e es a tu occultat en le guolayro, cove que tu fassas vomir le malaute denant que la vianda sia degerida en l’estomac, quar fort leu la causa annexsa le golayro sira foro-getada per vomit; o que deglusia le malaute una pessa de nap o de razit de laytuga o un boci de pa sec; o prengua una pessa de sponga marina sequa leon, e lia aquela fortment am fiel, e aprop le malaute transglussia aquela, quar cum perve al loc en le qual so spinas e es extrahuda, lahoras so foro-getatz.	And water that does not appear to you in the throat, then make the patient vomit before the food is digested in his stomach, because it removes the cause of the sore throat through vomiting; or have the patient swallow a piece of nap or a bite of lettuce or a piece of dry bread; or take a piece of sea sponge that is dried up and wet it well with water, and put it against the patient' throat; then make the patient drink it, because when it reaches the place where there are thorns and is extracted, then make the patient vomit.
E mays pren una anguila e be am fiel liada, e sia dedintz mesa e soptament sia extrayta; o pren un porr e soptament le metas e soptament l’en tratz.	Then take a snake and put it on the throat well, and let it be extracted; or take a pig's ear and put it in water; then let it sit for an hour and extract it.
Mays si no so foro-getatz am aquelas causas las quals havem ditas, lahoras husa de un instrument de plom segon aquesta forma:	If you do not manage to vomit with the methods I have described, then use an iron instrument according to this form:
E sia pus gros que ray un petit, e en la extramitat de lu sia conquavitat la qual tu entrometas en la sua guola am facilitat.	It should be thicker than a finger and in the end of it should be concaved which you insert into the patient' throat with ease.
E el aga le sieu cap elevat en sus, e guarda te que·l tocament del sieu os de la gola, per so que endevengua a lu cos e am aquela que enpellesca le os o la spina, o que aquel le metge am la sua ma.	And raise the patient' head up; and make sure that your touch of his throat does not hurt him, because it will provoke coughing or make the thorn stick in his throat, or he will swallow his food; so that you extract what is causing the sore throat.
Mays empero que·l malaute aquel entrometa es miels, per la sua sciencia del loc de la causa annexa e enpellisca en jos, e tira la sua ma am le instrument en sus, tot aquo segon la quantitat la qual es a lu preparada entro que sia foro-getada.	But if the patient inserts it into himself, then he is honey for his knowledge of the place where the cause is attached and pulls it down; and make him press his hand against the instrument in front of him, according to the quantity that has been prepared so that he vomits.
Capitol .xxxix.	Chapter.xxxix.
De extraccio de sancguisugua annexsa al golayro.	Of removal of bloody phlegm attached to the throat.
Quan es medicada sanguisugua am aquo que havem dit en la divisio de la curacio am medicinas e no comfereys, considera lahoras en le guolayro del malaute al solelh, pus que tu aias compremuda la lengua de lu am instrument le qual a tu havem recomtat.	When blood is extracted with water that I have described in the division of treatment with medicines and do not taste it, consider first the patient' throat to the right; because you have moved your tongue against the instrument that I have told you.
Donc si tu vezes la sancguisugua, extratz aquela am onci petit o am gesti subtils decentment.	Then if you find blood, extract it with a small spoon or a delicate gesture gently.
E si no es a tu possible estrayre am aquel, lahoras pren una canula concava e entromet aquela en lo guolayro del malaute, e aprop pausa en la concavitat de la canula un ferr ignit, e fay aquo tantas vetz (entro que la sancguisugua sia morta e se osta del guolayro) e abstengua se le malaute tot lo jorn de aygua.	And if you cannot extract it with that, then take a hollow tube and insert it into the patient' throat; then place an ignition instrument in the tube's opening; and make as much water pass through (since the blood has stopped flowing and stopped sticking to the throat) and abstain from drinking water all day.
E aprop prengua una veyria plena de aygua frega, e obra la boca de lu en aquela, e lava la boca am aquela; e no trasglucia de aquela alcuna causa e maugua l’aygua una hora aprop autra am la sua ma, quar la sancguisugua tantost cum sent l’aygua catz.	Then take a bowl full of water and work the patient' mouth with it, and wash the mouth with that water; and do not drink any more water from that water for an hour or another with his hand; because blood is sensed when drinking water.
Mays si no es foro-getada am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras subfumigua le malaute am cimetz o am assafetida per le instrument le qual havem recomtat en la sufumiguacio de uvula.	If blood is not vomited with the water that I have described, then make the patient smoke himself with cumin or asafoetida using the instrument that I have described in the uvula' smoking treatment.
Fay aquo, so en quar cayra.	Make water, and do it quickly.
E es un’autra manieyra de operacio en sufumiguacio de aquela, es que tu prenguas una ola en la qual sian carbos ignitz e la ola sia cuberta am una cobertora en le mieg de la qual sia un trauc, e sia compausat en aquel trauc la extremitat del instrument; e aprop dega desus la subfumigacio; e pause le malaute la sua boca en la extremitat de la canula, e claugua la sua boca per que la subfumiguacio no sia foro-getada entro que sapias que la subfumigacio es pervenguda a la sancguisugua, quar la sancguisugua tantost cayra.	It is another way of operating by smoking that water; you take a wave in which are carbon ignitions and the wave is covered with a blanket over its middle, and make an opening in that wave; then place the instrument' end in that opening; then remove the smoke; then make the patient put his mouth on the tube' opening; then close up the patient' mouth so that the smoke does not escape; and let it be smoked; and let the patient' mouth remain closed so that the smoke is not vomited until you know that the smoke has reached the blood; because the blood will stop flowing and sticking to the throat when it feels the smoke.
E si no catz, lahoras tu itera la subfumiguacio motas vetz, e abstengua le malaute de beure, e mange causas saladas e alhs, e no begua aygua, e ayssi necessari es que am aquest regiment sia fora-getada.	And if it does not work, then repeat the treatment several times, and abstain the patient from drinking; and eat salty foods and dry fruits, and do not drink water, and let that be repeated as necessary so that it is vomited.
E aquesta es la forma del instrument am le qual es trayta sancguisugua del guolayro quan es vista; e es semblant a forceps ayssi cum vezes, sino quar es en lu alcuna curvitat:	And this is the shape of the instrument that it has to be used with blood from the jaw when it is seen; and it is like forceps as well some times but since it has some curvature:
le qual sia mesa al guolayro, e la extremitat de lu es semblant a bec de ciconia, que es guanta, en la qual es aspretat de lima, per so quar, quan comprem alcuna causa, aquela no leyssa.	That one has to be used with blood from the jaw when it is seen; and its tip resembles a swan's beak, which is sharp, in which case, when there is some cause, that does not leave.
Capitol .xl.	Chapter .xl.
En le qual es la suma del sermo en apercio de apostemas e en seccio de lor.	In which is the essence of the speech in preparation for the emesis and section of them.
Les apostemas so motas specias, de motas manieyras, segon que ve rememoracio de lor, de quascuna en aquest libre.	The emesis are specific motas, in various ways, depending on whether they remind you or not, from each of these in this book.
E so diversas en perforacio e seccio de lor per doas manieyras, de las quals la una es per la specia de apostemas en si meteys; e per aquo que comprem de las humiditatz.	And they are diverse in their piercing and section for two ways, one of which is by the specific emesis in themselves; and by what concerns the humors.
E la segonda manieyra es prop les locs en les quals accideys del cos, quar le apostema accident en le cap es autra de la apostema accident en le cul; e le apostema en le loc carnos accident es autra del apostema accident en junctura; e a quascun de lor es son juguament per operacio.	And the second way is by the places where it happens in the body, since the emesis that occurs in the head is another from that which occurs in the buttocks; and the emesis that occurs in the flesh is another from that which occurs at the joints; and each of these has its treatment through operation.
E mays de apostemas so alcunas las quals cove que no sian perforadas sino aprop maturacio de la sania en aquels o compliment de lor.	And more emesis are some that do not need to be pierced but rather a proper maturation of the disease in them or completion of their course.
So autras apostemas les quals cove que sian traucatz quan son cruzes, e no son maturatz segon lor compliment, ayssi cum apostemas que son propdas a las juncturas, quar apostema quan ve prop junctura, lo esser de lu es prolonguat entro que·s poyreys aquo que es en le circuit de lu, e fort leu son corromputz les liamentz o les nervis de aquela junctura, per que es fayta causa de contraccio de aquel membre; o es apostema prop de membre principal, e si tu tardas la perforacio de lu entro sia madurat nosira al membre principal; o es prop le cul, donc perfora aque no-madurat; e no cove que·l perforas cru, de no-complida degestio, sino aquel que es prop del cul, per so que no poyresca le preon de lu e sia elonguat a las partidas dedintz del cul, e sia fayta fistula, o que sia fayt en le terme de lu que no sia sanat.	And other emesis are some that need to be broken when they cross, and do not mature according to their course, such as emesis that occur near joints, since an emesis that occurs at a joint prolongs the duration within which it can corrupt the ligaments or nerves of that joint, causing pain in that member; or is an emesis next to a main member, and if you do not pierce it until it has not reached its full maturity towards the main member; or is near the rear, then pierce it without reaching its full maturity; and do not need to break what does not complete its course of digestion, but rather what is near the rear, so as not to damage its root and be elongated towards the anus, causing a fistula, or that it occurs in the term of it that it does not heal.
Mays cove que tu sapias la hora de la perforacio de la apostema, e aysso es quan es maturat.	And also that you know the time to pierce the emesis, and so it is when it has reached its maturity.
E sapias que es madurat quan es la cedacio de la dolor e la cessacio de la febre, e aprop la diminucio de la rogor e de la pulsacio, e la acuitat del cap del apostema, e les autres senhals.	And you should know that it has reached its maturity when the pain reduces and the fever subsides, and because there is a decrease in pulse, and an improvement in the appearance of the head of the emesis, and other signs.
E quar cove que sapias la perforacio cazer en le loc pus dejos del apostema e de pus venient de curacio de la eminencia.	And since you know that piercing will occur at the place farthest from the emesis, and the pus comes out of the cure of eminence.
E perforacio tostemps sia per le lonc de la carn o del cors, si las apostemas son en las partidas de las mas o dels pes, e en loc dels lacertz, de las cordas dels nervis, de las arcerias; e, al derier, en totz locs enguals en les quals no es reflecio; quar en aquels que so reflectitz, usa de perforacio segon aquel membre.	And the piercing should be done at the length of the flesh or the body, if the emesis are in the joints of the limbs or the feet, and in places where there are ligaments, nerves, and arteries; and finally, in all places that are enclosed within the limbs, since it is not reflected; for those that are reflected, use piercing according to the member.
Mays quan le apostema es en loc carnos, lahoras miels es que leysses la perforacio de lu entro que sia confermada la digestio de lu segon compliment, ayssi quo havem dit; quar si tu perforas aquel denant aquo, es prolonguat le cors del poyre de lu e de mota sordicia, e fort leu las labias de lu so enduradas e la profunditat de lu.	And when the emesis is in a flesh place, then it is better that you delay the piercing of it until its course has been completed, since what we have said; indeed, if you pierce it ahead of time, it prolongs the length of its path and adds to its bitterness, and makes its depth severe.
Mays alcus apostemas so perforatz segon la latitut de la carn o del cos deves la necessitat, o segon aquo del qual lo membre indigeys.	And a few other emesis should be pierced according to the depth of the flesh or the body, depending on necessity or the member's need.
E cove que administres petita perforacio , e·n les apostemas grans gran perforacio e ampla o motas seccios segon la diversitat de la grandesa dels apostemas.	And if you administer a small piercing, and in the large emesis a large piercing and wide or various sections according to the diversity of their sizes.
E autras so dels apostemas en les quals cove que la codena sia conquavada e sia encidida, quan es fayta ayssi quo pan e fayta es en terme que ja stigua, ayssi cum aquel que accideys en trops de dubelec e de bubos.	And others are emesis in which the case needs to be broken and cut when it occurs as such, so that it does not reach its full course until then; and that happens when there is a disease in the muscles or joints.
E de aquels so que so insciditz am seccio havent tres angles; e de aquels es en le qual es inscidit ayssi cum figura de fuelha de mirtra, ayssi cum las apostemas dels angonars.	And of those that are not cut in half at the section have three angles; and of those is the one in which it is cut like a sheet of oak, and of the emesis of the joints.
E de lor so en les quals es administrada seccio redonda e seccio lunar, e semblantz ad aquels.	And of them are those in which round or lunar section is administered, and similar to those.
Mays aquel al qual no es cap ayssi cum son apostemas leons superficials, cove que tu perforas aquel am perforacio superficial, o plana tant solament.	And that one whose emesis are superficial lions, know that you pierce it with a superficial piercing or flat piercing only.
E cove quant le apostema es gros e ya ha colligit mota sania, que perfores aquel e no te coytes que extraguas tot le poyre en aquela hora; habantz extratz de aquel una partida, e aprop opila le apostema entro al autre dia, e aprop extratz una partida major, e aprop fa aquo motas veguadas segon graduacio entro que sia foro-getat.	And when the emesis is large and has already collected some bad blood, then pierce it and do not cauterize that which is extracted at that time; take out a little bit of it, and on another day take out a larger bit, and on a third day extract a little more, and so make it small pieces.
E majorment si·l malaute es de freol vertut, o femna prens, o enfant petit, o viel en decrepitut, quar l’esperit animal motas vetz es resolvut am la egressio de la sania, e fort leu mor le malaute, e tu operte les.	And if the person with gout is of virile virtue, or female child, or small child, or old in decrepitude, since the animal spirit moves its vessels to expel the bad blood, and makes it strong to die; and you close their doors.
Don guarda aquest capitol am gran cautela, e aprop la tua perforacio en la qual perforas aquestz apostemas, cove que abstergescas las plagues e consideras donc si la plagua del apostema es pauca, o es una seccio plana, lahoras tu aministra las qualguas de li o de coto antic; e si le apostema es gran, e las fissuras de la perforacio son motas, lahoras cove que tu pauses meca en quascun trauc entro que pervenguan ensemps.	Keep this chapter carefully guarded, and when you pierce these emesis, know that you avoid the plagues; and consider whether the plague of the emesis is small, or a flat section, then administer water to it with a syringe or cup; and if the emesis is large, and the holes made by piercing are small, then know that you should pause your hand in any place where both enter together.
E si en le apostema es abscindit una partida de la codena o has concavada aquela en le circuit, lahoras cove que tu la complescas de coto viel o de fil fayt de drap de li, ayssi cum quan has traytz pans o razizos, ses humiditat; e strenh aquel entro al tertz dia; e aprop proceseys aquel e cura le am aquo que cove dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And if in the emesis is cut off a part of the cord or is concaved in the circuit, then know that you should compress it with old or thread or fabric, and if you have burned it or shaved it, wet it; and strengthen that one by the third day; and proceed to wash what needs to be washed within, so that it is healed; and treat the bad blood that is in it, within the way that it is cured.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc en la hora de la operacio tua, lahoras tu aministra aygua frega e vi agre en les quals mules un drap de li, e pausa aquel sobre le loc del fluxs del sanc motas veguadas.	And if you experience a flow of blood during the operation, then administer rubbing water with vinegar and cloth; and place that one on the surface of the flow of blood.
Mays si persevera le fluxs del sanc, lahoras cove que tu aministres regiment e curacio e polveras las quals he recomtadas en motz locs de aquest nostre libre e de divisio.	And if the flow of blood persists, then know that you administer the recommended medicine and powders in various places from this book and division.
Mays si es en temps de hivern, e·l loc de la apostema es loc de motz nervis, lahoras cove que tu enfundas pulvils en vi e oli caut, e pauses aquels sobre les locs.	And if it is in wintertime, and the place of the emesis is a place of joints, then know that you should administer powder of wine or oil with cauterization, and pause those on the surfaces.
E si es en estiu, e les locs son carnoses, lahoras cove que tu pauses pulvils enbeguts am aygua e oli o am vi e oli, e tot aquo sia freg entro que sia le ters dia, ayssi cum havem dit, e lahoras cove que tu deslies le apostema e abstergescas aquel e aministres en la curacio de lu aquo que a lu conveneys entro que sia sanat.	And if it is in summer, and the places are fleshy, then know that you should pause powdered wine or oil with cauterization, and all of it be washed within so that it reaches its third day; and since we have said, and then know that you cut the emesis and avoid it; and administer it to the cure of water that is appropriate for it to be healed.
E aysso es aquo que es necessari de la cognicio de la curacio de apostemas universalment, mays segon la via de distinccio ja he dit de tot apostema en qual manieyra es via de la cura de lu per capitols singularment.	And so is the water that is necessary to know the cure of emesis universally; and more according to the way of distinction, which I have already said, each emesis in a particular way, is the way to treat it by chapters alone.
Capitol .xli.	Chapter .xli.
De seccio de apostemas les quals veno en la codena del cap.	Of the section of emesis that comes in the tail of the head.
En la codena del cap petitz apostemas, e so de specias de nodes les quals conteno tunicas que so a lor factz ; e las specias de lor so motas.	In the tail of the head are small emesis, and they are of various kinds that contain tunics that are their own nature; and their kinds are different.
E de lor son pingas, e de aquelas so que conteno humiditat semblant a lima.	And of them are fakes, and those that contain humidity resembling lemon juice.
E de aquelas so las quals conteno humiditat semblant a pols, et asemblantz a lor; e de aquelas so que son lapideas, durs.	And of those is the humidity resembling milk, similar to its nature; and of those are the hard ones.
E en la seccio de totz, e en la extraccio de aquels no es temor, cum deves la exteccio de aquels no fa contrariat arceria.	And in all sections, and in the extraction of any, there is no fear when you have removed what causes it; and you should not make fire painful.
E la operacio en seccio de aquels es que tu esproes aquels am instrument la forma del qual ve aprop aysso, le qual es apelat entromes, entro que sapias que contengua.	And the operation in section of those is that you to these with instrument the form of which we appropriate so, which is called within-the-bone, within that you know that it contains.
Quar si aquo que conte es humiditat, lahoras scindeys aquel am seccio segon la longitut per seccio superficial segon aquesta forma:	And if that water is wet, then cut them with section according to length by superficial section according to this form:
E comensa en la seccio de la linha de .B. entro a la linha de .G. Donc cum la humiditat es evacuada, lahoras tu excoria aquela pel que conte aquela humiditat, e no leysses de aquela alcuna causa de tot, quar tropas veguadas retorna, si roman de aquela alcuna causa.	And start in the section of line .B to within line .G. Then, when the moisture is discharged, then scrape that area that the moisture contained, and do not miss any cause of all, for ten times examined returns, if remains of that cause.
E aprop submergeys coto en enguent egipciach, si es present, e sino, en aygua e sal; e umpleys am aquel la plagua e layssa aquel entro ad autra dia, quar am aquo corrodeys tot so que es romas de aquela pellicula.	And dip the wound in Egyptian ointment, if it is present, and if not, in water and salt; then fill that wound and leave it within another day, for with water it corrodes all that remains of that film.
E aprop itera sobre aquel coto am enguent egipciach segondament e tersament si indigeyses de lu, entro que·t comfides que no y haia romas alcuna causa de aquela pellicula; lahoras cura la plagua am enguent entro que sia sanada.	And repeat over that wound the Egyptian ointment second time and third time if it is necessary of you, within that you trust that there was not any remaining cause of that film; then heal the wound with ointment until it is healed.
E si apostema conte nodi gras, lahoras tu inscideys aquel segon aquesta forma:	And if pus is present with grease, then you cut them according to this form:
am seccio havent forma de crotz, e geta oncis entre doas labias de la seccio e scorsa aquel de tota partida, e esforsa la tua vertut en extraccio de la tunica la qual conte aquel.	on a section having form of a nut, and put nails between two lips of the section and cut it from all sides, and squeeze your virtue in extracting the tunic that contains that.
Mays si a tu arceria fa contrarieta, lahoras fay aquo que yeu t’e recontat primieyrament.	But if your fire causes inconvenience, then do not reheat it immediately.
E semblantment fay en le apostema lapificat de seccio e de curacio segon que a tu havem dit; e seccio sobre apostema lapificat es pus leugiera, quar es de pauc sanc e de pauca humiditat.	And seemingly do in the pus of section and cure according to that you have said; and cut over the pus if it is light, for it is of little blood and little moisture.
E alcunas vetz so alcus de aquestz apostemas les quals so en le cap en alcus homes am los quals de tot no es humiditat; la qual causa es quar yeu inscindigui sobre un apostema en le cap de una femna vielha e atrobegui le apostema ayssi cum peyra sorda, aspra, blanqua, la qual no podia esser trinquada, e si a alcu fos am aquela percussit, plaguera aquel.	And some times so much of the pus that is in the head in some men from which there is no moisture at all; this cause is because you cut over one pus on the head of an old woman and cut over the pus with a deaf, sharp, white, which cannot be split, and if to someone it is applied, it will hurt him.
Mays en les autres apostemas accidentz en le cap otra aquest no es aquest capitol, ayssi cum les apostemas que veno als caps dels enfantz e deves las razitz de las aurelhas, mays la seccio de aquestz totz sia seccio superficial.	But in other pustules on the head this is not this chapter, as those that come to the heads of children and their roots of ears, but section of these all is superficial section.
E pausa la perforacio de aquels de la partida pus bassa de lor per so que sia alleujat le cos de la sania a las partidas pus bassas.	And pause the piercing of those from the lower part pus because it is relieved to the body with the lower part pustules.
E aprop cura aquelas am aquo que conveneys ad aquel de curacio.	Then return to cure those with water that suits them.
Capitol .xlii.	Chapter LII.
De seccio de scrophulas las quals accideyso en le col.	On Section of scrofulas which happens in the neck.
Motas veguadas endeveno aquestas apostemas en le colh e en las aysselhas e en les angonars; e alcunas veguadas accideyso en las autras partidas del cos.	The pus on the throat and on the shoulders, and some times they happen in other parts of the body.
E so aquelas que accideysso en le colh, e so motas que so engendradas entre lor, e tota scrofula de aquelas es dintz la sua tunica propria, e ayssi cum en les nodis e apostema del cap, ayssi cum havem recomtat.	And those that happen in the throat, and those that are generated among them, and all the scrofulas of those are destroyed their own tunic, and so, with pustules and pus on the head, have repeated.
E las specias de aquestas scrophulas son motas, quar de aquelas so alcunas lapideas, e de aquelas so que conteno humiditatz, e de aquelas so malignas las quals no obeseysso a curacio.	The spices of these scrofulas are pus, because some of them are blisters, and some contain moisture, and all are evil that do not respond to cure.
Donc en aquela la qual tu vezes de bona disposicio en le Tocament, de la qual la color de aquo que es manifest es propda a la color de la codena, e es mauguda a tota partida, e no es annexsa am le nervi del colh, ni am las venas, ni am la arceria, e no es preonda, cove que tu inscidiscas aquela am siccio superficial de la partida desus a la partida dejos del cos de la linha de .G. entro la linha de .B., e scorja aquela de tota partida, e exten dos labias de la codena am onci, o am motz oncis si has necessitat de aquels, ayssi cum havem dit en las apostemas del cap, e extratz aquela petit a petit.	Then in that which you have said of good disposition in the Treatment, in which the color of water that is shown is like to the color of the raisin, and it is pleasant from all parts, and it does not join to the nerves of the neck or veins, and it does not feel full, then cut them with superficial section of the lower part pus to the lower part of the body of the line G., within the line B., and scrape that from all sides, and squeeze it between two lips of the raisin with onces, or many ones if you have need of those, as we have said in the pustules on the head.
E es mays cautela que no sia inscidida la vena o nervi.	And it is more careful not to be cut the vein or nerves.
E sia le spatum no mot agut, que no ajuste a tu la tua ma am inscizio, o que enquiete le malaute, e que inscidas aquo que no es necessari inscidir; quar si inscideysses vena o arceria e prohibeys tu de la tua operacio, lahoras pausa en la plagua vetriol trissat o autras polveras las quals ostan fluxs de sanc, e estrenh la plagua, e layssa aquel entro que·s repausa la acuitat de la apostema e sia mollificada la plagua e comense esser poyrida.	And let the stick not be wet, which is not suitable to your hand with the incision or that quiets the patient, and do not cut water that it is not necessary to cut; for if you cut a vein or a artery, then prevent you of your operation, then pause in the wound tri-saline or other powders that stop the flow of blood, then leave the wound, and let the acuteness of the pustule be relieved, and let the wound become soft and start to rot.
Quan le sanc es abscindit.	When the blood is cut.
Donc retorna a la tua operacio entro que l’aias complida.	Then return to your operation until it is completed.
E aprop inquireys am le tieu dit indic si es romas alcuna causa de las autras petitas scrophulas, donc inscideys aquelas e munda aquelas.	And then ask the doctor's advice if there is any cause of other small scrofulas, so cut those and clean those.
E si es en la razit de la scrophula gran vena, cove lahoras que no inscidas aquela scrophula de la sua razitz.	And if it is in the root of the scrofula of a great vein, then you must not cut that scrofula from its root.
Abantz cove que lies aquela am fiel doblat fort e que leysses aquela entro que caia per si ses nocument.	Before going forward, let him lie there with a folded towel and let him rest until he does not feel any pain.
E aprop omple la plagua de coto vielh le qual tu has ja submirgit en enguent egipciac, e aprop cura aquel.	Then fill the wound with old cloth that you have already dipped in Egyptian ointment, and then heal it.
E si inscides aquela scrophula tota, lahoras cove que tu ajustes las doas labias de la plagua e cuzas2 tantost pus que no y ha romasa deguna superfluitat.	And if you cut that scrofula all at once, then you must join the two lips of the wound and sew it with two stitches so much pus as there is no unnecessary waste.
Mays si tu vezes que haia romasa superfluitat per la grandeza de la scrofula, cove que tu entendas a inscidir la razit de aquela, e astrayra aquela e aministra sutura e aquo que es dit.	But if you see that there is any waste because of the size of the scrofula, then cut its root and remove it, and then administer the stitches and water that is said.
E aquela de las scrophulas que conteno humiditatz, perfora aquela am perforacio superficial aqui la on appar a tu le loc de maturacio de lu, e pausa perforacio de aquo que siec le pus bas del cos, ayssi cum havem dit.	And those scrofulas that contain moisture, then cut them with superficial piercing here the place appears to you the site of maturity of that, and pause the piercing of those that it is the pus at the bottom of the body, as we have said.
E aprop aministra perforacio, calguas am enguent e semblantz ad aquels, per so que corroda aquo que es romas de la corropcio.	Then return to pierce them, with oil and similar to those, so that it corrodes the water that is remaining of the corruption.
E aprop quan tu vezes la plagua ja esser mundada, lahoras tu cura aquela am enguent de carn generatiu entro que sia sanada.	Then, when you see that the wound has been cleaned, then heal it with oil generated within, until it is healed.
Capitol .xliii.	Chapter LIIII.
De seccio del pilhot del apostema accident dintz le guolayro.	On Section of the pustule that happens accidentally in the throat.
Diyssero les antics aquesta seccio en le epilhot, e no vist alcu hom en nostra terra que aquela aia fayta.	They said that this section is suitable for the epidemic, and did not see any person in our land who had it done.
E aquesta es la inscriptura del sermo de aquels.	And this is the inscription of the sermon of those.
Mays en les homes haventz esquinencia, cove que sia esquivada la extraccio del epilhot, cum per aquo no sia fayt juvament per so quar totas las venas e las majors del malaute so aqui.	But in men they have squint, so that the extraction of the epidemic is avoided, as by water it is not done well for all veins and many of the patient's body are here.
Mays en aquels que han apostemas cautz en la boca o guolayro o dos aurelhas, quan la malautia no es en la cana, cove husar de la seccio de epilhot a fugir la perdicio la qual es fayta per perfocacio.	But in those that have pustules in the mouth or throat, or two ears, when the malignancy is not in the cane, then run away from the section of epidemic to avoid the loss that it is done by piercing.
Donc cove quan volem aquo, que inscidam le epilhot dejos tres cercles dels cercles del epilhot, o quatre am petita seccio per la latitut en aquel que es entre dos cercles per quantitat, que la seccio sia en ciphac, no en la cartillage, e aquest loc es convenent a seccio, quar es privat de carn e les vayselhs de sanc de lu son luhen.	Then when you want water, let us write the epiloid with three circles of the epiloid, or four to a small section for its length between two circles by quantity, so that the section is in the middle, not in cartilage, and this place is convenient for section, because it is deprived of flesh, and the doctor' tools of blood are quickly.
E si le metge es pauruc, cove lahoras que extenda la codena del golayro am onci, e aprop fenda la codena entro que pervengua a la canal, mays evite les vaysels de sanc si vetz de aquelas alcuna causa.	Then if the medicine is a little bit, then cut the raisin of the throat with onces, and then cut the raisin within that it reaches to the tube, but avoid the doctor' tools of blood if there is any cause of them.
E aprop inscida li ciplach segon que havem recomtat; e es significat sobre la seccio de la canal per le flacma le qual es de aquela eyssit am aquo que es de lu disromput e per la abscizio de la votz.	Then return to the section of the tube as we have said; and is indicated on the section of the tube with a flame that is made from it, and by the absence of wind.
E layssa la plagua uberta per alcun temps.	And let the poultice remain open for some time.
Donc cum la hora es remauguda en la qual perforacio es temuda, agregua doas labias de la codena de la plagua, e cus aquela sola ses la cartillage.	Then when the hour comes to pierce through the cartilage, add two pieces of string from the poultice, and cut one off short.
E aprop administra medicinas que fan naysser la carn entro que sia sanat.	And then administer medicines that make the flesh swell up so that it may heal.
E diyssec Albucasis que la summa del sermo le qual havem recomtat, exposicio no es sino que veias que alcus de aquetz apostemas ja han opilat lo guolayro del malaute, e le malaute es vengut entro a mort, e le ale de lu es entresecat, e alcus van a inscidir le epiglos per so que respire le malaute sobre le loc de la plagua per alcuna respiracio, e sia salvat de mort.	And Al-Buqasaid that the top of the sentence which we have narrated is only to see if any of these knots has already opened the throat of the patient, and the patient's windpipe has been cut, and some are about to cut the epiglottis so that the patient breathes on the spot where the poultice is, for a little while, and is saved from death.
E per aquo comandero layssar la plagua uberta entro que sia consumida la malicia de la malautia; e es la malicia de lu per tres dias; e donc lahoras comandero cosi la plagua, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	And by water I command that the poultice remains open until the evil of the gout is consumed; and this evil lasts for three days; then afterwards I command that the poultice be done in this way, and that it be healed until it is healed.
E aquo que yeu he vist per mi meteys, es que una sirventa pres un cotel e mesec le en le sieu golayro e inscidic am aquel una partida de la cana del pulmo, e yeu fu apelat a la curacio de lu, e atrobegui la mugen ayssi cum es mugit del moridos, e descubrigui la plagua e atrobegui le sanc le qual era yssit de la plagua petit.	And that which I have seen with my own eyes, is that a servant held a knife and cut through the throat of the patient and I was called for to heal him, and I heard the sound of his last breath, and I found the poultice and removed the cloth covering it, and I saw blood coming out.
Donc yeu fo confessat que aquela no havia inscidit vena ni guidegi, e le vent yssia de la plagua, e curegui aquela entro que foc sanada.	Then you confessed that she had not cut a vein or an artery, and the wind came out from the poultice, and I healed her until she was healed.
E no accidic a la sirventa si no rauquiera en la votz, e aprop alcus dias retornec ad miloracio de las suas dispozicios.	And did not happen to the servant except that he had pain in his throat, and after a few days he returned to his normal state of health.
E ara dic yeu que en la seccio del epilhot no ha temor.	And now let me tell you that there is no fear in cutting the epiglottis.
Capitol .xliv.	Chapter xliv.
De seccio sobre apostema le qual accideys en le golayro defora, e es apelat hernia del golayro.	Of the section on a knot that occurs in the throat before, and it is called a hernia of the throat.
Aquest apostema nompnat hernia del golayro es apostema gran segon la color del cors, e es mot en las femnas.	This knot named a hernia of the throat is a large knot according to the color of the body, and it occurs in women.
E es segon dos manieyras, quar o es natural o accidental.	It has two ways, either it is natural or it is accidental.
E en le natural no es engen de curar.	And in the natural one does not heal.
E l’accidental es segon dos manieyras del qual la un es semblant a nodes grasses, e l’autra manieyra es semblant apostema le qual es fayt per nodacio de arteria, e en aquel es temor.	And the accidental one has two ways: one looks like grass knots, and the other looks like a knot that is caused by an artery's constriction, and in that there is fear.
E no cove que·s fassa presumpcio a lu cum ferr sino en aquel que es petit.	And do not say that it is wrong to put metal on it unless it is small.
E tu proha aquel e investigua aquel am le dit, e si atrobas lu semblant a nodi gras, e no es suspendut am alcuna de las venas, lahoras tu inscideys aquel ayssi cum les nodes, e extratz aquel am aquo que conte lu de la pel e bursiclam; e sino, lahoras es perscrutat tot le sieu esser, e aprop cura le loc am aquo que cove de curacio entro que sia sanat.	And if you find it resembling a grass knot, and it is not suspended to any of the veins, then cut it with a pointed knife, and extract it with water that comes out of it; and if not, then examine all his body, and if you find anything suspicious, then heal the area with water that is used for healing, until it is healed.
Capitol .xlv.	Chapter xliv.
De seccio de las specias de nodes.	Of the section on knots of the throat.
Dels nodes so motas specias e yeu ja he dit totas las specias de lor en la divisio.	The knots have many kinds and I have already mentioned all their types in the division.
E cove que yeu recomte assi la diferencia entre node e exitura cum fassa dubitacio.	And do not hesitate to ask me about the difference between a knot and an inflammation with heat, when you are in doubt.
Donc yeu dic que am exitura es caliditat e febre e dolors vehementz entro que es sedada la ebullicio de la superfluitat; e es complida putrefaccio que lahora cessa la febre, la dolor e la calor.	Then you say that it is hot and feverish and has severe pain, and when the heat of the superfluity is eliminated; and it is completed by decay which ends the fever, the pain, and the heat.
Mays am node no es caliditat ni febre ni dolor, e conte aquel ciphac leon le qual es al u sac propri.	Maybe a knot is not hot or has fever or pain, but it contains something sharp that cuts the flesh, and it is attached to itself with a string.
E es segon la color del cors, e le comensament de lu es cum un ceze e es fayt ayssi cum vace, sia major o minor, e son segon dos specias, quar o so grassas e conteno humiditat, e las colors de la humiditat son motas, segon que yeu diyssi en la divisio.	And it has two colors according to the color of the body, and the beginning of it is with a swelling and it is made like this with water, and its kind is many, either grass-like or containing liquid, and the colors of the liquid are different, as I have said in the division.
Donc cove, quan pervenas a la curacio de node, que exprohes aquel e inquiras aquel al comensament am sturment le qual es apelat intromes, segon que vindra la sua forma en le capitol le qual es aprop aquest.	Then when you approach the healing of a knot, examine it with an instrument that is called an incision, according to its form in the next chapter which is coming.
E es manieyra de inquisicio de apostemas e de totz nodes, e es que tu prenguas aquest sturment e entromet aquel en le loc pus humit le qual atrobas en le apostema, e tu revolveras les tieus ditz am aquel petit a petit entro que sapias que·l sturment ja ha penetrat la codena.	And it is the way to investigate knots and all kinds of nodes, and it is that you take this instrument and insert it into the place that seems wet to you in the knot, and you turn the threads little by little until you know that the instrument has already entered the skin.
E aprop ultima la tua ma segon la mesura de la grandeza del apostema, e aprop extratz le entromes e considera aquo que es yssit en le vestigi de lu.	Then finish your incision according to the measure of the size of the knot, and remove the instrument from within it, and consider whether it is already healed in its trace.
E si es fora-getada la humiditat corrent, de qualque color sia, lahoras tu le inscideys am seccio superficial segon que he dit en les autres apostemas.	And if the liquid current has dried up, whatever its color is, then you cut it on a shallow section as I said in other knots.
E si del vestigi de l’intromes no hieys humiditat, lahoras sapias que es gras.	And if there is no moisture in the trace of the incision, then you will know that it is grass.
E secca sobre lu am seccio havent forma de crotz segon aquesta forma:	And dry on top with an irregular shape according to this form:
ayssi cum t’e ensenhat, e suspen aquel am oncis, e excorja la codena de tota part am facilitat, e guarda la pel o sac, si podes, sobre aquel e extraguas aquela sania am le node.	As I have taught you, then hang it upside down with nails, and cut the skin from all sides easily, and keep the hair or fur, if there is any, on top of the knot; and remove that skin from the knot.
Mays si es romput en la operacio, no es possible extrayre aquela sana, e motas veguadas endeve aquo, e lahoras tu la extratz a pessas entro que de lu no romangua denguna causa.	Maybe if it is ruptured during the operation, it is not possible to extract that skin, and many things can cause it to rupture; then you will extract it with scissors within it so that it does not rupture for any reason.
Quar si de lu roman denguna causa, pauc o trop, le node retorne segon le mays.	For if it is too much or too little, the knot returns according to the kind.
E si tu vezes que de lu roman alcuna part petita, lahoras comple la plagua de alcunas polveras corrosivas agudas e strenh la plagua, e pausa sobre aquela que sede apostema caut, e cura aquel del autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	And if you think that a small part of it has ruptured, then completely apply some sharp corrosive powder to the area, and place it over that which is causing the knot, and heal it with another type of healing until it is healed.
E si es node gran, lahoras tu cus las doas labias de lu e cura aquel am aquo que encarna.	And if it is a large knot, then you cut its two sides with a sharp knife and heal it with water that goes into it.
Mays si vena pulsatil es a lu contraria, o no-pulsatil, lahoras tu coyta e huemple le loc de zegi trissat que es vetriol e leyssa aquel streyt per dos dias o per tres entro que·s poyresca la plagua e que repause la ebullicio del sanc; e aprop retorna a inscindir aquo que es romas del node.	Maybe if the pulse is weak or not weak, then you cut and clean the area of the wound that was made by it, and leave it open to air for three days until it heals; and then return to cut what remains of the knot.
Capitol .xlvi.	Chapter xlvii.
De las formas del sturmentz necessaris en seccio e perforacio.	Of the shapes of the necessary instruments in section and piercing.
De aquels so las formas dels intromesas, e so de tres specias, que de aquels es alcu gran, e de lor es migier, e de lor es petit.	The shapes of the incisions are three kinds: some are large, others are medium, and the smallest are ones.
La forma de intromes gran es aquesta:	The large incision shape is like this:
La forma de intromes migier es aquesta:	The medium-sized incision shape is like this:
La forma de intromes petit es aquesta:	The small incision shape is like this:
Sian faytz de ferr, de alfulud, de extremitatz cayradas decentment, per so que festino le intrament en les apostemas.	If the instrument is made of iron, or it is sharp and smooth, and if the edges are properly curved, so that the instrument enters the knots easily.
E aquestas so las formas dels experientz, e son nompnatz albered, e un de aquels es apelat berid.	And these are called simple shapes, and one of them is called a bird.
E so de tres especias, quar de lor es gran, migier e pauc.	The three kinds are: some are large, others are medium, and the smallest.
La forma de experient gran, forma de lu:	The large shape of experience is like this:
La forma de experient migier, forma de lu:	The medium-sized shape of experience is like this:
La forma de experient pauc, forma de lu:	The small shape of experience is like this:
Conveneysso que sian per aquels apostemas e exituras e fistulas e bubos per so que entre aquelas so dels osses e de autras causas.	It is agreed that they are knots, and inflammations, and fistulas, and abscesses, so that some of them are on the bones, and others are causes.
E so faytz redontz, grosses, leons, ayssi cum grans agulhas am las quals son cosidas las selhas, e son faytas de eram citri, o de eram o de ferr, o de argent, E las milhors so quan so faytas de eram citri.	And they are round, large, and sharp needles that are sewn with threads of wool, and they are made of citrus, or iron, or silver, or gold; and the most common ones are made of iron.
E son faytz les experient de plum negre, les quals se acordan que per aquels sian ubertas las fistulas en la conquavitat de las quals so reflexios, que sian reflectidas am la sua levitat am aquelas refleccios.	And the black plums are shapes that are made by the opening of the fistula in the cavity in which they are reflected, and that are reflected above their level.
E so de tres specias, quar alcus de lor so loncs, e dels autres migiers, e dels autres breus, segon la quantitat del ample de la fistula e de la strictura de lu.	The three shapes are: some are long, and others are medium, and the smallest ones, according to the measure of the width of the fistula and the narrowness of it.
Forma del experient gran de plom:	Shape of the great experiment in lead
Forma del experient migier de plom:	Shape of the medium experiment in lead:
Forma del experient petit de plom:	Shape of the small experiment in lead:
Las formas dels oncis so de motas specias, quar de aquels so alcus simples, als quals es una curvitat solament, e so de tres specias: grans, paucs e migiers.	The shapes of the numbers are of a special kind, for those are called simples, to which there is only one curve, and they are of three kinds: great, few, and small.
E de lor so uncis orps, e so de tres specias.	And these have five sides and three points, and they are of three kinds: pointed, flat, and round.
E de aquels so uncis haventz doas curvaturas, e so de tres specias.	And those have two curves, and they are of three kinds: double-pointed, single-pointed, and rounded.
E de lor so haventz tres curvaturas, e so de tres specias.	And these have three curves, and they are of three kinds: triple-pointed, double-pointed, and single-pointed.
E totz aquetz so necessaris en lor loc.	And all of these are necessary in their place.
Forma de unci simple gran, forma de lu:	Shape of the simple great number, form of a triangle:
Forma de unci simple migier:	Shape of the simple small number:
Forma de unci simple pauc, forma de lu:	Shape of the simple few number, form of an oval:
Forma de unci orp gran:	Shape of the great pointed number:
Forma de unci orp migier, forma de lu:	Shape of the small pointed number, form of a triangle:
Forma de unci orp pauc, forma de lu:	Shape of the few pointed number, form of an oval:
Forma de unci gran havent dos curvaturas:	Shape of the great number with two curves:
Forma de unci migier havent dos curvatas:	Shape of the small number with two curves:
Forma de unci pauc havent dos curvaturas:	Shape of the few number with two curves:
Forma de unci gran havent tres curvaturas:	Shape of the great number with three curves:
Forma de unci migier havent tres curvaturas:	Shape of the small number with three curves:
Forma de unci pauc havent tres curvaturas:	Shape of the few number with three curves:
E aquestas so las formas dels scalpels am les quals son seccatz e scorjatz les nodes e le apostemas, e so de tres specias, quar de aquels es gran, migier, e pauc.	And these are the shapes of the scalpels, with which one cuts and scrapes the knots and pustules; and they are of three kinds: great, small, and few.
Forma de scapel gran:	Shape of the great scythe:
Forma del scapel migier:	Shape of the small scythe:
Forma de scapel pauc:	Shape of the few scythes:
Las extramitatz de aquels am les quals es fayta seccio so agudas e las autres extramitatz so no-agudas, e no so pausadas en tal manieyra, sino per que sia fayt juvament en la excorjacio dels nodes la temor de inscizio de vena o de nervi, e per aquels sia sanat le malaute e atrobe tranquilitat un petit per la adustio la qual atroba deves la excoriacio del apostema.	The extremities of those with which the section is sharp are acute, and the other extremities are not-acute, and they are not placed in such a manner, but rather that it be made in an instant in the Excoriation of the knots, the fear of incising a vein or nerve, and so that by this means the scythe is saned, and also tranquilized somewhat by the adustio - which thus obtains in the excorjication of the pustule.
E aquestas son las formas de almagidas, e so de tres specias: gran, migier e pauc, ayssi cum veyras.	And these are the shapes of the bullets, and they are of three kinds: great, small, and few; thus also with them.
La forma de magda gran:	Shape of the great bullet:
Forma de magda migier:	Shape of the small bullet:
Forma de magda pauc:	Shape of the few bullets:
Sian faytas de eram e so semblantz de ray am le qual e fayt alcofol.	When it is made from wax and seems like a ray, and when it is made with alcohol.
E es en la extramitat lada punctada am spatum occultada e en aquela corr a las partidas dedintz e defora, quan tu vols, ayssi cum veses.	And in the extreme right-angled point there are punctures and also in that part which is hidden within and without; when you wish, thus with them.
Las formas de spatimis, les quals so amaguatz entre los ditz deves la perforacio dels apostemas e no les percebo les malautes, e so de tres specias: gran, migier e pauc.	And the shapes of the spatulums, which are made between the teeth; thus also with them, that is, piercing the pustules and not perceiving the bad tastes, they are of three kinds: great, small, and few.
E aquestas so las formas de aquels:	And these are the shapes:
Las formas de ventozas am las quals es abscindit le flux del sanc, e so de tres specias; gran, migiera e pauca; las formas de lu:	The forms of windows, with which one cuts off the flow of blood; and they are of three kinds: great, small, and few. The shapes of triangles:
Sian faytas de eram citri, redondas am alcuna longitut , e sian subtils.	When it is made from wax-citrus, round in some length, and subtle.
E cove que sian aquestas specias de ventosas deves tu grans, migieras e paucas, per so que per aquelas abscindas flux de sanc am velocitat en necessitat, e lahoras quan a tu primieyrament no es medicina.	And these of the kinds of windows should be great, small, and few; so that, by these being cut off the flow of blood with speed in need, and when to you first, it is not medicine.
Enpero no uses de aquelas ad abscidir sanc en tot loc del cors, e non uses sino en locs carnoses, ayssi cum en les lacertis de las cambas e de las coyssas, e en les lacertz dels brasses, e de las mamillas e del ventre e dels engonars, e semblantz a lor dels lacertz carnoses humitz.	However, you do not use these to cut off blood in all parts of the body, but only in the flesh parts; indeed, in the folds of the legs and thighs, in the armpits, and in the navel, and also in the folds of breasts, belly, and underarms, resembling the flesh.
E alcunas veguadas son faytz de aquels strumentz autres petitz semblantz scorsas de fisacs segon aquesta forma; per les quals lo sanc es abscindit quan es fayt per fleubotomia, o deves inscizio de vena o de arceria.	And some vessels are made of these other instruments: small-looking scissors, according to this shape; and so the blood is cut off when it is made by a flood-cut or an incison of a vein or artery.
E alcunas veguadas son faytas redondas segon aquesta forma:	And some vessels are made round according to this shape:
Capitol .xlvii.	Chapter 47.
De la cura de las mamillas dels homes las quals so asembladas de femnas.	Of the care of men's breasts, which are assembled from women's breasts.
Alcunas veguadas so infladas las mamillas de alcus homes deves le compliment del dormir cum comensan esser pellutz, e aprop so infladas las mamillas, e so asembladas las mamillas de las femnas, e romano apostemosas, lejas.	Some vessels are inflated breasts of men that are made from the breasts of women by means of a cloth; and some vessels are inflated breasts, and also assembled breasts of women, and Roman breast-pumps, large.
E ad aquel que avoreys aquo, cove que inscidisca aquelas am seccio lunar segon aquesta forma, de la linha de .B. entro a la linha de .G., e aprop excorja la groceza tota, e aprop uempla la plagua de medicament encarnatiu, e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am cosidura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if you wish to cut off those with a lunar section according to this shape, from the line B within the line G, and so excoriate the whole filthiness; and so apply the plague of medicine that is incarnated, and so join together the two lips of the wound with sutures, and heal that which needs to be healed.
Mays si la mamilla declina a las partidas dejos e es mollificada per la sua magnitut ayssi cum endeve a las femnas, lahoras sia fendut en dos latz sieus pus sobiras, am dos seccios semblantz a figura lunar, de las quals quascuna sia contenguda en l’autra deves la fi de quascuna, entro que sia que la linha major contengua la menor segon aquesta forma de la linha de .B. e la linha de .G. E aprop excorja la codena la qual es entre dos labias de la plagua, e osta la pingueza, e aministra aquo que havem dit de la sutura e de las polveras aquo que es necessari en la curacio entro que sia sanat.	And if the breast declines to the left and is softened by its size, then cut it into two pieces above, and join them together below, resembling the lunar shape; so that each one is contained within the other, until such time as the major line contains the minor according to this form of the line from B and the line from G. And so excoriate the scald, which is between the two lips of the wound, and so prevent the pus; and give him medicine that has been made from the suture, and also from the powder that is necessary for the treatment within that it be healed.
E si tu non conpleysses la inscizio de aquo que cove inscidir per la inquietut del malaute, e per flux de sanc, lahoras cove que huemplas la plagua de coto submergit en enguent corrosiu e layssa aquel entro que aquo corroda que es romas de la grayssa, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if you do not like the cutting of that which covers the wound with the fear of the bad condition, and for the flow of blood; then cut off what it is that covers it with a corrosive bath, and so heal that which it is that is corroded, which is Roman in the greasiness, and so heal that which needs to be healed.
Capitol .xlviii.	Chapter 48.
De perforacio de apostemas que veno dejos le titillic.	Of the piercing of pustules that come from the left side of the line.
Aquetz apostemas que veno dejos le titillic so de las specias de scrophulas, durs, las quals conte una pel que es sac.	These pustules that come from the left side of the line are of the kinds of scrofulas and pains, which contain a pus.
E de aquelas so alcunas que conteno humiditatz; e aquelas que conteno humiditatz cove que sian inscididas am seccio lunar segon aquesta figura: de la linha de .G. a la linha de .B. E cum es tot evacuat aquo que es en le apostema de la sania, lahoras tu le comple de coto viel e leysa le entro al autra dia.	And some of those that contain moisture; and those that contain moisture are cut off according to this figure: from the line G to the line B. And when all is drained, what it is covered with water in the pustule of the sick person, then cut off the coto completely, and so heal that which needs to be healed on another day.
E aprop le coto sia ostat e sia curat am enguent convenient ad aquo, entro que sia sanat.	And so the coto is left and is healed with a convenient bath in water; until such time as it be healed.
E si le apostema de las specias dels nodes es, e de las scrophulas, lahoras tu scindeys sobre aquel ayssi cum havem dit en la seccio sobre las scrophulas engualment.	And if the pustule of the knots is, and of the scrofulas; then cut them off above that which is covered with a cloth in the section about the scrofulas separately.
May si la plagua es extenduda en aysso que yesca poyredura, lahoras administra en lu cauteri segon que en aquo havem denant dit.	And if the plague is spread out in a way that it causes pox, then administer to it according to what has been said before.
Capitol .xlix.	Chapter 49.
De seccio de apostemas que accideysso per arceria o per vena.	Of the piercing of pustules that happen through an artery or a vein.
Quan arceria es rompuda, e la codena es consolidada la qual es sobre aquela, lahoras motas veguadas accideys apostema E les senhals per les quals es conoguda que imflamacio e apostema sian per la arteria o per vena: quar quan apostema es per arceria es lonc agreguat en le preon del cors; e que quan inpelleysses le apostema am les tieus ditz, sentes en lu quays sia stridor.	When an artery is broken, and the codena is consolidated that is over it, then cut off those pustules with a sharp tool according to this figure: from the line B to the line G. And so the veins are cut off, and the blood is heated; for when a pustule happens through an artery, it is a long-aggregated pulse in the preon of the body; and when it is made by an incison of a vein, you feel a stridor.
E aquel que es per vena es redon al manifest del cors.	And that which happens through a vein is round in its course.
E seccio sobre aquest apostema es error, e majorment en aquel que es dejos las aysselhas, e en les angonars, e en le col, e en motz locs del cors; e es mot gran, donc cove que la sua curacio am ferr sia esquivada, e aquel que es en las extramitatz, o al cap, cove que sia evitat.	And the section over this pustule is an error, and most of all in that which are on the sides, and in the armpits, and in the neck, and also in the folds of the body; and it is very large, so that its cure with fire be avoided, and that which is in the extremities, or at the top, be avoided.
Mays sobre aquel que es de lor per imflacio de l’orrifici de la arceria, scindeys en la codena seccio en le lonc; e aprop huebre la seccio am uncis e aprop la arceria, e deliura de las tunicas entro que sia descuberta.	May so as those who are of them by the swelling of the orifice of the artery, cut in the cord in the long; and approach the section with nails and approach the artery, and free of tunics until it is uncovered.
E aprop met sobre aquel agulha e fay aquela penetrar entro al autre latz, e estrenh la arceria am fiel doble en dos locs, — la qual causa yeu a tu eyssenhegui en extraccio de doas arcerias les quals so en les templars.	Then place a needle on it and let it penetrate the other one, and string the artery with two knots,-- which causes you to feel an attack of pain in the extraction of two arteries that are in the temples.
E aprop punh le loc le qual es entre dos liamentz am spatum entro que yesca le sanc tot que es en lu, e sia dissolvut le apostema.	Then put the spot where it is between two ligaments with a needle so that it burns all of it while it is in there, and let the abscess be dissolved.
E aprop administra curacio en la qual es engendrat poyre entro que caian les liamentz; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz convenientz ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	Then administer a cure that is generated with dung within so that the ligaments fall; and heal it with hot water within so that it heals.
E si es apostema per seccio de vena, lahoras cove que tu tenguas am la tua ma aquo que es a tu possible del apostema am la codena, e aprop intromet la agulha dejos le loc le qual tu has tengut dejos la tua ma, e fay aquela penetrar; e sia en aquela fil doble entro que tu extraguas aquel del autre latz, e aprop ligua le apostema am bo liament segon que yeu he dit a tu en le liament de uva4 de doas partz am doas extremitatz del fil.	And if it is an abscess through the section of a vein, then cover what you have with your hand so that it is in your possible reach of the abscess with the cord, and insert the needle from the spot where you have held it with your hand, and let it penetrate; and be a double thread within so that you extract one from the other side, and ligate the abscess with one ligament according to what I said to you in the ligament of the grape of two parts with two extremities of the thread.
Mays si temes que extraguam le fil, lahoras entromet le fiel am aquela agula dejos tot le apostema deves la inscizio de la agulha primieyra, e strenh les tieus fiels en quatre locs.	May so as you fear to extract the thread, then insert the double thread from all the abscess according to the first incision of the needle, and tighten the threads in four places.
Aprop secca le apostema en le mieg loc de lu entro que quan es yssit aquo que es en lu, lahoras tu inscideys la superfluitat de la codena, e layssa aquo que de lu es liat.	Then dry the abscess in its place within so that when it is wet with water that is in it, then cut off the surplus of the cord, and let it be wet where it lies.
E aprop pausa sobre lu pulvil le qual has submergit en vi e oli, e aprop administra la curacio la qual es fayta am calguas e enguentz entro que sia sanat.	Then place over it the pillow that you have submerged in water and oil, and administer the cure that is done with hot water within so that it heals.
Capitol l del apostema le qual accideys per torcio de nervis.	Capitol for the abscess that occurs through turning of nerves.
Ayssi cum accideys apostema en arceria e en vena, e semblantment accideys apostema en les nervis quan accideys en lor percussio o accideys per trebal superfluable, e per semblantz.	Thus happen abscess in the artery and vein, and somewhat like them when they happen in their percussion or from superfluous work, and by analogy.
E es fayt le mays de lu en les locs dels adjutoris o del talo, o en tot loc en le qual so maugudas las juncturas.	And it is done in the places of the assistants or of the head, or in any place where joints are moved.
E es apostema greu, e es asemblat a la color del autre cors, e es en las majors de lu disposicios ses de lor e quan es streyt am vehementia, sent en lu le malaute semblant stupor.	And it is a difficult abscess, and somewhat like the color of the other body, and in the larger ones are disposed to their sides, and when it is hot with violence, you feel in the patient's legs a sort of stupor.
E no es apostema agreguat en le preon del cors, e per so es dejos la codena, e el es maugut a tota partida e no va a las partidas denant ni detras.	And it is not an abscess in the front of the body, and for this reason the cord is left, and it is moved all over, neither in front nor behind.
Donc aquo de aquels que es en las juncturas no cove que sia envasit am ferr, quar fort leu endevenguera contracio.	So then those that are at the joints do not cover what is in them with iron, for it would be difficult because it will resist.
Mays aquel que es en le cap o en le front fen la codena am spatum.	May so as that is on the head or in the forehead with a needle.
Mays si es apostema pauc, lahoras te aquel am les forfecs e abscindeys aquel de razitz.	May so as it is an abscess of little size, then cut off what is in its root.
E si es gran, lahoras tu le suspen am unci, e excorja aquel, e aprop osta aquel; e ajusta la plagua am sutura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if it is great, then cut off the excess with an inch, and remove what is in it, and stop up that; and patch the wound with suture, and heal it within so that it heals.
Capitol .li.	Capitol.
De seccio de apostema le qual accideys de cheil que accideys al ventre.	Of an abscess cut through the mouth, and somewhat towards the belly.
Endeveno ad alcus homes motas veguadas en les ventres de aquels e en las autras partidas del cors de aquels theils les quals son apelatz funguals per similitut de aquels am funges, dels quals la razitz es subtil e·l cap de aquel es gros; e ja las labias de aquels so conversas, e es de aquels que es petit, e es de aquels que es mot magnificat.	And it is a good thing to avoid for those who have blisters on their bellies and on the other parts of their bodies, as they are similar to mushrooms from which the root is thin and the head of them is thick; and the lips of these are not closed, and these are small.
E yeu ja e vist un, e en le ventre de lu eran dos theils les quals eran mays a funges semblantz, e no era diferencia entre aquels blancs, de menuda razitz.	And I have seen one, and in its belly there were two pieces that seemed like mushrooms, and there was no difference between those white ones, with small roots.
E ja las labias de aquels eran enversadas e se fendian, e humiditat corria de aquel tot temps.	And the lips of these were turned backwards, and moisture ran from them all the time.
Donc yeu inscidegui aquels e atrobegui en la un en pes quays xviii unc. e l’autre quays vi unc.	So you cut off those and split them in half in the center, cutting eighteen teeth. and the other one as six teeth.
E la operacio en la inscizio de lor es que consideres lahoras si·l malaute es humit, e la color de atheil es blanca, humit, de subtil razitz; lahoras tu le inscideys am spatum lat, e sian en la presencia tua cauteris en le foc, quar motas veguadas deves la seccio de lu es expellit mot sanc; e si te ventz le sanc, cauteriza aquel.	And the operation of their incision is that you consider if the patient' body is humid, and the color of the skin is white, humid, with thin roots; then cut off the latter at half-width, and are in your presence cauterize with fire, for what is seen from the cut should be expelled with a bit of blood; and if you blow on it, cauterize it.
E si vezes le malaute pauruc e temeros, guarda te de inscizio am ferr; mays lahoras pren fiel de plom recent fayt, e strenh am aquel atheil, la manieyra del qual es aquela que havem dita; e leyssa aquel per dos dias.	And if the patient is a little bit nervous and afraid, be careful of incision with iron; but then take an iron from fresh lead, and tighten it on that part of the skin, in the way that has been said before; and let that remain for two days.
E aprop ajusta en la strictura del fil de plom; donc, no cesses strenher le plom granre devetz en theil, entro que sia abscindit e cayha per se ses trebalh.	And then tighten it on the string of lead; so, do not tighten too much that it is torn from its side, and let it be cut and broken by itself with work.
Mays si theil es de grossa razitz, lahoras en la inscizio de lu es alcuna causa de temor e de paor, e majorment en aquel que es en le ventre.	May so as that is of thick roots, then in its incision there is no cause for fear and worry, and more so in that which is in the belly.
Mays possibla es que tu inscindas la maytat de lu , e aprop cauteriza aquel per que no retorne.	May so as that you could cut off what is most of it, and then cauterize it so that it does not return.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanada la plagua.	And then heal that within so that the wound heals.
E guarda te que tu no presumas inscidir theil le qual es de fusca color, de pauc sentiment, de leg reguardament, quar aquel es absi cancros.	And be careful not to cut off what is of a dark-colored skin, of little feeling, with a slight gaze, because that is cancerous.
E yeu vindre am rememoracio de cranc aprop aysso.	And I came to the remembrance of something like old age.
Capitol .lii.	Capitol.
De curacio de eminencia del umbilic.	Of cure for the eminence of the navel.
Eminencia del umbilic es fayta per motas causas; o per fissuras del ciphac le qual es sobre le ventre, e yeys de lu la tela o budel segon que endeve en las autras rupturas; o per sanc le qual flueys de vena o de arceria segon que es denant dit, o per ventositat coarctada en lu.	The eminence of the navel is caused by various things; or by fissures of the navel that is over the belly, and gives way to it with its thread or buddle according to what it has in other ruptures; or by blood flowing from a vein or artery according to what is before it, or by constriction of wind in it.
Mays si es per fissura del ciphac e per yssiment de la tela, lahoras la color del apostema es semblant a la color del cors; e es leon ses dolor, e aprop appar de divers situament.	May so as it is by a fissure of the navel and by tearing of the thread, then the color of the abscess is like the color of the body; and it is sharp pain, and there are various positions of it.
E si es per egressio del budel, lahoras le situament de aquel am lu de aquo que havem recontat, de mays vehement diversitat, e cum tu premes aquel am les tieus ditz es occultat, e aprop retorna; e fort leu es am lu so, e es magnificat mot deves le introt de banh e vehement trebalh.	May so as it is by the loss of the buddle, then the position of that with water that we have mentioned, and of various violence, and when you press it with your fingers, it returns; and there is a great movement towards it, and it is magnified by several deves of the inner part, and violent work.
Mays si per humiditat, lahoras es leon e no es occultat quan premes am la tua ma, ni es constrengut, ni es cregut.	May so as it is by humidity, then it is sharp and does not hide when you press with your hand, and is neither constricted nor broken.
E si es per sanc, lahoras am aquestz senhals apareys le apostema a negror declinant.	May so as it is by blood, then those signs indicate that the abscess is turning black.
Mays si es per carn nada, lahoras es apostema greu, gros e dur, e es ficat segon una quantitat.	May so as it is by meat, then it is a hard, thick, and durable abscess, and it remains in a certain quantity.
Mays si es per ventositat, lahoras le tocament de lu es leon.	May so as it is by constriction of wind, then the touch of that is sharp.
E la operacio en lu es que consideras lahoras si la eminencia de l’umbilic es per sanc de arceria, o de vena, o per ventositat; lahoras cove que sias prohibit de la curacio de lu, quar en aquela es temor e paor ayssi cum t’e ensenhat en le capitol en le qual he dit les apostemas per arceria e per vena.	And the operation of that is that you consider if the eminence of the navel is by blood flowing from an artery or vein, or by constriction of wind; then cover what you have with your hand, because in it there is fear and worry as I taught you in the chapter in which I said about abscesses caused by arteries and veins.
E si la eminencia del umbilic es per le budel o per la tela, lahoras cove que comandes al malaute que tengua le ale sieu, e sia stant extendut; e aprop senha am tenta en le circuit de tot le umbilic, e aprop comanda a lu que stia envers entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos, e aprop circunda am spatum lat en le circuit del umbilic sobre le loc le qual has senhat am la tenta; e aprop exten la maytat del apostema a las partidas desus am unci gran; e aprop lia en le circuit am fiel fort o am ceda e la manieyra del liar decent.	And if the eminence of the navel is by the buddle or thread, then order the servant to hold the ale with his right hand, and be standing; and put a needle from all the navel in the circuit, and order him to move it slowly around the navel on the right side of the ale, and move it around to the left with slow motion; and extend the double thread of the abscess to the sides in the circuit of the navel over the place where you have put it in front of the attempt; then cut off a bit from all the navel at half-width, and order him to hold the fire or the iron strongly in the way that is pleasant.
E aprop huebre le mieg del apostema extendut sobre le liament e intromet le dit tieu en aquel indic e quereys le budel; e si tu l’as atrobat ni guardat per le liament, lahoras tu extratz alxorati e impelleys le budel a las partidas dedintz del ventre.	And so tear the middle of the apostema, spread it over the ligament and insert this small stick in that direction and try to bring out the intestine; and if you can't reach it because of the ligament, then remove it with great effort and push the intestine into the innermost part of the abdomen.
E si has atrobada la tela, lahoras pren aquel am unci; e inscideys las superfluitatz de lu.	And if you have torn the membrane, then grab a sharp tool; and cut away its excess.
Mays si es contraria a tu arceria o vena, lahoras circunda aquel mot, e aprop retorna a la tua operacio; e pren dos agulhas e met en aquelas dos fiels fortz e entromet dos agulhas en le circuit le qual has feyt entorn le apostema en manieyra de crotz, las quals fassas penetrar; e aprop strenh le apostema en quatre partidas sobre las agulhas.	Or if it is against your arceria or vein, then turn around that point, and return to your operation; and take two needles and insert them firmly into those two threads and force the two needles through; and then tighten the apostema over the needles in four places.
E si tu vols, osta las agulhas e leyssa le loc entro que poyresca la carn extenduda e caia per si; o inscideys aquel quan es subtiliat e se poyreys, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And if you want, remove the needles and let the place heal on its own until it is healed; or cut it when it is thin and then clean it out, and then take care of that wound that covers the intestine inside so that it heals.
E si la eminencia del ombilic es de carn nada en lu o per humiditat, lahoras cove que tu conquaves le apostema ayssi cum havem dit e estraguas le sanc o la humiditat, la qual atrobas en lu, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove e que consolide le loc.	And if the eminence of the navel is not meat or because of humidity, then cover what you have opened up so that it heals as well as possible and removes the humidity or meat, which you have cut off, and then take care of that wound that covers the intestine and consolidates that place.
Capitol .liii.	Chapter 32.
De curacio de cranc.	On the Treatment of Bone Fractures.
Ja havem dit, en la divisio, de specia de cranc e en qual manieyra es via a la curacio de lu am medicinas, e que es squivador en lu la curacio am ferr per so que no sia ulcerat; e havem dit cranc engendrat en la mayra e cautela de la curacio de lu.	We have said, in the division, of the types of fractures and how they are treated with medicine, and that it is dangerous in their treatment not to ulcerate them; and we have said that these fractures are generated in the greatest and most careful way of treating them.
E diyssero les antics que alcunas veguadas cranc es en loc on es possibla la eradicacio de lu, ayssi cum de cran le qual es en las mamillas o en la coyssa e a lor semblantz dels membres allocat a estrayre tot aquel, e majorment quan es comensant petit.	And they said that some small fractures are in places where it is possible to remove them all, such as those in the nipples or thighs, and especially when they are starting out small.
Mays quan es antiquat e es gra, no cove que te propries a lu, quar yeu non pogui sanar de aquel alcu ni no he vist autre, ni que sia pervengut ad aquo.	But when it is old and big, don't cover it because the eye cannot heal such a wound nor has I ever seen anything come out of it, or that it has come into water.
E la operacio en lu es quan es allocat ayssi cum havem dit, es que tu precedescas e laysses le malaute e purgues de colera negra alcunas veguadas, e aprop sagna aquel, si es atrobada replecio manifesta.	And the operation in it is that you go ahead and let the patient rest and take some black cholera remedies from time to time, and then heal it if there is a clear regurgitation.
E aprop prepara le malaute am preparacio en le qual sia locat am operacio, e aprop prohiceys en le trauc uncis les quals cove ad aquel; e aprop concava de tota part am la codena sego bona perexcrutacio entro que no romangua alcuna causa de las razitz de lu.	And then prepare the patient for the operation in which that place is located, and then cut off their nails with a sharp tool and then clean them thoroughly from all sides to ensure that there is no cause of their nails to cause any problem.
E layssa correr le sanc, e no abscidas aquel leugierament, e exprem les locs, e abstergeys le sanc gros tot am la tua ma o am instrument am le qual es a tu possible dels instruments.	And let the blood flow, and don't stop that bleeding, and squeeze the places, and wash the blood thoroughly with your hand or with the instrument you have at hand.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat de sanc gros inscizio de vena o de arceria, lahoras cauterisa aquela entro que·l flux del sanc sia cessat, e aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	But if you feel a contradiction in the flow of thick blood when cutting a vein or an artery, then cauterize it so that the blood flow stops, and then take care of that other treatment until it is healed.
Capitol .liv.	Chapter 33.
De curacio de ydropici.	On the Treatment of Dropery.
Nos ja havem recomtat, en la divisio, de las specias de ydropici de l’aygua, e les senhals de quascuna especia, de la curacio de lu am medicinas.	We have already mentioned, in the division, of the types of dropery with water, and the signs of each type, on how to treat them with medicine.
E aquela la qual es curada am ferr no es sino la specia de althitas sola, e no es aproximat am ferr a la specia de timpanistres ni a la especia de yposarcha, quar aquo es mortal.	And that which is cured by iron is only the species of Althias alone, and it does not approach the species of Timpani or the species of Hyparch, because water is fatal.
E quan tu ja has medicat aquesta especia de ydropici timpanistre am medicinas e no comfereys la tua medicacio, lahoras considera, quar si al malaute ja es conseguida debelitat, o es am aquel autra malautia otra ydropici, ayssi cum si es en lu tos o cos de ventre e semblant ad aquels, lahoras guarda te que no le mediques am ferr, quar temor es sobre aquo.	And when you have already treated this species of dropery with medicine and do not understand your own treatment, then consider that if the patient has already been cured or if it is a different kind of disease from what we are treating here, namely, if it is a cough or a stomach ailment similar to this, then remember not to treat it with iron, because there is a fear about it.
Mays si tu vezes le malaute de vertut exuberant, e am lu no es autra malautia sino ydropici tant solament, e no enfant ni vielh, lahoras la manieyra de la operacio de lu es que tu eleves le malaute entre las tuas mas, e le ministre aprop lu exprema le ventre de lu am la sua ma, enpellen la aygua a la partida dejos del pentenilh, e aprop pren spatum spinos segon aquesta forma:	But if you find the patient to be very helpful, and there is no other disease in him but only dropery, and not old or young, then the way of operating on him is that you raise him between your hands, and the assistant presses his belly from below with his hand, and then you make a cut in this way:
sia de dos partz agudas lonc, de aguda extremitat ayssi cum spatum; mays empero sia en lu alcuna brevitat petit a petit, per so que en la operacio am aquel no passes entro al budel, e que ledas aquel.	be of two sharp edges long, with one sharp edge at the end, and then cut little by little so that during the operation you do not go into the intestine, and let it hang.
E aprop considera si la generacio de ydropici es de part dels budels, quar lahoras cove que tu am la seccio te alonhes del ombelic per la quantitat de tres ditz a las partidas dejos, en le dreyt de lu sobre le pentenilh.	And then consider that if the generation of dropery is from part of the intestine, because it is said that you have cut three fingers away from the navel on the right side over the penis.
Mays si la generacio de hydropici es per malautia del fietge, lahoras la tua seccio sia sinistra del ombilic per tres ditz.	But if the generation of dropery is from disease in the mother's womb, then your section should be to the left of the navel for three fingers.
E si la generacio de lu es per la melsa, lahoras la tua seccio sia en le las dreyt.	And if the generation is by self-abuse, then your section should be on the right side.
E no cove que la tua seccio sia sobre le costat sobre le qual vol jaser le malaute per que no corron las superfluitatz ad aquel loc freul.	And don''t cover that your section is on the rib from which you want to operate on the patient so that the excess fluid does not flow into that place.
E aprop perfora am le instrument tota la codena, e aprop entromet en aquela seccio, e eleva la tua ma am le spatum entre la codena e·l siphac, e tu excorja aquel; e si’ la quantitat de una ungla o enviro.	And then pierce the instrument thoroughly, and then insert it into that section, and raise your hand with the spadge between the blade and the syringe, and then pour out that amount; and if it is a little more or less than an ounce.
E aprop perforo le ciphac entro que pervengua le spatum al loc vuoyt, e es loc de l’aygua.	And then pierce the syringe so that the spadge reaches the desired place, and this is a place of water.
E aprop extratz aquel e entromet un instrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	And then remove it and insert an instrument which has such a shape:
e es semblant a canula de argent subtil; es fayt de argent o de eram o de lato leon, al qual en la partida pus bassa de lu es un petit trauc, e en les costatz de lu so tres traucs: dos de una partida e un del autra partida; e fayta es la extremitat de lu insciza segon la manieyra de pluma, ayssi cum vezes:	It is similar to a thin silver tube; it is made of silver or brass or ivory, and in its base there is a small hole, and in its sides three holes: two from one side and one from the other; and its end should be sharp according to the feather shape, as if:
E en la extramitat de lu pus sobirana es armilla, quar quan le instrument perve al aygua, lahoras aquela tantost deysen sobre le instrument, donc evacua de l’aygua en la ora miega quantitat, quar si tu evacuas de aquela mes que no cove en la hora, fort leu mor le malaute per resolucio del sieu spirit animal, o accideys a lu cincopi que es appropinquada la mort.	And at the end of it, there is an armilla, because when the instrument goes into the water, then it returns to the instrument immediately, and evacuates half the amount of water in one minute, for if you evacuate that quantity from it except for what is necessary so that your own spirit or soul leaves its body by resolving itself, or death comes upon it.
Mays evacua de aquela segon la quantitat de la vertut de lu e segon que significan a tu las disposicios del malaute de la vertut del pols de lu e de la bontat de lu.	But evacuate that second amount of the virtue of his breath and of the goodness of it, and let this mean to you the dispositions of the patient regarding the virtue of his pulse and its goodness.
E aprop extrats le instrument, e rete l’aygua la qual causa es quar tantost es retenguda per la codena la qual rete le trauc que es sobre le ciphac del qual e recomtat a tu que perfores aquel segon aquela manieyra.	And then remove the instrument, and hold back that water which causes the amount to be retained by the rib from which you want to operate on the patient so that it is held back by the blade that is above the syringe, and let this mean to you how much time the patient should spend in bed.
E aprop itera le instrument al autra dia si vezes le malaute tollerant aquo, e extratz de la aygua petita quantitat, e fay aquo per alcus jorns sobre temor, e guarda te de error entro que no romangua de l’aygua sino pauc.	And then repeat the instrument another day if the patient has endured water, and evacuate a small amount of water, and let it flow for several days out of fear that it might come from the water, and remember to make an error not to draw water but only a little bit.
Mays si tu temes sobre le malaute, e leyssas de l’aygua gran quantitat, lahoras cura aquel am sepultura en arena cauda, e mota suzor en banh, e al solelh espere per lonc temps; e cura aquel am medicinas dessicativas entro que sia sanat.	But if you are afraid of the patient, then let a large quantity of water flow, and bury it in sand, and make a soothing bath, and wait for a long time; and take care of that with drying medicines so that it heals.
E cauteriza sobre le stomac, e la melsa e·l fitge aprop la extraccio de l’aygua, segon que yeu he recontat en aquo que es precedit.	And then cauterize above the stomach, and the mother is the cause of the generation of water, as we have said before in this treatise.
Capitol .lv.	Chapter 5.
De la curacio dels enfants les quals so natz les locs de la urina no-perforatz.	On the Treatment of Children Who Have Blisters on the Urinary Passages.
Alcunas veguadas alcun dels enfantz es eyssi del ventre de la sua mayre e·l cap de la sua mixtio no es perforat (o es trauc streyt o no es en son loc).	Some children are born with blisters on the bladder's passage in their mother's womb, and the head of their mixture is not pierced (or it is straight or not in its place).
Donc cove coytar am perforacio de lu tantost que es nascut am spatum mot subtil segon aquesta forma:	Then place him on his back so that his legs hang down, while keeping his hands above his head.
E aprop pausa en le trauc un clavil subtil de plom e ligua aquel, e te per tres jorns o per .iiii.tre.	Then place a small plumb-colored nail on the joint, and tie it there; and for three days or for 30.000.000.000.
E quant vol urinar sia remaugut e hurine; e aprop retorne aquel.	And when he wants to urinate, let him stand up and urinate; and then bring him back again.
E si tu no pauses le plom, ja es possible que la urina la qual va sobre le loc, no leysa aquest claure.	And if you do not place the nail, it is possible that the urine which goes over the area does not allow this closure.
Mays aquel del qual le trauc es streyt sia medicat am clavil de Plom, ayssi cum havem dit, per trops dias entro que sia amplificat.	This nail from which the joint has been cut is made of lead; thus, as I have said, for three days or more it must be increased.
Mays aquels en les quals es le trauc no en son loc, so leditz, la qual causa es quar de aquels, aquel que es nat e·l trau es deves la fi del cap de la vergua per que no pot urinar a las partidas dedintz, entro que eleva la vergua am la sua ma a las partidas desus; e no es a lu generacio, per so quar le sperma no pot pervenir a la mayre segon rectitut, e es malautia mot laga.	These nails where the joint has been cut are not placed in their place, and this causes it because from these, the one who is born and cuts it is the end of the cap of the foot; so that he can not urinate on the inside, until he raises the foot to his head; and it is not a generation, for this reason the seed cannot reach the mother according to rectitude, and it is a bad disease.
E la manieyra de la operacio en lu es que·l malaute sia envessat sobre le sieu dos, e aprop exten le cap de la vergua de lu am la tua ma sinistra am vehement extraccio, e inscideys le cap del cap de la vergua del loc del perpucii am spatum agut, ayssi cum es inscizio de pluma, o que tu ne razas alcuna partida, per so que·l mieg de lu vengua semblant al cap de la vergua e que le trauc caia en le mieg loc segon que cove.	And the way of performing it on him is that the patient is placed on his back, and his head is extended over your left hand with great force; and cut off the top of the foot from the place of the penis with a sharp knife, or so that you do not scratch any part, in order that the blood of him may run down to the top of the foot and that the joint falls into its place according to what has been cut.
E guarda te que en la tua operacio de flux de sanc, quar motas vetz accideys aquo; e pausa te a lu am aquo que abscindeys le sanc, e cura la plagua entro que si’ sanada.	And you must be careful in your operation of the blood, since it may happen that this causes it to run; and wait until the blood has stopped flowing, and heal the wound while it is still open.
Capitol .lvi.	Chapter LVI.
De albater le qual accideys en le prepucii en le cap de la vergua e de corropcio e negror e adherencia del prepucii del cap de la vergua.	About the inflammation that occurs in the penis and the scrotum, and about corruption, blackness, and the adhesion of the foreskin to the head of the penis.
Motas veguadas accideys aquest albater en la vergua e es eminencia de carn laga.	These things that are seen in the penis and the scrotum are called gangrenes and they cause blackness; and there is an indurated swelling of the flesh.
E de aquela una es maligna e autra es no-maligna.	And of these there is one which is malignant and another which is not malignant.
No-maligna, cove que suspendas am unci subtil e abscindas aquela entro que aquela mondes tota; e aprop pausa sobre aquela coto submirgit en enguent egipciac; e aprop aquel, cura le am enguent diafinicon entro que sia sanat.	Not-malignant, if you suspend it with a small medicine and cut it off completely; then dip it in Egyptian ointment, and then treat it with the ointment every day until it is healed.
E si albater es maligna, de lega color, lahoras cove que tu aministres cauteri aprop la inscizio de lu e la razio de lu.	And if inflammation is malignant, of a pale color; then, if you want to treat it with cauterization and cutting, follow these instructions:
Mays si albater es en le prepuci del cap de la vergua no-circumcis, e la una partida de albater es dedintz le prepucii e l’autra partida es defora, lahoras cove que tu ostes albater le qual es dedintz al comensament entro que es consolidat; e lahora tu cura aquel deforo, quar quan tu curas aquel ensemps le prepuci, no es asegurat que no sia trinquat.	If the inflammation is in the foreskin of the head of the penis, and one part of the inflammation is inside the foreskin and another part is outside, then you should hold that which is inside until it is solid; and then treat that which is outside, since when you treat that which is all together, you cannot be sure that it will not become torn.
E ja eysamen accideys en les genetius e en le prepuci negror e corruccio, adonc cove que tu conquavas tot aquo que ja es denigrat e que ja se vol corrompre o que ja es corrumput; e aprop lineys sobre aquel aprop aquo am mel, le qual es contusit am farina de scorsa de milgrana e de errs trissatz e crivellatz.	And if corruption and blackness occur in the genitals and foreskin, then you should cut off completely that which has already become corrupted and is beginning to rot or has already rotted; and then dip it in flour made from milking the cow's teats, and mixed with three times as much salt and crushed herbs.
E aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sana.	And then treat that other one with another treatment until it is healed.
Mays si endeve flux de sanc, lahoras aministra cauteri lunar segon aquesta forma:	If there is blood flowing from the penis, then administer lunar cauterization according to this method:
quar cauteri juvatiu es a dos disposicios ensemps, so es a flux de sanc e a la plagua quan es corrumpuda.	Since cauterization is beneficial for both the flow of blood and the corruption that has occurred.
E si le cap de la vergua es corrodut e es destruit tot en la hora, lahoras cove que tu intrometas en lo meat del prepucii una canula de plom per so que le malaute urina per aquela.	And if the head of the penis is completely destroyed in an instant, then place a plumb pipe into the foreskin through which the patient can urinate.
En la adherencia del prepucii am le cap de la vergua (et aquesta adherencia no accideys sino en aquel del qual le prepucii es sa, e sobre lu no es exhigida circumcizio; e quan accideys adherencia per plagua o per apostema) cove que excorjas am spatum obtus entro que sia dissolvut le liament e sia deliurat le cap de la vergua de tota partida.	In the adhesion of the foreskin to the head of the penis (and this adhesion does not occur except in that which has the foreskin, and it is not required to cut off all the foreskin; and when adhesion occurs by corruption or swelling) then scrape with a blunt knife until it dissolves the ligament and frees the head of the penis completely.
E si es dificil desirnir aquelas exquisidament, lahoras cove que tu excorjes am spatum alcuna causa del cap de la vergua e del prepucii, e aysso es quar le prepucii, quan es subtil, fort leu es perforat per la sua subtilitat leugierament.	And if it is difficult to distinguish them carefully, then cut off the top of the head of the penis and the foreskin with a sharp knife; and then, because the foreskin, when it is thin, pierces it slightly by its thinness.
E aprop separa entre·l prepucii e·l cap de la vergua am dra7 de li subtil, le qual ja es mulhat en l’aygua frega per que no adherescan autra veguada.	And then separate between the foreskin and the head of the penis with a sharp knife; that which is very thin will be easily separated, since it will slip into the water; but take care not to cut yourself.
E aprop sia curat am vi stiptic entro que sia consolidat.	And then treat it with a violet poultice until it has hardened.
Capitol .lvii.	Chapter LVII.
De mundificacio dels enfants e de la curacio de aquo que accideys ad aquels de circumcisio.	About the cleaning of children and the treatment of water that occurs in those who are circumcised.
Circumcisio no es solucio de continuitat ayssi cum las autras plaguas: mays empero cum sia de la nostra operacio e de nostra voluntat, e lus de aquela sia propriament en les enfants, es necessari que asignem en aquela milhor operacio e via pus leugiera perdusent a salut.	Circumcision is not a solution for continence; on the other hand, it is useful in some cases, and it must be done with great care, especially because it concerns children; and if it is possible to do without this operation and to avoid such loss by means of another easier way, then that is better for salvation.
Donc dic que les antics no diyssero circumcisio en alcu dels lors libres, quar no n’usan en las suas leys, e no es sino quar havem aquisit per speriment, la qual causa es que yeu he atrobat la major partida dels artifexs e dels barbies usar circumcisir e mundificacio am novacula e am torores; e usan de liament am fiel e de inscizio am la ungla.	I say that the children of free people should not be circumcised, since they do not have it in their laws, and it is only because we have acquired it by trial, which has caused many crafters and barbers to use circumcision and purification with a needle and a scalpel; and they use a ligament made of sheepskin and cut with a scissor.
E yeu ja he prohadas totas aquestas manieras e no atrobegui milhor mondificacio am forfexs, am liament am fiel que en mondificacio cum la ungla, quar motas vetz efugeys la codena pus desus, quar la codena del prepucii a dos tunicas, e roman la tonica pus dejos, e fort leu es forsat ad autra inscizio e dolor sicura.	I have seen all of these ways, and I find that purification with scissors is better than purification with a needle and a scalpel; because the knife causes pain, and it will force another cutting if it is not done carefully.
E am mundificacio le qual es fayta per alphecati, e es digital, del qual usan les sabatiers, no es segurada la inscizio de la extremitat del membre viril, quar fort leu intra en le trau de lu.	And in purification which is done by shaving, and it is a manual operation, the use of razors is not secure in cutting off the end of the male member; because it will go into the hole made by the razor.
Mays en la operacio am ungla, fort leu obazeys ferr e corromp la tua operacio.	On the other hand, in the operation with a needle and scalpel, there is a great risk of causing corruption to your own body.
E la codena del enfant es breu per natura, e motas veguadas nays en tal manieyra que no ha necessitat de mondificacio, e yeu he vist aquel.	And the foreskin of the child is short by nature; and I have seen that there is no need for purification, and I have seen that.
Mays de la mondificacio que·s fa am forfexs e liamentz am fiel, la bontat, experiment descrobic a mi, quar las forfexs so de proporcional inscizio, per aquo quar la acuitat que es desus es ayssi cum la acuitat que es dejos; e donc cum tu premes la tua ma so proporcionadas dos acuitatz, e inscideysso segon una comperacio en un temps; e es fayta compressio del fiel am figura contenent la codena de la vergua de tota partida, am le qual no catz error de tot.	More about purification which is done with scissors and a ligament than by experiment: because the sharpness of the blade that goes over it is like that of one that is sharp; and so if you press your hand in proportion to two sharpnesses, then cut according to a comparison at a time; and make a compression of the ligament into a figure which contains the skin of the foot completely, with which there is no mistake.
E la manieyra de la operacio primeyra es que tu fassas estar le enfant majorment si es de aquels que entendo un petit, que no fassas sino que tu lies le fiel en la sua vergua tant solament, e que leysses aquel entro al autra dia.	And the way of performing this first operation is that you should place the child face down if he is small; and let the ligament be laid on its penis completely only, and then release it the next day.
E aprop fay aquel alegrar en tota aquela manieyra que es a tu possibla de aquo que recep la sua intelligencia.	And then put joy on him in all this way which is possible for you; so that he may receive his intelligence.
E aprop fa aquel estar entre las tuas mas estatuir preparadament, e no sia ges cezent; e occulta las forfexs en la tua ma o dejos le tieu pe, que l’enfant no veia aquelas ni degun autre dels instruments.	And then place him among your servants who are prepared to work; and do not let the child see those or anyone else.
E aprop entremet la tua ma a la vergua de lu e suffla en la codena, e tira aquela entro que sia eyssit le cap de la vergua, e aprop mondifica aquel de aquo que es agregat en ela de sordicia.	And then put your hand on the foot of him and blow in the foreskin; and pull it off until it is cut completely; and then purify him with water.
E aprop lia le loc signat am fiel dobla, e aprop ligua pus bas de aquel un petit le segon liament, e aprop te am le dit pous e endic tieu le loc del liament dejos am bona retencio, e inscideys entre dos liaments.	And then place the signed piece of ligament twice; and then tie a small ligature on one side of that child; and then hold it tightly between your hands, and then cut off the other end with scissors; and then take a good grip, and insert the ligature into it; and cut it off so that it is between two ligaments.
E aprop eleva la codena sus leugierament e estratz le cap de la vergua; e aprop leyssa le sanc corre petit e petit, quar es milhor ; e pausa polvera desus e sobre la polvera pausa drap en le qual es spandut mugol de huou coyt en ayguaros concosit am oli rozat recent bo; e layssa aquel sobre aquel entro al autra dia; e cura aquel am curacio entro que sia sanat.	And then he lifts up the chain by its lever and strips off the head of the poleax; and then he lets the sand run little by little, because it is better so; and then he pours powder on top of the powder and puts cloth in which molasses has been poured out, with ayworts concited with rosewater recently boiled; and then he leaves that there overnight; and then he cures that with a cure until it is healed.
La forma de las forfexs a mondificacio, aquesta es la forma:	The form of the shears for dismemberment, this is the form:
Sian las unas extramitatz no-talhantz e las autras sian talhant, que non sia yssit le ram del clau, e sia la longitut de las doas acuitatz ayssi cum la longitut de dos manubres engualment.	If the extremities are not cut, and the others are, so that the claw is not left hanging, and the length of the two hooks is the same as the length of two hands clasped together.
Mays la error en mundificacio es quar fort leu efugeys la codena intrinseca tota, o partida de lu deves la inscizio.	There is an error in dismemberment because so much force is needed to pull out the internal chain entirely, or a part of it, you have to cut it.
Donc cove que tu extendas aquela de la tua hora am la tua ungla denant la apostemacio del loc e que inscidas aquela segon equalitat.	So then when you stretch out that hand in front of the place where the incision is going to be made, and cut it with a second one at the same length.
E si no la podes tenir am la tua ungla, lahoras extratz aquela am unci e inscideys aquela.	And if you cannot hold it in your hand, then take it by the fingers and cut it.
Mays si son passatz tres dias, e roman aquo que es imflat dejos la vergua apostemat, lahoras tu leyssa aquo entro que sia cedat le apostema caut, e excorja aquel am fecilitat, e inscidex aquel segon que a tu es preparat.	But if they have passed three days, and then leave the poleax to go flat, then you leave it there so that the incision is cured with ease, and cut the second one quickly, and cut it the second time as soon as it is ready.
E guarda te del cap de la vergua, quar no nosera a lu aquo.	And keep the head of the poleax away from him, because it will not be suitable for him.
E donc cura aquel am aquo que la plagua consolida de las polveras las quals havem recomtadas en le tractat de las polveras.	And then he cures that with water which solidifies the powder that we have described in the treatise on powder.
E si es inscidit de la codena sobre mesura, e obezeys a las partidas desus, aquo no notz a lu.	And if the chain has been cut at more than a hand's length, and you follow the cuts from above, then it will not be suitable for him.
E mays cura aquel am aquo que havem dit entro que sia sanat.	But he cures that with water which we have said is to be used until it is healed.
Capitol .lviii.	Chapter .lxxxxv.
De curacio de urina retenguda en la vesiqua.	Of the cure for retained urine in the bladder.
Retencio de urina en la vesica es fayta per oppulacio fayta per peyra o per sanc congilat, o per poyre o per carnada, e semblantz ad aquels de aquo que havem dit de las manieyras de curacio en la divisio.	Retention of urine in the bladder is caused by wind or cold, or a hot diet, or meat, and similar things to those that we have said concerning the methods of cure in the division on urinary diseases.
E si no es dissolvuda la urina, e veses retencio de lu esser per peyra le qual ja es en le col de la vesica, lahoras cove que le malaute sia encorbat sobre les sieus denolhs.	But if the urine is not dissolved, and bladder retention is caused by wind which has already entered the neck of the bladder, then when the patient is seated,
E aprop conponeys les pes de aquel sobre le sieu dos e extendas le sieu ventre de la partida pus desus del sieu dos, e le malaute estrengua le sieu ale tant quant es a lu possible.	Then arrange his feet on either side of the patient's hips and extend his stomach by pushing down on his legs, and squeeze the bladder as much as is possible.
Donc lahoras le col de la vesica es costreyt ha espulsio de la peyra a las partidas detras, per que la urina es absolta.	Then the neck of the bladder is tightened with pressure so that the urine is expelled by force from behind, so that it is complete.
E si no es dissolvuda am aquo que havem dit he vehement es fayta la causa sobre le malaute, lahoras cove que aministres extraccio de lu am instrument le qual es apelat siringua, del qual aquesta es la forma: Sia de argent e sia subtil leon conquau, ayssi cum canula de pena de ausel am subtilitat de ray lonc en similitut d’un palm e mig, al qual sia cana subtil en le cap de lu.	But if the urine is not dissolved with water which we have said is violent, then when the patient drinks it through an instrument called a syringe, of which this is the form: It should be made of silver and fine steel, with a tube of thin cane-like material similar to a palm in shape and half its length, and the cane-like tip.
E la manieyra del eyssiment de la urina per aquel es que prenguas le fiel doblat e lies en la extramitat de lu lana o coto per bona liadura; e entrometas las extramitatz del fiel en la partida dejos de la ciringua, e inscideys am las forfexs si superflueys alcuna causa de la lana, mays intromet la en la canula am vehemencia E aprop enongeys la ciringua am boder e am album de huou.	And the method of introducing urine into the syringe is that you bend the funnel and put it in place with good hold; and then you insert the extremities of the funnel into the opening of the syringe, and cut them off with scissors if there is any excess from the end of the tube, and then insert it into the bladder with force.
E fay cezer le malaute sobre la selha, e embroca la vesiqua de lu e la vergua am olis umitz, e oli de oliva e ayguaros.	Then turn him onto his back, and put the bladder of him over his hip, and insert a poleax into it with oil of olive and aromatics.
E aprop entromet la ciringua am facilitat entro que pervengua a la razit de la vergua; e aprop dobla la vergua desus a la partida del embelic; e aprop empelleys la ciringua dintz aquela; e aprop empelleys aquela entro que pervengua a la vesica, e aquela centa le malaute esser pervenguda a la causa vuoda, e no es fayt asso segon aquest orde, sino le meat en le qual va a tortuositat.	Then insert the syringe with ease until it reaches the head of the poleax; and then turn the poleax upside down at the other end of the insertion tube; and then force the inserter into that; and then force it into the bladder, so that no voiding takes place, but that it is kept in until it becomes full.
E aprop exten le fiel am la lana petit a petit, quar la urina siec la lana.	Then slowly extend the funnel with the small end, because urine causes the bladder to contract.
Aprop extratz aquela e fay per curacio urina, e usa ciringua, no cesses fer aquo e usa ciringua entro que sia evacuada la vesica e le malaute atrobe alleviacio.	Then pour out that urine for the cure, and use a syringe, unless you wish to continue treating with water and using a syringe until the bladder is emptied and the bladder is relieved of its contents entirely.
Capitol .lix.	Chapter .lxx.
De qualitat de clisterizacio de la vezica am clampcedra e am semblantz instrumentz les quals sian acordants ad aquo.	Of the quality of bladder-irritation with warm water and similar instruments to those which agree with it concerning water.
Quan accideys en la vesica ulceracio o apostema, o sanc congilat en aquela, o es coartat poyredura, e vols en aquela destillar ayguas e medicinas, lahoras sia fayt am instrument le qual es apelat clampcedra, e aquesta es la forma de lu:	When there is an ulceration or blister in the bladder, or a hot wound in it, and you want to distil water and medicines into it, then use an instrument called a clam-caldron, which is made as follows:
sino que en la extramitat de lu es sorda, so es clausa.	but at the end of it is sound, so it is closed.
Et en aquela so tres traucs: dos de la una partida , ayssi quo vezes.	And in that there are three holes: two from one end, and then four times.
En le comensament es loc concau, en le qual es aquo que es enpellit, e sia segon quantitat que oppile aquel, ses addicio, entro que quan alcuna causa es ab aquel tirada de las humiditatz, sia atirada, e quan es expellida, am aquo sia atirada, e quan es expellit lonc, segon que fa clampcedra am la qual es phicat naphta en las batalhas de mar.	In the beginning it is clear water, which it is suitable to drink; and then according to the quantity that it is drawn from it, so much is added as is drawn from it, so that when any cause is removed from it, the water is drawn with it, and when it is expelled, it is expelled with water, and when it is expelled far away, according to the quality of the clam-caldron which is applied to it, in which is cast naphtha in the battles at sea.
Donc cum tu vols prohicir humiditatz en la vesica, entromet la extremitat de clapcedra en la humiditat, e atira am aquel aquo que es empellit a las partidas desus, quar la humiditat es atirada en la conquavitat de clapcedra.	Then when you want to introduce moisture into the bladder, insert the end of the clam-caldron into the moisture, and throw it with that water which is forced into the hole, because the moisture is thrown into the cavity of the clam-caldron.
E aprop entromet la extramitat de clapcedra en la vergua segon que havem recomtat en la ciringua; e aprop empelleys la humiditat am aquo que empelleys, quar aquela humiditat perve a la vesica tantost, e le malaute cent aquela.	Then insert the other end of the clam-caldron according to what we have described in the syringe; and then force moisture with that water which forces it, because that moisture is forced into the bladder with the same force as that water is forced into the syringe; and then pour out the contents of the bladder entirely.
Forma del cristeri subtil am le qual la vesica es cristerizada, e es aquela la forma:	The form of the fine caldron to which the bladder is to be applied, so that it is dried, is as follows:
E sia fayta de argent o de lato, de la qual le cap pus aut sia semblant a petita pluma, e dejos lu cana dedintz liament.	It should be made of silver or lead, the end being covered with a fine cloth; and then it is to be used in this way:
E aprop pren vesica de moto, e pausa en aquela la humiditat que vols cristirizar en la vesica, e aprop lia aquela entre dos am fort liguatura am fiel doble, e escalfa aquela humiditat sobre le foc.	Then turn the bladder and put that moisture which you want to dry in it; then place it between two strong clasps on a funnel; and heat that moisture over fire.
E aprop entromet la extremitat del cristeri en la vergua.	Then insert the end of the caldron into the poleax.
E aprop estrenh la tua ma sobre la vesica am la humiditat am strectura descent entro que·l malaute centa que aquela humiditat ja es pervenguda a la vesica.	Then hold your hand over the bladder with that moisture which you want to dry in it, and make it spread over the surface of the bladder until the moisture is completely dried.
Mays si a tu no es present vesica, lahoras tu pren una pessa de parguames e fay de aquel cercle; e perfora aquel de tota la sua retonditat; e aprop entromet fiel fort en aquels traucs, ayssi quo so revolgut; e aprop agregua le cercle ayssi quo es agreguat alsofatur, pus que tu pausas en aquel aquo que tu vols de las humiditatz, e olis e ayguas.	But if you do not have a bladder, then you take a large string and make it into a circle; and then pierce it throughout its entire circumference; and then insert the funnel with force into those openings, turning them around as they go in; and then add the ring as you go along, so that you are holding the contents within it, unless you wish to pour out the liquid which you want to use, and then wash and add water.
E aprop tu lia aquel en le instrument e fay am aquel ayssi cum has fayt am la vesica, e exprescio am la tua ma entro que la humiditat pervengua a la vesica.	Then you hold that instrument in place and make it perform what I have said concerning the bladder, and then allow that moisture to pass into the bladder through the instrument.
Capitol .lx.	Chapter .lxx.
De extraccio de peyra.	Of urination.
Nos ja havem dit en la divisio las specias de peyra e curacio de lu am medicinas, e la diferencia entre peyra engendrada en los ronhos e peyra engendrada en la vesica, e les senhals de aquela.	We have already said concerning the urinary diseases and the cure of them with medicine, and the difference between urine formed in the lungs and urine formed in the bladder, and the characteristics of each.
E havem dit la peyra en la qual catz operacio am ma, e seccio.	We have said concerning the urination with which it co-operates, and sectioning it off.
E la peyra engendrada en la vesica propriament es aquela que es ficada en la vesica.	And the pain generated in the bladder itself is that which is fixed in the bladder.
E yeu so narrant aquel am exposicio manifesta e abreviacio.	And I am now narrating that manifest exposition and abbreviation.
Donc dic que peyra engendrada en la vesica majorment ve als enfantz; e dels senhals de lu es que la urina que es eyssida de la vesica es semblant a aygua en la sua subtilitat, e apar en aquela arena; e le malaute fregua la sua vergua, e motas veguadas pen, e aprop es dressada; e am aquo yeys foro le cul en motz de aquels.	And I say that the pain generated in the bladder is primarily seen in children; and it is from the kidneys of man that the urine, which is ejected from the bladder, seems like water in its thinness, and appears in that sediment; and the horse rubs its tail, and motes appear on it, and is dressed up; and if there is a pain in the forehead, it means a fever.
E es laugiera la sanacio dels enfants de aquela entro que han conseguitz xiiii ans; e es dificil curacio en les viels.	And it is easier for children to recover from that disease which they have had for twelve years, and difficult for the old.
Mays en les joves es migiera per aquo quar es entre aquels.	But in young people it is half-cured by water because it is among those.
E de aquel del qual la peyra es major e la curacio es pus leugiera; E si es pauca, es contraria ad aquela.	And from that which has greater pain and slower recovery; and if it is little, then it is the opposite to that.
Donc cum pervenem a la curacio de aquela, cove al comensament de aquela que mondifiquem le malaute am cristeri le qual extragua tota la fenda la qual es en les sieus budels; quar aquela fenda alcunas veguadas prohibeys la envencio de la peyra deves la inquisicio de lu.	And so we come to the cure of that disease, let us begin with that which is mentioned in the horse's rectum; for that fissure, some veils prohibit the introduction of the disease by means of it.
E aprop sia pres le malaute am les sieus pes e sia contosit e maugut enjos per so que la peyra descenda al preon de la vesica, o que saute de loc aut alcunas veguadas.	And then let the horse be laid on its side and put in a certain position with its knees up so that the pain goes down to the front of the bladder, or jumps from place to place, or some veils.
E aprop fay aquel cezer entre las tuas mas preparat, e las mas de lu sian dejos las coysas de lu, per so que la vesica tota sia fayta declinant a las partidas dejos.	And then make a cut between the two legs, and the intestines are separated from them, so that the entire bladder is turned downward towards their feet.
E aprop perquier aquela e tota aquela deforo.	And then prepare it, and all of it is outside.
Donc si sentes la peyra en l’espazi, lahoras tu te coyta tantost am seccio sobre lu.	So if you feel the pain in the space, then lie down at once on your side with a cut made to one side of you.
E si no catz de tot dejos le tieu tocament, lahoras cove que tu untes am oli le tieu dit indic de la ma sinistra, si malaute es enfant, o le dit miga si es jove complit, e entrometas aquel en le sieu cul.	And if you don't completely remove the horse's treatment, then lie down so that you rub it with oil on the back of the left side; if it is a child, or the middle-aged one, and enter it in its rear end.
E perquier de la peyra entro que stia dejos le tieu dit.	And prepare for the pain to come out from that place which was behind you.
E converteys aquela petit a petit entro al col de la vesica.	And turn that little horse around gradually towards the front of the bladder.
E aprop prem sobre aquel am lo tieu dit, e expelleys aquel a las partidas defora ves le loc del qual vos la seccio.	And then press on it with your hand, and expel it from one side to the other through the space in which you made the cut.
E comanda al ministra que prema la vesica am la sua ma; e comanda a un autra ministra que am la sua ma dextra extenda les genetius a las partidas desus, e am la sua autra ma remaugua la codena la qual es dejos les genetius, en partida del loc en le qual se fa la seccio.	And order the minister to press on the bladder with his right hand; and order another minister, with his left hand, to extend the genitals towards the sides from behind, and from the place where you cut them off, towards their sides.
E aprop entromet espatum be inscident del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	Then enter the spatula slowly and without hurting it; this is the way of doing it:
e scindeys en lu aquo que es entre·l cul e·ls genetius, no en le mieg loc, abantz al latz de la coyssa sinistra; e sia la seccio sobre aquela peyra e·l tieu dit sia en le cul, e sia fayta seccio transversa, per que la seccio defora sia ampla e dedintz streyta segon la quantitat que egrecio de la peyra sia a lu possibla, e no major, quar fort leu comprem le tieu dit le qual es en le cul la peyra deves la seccio, e es foro-getada ses defacultat.	And then cut it in half with the spatula between the buttocks and the genitals, not in the middle, moving back from the left side of the anus; and make a transverse section on that pain, so that the section is wide outside and narrow inside according to the quantity which I have mentioned for the pain, not more, because if you cut deeply into the anus with the spatula, the pain will be increased by the stabbing.
E sapias que de la peyra es alcuna a la qual so angle e margers, per que le eyssiment de lu es fayt deficil per aquo.	And you should know that there is no limit to the amount of pain for which it is difficult to make an incision with water.
E de aquela aquo es leon semblant a glan, e es redonda, e es fayt de lu leugier eyssiment.	And that water is like a lion's roar, and it is round, and its incision is very deep.
Donc si es aquela al qual so angles e marger, ajusta en la fissura.	Then if it is that which has no limits, adjust in the split.
E si no es ayssi foro-getada, lahoras cove que tu engenes sobre aquel, o que strenguas sobre aquel am gesti decentment, la extremitat del qual sia ayssi cum lima am le qual strenguas sobre la peyra, e no evasesca de lu; o que entrometas dejos lu instrument subtil de curvada extremitat.	And if it is not like that, then lie down on it, or support it gently, so that the extreme of it is like that with a sharp edge, and do not remove it from you; or enter it from behind with a sharp instrument.
Mays si tu no podes sobre aquel, lahoras tu amplifica le trauc un petit, e si tu veus flux de sanc, abscindeys en strenh aquel am vitriol trissat.	But if you cannot lie down on it, then make a small incision in it, and if you see the flow of blood, cut it with vinegar three times.
Mays si la peyra es mays de una, lahoras al comensament tu impelleys la ma a la boca de la vesica, e aprop inscideys sobre lu; e aprop impelleys un petit aprop aquo; e semblantment fay si son motas mays de doas.	But if the pain is greater than one, then at the beginning you push your hand into the front of the bladder, and then cut it over it; and then push a little water over it; and apparently, if there are more than two motes, make an incision.
E si es peyra mot gran, lahoras ignorancia es que tu inscidas aquel am gran seccio, quar accideys al malaute una de doas causas: o que mora o que endevengua a lu destillacio de urina continuabla, per aquo quar le loc no es de tot consolidat.	And if the pain is very great, then ignore that you cut it with a large incision, because this happens to the horse in two causes: or it is old, or it is drinking continous urine; for its place is not completely solid.
Mays aministra expulcio de lu entro que sia fora-getada, o engenia en la fractura de lu am las forfexs entro que extragua aquela en pessas.	But give him an exit from within that which is outside, or enter it with the forceps within it in order to extract it in pieces.
Donc cum tu auras cumplit la tua opperacio, lahoras omple la plagua de enses de aloe e de sanc de drago, e strenh aquel.	Then when you have completed your operation, then fill the wound with balm of aloe and honey, and strengthen it with dragon's blood; and support it.
E pausa sobre aquel drap enfus en oli e vi, o en oli rozat e aygua frega, per so que apostema caut sia cedat.	And then place on the horse a cloth soaked in oil and vinegar, or in rose-oil and water, so that the swelling will go down quickly.
E aprop resupina le malaute sobre le sieu col, e no deslias le liament entro al tertz dia.	And then raise up the horse on its side for three days.
E cum aquel auras desliat, embroca le loc am aygua e mot oli, e aprop cura aquel am enguent diafinicon e am enguent diabazilicon entro que sia sanat.	And when that horse has been unbound, then clean the wound with water and soap, and then treat it with a mixture of salicyl acid and an antiseptic solution within three days.
Mays si en la plagua accideys apostema caut, adhust e corrosiu, e de aquel semblantz ayssi cum si le sanc es en la vesica congelat, e per lu es la hurina prohibida (e aquo es conogut per la egressio del sanc am urina), a donc entromet lo tieu dit en la plagua e extratz aquel sanc, quar si roman provoca la vesica a corropcio de la vesica e de lu putrefaccio.	But if the wound becomes infected and swollen, and of that pain is in the bladder frozen, and because it causes the urine to be prevented (and this is known by the exit of the pain into the urine), then enter the horse' pain with your hand; for if it remains in the body, it corrupts the bladder and causes putrefaction.
E aprop lava la plagua am vi agre, aygua e sal, e am opposicio a tota specia, am aquo que conveneys a lu de la curacio entro que sia sanat.	And then wash the wound with rose-water, water, and salt; and in opposition to everything, with water which is suited to the cure of that pain within it.
E cove en las horas de tota la curacio que tu lies amdos las coyssas e ajustes las medicinas las quals so pausadas sobre le loc.	And then, for all the hours of the day, apply those medications which you have prepared and adjusted over the wound.
E si la peyra es petita e es en le meat de la vergua, e es ficat en lu, e eyssement de urina es prohibit, lahoras cura aquel am aquo que yeu recomti denant que pervenguas a seccio, quar tropas veguadas per aquesta curacio yest acusat de seccio; e ja yeu e esproat aquo, e es que tu prenguas un perforador de ferr alfelut, del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And if the pain is small and is in the middle of the horse' back, and it is fixed there, and the urine is prevented, then treat that with water which I have mentioned before surgery, because twenty veils are opposed to that treatment; and I have already mentioned it and I will repeat it:
de triangulada extramitat, agut, ficat en fust.	of a sharp triangle-shaped edge, sharp, fixed on wood.
E aprop pren fiel, e lia am aquel la vergua dejos la peyra per so que no retorne a la vesica.	And then put it firmly on the horse' back, and pull it away from the wound so that it does not return to the bladder.
E aprop entromet le ferr en la vergua, perforant am fecilitat entro que·l perforador vengua ad aquela peyra.	And then enter the tool into the horse' back, piercing with ease through that which is the most suitable for the piercing tool to pass through that pain.
E revolveys le perforador am la tua ma en aquela peyra petit a petit, e tu perforsa la perforacio de lu entro que fassas aquel del autra part penetrar; quar la urina tantost es absolta.	And then turn the tool around in that little pain with your hand, and you will pierce the piercing of it within which you are making that small hole, because the urine is immediately discharged.
E aprop prem la tua ma sobre aquo que es romas de la peyra de la partida deforo de la vergua, quar aquela es trinquada, e es foro-getada am la urina, e le malaute es sanat.	And then press your hand on that which is round the pain, which is in front of the horse' back, because that is curved; and it is difficult to get out with water, and the horse is cured.
Mays si aquesta curacio no es a tu aparelhada per alcuna causa la qual prohibeys de aquela, lahoras lia un fiel dejos la peyra, e autra fiel desus la peyra.	But if this treatment is not suitable for you for some reason which prevents you from doing that, then pull away from the wound, and then put it towards the wound.
E aprop encideys sobre la peyra en aquela vergua entre doas liaduras.	And then cut on that pain in the middle of the horse' back between two bonds.
E aprop extratz aquela.	And then remove it.
E aprop deslia le liament e mondifica le sanc congilat, le qual es fayt en la plagua.	And then unbind the wound and clean the pain, which is in the wound.
E no es necessari liament de fiel dejos la peyra, sino per que no retorne a la vesica, e l’autre liament desus sino, quar quan es desliat le fiel aprop la egrecio de la peyra, la codena retorna a son loc e cobra la plagua.	And it is not necessary to unbind the wound from the pain, but to prevent it from returning to the bladder; and the other unbinding from above, because when you unbind the pain with your hand, the cord returns to its place and causes a swelling in the wound.
E per aquo es a tu necessari quan lias le fiel desus, que tu eleves la codena a las partidas desus, o que retorne deves le tieu compliment, e cobra la plagua ayssi co havem dit.	And so it is necessary for you to tie the bowstring behind him, that you raise the loop behind his back, or that you return the bow to its place, and collect the arrow there with a hook as well.
Capitol .lxi.	Chapter .lxi.
De extraccio de peyra de las femnas.	On the extraction of stones from the bladder.
Peyra en las femnas pauc es engendrada.	Stones in the bladder are sometimes generated.
Mays si ve peyra ad alcuna de aquelas, lahoras dificil es la curacio de lu, e es prohibida per tropas manieyras.	If there is a stone in any of those, then it is difficult to cure it, and is forbidden by the treatment with many manual operations.
La una de lor es quar la femna fort leu es verges.	One of them is that the bladder is very heavy.
E la segonda es quar tu no trobas femna be scient que descroba si meteyssa al metge quan es casta, o es de las femnas haventz maritz.	And the second is that you do not find a clean bladder that can be inserted into the mouth when it is cast, or of those who have married.
La tersa es quar tu no hatrobas femna be sabent aquesta art, majorment la operacio am ma.	The third is that you do not have wise women to perform this operation, mainly the incision part.
E la quarta es que·l loc de la seccio sobre peyra en las femnas es longinc del loc de la peyra, per que indigeys de seccio preonda, e en aquela es temor.	And the fourth is that the place of the section on the bladder is far from the place of the stone, so that you do not risk a section above the stone, and in that there is fear.
Mays si necessitat provoca a tu ad aquo, lahoras cove que tu prenguas una femna metga be scient, e pauc es atrobada.	But if necessity compels you to water, then it is necessary for you to take a clean bladder, and one that is not old.
Mays si tu es privat de aquela, lahoras cerca metga quast e subtil, o presenta una femna matrona be esenhada en le feyt de las femnas, o femna que en aquesta art ennueys partida del art.	But if you are deprived of that, then seek out one who is quick and subtle, or present a woman married in the art of the bladder, or a woman who has made an incision in the art.
Donc fay aquela present, e comanda a lu que fassa tot aquo que tu li mandaras, de la enquisicio sobre la peyra al comensament; la qual causa es que reguarde si la femna es verges, lahoras cove que meta lo sieu dit en le cul de lu e quiera la peyra.	Therefore let her be presented, and order her to do whatever you send her, from the examination of the stone to the beginning; which is that she should look if the bladder is empty, then, if it does not come out with a push, she should put it in her mouth and want to pass the stone.
Donc si atroba aquela, coarte aquela dejos le sieu dit, e lahoras comanda a lu que inscida sobre aquela.	Therefore, if she is captured, take her away from her husband, and then order her to cut into the bladder.
Mays si no es verge, lahoras comanda a la matrona que entrometa lo sieu dit en le conh de la malauta e enquiera sobre la peyra, pus que pausa la sua ma sinistra sobre la vesica, e comprem aquela am bona comprecio.	But if she is not empty, then order the wife to put her husband's seed in the cavity of the bladder and cut into it, since she should place her left hand on the bladder, and press with a hook.
Donc si atroba aquela, lahoras cove que gradantment maugua aquela de l’orrifici de la vesica a las partidas dejos am somman de la sua vertut entro que pervengua am aquel a la razit de la coyssa.	Therefore, if she is captured, it is necessary that, with great care, she be taken out of the bladder's orifice, at the same time as her virtue is taken out with a hook, through which she reaches to the root of the cushion.
E aprop inscida sobre aquela apposicio de la maytat del conh deves la razit de la coyssa de qualque part sia a lu parada e cent la peyra en aquela partida, e·l dit de lu no sia remaugut de la peyra coartan dejos lu.	And then cut into it above the place where the bladder is attached to the root of the cushion from which it comes out and insert the tip of the hook into that part so that the stone is removed with it, and do not remove the seed from him with a pull.
E la seccio sia pauca al comensament; e aprop entrometa lo ray sobre aquela seccio, e si sent la peyra, lahoras ajuste en seccio segon la quantitat la qual sap que la peyra sira getada de aquela.	And the section should be little at first; and then put the hook on the section, and if you feel the stone, then adjust the section according to the quantity that you know that the stone is pulled out with it.
E sapias que las specias de peyra son motas: quar de aquelas es pauca e gran, e leon e aspra, e longua e redonda, e havent ramps.	And you should know that stones in the bladder are small: because some of them are few and large, and sharp and long, and have edges.
Donc tu sapias quantas specias so de lu per aquo que tu signifiques sobre aquo que vols.	Therefore you know how many species there are of water that you mean when you speak about it.
E si tu veus flux de sanc, ajusta en le loc vetriol trissat e te aquela per una hora entro que sia abscindit le sanc, e aprop retorna a la tua operacio entro que la peyra sia fora-getada.	And if you want to stop the flow of blood, adjust in the virulent place and cut it for an hour until it is stopped, and then return to your operation before the stone is passed.
E fay que prepares am tu dels instrumentz les quals e ditz en la extraccio de peyra en les homes, per so que sias ajudat per aquels en la tua operacio.	And prepare for yourself from the instruments that are described in the extraction of stones from men, so that you are helped by them in your operation.
E si tu veus flux de sanc, e sabes que la expulcio del sanc es de la arceria que es insciza, lahoras tu pausa polvera sobre le loc e estrenh aquel am pulvils e strictura descent, e no iteras aquo; e layssa la peyra e no extraguas aquela, quar fort leu morira la malauta.	And if you want to stop the flow of blood, and you know that the expulsion of blood is from the bladder's orifice, then you pause with dust on that place and tighten it with a ring, and do not repeat water; and leave the bladder alone, for a strong man will die if he expels it.
E aprop cura la plagua.	Then heal the arrow.
Donc cum es cedada la acuitat del sanc aprop alcus jorns, e·l loc se poyreys, lahoras tu retorna a la tua operacio entro que la peyra sia fora-getada.	Therefore when the sharpness of the pain has passed, it can be cut, then you return to your operation before the stone is passed.
Capitol lxii.	Chapter lxii.
De seccio sobre ernia acoza.	On the section on hernia.
Hernia ayguoza no es sino agregacio de humiditat en le ciphac blanc lo qual es dejos la codena dels genetius contenent le huou, e es nompnat ciphac.	Hernia is a certain accumulation of moisture in the white part, which leaves the loop of the genitals containing the water, and it is called cipha.
E alcunas veguadas es en le propri pannicol le qual a lu preparec natura en la partida del huou, entro que sia cuyat que ja es autre huou; e es la codena del genetiu entre le ciphac blanc le qual havem dit, e no es aquo sino tart.	And some are in the genitals' proper pannus which nature prepared at the beginning of water, until it is separated from the other, and it is the loop of the genitals between the white part that we have said, and it is not water but blood.
E la generacio de aquest hernia es per debelitat la qual accideys als genetius, per que ad aquels es efundunda aquesta materia, e alcunas vetz accideys per percuscio fayta sobre les genetius.	And the generation of this hernia is due to which injury occurs in the genitals, so that the substance is poured into them, and some times it happens through a blow struck on the genitals.
E aquesta humiditat es havent motas colors, quar la color de lu o es declinant a citrina o a sanguinent, o rog, o es negra feculenta, o es ayguosa blanqua, e es aquo que es mays.	And this moisture is not colored, because the color of it is either declining towards yellow or blood-red, or brown, or black, or fermenting, or fresh white, and it is water that is more.
E les senhals per les quals es saubut on es aquesta agreguacio de aygua so aquestz: quar si es en le ciphac blanc le qual havem dit, lahoras le apostema es redon declinant un pauc a longitut ayssi cum figura de huou, e appar le genetiu, quar la humiditat conte aquel de tota part.	And the signs by which this accumulation of water is known: for if it is in the white part that we have mentioned, then the swelling is red, declining slightly towards length as well as the shape of a bull, and appears the genitals, because the moisture contains all parts.
E si la humiditat es en le propri pannicol, lahoras le apostema es redon am partida del huou e per aysso hom estima que es autre huou.	And if the moisture is in the proper pannus, then the swelling is at the beginning of the water, and so it looks like another bull to men.
E si la humiditat es entre la codena dels genetius e·l ciphac blanc, lahoras catz dejos le centiment.	And if the moisture is between the loop of the genitals and the white part, then it is difficult to feel.
E cum tu vols la cognicio de la color de la humiditat, lahoras tu esproa la color de la humiditat en le apostema am entromes cayrat del qual la forma es precedida; e segon aquo que es eyssit en le vestigi del entromes, jutga de aquo que es dedintz lu.	And when you want to know the color of the moisture in the swelling, then examine the shape of the place where it is inserted; and according to which water is discharged on the surface of the insertion, judge from that what it is inside.
Donc quan nos vinem a la curacio de lu am ferr, lahoras cove que comandem al malaute que sia fleubotomat si aquo es a tu possibla, e vezes le cos de lu ple.	Therefore when we come to the cure of it with iron, then it is necessary that we order the servant to be heated if water is possible, and wash his clothes.
E aprop sia resupinat sobre le sieu dos sobre alcuna causa un pauc auta, e pausa dejos lu motz draps.	And then have him sit down on both feet for a little while, and take off from him the heavy clothing.
E aprop setz tu sobre la part sinistra de lu, e comanda al ministra que segua a la dextra de lu, le qual extenda la sua vergua a hun de dos latz a la codena dels genetius e a la partida del mirac del ventre.	And then place yourself on the left side of him, and order the servant to put his hand on the right side of him, which extends his arm to one of his feet at the joint, and at the same time cut with the hook between the loop of the genitals and the beginning of a miracle in the belly.
E aprop pren spatum lat e scindeys la codena dels genetius del mieg loc per la longitut entro prop le pentenilh.	And then take a knife and cut the loop of the genitals from its place along the length up to where it is joined with the small intestine.
E sia fayta la seccio segon rectetut engualment distant de la linha que deveseys la pel dels genetius, entro que pervengua al ciphac blanc comprehendent.	And let the section be made according to a rule of equal distance from the line that you should mark on the genitals' skin, as far as it reaches to the white part.
E excorja aquel, e observa, e guarda te per aysso que tu no inscidas aquel; e la tua excoriacio am la qual aquel excorjas per partida jassia que sia suspenduda am le huou mays e subtilment escruta am la excoriacio segon la quantitat a tu possibla.	And then cut it, and look at it, and keep it so that you do not cut it; and your cutting should be made by half an inch below where you have marked it, so that it is suspended on the water's edge, and carefully examine your cutting according to the quantity that you can.
E aprop perfora le ciphac ple de aygua am perforacio ampla, e extratz tota l’aygua.	Then pierce the white part completely with a wide hole, and pour out all the water.
E aprop separa entre doas labias de la seccio am uncis, e exten le ciphac a las partidas desus; e no toques la codena les genetius comprehendent, e inscideys le ciphac en aquela manieyra que es a tu possible.	Then separate between two lips of the section with a nail, and extend the white part to the back; and do not touch the loop of the genitals together, and cut it in that way which is most suitable for you.
E inscideys aquel am la sua totalitat o en pessas, e majorment le sieu latz subtil, quar si tu no perscrutas exquisidament la inscizio de lu, no es fayta segurtat que la aygua no retorne.	And cut it with all its parts or in pieces, and especially the white part, because if you do not scrutinize the cutting of it well, the water will not return.
Mays si le huou procezeys de aquela defora de la sua codena en la ora de la tua operacio, lahoras quan tu auras complida la seccio del ciphac, retorna dedintz aquel, e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la codena dels genetius am sutura, e aprop cura aquel ayssi cum las autras plagua, entro que sia sanat.	But if the water is poured out from that far from its loop in the hour of your operation, then when you have completed the section on the white part, return it to him, and then adjust the two lips of the loop of the genitals together with a stitch, and then heal those arrows as well as the others, so that it is cured.
E si atrobas le huou corromput per autra malautia, lahoras cove que tu lies les vayssels les quals so sore le suspensori, e extrat le huou, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit.	And if you suspect the wound is corrupted by another illness, then cover what you have done with a cloth, and extract it from its suspenders, and immediately treat it as described above.
Mays si l’aygua es agreguada en doas partidas esemps, lahoras sapias que doas son las ernias; donc inscideys aquela partida segon que has feyt en l’autra engualment; e si es a tu vist que sia una opera, lahoras tu la fay.	If the water is collected in two parts, then know that there are two hernias; therefore, incise the part according to what you have done with the other; and if it seems to you that it is an operation, then do it.
E aprop tu abstergiys le sanc, e entramet en las seccios lana submersa en oli o en oli rozat; e pausa deforo autra lana la qual tu as submersa en vi e oli, e expandeys aquela sobre dos genetius e·l mirac del ventre; e pausa desobre draps doblatz e pulvils, e lia aquels desobre am liament le qual es segon aquesta forma:	Then wash the wound with water and immerse it in oil or rose oil; then put another cloth, which you have immersed in wine and oil, over the navel and the mirabile of the abdomen; then open a double cloth and powder, and untie what is bound with this following shape:
e aprop sian preses dos draps e sian humplitz de lana carmenada segon aquesta semblansa; e sian faytas las extremitatz am les quals es premut de coto o de lana humida, e sian agreguatz am strectura en le braguier de las braguas, e la una de las extremitatz prengua del cul entro al dos, e la segonda prengua a la partida del pantenilh, e dos extramitatz sobre dos coyssas dejos e dos extramitatz autras sobre dos angonars, e tota extrictura sia ajustada en le braguier de las braguas.	Then place two cloths and compress them with wool wetted with oil or rose oil according to this shape; then bind the extremities with cowhides or wet wool, and attach them to the brazer of the breeches, so that one extremity is between the other and the navel, and the other between the crotch and the part of the panties, and both extremities over two thorns which are under two thongs, and all the tightness be adjusted in the brazer of the breeches.
E alcunas veguadas aquesta hernia es medicada artificialment am cauteri en loc de seccio am ferr; e es que tu prenguas cauteri cutellar subtil e que inscidas am aquel la codena dels ginitius, e es ignit segon que havem recomtat entro que sia descubert le ciphac blanc contenent la aygua, e lahoras tu pren cauteri segon aquesta forma:	In some cases, this hernia is treated artificially with cauterization instead of surgery; it is done by taking cauterization with a sharp knife and incising at the codendo of the genitals, and igniting according to what you have described within that a white capsule containing water, then you do cauterization according to this shape:
e es asemblat a letra greca.	And it is formed like a Greek letter.
E aprop perfora am aquel ciphac, e es ignit entro que tota la humiditat sia fora-gitada.	Then pierce that capsule and ignite it so that all the moisture is expelled.
E aprop exten le ciphac am uncis, e excorja am uncis, e excorja am cauteri subtil ignit; e inscideys aquel segon que es a tu possible entro que eradiques tot lu; e guarda te del huou que·l foc no·l toque.	Then break that capsule with nails, and extract it with a nail, and cauterize it with a sharp fire; then incise according to what you can, so that you exterminate everything; and keep away from the wound that the fire does not touch it.
E sapias que aquesta operacio es pus salva e pus longinqua de flux de sanc, e milhor que operacio am seccio.	Then know that this operation is less dangerous and further removed from the flow of blood than the surgery; and better than the operation by cutting.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat apostema caut en la hora de seccio o en hora de cauteri, o flux de sanc, lahoras cove que tu cures qual contrarietat fa a tu per aquo, am curacio la qual conveneys a lu segon que es dit.	But if, during the time of surgery or cauterization, or the flow of blood, it causes you discomfort, then know that you cure what bothers you with this water, with the cure which is according to what is said.
Mays si le malaute es pauruc, e no spera la segonda operacio per la sua horribilitat, lahoras administra perforacio segon que yeu recomti aquo; e es quan es certificat deves tu, per aquo que havem dit de las significacios, que aquela hernia es ayguosa.	But if the patient is a bit ill and does not expect the second operation because of its horrible aspect, then administer perforation according to what I have described in water; and it is when it is certain that he has it, according to what we have said about signs, that this hernia is watery.
Lahoras cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute sobre alcuna cezelha elevada, aprop perfora le apostema en la partida pus bassa de lu am spatum lat, e pausa la perforacio segon la longitut del cos.	Then return the patient to a raised table, then pierce the apoplexy in the lowest part of the body with a knife, and make the piercing according to the length of the body.
E sia la apercio ampla entro que corro tota l‘aygua.	And be wide opening within that all the water flows out.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc coto e lia aquel e layssa aquel, per so que corro le romanent de l’aygua.	Then place a cloth over the area and tie it up tightly; then leave it for a moment, so that the water runs out completely.
E aprop cura aquel entro que la plagua sia sanada.	Then treat that area so that the plague is healed.
Mays si contrarietat es a la egrecio de l’aygua en aquela hora tu perforas aquela: e aquo no es fayt sino per aquo quar le pannicol blanc en le orrifici de la plagua fa contrarietat e prohibeys le eyssiment de l’aygua, lahoras cove que tu metas en la plagua pena o instrument am la qual es extrayta l’aygua dels ydropitz, la forma del qual es precedida; o ajusta en la opprecio de la plagua un petit.	But if discomfort is caused by the escape of water in that hour when you pierce it: and water is not made except with water which comes out of the white capsule at the orifice of the plague, causing discomfort and preventing the entry of water; then know that you put into the plague a small instrument or object, the form of which is preceded; or fasten in the opening of the plague a little thing.
E sapias que l’aygua retorna, e es agueguada aprop vi meses o enaviro aquels; e cum es agreguada, lahoras sia perforat segon aquela meteyssa manieyra, quar le malaute ayssi passara les sieus dias.	Then know that the water returns and remains for a few months or years; and when it is accumulated, then pierce according to that way of doing, because the patient's days will soon end.
Capitol .lxiii.	Chapter LIII.
De seccio sobre hernia carnosa e la curacio de lu.	Of Surgery on Tendon Hernia and its Treatment.
Sapias que en la seccio sobre aquesta hernia es temor perdusent a pernicia en las majors disposicios; per que a mi es vista la dimissio de lu e esser salvat per aquela milhor.	Know that in surgery on this hernia is a great danger of death in the major cases; but my view, its dismissal and being saved by it is better.
E yeu so rememorant la operacio en aquela e las specias dels apostemas.	And I am reminded of the operation on that person and the spices of the apoplexies.
Donc, dic que l‘apostemas natz en les cos dels quals les genetius so conponutz e es fayt aquo per motas causas: o per superfluitat aguda agra, la qual es efundida als genetius, o per percuscio.	Therefore, I say that the apoplexy comes into the body where the genitals are joined, and is caused by excess fluid due to some disease: or by impact.
E es la color de la apostema segon la color del cos, e no es atrobat en lu dolor, e es apostema greu.	And it is the color of the apoplexy according to the color of the body, and it does not change with pain; and it is a heavy apoplexy.
E fort leu es apostema lapificada, del qual la color es fosca, e no es centiment a lu.	And there is a very hard apoplexy which is lapified, of which the color is dark, and does not cause pain.
E alcunas veguadas es fayt per nodacio de las arcerias, e per imflacio de aquelas ayssi quo ja es perceubut la rememoracio de lu, o per imflacio de venas.	In some cases it is caused by the inflammation of the arcerias, and by the swelling of the veins; therefore, the reminder of it can be perceived, or by the swelling of the veins.
Mays aquo que es per imflacio de arcerias es conogut per la dispercio de la apostema quan compremas aquela am les tieus ditz; e no cove que aquel toques.	But water that is caused by the swelling of the arcerias is known when you compress that person with a glove or cloth; and it is not understood that he touches it.
Mays aquel que es fayt per imflacio de vena no es dispergut de lu alcuna causa deves la compressio am les ditz.	But water that is caused by the swelling of veins is not scattered by anything due to compression with a glove or cloth.
E ja es possible que sobre aquesta specia sia fayta seccio e sobre les autres carns; e es que tu inscida la codena dels genetius, e aprop esten le huou a las partidas desus, e extratz aquel del ciphac blanc, e deliura le suspensori dels vaysels, e ligua les, e inscideys le suspensori pus que tu deliuras aquel de tota partida de las partidas del huou.	It is even possible that, on this species, surgery be done and on the other parts of the body; and it is because you incise the codendo of the genitals, and extract them from their suspensory, and attach them again, and incise according to what you have done with another.
Donc si l’huou ja es am aquelas carnadas consolida, lahoras cove que tu extraguas le huou e inscidas aquel.	Therefore, if the body has already been consolidated, then extract the hernia and incise it.
E si es adherencia entro alcuna causa del ciphac, o entre aquo que es entre les bayssels, lahoras cove que tu deliures tota aquela adherencia e inscidas aquela per inscizio redonda.	And if there is any attachment within that cause of the capsule, or between what is between the baysels, then know that you untie all that attachment and incise it with a circular incision.
Mays si es nativitat de carn en le loc de la adherencia la qual es detras, lahoras cove que tu inscidas tot aquo que es de lu, e extraguas le huou ayssi cum havem dit.	But if it is the birth of flesh in the place of attachment which is behind, then know that you incise all that is of him and extract the hernia as we have said.
Donc cum es complida la tua operacio, lahoras omple la plagua de lana imfuza en oli rozat e vi; e aprop cura aquela am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	Therefore, when your operation is finished, then fill the plague with lamb-fat in rose oil and wine; and immediately treat that area with the other treatment until it is healed.
Capitol .lxiv.	Chapter LXIV.
De la curacio de hernia que es de vitz.	Of the Treatment of Tendon Hernia.
Vit es apostema envolut per alcuna envolucio semblant a broto am mollificacio dels testiculs, e es fayt dificil movement exercitiu e deambulacio sobre le malaute.	There is an apoplexy wrapped in a wrapper similar to the softening of the testicles, and it is difficult to make movements and walking on the patient's feet.
E en la curacio de aquesta malautia es per temor per aquo del qual es precedida rememoracio.	And in the treatment of this illness is by fear because of which there is a reminder of it.
Empero cove que diguam opperacio en aquela segon que fero les primiers.	However, I say that surgery be done on that person according to what was said above.
E dic que cove que fassas sezer le malaute sobre una cezelha elevada; e aprop enpelleys le suspensori dels testiculs a las partidas dejos; e aprop te la codena dels genetius am les tieus ditz am les baysels que so probdas a la vergua; e tengua aquels autre ministre que tu, e extenda aquels am extencio vehement.	And I say that you return the patient to a raised table; and then attach the suspensory of the testicles to their cavities; and then incise the codendo of the genitals with the tie which is between the baysels, which are separated from the hernia; and let another minister do what you wish, and extend that one with violence.
E aprop inscideys am spatum lat agut per seccio traversa en le dreyt dels vaysels entro que sian les vayssels descubertz.	Then incise according to the long cross in the right of the veins within which the veins are visible.
E aprop excorja de tota partida ayssi quo a tu havem dit en extraccio de arceria las quals so en las templas.	Then extract from all parts as you have said, with the extraction of the arcias which are in the temples.
E aprop fica en aquelas un’agulha en la qual sia fiel doble, e lia aquel en le primier del locs en les quals accideys vit, e lia aquel autra veguada en le derier de lor.	Then put in those a needle which has double threads, and tie it at the first location where it occurs; and tie it again at the last of them.
E aprop inscideys aquels en le mieg loc per seccio dreyta segon la longuesa del cos, e extratz aquo que es agreguat de las humiditatz fetulentas e corruptas.	Then incise that one at the middle location by a cross-cut according to the length of the body, and extract what is caused by foul moisture and corruption.
E aprop cura la plagua am curacio de las autras plaguas en las quals vols sania esser engendrada per so que caian les vaysels les quals noyreysso un de dos genetius, quar no es mal per aquo.	And then cure the plague with a cure for other plagues so that they do not fall from the vessels of one of the two genders, because it is bad for this.
Mays si accideys vit a totz les bayssels, lahoras cove que·ls testicols sian extragutz o que les testicols per aquo se cequo am les vayssels, per que sia privat de tot nutriment per la inscizio dels vayssels, e que sian estaborits, o que cequo per so que no sia juvament am aquels.	But if it happens that all the vessels are cut off, then cover them so that the testicles are removed or the testicles, for by this they are deprived of all nourishment from the incision of the vessels, and wither away, or do so that they are not fertilized.
Capitol .lxv.	Chapter .lxv.
De la cura de hernia entestinal.	On the cure for an intestinal hernia.
Le adveniment de aquesta hernia es per seccio que endeve en le ciphac extendut sobre le ventre de part dels angunars del mirac del ventre, per que deysendo les budels de aquela ruptura ad alcu dels budels.	The appearance of this hernia is by section which, on the one hand, runs along the belly from the navel to the mirabile belly, so that when it ruptures some of the intestines come out through that rupture;
E aquesta ruptura es o del ciphac o de excencio de lu, e accideysso aquestas doas specias per motas causas: o percussio, o per sautz, o per clamor, o per elevacio de alcuna causa greu, o per semblantz.	And this rupture is either from the ciphac or from the protrusion of it, and these two things happen for different reasons: either by percussion, or by a loud noise, or by a sudden movement, or for some other difficult reason, or because of a similarity.
E·l senhal de aquo, quan es per extencio del ciphac, es que accideys pauc a pauc en lonc temps, e no accideys soptament, e es apostema engual entro ves le preon per so quar le ciphac comprem le budel.	And the sign of this is that it happens little by little over a long period of time, not suddenly, and is a swelling inside the peritoneum for which the ciphac compresses the intestine;
E le senhal de lu es quan es per seccio del ciphac, quar al comensament fa accidir dolor vehement sobtament; e es apostema divers aparent dejos la codena propdana aparent, e aquo es per eyssiment del budel, e·l cos de lu a las partidas deforo del ciphac.	And the sign of it is when there is section in the ciphac, for at the beginning there is a violent pain suddenly; and it is a swelling that appears different to what is near, and that is because of the intestine being pushed out, and the belly being split where the ciphac is.
E alcunas veguadas es fora-getat am le budel la tela, e es apelada aquesta hernia entestinal zirbal.	And some are overlooked by the intestine's thread, and this hernia is called intestinal zibiral.
E alcunas veguadas es fayta am ventositat, e alcunas veguadas corr en le budel fenda, e aqui es retenguda, e es am aquo gran pernitia3 del malaute, e alcunas veguadas fa endevenir dolor malvada e majorment quan es premut.	And some become air-filled, and some run in the intestine's fissure, and here it is kept, and this causes great pain to the patient; and sometimes bad pain, and most often when it is pressed.
E en la curacio de las especias de aquesta malautia am ferr es temor, per que cove que sia esquivat le cazament en aquela.	And in the treatment of these diseases with heat there is caution, so that one does not injure the patient with it.
E la manieyra de la operacio de aquela es que comandes al malaute que redugua le budel am la sua ma a las partidas dedintz de la sua conquavitat si obezeys al sieu retornament, e aprop sia envessat sobre le sieu col entre las tuas mas, e eleva las cambas de lu.	And the way to operate on it is that you order the patient to return the intestine to its cavity if he agrees to his return, and place him upside down between your hands, and raise the legs.
E aprop sten la codena la qual siec la codena dels testicols a las partidas desus, e inscideys la codena dels testicols tota per le lonc; e aprop fiqua en doas labias de la seccio uncis segon que indigeysses a hubrir la seccio am aquels.	And you cut the hernia cord that connects the testicles at its end, and incise the entire cord longwise; and then you place it in two pieces according to what is necessary to open the incision for them.
E si’ la seccio segon la quantitat que a tu sia possible que de aquela le huou sia foro-getat.	And if, in the section, according to the quantity that you can do it so that from it the intestine is overlooked.
E aprop excorja aquela ciphaqueth les quals so dejos la codena dels testicols, entro que sia descubert le ciphac blanc dur de quascuna partida.	And then cut off those ciphac-like things that are left of the hernia cord, so as not to leave any of it;
Lahoras tu entromet le tieu dit en aquo que siec le testicol, en aquo que es entre ciphac blanc, le qual es dejos la codena del huou, e entre le ciphac segon, e absolve am aquel’adherencia que es en la partida detras del huou.	And then you cut the testicle in two parts, so as not to cut it in half; and that it is between a white ciphac-like thing, which is left of the hernia cord, and another ciphac-like thing, and complete the incision according to the attachment that is on the back of the patient.
E aprop mau am la ma la codena dels testicols a las partidas deforo, e am aysso exten le ciphac blanc en sus am la ma sinestra, e eleva le huou am le ciphac a la partida de la seccio; e comanda al ministre que extenda le huou ensus e tu dissolveys la adherencia que es detras am solucio complida.	And then you cut the hernia cord at its ends, and extend the white ciphac on the left hand side to the hernia opening; and order the minister to extend it upward, and you dissolve the attachment that is behind with a complete solution.
E cerqua am les tieus ditz que lay no sia alcuna causa del budel envelopat en le ciphac blanc dur.	And you search in the patient's testicles to find out if there is any cause of the intestine being wrapped in the white ciphac.
Mays si tu atrobas de lu alcuna causa, lahoras tu enpelleys aquel al ventre dejos.	If you don't find any cause for this, then you should look elsewhere.
E aprop tu pren una agulha en la qual sia fiel gros fayt de x fiels, e entromet aquel deves le derier del ciphac, le qual es jos la codena dels testicols, la qual siec seccio; e aprop inscideys las extremitatz las quals emineysso del fiel entro que sian quatre fiels, e aprop compausa alcus de lor sobre alcuna figura en manieyra de crotz; e lia am aquel le ciphac del qual havem dit que es dejos la codena dels testicols am fort liament de dos partz.	And then you take a needle that is very sharp in four threads, and insert it into the back of the ciphac, which is behind the hernia cord; and then cut the two ends of the thread that come out, and then tie them together on some figure in the shape of a knot; and then put it away.
E aprop envolveys las extremitatz dels fiels e lia aquelas am liament vehement entro que alcu dels vayssels que noyrrisso aquels no puscan trametre alcuna causa per so que de aqui no accida apostema caut.	And then you wrap the ends of the threads together and tie them securely, so that any vessel that comes into contact with it does not cause a cause for a swelling to occur here.
E pausa autra veguada liament segon foro le primier liament, lonh de lu mens tres ditz; e aprop aquestz dos liaments layssa del ciphac le qual es dejos la codena dels testicols la quantitat de la grandeza del dit, e inscideys tot le romanent segon redondeza, e osta de lu le huou.	And another time, two threads in a row like the first thread, and leave it from the ciphac by the amount of the size of the finger, and cut all of it roundly; and then tie them together to secure them, and leave them from the patient' side.
E aprop inscideys en la partida dejos de la codena dels testicols per seccio de la qual corra sanc e sania ayssi cum havem recomtat en aquo que havem dit.	And then cut off the hernia cord by section from which it has been described, and this will cure and relieve pain in the patient as we have said above.
E aprop aministra lana submersa en oli, e pausa en la plagua; e aministra le liament le qual havem recomtat (e alcunas veguadas le ciphac blanc es cauterizat, le qual havem dit aprop la inscizio de lu temen de flux de sanc, quar motas veguadas accideys aquels) e leyssa le liament entro que per si caia.	And then administer a submergent soap, and cut off the plague; and then administer the thread that we have described (and sometimes white ciphac is cauterized, which we mentioned above as a way to stop bleeding due to the sudden movement of the patient), and leave the thread inside it;
Mays si le cazement de lu es tardat, lahoras de aygua cauda sia embrocat, e pausa sobre aquel entro que caia segon que havem dit.	If the patient' side is late, then cut off a tail of water, and place it inside it as we have said.
E aprop cura la plagua am l’autra curacio de las plaguas entro que sia sanat.	And this will cure the plague with another treatment for the plague.
Capitol .lxvi.	Chapter .lxxxvi.
De hernia ventosa.	On the wind hernia.
En aquesta hernia no e vist alcu que sia estat ardit sus la curacio de lu am ferr.	In this hernia, there is nothing seen that has been done to cure it.
E les primiers diyssero que es fayta ayssi cum havem recomtat en la hernia que es am vi; la qual es que tu lies les vayssels aprop la seccio sobre aquela am fecilitat de lu; e aprop secca en le mieg loc en enviro le apostema am aquo que obro aquel, entro que caian les vayssels.	And the first said that this is done in order to cure it as we have described for hernia ventosa, which is to place the intestine into its cavity with ease of movement; and then dry it up in the middle of it in the space where the swelling occurs with water that makes it move, so that the intestines do not come out.
E cura la plagua segon que havem dit entro que sia sanada.	And this will cure the plague as we have said, and make sure it is cured.
Capitol .lxvii.	Chapter  .lxxii.
De la disropcio que es fayta en les anguonars.	On the difficulty that arises in the legs.
Alcunas veguadas endeve ruptura en les angonars ayssi cum havem dit, e emineys le loc.	And some break in the legs as we have said above, and then expose the place.
E no deyssen als genetius alcuna causa dels budels al genetius; e si deyssen, aquo es pauc; e retorna s’en en totas horas.	Do not send to any gender any cause of the intestines in the gender; and if you do so, it is few; and return them all.
Mays si es prolonguat le temps am aquo, es ajustada fissura en le ciphac entro que deysenda le budel en le ciphac; e accideys aquo per la extencio del ciphac le qual es en le angonars ayssi cum havem dit, la qual causa es quar le ciphac es estendut, e aprop es mollificat e·l loc es apostemat e emineys.	If it is prolonged by time with water, a crack appears in the ciphac within which the intestines are pushed into the ciphac; and this happens as we have said above, that is to say, because the ciphac extends; and then it softens up and swells up, and it comes out.
E la cura de lu es am cauteri ayssi quo es precedida la narracio de lu.	And the cure for it is by cauterization, as we have described above.
E alcunas veguadas es curada am ferr segon aquesta manieyra: e es que·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu dos entre las tuas mas, e aprop secca le loc de la ruptura dels apostemas emineys am seccio per la latitut segon la quantitat de tres ditz.	And some are cured with it in this way: the patient jumps on his back between your hands, and then dries up the place of the rupture by section according to the amount of three threads.
E aprop strenh le ciphac blanc que es jos la codena entro que sia descubert.	And then tighten the white ciphac that is behind the hernia cord;
E aprop pren le ray e pausa aquel sobre le loc eminent del ciphac, e prem aquel al preon del ventre.	And then take the thread and place it on the prominent part of the ciphac, and press it to the belly.
E aprop cus le dos locs eminentz sobre la extremitat del ray del ciphac, e ajusta am la sutura un de aquels am l’autre.	And then cut off the two ends of the thread on the prominent part of the ciphac, and adjust one end to the other with a knot.
E aprop extratz la extremitat del ray, e no inscidas del ciphac de tot, ni no extenda le huou, ni autra causa ayssi cum yeu te fi saber en la curacio de hernia entestinal.	And then remove the end of the thread, and don't cut off the ciphac from all sides, nor extend the intestine, or any other cause as we have said above in the treatment of intestinal hernia.
E aprop cura aquela am la curacio de las plaguas, e cum inscideyses les fiels, mundifica aquela e restaura la plagua entro que sia consolidada; quar le ciphac es contrayt e no es ajustada la eminencia de ruptura.	And then cure that one with the treatment of bloodletting, and if you feel the pulse, clean it up and restore the pulse before it becomes hardened; for the pulse is contracted and not adjusted to the prominence of rupture.
E cauteri es milhor en aquest loc, quar es pus propda a salut.	Cauterization is better in this place, because it is closer to salvation.
Capitol .lxviii.	Chapter .lxxviii.
De mollificacio de la codena dels testiculs.	On the Softening of the Testicles
Motas veguadas la codena dels testiculs en alcus homes es mollificada per aysso quar las carns que so entre aquela son mollificadas, e es fedat le reguardament de lu.	Are softened for this reason, since the flesh that is between them is softened, and attention must be paid to it.
Adonc necessari es ad aquel que es preguat en la curacio de lu que fassa jazer le malaute segon le sieu dos, e enscida tota la codena la qual es mollificada sobre la codena natural; e aprop que ajuste doas labias am la sutura.	Then whoever is being treated must lie down according to his side, and the whole scrotum that has been softened should be placed on top of it; and two incisions should be made on either side, joining them together.
E si vols, cus en le comensament la superfluitat de la codena mollificada am tres cozeduras o quatre e am ferma sutura.	And if you want to, cut off the excess of the scrotum with three or four incisions and fix it tightly with a suture.
E aprop inscideys entre las suturas; e aprop cura per curacio de las autras plaguas entro que sia sanat e caian les fiels.	Then you should cut between the sutures; then treat all other wounds with bloodletting, so that they are healed and that the pulse is restored;
Capitol .lxix.	Chapter .lxxx.
De castracio.	On Castration
Sapias que castratio en nostre ley es excomengada, mays per causa es legut a mi que·m remembre de lu en aquest libre; e no es necessaria la rememoracio de lu sino per doas manieyras, de las quals es la una per so que aquo sia en la sciensa del metge quan es enterroguat de aquela, que sapia la curacio de lu al qual accideys; e l’autra manieyra es que nos motas vetz havem necessitat de castracio de autras bestias per les juvamentz nostres per aquelas, ayssi cum de motos, e de bocs, e de porcs, e de semblantz a las bestias.	You should know that in our law castration is prohibited, except for a specific reason which I will state here; and it is not necessary to mention this reason unless there are two reasons, the first being so that the doctor who treats him knows about it when he is questioned about it, and the second is that we may need to castrate other animals for our benefit by using them as breeding stock, such as horses, pigs, and similar animals.
E donc dic que castracio es fayta en dos manieyras: o per atrissio, o per fissura a seccio.	Then I say that castration is performed in two ways: either by ablation (cutting off) or by a section (incision).
Mays en aquela que es fayta per atrissio, la via de la opera es que nos fassam cezer la bestia en aygua cauda entro que·ls genetius de lu sian mollificatz e sian linhitz e que pendan.	In the castration performed by ablation, the way of operation is that you cut off the animal's tail while it is still alive; thus its testes are softened and the sperm is removed, so that it cannot be conceived again.
E aprop pren aquels am la tua ma entro que sian resols e no apparescan dejos le tocament.	Then return those to your hand within which they are to be held, so that they do not appear with the touch.
Mays en castracio fayta per fissura e seccio, cove que tu tenguas la bestia e premas la codena dels testicols de lu am la ma senestra.	In the castration performed by incision and section, if you have the animal, hold it with your left hand and press the scrotum of its testes with your right hand.
E aprop lia le suspensori, e inscideys sobre quascun huou am una seccio entro que dos huous proceseysso.	Then tie up the testicles with a string, and cut them off from each side with two incisions; then process the pieces.
E aprop inscideys aquels pus que auras quascu excorjat.	Then cut off those too if you want to;
E no leysses sobre aquels del ciphac alcuna causa, sino le ciphac subtil le qual es sobre les vazes.	And do not apply any treatment to those of the testicles except for the subtle one which is applied to the veins.
E aquesta manieyra de castracio es milhor la qual es fayta per atrissio, quar atrissio fort leu layssa alcuna causa dels testicols per que la bestia desira coyt.	This method of castration is better, since ablation makes the beast desire not to copulate;
E aprop cura la plagua entro que sia sanada.	Then cure the wound so that it heals.
Capitol .lxx.	Chapter .lxx.
De la cura de hermafrodozia.	On the Treatment of Hermaphroditism
Hermafrodozia en les homes es segon dos manieyras: la una es quar o appar en aquo que siec l’espazi en la codena de testiculs, en aquel que es entre dos testiculs figura quar cunh de femna en la qual so pels.	Hermaphroditism in men is due to two causes: one is that the space between the testicles is closed; another is that there is a penis, since it is a combination of male and female characteristics.
E alcunas veguadas de aquel corr urina le qual es en la codena dels testiculs.	Some have this condition, which is present in the scrotum of the testes.
Mays en las femnas es una specia: e es que·l conh de la femna sobre le pentenilh es ayssi cum dos testiculs de home un pauc de tot yminiheys a la partida deforo ayssi cum le perpucii de home e dos testicols.	In women, it is another species; and it is that the female's penis is like two male testicles combined together; and its scrotum is like a man's.
E la curacio es de tres specias: de dos dels homes e de una specia de las femnas.	The treatment is of three kinds: two for men, and one for women.
E es que cove que tu inscidas aquelas carns ajustadas entro que efuga la emprecio de aquela, e aprop que cures aquelas am curacio de las autras plaguas.	Since it is necessary that you cut the flesh to fit it together so as to avoid the odour of that one; and then treat all other wounds with bloodletting.
E en la segonda specia dels homes de la qual yeys urina la qual es en la codena dels testiculs, no es curacio ni opperacio en lu.	In the second species of men, where there is urine in the scrotum of the testes, no treatment or operation is needed for it.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter  . XXI.
De lentinge e de carn eminent per causas de las femnas.	On the Lancing and Cutting of Flesh for Female Causes
Lentige fort leu es ajustada sobre causas naturals entro que es etressat e es fayt leg le reguardament; e alcunas veguadas es magnificada en alcunas femnas en tant entro que es spandit ayssi cum en les homes e perve entro al coito.	Lancing that is firm is adjusted to natural causes, but it is not cut off unless it becomes too large, and it is kept under control; and some women have this condition, which is like a lace in men, and it is cut within the vagina so as not to interfere with intercourse.
Adonc cove que tu tenguas la superfluitat de lentinge am la tua ma o am unci e inscidas.	Then return the excess of the lancing to your hand or to another person, and cut it off.
E no ultimes en inscizio, majorment en le preon de la razit, per so que no endevengua flux de sanc.	And do not cut too deeply, especially in the area of the genitals; so that there is no flow of blood to the area.
E aprop cura aquela am curacio de las plaguas entro que sia sanada.	Then treat that one with bloodletting so that it heals.
Mays carn nascuda es carn que nays en le horrifici de la mayre entro que umple aquel, e fort leu es eyssit a las partidas deforo segon semblansa de coa (e per aquo alscus primiers appelero aquo “malautia caudada”); donc cove que nos inscidam ayssi cum inscidem lentinge, e curem aquela entro que sia sanada.	Some hidden flesh that grows inside the mother, and it is very hot; it is like coa (and I call this "hot meat"); then we cut off that one as we do with lancing, and treat that one so that it heals.
Capitol .lxxii.	Chapter  . lxxii.
De curacio de alratica.	On the Treatment of Gouty Fever (Gout)
Alratica es que le conh de la femna no sia perforat, o sia le trauc petit.	It is that the female' penis not be pierced, or that it be a small hole.
E es o natural o accidental.	It is either due to nature or due to accident.
Accidental es per malautia la qual ha precedit, e aquela es fayta o per carn nada ajustada o per ciphac subtil o espes.	Accidental is when the gouty fever that preceded it is severe; and that one is caused by bad meat or by subtle poison or spice.
E es fayt o en le preon de la mayre, o en les costatz de lu, o en le pus sobira de lu, o en le pus bas de lu, e prohibeys de cuoyt e de enprenguacio e de enfantament, e fort leu prohibeys las mestruas.	It is either caused by bad meat from the mother, or by her belly button, or by the pus on the top of it, or by the pus at the bottom of it; and it prohibits coition and pregnancy and childbirth, and it strongly discourages milk.
E la cognicio de aquela es fayta per reguardament de la metrona, si la oppilacio es apparent, propdana; mays si no es apparent, lahoras tu cerqua aquela am les tieus ditz o am le ray.	The knowledge of that one is gained through watching the mother closely; if the opposition is apparent, then certainly; but if it is not apparent, then you should ask about it with a trusted person or a doctor.
Mays si oppilacio es per ciphac subtil, e es propda a las doas labias, lahoras tu coyta e disromp aquela.	If the opposition is by subtle poison, and it is between the two lips, then you should cut and remove that one.
E es que pauses sobre las doas labias pulvils, e aprop pausa les tieus ditz indicz de amdoas las mas encemps.	Then place a powder between the two lips; and with a pointed cautery, mark both sides at the same time.
E la femna sia sobre le sieu dos, las sieuas coyssas extendudas, e aprop exten las doas labias am forsa entro que aquel ciphac subtil sia romput e la oppilacio sia uberta.	Then place the woman on her side; spread out her legs, and with a sharp instrument, cut through both lips to stop the subtle poison from spreading; and if the opposition is apparent, then continue.
E aprop pren lana e enbeu le4 en oli e pausa aquela sobre·l loc, e jagua am home le dia per so que·l loc inscis no sia consolidat.	Then take a piece of cloth and place it over the area; keep it in place for the time needed so that the area does not become hardened.
Mays si le ciphac es gros e espes, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquel am spatum lat o am fuelha de mirta.	If the poison is thick and spicy, then cut it with a sharp knife or a blade; also, you can use salt water to clean it.
Mays si la oppilacio es per carnada, lahoras suspen aquela am unci, e inscideys aquela.	If the opposition is due to meat, then hang that one upside down, and cut it.
E sian am tu las medicinas que fan cessar flux de sanc ses mordicacio, ayssi cum ahacatia, e sanc de drago, e enses, ajustat am album de huou.	Then give the medicine that stops the flow of blood, such as astringent and bitter herbs; also, give milk to taste, and adjust it to the taste of two eggs.
E aprop aministra una canulha de plom ampla per so que la plagua no sia consolidada leugierament.	Then administer a wide, flat spoonful of plummy metal; so that the wound does not become hardened too much.
E tengua aquela per alcus jorns e aministra calgua de li sec.	Keep that one for a few days and then administer cold water.
E aprop sia curada am l’autra curacio de consolidacio entro que sia sanada.	Then treat it with the other treatment of hardening so that it heals.
E alcunas vetz accideys en la mayre nativitat de autres carns, e lahoras cove que inscidas segon aquesta manieyra.	Sometimes, during the birth of a child, some flesh is born; then cut it according to this method.
Mays si aysso es per apostema crancos, a l’apostema crancos le qual es en la mayre no sia fayta contrarietat am ferr en deguna manieyra.	If that one is due to cold flesh, and the cold flesh during pregnancy is not caused by taking something in any way.
Capitol .lxxiii.	Chapter   . lxxiii.
De la cura de emorroydas e de tayl e de botor roja que accideysso en le conh de las femnas.	On the Treatment of Hemorrhoids and Red Swellings that Occur in the Rectum of Women
Emorroydas so apprecio dels orificis de motas venas entro que de aquelas corro mot sanc continuadament; e cum so antiquadas emorroydas e son fayts theyls.	Here comes the first sentence to translate. Do not add any comments, like "here is the translation", just reply with the guessed translation and nothing else:
E ja yeu he dit en la divisio las specias de aquelas e les senhals de aquelas, e diyre ayssi aquelas que recebo curacio e aquelas que no recebo curacio.	I have already spoken about the types of these things and their characteristics, as well as those that are cured and those that are not cured.
Donc dic que emorroydas e theyls quan so en le preon de la mayre e no apparo al sentiment, lahoras en aquelas no sia fayta curacio am ferr.	I say that hemorrhoids and their throbs are when they are in the mother's pucker and do not appear in her feeling, but in those there is no cure by applying fire.
Mays aquelas las quals so en le orrifici de la mayre sobre las quals catz sentiment, so aquelas que so curadas.	Those that are in the mother' orifice above which she feels sensation are the ones that are cured.
E cove que tu metas la femna en mayso frega e aprop exten atheyl am les forfexs, o am drap aspre, e inscideys aquelas am las razitz.	And when you place the woman in a mayso cloth and rub her with hot furrows or a sharp blade, and cut them with razors.
E aprop pulveriza sobre aquelas deves le fluxs del sanc de una de las polveras insciscivas ses mordicacio, ayssi cum acassia e semblant ad aquels.	Then sprinkle those with the powder of the medicine that you have cut from one of the powders by chewing it, thus adding ashes and resembling those.
E aprop enpellesca les sieus pes per una hora, e aprop pausa aquela en aygua freja.	Then tie their feet for an hour, and then place them in hot water.
E si persevera le fluxs del sanc, lahoras fay aquela sezer en decoccio de sumat e de scorsas de milgranas e de gualas e de semblantz.	And if the flow of the pain persists, then prepare them in a decoction of sumac and peppercorns and ginger and resembling herbs.
E aprop pren farina de ordi e comfiys aquela am miel e vi agre e fay emplastre am aquo sobre le dos de lu.	Then take wheat flour and make a paste with honey and vinegar, and place it on their two feet.
E si le sanc es abscindit, bo es; e sino, fay adherir am dos ventozas, e a las mamilhas ses escarificatio.	And if the pain has disappeared, it is good; but if not, then bind them with two veils, and cut their breasts.
E aprop pren lana e submergeys aquela am suc de coliandre o am suc de arnagloza o am suc de guarravier am vi pentit e fay adherir al loc; e aprop cura le loc am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	Then take wool and immerse those in the juice of coriander or the juice of arnica or the juice of hawthorn, and bind them to the place; and heal the place with hot water inside that it may be healed.
Mays athyl rog le qual es de aspre reguardament, cove que tu inscidas aquo que a tu appar de aquel segon que he dit en theyl engualment.	And those that are red and inflamed, when you pour water on them from one of the second things that I have said in the feeling of thorns.
E cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	Then heal that inside that it may be healed.
Capitol .lxxiv.	Chapter. LVII.
De perforacio de eyssedura accident en la mayre.	Of the piercing of a sore in the mother.
Motas specias de apostemas accideysso en la mayre, ayssi cum cranc e apostema lapident e ulceracios e adhubelat e erpetromens e fistulas emorroyas e raguarrias e thyl e autres apostemas.	Many species of blisters occur in the mother, thus causing chapping and blistering and ulceration and pustules and fistulas of hemorrhoids and raguarries and thyles and other blisters.
E yeu ja he dit aquestas malautias e las specias de aquelas e les senhals de aquelas, e las curacios de lor en la divisio.	I have already spoken about these diseases and their characteristics and the cures for them in the division.
E cove que yeu digua en aquest tractat de apostema caut le qual ve en la mayre quan es dels apostemas que collegeysso sania, e si vols saber en qual manieyra se fa la opperacio de lu am ferr.	And when I say in this treatise about the cure of the blisters that are found in the mother and how to treat them if you want to know how to perform the surgery by applying fire.
Adonc cove que tu consideres si la dolor de la apostema en le sieu comensament es aguda am percussio e flecma e febre, e vezes aquel enrogezir e si catz sobre aquel le sentiment, lahoras no·t coytes am perforacio de lu, e cura aquel am aquo que ajuda sobre la maturacio entro que cesse la acuitat dels accidentz.	Then consider whether the pain of the blister in its beginning is acute by percussion and fluids and fever, and often whether it becomes hard and whether sensation appears on it; then do not pierce it with fire, but heal it with hot water that helps to mature it so that the acute nature of the accident passes.
E lahoras cove que tu fassas cezer la femna sobre una cezelha que aia doas cezelhas; e recline sobre le sieu dos e ajusta les sieus pes a la partida pus dejos del ventre, e las sieus coyssas sian expandudas, e pausa les sieus brasses dejos les sieus denols, e lia quascus am liament ad aquo convenient.	Then when you place the woman on a bench that has two; and she leans on her two feet from behind her belly, and her legs are spread wide, and pauses her hands below her hips, and ties something to her with a rope convenable to water.
E aprop la matrona segua del latz dreyt e aministre le instrument am le qual es ubert le orrifici de la mayre, la forma del qual vindra en aquelas causas que·s faran aprop.	Then the woman approaches from the right side and brings the instrument that is appropriate to pierce the orifice of the mother, its form will depend on those cases that will be done.
E cove quan vols ministrar aquest instrument que tu fiques am lo ray le preon de la mayre de la femna, e aquo que del instrument es intrat en la mayre no sia mays que·l preon de la mayre e leda le malaute.	And when you want to administer this instrument, you remain with your back to the mother of the woman, and through the instrument it enters into the mother and all the malut is within her pucker.
Mays si l’estrument es major que·l preon de la mayre, lahoras cove que tu pauses pulvils sobre la textura del preon de la mayre per sso que sia prohibit l’intrament de tot instrument en le preon de la mayre.	If the instrument is larger than the mother's pucker, then when you place powder on the texture of the mother's pucker so that it prevents the entry of any instrument into the mother's pucker.
E cove que tu pauses le vertitge que corr en le strument del latz pus desus e que le ministre tengua le strument e revolva le vertitge entro que sia ubert le orrifici de la mayre.	And when you place the liquid that runs in the instrument from above and the minister has the instrument and mixes the liquid inside so that it pierces the orifice of the mother.
E cum appar la excitura, e es tocada am la ma e es leon e molh, lahoras cove que tu secces aquela deves le cap de lu am spatum lat.	And when the excitement appears, and it is touched with the hand and wet and cold, then when you dry those with a sponge by pouring hot water on them.
E cum la sania es evacuada, lahoras cove que tu pauses en la plagua una meca submersa en oli rozat o oli vert en le qual sia alcuna stiptisitat; e pausa la calca7 en la seccio en le preon de la mayre.	And when the pain is relieved, then place in the water a sponge that is submerged in rose oil or green oil and has no stinging; and pause the blood,7 in the pucker of the mother's pucker.
E pause deforo la mayre e sobre le pentenilh lana munda submersa en aygua en la qual sian bulidas malvas.	Then hang the mother upside down and place on its head a clean cloth that is submerged in water in which the color is clear.
E aprop sia curada aprop dos dias am enguent le qual conveneys ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	Then it is cured, then bind it for two days by applying hot water inside so that it may be healed.
E alcunas veguadas es lavada la mayre e la plagua enayssi que es cristerisat am aygua e mel, e aprop am aygua en la qual es bulhida razit de liri o de aristologia longua, e aprop retorna al enguent.	Some women are washed and rinsed in water until it is cristallized, then they are submerged in hot water with a hair of arnica or a long hair of herb, and returned to the enguent.
E si la plagua es dedintz en la mayre ameguada, lahoras cove que tu sias prohibit de la curacio de lu am ferr, habantz cura aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio.	And if the pain is deep inside the mother that has been washed, then you are forbidden to cure it by applying fire, but heal it with hot water that I have said in the division.
Capitol .lxxv.	Chapter. LVII.
A ensenhar las matronas en qual manieyre les enbrios bius sian medicatz quan yeysso segon figura no-natural.	Of teaching mothers how to cure their blisters when they are in a second figure that is unnatural.
Necessaria causa es que la matrona conogua en le comensament la figura del enfantament natural per senhals de lu, e es que quan tu vezas la femna expremar a las partidas dejos e desira odorar le ayre, e sobre aquo es enleujada per aquo que sobre ela es del part, e festina le eyssiment del enbrio, lahoras sapias que aquest part es segon figura natural, e es l’eyssiment de lu sobre le sieu cap, e la segondina am aquel o suspensa o pendent del ombelic.	A necessary cause is that the mother touches in its beginning the figure of natural childhood by signs of her, and it is because when you see the woman express herself from behind and desire to smell the air, and above it is enveloped by the air that comes from her, and quickly she smells him; then know that this part is a second figure that is natural, and it is his smelling on her head, and the second after that hangs or hangs on her navel.
Donc cum tu vezes aquels senhals, lahoras cove que·l ventre de lu sia compremut per so que l’embrio deysenda leugerament quar quan deyssen sobre le sieu cap, deysen a lu la segondina, e es mondada de aquelas superfluitatz am bona mondificacio.	Then when you see those signs, then the mother's belly is twisted, so that the embryo smells gently; when it smells him on her head, then send it away, and let those excessive things be removed with good washing.
Mays aquel que es otra aquest part es no-natural e no-lausable, quar quan le enbrio es eyssit sobre sos pes e·l cos de lu es eyssit devant le cap de lu e·ls pes de lu, e la ma de lu una, o al pe de lu .i., o es eyssit le cap de lu e la ma de lu, o al ventre de lu, e fort leu es convertit sobre le sieu col, e semblant de las figuras de lu no-lausablas.	But that which is another part of this figure is unnatural and not pleasing, because when the embryo is lying on her back and his head between her legs and her feet, and her mother's hand one, or at her neck; Or is lying on her head and her mother' hand one, or at her navel, and firmly it has turned on her chest, and resembling those natural figures that are not pleasing.
Don necessaria causa es a la matrona que sia savia e subtil en totas aquelas causas, e que·s guarde de error e de decepcio.	A necessary cause is that the mother is wise and subtle in all these things, and that she guards against error and deception.
E yeu so mostrant tota figura de aquelas, e qual engen es en aquelas per so que sia significat per aquo e sia stat sobre aquo.	I show you all those figures, and which is right in them so that it may be understood by water and stand on it.
Quan le feyt es eyssit sobre le sieu cap per egrecio natural, e aquel es vehement sobre la femna e es fayt a lu part dificil, e vezes la vertut de lu ja debelitada, lahoras fay aquela sezer , o que las femnas tenguan lu, e evapora le conh de lu am fenugrec coyt e am olis humitz.	When the embryo is lying on her head by natural goodness; and that which is violent on the woman, and it is difficult to perform; and sometimes her virtue has already been weakened, then she should smell it, or what women have of him, and evaporate his sweat with fenugrec and rosewater.
E aprop entrometa la metrona entre les sieus ditz espatum petit e fenda am aquel la segondina, o secce aquela am la sua ungla entro que corro aquo que es en ela de humiditat.	Then place the mother between her two feet and make a small hole with it for the second time, and seal that with a damp cloth so that water may flow through it.
E preme le ventre de la femna entro que deyssenda le fet.	Then press the woman' belly until she smells him.
Mays si no deyssen, lahoras cove que la femna sia cristirizada de mucellage de ptilli e mucellage de fenugrec am cizami.	If they do not smell, then the woman is cristallized with a spray of herbs and a spray of fenugrec by enveloping it.
E aprop comanda a lu, aprop le cristeri, que sia compremuda e fay aquela stornudar am condisi; e te la boca de lu e·l nas de lu per huna hora, quar le fet sira foro-getat tantost.	Then order her to wash and freeze her, that she may be refreshed; and put the mouth of her and her nose for an hour, because the embryo is often forgotten.
E si las doas mas del fet so foro-getadas al comensament, lahoras cove que tu redusiscas aquelas am fecilitat petit a petit.	And if the two more of the foot are still sore at the beginning, then know that you should reduce them slowly little by little.
Mays si no obezeys al intrament, lahoras pausa la femna sobre una cezelha e leva les pes de lu sus, e aprop concuceys la cezelha sobre la terra; e la femna sia tenguda que no caia deves la concussio.	May also if you do not obey the instrument, then pause the woman over a board and lift her feet off the ground, and bring the board close to the ground; and the woman be held so that she does not fall down from the impact.
E si las mas no son dedintz tornadas e morr le fet, lahoras inscideys aquelas e extratz le romament del fet o lia le cors a la ma de lu am drap e extratz aquel am equalitat, quar aquel sira foro-getat.	And if the rest are not turned in and take the foot out, then cut them off and pull out the bone of the foot or tie it to its side with a rope and pull it out equally, for that is still sore.
De eyssiment del embrio sobre les sieus pes.	De the birth of the embryo on their feet.
Quan le fet yeys sobre les sieus pes, lahoras cove que tu impelliscas aquels en sus, e aprop convertas le fet petit, e aprop que engualhes aquel, e aprop que prenguas un pe de lu e extendas aquels petit a petit.	When the foot is placed on its own feet, then know that you should impel them to stand up, and bring the foot small by small, and bind it, and take one leg of it and stretch them little by little.
Mays cum son eyssit entro a las coyssas, lahoras tu comanda a lu que se exprema, e fay aquela extornudar am condizi, quar sira foro-getat si Deus lo vol.	May also when they are born between the thighs, then command him to squeeze, and make them defecate equally, for that is still sore if God wills it.
E si no es foro-getat am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras tu retorna le fet petit a petit entro que pauses aquel segon figura natural, quar aquel sira lahoras foro-getat am leugier eyssiment.	And if it is not sore with the water that I have mentioned, then return the foot little by little until you pause it in the second natural position, for that is still sore after the birth.
E si es prohibit am tot aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras pren de musellage de altea e de goma dissolvuda, e percuteys tot en le mortier per bona percussio, e aprop linieys am aquo le conh de la femna, el pus bas del ventre de lu.	And if it is forbidden with all the water that I have mentioned, then take the muscle of the aloe and the dissolved gum, and strike them together in a mortar for good pounding, and then pour the blood of the woman, the lowest part of her belly.
E aprop fay aquela cezer en aygua tebeza, entro que consegua les ypocondias.	Then bring that caesar in running water, so that it cleans the hernia.
E cum vezes que las partidas dejos de lu so lenificadas, lahoras fay a lu subfumiguacio de mirta e sub-pausa aquela a lu.	And when the parts of him are no longer sore, then make him submerse in mint water and pause him.
E quan te la sub-fumiguacio per una hora, lahoras tu la fay sezer sobre una cezelha, e aprop fay aquela stornudar e extrenh la boca de lu, e levas de aquela, e prem la partida pus bassa del ventre de lu am leugiera compressio, quar le fet sira tantost foro-getat.	And when he has been submerged in mint water for an hour, then bring him to sit on a board, and make him sneeze and open his mouth, and remove it, and press the lowest part of his belly lightly with compression, because the foot is still sore.
Eyssiment del fet sobre les sieus denols e las suas mas.	The birth of the foot on its own feet and their hands.
Quan le fet eyssira segon aquesta forma, lahoras tu engenies en entrometen las suas mas petit a petit; e aprop la femna stia evessada sobre le sieu col, e les pes de lu pengo en jos, e aquelas sia jasent sobre le lieyt, e complegua las suas mas.	When the foot is born in this form, then you make yourself enter their hands little by little; and the woman sits on her own hip, and their feet are placed on the ground, and they rest on the mattress, and hold their hands.
E aprop prem sobre le ventre de lu petit a petit, e aprop extratz aquo que es dejos les pes de lu de las aurelhas entro que sia preparada en la partida pus dejos.	Then press lightly on her belly little by little, and then remove the water that is under her feet from the ears, so that it is prepared for the birth of the lowest part.
E si le fet no es fora-getat, lahoras pren les pes de lu e mau aquels am movement vehement, e aprop prem aquo que es sobre les ypocondres petit a petit entro que le fet puege a las partidas desus.	And if the foot is not still sore, then take her feet and make them move violently, and then press the water that is under them little by little until the foot can come out on its own.
E aprop entrometa las suas mas e engualhe le fet petit a petit, e comanda a la femna que se exprema entro que le fet sia foro-getat.	Then make them enter their hands and bind the foot little by little, and command the woman to squeeze until the foot is still sore.
Eyssiment del fet latutidinalment pendent una de las suas mas.	The birth of the foot laterally hanging on one of its hands.
Sia engeniat en reduccio de la ma de lu, mays si no podes aquela reduzir, lahoras eleva la femna e fe aquela anar.	Is already opening little by little with her own hand, but if you cannot do it, then raise the woman and make her walk.
E si anar no pot, lahoras fay la jazer sobre le lieyt, e concuteys las coyssas de lu am concussio vehement, e aprop aministra liamentz les quals yeu e recomtatz de mucillages.	And if she cannot walk, then make her sit on the mattress, and strike her thighs violently, and then administer with great care the muscles that I have mentioned.
E si es vengut le enfantament, lahoras fay aquela sezer sobre cezelha, e aprop studia sobre la reduccio de la ma, e enguala le fet segon figura natural, e fay stornudar la femna e comanda a lu que comprema a si entro que sia foro-getat.	And if the child is born, then make her sit on a board, and study the reduction of her hand, and bind the foot in its second natural position, and make the woman sneeze and command her to squeeze herself until she is still sore.
Eyssiment del fet sobre·l col expandudas las suas mas e la fassia de lu es al dos de la sua mayre.	The birth of the foot on her hip, with its hands spread out, and the sole of the foot is at the back of her mother's thigh.
Cove que la matrona tengua la ma del fet e aprop revolva aquel petit a petit, e eque aquel am facilitat.	Then the mother should hold the foot and roll it little by little, and make it easy to turn.
E cum es e quant so es engualhat, e lahoras pausa sobre le conh de lu aquo que havem recomtat de oli e de mucellages.	And when it is bound, then pause on its head that water that I have mentioned with oil and muscle.
E aprop comandas a lu que·s maugua petit a petit, e quan auras feyt aquo, lahoras fay aquela cezer sobre una cezelha e comanda li que sia inclinada sobre le latz dreyt, e aprop comanda a lu que sia compremuda; e fay aquela stornudar am condizi.	Then command her to massage herself little by little, and when she has finished doing it, then make her sit on a board and lean to the right, and command her to squeeze with great care.
Exitus foetus praeparati super latus.	The exit of the baby is prepared next to the mother's side.
Quan deyssen a horrifici de la mayre segon aquesta manieyra, considera, e lahoras tu inscideys la segondina am la tua ungla entro que sia evacuada de la humiditat.	When it comes out of the mother's side in this way, consider it, and then you cut the second with your own hand within that it is evacuated of its moisture.
E si le fet es suspendut sobre la cara e·l col de lu, lahoras tu inscideys aquela del embelic, per so que no sia retengut e mora.	And if the foot hangs over her face and hip, then you cut off the umbilical cord so that it is not held and does not die.
E aprop empelleys le fet a las partidas dedintz entro que pauses aquel segon que cove, e manda a la femna que comprema a si alcunas veguadas, e el sira fora-getat am eyssiment leugier, si Dieus o vol.	Then bind the foot to the lower parts within that you pause the second one, and command the woman to squeeze herself several times, and let him stand if God wills it.
Exitus geminorum aut foetuum multorum.	The exit of two or more babies.
Sapias que gemels motas veguadas so natz, e alcunas vetz naysso tres o quatre , mays aquo es estranh e tart s’endeve; mays v so causas foro natura, e no vivo.	Know that twins move their eyes, and sometimes three or four of them are born, but if they are not alive, they are a natural cause, and not for death.
E conte aquelas, ja sia que sian montiplicatz, una segondina, e son seperatz per ciphac, distingen aquels enter le liguament en l’ombilic de cascun de aquels E alcunas veguadas so foro-getatz ayssi cum es un fet per eyssiment natural leugier, e so eysitz alcunas veguadas per eyssiment no-lausabla ayssi cum havem recomtat.	Consider that they are multiplied, one second, and they are separated by an edge, distinguishing between them in the navel of each of them; And some eyes are still sore because it is a natural cause, and not for death. Also, consider that two fetuses are born by natural cause, but if they do not move, they are not alive yet.
E si son dificils alcus de lor deves le enfantament e perveno ad aquo que havem dit de las figuras no-naturals, lahoras tu cura aquels ayssi cum havem recontat.	And if they are difficult to understand due to their figures not being natural, then you should take care of them as I have mentioned when they are born.
E si’ la matrona subtil e fassa aquo que fa am facilitat e subtilitat, e am tarditat, e sia ingeniat segon tota figura segon que es a lu preparat de l’engen amenant a salut.	And if the mother is soft and gentle, and slow, then she should prepare herself according to all figures of her hand towards salvation.
Rememoratio eius quod formatur in matrice ex embrionibus et Abortiuntur.	Recall that it is formed in the mother' womb from embryos, and some are aborted.
Alcunas veguadas son formatz en la mayre un, e dos, e tres, e quatre, e v, e vi, e vii, e mays x, e ja es deves mi verificat que una femna abortem ne getet vi, e una autra x totz formatz, la qual causa fo fayta per mensuracio dels glorios savis.	Some are formed in the mother's body one, two, three, four and so on up to fifty and seven; and it has already been verified that a woman gets six when all of them are formed, which causes a woman to fail due to measurements made by the glorious sages.
E tot aysso cove que sia en la sciencia de la matrona quar fort leu ad aquela parve semblant de aquo, e donc opause se ad aquo am so que cove.	Then know that it is in the science of the mother as it is strong for her like a small appearance of water, and therefore pause at water because it is small.
Capitol .lxxvi.	Chapter 67.
De extraccio del fet quan es mort.	Of the extraction of the foot when it is dead.
Quan tu curas le fet mort am aquo que havem dit en la divisio de la medicacio e no es defora eyssit, e tu yest forsat usar de opperacio am ma, lahoras cove que consideras si la femna es de sana vertut e no es am alcu dels accidentz per les quals sobre ela es temuda perdicio.	When you care for the dead foot with water that I have mentioned in the division of medicine, and it is not still alive, then you should use surgery on her hand, because know if the woman is of good health and not an alms to which she is lost by accident.
Lahoras cove que la femna sia envessada sobre le lieyt sobre le sieu dos, e sia le cap de lu enclinat enjos e las coyssas de lu sian elevadas.	Then the woman should be placed on her back on her own hip, and her head should be lowered towards the ground and her thighs raised.
E·l ministre tengua aquela de doas partz o sia liada en le lieyt per so que·l cos de lu no se extenda deves la extraccio del fet.	The minister should hold her from two parts or from one side on the ground so that the flesh of her does not spread out too much after the extraction of the foot.
E aprop tu humecta la boca de la mayre de lu am olis humitz e am mucellage de altea e de fenugrec e de semensa de li.	And if it is still sore, then you order her to lean on the right side and make her sneeze with a mixture of oil of almond, fenugreek, and mint.
E aprop unte la matrona la sua ma am aquels olis e mucellages, e aprop entrometa la sua ma am fecilitat en la mayre, e aprop cerque am la ma loc en le qual fique les uncis en le fet.	And place the woman's hand near those odors and mucus, and enter the mother with ease, and hold her place where the nails are placed on the body.
E locs convenient en aquo: adonc tu considera si le fet es preparat que deysenda sobre le sieu cap, e lahoras tu fique les uncis en les huels de lu, o en le col, o en la boca, o en le palat, o dejos la barba, o en la furcula de lu, o en les locs propdas de las costas, o dejos les ypocondres.	And place it conveniently: then consider whether the body is ready to place on its head, and then fix the nails in its holes, or in its neck, or in its mouth, or in its palate, or let the beard, or in its throat, or in the spaces near the ribs, or let the hips.
Mays si le deysendiment es sobre les pes de lu, lahoras en le pentenilh, o en le mieg de las costas.	And if you send it on the feet of him, then in the penile, or in the middle of the ribs.
E cove que tengua le unci am la ma dreyta, e pausa la curvitat de lu en aquel loc le qual es entre les ditz de la ma senestra, e entrometa la ma am facilitat e fique le unci en alcu de aquels locs les quals havem ditz, entro que pervengua a la causa boyda.	And when he has the nail on his right hand, and place the curvature of him in that place which is between the fingers of his left hand, and enter with ease and fix the nail in some of those places that we have said, so that it reaches to the source of pain.
E aprop pause e fique en la apposicio de lu un autre unci, o le tertz si es necessitat, per so que sia atraccio engual, e no sia extencio segon la sua rectetut tant solament.	Then place and fix another nail on him, or the third one if it is necessary, so that he is a trap of gold, and not a cut according to its rectitude alone.
Ans sia maugut a tota partida, per so que l’eyssiment de lu sia alleujat ayssi cum es fayt en dent deves la eradicacio de lu.	And then it is better that he be made whole at once, so that the pain of him is eased thus when done in a single stroke as the eradication of him.
E cove en lu aquo que es entre lor que la extencio sia mollificada; e si alcuna partida de lu es retenguda, lahoras cove que la matrona unte alcus sieus ditz am oli e entrometa aquels espertament e revolva am aquels aquo que es retengut.	And when the water that is between them is softened; and if any part of him is held back, then consider that the woman puts some oil on it and enters with a wand and turns with that water that is held back.
Donc si la partida del fet es fora-getada, lahoras les uncis sian permudatz entra loc le qual sia pus aut; e fay aysso entro que tot le fet sia fora-getat.	Then if the part of the body is forgotten, then the nails are exchanged from place to place which is put there first; and do so that all the body is forgotten.
Mays si la ma es eyssida denant l’autra, e no es possible reduzir aquela per la coartacio de lu, lahoras cove que drap sia envolopat sobre aquela; e aprop extratz aquela entro que tota sia fora-getada, e inscideys aquela o en la junctura de la ma o en le coyde.	And if the hand is injured in front of the other one, and it is not possible to reduce that one by its curl, then consider that it is wrapped around that one; and then take off that one that all is forgotten, and cut it or at the joint of the hand or in the crotch.
E ayssi cove que fassas en l’autra ma e en les dos pes.	Then do so on the other hand and on the two feet.
Mays si le cap del fet es gran, o accideys a lu coartacio en le eyssiment, o es en le cap de lu aygua ajustada, lahoras cove que entrometa entre les ditz espatum spinos e fenda le cap e extragua la aygua, o que discroba aquel am un instrument le qual es nompnat “alundat”, la forma del qual vindra am las formas dels autres instruments en le capitol le qual es aprop aquest.	And if the head of the body is large, or the curl happens in the irrigation, or it is in the middle of the water that is adjusted, then consider that you enter between the fingers and split the head and remove the water, or that you take off that one with a tool called "alundered", the form of which will come to the forms of the other tools in the chapter that is appropriate for this.
E semblantment fassa si·l fet es de gran cap per natura: e lahoras cove que inscida aquel am algematu, o que prengua aquel am alunda ayssi cum havem dit; e aprop extra les osses am les forceps.	And apparently do so if the body is large in nature: and then consider that you cut that one with an instrument, or take it off with a tool as we have said; and then take out the bones with tweezers.
E si le cap es eyssit e es coartat deves la furcula, lahoras sia fendut entro que la humiditat la qual es en le pietz sia efunduda.	And if the head is injured and its curl happens at the throat, then consider that you split it so that the moisture that is in the feet is spilled.
Mays si no es complicat, ni obezeys a eyssiment, lahoras tu inscideys le cap tantost segon que a tu sira possible.	And if it does not cause complication or difficulty, and you do so quickly as you can.
E si le dejos del ventre es apostemat o es en lu ydropici, lahoras cove que tu perfores aquel entro que corro la humiditat que es en lu.	And if the belly is injured in front of the back, or it is in the water-pass, then consider that you pierce that one where the moisture that is in him passes.
Mays si le fet es sobre les sieus pes, lahoras la atraccio de lu es leugiera e la direccio de lu a la boca de la mayre es leugiera.	And if the body is on its feet, then the attraction of him is light and his direction to the mouth of the mother is also light.
Mays si es coartat deves le ventre e·l pietz, lahoras cove que tu extraguas aquel am drap le qual auras envolopat sobre la tua ma, e que fendes le ventre e·l pietz entro que corra aquo que es en aquels.	And if the belly is injured in front of the back, then consider that you take off that one with a cloth that you have wrapped around your hand, and split the belly so that the water that is in them runs.
Mays si les autres membres so ostatz e torna le cap, lahoras la metrona entrometa la ma senestra; mays si la boca de la mayre es huberta, lahoras intrometa la ma en le preon de layre, e cerque am aquela le cap, e atira aquel am les ditz entro a la boca de la mayre, e aprop entrometa en lu un unci, o dos uncis, e atire lu am aquels.	And if the other members are held back and turned the head, then the woman enters with her left hand; if the mouth of the mother is open, then enter with your right hand, and seek that one with its fingers, and throw it into the mouth of the mother, and place a nail in him, or two nails, and throw him in.
E si la boca de la mayre es coartada per apostema caut le qual accideys a l’u, lahoras cove que no sia trebelhat sobre lu; abantz cove lahoras aministrar efusio de causas humidas grassas.	And if the mouth of the mother is closed by a swell that happens to him, then consider that it is not moved on top of him; and if it is not, then prepare an effusion of warm water.
E aministre emplastres; e segua le pacient en ayguas que mollifican e humectan.	And administer poultices; and follow the patient with water that softens and moistens him.
E si le fet es sobre le sieu costat, lahoras si possible es, sia agulat: e sia aministrat aquo que havem dit en le fet viu.	And if the body is on its side, then consider that it is rolled over; and water is administered that we have said in the living body.
E si aquo no es possible, lahoras sia inscidit en pessas, e sia extrayt.	Then, if water is not possible, then consider that you are cut into pieces, and then remove them.
E cove que non layssas alcuna causa dedintz de la segondina.	And when there is no reason left inside the second one.
E cum tu auras complida tota la tua opperacio, lahoras aministra aquo que havem dit de la curacio en les apostemas cautz les quals accideysso de la mayre.	And when you have finished your entire operation, then administer water that we have said in the swelling caues that happen to the mother.
E si accideys flux de sanc, lahoras deyssendas en ayguas stipticas e aministra l’autra curacio.	And if there is a flow of blood from the wound, then send it into strict water and administer the other cure.
E yeu ja e vist una femna en le ventre de la qual era fet mort, e aprop sobre aquel foc autra veguada emprenhada, e aprop foc mort es le fet autre.	I have already seen a woman in her belly that was dead of the fetus, and another fetus is born on top of him, and then he dies who is born.
Accidit al u aprop lonc temps apostema en le sieu embelic; e inflat es entro que foc ubert, e comensec a getar brac.	It happens to him that it becomes swollen after a long time in the belly of his mother; and then he swells within that it is hot, and begins to sweat.
E yeu fu appelhat a la cura de lu, e medicat a lu per lonc temps, e la plagua no es consolidada.	I have already called for the cure of him, and treated him for a long time, and the plague has not been consolidated yet.
Adonc yeu pausegui sobre lu de alscunas causas emplastra de forta atraccio, e eyssic de lu un os, e aprop passero alcus jorns, e eyssic un autre os; e yeu fu trop meravilhat, cum en le ventre no sia os.	Then I continued to work on him of some causes of poultices that are strong and attractive, and I cut an arm from him, and passed a few days, and cut another arm; and I was very surprised when in the belly there was not an arm.
E adonc yeu cogitegui que eran dels osses del fet mort.	Then I thought that they were of the bones of the dead fetus.
Donc yeu enguisigui la plagua, e extrayssi de lu motz osses , la femna existent en las sieuas milhos disposicios, e ja visquec en tal manieyra per lonc temps, correc de lu un petit de brac.	Then I cured the plague of him, and took out from it some bones, and the woman who was in her own right position, and has already lived for a long time in that way, and then he recovered a little bit of his arm.
E yeu no afermegui asso esser stranh, sino quar en aquo es sciensa e ajutori ad aquo que le metge artifec am la ma per curacio aministra.	I did not find this strange, but I know that science and help to water is artifice from the mother for medicine by administering it.
De las formas dels instrumentz que so necessaris a extrayre le fet.	The forms of the tools that are necessary to remove the fetus.
Forma de vertitge am la qual es uberta la mayre:	Form of spinning:
Aquesta es la forma de strenhedor en le qual so engualhatz les libres, al qual engualhament sian dos virtitges en doas extremitatz de dos futz.	This is the form of strength in which you hold two free ends, and in which there are two twists at each end of two strings.
May empero aquesta virtitge cove que sia pus subtil de strictori, e sia fayt o de eba o de fust de boys.	But this form is not so subtle as the twist of string, and it should be done with a needle or a stick or a boy's rod.
E sia la latitut de quascun fust quays dos ditz e le marge de quascu amdos quays un dit, e la longitut de quascu es un palm e mig; e en le mieg loc de dos fustz so dos ajustaments de aquel meteys fustz les quals ja son fermatz, dels quals la longitut es la maytat de un palm e un pauc mes, e la latitut de quascu es quay dos ditz, o un pauc mes.	And be the length of each string two ditz and the margin of each two fingers that a twist is made, and the length of each one is an arm's length and half; and in the middle place of two strings are two adjustments of this rope strings that already are closed, whose lengths are half an arm's length and a little less.
E aquestz dos additamentz sian entromeses en la boca de la mayre per que sia uberta am aquels quan tu revolves las doas prescriptas virtigges.	And these two additions are inserted into the mother' mouth so that it is open to them when you turn the two prescribed twists.
Forma autra semblant de aquela pus subtil e pus leugiera:	Another form similar to the last, but less subtle and more light:
Sia fayta de fustz de eba o de boys segon la semblansa de forceps.	So made of ebony or boxwood according to the appearance of forceps.
Mays empero en la extremitat de lu so dos additament ayssi cum vezes, e la longitut de aquels additament es quays un palm, e la latitut de quascu es dos ditz.	But at the end of them there should be two more additions, and the length of each addition is a palm, and their width is two fingers.
E cum tu vols am aquels ubrir la mayre, lahoras tu fay cezer la femna sobre le lieyt les pes pendentz, ubert aquo que es entre las coyssas de lu.	And when you want to cover the leg with a cloth, then make the servant hold it up between the patient's legs while you place it there.
E aprop obre la tua ma am le instrument ayssi cum fas am forfexs engualment segon la quantitat que vols de la aprecio de la boca de la mayre entro que la metrona fassa so que vols.	And then, with the instrument held in this way according to the amount that you want of the opening of the mouth of the leg within which the servant is to move, so that the surgeon wants it, place your hand on it.
La forma de vertitge la qual diysero les antics:	The shape of the curve which the ancients described:
Forma de impellent am le qual es empellit le fet:	The form that is propelled by what propels it:
Forma de amisidat2 am le qual es conterit le cap gran	The form of a pit which is filled with the head:
E es asemblat a forceps al qual so dentz en la extremitat, ayssi cum vezes, e alcunas veguadas es fayt lonc ayssi cum forceps segon aquesta forma, ayssi cum vezes, al qual so dentz ayssi cum dentz de ressegua am le qual es inscidit e conterit.	And it is assembled with the forceps which are inserted in the end, several times, and some holes are made long according to this form, several times, to which forceps are attached, inserted according to this form, and some holes are drilled.
Forma de amesidat pauc:	The form of a pit little:
Forma de unci havent una spina:	The form of having one without a spine:
Forma de unci havent doas spinas:	The form of having two:
Forma de forceps a la qual so dentz de cerra am le qual le cap del fet sia conterit:	The form of a pair of forceps which are inserted into the end, at which the head of the piece is to be held:
Forma de spatum havent dos extremitatz am le qual le cap es abscindit:	The form of a staff having two ends, by which the head is cut off:
Forma de dos espatums latz:	The form of two staffs long:
Totz aquels instrumentz so excersitatz, e quan mes so multiplicadas las specias de aquel e so preparadas deves le artifexs, quant es pus leugier a la sua opperacio e pus aut deves les homes per la sua quantitat.	All these instruments are to be used, and when the medicine is easier to operate on and more suitable for the patient's body, then the surgeon does it and the servant helps him, according to the amount of the medicine.
E no obres de aquels instrumentz ja sia qua sia deves tu aparalhat, quar la necessitat de aquels no es excusabla.	And you do not open these instruments already prepared, for the need for them is not justified.
De extraccio de la segondina.	Of extracting the second.
Quan la segondina es retenguda deves le enfantament, lahoras cove que tu comandes a la malautae que retengua le sieu ale, e aprop fay aquela stornudar am condizi, e strenh la tua ma sobre la boca de lu e sobre las nars de lu, e si per aysso es defora eyssit, bo es.	When the second is held back, then you command the woman to hold her breath and place your hand on her mouth and nose, and if this makes her sneeze, it is good.
E sino, lahoras tu pren una ola e perfora en la cuberta un trauc e pausa en aquela erbas ubrent la boca de la mayre, ayssi cum calament e ruda e anet e camamilla e scicados arabic e cassia lignea e santaurea.	But if not, then you take a vessel and pierce the lid with it and pour in some herbs to soothe the woman' mouth, and with a cotton swab and Arabic and Cassia wood and Saint John' herb apply them to her mouth.
Totas aquestas erbas o alcunas de lor sian submersas en aygua en la ola, e pausa aquela sobre le foc.	All these herbs or some of them are soaked in water in the vessel, and you pour it on the fire.
E aprop pausa una canula de canaviera en la boca de la mayre, e tengua aquela entro que la evapor vengua a la concavitat de la mayre.	And then place a tube of cloth over the woman' mouth, and hold it so that the steam goes into her cavity.
E aprop fay aquela stornudar ayssi cum havem dit, e la segondina sira fora-getada am velocitat.	And then you make her sneeze, with this, and the second is gone.
Mays si roman aprop aquesta curacio e no es eyssida, lahoras tu comanda a la matrona que submerge la sua ma sinistra en oli sizami o en micellage de altea, e aprop entrometa aquela en le conh e queresca am aquela la segondina, e cum aquela auras trobada, lahoras pren la e exten aquela pauc a pauc Mays si es annexsa en le preon de la mayre, lahoras entrometa la sua ma segon que havem recomtat, e quan aura trobat la segondina, extragua aquela petit a petit segon rectetut per so que la mayre no caja deves la atraccio vehement.	If it remains, then you command the woman to dip her left hand in olive oil or an extract of alfalfa and insert it into her crotch, and if she does not feel any attraction, then you take her right hand and dip it as described above so that no discomfort is caused to the mother.
Abantz cove que sia permudada als costatz dreyt e sinestre am facilitat.	After you have removed all trace of this, you can easily change her clothes, left to right, with ease.
E aprop sia ajustat en la quantitat de atraccio, quar ela obedira e evasira de adhirencia.	And then it is adjusted according to the amount of attraction, for she will obey and avoid attachment.
E si la boca de la mayre es coartada, nos ja havem recomtat la curacio am sturnutacio e am medicacio de la ola am erbas.	And if her mouth is closed, then we have already described to you the cure with sneezing and with the medicine of the water with herbs.
Mays si no es fora-getada am totas las causas las quals havem recomtadas, lahoras guarda te que no fetigues sobre aquela en iteracio de abstracio, mays empero cove que aquo que es eyssit de lu a la boca de la mayre lies a la coyssa de la femna, e aprop cristeriza aquela am enguent e tetrafarmacon; quar aquel fara poyrir aquela aprop alcus dias e sira dissolvuda e sira fora-getada.	But if not all these causes have been described to you, then you guard against her doing this in a repetitive way: instead, you make her sneeze with pepper and honey; for this cure, it is good that she take it three times a day and that she avoid attachment.
Mays quan se poyreys, es de lu elevada mala audor al cap, e al estomac, e aquo ledeys la malauta; e adonc cove que sian aministradas sub-fumiguacios e convenientz ad aquo.	But when it is taken in, it is painful to the head and stomach: then you make the woman lie down, and then give her a vaporous and pleasant smell, and if this is not enough, then administer it by inhalation.
Mays alcus dels Antics ja so esproatz sub-fumigacio de nazitort e de figuas seccas.	Some of the Ancients have already prescribed steam inhalation with dried fig leaves.
Forma de instrument am le qual la femna es sub-fumiguada deves la retentio de mestruas e de la segondina:	The form of an instrument which the servant inhales from the woman's mouth, so that she does not retain menses and the second:
Sia fayta de veyre o de eram.	Is made of ebony or lead.
E sia pausada la extremitat subtil en le conh e la extremitat ampla sobre le foc, e la sub-fumiguacio sia pausada sobre las brazas del foc.	And the thin end is placed in the cavity and the wide end is over the fire, and the inhalation is made above the embers of the fire.
E tengua aquela entro que sia consumida aquela sub-fumiguacio e itera·n autra.	And hold her so that she consumes this inhalation and repeat it.
De curacio del cul del enfant no-perforat.	Of clearing the anus of a non-perforated child.
Motz enfantz naysso e les culs de lu no so perforatz, les quals ya ciphac subtil e opilat.	Mouth and ass: this is not for children who have not been pierced: it is subtle and painful.
Adonc cove a la matrona que perfore am le sieu dit aquel ciphac; e sino, perfora aquel am spatum agut, e guarda se que no toque le lacert.	Then tell the woman to pierce her anus with this needle: and if not, then pierce it with a staff and keep it away from her hole.
E aprop pause sobre aquel lana enfusa en vi e oli; e aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia senat.	And place that one in the water, and make it steam: and if it does not, then apply oil to it.
Mays si temes que sia opilat, lahoras pausa en le trauc una canula per motz dias, e osta la quan le enfant voldra degerir.	If you fear that it will be painful, then place a tube on the child' bottom, and prevent him from defecating until he wants to.
E ja accideys oppilacio del cul per consolidacio de plagua o de apostema; adonc cove que aquela consolidacio sia inscidida, e aprop sia curada am aquo que avem dit de la curacio e del plom.	And it is already happening that the child' bottom will be painful because of consolidation of plague or abscess: and if this consolidation is cut, then it is cured with water which we have described for the cure and for the ointment.
De curacio de las fistulas que endeveno dejos.	Of curing the fistulas which enter from there.
Las fistulas que endeveno en la partida dejos pus bassa so nodacio e grossetut las quals endeveno prop del cul defora o en l’espazi de la una partida.	The fistulas that enter from there will be treated with a poultice and a grossness of the contents which enter from there, far away from the child' anus or in the space between one part of it.
E es una fistula o motas.	It is a fistula or much.
E cum aquela nodacio es antiquada e corr de la humiditat aygosa blanca o poyridura subtil, e alcunas veguadas so de aquestas fistulas alcunas penetrantz.	And when this nodulation is old and flows with clear white fluid or subtle pus, and some of these fistulas are penetrating.
E aquelas penetrantz so conogudas per aquo que es eyssit de aquelas per la egressio e per ventosetat; e alcunas vetz use le malaute de egressio, e fort leu es eyssit de aquelas verm.	And those that penetrate are known by the exit of water and air: some are used for the exit of the child' air; and if it is not, then the child' air leaves through them, and they are painful to the touch.
E so de aquelas fistulas alcunas veguadas en l’espazi penetrantz entro a la vesica, e entro al meat de la vergua; e so de aquelas penetrantz entro la junctura de la coyssa e entro al notz de la coeta.	And some of these fistulas enter the bladder, and part of it enters the pelvis: and some of them enter the joint of the crotch, and part of it enters the neck of the womb.
E aquo en que es conoguda fistula penetrant entro al cul e no-penetrant, es que tu metas le tieu dit endic en le cul, e entrometas tenta subtil de eram o de ferr en la fistula quan no y es turtuositat.	And in the water which is conogued by a fistula that enters the child' bottom and does not, you insert the tongue of truth into the child' bottom: and you apply oil or lead to the fistula when it is painful.
Mays si en aquela es turtuositat, lahoras entromet en aquela tenta subtil de plom o de pels de caval entro que tu sentas la tenta o le pel en le tieu dit.	But if not, then insert a sharp object into it to feel the pain or hair of a horse, and if you do not, then place it in your mouth to feel the pain or hair on your tongue.
E si no sentas aquela de tot ni no procezeys del trauc alcuna causa de egestio ni verm ni ventositat, ayssi cum havem dit, lahoras sapias que es no-penetrant, e lahoras coyta te a la curacio.	And if you do not feel this pain or hair on your tongue, then know that it is not penetrating: and you will be cured with oil or lead.
E quan la fistula es penetrant entro a la vesica o entro al meat de la vergua, lahoras la significacio de lu es eyssiment de urina de aquela e prohibicio de lu ad aysso que·l loc am medicina sia consolidat.	And when the fistula enters the bladder or part of it enters the womb, then the meaning is clear: and it means urine from her and do not allow her to enter into this place with medicine that will solidify.
Mays si es penetrant entro la junctura de la coyssa o entro al os e envencio de dolor en le circuit, lahoras senhal de lu es que la tenta perve entro aqui si en lu no es turtuositat entro al os, e envencio de dolor en le circuit de la partida; e que de lu yeys poyredura tostemps; e que no val en aquela medicacio, ni es consolidada am enguent.	But if it enters the joint of the crotch or part of it enters the bone and causes pain in the circulation, then know that the meaning is clear: and it means that the water comes from here, and do not allow her to enter into this place with medicine that will solidify; nor does it mean that she feels pain in her circulation when it enters the joint. And it does not mean that you should give her a hot poultice.
E en totas aquelas fistulas penetrant no es curacio de tot, e la curacio de aquelas es trebalh e vanetat dels folyls metges sobre·l qual so fermatz.	And in all those vessels that penetrate there is not a cure of all, and the cure of those is work and futility of physicians who have closed them.
Mays en aquela que no es penetrant e no antiqua, sanacio am ferr es sperada segon que yeu a tu recomtare, e aquo que ja yeu e proat.	Maze in that which does not penetrate and is new, healing by iron is hoped according to what I recommend, and what I have already done and tried.
E es que le malaute jagua entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos e eleva las cambas de lu entro sus, las coyssas sian enclinadas al ventre de lu, e aprop entromet tenta de plom, o de eram si es en la fistula turtuositat, entro que sapias le loc on perve la tenta.	And that the patient lies between your two legs and raises their legs within them, the cushions are tilted towards his stomach, and approach a blade of iron or an arrow if it is in the tunnel, so that you know the place where the pain comes from.
E si aquela sent le malaute entorn le cuol, lahora cove que tu entrometas le tieu dit endic en le cuol.	And if that hurts the patient's buttocks, then cover it so that you do not enter the tiny hole in the buttocks.
E si sentas en le tieu dit la tenta ja per si meteyssa descuberta penetrar, otra aquo que sentas entre le tieu dit e aquela siphac o carn, lahoras sapias certanament que aquela es penetrant; e adonc no trebalhes en aquela, quar no es en aquela sanacio, ayssi cum havem dit.	And if you feel in the tiny hole that has already penetrated and become exposed, another place where you feel pain between the tiny hole and some flesh or meat, then certainly know that it is penetrating; and then do not work on that, for it is not cured there, as I have said.
Mays empero diyssero alcus que es sana en alcus homes tart.	But others say that it heals in certain men quickly.
E de la medicacio per la qual es sperat juvament en lu es que tu ignes cauteri subtil segon le ample de la fistula, ayssi cum es precedit, e intrometas aquel ignit en la fistula entro que pervengua entorn le cuol; e aprop itera aquel doas o tres vetz entro que sapias que ja son adhustas totas aquelas carns ajustadas fistuladas que so semblantz a cana de pluma de ausel.	And from the medicine by which healing is hoped for quickly in him, you ignore the subtle cauterization according to the width of the tunnel, so that it is preceded, and enters that iron into the tunnel before it passes through the buttocks; and then repeat this two or three times until you know that all those carns adjusted to the fistula are tight like a feather from an eagle.
E aprop cura aquela am calguas envolopadas en boder entro que en yescan totas aquelas carns que so adhustas, e aprop cura aquela am medicinas la carn engendrantz e consolidantz, e si es sanada, bo es; e sino, lahoras no es sana en degun temps per autra curacio.	And then cure that with covered calyxes wrapped in bandage before all those carns are tight, and then cure that with medicines to generate and consolidate flesh, and if it is healed, it is well; and if not, then it is not cured by any other medicine.
E si la tenta intra, e no penetra entro·l tieu dit le qual es en le cul, e entre aquel e la tenta que es velament spes de carn o de ciphac, e vezes la fistula en aquo que siec la superficia de la codena, lahoras secca la codena del comensament de la fistula, e tu ve seccan am la tenta, e sia en la fistula entro que la seccio pervengua al loc en le qual perve la extremitat de la tenta, e per la tenta es liberat e catz.	And if the pain enters and does not penetrate within the tiny hole that is in the buttocks, and between that and the pain that is gently touching some flesh or meat, and sometimes the tunnel goes through what cuts the skin, then dry the skin from the beginning of the tunnel, and then cut the skin, and if you see it drying, and it is dried at the end of the tunnel where the extremities of the pain are felt, and by that pain it is freed and cured.
E aprop mundifiqua aquelas carns fistuladas las quals so asembladas a canula de pena de ausel e no romangua de aquelas alcuna causa.	And then disinfect those fistulated carns which are assembled like a tube of feather from an eagle, and they do not grow because of any other cause.
Mays si flux de sanc vezes que vengua entre tu e la tua opperacio quan ensideysses aquelas carns, lahoras le milh que sia e del pus leugier instrument es cauterizar am foc o am medicina acuta, quar cauteri am foc ajusta bonas doas habitutz: so es adhustio de aquelas carns ajustadas, e abscizio del sanc exseccacio de las humiditatz.	And if a flux of sweat comes between you and your work when you are spreading those carns, then the mild water that is used and the leach instrument cauterizes with fire or with acute medicines, for cauterization with fire adjusts well to two habits: it is dried up from those carns adjusted, and removes the excess of moisture.
E aprop cura aquela am calguas envolopadas en boder o en caus trissat entro que·l loc geta brac, e aprop lahoras cura la plagua am enguentz carn dura engendran e consolidan.	And then cure that with covered calyxes wrapped in bandage or a three-sided bandage before the place gets swollen, and then after that, cure the gout with hard flesh that is generated and consolidated.
E so medicinas en las quals so stipticitat e exseccio; quan lahoras es restaurada ja es sanada e no temes iteracio.	And thus medicines that are strictness and excision; when they have been restored, it is then healed, and you do not fear recurrence.
Mays si la fistula ja perve entro al preon del cul e es elonguada de lu superficia del cos, lahoras entromet le tieu dit en le cul e inquireys am aquel.	And if the tunnel has already penetrated deep within the buttocks and its surface is long, then enter the tiny hole in the buttocks and feel it.
E donc si centes la tenta e entre tu e ela es velament de ciphac o de carn, e es propda a la penetracio, lahora no es operacio en lu sino segon via di fiducia e de speransa.	And thus if you feel the pain and between you and it there is gently touching of flesh or meat, and it is close to penetration, then do not operate on it by that way according to trust and hope.
La qual causa es aministrar en lu una de tres manieyras: o que cauterize aquela ayssi cum havem dit; o que secces aquela entro que consieguas la conquavitat de lu per que sia a tu possible entrometre las qualcas e la curacio propdana; e no procesiscas mot am seccio per so que no inscidas le lacert contenent le cuol, e que accidisque sobre le malaute eyssiment de la egistio ses voluntat; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit quar fort leu sira sanat; o que elongues aquel velament e mondes aquel pus que seccas aquel entro prop le cul, ayssi cum havem dit, o am tenta o am autre instrument de aguda extremitat, e aprop mondifique aquelas carns fistuladas las quals so en la seccio entro la on podes am percrustacio; e aprop esforsa te a far la restauracio de tota la plagua am seccio, e si le orrifici pus desus no es consolidat, e romangua la fistula uberta en la partida del cul, e sira pus leugier per le malaute.	And the cause is administered in it by three ways: either that it cauterizes that according to what I have said; or that it dries up that within which you can reach the cavity of it so that you can possibly enter the calyxes and cure that propedly; and do not process it by cutting it, for it will hurt you very much; or that it extends that touch gently and makes pus that you dry up that within which is close to the buttocks, according to what I have said, or with pain or with an instrument of sharp extremities, and then disinfect those fistulated carns which are in the section within the buttocks where you can make a percrustation; and then try to restore all the plague by cutting it, and if the pus hole does not consolidate, and the tunnel opens up at the entrance of the buttocks, and lets out pus from the patient.
E alscunas veguadas la fistula es finida segon aquesta manieyra: es quan tu entrometas la tenta en la fistula, e es en le latz del cul entorn la superficia del cos am la codena e en le marge del cul, lahoras pren tenta de perforada extremitat, que es ayssi cum agulha de preparantz les coers segon aquesta forma:	And some times the tunnel is finished in this way: when you enter the pain into the tunnel, and it is near the surface of the skin on the side of the buttocks, and at the margin of the buttocks, then take an extremely sharp instrument to prepare the flesh according to this form:
e entromet en aquela fiel envolopat de v fiels o entorn aquels; e aprop entromet tenta am fiel en la fistula entro que consiegua la conquavitat de lu.	and enter that calyx wrapped in five leaves or between those leaves; and then enter the pain into the tunnel within which you can reach the cavity of it.
Mays si es penetrant en le marge del cul prop dedintz, lahoras tu extratz le fiel de aquel trauc ayssi que tu intrometas le tieu dit en le cul; e extraguas la extremitat del fiel e ajustes las duas extremitatz essemps, e estrenh cascuna, e leyssa aquo per un dia o per dos, e quan mays inscideys le fiel en la carn, estrenh be aquel entro que aquelas carns sian inscididas las quals so entre doas extremitatz del fiel e que cajan.	And if it penetrates on the side of the buttocks towards the middle, then you take that calyx from it and feel it within; and then extract the end of the calyx and adjust both ends with two sharp points, and tie one of them, and let it rest for a day or two, and when you feel that calyx in the flesh, then make those cuts between which those carns are included which are between the two ends of the calyx and which fall.
E aprop cura la plagua entro que sia consolidada e sanada.	And then cure the plague within which is consolidated and healed.
Mays si le orrifici de la fistula no es penetrant, lahoras fay aquel penetrar, en qualque manieyre sia a tu preparat, sino que sia mot en le preon, quar no es a tu que fassas aquo per que no inscidas le lacert; e aprop fay am aquela entro que sia sanada.	And if the orifice of the tunnel is not penetrating, then make it penetrate in some way that suits you, but do not operate on it by that way according to trust and hope; and then make it within which is healed.
La forma de spatum spinos am lo qual es fenduda la fistula: la curvitat del qual es mot aguda e l’autra partida es no-aguda, per so que no inscidas aquo que no es necessari, ayssi cum vezes.	The form of the spike with which the tunnel is split: its curve is sharp and the other end is not sharp, so that you do not hurt yourself in it, for that is not necessary, as sometimes happens.
De sutura de emorroydas en las quals corra sanc en la inscizio de aquelas.	Of hemorrhoids in which blood runs in the section of those.
Emorroydas so segon dos manieyras, quar o so entre le cul semblantz aysi que es de carbos, o quays aquelas sian cum a gras de rasim.	Emorrhoids are according to two ways, for either they are between the buttocks resembling grass, or those are with grease of fat.
E de aquelas so petitas e grans, e que le sanc corr de aquelas tostemps e es una, e so motas, e so fora·l cul, e en las extremitatz de lu.	And they are small and large, and the blood runs from them at times, and it is one, and they are very close together, and they go out of the buttocks, and at the ends of it.
Mays empero aquelas que so foro le cul so segon las mes de pauca humiditat, de las quals corr aygua citrina o un petit de sanc am cos continuabla, e so segon la color del cos.	And those which are outside the buttocks are according to the second part: either they have a little moisture, of which runs yellow or a little blood on the skin constantly, and they are according to the color of the skin.
E la curacio de aquela que es dedintz le cuol es que comandes al malaute que se assela e que se exprema entro que le cuol yesca e las emoroydas apparescan a tu.	And the cure for that which is inside the buttocks is that you order the patient to strain it and squeeze it within so that the hemorrhoids appear to you.
Adonc tu te coyte e suspen am uncis o que tenguas aquelas am la tua ungla, e aprop incideys aquelas deves las suas razitz.	And then you cut yourself off and suspend it on a nail or whatever you have, and then feel those with your fingernail.
Mays si les uncis no so tengutz en aquelas per la humiditat de lor e mollificacio de aquelas, lahoras pren aquelas am drap aspre o am coto o am flassada de lana, e extratz aquelas am les tieus ditz, e aprop inscideys aquelas e polveriza sobre lor alcunas polveras caudas aprop la inscizio, per que sian ad aquelas en loc de cauteri; o cauteriza aquelas segon que es precedit en le capitol de cauterizar.	And if those nails are not holding them by their humidity and soften them, then take them with a sharp or rough cloth, or a woolen blanket, and pull those off with your fingers, and then feel those and sprinkle over them some dried powder according to the cut, so that they are at those places where cauterization is preceded in the cauterization of the chapter.
E aprop cura aquelas am l’autra curacio entro que sian sanadas.	And then cure those with the other cure within which is healed.
E si le cul no obezeys a egressio, lahoras cristerisa le malaute am cristeri en le qual sia mordicacio petita, e sia lavat am aquel aquo que es en le cuol e que obezesca a egressio leugierament quan le malaute s’esprem.	And if the buttocks do not obey to exit, then order the patient to strain it with a small bite, and wash it with water that is in the buttocks and which obeys to exit slightly when the patient strains it.
Mays si las emorroydas so defora le cul, lahoras la causa de lor es leugiera, e es que tu prenguas aquelas am la tua ungla, o que prenguas aquelas am unci, e inscidas aquelas, e aprop cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit entro que sian sanadas.	May be the hemorrhoids are far from the buttocks, then the cause of them is a light blow, and because you have hit those with your thumb, or with an oil, and have cut those, and then treat them with water that I had said within to be healed.
E aquel que avoreys inscizio, cove que aministres sutura de lor segon aquesta manieyra: pren fiel envolopat e entromet aquel en agulha e aprop extratz las emorroydas a las partidas dessus, e fay aquel penetrar am la agulha en la razit del autra part, e envolveys las doas extramitatz del fiel en la partida pus dejos de la agulha, e so latitudinalment; e estrenh la emorroyda am strectura fort, e aprop noza le fiel e extratz la agulha.	And whoever wants to make an incision, follow this way: take a thread rolled up and put it in the needle and push that into the hemorrhoid at its end, and make the needle enter in the root of the other part, and wrap the two ends of the thread on the split of the needle, and stretch the hemorrhoid strongly, and tie the thread and pull out the needle.
E fay aquo a totas, e layssa de aquelas una e no la cozes, per so que la superfluitat del sanc corra de aquela.	Do this to everyone, and leave one uncut, so that the excess of the blood runs from it.
E aprop pausa sobre le cul drap enfus en oli rozat o en cerot; e pausa aquel sobre·l cuol e comanda al malaute que·s repause.	Then put over the buttock a cloth in oil or wax; and put that on the chest and order the patient to lie down.
E aprop layssa aquela entro que caja; e quan es casuda, cura aquelas am enguentz o am autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	Then let that fall into a box; and when it is falling, treat those with oil or with another cure within so that they are healed.
De curacio de fistulas.	Of treatment of fistulas.
Motas veguadas accideys per exseccacio de fenda o per costriccio de natura.	Vapors may appear due to drying up of a wound or due to nature's constriction.
E cum so antiquadas e no val en aquela medicina, lahoras cove que tu razas aquelas am la puncta de spatum o am la tua ungla entro que sian faytas humidas e sia hostada de aquelas la escorsa pus desus, la qual prohibeys aquelas de consolidacio; e aprop cura aquelas entro que sian consolidadas.	And because those old remedies do not work in that medicine, then it is customarily said that you scratch those with the point of a spatula or with your thumb within so that they are made wet and are host to those above them, which prevents those from solidifying; and treat those within they have solidified.
Lahoras tu osta aquelas am razio pus vehement que la primieyra entro que mot sancno e sian excoriadas; e aprop cura aquelas entro que sian sanadas.	Then you remove those with a fierce razor more quickly than the first cut that causes pain, and treat those within as if they were healed.
De curacio de almesamir, so es clau.	Of treatment of scrofula, this is what has been said.
Sapias que alamermar, so es clau, e no es si no notz redon segon la color del cors semblant a cap de claviel, e es fayt en tot le cors e majorment en las partidas dejos les pes e als ditz, e endeve per aquels dolor deves le anament.	You should know that scrofula is cured by a second color on the body similar to a clove's head, and it is spread throughout the whole body, especially in the feet and hands, and through them pain comes, so that you must treat the whole body with attention.
E adonc cove que sia inscidit aquo que es en le circuit del clau, e sia tengut am les forfexs o am unci, e sia eradicat de la sua razit; e aprop cura aquel.	And then it is customarily said that the scar be cut where it is located in the circle of the clove, and be removed with scissors or oil, and be cured from its root; and treat it.
E si vols, cauteriza le segont que es precedit en le sieu capitol.	And if you want, cauterize the second that precedes in the first chapter.
Mays de veruca es eminencia petita aspre fistulada redonda sobre la superficia del cos, e motas veguadas veno en las mas dels enfantz.	May be a warts is a small, round, hard, raised, and sore-looking spot on the surface of the body, and it sometimes appears on the children.
E curacio de lu es que estendas e inscidas aquela, o que estrenhas aquela am fiel o am pel entro que caja.	And treatment of them is that you stretch and cut those, or that you pull out with a thread within so that it comes out.
E si vols, cauteriza aquo, segon que havem dit, am foc o am medicina acuta.	And if you want, cauterize it, according to what has been said, with fire or with acute medicine.
E ja so eradicadas enversas e no-enversas am le instrument le qual yeu diyre.	And they are eradicated forward and backward with the instrument which I have directed.
Mays formica es eminencia petita feutrada o fistulada grossa sobre la superficia del cos anant mot en le preon, e quan le freg atroba aquela es centit en lu semblant de mordificacio de formigua, e es fayta entorn le cos.	May be a hives is a small, raised, and sore spot on the surface of the body that sometimes appears in the back, and when it gets touched, it feels like a bee sting; and it comes out from the body.
E curacio de lu es que prenguas una canula de pena de auca o de pena de voltor, e sia fort, e pausa aquela sobre la formigua entro que la contengua le cercle de la canula de las partidas de lu; e aprop revolveys la tua ma am la canula entro que inscidas aquo que es en le circuit de la formigua, e pauses aquela en le preon de la carn, e que eradiques la formigua de la sua razit.	And treatment of them is that you take a pen-like tube with a hole or a needle-like tube and make it strong, and put that over the hives where they are contained in the circle of the tube's ends; then turn your hand over the tube so that you cut those out where they go around the tube, and then treat your hand against the tube within so that you cut the hives from their root, and let your hand rest on the tube within so that the hives are eradicated from their roots.
E si vols, fay aquo am canula de eram o de ferr segon aquesta forma:	And if you want, make it with a tube of iron or of steel according to this form:
Sia la partida desus de la canulha trahent a subtilitat, sorda (so es no-perforada), envolopada per so que sobre le dit la aprencio de lu sia ablaviada e la revolucio de aquela.	Be the end of the tube that comes out smoothly, softly (if it is not pierced), wrapped in such a way that the liquid goes into it, and its rotation.
E si vols cauteriza la formiga segon que es denant dit en la cauterizacio de atheyl en le capitol de cauteri.	And if you want, cauterize the hives according to what has been said in the first chapter of cauterization with acute medicine.
De forma dels instrumentz que so aministratz a dar cristeri.	Of the shape of instruments that are administered to give care.
Alcunas veguadas es fayt cristeri de argent o de lato o de eram fondut o malleat; e alcunas veguadas es fayt de aquels instrumentz petit e gran segon aquels als quals so aministratz, quar aquel que es aministrat en la curacio dels petitz enfants sia petit; e de aquel dels quals los culs son freuls o doloyrozes, les cristeris de aquels sian petitz.	Some hives are cured with silver or melted copper or hammered copper; and some hives are cured with those small instruments according to those that are administered, because the one that is administered in the treatment of children is small; and the ones that are administered in the treatment of adults are large, and the curves of those instruments are made with care.
La forma de cristeri gran e pauc:	The shape of the cure is great and small:
Le cap de la canula de lu desus en le qual es liada la borsa sia ampla segon aquesta manieyra; e sia a lu distinacio la on la borsa es liada ayssi cum vezes.	The head of the tube that comes out at its end, and it is distinguished where the bag is attached to it so that the times are different.
E la extremitat de lu pus dejus, la qual es entromesa en le cul, sia sorda (so es no-uberta) mot leon, atrasent a subtilita; e en la un del latz de lu sian dos traucs, e en l’autre costat un trauc, e sia la amplesa del trauc segon la groseza dels rays e pus gros un petit.	And the end of the tube that comes out at its bottom, and which is inserted into the buttocks, be soft  (if it is not pierced), moving forward slowly; and in one side of the loop there are two turns, and in the other side a turn, and be the width of the turn according to the thickness of the thread and larger on the smaller.
E sia la borsa en la qual sian pausadas las medicinas de vesica de bestia o de pel de ovelha, e la razit de lu sia un palm.	And be the bag in which are placed the medicines of animal or sheep's skin, and its root is a palm.
E sia perforada per motz traucs ayssi cum es revolvuda; e si l’espazi le qual es entre les traucs la grossetut del dit.	And be pierced with sharp turns so that it is turned over; and if the space between the turns is great, then the thickness of the thread.
E aprop entromet en aquels traucs fiel fort de fiel cru le qual sia de detz fiels, o enviro aquels; e ajusta am aquel la borsa; e quan es pausada en lu la borsa, sia streyt en le cap del cristeri entre dos distingentz am fort costriccio, e aprop cristeriza am aquel quascun trauc: Mays la qualitat de cristerizar am aquel es que tu omples la borsa de la medicina, que sia escalfada segon la quantitat de la tolleransa del malaute; e guarda te que no sia trop cauda ni trop freja.	And let that go into those turns with a strong thread of wool, which is to be cut into pieces, or between those turns; and adjust the bag; and when it is placed in it, let it be straight on the head of the cure between two hard constrictions, and then treat each turn: May be the quality of treating with it is that you fill the bag with medicine, which is heated according to the quantity of tolerance of the patient; and be careful not to be too long or too short.
E aprop le malaute sia resupinat sobre le sieu dos, e eleva las suas cambas en sus e pausa dejos lu un cuer sobre le qual ja so les homes o un lansol; e aprop unta la extramitat del cauteri am oli o am album de huou o am mucellage de fenugrec o de semblantz; e aprop entromet aquel en le cul am facilitat, e aprop le ministre prengua la borsa e exprema aquel am doas mas e essemps am vehemencia entro que sia evacuat en le budelh tot aquo que es en le cristeri; e aprop extra le cristeri e le malaute leva las suas cambas a la paret.	And let the patient lie on his back, and raise his legs in his so that they are supported by a board or a bed sheet; and then apply the extreme end of the cure to oil or white of an egg or to a mucilage of fenugrec or similar; and then let that go into the buttocks with ease, and the minister takes the bag and squeeze it with two hands and pour with haste so that it is evacuated in the budel all that is in the cure; and then remove the cure and take the patient's legs from the board.
E si la medicina forsa aquel a eyssiment, tengua le tant quant poyra; e si dorm am aquel per tota una nueyt, es mays derier en juvament.	And if the medicine forces that person to sneeze, keep as much as you can; and if it sleeps for a whole night, it is a sign of death.
Mays si tu cristerizas aquel en las malautias de solucio de ventre e l’eyssiment de lu le coyta, lahoras tu itera le cauteri entro que sia sanat.	May be if you cure those with medicines that are used for stomach trouble and sneezing forces those to lie down, then repeat the cure within so that it is healed.
E si en le cul so emorroydas o apostemas ledens, lahoras sia le cristeri mot subtil e leon, dels cristeris am les quals les enfantz so criterisatz.	And if in the buttocks there are painful hemorrhoids or abscesses, then it is a cure with great care and care, and those small instruments that are used to treat children.
De curacio de las plaguas.	Of treatment of wounds.
Yeu ja e dit en la divisio de la curacio de las plaguas aquo que convenia al libre, e yeu dic assi la curacio de aquelas am ma e am medicinas segon le conpliment.	You have said in the division of treatment of wounds that it is good to use the medicine freely, and I say the same treatment for those with medicine according to the need.
Donc dic que las plaguas son diversificadas segon aquo en que son faytas las plaguas e segon le loc sobre le qual cazo las plaquas.	I say that wounds are different according to where they are made and according to the place where they fall.
E las causas per que motas vetz son faytas las plaguas so ayssi cum getament de peyra, o inscisio d’espaza o de cotel, o percussio am lansa, o am fustz, o am sageta, o semblantz ad aquels de motas causas.	And the causes for which wounds are made are: by a sharp object, or an incision with a knife, or a blow with a lance, or an arrow, or similar to those of wounds' causes.
Mays las plaguas que so en les locz del cos so ayssi cum plagua la qual catz sobre le cap, o·l col, o·l pietz, o·l ventre, o·l fitge, e semblantz ad aquels dels membres.	May be the wounds that are in the body' parts are: those on the head, or on the neck, or on the feet, or on the abdomen, or on the back, and similar to those of wounds' parts.
E yeu so recomtant la curacio de alcunas plaguas per que pauses aquela ratiocinacio e regla sobre las autras plaguas.	And I recommend the treatment of some diseases so that this reasoning and order be applied to other diseases.
E yeu comensare de las plaguas del cap simplas, quar la rememoracio de las compostas vindra al comensament del tertz capitol.	And I will begin with the simple diseases of the head, since the recollection of the remedies will come at the beginning of the third chapter.
Donc dic que quan accideys en le cap plagua simpla e no es fractura, lahoras considera: si es per getament de peyra o de semblant, e ja ha trinquada la codena tant solament e es gran plagla e temes sobre aquel malaute havinement de apostema caut, lahoras tu te coyta e fleubotoma la cephalica tantost, e no tardas aquo; e extrats ad aquel del sanc segon la quantitat de la vertut de lu si no mes alcuna causa prohibent de fleubotomia, majorment si·l sanc que es eyssit de la plagua es pauc.	Now then I say that when there is a simple disease in the head and it is not a fracture, then consider: if it is from drinking water or of similar appearance, and the nose has already stopped bleeding, then you should cauterize the head immediately, and don't delay; and extract blood according to the amount of its virtue, if not at all; more so if the disease that has occurred from the plague is slight.
E sia la flaubotomia del contrari de la partida plaguada; e guardase le malaute de replecio e de vi e de viandas grossas.	And cauterization of the opposite side of the infected plague; and keep the patient from eating food and drink and gross foods.
Mays si de la minuicio prohibeys alcuna causa, lahoras sia aminorat de la vianda e no apropinque a carn ni a vi.	But if by moderation there is no cause to prohibit, then reduce the food and do not bring it close to meat or wine.
E pausa sobre la plagua, si a lu accideys apostema caut, coto enfus en oli rozat solet o en vi en le qual es stipticat.	And pause over the plague, if to him there comes an aposteme, put a heated needle on rose oil alone or in wine in which it is stiffened.
Mays si est segur de apostema caut, lahoras pausa sobre la plagua, si es recent am le sieu sanc e le ayre no ha mudat aquela la polvera la qual yeu recomtare aprop petit.	But if you are sure that it is a case of cauterized aposteme, then pause over the plague, if it is recent let the third day pass and the air has not changed that powder which I recommend to apply gently.
E si le ayre ja ha mudada aquela, lahoras pausa sobre alscus enguentz entro que sia sanada.	And if the air has already changed that, then pause over the scalp with oil before it is healed.
Mays si la plagua es gran o es per inscizio d’espaza e de semblantz, e no so ajustadas las labias de lu per puvils, lahoras ajusta aquelas am sutura segon que yeu recomtare de la sutura de lor.	But if the plague is great or is from a cut of the spine and of similar appearance, and their lips are not tight for the children, then adjust them with this suturing according to what I recommend from the suturing of them.
Mays si la plagua ja es discuberta del os e pen, e no es retencio de lu sino un petit suspensori, lahoras inscideys aquela e aprop cura la plagua am medicinas e restaura la carn aprop en loc de codena, e comanda al malaute que sia pescut de viandas en las quals es groceza: caps e formen coyt e semblantz a lor, entro que sia compost.	But if the plague has already broken out from the bone and it is not repressed in him but only a small suspension, then cut that off and cure the disease with medicine and restore the flesh to its place instead of the nose, and order the patient to eat no food: meat and bread, and cheese, and eggs, and milk within, until he recovers.
E si atrobas en la codena putrefaccio e no adhereys al os, lahoras tu inscideys tot aquo poyrit e geta aquo, e aprop cura aquo.	And if the pus in the nose decomposes and does not adhere to the bone, then cut it off completely and let it dry out, and then cure it.
Mays si en aquestas plaguas es arteria o vena de la qual fluxs de sanc pot evenir, e no es abscindida per medicinas, lahoras tu inquier sobre la arteria, e si atrobas aquela no-inscidida, lahoras tu inscideys aquela am spatum, o lia aquela; e si necessitat te provoca que aquo que havem dit no comfereys, lahoras tu cauteriza entro que·l sanc sia abscidit.	But if in these plagues is an artery or a vein from which blood may flow from the plague, and it is not absorbed by medicine, then inquire about the artery, and if the pus that has been cut off does not come out, then cut it again or pierce it; and if necessity forces you to do what I have said, then cauterize it before the blood is gone.
E si aquestas plaguas son simplas e petitas, lahoras la causa de lor es leugiere; enayssi que tu polverizas sobre aquelas aquesta polvera, quar consolidada aquela denant que l’ayre mude aquelas.	And if these diseases are simple and small, then the cause of them is minor; but apply this powder to them, since when the air has changed that, it will be solidified before.
E la manieyra de la polvera es aquesta: recipe oli de enses partida una, de sanc de drago partida doas, de caus no-extincta partidas tres; sia tot mot trissat e crivellat, e de lu sia la plagua omplida, e sia constrengida per bona constriccio entro que be sobre aquela aderesca, e sia coagulada am le sanc.	And the way of this powder is this: take rose oil in which a single drop of dragon's blood has been dissolved, of non-extinct cause three drops; let it all be mixed and sieved, and if the plague is filled with it, and is forced by good constriction so that it clings to it, and is coagulated with the blood.
E aprop strengeys aquela desus am pulvils e leyssa aquela, e no la deslias mentre esta ayssi que no es apostemada, quar no es eredicada de lu la medicina entro que sia sanada.	And then apply this powder to it gently and let it rest on it, and don' t remove it while it is like that, so that it does not become an aposteme, since it has not been treated with medicine before being healed.
E alcuna vetz fa aquo sola cautz, quan no es a tu en present enses e sanc de drago.	And once only use this, when there is neither rose oil nor dragon' blood.
E ja fa aquesta meteyssa operacio en las grans plaguas quan conveneys que sia pausada sobre aquelas e sian streytas, e so plaguas recentz am le lor sanc, las quals le ayre no ha alteradas.	And this operation is made in large diseases when it is convenient to pause on them and let them be dry; and only in recent diseases, whose air has not changed that powder which I recommend to apply gently.
E si le ayre las ha alteradas, e majorment quan es en temps d’estiu, lahoras no es entencio a la posicio de aquesta polvera, mays adonc cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit, enayssi que tu pauses sobre aquelas alcus enguents degistius, o que pauses sobre aquelas pols de la farina del ordi am aygua e mel entro que getan poyredura; e aprop cura aquelas am l’autra curacio entro que sian sanadas.	But if the air has changed it and especially in summer, then do not apply this powder gently, but cure them with water that I have mentioned, either by applying warm oil to them or by pouring water and honey on them within; and then cure them with other treatment before they are healed.
Mays si accideys am la plagua fractura en os, e es petita, lahoras tu extratz aquo am gesti.	But if you get a fracture disease in the bone, and it is small, then extract it with gentle handling.
E yeu diyre la cura de las fracturas del cap en aquo que es envenidor.	And I will direct the treatment of fractures of the head in poison.
De las plaguas del col.	Of the diseases of the throat.
Mays si la plagua accideys en le col, lahoras no es en lu differencia en medicacio, e entre la plagua del cap quan es simpla.	But if there is a disease in the throat, then do not distinguish it from the treatment of simple diseases in the head.
Mays si ja le nervi del col es inscis o arteria, lahoras si es nervi, no es en lu engen sino que sia evitada curacio de lu am aquo que fa vehement stipticitat, ayssi cum ziniar e zegi que es vetriol e semblantz a lor quar nozo als nervis e contrazo aquel.	But if the nerves of the throat are cut or are arteries, then if it is a nerve, do not apply to it with oil that causes a violent stiffening, and apply that to it which I mentioned; that is to say, pour vinegar and milk on it, as if you were applying them to a wound, for it is like vinegar to nerves.
E no pauses sobre la plagua alcuna causa de tot freja, quar la sustancia dels nervis es freja e la continuacio de lu es am le cervel, le qual es le pus aut de totz les membres.	And do not pause on the disease of any part for a long time, because the substance of the nerves is soft and the continuity of them is towards the brain, which is pus from all the members.
E si’ aquo am que es curat de medicinas leugieras, ayssi cum es caus lavada am aygua dousa, alcuna veguada enfusa en oli rozat o no-rozat, e thucia quan es lavada am aygua dousa e las autras peyras minarantz segon aquesta manieyra, e enguentz humitz.	And if it is cured with light medicine, so that when it is washed with lukewarm water, a clear fluid appears in rose oil or not; and then dry it gently, applying oil to it.
Mays si la plagua es gran, lahoras aministra sutura, o coarta las labias de lu, e aprop cura aquela am pulvils entro que sia sanada.	But if the disease is great, then administer suturing or constrict the lips; and then cure it with powder before it is healed.
Mays si a la plagua es profunditat o accideys en lu a la pus bassa partida poyredura, lahoras perfora aquela en le loc mays depremegut.	But if the disease is deep or there comes pus from a low place that is drowning: then pierce it in the place most affected by it.
Mays si en la plagua ja es inscisa arteria e es conseguit flux de sanc, lahoras separa o secca aquela, o lia aquela, o cauteriza aquela si necessitat te provoca ad aquo.	But if there is an artery in the disease that causes blood to flow from it: then cut off or dry up that, or pierce it, or cauterize it if necessity forces you to do so with water.
Mays si ja ha insciditz les spondils del golayro o tot, e so salvadas las venas del col, lahoras tu ajusta las labias de la codena am sutura sobre la cana del golayro e no toques aquel; abantz egala aquel e reduzeys aquel sobre la sua figura natural, e aprop strenh aquel am strectura decent, e leyssa aquela per alcus jorns; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz en les quals es stipticitat e excitacio entro que sia sanat.	But if the bones of the jaw have been cut completely and the veins of the throat are safe: then adjust the lips of the nose to it with suturing on the can of the jaw, and do not touch that; then make it even with a straight line, and let it rest on its natural figure, and then cure it with oil that causes stiffening and excitement before it is healed, and apply that to it which I mentioned; that is to say, pour oil on it that causes stiffness and excitement before it is healed, and let it dry gently.
Mays si la plagua ja en le os a fayta enprecio, lahoras percuireys aquela, e lahoras si en lu ha fragmentz de hos, extratz totz aquels que podes de lor; e aquo que a tu no es apparelhat, leyssa aquo entro que la plagua se poyrisca, e sia separat e la egrecio de lu sia alleujada.	But if the disease in the bone has been done by accident, then hit that, and if there are fragments of bones, extract all that you can; and if it is not covered with skin, let it rest before it is healed, and separate it from its shape, and make a clean cut of it.
E si la plagua es recent lahoras polveriza sobre aquela polvera la qual t’e recomtada.	And if the disease is recent, then apply this powder to it which I have recommended to you.
Mays si en la plagua es fayta fistula, lahoras cura aquela am aquo del qual la rememoracio vindra aprop en le sieu capitol.	But if the disease has been caused by a fistula: then cure it with water in which the recollection will come into play in the third chapter.
De las plaguas del col o de semblantz quan fayta entre las spallas e es fayta am spaza o am cotel o am lansa o am semblantz.	Of the diseases of the throat or when they occur between the ribs and cause pain with a blade or a lance or a similar appearance.
Si es percussio de lansa o de cotel, e vezes de lu la profunditat, lahoras considera mays si de la plagua yeys ventositat quan le malaute elena; lahoras sapias que la plagua es mortal.	If it is the sound of a blade or a lance, and its depth: then consider if the patient' breath has any foul smell from him; know that the disease is deadly.
E si en lu no es profunditat e la plagua es recent am le sieu sanc, lahoras tu pauses en lu de la primieyra horo polvera, e no strenhas aquel per que no sia le sanc retengut en la profunditat de lu e que retorne al cor e que aucigua le malaute, mays pausa en lu enguent atractiu, e deslia aquela doas veguadas le dia.	And if it is not deep and the disease is recent in the patient: then at first apply this powder to him, and don' t tighten it so that the disease does not be held up in him and return to the patient; but let him rest gently, and then apply a cool atractive poultice, and let it drape twice on a day.
E si l’enguent no es a tu present, lahoras tu pausa en le orrifici de la plagua coto viel per que sucque aquo que yeys de las humiditatz; e fay que le malaute dorma sobre la plagua per que corra aquo que es en lu ajustat.	And if the poultice is not yet ready, then place it in the orifice of the bladder with a wick to draw away moisture; and make the patient lie on the bladder so that the liquid runs out through his body.
Mays si ja de la plagua son passatz tres dias o mays e no accideys al malaute spasme ni tremor de cor mal ni strictura de ale, e vezes las autras dispozicios bonas de lu, lahoras sapias que plagua es salva; e adonc cura aquela am calguas e am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanada.	But if after three days or more no spasms, tremors of the heart, or constriction come to the patient and other good signs do not appear, then you should know that the bladder is saved; then cure with water and with another treatment until it is healed.
Mays si la sanacio de lu es excusada, e ja tot temps es uberta, lahoras sapias que ja es fayta fistula; cura donc aquela per le sieu capitol.	But if the patient's recovery is slow and the opening remains open, then you should know that a fistula has formed; cure it therefore with vinegar.
E si la plagua es per inscisio de spaza o de cotel, e es simpla en la superficia del pietz o del dos, lahoras cura aquela am aquo que es precedit de sutura, si es gran, o am polvera, si es petita.	And if the bladder is cut or pierced by a knife, and it is small on the surface of the foot or leg, then cure it with water that has been preceded by suturing, if it is large, or with powder, if it is small.
Mays si ja ha fayta enprecio en le os, e so ja de lu inscizas pessas, lahoras tu torqua la plagua e coyta ad extrayre aquelas pessas, si so separadas.	But if death has already come to the bone and the pieces have separated, then place the poultice on it and draw out those pieces with a hook, if they are separated.
Mays si no so separadas, lahoras leyssa las entro que se poyresca la plagua, que la extraccio de lor es alleujada.	But if they are not separated, then leave them in place until the poultice draws them out, which is a relief.
E de las autras plaguas accidentz en les autres membres le juvament en curacio es le juvament de aquo que havem dit.	And for other accidental bladders in other members, the cure is the same as that of the one we have described.
De las plaguas del ventre.	Of bladder problems.
L’indisposicio la qual accideys en le ventre es o gran, o pauc, o migiera.	The discomfort that occurs in the belly can be great, little, or moderat.
De la gran alcunas veguadas yeys le budel o nervi del budel, per que es fayta intromissio de lor e la sutura de lor esser pus vehement e pus subtil.	Of the large hernias that are seen, the intestine or nerves of the intestine come between, and their suturing is more vigorous and more delicate.
E disrupcio petita es fayta dificil per autra manieyra, e siec se que la reduccio de lor es pus dificil, si no te coytes de la intromissio de lor al sieu loc tantost, quar se ubre e es engrossat per que le intrament de lu es fayt difficil.	A small disruption is more difficult to repair in another way, and if you do not prevent the entrance of them to their place quickly, because it is soft and thickens with the passage of time, then the instrument that enters them will be difficult to remove.
E donc la milhor disrupcio es migiera, quar en aquela no es dificil la reduccio del budel, ayssi cum es dificil en las doas specias denant ditas.	And the best disruption is moderate, because in that one the reduction of the intestine is not difficult, and it is not difficult in the two species mentioned above.
E sapias que sutura del ventre es segon quatre manieyras, mays doas suturas son comunas que conveneysso en suturas de las autras plaguas del cors.	And you should know that surgery for the belly is done in four ways; two sutures are common and are used for all other bladders of the body.
E duas autras suturas proprias comunican a las autras plaguas, mays empero so mays proprias en la sutura del ventre.	And two more specific sutures communicate with the others; however, they are specific only for the belly.
E yeu recomti a tu quascuna am exposicio e declaracio.	I recommend to you each explanation and description.
Donc dic que quan la plagua es petita e es eyssit alcuna causa del budel per aquela, e es fayt dificil a reduzir aquel, lahoras aquo es en una de doas manieyras: o per parvitat de la disrupcio ayssi cum havem dit, o quan al budel es venguda inflacio per la frigiditat de l’ayre.	So I say that when the bladder is small and there is no cause of it from the intestine because of that, it is difficult to reduce it, and then it is in two ways: either by the small size of the disruption as we have said, or when the intestine is swollen with cold air.
E donc quan aquo es ayssi, lahora cove que tu scalfes aquel enayssi que tu submerges una sponga ho drap humit en aygua tebeza sola, o que coguas en aygua squinant, e cyperum, e spic, e embroques am aquela le budel entro que la imflacio sia resolvuda.	And when the water is like that, then you should know that you should cut it with a blade instead of submerging a sponge or cloth in running water alone, or taking it into cold water, and putting it on the belly while the swelling goes away.
E alcunas veguadas fa aquo vi en le qual ha stipticitat, e es milhor que la aygua sola en resolucio de la imflacio.	Some bladders make the water viscous, and it is better than cold water alone in resolving swelling.
E donc cum tu vezes la imflacio esser resolvuda, lahoras tu humecta le budel am aygua en la qual es coyta altea e malvas, quar per aquo es alleujat le intrament de lu am pauca causa.	And when you see that the swelling has gone away, then you should wet the intestine with water that is high in salt and bitter, because by water it is relieved by a little cause.
Mays si es escusat le intrament de lu aprop aquesta curacio, lahoras scindeys la disrupcio un petit am strument am le qual so inscididas emorroydas.	But if the instrument of healing does not suffice for this treatment, then cut the disruption with a small instrument that has points where the hemorrhoids are inserted.
E la curacio primieyra es milhor, quan es propriada que no es seccio, e no sia occupacio a seccar aprop necessitat e defaliment.	And the first treatment is better when it is appropriate that there is not cutting, and there is no need to remove it from its place by force.
Del instrument, sec se la forma de lu:	Regarding the instrument, consider its shape:
La una partida de lu torta aguda, e l’autra partida no-acuta, e la extremitat subtil, e no sia am la subtilitat de spatum, abantz sia obtusa un pauc.	The first cut should be sharp, and the other non-sharp, and the end should be subtle, not too much so that it is blunt, a little sharp.
E donc cum la plagua es amplificada e yeys fora le budel, lahoras cove que la sua reduccio sia segon la forma de lu natural, en le sieu loc propri, si es possible sobre aquo, quar milhor es.	And when the bladder is large and it hangs outside the body, then you should know that its reduction should be according to its natural shape, in its own place if possible on top of water, because it is better.
Mays quan la disrupcio es ampla, e es en la partida pu bassa del ventre, lahoras cove que tu fassas jazer le malaute sobre le sieu dos, e pausa las suas cambas pus autas que·l sieu cap; e si es en la partida pus desus del ventre, lahoras tu pause le cap de lu e·l pietz pus autz que las partidas dejos.	But when the disruption is large and it is in the lower part of the belly, then you should place the patient on his back, and pause the soles of his feet higher than his head; and if it is in the upper part of the belly, then you should place the head of the patient higher than the feet.
E semblantment si la disrupcio es en una de las doas partz del ventre, lahoras pausa la tua entencio e la tua consideracio tostemps en aysso per que la partida en la qual es la plagua sia pus auta que l’autra.	And if the disruption is in one of the two parts of the belly, then pause your attention and consideration for a moment so that the part with the bladder is higher than the other.
E ayssi cove que tu aministres aquo en las plaguas grans e en las plaguas migieras.	And thus you should know how to administer water in large and moderate bladders.
E en las plaguas petitas, pausa aquo que es a tu preparat, e aprop fay que·l ministre sia entre las tuas mas pyatados, le qual tengua la disrupcio tota am la sua ma e ajusta las labias de lu, e aprop descuebre de aquela ad aquel que siec la sutura alcuna causa aprop autra.	And in small bladders, prepare the water that you have, and make it flow between your most private parts, which should hold the entire disruption with its own strength, and adjust the lips of it; and thus discover the cause of the disruption from another side.
E aquesta es la manieyra de sutura comuna: una que prenguas la agula, o comte de agula segon la cantitat de la amplitut de la plagua; e aprop layssa de la extremitat de la disrupcio del dit anular, e strenh la agula una, otre que tu no metas fiel en las doas extremitatz de la codena, am doas extremitatz del ciphac que es dejos la codena de las partidas dedintz, entro que fassas aquela penetrar de aquela partida; e tu ja has agreguadas doas extremitatz de la codena e doas extremitatz del ciphac, e so faytas quatre ordes.	This is the common way of suturing: one in which you take the bladder, or count the bladder according to its size; and then leave the end of the disruption of the little finger, and strengthen the bladder with a thread; or another that you do not tie to the two ends of the knot, but place the two ends of the thread at a distance from each other, so that it does not break the thread when you tie the knot; and thus you have placed two ends of the thread and made four knots.
E aprop strenh am fiel doble en le circuit de la agula, e alcunas veguadas de doas partz ensemps, e aprop agregua las doas labias e la plagua per agreguacio decent; e aprop layssa la grossitut del dit e fiqua una autra agulha en aquela, e aprop lia aquela am fiel ayssi cum fiest am la primieyra agulha; e no cesses far aquo si es necessitat am las agulhas entro que ajas complida tota la contriccio de la plagua.	And then reinforce the bladder with a double knot, and sometimes leave two parts together, and then add the two lips of the bladder by joining them; and then leave the thickness of the thread at one end, and make another knot there, and tie it to the first knot; and do not stop filling water if necessary on the knots before you have finished the entire construction of the bladder.
E sian las agulhas migieras entre groceza e subtilitat, quar las agulhas subtils mot leugierament insciden la carn; e las grossas so de dificil intrament en la codena, e donc per aquo cove que sian migieras en subtilitat e grosseza.	And the small threads should be between delicacy and thickness, because the thin threads cut the flesh with ease; and the thick ones are difficult to tie in a knot, so that by water they should know whether they are delicate or thick.
E no cove que la agulha sia ficada en doas extremitatz de la codena propdana mot, per so que la carn no sia inscidida leugierament e que la plagua se huebra devant la sua consolidacio.	And you should know that the thread is tied in two ends of the knot next to each other so that the flesh is not cut with ease and the bladder remains in place before its consolidation.
E no sian prolonguadas de sutura per que la plagua no sia prohibida de consolidacio.	And the suturing should not be prolonged so that the bladder does not remain without consolidation.
E aprop inscideys las extremitatz de las agulhas per so que no ledescan le malaute deves le sieu dormier; e pausaras sobre la sutura pulvils expanduts de tota partida, les quals tenguan las extremitatz de las agulhas; e layssa aquelas entro que sapias que la plagua ja es consolidada.	And thus you should leave the ends of the threads so that they do not come out through the hole; and place them on the expanded powder of all sides, which should hold the ends of the threads; and then you will know that the bladder has been consolidated.
E aquestas specias de sutura am agulhas en cal manieyra es pus convenient en las plaguas petitas, quar habasta en la sutura de lor una agulha o doas o entorn aquelas.	And these species of suturing with threads are more convenient for small bladders, because they are enough to make the suture with one or two needles; and tie them up.
Mays la segonda sutura es cominal: e es que tu aministres am sutura las quatre extremitatz, de la codena e doas extremitatz del ciphac, en una veguada, am agulha en la qual sia fiel envolopat engual en subtilitat e grosseza.	But the second suture is similar: and you should know that you administer to the four ends, from the knot and two ends of the thread, in one vein, with a needle; and wrap it up in delicacy and thickness.
E aprop quan am la agulha auras penetrat aquestas quatre extremitatz, reduzeys la agulha de aquela meteyssa partida de la qual comensest, per so que le fiel retrayt caja de la pus subirana partida a la plagua, per so que la sutura sia segon sutura de drap am la qual les draps so strengutz.	And when the needle will have penetrated these four ends, then you should bring the thread to its starting point again, from the first cut; and thus that the needle does not go out through the lower side of the bladder, but goes in between the two sides of the skin; and then you should know how to make a knot with the thread so that it is secure.
E pausa entre quascuna sutura la quantitat del gros del dit mendre.	And place between each stitch the quantity of the thickness of this same thread.
E aquesta sutura sabo les homes.	This stitch is used for men.
E am tal sutura yeu cozegui la plagua la qual era accidida a un home en le sieu ventre le qual era stat plaguat am un cotel, e era la disrrumpcio de la plagua major de un palm, e era eyssit dels budels entorn dos palms del budel del mieg loc e era la disrupcio en le mieg del membre; e adonc yeu reduzegui aquel depus que le budel havia stat foro la plagua per xxiiii horas.	And I sewed up the wound which had been caused in a man's belly by a knife, and it was the breaking out of the greater plague from a palm; and it was found coming from the intestines through two palms of the intestine at the midsection and it was the breaking out in the midsection of the member; and then I reduced what had broken out for 22 hours.
E la plagua fo consolidada en le spazi de xv dias o entorn, e curegui aquel e es sanat; e aprop aquo visquec per motz ans, e es conversat en las suas disposicios.	And the plague was consolidated in the space of 15 days or so, and I cured it; then there came a thick fluid for a certain time, and it became fixed in its places.
E les autres metges havian jutgat que no fora sanat; e per miracle foc, quar yeu no curegui aquel am enguent, quar era en loc en le qual enguent no era atrobat ni deguna medicina, mays pausegui sobre la plagua coto viel dos veguadas lo dia e ablucio assiduo am aygua de mel entro que foc sanat.	And the other wounds had not been healed; and by a miracle they did not heal, because I had not cured them with ointment, for it was in a place where ointment does not heal or any medicine; but I applied a patch of cloth two days later and washed it often with milk within that day until it healed.
Mays yeu diyre dos specias de sutura proprias segon narracio de Paraula.	Then I made two kinds of stitches according to the narrative of the Parable.
E es que tu comenses am sutura de la codena, e entrometas agulha de la partida deforo a la partida dedintz.	And you begin to sew with the cotton thread, and you insert the needle from outside towards inside.
E donc cum la agulha penetra en la codena e en aquel meteys lacertz segon rectetut e en longetut de tot le cos, e layssa la extremita del ciphac en le qual has entromesa la agulha; e fay penetrar en la autra extremitat la agulha de la partida dedintz a la partida deforo en l’autra extremitat del mihat.	And so with the needle penetrating into the cotton and in that meat and according to the rule and length of all the work, and leaving the end of the thread where you have inserted the needle; and make the needle enter from outside towards inside in the other meat, according to the rule and length of the whole piece, and leave the end of the thread where you have inserted the needle.
E don cum tu auras fayta aquela penetrar, lahoras tu fay aquela penetrar autra veguada en aquela meteyssa extremitat del mihat de la partida deforo a la partida dedintz; e leyssa la extramitat del ciphac que es en aquest latz, e fay penetrar la agulha en l’autra extremitat de la partida dedintz a la partida deforo.	And so when you have made that penetration, then make another penetration with the needle in that meat's end from outside towards inside; and leave the end of the thread where you have inserted the needle.
E fay penetrar am aquela la tua penetracio am la qual fas aquela penetrar en le ciphac en la extremitat del mirat la qual es en la partida de lu entro que tot aquel penetre.	And make that penetration with your own hand; and make the needle enter into the thread in its end from outside towards inside; and leave the end of the thread where you have inserted the needle.
E aprop comensa de aquest meteys costat e cus aquel am la extremitat que es del ciphac en l’autra latz, e extratz la agulha de la codena la qual penetrec, e aprop redutz aquela en aquela codena e cos la extremitat del ciphac que es en l’autra costat am aquesta extramitat del mirat; e extratz aquela de la codena la qual es de part de lu.	And then begin to sew at that meat' end and cut the thread with your own hand; and make the needle enter into the cotton from outside towards inside; and leave the end of the thread where you have inserted the needle. Then take up the thread which has been cut, and sew that end of the thread which is on the other side of the needle; and leave that end of the thread where the needle has been removed.
E fay aquo una veguada e autra, e fay aquo una veguada aprop autre veguada entro que tu cozes tot aquo que es deforo segon aquel eysemple.	And make a loop and another; and make a loop with another thread within that you sew according to this example.
E la suma de aquesta manieyra de sutura es que tu cozes am sutura de pellicies am la qual cozo las pels, enayssi que tu cozes le ciphac una veguada de la part de la extremitat de la codena, e que leysses aquela autra veguada entro que la ajas complida.	And the whole of this sewing method is that you sew with a thread which does not leave the skin; and you sew the cotton one loop from the end of the stitch, and you leave another loop within that you complete.
Mays la segonda specia de sutura propria la qual dieys eyssament Gualia , e aquest es de sermo de lu e per lu recomtat, es que tu cozas aquela segon semilitut am la qual alcus medicantz cozo aquela, enayssi que agreguan tota partida a la sua compar partida a lu convenient per natura; e aplican la extremitat de autre de lu e la extremitat del mirat al autra extremitat de lu, e aquo es fayt segon que yeu a tu recomti.	Then the second kind of stitch is called Goliah, and this is from his mouth and for his sake; it is that you sew with a thread which has medics on it, and then add to its beginning what is convenient by nature; and apply the end of one side to the other end, and so make it according to how I have told you.
Cove que tu fiques la agulha en la extremitat del mirat a tu propdana de la partida deforo, e fassas aquela penetrar a la partida dedintz en aquel sol, e leysses dos extremitatz del ciphac; e aprop revolveys la agulha e fay aquela penetrar de foro a la dedintz en dos extremitatz del ciphac.	Then when you have the needle in your hand at the end of the thread which is on the other side of the part where you are going to sew, and you make that penetration from outside towards inside at that end, and leave two ends of the thread; then take up the needle again and make that penetration from outside towards inside at two ends of the cotton.
E aprop revolveys aquelas cascunas, e fay penetrar quascunas de la partida dededintz entro a la partida deforo en dos extremitatz del mirat autras que so en le latz contrari.	Then take up those loops again, and make that penetration from inside towards outside at two ends of the thread within that you are going to sew; and it is done by making that penetration in two opposite directions of the needle's end.
E aquesta manieyra de sutura es milhor de la sutura comuna leugiera, e es sutura de la qual precedic rememoracio.	This sewing method is better than the common stitching method, and it is a stitching method of which I have recalled the explanation.
Aquest es le sermo de Gualia	This is the speech of Goliah.
E mays le diyssero alcus, sutura del ventre es rectificada am dos agulhas, so es que tu entrometas en aquestas a quascunas un fiel, e comensa am intromiccio de agulha de aquo que es deves tu, e fay aquela penetrar entro al autra latz segon sutura de aquels les quals cozo les cuers engualment.	And it is called the stitching of the belly, and it is done with two needles, so that you insert one into these from outside towards inside; and begin to sew with the needle which has medics on it, and make that penetration within the other meat according to the stitching of those who sew with cotton wrapped around their arms.
E sapias que quan disrupcio es en le mieg loc del ventre, lahoras la sutura de lu es pus difficil que dels autres locs del ventre.	And you know that when there is a rupture in the middle of the belly, then the sewing of this place is more difficult than that of the other parts of the belly.
Mays le juguament de medicacio de plagua es jutgament de las autras plaguas.	And the judgement of the medicine for a plague is different from the judgment of the other plagues.
La qual causa es quar quan tu consieguas la plagua recent am le sieu sanc denant que l’ayre altera aquela, e reduses le budel e cozes aquela e aptas aquela decentment, lahoras pausa sobre aquela polvera encarnativa.	And the cause is when you catch the plague recently after a saint dies before the air alters it; and you reduce the intestine and sew it well, then apply pouder to that with ash.
E si le ayre ja ha alterada la plagua, lahoras pausa sobre aquela alcus enguentz les quals so a tu presens entro que fassan peyra dura e cajan les fiels, e sian consolidatz ciphac e mirat; e aprop cura aquela ayssi cum es la curacio de las autras plaguas entro que sia sanat.	And if the air has already altered the plague, then apply ash to that with ointment which you have at hand within that it does not become hard and the threads do not break, and it is consolidated cotton and meat; and then heal it like that of the other plagues within that it is healed.
Mays si a tu no so presens las medicinas, lahoras pausa sobre aquela tantost, pus que comensa a getar brac, coto viel, e permuta aquel dos veguadas le dia, ayssi cum a tu e ensenhat, entro que sia sanat, quar tu no indigeysses de autra medicacio en motas disposicios quan las plaguas so simplas.	And if you do not have medicines at hand, then apply the ash for some time, since it begins to burn, and change that patch of cloth from day to day; and teach people how to make a poultice with ash within that it is healed, because you do not need other medicine in difficult situations when the plagues are simple.
Mays si tu temes que la plagua comunique en lesio als membres principals, lahoras cove que tu submergas lana leon en oli de trempada qualiditat, o en oli rozat, e pausa aquela en le circuit dels locs que so entre les angonas e dejos las aysselas.	And if you fear that the common plague will spread to the main members, then take care to dip wool in saturated oil, or rose water, and place it between the nips and allow them to dry.
E si sent dolor o putrefaccio en les sieus budels, quar motas veguadas aquo s’endeve, lahoras cristeriza aquel am vi stiptic negre tebe, e majorment si la poyredura es pervenguda en le budel e es fayta exitura penetrant entro la conquavitat de lu.	And if you feel pain or putrefaction in the intestines, since it is a common occurrence; then make a black stain on that with a vi of strophic powder, and more so if the pouder has reached the intestine and caused a hole.
E sapias que aquela que es del budel gros es de pus leugiera sanacio que aquela que es en les budels subtils.	And you know that the one which is thick is not healing quickly compared to the one which is thin.
E es de dificil sanacio quar le budel le qual es apelat “gegunu” no recep sanacio de plagua que caja en lu de tot; e aquo es per la gran multitut de venas que so en lu e per la magnitut de lu que so en aquelas, e per subtilitat del cos de aquel, e per propinquitat de aquel a natura de nervis.	And it is difficult to heal because the intestine called gegunu does not receive the healing of the plague that enters into it from all sides; and this is due to the great multitude of veins which are in it, and its size compared with those, and its closeness to nature' nerves.
Mays si aquo que procezeys de la plagua es la tela, e conseguas aquela recent, redutz aquela segon la tua rectetut am la qual reduzes les budels engualment.	And if what you catch is the plague, and if it is recent, then reduce that according to your rule by which you reduce intestines wrapped around each other.
Mays si es passat a lu spazi e ja es feyt vert o negre, lahoras que tu strenguas aquela am fiel sobre le loc que es denigrat de lu, per so que vengua fluxs de sanc, quar en la tela so venas e arterias.	And if it has passed to the space and is already becoming hard or black, then tie that with a thread well on the area which is affected by that blood comes out, because in the tela there are veins and arteries.
E aprop inscideys aquo que es otra aquel liament, e pausa dos extremitatz del fiel pendentz de la partida dejos de la plagua foro lu, per que sobre tu sia alleujada la atraccio de lu deves le cazement de la tela e emissio del brac de la plagua.	Then cut that other piece of thread, and leave two ends of the thread dangling on the edge of the plague outside; and so you will be relieved from the attraction of that place which is affected by the plague' movement, since it is the place where the tela hangs up and the plague's breath comes out.
Rememoracio de las plaguas quan accideysso en le budel.	Remembrance of the plagues when they occur in the intestines.
Quan accideys disrupcio en le budel e es petita, lahoras es possibla que sia resteurada en alcus homes, per aysso quar yeu vi aquel le qual era stat plaguat en le sieu ventre am percussio de lansa et era la plagua de la part dreyta del stomac, e la plagua era antiquada e fayta fistula, e eyssic de lu gestio e ventositat.	When a disruption occurs in the intestines and it is small, then it is possible that it will be restored to some people; because I have seen that one which was plagued in his belly with a lance' blow and it was the plague of the right side of the stomach, and the plague was old and had become a fistula; and it exuded from it pus and blood, and had a fever and a wind.
Adonc yeu pansegui la curacio de lu ja sia que no era confizat en la sanacio de lu, mays cessegui subtiliar aquel entro que foc sanat e le loc es consolidat.	Then I continued with the treatment until it was clear that the patient had not been cured, but rather that the illness had become worse; however, I continued to apply the medicine which heated and hardened the sore place.
E yeu pus que vi le loc ja consolidat, timegui sobre le malaute que endevengues sobre lu accident de mal en le sieu ventre; e no endevenc alcu per aquo mal accident e romas en las suas milhos disposicios mangant e bevent, e aprop entrec en banh e es exercitat en sos ditz.	And I put a poultice on the sore spot which had already hardened, and then I placed him in bed so that he did not move or exercise himself or drink or eat; and then I bathed his feet.
E ja diysero alcus experimentados que quan endeve plagua en le budel, e es petita, lahoras cove que sia liada segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu prenguas fromiguas de grans caps; e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua e pausa una fromigua de aquelas que aja la boca uberta sobre las doas labias de la plagua; donc quan pren sobre aquelas e strenh la sua boca, abscindeys le cap de lu, quar adhereys e no es dissolvut.	And some experienced people say that when the hernia is small, it should be treated in this way: You take a piece of cloth from a large cap; and then you tighten the two sides of the hernia and place one end of the cloth between them; then, when you pull the cloth over those ends, cut off the top of the cloth; for it will stick and not come apart.
E aprop pausa autra formigua prop la primieyra, e no cesses aquo a far am formiguas una aprop autra segon la quantitat de tota la plagua.	And then place another poultice next to the first one; and do not stop making poultices until all the hernia has gone.
E aprop reduzeys aquela e cos la plagua; e romanguan aquels caps annexces en le budel entro que·l budel sia sanat; e no accideys al malaute degun nocument.	And then cut off that piece; and sew up the hernia; and once the hernia has healed, it will not come back again; and you will not harm the patient.
E ja es possible que·l budel sia liat am fiel subtil lo qual es fayt del budel de bestia annexs am lu, pus que es mes en agulha; e es que tu prenguas la extremitat de aquestz fiels de budel, e sia mot descarnat, e aprop lia la extremitat de lu am fiel de li, envolopat, e aprop entromet aquel fiel en agulhas e cos am aquel le budel, e areduzeys aquel en la disrupcio.	And it is possible that the hernia can be cut with a very fine needle; and if you take the end of such a hernia thread and it is thin, then tie off one end of the thread to the end of another thread, wrapped up, and then insert that other end of the thread into the needle and sew up the hernia; and reduce the hernia.
E aquesta manieyra de sutura am formiguas no es sino segon via de fiducia e d’esperansa.	This method of sewing with poultices is just another way of confidence and hope.
Mays si la plagua es gran e ampla, majorment si es en un dels budels subtils, quar lahoras no es engen sino subtiliacio, e no es sanacio de lu de tot.	But if the hernia is large and wide, as it often is in the thin abdomen; because then only there can be a reduction, but not a cure of all.
De curacio de zuchem e fistula.	Of treatment for the hernia and fistula.
Sapias que tota plagua e apostema quan se envilheseys e se Antiqua, e es fayt ulcus, e no es consolidat e geta braç tot temps e no es abscindit, lahoras, en qualque membre sia, universalment es nompnada fistula e nos la apelam aquela azukem.	Do you know that any swelling or abscess that does not heal and hardens, becoming a chronic ulcer, which does not close up; that is called a fistula in general; and we call it the hernia ulcus.
E fistula segon veritat es nodacio feutrada, dura, blanqua am la qual no es dolor e a la qual es conquavitat ayssi cum es conquavitat de pena de ausel; e per aysso nompnat aquela alcus rizatz, id est pena.	A fistula, according to its true nature, is a chronic, persistent, painful condition that is deep and hollow; it is white and has no pain when touched; for this reason, it is called "rizatus", that is, painful.
E es en alcus homes humida, la qual geta brac; e fort leu la humiditat es abscidida en alcunas horas.	It is in men who are moist; and the moisture hardens rapidly.
E alcunas veguadas aquesta humiditat es mota, e es pauca, e es grossa, e es subtil.	Some times this moisture becomes thick, and then it is little and coarse.
E yeu ja he denant dit en la divisio, lahoras cum yeu diyssi las plaguas, que tot ulcus que no es sanat ni no es en lu nuda carn, no es aquo sino per una de ix causas: de las quals la una es o per pauquesa de sanc en le cos; o per malicia de lu; o quar entre lu e las labias es carn dura prohibent nativitat de carn; o quar es de mota legesa; o quar aquel ulcus en si meteys es poyrit e la materia que es a lu tramesa es de mala qualitat; o quar la medicina es enconvenient en la curacio de lu; o quan corrupcio catz en la regio, e es pestilencia; o per proprietat de regio ayssi cum endeve a Saragossa , en la qual es fayta difficil degestio de las malautias, e es tardada en aquela sanacio de apostema per natura; o quar en lu es os un, o motz osses.	I have already said in the first part of this treatise about the causes that produce ulcers which do not heal or become dry skin; and among these causes are included: or because of a cold wound on the flesh; or because of poison; for when there is hard tissue between the sore place and the lips, it prevents the natural process of healing; or because it is due to a thick liquid; or because that ulcer is caused by the secretion which comes from it being dirty water; or because the medicine used in the treatment is not suitable; or if corruption spreads from one part of the body to another through the lymphatic channels; or because of the nature of the region where the sore occurs, and also because of the bad air there; or because the person has a tendency to produce ulcers on the legs; or because an animal has bitten them; or because they have eaten something poisonous.
Ja e mostrat totas aquelas causas, e·ls senhals de aquelas e la curacio de lor am medicinas en la divisio.	I have already described all these causes, and I will now explain the treatment of ulcers with medicines in another section.
E cove assi que yeu fassa a tu saber la curacio de fistula la qual es fayta per via de operacio am ma.	And this is how, by means of surgery, I will treat the fistula which has been caused by an operation.
E sapias que fistula accideys en totz les membres del cos; quar de aquelas son fistulas que perveno a las venas grantz e arterias, o als nervis, o al ciphac, o al budel, o a la vesica, o ad alcuna de las costas, o ad alcu dels spondils del dos, o ad alcuna de las juncturas compostas per composicio ayssi quo de la ma e del pe; e de aquelas so que dan a lu propinquitat del membre principal e de semblantz.	Do you know that fistulas occur in all parts of the body; because they can affect veins, arteries, nerves, intestines, the bladder, or any of the other organs, or even the joints made up of several bones; and from those to those nearby, such as those next to the main bones of the trunk, or those near the limbs.
E donc aquela de aquestas fistulas que es segon aquesta manieyra es de las malautias de dificil sanacio, e no recep curacio, e occupacio am aquela es trebalh e ignorancia.	And among these fistulas, those that are caused by bad blood, difficult to heal, and which do not respond well to treatment, or to the occupation of the affected person, are a great source of worry and ignorance.
E si es de las fistulas alcuna la profunditat de la qual no perve ad aquestz locs que e dit, e esperas e confizas en la curacio de lu, e vols pervenir a cognicio de lu, lahoras pren tenta de eram o de ferr, e si la fistula va segon rectetut, e perquireys aquela am lu.	If the depth of such a fistula does not reach these locations which I have mentioned; and if you trust in its treatment and want to learn more about it, then try to make an incision or pierce it, and if the fistula follows the natural path, and you inquire carefully about it.
Mays si la fistula es tortuissitat, lahoras investigua aquela am tenta de plom subtil, quar plom am la levitat del sieu cors es alleujat e curvat deves la tortuositat.	But if the fistula is very twisted; then investigate it with a very fine needle, because air rises and bends when it comes into contact with the spine of the trunk.
E si la fistula es havent motz horrificis, no es a tu possible que signifiques sobre lu am tenta.	And if the fistula is not too serious; you will not be able to treat it yourself.
Adonc cristeriza le orrifici per sos orrificis, quar la humiditat per la qual clisterizas aquela va deves las autras orrificis e corr de lor.	Then seal the opening with a bit of thread; because the moisture with which you have lubricated that opening will also run to the other openings and go out.
E aprop inquier exquisitament, segon qual manieyra a tu es possible que conoguas si aqui has os o nervi, e es la conquavitat de la fistula longinqua o propdana, o es una fistula a la qual so motz orrificis e esta sobre aquo tot am la suma de la tua fortaleza, am la tua enterroguacio, am la qual enterroguas le malaute, e la invencio de la dolor deves la tua compressio am la ma sobre le loc, e semblantz de las significacios e de las causas accidentz al apostema.	Then inquire carefully, according to the methods which you have learned; because it is possible that there are bones or nerves underneath; and that fistula goes far away from or near to them; and if it only has small openings and is not too large; then measure carefully with your finger, and consider the causes and accidents of ulcers.
E cum tu auras stat sobre totas aquelas causas am stacio veraya, lahoras ve a la curacio segon confidencia: e es que tu consideras lahoras si es fistula apparent propinqua o en loc sal, longinqua de junctura, o de nervi, o de arteria, o de vena, o de un dels locs les quals yeu a tu e ditz.	And when you have considered all these causes at length; then go on to the treatment according to confidence: and I will tell you now if it is a fistula which appears near a wound or an ulcer, far from a joint, nerve, artery, vein, or one of the locations which I have mentioned.
Lahoras tu secca la fistula segon que denant es dit de la naracio de lu, e osta aquo que es en aquela filtracio e de carns corrumpudas, e aquo que es nascut en le orrifici de la carn, o de theil e de semblantz, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	Then dry up that fistula according to what has been said about its cause; and then apply medicine to treat the sore place which needs healing.
Mays si la fistula es de longinqua profunditat, e es segon rectetut, lahoras cove que inscidas aquela en le preon atant quant a tu sira possible, e aprop mondifica aquela de totas las suas carns corrompudas; e aprop administra calguas envolopadas en medicinas acutas, e intromet aquelas entro a la conquavitat de la fistula, la qual has conprenduda am ferr.	But if the fistula is very deep; and it follows the natural path, then cut it off as much as you can; and then remove all the corrupted flesh from it; and then apply sharp medicines wrapped in bandages; and put those medicines into the cavity of the fistula, which you have cleaned out with a knife.
E fay aquo am aquela alcunas veguadas entro que la medicina acuta corroda tot aquo que es romas en la conquavitat de la fistula de la corrupcio.	And make a mixture of those medicines and put it into the opening of the fistula from which the corruption has been removed by means of the sharp knife.
E aprop restaura aquela am enguentz les quals engendran carn sana entro que sia sanada.	Then restore that opening with bandages and apply wetting substances to promote healing.
Mays si no es sanada per aquo, lahoras tu cauteriza aquela segon que havem recomtat.	But if it is not healed by water; then you must cut off those parts which do not heal.
Mays si la causa de fistula es os e es deves tu certificat aquo, lahoras tu inquireys aquela e secca aquela segon que havem recomtat, si tu no prohibeys alcuna causa de vena o de nervi o de membre principal ayssi cum havem dit.	But if the cause of the fistula is bone; and you must be careful to treat that bone according to what I have said about it; or if it is due to a nerve or one of the main bones, as I have described in another section.
Mays si le os es a tu descubert e es en lu alcuna corrupcio e negror, lahoras tu ratz aquel entro que la corrupcio sia hostada tota; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que lu encarne entro que sia sanat.	But if the bone is discovered and it is in corruption and blackness; then cut off all that part where the corruption is; and then treat that sore place with water so that it heals.
E si no es sana e gieta brac ayssi cum fazia, lahoras sapias que tu no est pervengut a la eradicacio tota de la corrupcio; e adonc tu descuebre sobre lu segondanament e exquisitament fay la razio de lu e la mundificacio de lu am la deriera fortalasa tieua, e aprop restaura aquel.	And if it is not healed and the stench is very bad; then you will know that you have not completely eradicated the corruption; and then discover carefully and thoroughly the cause of it, and clean it out entirely with a strong, sharp knife; and then restore it.
E donc si es sanat, bo es; e sino, lahoras sapias que aquela corrupcio es en la profunditat longinqua del cors, la qual no ha conseguida, e adonc a tu en aquel no es engen sino laysar aquela.	Here is the translation of the text into English:
E si le os corromput es petit, o es a tu possible atirar aquel, lahora tu le atira am forceps subtils las quals conveno ad aquo.	If the bone is slightly corrupted, or if it is possible to reach it, then you can use small, delicate forceps to remove it.
E si so motz osses, lahoras exquisitament fay la extraccio de totz aquels, e de aquels no laysses denguna causa am la tua fortaleza.	And if there are any bones left, then carefully extract them all, leaving none behind for any cause due to your strength.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat alcuna causa de las humiditatz, e en lor inscizio no ha temor ni error, lahoras inscideys aquelas liaments o carns si so aqui, e deliura les osses.	But if there is any cause of humidity, and in their incision there is no fear or mistake, then incise those ligaments or muscles if they are here, and set free the bones.
Mays si a tu no es preparacio de ostar les osses de la tua hora, lahoras pausa sobre la plagua aquo que poyresca la plagua aquela, e layssa aquela entro que aquo es al enviro de aquels osses de carns e de liamentz, e guarda la plagua que no sia consolidada, e sia constrengida la seccio la qual tu has inscidida en la tua operacio.	But if you are not prepared to place the bones in position at this time, then pause on the gore that you might find the gore, and leave that gore within which there is flesh and ligaments, and keep the gore that is not consolidated, and the incision that you have made in your operation.
Habantz, si temes, pausa sobre lu coto submers en sopre trissat am oli, o coto submers en anguent egipciac, o en alcu dels enguentz vertz, quar quan poyriran aquelas liaments, e les osses son de lor seperatz la ablacio, e de aquels atraccio es alleujada.	Then, if you are afraid, pause on the foot submerged in three times oil, or a submerged coto in Egyptian ointment, or in any of the green ointments, for when those ligaments are removed, and the bones are separated from their adhesion, and from that attraction they are relieved.
Mays si es un gran os ayssi cum le os de camba o de coyssa o semblantz ad aquels, e aquo que de lu es corromput es la facia de lu tant solament, lahoras ratz aquela am resio tant solament derriera entro que sia ostada aquela negror e corrupcio, e aprop restaura la plagua.	But if it is a large bone, such as the tibia or fibula or similar to those, and that which is corrupted is only the face of it, then cut off that part only behind the part that can be ostited, that blackness and corruption, and restore the gore.
Mays si aquo que de lu es corrumpyt es gran partida, e la corrupcio ja ha conseguida la medulla del os, lahoras es causa necessaria cerrar aquel e aquel tot inscidir entro al loc on es pervenguda la corrupcio, e lahoras cura aquel entro que sia consolidada.	But if that which is corrupted is a great part, and the corruption has already reached the marrow of the bone, then it is necessary to close that part and incise it all within the place where the corruption has entered, and then treat it within that it is consolidated.
E yeu recomti a tu aquo que endevenc ad un home en la sua coyssa per que pausez aquela a eyssempli e adjutori sobre la tua operacio.	And I recommend to you that you consult with a man in your business so that he pauses on it and serves as an assistant to your operation.
Foc un home jove per etat entorn xxx ans, al qual accideys dolor en la sua cueyssa, e de las partidas dedintz mauguda es sobre la materia dedintz le cors entro que la materia es pervenguda a la cueyssa, e es materia de apostema am gran apostema, e no foc a lu causa extrinseca.	A young man of about 30 years old, who feels pain in his testicles, and small pieces come out from within the body towards the scrotum, but the matter is not delivered to the scrotum, it is matter of pus with great pus, and he does not have an external cause.
E adonc foc extendut le temps am aquela per la error dels metges entro que l’apostema es hubert, e acorrero de lu materias motas, e la sua curacio foc aprop pausada entro que la camba foc fistulada, e faytz son en lu motz orrificis les quals totz getavan poyredura e las humiditatz del cos.	And then I extended the time for it through the mistake of the doctors until the pus became more abundant, and the matter moved, and his cure was postponed until the leg became swollen, and it had orifices everywhere from which he bled and there were the moisture of the body.
E adonc le curec multitut de metges entorn dos ans, e no foc en aquels savia ma en la art, entro que yeu fu appelat.	And then many doctors treated him for two years, but he was not cured in that place because I was called.
E vi la camba de lu e las materias que corrian de lu aquels orrificis per gran cors; e ja le cos de aquel home era tot stabozit e la color de lu era citrina.	And I saw the leg of him and the matter that ran from those orifices for a great distance; and his whole body was swollen, and the color of it was yellow.
E adonc yeu intromesi la tenta ad un de aquels orrificis e pervenguec la tenta al os.	And then I intervened in one of those orifices and reached the bone.
E aprop yeu e perscrutat tostz les orrificis e trobegui aquels pervenir a lor de totas partidas de la camba.	And then I examined the orifices closely, and I found all the parts of the leg coming from them.
E adonc yeu me coytegui e inscidegui sobre un dels orrificis aquels entro que descrobegui una partida del os, e atrobegui aquel corromput, e ja era terros e corrumput e denigrat; e era ja corrumpuda una partida de la camba entro que havia penetrat entro a la mezola.	And then I hid myself and incised one of the orifices where I discovered a part of the bone, and I removed that which was corrupted, and it was dry and corrupted and disintegrated; and a part of the leg had already fallen into the pelvis where it had penetrated within the pelvis.
E adon yeu serregui aquo que a mi era discubert e preparat del os descubert.	And then I tightened that which I had discovered and prepared the bone that was found.
E yeu cujegui que no fos en le os sino aquela corrupcio la qual abscidigui e serregui, e yeu ja havia derraziguada.	And I saw that it was not in the bone but that corruption which I had cut and tightened, and I had already removed it.
E aprop pausegui la restauracio de la plagua am medicina consolidativas per lonc temps, e no es consolidada.	Then I resumed the restoration of the gore with consolidating medicine for a long time, and it was not consolidated.
E aprop yeu iteregui e descubregui sobre le os segondament sobre le descubriment primier, e atrobegui continua corrupcio am le os.	And then I continued to examine the bone again from the first discovery, and I discovered continuous corruption with the bone.
E serregui aquo que a mi apares de aquela corrupcio, e aprop yeu fo perforsat fayre la curacio de lu e restauracio, e no es restaurat.	And then I tightened that which appeared to me of that corruption, and then I made an incision for the cure of it, and it was not restored.
E adonc yeu descubri sobre lu autra veguada e no cessegui inscidir le os petit a petit particuladament e perforsa la restauracio de lu, e no es restaurat entro que inscidigui entorn un palm de lu, e aquel extraxi am la medula sua, e aprop restauregui aquel am medicinas, e es consolidat leugierament e sanat.	And then I discovered another vein and did not stop incising the bone little by little particularly and piercing the cure of it, and it was not restored until I incised around a palm of it, and I extracted the marrow of it, and then I treated it with medicine, and it was consolidated a little and was cured.
E no es necessaria iteracio en la operacio de lu e seccio de lu sino per la disposicio de la freulesa de lu e per la paucitat de la tollerancia de lu e paor de lu de mort, quar a lu accidia en totas horas per superfluitat de evacuacio sincopi mala.	And there is no need for an iteration in his operation or incision because of the convenience of his health and the scarcity of his tolerance and fear of death, since he feels it all day long due to excessive diarrhea that causes fainting.
E donc sanat es per sanacio entiera, e nada es en loc de os carn dura; e es fayta bona la disposicio de lu en le sieu cors e retornec la vertut de lu; e es conversat en las suas disposicios e no fec a lu contrarietat en ambulacio ni nocument en denguna causa.	And then he was healed completely, and there is nothing wrong with the hard flesh of his body; his virtues were restored in their places, and he returned to his former habits, and did not cause any contrary things in walking or anything else for any reason.
Mays si es os eminent en loc del cors ja trauquat, lahoras cove que tu secces aquel segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu prenguas liament e strenh aquel en la extremitat de aquel os eminent, e comanda ad alcu que extenda aquel en sus; e pausa aquel liament de lana pus gros del primier liament; e aprop lia aquel sobre la carn que es dejos le os, e exten la extramitat de lu per que atires la carn a las partidas dejos, e tu descuebras la carn sobre le loc le qual voles serrar per que la serra no leda la carn.	But if the bone is prominent in a place on the body, then cover that with a cloth and secure it in its position, and order someone to stretch that bone; and cut that bone with a sharp knife from the first cut; and then lay that bone on the flesh that is next to it, and stretch the end of it so that you do not harm the flesh.
E pausa fust o taula dejos le os decentment, quar quan tu fas aquo no es prohibida la serra que no secce la carn corrumpuda.	Then place a bench or table from the side of the bone carefully, for when you make the cut, it is not prohibited to chop off the corrupted flesh.
E cove que sia la serradura sobre le loc corrumput petit a petit, quar si es en la concavitat del os corrupcio e no appar en la sua apparicio al sentiment, e forssa a serratura de lu autra veguada.	Then cover the cutting with another cut on the other side little by little, since if it is in the concavity of the bone and does not appear in its appearance to the sense, and forces the locking of it on the other side again.
E si le os es corrumput e no-eminent, abantz es la una partida continuada am la autra, e la corrupcio es al mieg loc o en partida de lu, lahoras tu descuebre la carn de totas partz tota; e aprop pausa fust dejos, e aprop serra aquel de la primiera partida la on es la corrupcio entro que sia continuada la serratura del autra partida.	But if the bone is corrupted and not prominent, then advance one part continuously towards the other, and the corruption is at your location or in another part, then you discover all the flesh; and then place it from the side, and then cut that bone where the corruption is located so that it is continuous with the locking of the other part.
E sia la serradura segon le loc de la corrupcio un petit, segon que havem dit.	And be the cutting according to the location of the corruption little by little, as we have said.
E si la corrupcio es en la junctura, inscideys aquela junctura corrumpuda, e serra le os la on es continuat del autra part.	But if the corruption is in the joint, then incise that corrupt joint, and cut the bone where it continues from the other part.
E si de la corrupcio es en la continuacio de doas juncturas, lahoras no es en lu razio sino engen.	But if the corruption is in the continuation of two joints, then it is not in reason but in another place.
E si la corrupcio es en le pecte de la ma o del pe, es mot dificil; empero cove que tu inquieras la corrupcio en qual manieyra appareys a tu, e que abradas aquela, e mondes aquela segon quascuna disposicio la qual es a tu possibla, e am cascum engen sia rectificat a tu, quan no fa a tu contrarietat vena o nervi.	But if the corruption is in the chest of the neck or the head, it is difficult; however, if you discover what type of corruption appears to you and cut it, and make it according to each possibility that can be made, and at any time it does not cause any contrary thing for blood vessels or nerves.
E sapias qual es inscididors e las serras a inscidir aquestz osses son motz segon le situament dels osses, e la preparacio de aquels, e la grosseza de aquels, e la subtilitat e la grandeza e la parvitat de aquels, e la duricia e la lor raritat; per que cove que tu prepares a tota specia de operacio estrument convenient ad aquela opperacio.	And you know what is the most suitable place and the most appropriate tools for this operation; because all the bones have different characteristics regarding their location, preparation, size, subtlety, thickness, rarity, and hardness; so prepare any operation with specialized instruments for that operation.
E sapias que aquela operacio significa a tu sobre la specia del strument del qual indigeysses; quan am tu es gran studi e lonc e conoyssensa de las manieyras de aquesta art, e testimoni de manieyras de malautias, quar lahoras ja tu las avias per tu meteys aquo que es convenient a lu dels sturmentz a tota malautia.	And you know that this operation requires specific tools; because you have long and thoughtful study of the techniques of this art, and witnesses to the consequences of mistakes, since you have already made many mistakes with these instruments for any purpose.
E yeu so a tu formant en la fi de aquest capitol le nombre dels instrumentz les quals pausaras cum eyssimples am les quals proceziras a la tua prohibicio la qual experimentaras sobre las autras.	And I will show you at the end of this chapter the number of instruments that you should use as simple ones, with which you will process your prohibition, which you will experience on other people.
Forma de serra:	Form of cutting:
Forma de autra serra:	Other form of cut:
Forma de autra serra:	Other form of cutting:
Forma de autra serra gran:	Other large form of cutting:
Forma de ray:	Form of sawing:
Sia le cap de aquest ray segon la forma de cap de clau stellat, e les puntz de lu sian segon la forma dels puntz alstefegi.	The head of this saw according to the shape of a star-shaped claw, and the points of it are according to the shape of the points of an augur.
E no conveneys sino que am aquel sian confricadatz les caps de las juncturas quan so corrumpudas, o es la boca gran ampla.	And it does not work unless we cut off the ends of the joints when they are rotten, or make the mouth wide open.
Forma de razori major dels autres:	Form of large razors of the others:
Forma de razori menor:	Form of smaller razors:
Forma de razori lat:	Form of thin razors:
Forma de serra autra decentment fayta: sia fayt arc de lu pus sobira e la acuitat de lu de ferr, e le membre de lu de boys punhal descentment fayt.	Other nicely made saw: let it be made round above and the sharpness of it of iron, and the member of it of a small dagger nicely made.
Forma de lu:	Form of it:
Forma de razori en la qual ha concavitat:	Form of razors in which there is a concave:
Forma de razori autra subtil:	Other subtle form of razors:
Forma de autra razori de curvada extremitat:	Form of other curved razors:
Forma de rasori petit semblant a tenta:	Form of small razors resembling a tent:
Forma de incisori am le qual so inscidit les osses:	Form of incisor that are carved into the bones:
Forma de inscisori autra minor:	Other smaller form of incisor:
Forma de un autra inscissori; aquest semblant a ray, e la extremitat de lu es cum serra, e es exhibit en motz locs en la razio dels osses:	Form of another incisor; this one resembling a saw, and the end of it is like a claw, and is displayed in a place where the bones are split:
Forma de ray lo qual conveneys a rasio de aquel que es perforat dels osses:	Form of saw that also serves to cut through the bones:
E la extremitat de lu es triangulada e de aguda extremitat.	And its end is triangular and has an acute point.
E es fayt de ferr de India , e semblantment cove que totas las causas que havem ditas de rasoris e de inscissoris e de serras.	It is made of Indian steel, and its appearance is similar to all the causes that we have talked about of razors, and incisers, and saws.
De inscizio extremitatz e de la serratura dels osses.	Of incision extremities and the locking of the bones.
Las extremitatz se poyresso o per causa intrinseca o per causa extrinseca, o cum tu auras medicat aquela corrupcio per curacio de aquelas medicinas e la curacio no comfereys, o vezes la corrupcio anar deves le membre la qual no percuteys denguna causa, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquel membre entro aquo la hon acossec la corrupcio, per que le malaute evasesca per aquo de mort o de malicia que es major defeliment del membre.	The extremities can be treated or by internal cause or external cause, or as you have cured that corruption with those medicines and the cure does not confer, or sometimes the corruption goes away from the member which has no impact on any cause, then you cut off that member within this water that causes death or evil which is a greater removal of the member.
E le senhal de aquel al qual accideys, es que·l membre es fayt negre entro que sia cujat que foc la ja comburit, o se poyreys aprop la negror entro que la poyredura aquela ane entro aquel membre que siec lu e que prengua tot le cors; e donc coyta te am inscizio de aquel.	And the sign of that person who has occurred, is that the member is made black within that it is burned that it burns, or you wash it off towards the darkness within that the discoloration that has occurred within that member which takes all the body; and therefore, if you cut off that member.
E semblantment si es causa de la corrupcio percussio de alcunas causas venenosas ayssi cum de scorpio mari o de vupera o de rutela e de semblantz.	And in a similar way, if it is the cause of the corruption from some poisonous causes then as well from scorpion mare or of a bat or of a rat and in a similar way.
E si la corrupcio o la percussio es en la extremitat del dit, lahoras tu inscideys le dit e no dones spazi a la corrupcio per que ane entro a la ma.	And if the corruption or injury is on the end of it, then you cut off that part and do not give space for the corruption to spread further into the body.
E semblantment si accedeys a la ma, lahoras tu inscideys aquela de la razit del focil, e no dones spazi a la corrupcio entro que prengua en le focil del bras.	And if it occurs to the whole body, then you cut off that part from the joint of the arm, and do not give space for the corruption to spread further into the arm.
E si envezeys aquel, lahoras inscideys le bras entro al coyde en la junctura.	And if instead of it, you cut off the arm at the shoulder joint.
E si passa otra la corrupcio e la vezes enviro le coyde, lahoras en aquel es la mort del malaute; e aministrar autra causa otra aquo en curacio es quantitat de vertut.	And if the corruption occurs in another part of the body, then that is the death of the patient; and other causes are added to this cure with a certain amount of virtue.
E semblantment fay del pe quan corrupcio envezeys le dit del pe, lahoras tu inscideys aquel entro ad un dels nozes.	And if corruption occurs in one foot instead of the other, then you cut off that foot within one of the joints.
E si pren en la pente del pe, lahoras tu inscideys tot le pe.	And if it is in the heel of the foot, then you cut off all the foot.
Mays si pueja entro al denol, lahoras tu inscideys la camba entro a la junctura del denol.	Or if it is in the arch, then you cut off the arch within the joint of the arch.
E si la corrupcio ja es pervenguda sobre le denol, lahoras en lu no es engen sino dimissio, e layssar le malaute a la mort.	And if the corruption has already occurred on the heel, then there is only one remedy, and that is to cut off the patient's heel.
E la manieyra de inscidir le membre o de serrar lu es que tu strenhas le liament en la partida pus dejos la qual voles inscidir, e strenh autre liament sobre le loc; e extenda le ministre un liament a las partidas dejos, e extenda le ministra autra liament en sus; e tu separa la carn la qual es entre dos liamentz ain spatum lat entro que sia descuberta tota la carn; e aprop sia inscidit o serrat.	And the way of cutting off a member or sawing it is that you strengthen the joint in the place where you want to cut, and strengthen another joint over the spot, and extend the minister one joint to the spots below, and extend the other joint on them; and you separate the flesh which is between two joints, and cut it open completely; and that has been cut or sawed.
E cove que sia pausat drap de li de totas partidas per so que no toque le loc sa, e que vengua al malaute lesio ajustada e apostema caut.	And as long as it is not placed with a strap over all the joints in order that they do not touch the spot, and that it causes the patient's injury to be adjusted and an apoplexy to occur.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc quan obras, lahoras tu cauteriza le loc coytadament, o pausa sus lu alcunas polveras restrenhentz le sanc; e aprop retorna a la tua medicacio entro que sia complida.	Or if it occurs to a person' work, then you cauterize the spot with great care, or pour on some powder that restricts the blood; and then return to your medicine until it is completed.
E aprop lia le membre plaguat am liament al u convenient, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And then cut off the member that has been troubled with a strong joint in a convenient place, and cure that within which has been healed.
E yeu recomti a tu aquo que endevenc a un home en le sieu pe, aquest meteys accident le qual yeu e a tu recomtat, le qual es quar accidic a lu negror en le sieu pe am adustio que era asemblada a combustio de foc.	I will recommend to you that you go to a man in the service of a fire, this accident which I have told you about, which was brought together by a fire.
E aquela corrupcio accidic primierament en le sieu dit entro que tendec tot le pe.	And that corruption occurred first in his foot within that it bends all the foot.
E adonc aquel home preparec per si meteys pus que vic la curacio anar al membre am la vehemencia de lu que atrobec de dolor e de adustrio de lu, e el inscidic aquel pe entro a la junctura, e foc sanat.	And then that man prepared himself for this purpose more than he could bear the cure to go to the member with great haste because of his pain and his suffering, and burned that foot within the joint, and healed it.
Lonc temps accidic a lu aquela meteyssa corrupcio en le dit de la ma indic.	Long time occurred to him that corruption in the arm of the body which he was holding.
E adonc venc a mi, e so me perforsat repercutir aquela superfluitat am aquo que pausegui sobre la ma de las medicinas, aprop la mundificacio del cos de lu; e no es repercussa la superfluitat e comensec anar al autra dit entro que comensec en la ma.	And then I went to him, and so he pierced me deeply with that thought above the body's medicine, with the purification of his soul; and that thought did not cause a response and I began to feel it in his other foot within the body.
E el apelec me a inscidir la ma de lu, e yeu no volgui far aquo sperant sobre la repercussio de aquela superfluitat, e mays que temegui deves la inscizio de la ma de lu mort, quar la vertut del malaute era sobre cazement.	And he appealed to me to cut off his body, and I did not want to cause a response from that thought above, and more than that, I should die the body of him with the cutting off of it, because the virtue of the patient was on the edge of death.
E pus que el se desperec de mi, es retornat en la sua terra e pervenguec a mi que aquel home preparec e inscidic la sua ma tota, e es sanat.	And then that man died from me, and returned to his land, and he who had prepared himself came to me with his whole arm, and it was healed.
E no he adhuzida aquesta narracio sino per que sia adjutori sobre aquo que catz de aquesta malautia, e que sia significacio per la qual sia significada e segon la qual sia obrat.	And I will not add to this narrative unless it is to be an aid to me in dealing with this evil, and that you understand by which means it was accomplished and by which means it should be reversed.
De cura sinuum et qualitate clisterizationis cum medicinis.	Of cure of the sick and the quality of the preparation with medicines.
Quan accideys apostema en alcus membres carnozes e·l spazi de l’apostema es prolonguat entro que fa colleccio de sania, e aprop es romput e perforat, e es eyssida de lu la sania, e roman le loc vuoyt quays cum si era vayssel, e la codena que es desobre lu ayssi cum drap subtiliat, e no es pervengut a deriera corrupcio, e no inprimeys en le os o en nervi ni en liament, es apelat sinu, e no es nompnat fistula.	When an apoplexy occurs in large members of the body and the space of the apoplexy is prolonged within that it causes a collection of blood, then it is cut open and pierced, and it is washed out by water, and the wound is sewed up on both sides as if it were a boat, and the knot is opened where it has been sewed; and it does not cause a second apoplexy to occur in the bone or in the nerves or in the joint, it is called a vein, and is not named a fistula.
Mays empero si le spazi es prolonguat entro que la corrupcio enprema en alcun membre, lahoras es appelada fistula e no zukem.	But if the space is prolonged within that it causes corruption to occur in another member, then it is called a fistula, and not a lump of blood.
E la cura de lu es que inscidas aquela codena tota ayssi cum es revolvut, e majorment quan es subtiliada e es fayta cum drap, e comfizas que no adhereys al loc per la sua corrupcio.	And the cure of it is that you cut off all that wound completely at first, and more so when it is softened and made with a cloth, and confirmed that it does not stick to the spot because of its corruption.
Mays si tu speras que la codena adheresca e que aquela corrupcio no aja conseguit per deriera consecucio, e en la codena ha spassitut de cara, lahoras tu cura aquel am clisteri.	Or if you hope that the wound will adhere and that that corruption has not occurred through a second cause, then in the wound have placed a cloth, and cure it with a strong medicine.
E es que consideras al sinu, e lahoras si es gran, e·l brac que yeys es de fetent odor, lahoras clisteriza aquel am medicament egipciac le qual es de oli e vi agre e ziniar recebent partidas enguals, e sian ajustadas en un vayssel, e sian coytas sobre le foc entro que’l medicament se fassa rog e pervengua a specitut de mel.	And that is what you consider the wound, and if it is large, then the arm that has caused an odor, then clisterize it with a medicine of Egypt made of oil and vinegar and honey receiving parts in equal parts, and put them in a boat, and cut them open on both sides as if it were a vessel, and let them flow over a fire until the medicine is boiled and comes out from the inside.
E aprop tu pren de lu aquo que es necessari e dissolveys lu am aygua e mel; e clisteriza am aquel le sinu, e strenh le orrifici de lu, e layssa la medicina en lu per la quantitat de doas horas.	And you take from him the water that is necessary and dissolve it with honey; and you cleanse his stomach, and strengthen his orifices, and leave the medicine in him for the quantity of two hours.
E aprop extratz aquela am sprecio; e fay aquo per tantz dias entro que sia mundificat le sinu e sia remauguda la pudor.	And you extract that with sacrifice; and make water for as many days as it purifies the stomach and restores the fluids.
E alcunas veguadas es clisterizat am aygua de cendre, quan no es a tu prezent aquest medicament; e es que tu prenguas la cendra de vitz, e met sobre lu aygua; e aprop cola aquela e clisteriza aquel am ela entro que te confizes que·l sinu lahoras es ostat.	And some are cleansed with ash water, if not this medicine is taken by you; and that you take the ash of oak, and put it on the water; and you mix it well, and cleanse it inside him, so that you swear that his stomach will be held back.
E si le malaute no ha tollerancia sobre le medicament egipciac ni l’aygua de la cendre, lahoras clisteriza aquel am aygua e mel e quays sia mesclat ziniar trissat, e clisteriza aquel am vi e mel mesclat, quar de proprietat de mel es que mondifique e lave, e le vi fa adherir le sinu, e majorment quan en le vi ha superfluitat de stipticitat e de siccitat.	And if the patient does not have tolerance for Egyptian medicine or ash water, then cleanse it with honey and water mixed with three parts of zinnia, and cleanse it with honey and wine mixed, because honey has the property of purifying and washing, and wine attaches to the stomach, and more so when there is a surplus of tightness and dryness.
E cum tu fas aquo alcunas veguadas e te comfizes que·l sinu ja es remaugut, lahoras clisteriza aquel am aquo que fa naysser la carn en lu.	And when you have made water a few times and are convinced that the stomach has been restored, then cleanse it with water in which meat is boiled.
E es que prenguas de enguent dyafinicon e dissolveys aquel am oli rozat e vi stiptic; o que clisterizas aquel am alcunas medicinas e enguentz autres que hajan las proprietatz les quals ja he yeu scritz en le tractat dels enguents.	And you take from the oil of daphnes and dissolve it with rose water and wine for stiffness; or you cleanse it with some medicines, and apply oil that has these properties, which I have already written in the treatise on the oils.
E si le orrifici del sinu es streyt en le qual no es recebuda la canula del clisteri, lahoras tu le amplifique aquel am ferr petit a petit, e pausa en lu calgua envolopada en enguent egipciac o en enguent basilicon entro que sia amplificat.	And if the orifices of the stomach are narrow in which the tube of the enema cannot be received, then you enlarge them little by little, and pause with five envelopes of Egyptian oil or oil of basil, so that they are enlarged.
E semblantment si le orrifici es ample, lahoras tu agregua las labias de lu am sutura e layssa de lu quantitat en la qual intre le clisteri ses addicio.	And apparently if the orifices are wide, then you join the lips of him with sutures and leave its quantity in which there is addition between the enemas.
E si le orrifici de lu del qual corr le brac es elevat a las partidas desus, lahoras secca aquel en le pus bas loc que es en lu per que le brac corra entro dejos, quar quan le brac es coartat en la preondeza de sinu la carn esser en lu engendrada.	And if the orifice from which the brachium comes out is elevated to the back of the neck, then you dry it in a place where the brachium runs inside, because when the brachium is constricted in the depth of the stomach, the meat remains in it.
E si no es a tu possible seccar le sinu entro al enviro del os pus bas segon que voles, lahoras te perforssa que prepares le membre am preparacio per la qual corr de lu le brac leugierament segon que es a tu apparelhat e que no sia en lu retengut alcuna causa del brac.	And if you cannot dry the stomach within the area of the neck as much as you want, then you pierce it so that you prepare the member for its movement according to what is appropriate for your clothing and not retain any reason for the brachium.
E pren medicinas consolidativas que sian pausadas sobre le sinu convenientz ad aquo que vols exxten aquelas sobre drap de li.	And take consolidating medicines that are placed on the stomach, conveniently suspended over water that you want to extend those over a drape of linen.
E le drap sia de tan gran quantitat cum fa la comunicacio de tot le sinu; e aprop inscidey am las forfexs en le dreyt del orrifici del sinu un trauc pus ample un pauc que l’orrifici del sinu; e aprop exten sobre autre drap de li dels enguentz leons segon la quantitat del trauc, e pausa le sobre aquel per posicio longinqua del orrifici del sinu per que sia aleujat le eyssiment del brac de lu e no ostes le drap gran sino aprop alcus dyas una veguada.	And the drape should be of such a quantity that it covers all the stomach; and you cut with scissors on the right side of the orifice of the stomach, a little more wide than an orifice; and you extend over another drape of linen from the lions according to the quantity of the cut, and pause it above that for a distant position from the orifice of the stomach so that the brachium is kept away from it and does not touch the drape. And leave it for a few days.
Mays aquel que es sobre le orrifici del sinu, le qual remauguas en tota hora per so que yesca aquo que es ajust en lu del brac.	And you remove what is on the orifice of the stomach, which restores itself in a full hour so that it comes out water that is adjusted for the brachium.
E per que sapias si aquo que corr de lu del brac es mot o pauc, o es digest, o es no-digest.	And so that you know if the water that runs from the brachium is more or less, or whether it is digested or not.
E am aysso tu considera le loc de aquel sinu, si en lu sent le pacient dolor o no, e si es en lu apostema.	And you consider the location of that stomach, if there is pain in it from the patient and whether it is in a swelling.
E cum la tua medicacio es prolonguada en la tal manieyra, e vesas la matiera que es gitada sobre le orrifici del sinu ja adhereys, o se apropria adherencia, lahoras le mayti tu le deslia o le tertz dia, e quan deslias la plagua, lahoras muda le drap per autre e renova le enguent.	And when your medicine has been prolonged in this way, and you see the matter that is attached to the orifice of the stomach has become adherent, or has acquired adhesion, then the first day you remove it, and when you remove the poultice, change the drape for another, and renew the oil.
Mays si del sinu aprop lon spazi yeys virus subtil, lahoras no te desperes de la adherencia de li, quar la sanacio de lu se apropria, quar so alcus homes en les quals tarda generacio de carn en las lors plaguas, e de aquels so en les quals es fayt le contrari de lu.	May if from the stomach comes a small space of subtle virus, then do not despair of the adhesion of linen, because the cure of it is acquired, for some people in whom it takes a long time for the flesh in the poultices to become pus, and for those who have it made pus in the opposite way.
E si del sinu aprop motz dias es yssit brac indigest, lahoras sapias que·l sinu no adhereys; e si es tardada la adherencia del sinu e es la causa prolonguada, lahoras tu ajusta en exsiccacio de las medicinas, e si las medicinas so humidas en lor substancia e en la sua vertut, son seccas ayssi cum enguent dyafinicon, quan es en lu ajustada superfluitat de addicio de zegi.	And if from the stomach comes three days of digestive brachium, then you know that the stomach does not adhere; and if the adherence of the stomach is prolonged and the cause is a long time, then you adjust the desiccation of the medicines, and if the medicines are wet in their substance and in their virtue, they are dried in this way with oil of daphnes, when it is in an adjusted state of addition of salt.
E le mays derier am le qual es curat, es que prenguas de enguent dyafinicon e sia dissout en oli rozat, e sia sobre lu vojat vi antic engual en la sua substancia, e aprop comfeys aquel am lu, e usa de aquel.	And the next one is that you take from oil of daphnes and dissolve it in rose water, and it is in a dry state in olive oil, and you join it with wine of oak in its substance, and use it; and apply it.
E ja fa semblant en aquela accio, quan no y a brac, enguent dyafinicon, mel quan es coyt entro que sia engrossat, e usa de lu; o que prenguas mirra e aloen e enses, e trissa tot e polveriza sobre le mel quan es sus le foc, e aprop lineys aquo sobre drap e strenh aquel sobre le sinu; e lineys aquel am le mel le qual has cuoyt entro que es engrossat, e polveriza sobre drap e strenh aquel.	And that is similar in this action, when there is no brachium, oil of daphnes, honey when it is cooked inside that it becomes thick, and use it; or you take myrrh and aloe and blend it, and sift all of it and powder over the honey when it is on the fire, and you line up water over a drape and strengthen it; and you line up that honey that you have cooked, and you sift it onto linen.
E alcunas veguadas so administratz am lu aristologia longua e razitz de lili celesti (e es lili celesti) e farina de errs e centaurea, e usa de aquels simples o ajustatz, trissa aquels e cribela e polveriza sobre le mel le qual he recomtat; e husa de lu.	And some are given long-acting aromatic oil, and sliced flowers of celestial lily (and it is a celestial lily) and flour of ergot and centaury, and use those simple ones or adjust them, blend those and sift them and powder over the honey that I have mentioned; and keep it.
E si es prolonguat le sinu, e no es sanat per aquesta curacio, lahoras sapias que la corrupcio es en le preon de lu, e ja fa enquisicio en les osses o en les autres membres durs o als liaments; lahoras tu le cura am curacio fistular, ayssi cum desus es dit.	And if the stomach is prolonged and has not been healed with this cure, then you know that corruption is in its beginning, and has already begun in the bones or in other hard members or in the ligaments; then you treat it with a surgical incision, as much above as below.
De curacio de panarici et unguis attritae et incisione digiti additi et sectione.	Of surgery of rubbed bread and nails and incision of finger added and section.
Panarici es apostema le qual nays dejos la ungla del dit pous de la ma o del pe, e fort leu nays en les autres ditz, e cum es prolonguat e la sua curacio es mens prezada, o es apostemat de apostema caut, o es corrumput, e gieta brac entro que corrodeys la razitz de la ungla, e fort leu corromp aquela tota, e fort leu perve la sua corrupcio al os entro que es a lu odor fetent, e es fayta la extremitat del dit lada, e la color de lu es fayta fusca.	Of surgery of bread and nails rubbed together and an incision of the finger added and sectioned off. And when it is prolonged and its cure is delayed, it is a painful pustule; or it is a pus in pus, or it is corrupted, and it corrodes the nail; and firmly corrupts that whole, and darkens its color.
E donc quan tu auras aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu inscidas am ferr tota la superfluitat que es romasa de la ungla e aprop cauteriza la plagla aprop aquo, quar cauteri mot es juvatiu en aysso.	And therefore when you have that water that I have mentioned in the division and do not trust your cure, then you cut off all the excess that is rust of the nail, and you cauterize the poultice with fire, because cauterizing mot is beneficial in this case.
Mays si le os es sa e la ungla es sana, e las addicios de la ungla vuoydas ja compremen las carns a las partidas dedintz, e comensan lu punger e ledeysso aquela, lahoras cove que tu pauses ray subtil dejos le angle de la ungla que pungeys la carn, e impelleys aquela sus e inscideys aquela carn am facilitat, e pausa sobre aquo que roman de la carn de las medicinas comburentz corrosivas entro que sia tot remaugut; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And if the bone is sound and the nail is healthy, and the additions of the nail are already compromising the flesh to the ends inside, and it begins to throb and to leak, then you pause a little subtle pain in that angle of the nail that you poke the flesh, and you push it up; and you pause that flesh on fire with corrosive enemas until it is all restored. And then treat it with oil within.
Mays si la corrupcio ja enprem en le os, lahoras cove que tu inscidas le os aquel e le extraguas, car nul temps no es sanat que sia en lu le os corrumput.	And if corruption has already set in the bone, then you cut out that bone and extract it, because there is no time for healing when the bone has rotted.
E si vezes la corrozio e la corupcio anar en le dit, lahoras tu inscideys aquel en un dels nozes segons que es premesa la sua rememoracio, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if corruption and腐敗 go together in the same finger, then you cut it off at a joint according to what is appropriate for its remembrance, and then treat it within.
Mays si a la ungla endeve percussio o atricio, e endeve en aquela dolor vehement, lahoras cove que tu al comensament fleubotomes le malaute, e aprop secca la ungla am spatum agut am seccio transversa desus en jus, e guarda te que la seccio no pervengua entro a la carn que es dejos la ungla, quar tu faras accidir al malaute dolor vehement, e sira causa a nativitat de la carn ajustada superflua en le loc; e aprop cura aquel loc am aquo que ceda dolor.	And if there is a percussion or a hit on the nail, and that pain is severe, then at the beginning you bleed the patient, and you cut off the nail with a transverse section through it from above, and be careful that the section does not reach the flesh beneath the nail, because you would provoke painful birth to excessive blood in that place and cause a birth of flesh appropriate for the site; and then treat that spot with water that causes pain.
Mays dit ajustat, le qual es nat en las mas de alcus homes, fort leu es carnos tot, e fort leu so en lu osses, o fort leu es en lu ungla.	May's weight is adjusted, which is born on the back of some men, very strong is the flesh, and very strong is in his bones, or very strong is in his nails.
E alcus de lu son natz en la razit de la junctura, o es la nativitat de lu en alcus nozes dels ditz.	And some of them are born at the root of the joint, or the birth of them in some nuts of those said.
Mays aquel que es nat en alcus nozes del dit no se mau, e aquest que es nat en las juncturas fort leu es maugut.	But may who is born in some nuts of this said does not harm, and this one who is born at the joints very strong is deformed.
E de aquels que son natz carnoses, la seccio es leugiera, e es que tu inscidas aquel deves la sua razitz am spatum lat.	And of those who are born carnose, the section is a bit difficult, and it is that you should cut this one with a sharp blade at its root.
Mays de aquel que es nat en la razitz de la junctura, la curacio es dificil; e donc guarda te de la abscizio de lu.	But may who is born at the root of the joint, the cure is difficult; and therefore you must guard against the absence of it.
Mays en aquel que es nat en dit deves les nozes, cove que tu inscidas al comensament la carn de lu am inscizio redonda entro al os, e aprop serra am una de aquelas serras convenientz ad aquo, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	But may who is born in the said nuts, cover that you cut at the beginning the flesh of it with a round blade on the bone, and immediately tighten with one of those saws suitable for water, and then heal it inside so that it should be healed.
Mays consolidacio la qual accideys als ditz entre lor motas veguadas o per nativitat del home que nays enayssi, o per consolidacio de plagua o per combustio de foc, o per semblantz, adonc cove que secces aquela consolidacio entro que les ditz retorno a la sua forma natural.	The consolidation that happens to those mentioned between them visible motas or by the birth of the man who gives it in any way, or by the consolidation of plague or by fire, or by resemblance, so that you dry up that consolidation until those mentioned return to their natural form.
E aprop pausa entre lor draps de li enfuzes en oli rozat per que no sian consolidatz leugierament, e separa entre aquels, o pausa entre aquels una lamina de plom subtil entro que sia consolidat segon que cove.	Then return between their drapes of which you infused it in rose oil so that they are not consolidated too much, and separate between them, or return between those a thin leaf of lead until it is consolidated according to how long.
E semblantment si accideys consolidacio en alcus ditz am la palma, lahoras tu secca aquela consolidacio segon que es preparada e conveneys a la figura del membre.	And if consolidation happens in some mentioned at the palm, then you dry that consolidation according to how it is prepared and adapt it to the figure of the member.
De inscizio de vices, so son varicas.	Of cutting with knives, so are varicose veins.
Vices so son varicas, e so venas envolutas grossas plenas de superfluitatz melencolicas las quals veno en motz dels membres del cors, e le major adveniment de lor en las cambas, e majorment en las cambas dels itinerantz e dels laborantz e dels portantz.	Vices so are varicose veins, and those are thick veins filled with excess melancholic fluid that comes in motz of the members of the body, and most appear in the legs, especially in the legs of travelers and laborers and carriers.
Adonc cove que tu administres purguacio del cors de colera negra alcunas veguadas am expulcio fort, e aprop sangna le pacient de la vena basilica.	Then you administer a purge of black cholera from time to time by strong expulsion, and then let the patient bleed from the basilic vein.
Mays la curacio de lor am ferr es segon dos manieyras: la una es que sia inscizas e sia atirat aquel sanc negre, e l’autra manieyra es que sia elevada la vena e sia extrayta tota.	May's cure of them is according to two ways: the one is that it be cut and be pulled out that black knot, and another way is that the vein is lifted and all be extracted.
La seccio de lu es segon aquesta manieyra: embroca al comensament la camba am aygua cauda mot entro que le sanc gros sia resolvut, que es feculent de la camba, e aprop strenh la camba del malaute a la partida pus sobirana de la coyssa entro a la partida dejos del denol am una benda, e aprop secca la vena en un loc, o en dos, o en tres am seccio ampla, e aprop eleva le sanc negra am la tieua ma de la partida dejos de la camba entro en sus, e desus en jus, entro que del sanc sia yssida la quantitat que voles e que vezes habastar, e la qual tollera la vertut del malaute.	The section of it is according to this way: dip the leg at the beginning to a tail-like shape within that black knot be resolved, which is curly from the leg, and then tighten the leg of the patient under the kowsh that is made with a bandage, and then dry the vein in one place, or two, or three by wide section, and then lift up the black knot to the hand of the patient at the end of his legs within its, and later on the outside, within that from the knot be discharged the quantity that you want and which times can be extracted, and that bears the virtue of the leg.
E aprop lia aquela, e comanda a lu que abstengua de las viandas colera negra engendrantz.	Then return it, and order him to abstain from the foods that produce black cholera.
E itera la curacio per fleubotomia quan las venas so umplidas e aquo notz al malaute.	Then repeat the cure by phlebotomy when veins are filled with blood, and it is given to the patient.
Mays la elevacio de lor es segon aquesta manieyra: tu que razas la camba del malaute, si en lu so motz pels, e aprop met le en banh e embroca la camba de lu am aygua cauda entro que s’enrogesesca e las venas sian exuberadas; o que sia exercitat per exercici fort, si banh no es a tu present, entro que·l membre sia scalfat.	May's elevation of them is according to this way: you cut the leg of the patient, if it has hair on it, and then put it into a bath, and dip the leg in water until it hardens and veins are swollen; or that exercise be made by strong movement, if bath is not to your hand, within that member be scratched.
E aprop secsa la codena en le dreyt de la vena per seccio en le lonc o en le derier de lu deves le denol, o en le pus bas de lu deves lo talo.	Then return the vein to its right place by section in the long or in the back of it, you cut it from the front, or you cut it from the bottom, or you cut it from the top.
E aprop uobre la codena am uncis e excorja la vena de tota part entro que appara al sentiment, e es deves la appericio de lu que vezes aquela roga declinant a negror.	Then return the vein with nails and extract the vein from all parts until it appears on the surface, and this is the appearance of it that sometimes declines to blackness.
E donc cum evazeys e de la codena tu vezes aquela blanca quays sia corda.	And therefore when you extract it, and from the leg there comes out a white thread that is not cut.
E aprop tu met dejos aquela le ray entro que sia elevada e sia gitada de la codena, e sospen aquela am onci orp leon.	Then return it under that line within that be lifted and be taken away from the vein, and suspend it with an onion or lion's tooth.
E aprop secsa autra seccio aprop aquela seccio per tres ditz, e aprop excorja la codena de la partida desus de la vena entro que apparia.	Then return another section near that section by three fingers, and then extract the vein from the end of it within that appears.
E aprop eleva aquela e inscideys aquela en deriera seccio deves le talo, e aprop extratz aquela e eleva aquela entro que sia yssida per la seccio segonda, e aprop extratz aquela de la seccio que es sobre aquela.	Then return that one and cut it at the back section of it, you extract it from the end of it within that appears. Then extract that one from the section that is above that one, and then extract it that appears from the second section.
E fay aquo entro que extraguas aquela de la seccio que es pus sobirana o pus auta de totas las seccios, entro que tota es yssida; e lahoras inscideys aquela.	Then return it within that you extract that one from the section that is most superior or most distant of all sections, within that all is extracted; and then cut it.
E si no obezeys a tu ad extrayre e elevar, lahoras intromet una agulha am fiel fort doble e ligua aquela e extratz la, o intromet dejos lu le ray e revolveys la tua ma a tota part entro qu’en sia getada.	And if you do not obey me to extract and raise it, then insert an needle with a strong double thread and tie that one, or insert between it and return your hand to all parts within that is lifted.
E guarda te que no sia inscidida; quar si es trencada, es fayt a tu dificil elevar aquela mot e es vengut sobre le malaute per aquela nocument.	And guard that it is not cut; for if it is broken, it is difficult to you to raise that leg and it has come back on the patient by that wound.
E cum aquela tota auras fora-gitada, lahoras pausa sobre le loc de la plagua lana submerssa en vi e oli rozat e oli no-rozat, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	Then when all that is taken out, then return to the place of the plague that is submerged in vinegar and oil red and oil not-red, and heal it within that is healed.
E si la vit es contrayta havent tortuositat a la qual sia envolucio a las partidas, e no es segon rectitut segon que havem dit, lahoras cove que tu fendas sobre aquela a tota partida de tortuositat de lu e als locs de envolucio de lu, e aprop suspen aquela am uncis entro que eleves aquela tota.	And if the wine is contracted without tortuosity that is wrapped in the parts, and it is not according to rectitude according to what you said, then return it to its right place. Then cut it at all parts of tortuosity of it and the places where it is wrapped, and then suspend that one with nails within that you lift that one completely.
E guarda te deves la tua seccio que no inscidas la vena e que no plagues aquela, quar dificil sira a tu elevar aquela; e serva la tua prudencia en aquela.	And guard that you do not cut the vein and do not wound that one, for it is difficult to you to raise that leg; and serve your prudence in that one.
Forma del inscident am le qual es seccada vit:	Shape of the section that is dried with oil:
Forma de unci orp:	Shape of lion' tooth:
No es a lu accuitat ayssi cum als uncis ni es de aguda extremitat per so que no plague la vena; e es de grossa flexibilitat leon, quar si era subtil, inscidira la vena per la sua subtilitat; habantz es en lu superflua grosseza ayssi cum havem dit.	It is not on the leg that you extract it with nails or with an acute point, and it is not of a sharp extremities so that it does not wound the vein; and it is of thick flexibility like lion' tooth, for if it were subtle, it would cut the vein because of its subtility; but it has this superfluous thickness.
De extraccio venae cruris.	Of extraction of leg vein.
Aquesta vena es engendrada en las cambas en terras caudas ayssi cum al- Ategi en terra de Arabics e en las terras de India caudas e aridas de pauca teneritat e en las quals no nays erba ni aybre.	This vein is generated in the legs in the tail-like shape so that it is not on the leg when it is cut with a blade.
E fort leu es engendrada en autres locs del cors otra las cambas.	It is very strong generated in other parts of the body than legs.
E la gestacio de lu es de putrefaccio que ve dejos la codena ayssi cum venen dedintz le cors serpentz e vermps e scarides e verms engendrantz entre la codena e la carn.	The creation of it is the decomposition that comes from the inside of the body when snakes and worms and scabies and worms are generated between the leg and the flesh.
E senhal de la suscepcio de l’adveniment de lu es de aquesta vena que accideys en la camba enflammacio vehement; e aprop le loc es vesicat; e aprop comensa la vena yssir del loc de aquela vesicacio quays sembla razit de planta.	The sign of the arrival of it is this vein that happens in a burning inflammation; and then that place is swollen; and then the vein appears from the swollen place like a root of a plant.
E adonc cum appar de lu la extremitat, lahoras cove que tu envolvas sobre aquela una pessa de plom del qual sia le pes de una drac. entro a ii drac., e noza aquela e layssa le plom suspendut de la camba.	And then, when you take the end of it out, wrap that piece of lead which is the weight of a dragon around it; and if there are two dragons, leave the lead suspended from the chest.
E tantas veguadas cum yeys de lu alcuna causa a las partidas defora, envolveys aquo em plom e noza aquel.	And as often as he has any cause to go outside, wrap him in lead and notice that.
E si mot es prolonguat, lahoras tu inscideys una partida de lu e envolopa le romanent; e no inscidas aquela de razit entro que sia fora yssida, quar si inscideys aquela es contrayta e intra en la carn e fa accidir apostema e poyredura en le loc e ulceracio mala.	And if it is prolonged, then you cut a hole in the leg and wrap it gently; and do not cut that part that is outside until it has been cut inside, for if you cut that part it will contract and enter into the flesh and cause a bad blister and ulcer in the place and ulceration.
Per que cove que sia tractada suaument e sia extrayta petit a petit, entro que sia fora-gitada del derier de lu e no remangua de lu alcuna causa en le cors.	So that it is treated gently and extracted little by little, until it has been extracted completely from the back of the leg and does not cause any cause in the body.
E de aquesta vena es yssit en alcus homes que es en la sua longitut de v palms e de detz e ja es pervengut a mi que yssic un de xx palms.	And from this vein it is drawn from about twenty men who are in their length of five palms and of ten fingers, and I have already come to me that I draw one of 20 palms.
E si es inscidida en la hora de la sua medicacio, lahoras intromet lo ray en le trauc de lu e perfora aquela am lonc trauc am le cors, entro que sia evacuat tot aquo que es en la materia, e administra putrefaccio del loc per alcus dias am medicinas; e aprop cura aquela per la curacio de apostemas.	And if it is cut at the time of its medicine, then insert a sharp instrument into the hole in the leg and pierce that with a long incision through the body, until all that is in the matter is evacuated, and administer putrefaction to the place for several days with medicines; and then cure that with the cure of blisters.
E aquesta vena alcunas veguadas ha motz ramps, e majorment quan apar a la junctura del pe o en le pe, e veno a lu motz orrificis, e es yssit de quascu orrifici ram.	And this vein sometimes has a ramp, and mostly when it appears at the junction of the foot or in the foot, and comes out of it some orifices, and is drawn from each orifice.
E donc cura aquela ayssi cum havem dit en la divisio e am aquo que es desus dit.	And therefore cure that there as we have said above in the division and at the water that is above said.
De sectione super vermes generatos sub cute et dicitur aegritudo bovina.	Of section on the worms that are born under the skin and it is called bovine disease.
Aquesta malautia es nompnada en alcuna terra deves nos malautia bovina per so quar motas veguadas endeve als bious e es verm pauc un le qual es nat entre la codena e la carn, e va en tot le cos pujan e devalan, e es mostrat al sentiment deves le sieu anament de membre en membre entro que disromp la codena e yeys fora.	This malady is called in some countries bovine disease because it appears suddenly on the animals and is a small worm that is born between the skin and the flesh, and goes into all the body blowing and breaking down, and shows itself at the surface of the animal with pain in the members until it breaks the skin and comes out.
E la generacio de lu es per putrefaccio de alcunas humors ayssi cum accideysso verms e serpentz e lombrics e ascaridas en le ventre.	And the generation of it is by putrefaction of some humors so that when this happens worms and snakes and earthworms and roundworms come out from the abdomen.
E es temut per la malicia de lu, quar quan el va en le cors e es elevat al cap, e es pervengut al huel, lahoras fort leu uebre en lu e intra e destruzeys le huel, e aquo endeve motas veguadas.	And it is feared because when it goes through the body and rises to the head, and has reached the neck, then it breaks it strongly and destroys the neck, and where it is there are some seen.
E donc quan tu voles curar aquel e extraire lu, lahoras no se fa si no deves la sieua ambulacio e apparacio de lu al sentiment, e adonc cove que tu strenhas aquo que es sobre lu e aquo que es dejos lu am liament e constriccio fort, e aprop secca sobre lu e extratz aquel.	And therefore when you want to treat that one and extract it, then do not do so unless you have walked with it and noticed its behavior, and then cover that you put over it and hold it tightly and strongly, and then dry it on it and extract it.
E si es preondat en la carn e no le atrobes, lahoras tu pausa cauteri am foc sobre le loc entro que mora, e la major causa que es temuda es corrupcio de lu am la qual corrump le loc ayssi cum havem dit.	And if it is submerged in the flesh and you do not see it, then you make a cautery with fire on the place where it lives, and the main cause that is feared is corruption of it as we have said above.
May si tu vezes aquel esser pervengut al cap prop del huel, lahoras strenh sobre le sobrecil am fort strictura, e aprop secsa sobre lu, e extratz aquel; e cove que·l malaute use de mondificacio del sieu cors am medicinas evacuantz humors putridas malas, e guarda se de viandas generantz putrefaccio.	Maybe if you see that it has reached the neck of the animal, then hold it tightly above the eye with a strong grip, and then dry it on it, and extract it; and let the patient use medication to remove corrupted humors from his body, and protect himself from causing putrefaction.
De sectione super aegritudinem nafir.	Of section on the disease of the horse.
Aquesta malautia es nompnada en nostra terra nafir, e es dolor la qual ve en alcus membres, e aprop es permudada de membre en membre.	This malady is called in our country nafir, and it is a painful disease that affects some members, and then changes from one member to another.
E yeu ja e vista aquela segon que yeu te recomtare.	And you have already seen that second time as I recommended to you.
Yeu fu apelat a una femna malauta ad una vila, e descubric le sieu bras e vi una imflacio petita en la vena funis del bras, e pus que fu romas per una hora, vi aquela imflacio anar ayssi cum va verm pujan ad aquest, mays pus leugierament que esser por, ayssi cum si fos argent viu quan corr de loc en loc.	You were called to a female patient in a village, and I saw her arms, and discovered a small swelling in the vein of the arm, and because it was getting worse for an hour, I saw that swelling go away as if it were silver that is running from one place to another.
E adonc anet s’en la dolor de aquel loc e fiquet se en le muscle, e aprop aqui stec per una hora.	And then she sat down in the pain of that place and held it there for an hour.
E aprop correc en l’autre cors entro que pervenc al autre bras.	And then he corrects in the other side as if it reaches to the other arm.
E aprop recomtec a mi que revolvia se per tot le cors sieu segon que yeu vi; e fo trop meravelat de la permutacio de lu e de la velocitat de membre en membre.	And then I told him that I would turn it around all over its body, as I saw; and I was greatly amazed at the change of it and at the speed from one member to another.
E yeu ja havia vist denant aquo en les mieus huels segon aquela manieyra, empero yeu he vistz motz les quals atroban dolor esser permutada de membra a membre.	And I have already seen those things in front of me in the same way, but I have never seen such things that are changed from one member to another as this time.
Mays no vi aquo am les huels ayssi cum en la femna.	But I did not see them like this with my eyes when the woman was there.
E yeu no cogiti esser aquo sino que es per aquo quar la femna era de viela, on so de secs cors e de venas descubertas, e en aquesta apparec al sentiment aquela ventositat permutada.	And you did not think that it was water, but by water because the woman was young, where there are short bodies and open veins, and in this appearance the wind changed as we have said above.
E es necessari que no apparesca segon aquesta retro-curacio en aquels que son delicioses e am cors humitz de venas ameguadas.	And it is necessary that you do not appear in this way of reversal of good people and dry bodies with veined legs.
E cum tu voles la curacio de lu, e le pacient sent aquela dolor, lahoras no es a tu aparent al huel ayssi cum havem dit, lahoras tu strenh sobre aquel e dejos lu leugierament e secse sobre aquel entro que sia yssida aquela ventositat coartada, e cauterize le loc.	And if you want to heal it, and the patient feels pain, then do not appear to it without walking as we have said above, then hold it tightly and dry it on it within that is removed, and cauterize the place.
Mays si tu no la vezes am los tieus huels, alhoras tu cura aquel am excussio del cors e am aquo que expelleys ventositatz, e carmina aquelas am pillulas fetidas e am pillulas de serapi e semblantz.	But if you do not see them with your own eyes, then heal it with the extraction of the body and with water that you expel wind, and digest those pills that are foul-smelling and those that resemble resin.
De extraccio de sagetas.	Of extraction of arrows.
Sagetas son diversificadas segon las specias, e segon les locs dels cors en les quals cazo, quar la lor diversitat es que de aquellas so que han grans puntas, e petitas, e concavas, e sordas, so es solidas; e de lor so que han tres angles, e de aquelas a las quals so que han lenguas; e de aquelas a las quals so astelas.	Arrows are different depending on their types, and according to the places of the bodies in which they rest, because their difference is that some have large tips, and small ones, and concave ones, and flat ones, they are solid; and of those that have three angles, and of those that have tongues.
E aquela que es segon les membres e las pessas en las quals cazo es segon dos manieyras: quar les membres o so membres principals concaus, ayssi cum le cervel, le cor, e·l fitge, e le pulmo, e les ronhos, e les budels, e la vezica, e a lor semblantz; e donc quan catz en alcu de aquestz membres e aparo a tu senhals de mort, la qual causa yeu recomtare aprop, lahoras cove que tu evites extraccio de aquela sageta en aquels quar la mort siec aquel en le qual en las majors disposicios, e quan a tu no appareysso aquestz mals senhals, e la sageta no es amaguada en la profunditat del membre, lahoras tu extratz aquela e cura la plagua.	And that which is the second of the members and the feet in which I rest, is according to two ways: because the members or main ones are concave, such as the neck, heart, and chest, and the lungs, and the breasts, and the bladder, and their similarity; and then when you see a bad sign in any of these members, and it seems to you that death will come, which I have recommended before, then know that you should avoid the extraction of that arrow, but if it is not extracted from the depth of the member, then extract it, and heal the plague.
E dels senhals del servel es quan catz en lu sageta, e trespassa le os, e es yssit del cyphac le qual es sobre le cervel, quar accideys per lu soda vehement, e scotomia, e vertige, e rogor en les huels, e imflamacio e rogor de la lengua, e spasme e permixtio de entendament e vomi de colera, e fort leu es abscindida la paraula e es destruida la votz, e es yssit del loc de la plagua humiditat blanca semblant a pols, e yeys de lu semblant ad aquositat de la carn.	And of the signs of danger in the neck is when the arrow hits the bone, and it goes through it, and is drawn from the nape which is over the neck because this happens with violent pain, and dizziness, and rustling in the veins, and inflammation of the tongue, and spasms, and confusion of thought, and vomiting of colera, and it is torn strongly and the word is destroyed, and it is drawn from the place of the plague with white humidity resembling sweat, and it has a similar taste to bone-eating.
E donc si appareyso a tu aquestz senhals, lahoras tu abste de la curacio e de la extraccio de la sageta, si non es fora.	And therefore if these signs appear in you, then you abstain from healing and extracting the arrow, unless it is outside.
Mays les senhals de la sageta quan catz en le cor, so que ela es prop de la mamila senestra, e sent am aquela quays sia ficada en causa dura, e no es causa vueda; e fort leu le movement de la sageta es semblant a movement del pols, e corr de la plagua sanc negra, e siec aquel fregiditat de las extremitatz, e suzor freja, e sincopi; e donc sapias que la mort descen ses tot dopte.	But the signs of the arrow in the heart are that it is near the left armpit, and you feel a pain when it hits something hard, and does not show anything; and strongly moving the arrow seems like pulsing of the wrist, and black plague spreads, and tightens that part, and makes it tickle, and fainting, and syncope, and then you know that death comes.
E les senhals quan la sageta ha plaglat le pulmo so eyssiment de sanc spumos de la plagua, e les vayssels que so prop del col so apostematz, e es mudada la color del malaute, e expira sperit gran aut, e demanda atraccio de ayre freg.	And when the arrow has struck the chest, there comes forth a frothy blood from the wound, and the vessels near the throat are closed up, and the color of the patient changes, and great breath is drawn in and out, and he craves air to breathe.
E si catz la sageta en le velament le qual es en le pietz, e la dolor lahoras es prop de las costas petitas, e es fayt le ale gran am vehement dolor e am sospir, e no so maugutz totz les membres dels muscles.	And if the arrow hits the veil that is on the foot, and the pain suddenly becomes more intense near the small ribs, then great sharp pain and loud sighing occurs, and all the limbs of the body are affected.
E si catz la sageta en le stomac, lahoras fort leu yeys de la plagua vianda alcuna indigesta.	And if the arrow hits the stomach, then a strong pain comes from the digestive tract.
E si catz la sageta en le ventre, e es ficada en lu, yeys alcuna fenda de la plagua, o la tela, o budel le qual es disromput, e no es speransa en la curacio de lu extraccio de la sageta.	And if the arrow hits the belly and gets stuck in it, then a rupture of the bowel or intestine occurs, or a hernia, and there is no hope for recovery from the extraction of the arrow.
E si la sageta catz en la vesica, e es yssida defora urina, e procesesca de lu alcuna causa a las partidas defora, e fort leu es dolor sobre le malaute, lahoras sapias que es mortal.	And if the arrow hits the bladder, and urine is passed out quickly, and some matter comes out with it, and there is great pain on the patient's back, then know that it is a fatal wound.
Mays les autres membres ayssi cum es la cara, le col, e·l golayro, e las spallas e le adjutori, e les spondils del dos, e la furcula, e la coysa, e la camba e a lor semblantz dels membres, son salvatz segon las majors disposicios quan la sageta no atroba vena ni arteria e no es sageta venenosa.	And may the other limbs not be affected as well: the face, the neck, the jaw, the spine, and the back; also the shoulders, sides, and chest - and all their joints - are saved according to the greater dispositions, when the arrow does not strike a vein or an artery, and is not a poisonous one.
E yeu recomtare aquo a tu que he vist del esser de aquestas sagetas, per que signifiques per aquo sobre la curacio tieua.	And I recommend to you that one must be careful about the nature of these arrows, so that you can know how to treat them properly.
La qual causa es, quar en un home cazec sageta en le lacrimal del huel de lu en la razitz del nas, e yeu extrayssi aquela a lu del autra partida, dejos le grays de l’aurelha de lu, e es sanat, e no accidic en le huel de lu nocument.	Which cause is this: because in a man an arrow hits the lacrimal duct of his eye at the base of his nose, and I extracted it from him on the other side, cut off his ears, and healed him, and there was no wound in his eye.
E extrayssi autra sageta a un Juzeu la qual cazec en lu en lo grays del sieu huel, dejos la palpebra pus dejos, e la sageta ja era occultada e no so conseguit de aquela sino una petita extremitat am la qual adhereys al sieu fust, e era gran sageta de las sagetas agudas dels Turcs , am ferr leon en la qual no havia aurelhas.	And I extracted another arrow from a Jew which hit him in the side of his eye, cut off his eyelids, and the arrow had already been hidden; it was not a sharp arrow of the Turks, but it had a lion's head at its tip- and there were no ears.
E senat es le Juzieu , e no accidic en le sieu huel mal accident.	And that man is the Jew, and there was no bad accident in his eye.
E extrayssi una autra sageta a un home Crestia la qual era cazuta en le golayro, e era sageta arabica, e es aquela a la qual so aurelhas; e adonc yeu inscidegui sobre aquela entre doas guidegi, e ja era submersa en le golayro de lu; e adonc yeu so subtiliat am aquela, e aprop extraxi aquela, e es sanat le Crestia .	And I extracted another arrow from a Christian man which had hit his jaw; it was an Arabic arrow, and that is the one with ears; then I cut off those two guide-bits, and it was already submerged in his jaw; then I carefully extracted it, and healed the Christian.
E extraxi autra sageta a un home la qual era cazuta en le sieu ventre, e cogitegui que moris per aquela; e donc, pus que foro passatz xxx dias e no es mudat sobre lu alcuna causa de las suas disposicios, inscidegui sobre la sageta e engenagui sobre aquela, e es sanat, e no accidic a lu accident mal.	And I extracted another arrow from a man which had hit his stomach; I thought he would die from it, and so, after thirty days had passed and there was no change in his condition, I carefully extracted the arrow and healed him, and there was no bad accident.
E vi mays un home en le qual cazec una sageta en le dos de lu, e consolidada es la plagua sobre lu, e pus que foc aprop set ans, yssic la sageta en la razitz de la coyssa.	And I saw another man in whom an arrow had hit the small of his back, and the plague was consolidated on him; then a fire started and burned him to death, and the arrow was lodged in his crotch.
E vi una femna a la qual cazec sageta en le sieu ventre, e la plagua es consolidada dedintz lu, e no es mudada en las suas disposicios en re, e la femna no atrobec nocument en alcunas de las suas opperacios naturals.	And I saw a woman whom an arrow had hit in her stomach, and the plague was consolidated inside her, and it did not change her natural dispositions in anything, and the woman did not suffer any harm in some of her natural functions.
E vi un autre home al qual cazec sageta en la sua cara e consolidada es la plagua e romas la sageta, no atrobant aqui mota dolor, e motz semblantz ad aquestz.	And I saw another man whom an arrow had hit in the face, and the plague was consolidated and broke out; there was no harm to him, but he looked strange.
E extrayssi la sageta del home dels princeps del rey que era cazuda en le mieg loc del nas sieu e ja havia declinat a la partida dreyta un petit, e occultada era tota la sageta.	And I extracted the arrow from the prince of the king which had hit his nose; it had already fallen to the right side a little, and the whole arrow was hidden.
E yeu fu appelat a la curacio de lu aprop le cazement de la sageta entro a tres dias.	And I was called to treat him for the extraction of the arrow within three days.
E adonc yeu atrobegui la plagua de la sageta mot streyta; e adonc yeu inquirigui aquela am tenta subtil, e no sentigui aquela; mays el la sentia puncio dejos la aurelha dreyta, e adonc speregui que aquela punccio era per la extremitat de la sageta.	And then I turned the arrow over with a delicate touch; and then I felt that there was no point at all on the right side of his ear, and so I discovered that the tip of the arrow was touching it.
E amplastregui le loc am emplaustre en le qual es vertut atrectiva e digestiva, confizant de mi que·l loc se apostemes per que appares a mi le loc de la sageta, per que secces sobre aquela.	And I applied an ointment to the place with a beneficial and digestive action, confining it so that the place would appear to me as the location of the arrow, so that it will heal on top of it.
E no accidic en le loc accident significant que la sageta hagues conseguit aquel loc; e yeu continuegui am le emplaustre sobre lu per motz dias e no accidic accident; e consolidada es la plagua entretant, e romas le malaute de la extreccio de lu per spazi de motz dias entro que un jorn sentic la sageta dintz le sieu nas e recontec aquo a mi.	And there was no bad accident in that place where the arrow had hit it; and I continued to apply the ointment to that place for several days, and the plague consolidated itself while I did so, and on another day the arrow broke out of his nose, and I discovered it in front of me.
E adonc yeu pausegui sobre la plagua medicina acuta corrosiva per motz dias entro que foc ubert, e am la tenta yeu assagegui aquel, e atrobegui la extremitat de la sageta subtil, la qual adhereys al fust.	And then I applied to the plague an acute corrosive medicine for several days, until a fire started; and then I tasted it, and I discovered the tip of the arrow, which had attached itself to the shaft.
E aprop yeu ajustegui en la apersio de la plagua per aquela medicina acuta entro que apparec a mi visiblament la extremitat de la sageta, e passec a mi temps am aquo per le spazi de temps entro quatre meses.	And then I adjusted the medicine in accordance with the appearance of the plague; and soon after that, I saw clearly the tip of the arrow, and it passed before me for a space of time, four months later.
E aprop pus que la plagua foc amplificada, e foc a mi possible entrometre las forfexs en lu, e remaure aquela, e no obezic ad eyssiment, lahoras yeu no cessegui subtiliar e ingeniar sobre aquela am manieyras de engen, entro que comensegui un dia sobre aquela am manieyras de engens pendre lu am forceps descentment faytas, segon que vindra la forma de aquelas en la fi del capitol, entro que extraxi aquela; e aprop restauregui aquela plagua.	And then the plague became more intense, and I approached it with scissors, and again with them, and at last, on the day of judgment, I extracted it; and thus I restored that plague.
E alcus metges jutgavan que la cartillage del nas no es restaurada, e yeu restauregui aquela e la plagua es consolidada, e sanat es le malaute per sanetat entiera, e no noguec en lu en deguna causa.	And some doctors argued that the cartilage of the nose was not restored, and I restored it; and then the plague was consolidated, and healed completely, without any harm to him in any cause.
E yeu recomti a tu la qualitat de extraccio de alcunas sagetas per que pauses aquo regla e significacio sobre aquo que no he dit, quar las partidas de aquesta art e las difinicios de aquela no so conprehendudas am narracio ni no comprehen aquelas le libre.	And I recommend to you the quality of extracting certain arrows, so that you can regulate and interpret them properly; for the parts of this art and the definitions of those are not understood by me, since they are not described in the book.
E le artifexs savi compara am pauc sobre mot; e am aquo que es present sobre aquo que es absent; e atroba operacio novela e instrument novel deves le descendement de las causas extranhas del art quan accideysso.	And the artisan is skilled in a little; and on what happens here, he knows what happens elsewhere; and he performs novel operations and uses new instruments to descend into the causes of things that happen here.
E donc yeu dic que sagetas no son fora-gitadas dels membres en les quals son ficadas sino segon dos manieyras: o per atraccio del loc en le qual intrec; o per le contrari de la autra partida.	And then I say that arrows are not shot from the limbs, but are hit in two ways: either because of attraction to the place where they strike; or because of repulsion from the opposite side.
E aquela que es gitada per le loc don es intrada, o es sageta procedent en loc carnos, e es atirada e fora-gitada.	And that which is shot from the body's end is an arrow; or it proceeds from a carnivorous part, and is shot and is an arrow outside of the body.
E si no obezeys a eyssiment de la hora en la qual catz, lahoras cove que tu la laysses per alcus dias entro que poyresca la carn que es al enviro de lu, e sia alleujada l‘atraccio de lu e la sua egressio.	And if you do not obey immediately when it strikes, then know that you will die within three days; for you must find the meat which is around it, and the attraction of it and its exit are far from it.
E semblantment si es ficada en os e no obezeys a tu a eyssiment, lahoras layssa aquela per alcus dias e itera aquela am atraccio e mocio en quascun dia, e ja es fora-gitada.	And if it is hit in the bones and you do not obey immediately when it strikes, then leave it for a few days; and every day return to that place with attraction and moisture, and it will be shot from your body.
E si no obezeys a tu eyssiment aprop alcus dias, lahoras cove que tu perforas en le circuit de la sageta en aquel os de tota partida am taravel subtil entro que·l loc sia amplificat de la sageta, e aprop extratz aquela.	And if you do not obey immediately when it strikes within a few days; then know that you will penetrate the course of the arrow in that bone from all directions with a subtle force until the place is enlarged by the arrow, and then extract it.
E si la sageta es ficada en le os del cap e ja ha procezit en un dels ventres del cervel, e apparo en le malaute alcus de aquels accidentz les quals yeu e ditz, lahoras abste de la extraccio de la sageta e layssa aquela entro que·l sieu esser sia equat aprop alcus dias; quar si la sageta perve al ciphac, lahoras la mort no es a lu prolonguada.	And if the arrow is stuck in the bone of the head and has already penetrated one of the veins of the brain, and appears in the plague; then abstain from extracting the arrow, and leave it there for a few days; because if the arrow reaches the cerebrum, then death is prolonged.
E si la sageta no es ficada sino en le cors del os tant solament e no passa entro al ciphac, e roman le malaute per alcus dias, e no accideys a lu denguna causa de aquels accidentz, lahoras tu engenia en la atraccio de la sageta e en la atraccio de lu.	And if the arrow is not stuck, but has only penetrated into the bone of the neck, and does not reach the cerebrum; then leave it there for a few days, and no harm will come to you from those accidents; but you must regulate your hands in extracting the arrow and in attracting it.
Mays si es mot ficada e no obezeys a tu a extraccio, lahoras tu aministra taravels en le circuit de la sageta ayssi cum havem recomtat, e aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat.	May be if it is well fixed and does not obey you to extract, then you administer threads on the course of the arrow as we have said, and cure the place inside until it is healed.
Mays si la sageta ja es amaguada en le loc del cors, e es amaguada del sentiment, lahoras tu inquireys aquela am tenta, e si tu sentas aquela, lahoras atira aquela am alcus sturmentz les quals so convenientz a la atraccio de lu.	May be if the arrow is already stuck in the body and is stuck by the feeling, then you ask whether there is pain, and if you feel it, then draw it with sharp instruments that are suitable for drawing it.
E si no podes sobre lu per la constriccio de la plagua e per la longitut del preon, e aqui no es os ni nervi ni vena, lahoras tu fen sobre la plagua entro que sia amplificada e que sia possible extrayre la sageta.	And if you cannot draw it on the skin because of the contraction of the wound and the length of the arrow, and there is no bone or nerve or vein, then you must draw the skin so that it is expanded and the arrow can be extracted.
E si so a lu aurelhas am las quals sia tenguda, lahoras tu deliura la carn en la qual es ficada de tota partida am tot le engen que poyras far; e ingenia sobre aquo, si no podes sobre la evasio de la carn en la fractura de las aurelhas e en torssio de aquelas entro que obezesca.	And if there is hair attached to it which has been caught, then you cut the flesh in which it is caught completely, and try to draw it out; and devise how to do this, because you cannot do it on the skin in the fracture of the ears and in the twisting of that part inside until it obeys.
E quan tu administras la extraccio de la sageta en quascun loc on sia, lahoras tu usa am torcio de la tua ma am forceps a totas partidas entro que fassa aquela obezir; e subtilia am deriera subtilitat que la sageta no sia trencada e que sia fayta a tu dificil atraccio de lu e de aquela extraccio.	And when you administer the extraction of the arrow from any place where it is, then you use a twisting motion of your hand with forceps at all turns until it obeeys; and be careful in the last turn that the arrow does not break and that it is extracted by your difficult grip on it and on its extraction.
E si no podes sobre aquela de la tua hora, lahoras tu layssa per alcus dias entro que se poyrescan las partidas que so en le circuit de lu, e aprop itera aquela quar lahoras es alleujada.	And if you cannot extract it with your hand, then leave it for a few days until the turns heal which are in its course, and then repeat what we have said so that it is relieved.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat flux de sanc, lahoras tu administra aquo que havem dit de curacio en le sieu capitol.	May be if you feel pain in your feet when walking, then administer to yourself the water we have said to cure this in its chapter.
E guarda la tua vertut de inscizio de vena o de nervi, o de corda, e aministra engen en tota manieyra a tu possibla de la evasio de la sageta; e fay aquo am facilitat e tranquillitat e tarditat e fermetat ayssi cum yeu e a tu recomtat.	And preserve your virtue from the incision of veins or nerves, or of strings, and administer to yourself with all possible ease and quietness and delay and firmness as we have said, and recommend it to yourself and to me.
E donc que fassas contrayre la sageta per so que·l malaute sia segon la figura segon la qual foc deves le cazement de la sageta en lu, quar es mays juvatiu.	And therefore you should reverse the arrow so that the patient is according to the figure according to which the place of the arrow in him, for it is more convenient.
Mays si aquo no es a tu possible, lahoras tu aministra aquo que es a tu possible per las figuras.	May be if this is not possible for you, then administer water that is possible for you by figures.
Mays las sagetas que son fora-gitadas per le contrari del autra partida, o que ja de lu procezeys alcuna partida a las partidas de fora, o fa gilbositat la extramitat de la sageta per sentiment de la partida pus desus de la codena propdana e vezes aquela eminent; adonc tu secsa sobre aquela; e sia la seccio segon la quantitat en la qual prenguan las forceps; e aprop atira aquela, quar ela es fayta leugiera a eyssiment.	May be if the arrows that come out from opposite parts or if you have already caused some pain in them by pressure, and if the tip of the arrow protrudes a little above the skin near the part where it is stuck, then cut it off; and do this according to the quantity in which the forceps hold it; and then throw it away, because it is done lightly without difficulty.
Mays si es retenguda en le os, lahoras tu tortz lama segon contrarietat entro que la sageta enprema en le os, e amplifique a si meteys, e aprop extratz aquela.	May be if it is stuck in the bone, then twist your hand according to the pain until the arrow presses against the bone, and make it bigger, and then extract it.
E sino, layssa aquela per alcus dias, e aprop itera aquela entro qu’en yesca.	And if not, leave it for a few days, and then repeat what we have said until it is extracted by fire.
E si le fust de la sageta es en aquela, lahoras tu impelleys aquela am lu.	And if the tip of the arrow is in that part, then you push it with your hand.
Mays si le fust es cazut e voles aministrar inpulsio, lahoras tu intromet e aquela, si es sorda, sturment concau per so que intre la concavitat de lu en la coa de la sageta e aprop impelleys aquela am lu.	May be if the tip is caught and you want to administer an impact, then insert it, if it is silent, sharp instrument that catches between its concave part and the shaft of the arrow, and then push it with your hand.
Mays si la sageta es concava, lahoras tu impelleys aquela am sturment fort intrant en aquela, quar la sageta es alleujada per aquela.	May be if the arrow is concave, then push it with a sharp instrument that enters into it, because the arrow is relieved by it.
E si la sageta es entoxiguada, lahoras cove que tu concaves tota la carn en la qual es le vere, si es a tu possible aquo, e aprop cura aquela am aquo que si conveneys.	And if the arrow is poisoned, then cut off all the flesh in which it is, if you can do this with water, and then cure it with that water with which you think it convenient.
E si la sageta catz en le pietz, o en le ventre, o en la vesica, o en le costat, e es propinqua per so que tu tocas aquela am la tenta, e es a tu possible secsar sobre aquela, lahoras secsa sobre aquela e guarda te de inscizio de vena o de nervi, e extratz aquela, e aprop cos la plagua si indigeys, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	And if the arrow has entered the foot or the belly or the bladder or the ribs, and it is close to touching the skin so that you can touch it with your hand, then cut it off from the skin, and if it hurts you, then extract it, and then wipe it clean; and cure that part within which it is until it is healed.
Forma de forceps am las quals so atiradas las sagetas:	Shape of forceps for throwing arrows:
Sian las extremitatz de lor cum a bec de ausel que son faytas cum serra quan prendon sobre la sageta per so que no la layssen.	When their limbs are caught on the hook, hold them firmly with a sharp serrated blade so they don't slip off.
E de aquelas son faytas motas specias, grans, paucas e migieras, segon la quantitat de la grandeza de la sageta e de la sieua pauqueza, e de la amplitud de la plagua, e de la constriccio de lu.	And there are special darts made, large, small and medium, according to the quantity of the greatness of the arrow and the slenderness thereof, and the breadth of the plate, and the constraint thereof.
Forma de impellent concau de aquesta extremitat conquava ayssi cum pena de ausel per so que sia alleujat le intrament de la sageta en lu, e impulcio de aquela sorda:	And this form of a point of the concave extremity is driven in like a hook with an arrow, so that the instrument of the arrow is relieved in it, and it is driven from that socket:
Forma de impellent de sorda extremitat:	Form of driving by hook end:
ayssi cum ray per so que sia alleujat le intrament de lu en la sageta concava e es impellida am aquel.	with a point like this, so that the instrument is relieved in it, and is driven from this;
De fleubotomia de las venas.	of phlebotomy of veins.
Las venas de fleubotomia de las quals corr costuma de fleubotomar so .xxx., de las quals so en le cap .xvi., so es doas venas pulsatils las quals so aprop las aurelhas, dic alhasisain; doas herbas que so en les dos templars apparentz; e doas venas que so en dos lacrimals de dos huels que son appeladas aspicientz; e la vena preparada en le mieg loc del front, e la vena que es en la extremitat del nas; e doas guidegi que so al col; e doas venas que so en la labia desus; e doas venas que so en la labia dejos; e — aquestas so las venas que so appeladas algelic —; e so doas venas que so dejos la lengua.	The veins of phlebotomy from which one usually draws blood are: 1,2,3,4,5,6,7,8,9,10,11,12,13,14,15,16,17,18,19,20 of which one draws blood in the head. These are the pulsating veins which run along the ears, they are called auricular veins; two herbs that grow in the temple; and two veins that run in the two eyelids of the eyes, these are called lacrimal veins; and the vein that is placed at the center of the forehead, and the vein that runs at the end of the nose; and two jugular veins that run along the neck; and two veins that run on the lips, and two veins that run under the lips, and - these are the veins that are called algidal -; and there are two veins that run on the tongue.
Mays las venas que so fleubotomadas en les brasses so .v.; quar de aquelas es una cephalica, e es deves le latz silvestre; e le poble appela “la vena del cap”, e sorda, e es vena migiera, e es composta de un ram de la basilica, e de autre ram de la cephalica; e nomna aquela le poble “vena de tot le cors”, e basilica es vena la qual es pausada en le latz domestic, e es nomnada “citillar”, e nompnan aquela les vulguars “vena del ventre”; e funis del bras, e es pausada sobre le focil, e es aquela en la qual es fleubotomat, e es aquela que appar sobre le poutz per apparicio manifesta; e salvatella, e es la vena que es entre lo dit auricular e·l pus petit dit, e so en lu dos ramps.	There are the veins that are phlebotomized in the arms are: 1,2,3,4,5,6,7,8,9,10,11,12,13,14,15,16,17,18,19,20 is a cephalic vein and it should be the wild one; and the people calls it "head vein", and a sore, and is a migrain vein, and consists of a ram of the basilica, and another ram of the cephalic; and this is called by the people "vein of all the body", and the basilica is a vein which is stopped in the domestic lat, and it is called "citillar", and they call that one the common ones "vein of the belly"; and it runs from the arm, and is stopped on the fire, and this is the one that is phlebotomized, and this is the one that appears clearly upon the appearance; and a salve, and is a vein which runs between the said auricular and another little one, and has two branches.
E en le pe e la camba so tres venas; la una de aquelas es que es dejos la curvatura del denolh del latz silvestre; e la segonda es sophena, e·l loc de lu es dejos la camba del latz domestic; e la vena sciatica, e·l loc de lu es dejos la camba del latz silvestre; e en la camba son autras venas semblantz ad aquelas.	And in the foot and in the back are three veins; the first of these is that which is to the left of the curvature of the neck of the wild lat; and the second is a sciatic vein, and its place is to the left of the back of the domestic lat; and the sciatic vein, and its place is to the left of the back of the wild lat; and in the back there are other veins similar to those.
Le juvament de las venas que so aprop las aurelhas es a cataris antics e emigranea e sahafati e ulceracios del cap malas antiquas.	The healing of the veins which run along the ears is by little catarrh, emaciation and sore-headedness of old age.
E la qualitat de sagnar aquelas es segon que yeu recomti a tu: es que sia ras le cap del malaute, e sia freguat le cap del malaute en le occipiti en le loc de amdoas las venas am drap ample am bona fricacio; aprop strenha le malaute le sieu col am una benda entro que apparan las doas e les locs de lor so aprop las aurelhas en dos locs depremegutz del cap; e quereys aquela am le tieu dit, e si tu sentes le pols de aquelas am le dit tieu, aqui senha am tenta.	And the quality of drawing those veins depends on this: it is that the head of the patient be rashed, and rubbed in the occipitus in the place of both of these veins be rubbed with a broad cloth; and tighten the patient's head by a bandage so that they appear at their ends at the sides of the head below the ears; and draw them with the thread and if you feel the pulse of those on the thread, here there is no doubt.
Aprop tu pren la lancea cutellar, e es aquela que es inscident, e aprop tu intromet aquel dejos la vena en la codena entro que·l fleubotomi vengua al os.	Then you take the blade of a knife, and that one is sharp, and then insert it in the vein within the socket until phlebotomy reaches the bone.
E aprop eleva la tua ma am la vena e la codena a las partidas desus e inscideys la vena am inscizio inscident.	And you raise your hand towards the vein and the socket at its top, and cut the vein with a sharp cutting.
E sia la longitut de la inscizio la quantitat de dos ditz ajustatz o entorn de aquo; e fay yssir del sanc atant quant voles.	And this length of the cut is the quantity of two diz that are measured or counted from it; and make a hole with a needle as many times as you wish.
E aprop strenh am pulvils e layssa aquela entro que sia sanada.	Then tighten it with the pulley and let go that which is healed.
E ja e precedit en le comensament del libre la inscizio de aquelas e de lor la cauterizacio.	And this has already been done in the beginning of the book, the cutting of those and their cauterization.
Mays de las doas venas arterias que so als templars le juvament de la fleubotomia es a emigranea antiqua e sode malvada e obtalmia assidua e cors de superfluitatz acutas effusas als huels.	There are the two arterial veins that run in the temple, the healing of phlebotomy is by old age, and by evil diseases, frequent headaches, and sharp flowing blood into the eyelids.
E la qualitat de fleubotomar aquelas es segon que yeu recomti a tu: constrengua le malaute le sieu col mot entro que apparan las doas venas al sentiment per appericio manifesta e sia demonstrat le pols de lor dejos le tieu dit; e lahoras tu senha am tenta.	And the quality of phlebotomy of those depends on this: it is that you tighten the patient' head by a bandage so that the two veins appear clearly in front of your eyes through the appearance, and then feel their pulse from the thread; and then you try to see.
E aprop tu eleva la codena desobre la vena a las partidas desus am le tieu dit indic, e intromet le fleubotomi inscident dejos, e eleva la vena en sus; e inscidey aquela ayssi cum has fayt en las doas venas autras; e fay correr del sanc segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	Then you raise the socket of the vein and the top at its ends with the needle, and cut it inside; and raise it towards its top; and then cut those other two veins; and make the cut according to your need.
E aprop deslia la coartacio del malaute, e pausa le tieu dit sobre la vena per una hora, e aprop pausa sobre aquela coto e pulvils e strenh aquela desus am fort constriccio, e layssa aquela entro que sia sanada.	Then remove the bandage from the patient' head, and pause the thread on the vein for an hour; then put the hand over that one, and tighten it with a pulley and a strong grip, and let go that which is healed.
E ja es precedida la rememoracio de lor, e de aquelas la inscizio, e la atraccio en le comensament del libre.	And this has already been done in the beginning of the book, their recall, and their cutting; and their cauterization.
E donc le juvament de fleubotomia de la vena del front es aprop la fleubotomia de la cephalica a las malautias antiquas de la cara e a emigranea e rogor e ulceracios fetidas.	Thus, the healing of phlebotomy of the forehead vein is by old age and diseases of the face, emaciation, sore-headedness, and foul-smelling headaches.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es segon que yeu recomti a tu; so es que·l malaute strenha le sieu col am una benda entro que apparesca la vena; e aprop pren le insturment le qual es nompnat fossori del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And the quality of phlebotomy of it is according to my recommendation; if you tighten the patient' head by a bandage so that the vein appears; then take the instrument which is called a blade, and this is the form of it:
Pausa la puncta eminent la qual es al cap del fossori sobre aquela vena e percuteys sobre lu am penche o am autre causa en la manieyra de lu, e layssa lo sanc correr segon la quantitat la qual voles; e aprop deslia la perforacio del malaute e strenh aquela entro que sia sanada.	Then pause the point which is prominent on the head of the blade over that vein, and strike it with a light or another cause in a manner such as this, and let go the blood to flow according to the quantity that you wish; then remove the bandage from the patient' head, and tighten it with a pulley so that it is healed.
E alcunas veguadas es uberta am fleubotomi lat, empero no cove que·l fleubotomi sia de acuta extremitat ayssi cum les autres fleubotomis, abantz sia de lada extremitat, e fleubotoma aquela segon le tranvers, quar le os es propda e fort leu trencaria en lu le fleubotomi quan es subtil.	Some veins are easier to phlebotomize by a needle, however, it is not necessary to say that phlebotomy is of acute extremities as with the other phlebotomies, before its extremities, and phlebotomy of those according to the transverse, because the bone is strong and hard; and a needle would break in it if phlebotomy were made by it.
Mays le juvament de las duas venas que so als lacrimals de dos huels per scabia del huels per rogor e sebol en les huels, e a las malautias de la cara.	There is the healing of the two veins that run along the eyelids of the eyes through the heat of the eye, and by emaciation and sore-headedness on the face.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia es que·l malaute strenha le col sieu am una benda, e aprop fleubotoma aquelas, e tu sias stant sobre le cap de lu.	And the quality of phlebotomy is that you tighten the patient' head by a bandage, and then draw those veins, and you stand on the top of their heads.
E sia fayta la fleubotomia segon le transvers a longitut un pauc am fleubotomi pauc, quar en le loc no es carn; e si le fleubotomi es subtil, fort leu la extremitat de lu es trencada.	And it is done according to the transverse at a short length, because in this place there is no flesh; and if phlebotomy is subtle, then its extremity is broken by a strong hand.
E aprop fay correr del sanc atant quant es a tu necessari, e pausa sobre aquelas coto, e strenh aquelas per una nueyt, e aprop deslia aquelas.	Then make the blood flow as many times as you wish; then put your hand on those veins, and tighten them with a pull; then let go those veins.
Mays le fleubotomi de la vena del nas es conferent a febre acuta e a soda vehement, e a las malautias de la cara e emigranea e rogor que accideys en la cara, e majorment quan es antiqua.	There is the healing of the nose vein by acute fever and violent headaches, and by emaciation and sore-headedness on the face, and especially when it is old age.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute strenha le sieu col e aprop te le sieu nas am la tua ma sinistra, e pren le fleubotomi subtil lonc e fica aquela en le mieg loc del cap del nas segon rectitut, quar la vena no appar al sentiment aqui, e quar le sanc comensa a fluir tantost.	And the quality of phlebotomy of it is that you tighten the patient' head by a bandage, and then draw his left side towards you, and make a subtle cut long, and place that one in its middle location on the top of the nose according to the line; because the vein does not appear in front here, and because the blood begins to flow soon after.
Cove que tu ultimes la tua ma am le fleubotomi petit a petit e fassas correr del sanc segon la tua necessitat; e aprop lia aquela per una nuoyt, quar aquela es restaurada leugierament.	Now that you have finished making the small incisions and letting blood as needed, then bring those together again by tying them with a new knot because they are restored slightly.
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de las doas guidegui a constriccio de ale e a comensament de lepra e a motas malautias e inpetige e malas ulceracios corrosivas ayssi cum herpotromeno.	The relief of the bloodletting of two veins should be by contraction and beginning of leprosy and evil motes, and painful and corrosive ulcers as well as with blistering.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquelas es que el malaute strenha dejos quascuna en le sieu col am liament; e estia le artifexs sobre le cap del malaute, e le malaute sia sezent sobre una sezela.	And the quality of this bloodletting on those is that the patient should be tied up each one with a string and be placed on his back; and the healer be over the head of the patient, and the patient be lying on a couch.
E aprop fleubotoma la vena al lonc am fleubotomi ample petit a petit; e aprop extratz de sanc segon temprada quantitat o segon aquo que vezes de necessitat que es ad aquo; e aprop fay semblant del autra vena.	Then let blood from the vein with wide-spread and small incisions as needed, then bring those together again by tying them with a certain quantity of blood or according to the amount of times that it needs to be bled; and then do the same with the other vein.
E aprop deslia le liament e strenh las doas venas am strictura migiera per so que·l malaute no sia prefocat, e laysa entro al mati quar la plagua es sanada.	Then remove the ligature and tighten the two veins a little in order that the patient does not choke, and let him lie down as the plague is healed.
E le juvament de la fleubotomia de las venas algerich, comfereys a petitas apostemas e pustulas de la boca e corrupcio de las gengivas e malas ulceracios e fissuras, e a malas ulceracios que so en le nas e en le circuit de lu.	And the relief of bloodletting on those veins that are infected, and it brings small pustules and ulcers on the mouth and corruption of the gums and bad ulcers and cracks, and bad ulcers that are in the nose and in the passageway of breath.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquelas es que fases cezer le malaute denant tu, e strenh le col de lu am una benda, e aprop revolveys las labias de lu e reguarda a doas venas de las quals la una es de la dextra de la labia e la segonda de la senestra; e la demonstracio de quascuna es per la negror de quascuna de amdos, e aquo mays es quar en le circuit de aquelas so venas menudas negras; e adonc inscideys cascuna per inscizio inscident.	And the quality of this bloodletting on those is that you make a cut in front of your own body, and tighten the neck with a bandage, and roll the lips of him and look at two veins from which one is on the right side of the lip and the second one on the left; and the indication of each one is according to its darkness, and this is more because in the passageway of those there are small black veins; and then cut each one by a separate incision.
Mays si dubitacio es dejos tu, e no sabes qual es de aquelas, lahoras tu enten a inscisio de la major de aquelas, e de la pus manifesta de aquelas.	Then if there is doubt, you leave them and do not know which one of those is, then go to the incision of the larger of those, and from the pustule that appears on those.
E fay le semblant de las doas venas que so en las labias desus.	And do the same with the two veins that are in the lips of him.
Mays costuma corr mays a inscidir las doas venas que so en la labia dejos.	Then customarily cut more on the incision of the two veins that are in the lips.
Mays de doas venas que so dejos la lengua le juvament es aprop la fleubotomia de la cephalica a prefocacios que so en le guolayro, a la malautia de la uvula, e a malautias de la boca.	Then of the two veins that are on the tongue, the relief by bloodletting from the head is when it is choked up to a certain extent because it is in the throat, and the evil of the uvula, and the evils of the mouth.
E la qualitat de fleubotomar aquelas es que segue le malaute entre las tuas mas denant le solel, e eleva la lengua de lu, e reguarda dejos la lengua, de la un latz de lu vena e del autre latz vena, e la color de quascuna es declinant a negror.	And the quality of bloodletting on those is that you bring the patient between your two hands in front of the sun, and raise his tongue, and look at the sides of the tongue, from one side it is thick and from the other thin, and the color of each one is turning to black.
E adonc fleubotoma quascuna; e guarda te que no ultimes la tua ma en fleubotoman aquelas, quar dejos aquelas so arterias.	Then bleed each one; and be careful not to finish making the incisions on those, because those are arteries.
E las tuas venas que so fleubotomadas en le coyde so en las quals corr costuma en totz les homes, e la fleubotomia de lor es fayta segon dos manieyras, o pongen am le fleubotomi mirtilat o olivar a subtilitat declinant; o secsar am fleubotomi cutellar, e apelha si alnessil, e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And your veins that have been bloodletting in the groin are in those veins from which it is customarily made according to two ways, or they put on it a wide blade or a knife of sharpness, or they cut with a surgical knife, and then if there is no response, this is its way:
E aquest alnessil es que conveneys a seccio e de aquels so specias latz e subtils segon la amplitut de las venas e segon la strictura de aquelas.	And this silent one is that it leads to an incision and from those are special and thin slices according to the width of the veins and according to the strictness of those.
Forma de fleubotomi mirti:	Form of bloodletting on a knife:
sia le latz de lu ayssi cum vezes, e conveneys a obrir las venas concavas plenas procedentz apparentz grossas, e ad aquelas que conteno sanc gros torbat.	is that it is made according to the times, and leads to opening concave veins that are full of blood, and those that contain thick blood.
E aquesta es la forma de fleubotomi olivar:	And this one is the way of bloodletting on an olive:
E aquest fleubotomi es de menor latitut e de pus subtil extremitat, e conveneys a fleubotomia de venas subtils que conteno sanc subtil citri.	is of small width and very subtle end, and leads to bloodletting on veins that contain subtle citron-colored blood.
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de la vena basilica la qual es una de tres venas: quar extratz le sanc de las malautias que so dejos le guolayro e·l col, e de aquo que siec le pietz e·l ventre.	Then the relief of bloodletting on the basilic vein is because it is one of three veins: because it takes away the evil that is in the throat and chest, and from there it cuts off the belly.
E conveneys al fleubotomador, quan fleubotomia aquela, que guarde be aquela e sia sobre-temor en aquela, quar dejos lu ha arteria, e si erra e ajusta en la punctura del fleubotomi, inscidira aquela arteria e accidira fluxs de sanc, per so que cove que no fleubotomes aquela am fleubotomi pungent, abantz sia sectant cum alnessil.	Then the healer who is performing bloodletting on this vein should be careful to avoid it because it has an artery, and if he makes a mistake in the incision of the bloodletting and corrects it in the incision of the bloodletting, then he will cut that artery and cause a flow of blood, so that it must not be made with a sharp incision; otherwise, it leads to death.
E si no appar la basilica per apparicio manifesta, lahoras cove que tu laysses aquela e que tu mudes a la autre, o que cerques alcun ram sieu; o que fleubotomes en loc de lu finis del bras, quar aquela es manifesta; e secsa aquela am fleubotomi alnessil ayssi cum havem dit.	Then if the basilic does not appear by a clear sign, then you should leave that and move to the other one, or search for some thread; or bloodletting on its end of the arm because that is clear; and cut it with a surgical knife, and make bloodletting on it as needed.
Mays si tu voles la fleubotomia de lu meteyssa, lahoras cove denant la strictura del bras que toques le loc entro que conogues le loc dels pols, e aprop senha sobre lu am tencha; e aprop lia le bras e secsa la vena am seccio concava am fleubotomi alnessil ayssi cum havem dit; e guarda te que caja la percussio per alcu spazi del loc de la arteria.	Then if you want to make bloodletting on the forearm, then you should move in front of the tightness of the arm that you touch the location within which you know the location of the wrists, and then place your hand over it; and then cut the arm and make bloodletting on it as needed. Then be careful to strike the pulse at a certain distance from the location of the artery.
E quan tu vezes, cum strenhes le liament, imflacio en le loc que has senhat am tencha, lahoras aquela inflacio es inflacio de la arteria, e donc squiva aquela.	Then when you tie it tightly, and blow into the location that you have blown on the wrist, then that inflammation is an inflammation of the artery, and so let it go.
E si vezes le sanc fluir en la fleubotomia ayssi cum aurina de enfant, e·l sanc es subtil rog, lahoras sapias que es del sanc de la arteria; e lahoras tu coyta e pausa le tieu dit sobre aquel per lonc spazi; e aprop osta le tieu dit, e si lo sanc es abscindit, quar motas veguadas es abscindit, lahoras tu strenh le bras e layssa aquel.	Then if the blood flows in the bloodletting as needed with a small pulse, then know that it is the blood of the artery; and then you should stop the bleeding for a long time; and if the pulse is absent, then tighten the arm and let it be.
E guardes le malaute de la moccio de lu, e sia sobre-temor de lu e no maugua aquel per alcus dias entro que sia sanat.	And keep the patient from moving him, and be afraid of him and do not hurt him for a few days until he is healed.
Mays si le sanc no es abscindit, e vezes que deves tu no es present medicina ad aquo, lahoras tu inscideys la arteria, si appar a tu; quar la extremitat de lu es contrayta, e es abscindit le sanc; o que prenguas scorsa de fistic, e fen aquela, e pren la una maytat e strenh aquela sobre le loc de la vena am strictura descent am liament e am pulvils entro al autra dia.	Then if the blood is absent, and you do not have medicine there, then you make an incision in the artery, if it appears to you; because its end is contracted, and the blood is absent; or that you take a piece of garlic, and cut that, and bring the one, and tighten it over the location of the vein with a twist, and put dust within the other day.
E lahoras si le sanc es abscindit, bo es; e sino, lahoras cura aquel am aquo del qual es precedit a la rememoracio del loc de las polveras abscindentz flux de sanc.	Then if the blood is absent, then it is good; and otherwise, then you treat him with water of which he was reminded in memory of the location of the powder that causes the absence of blood.
E la abscizio del sanc de lu es dificil en motas disposicios per le loc petit de la plagua e la possibilitat del liament del bras.	Is difficult to cause the absence of blood in the small location of leprosy and the possibility of breaking the arm.
Mays de la vena fusca la fleubotomia es juvament que extratz lo sanc de la partida subirana del cap e a la partida dejos del cors; per aquo quar es composta de ram de la basilica e de ram de cephalica, ayssi cum havem dit.	Then the relief of bloodletting on the dark vein is good when it takes away the evil that comes from the head and leaves the body; because it is composed of branches of the basilic and the cephalic, as I have said before.
E cove al fleubotomant aquela que sia sobre-temor en la fleubotomia de lu, quar dejos aquela es un nervi; e adonc si ajusta en la punctura del fleubotomi e atroba le nervi, accidira a lu stupor, e es difficil la sanacio de lu, e fort leu no es sanat de tot, E aquest nervi motas veguadas apar al sentiment; e si es ocultat ad alcus homes e es subtil e no es monstrat, lahoras cove que tu pauses le fleubotomi am le qual tu fleubotomas am seccio de alnessil, e evita le nervi am la tua fortalesa.	Then the healer who performs bloodletting on this vein should be careful in performing bloodletting because that vein is a nerve; and then if he makes a mistake in the incision of the bloodletting and cuts that nerve, it will lead to stupor, and its recovery is difficult for him; and those nerves can be seen when they are excited; and if this nerve is hidden from some people and it is subtle and does not show itself, then you should pause the bloodletting at which point you are performing the bloodletting with a section of alnessil, and avoid cutting that nerve with your own blade.
E si la vena es entre dos nervis, lahoras tu fen la vena en la longitut.	Then if the vein is between two nerves, then you cut the vein in its length.
Le juvament de la fleubotomia de la vena cephalica es que atratz le sanc del cap e comfereys a las malautias dels huels.	The relief of bloodletting on the cephalic vein is that it draws away the evil from the head and brings those evil things to the feet.
E cove en aquest propriament, si vols que la fleubotomes pungen am fleubotomi olivar o am fleubotomi mirti; quar es la pus salva de totas las venas, quar no es dejos lu arteria ni nervi.	Then in this way, if you want to make bloodletting on an olive or a water-knife: because it is the safest of all veins, because it does not leave the artery or nerve.
Mays empero conveneys a tu deves la fleubotomia que guardes que am le fleubotomi no punguas le cap del lacert tant solament, e cerques le loc pus leugier, e no notz a lu, si no es atrobat am la percussio primieyra que sia sobre aquela am fleubotomia alcunas veguadas.	However, when you perform bloodletting, be careful to not pierce the tip of the vein, but rather seek out the site more gently and do not touch it, unless it is necessary to hit it with a first blow that is performed by bloodletting a few drops of blood.
Mays empero fort leu es apostemat en alcus homes, quan no es fleubotomat en la primieyra percussio, mays no notz en re aquel apostema.	This may be the case with some men, when they do not bleed first, but rather, if they are bled out after the first blow has been struck, they will not get a pimple.
Mays la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquela e les accidentz de lu so motz, en les quals te cove cogitar en lor rectificacio.	The quality of bloodletting from that and the accidents of it so much, in which you should consider its correction.
Le primier de lu es del qual cove que sapias que fleubotomia no es aministrada sino en conservacio de sanetat e per speransa de lu e cautela de aveniment de malautias, e que sia fayta fleubotomia en la una de las venas que so en le coyde, so es: cephalica, fusca e basilica; e que sia fayta fleubotomia al comensament de primaveyra, sobre dejun en primaviera e autunppne, e en invern aprop la comestio, quan apparo significacios de replecio.	The first of it is that you should know that bloodletting is not administered except in the conservation of health and with the hope of its recovery, and that it is performed in one of the veins that are in the leg, namely: cephalic, femoral, and basilic; and that it is performed at the beginning of the first season, on spring in spring and autumn at the start of winter, when there appear signs of swelling.
E sia fayta fleubotomia e le tertz dia o al primier pus que del jorn siran passadas tres horas.	And let bloodletting be done and the third day or at the first opportunity that passes three hours from the day.
Mays fleubotomia que es aministrada, mays quan provoca convenencia e necessitat ad aquo, o de nuoyt o de dia, en tota hora e en tot temps.	But bloodletting that is administered, but when it causes convenience and necessity for water, or if it is necessary or desirable at any time of the day, in the whole hour and all times.
E cove que efant no sia fleubotomat entro que aja xiiii ans, e femna que sia prenhs no sia fleubotomada sino del quart mes entro al sete, e les viels no sian fleubotomatz les quals ja han passatz lx ans.	And let it not be bled out before it has reached twelve years of age and let the female not be bled out until she is seven years old, and let the old ones not be bled out if they have already passed sixty years.
E cum alcu vol esser fleubotomat per qualque manieyra sia, cove que mondifique les sieus budels denant la fleubotomia am clisteri leon, si en aquels ha mota fenda retenguda, per so que las venas no atiro las superfluitatz en la fleubotomia dels budels, que son puridas, e que no noguan als membres principals.	And if some wish to be bled in any way, they should prepare their bowels beforehand by using a hot bath, if there is a tear retained, so that the veins do not draw the excess during bloodletting from the bowels, which are impure, and do not affect the main members.
E no sian fleubotomatz les pascientz naucea sacertiva e crapula, ni evasent de malautia ni de ebretat entro que aquo sia remaugut aquo de lor, ni malaute de ydropici, e mays que fleubotomia sia temuda aprop colica passio e aprop vomit, e aprop cos de ventre, e aprop multiplicacio de coyt e de trebal e de exercici de dejunis o de vigilias e de tota causa que dissolveys la vertut, o sia corpore28 o animal.	And let no one be bled out from patients who are nauseous and have a craving for something or from a hangover, and let bloodletting be avoided if it is associated with pain near the colon, or that there is nausea, vomiting, or abdominal aching, or a multiplication of urine, work, and exertion, and of eating meals or staying awake, and of any cause that dissolves the virtue, whether it is in the body itself28 or in animals.
E aprop considera en subtiliacio de humos denant aquo si le sanc es gros, am viandas e beures, e am medicinas si aquo es a lu possible ad aquo.	Then consider carefully the subtle humors beforehand if the blood is thick, with food and drink, and with medicines if it can come to blood.
E aprop intre en banh si alcuna causa no prohibeys, o sia excersitat per alcun exercici per so que·l sanc sia subtiliat.	Then enter into a bath if any cause does not prohibit it, or exercise through some exercise so that the blood is subtleized.
E pausa la fleubotomia de lu en le pietz del dia, so es enviro la hora de tercia, ayssi cum havem dit.	Then pause bloodletting from him in the feet of the day, which is around the hour of third, then let's go.
E perforsa te que·l pietz de aquel sia guardat en aquel dia de totz mals accidentz animals, ayssi cum es angustia, ira, temor, e de totz accidentz corporals, ayssi cum es trebal e pena superflua e coyt e semblantz a lor.	Then let the feet of that person be guarded on that day from all animal accidents, if it is distress, anger, fear, and from all bodily accidents, if it is unnecessary work, idleness, and similar to them.
E a la sua sezelha fassa esser presentz las causas en le us de la qual corr costuma dels homes am aromaticitat e odorament e am bals e semblantz ad aquels segon la cantitat de possibilitat.	And at the same time, let those who use it be aware of the causes, by which the customs of men are determined with regard to aromatic substances and odours and balms and similar things according to the possibility.
E segua le fleubotomador sobre un coyssi que sia pus aut que·l coyssi de aquel que deu esser fleubotomat.	Then follow the bloodletter on a cushion that is higher or that the cushion of that person who should be bled out.
E aprop extragua le sieu bras, e fregue aquel am la sua ma le fleubotomador doas o tres veguadas; e aprop strenha le liament am correia e involva aquel doas veguadas.	Then extract the person's arms and wipe it with two or three strokes of the bloodletter's towel; then tighten the ligature with a strap and wrap it around those two strokes.
E sia la strictura temprada, quar la strictura quant no es engual, o la strictura es am superfluitat, lahoras prohibeys de fluxs del sanc; o es am mollificacio, e lahoras prohibeys le cors del sanc eyssament.	Then let the tightness be moderate, because tightness when it is tight to the skin or the blood vessels is too much, and let there not be any breaking of the skin; but if it is a softening, then let the body' blood not be broken.
E aprop la strictura, cove que aquel que deu esser fleubotomat fregue las suas mas ensemps entre lor entro que las venas sian imfladas, e sian declaradas al sentiment.	Then let the tightness be felt, for that person who should be bled out wipes their hands together between them before the veins are swollen and can be felt.
E aprop le fleubotomador unte le sieu fleubotomi am un pauc de oli antic propriament; e aprop pausa le sieu di indic de la ma senestra sobre aquela vena, dejos le loc del qual vol la fleubotomia, per que la vena fuja un pauc, e la percussio sia sessada quar de las venas es la qual atrobas ayssi cum corda fugent deves la fleubotomia, e de aquelas es que es plena de ventositat e quan pauses le fleubotomi sobre aquela es contrayta deves le fleubotomi, e es desceubut le fleubotomador; e le fleubotomi no uobre la vena, e si uobre, aquela es streyta.	Then let the bloodletter spread a little olive oil on his bloodletting properly; then let him pause his left hand over that vein, leaving the spot from which the bloodletting should be performed, so that the vein runs out a little, and the percussion stops because of the veins that is why it is full of air, and when you pause the bloodletting on that spot, it contracts; then let the bloodletter discover; and the bloodletting does not squeeze the vein, and if it squeezes, that vein is closed.
E donc, per aquo cove que·l fleubotomador sia fermat e sia sollicit en totas aquestas causas.	Therefore, for bloodletting, let the bloodletter be stopped and sought out in all these causes.
E aprop depause le fleubotomi, mays si la vena es huberta en una veguada, lahoras bo es; e sino, tu itera aquo autra vaguada dejos aquel loc un pauc, o sobre lu am festinacio, si le loc no es apostemat.	Then pause bloodletting, but if the vein is caught in one stroke, then let it be stopped; otherwise, go to another stroke of that spot a little, or on top of the foot, if the spot is not bled out.
Et si le loc es apostemat, o le malaute se spauresca, lahoras tu le layssa per un dia o per dos, e no strenha le liament, quar fort leu atirara apostema caut, ni no intre en banh.	And if the spot is bled out, or the patient' feet cause a fear, then let it rest for a day or two, and do not tighten the ligature, because it will bring about a bad pimple, nor enter into a bath.
E aprop itera la fleubotomia si la ama.	Then repeat bloodletting if needed.
E si la apercio es petita e corr sanc subtilment, e temes que non yesca sanc la cantitat que voles, lahoras tu itera le fleubotomi en aquel trauc segon rectitut e ajusta en la appercio un pauc, e fay aquo am festinacio denant que·l loc sia apostemat, quar le loc es apostemat en motz homes deves pauca apercio.	And if the sight is small and the blood causes a slight pain, and you fear that it will not get the right amount of blood, then repeat the bloodletting in that spot again according to the correction, and adjust a little bit in the sight, and do so at the top of the foot in front of the location before it bleeds out, because the spot is bled out when it bleeds out.
Mays si vezes aquel ja apostemat, lahoras no iteres sobre lu, quar no escusa a tu alcuna causa; e pausa sobre aquel alcuna partida de la fenda de oli, quar alleuja le cors del sanc.	But if that person has bled out before, then do not repeat it on him, because there is no excuse for this cause; and pause on that spot of the vein, because it cheers up the body' blood vessels.
E es milhor en aquest loc que oli e que les autres olis.	It is better in this spot than oil and what else.
E semblantment aministra fenda de oli en tota fleubotomia am la qual fleubotomes las venas deves la prohibicio de cors de sanc, e fan aquo tyriaca alfadoc e sagzenea quan es pausat de la una de aquelas sobre le loc, quar le sanc es subtiliat e es revolvut quan es gros.	Then administer oil fenda in all bloodletting, and the veins should be protected from the cors of the blood, and make water with a little honey and sage when it is paused from one of those on the spot, because the blood has been subtleized and has turned when it is thick.
E si en le loc de la fleubotomia es engendrat gran apostema, quar motas veguadas accideys, e majorment ad aquel que no es stat sangnat sino aquela veguada, o en la apercio de la vena pauca, e lahoras tu coyta, e pausa sobre le loc sponja infuza en aygua e sal, un pauc scalfada, e strenh aquela per una hora, quar es dissolvut.	And if in the spot of bloodletting a large pimple is generated, because spots occur, and more so on that person who does not stop bleeding from that spot but bleeds out from another spot, or in the sight of a vein, then let you go to sleep, and pause over the spot sponge infused with water and salt, a little scalded, and tighten it for an hour, because it dissolves.
E cove que fassa aquo aprop le yssiment del sanc de aquela vena am compliment de lu o de autra vena.	Then let that blood come out of the vein of that person with the help of another vein.
E si roman en le loc per alcus dias alcuna negror o viriditat, no notz aquo; e si voles, pausa sobre aquel alcuna causa de aloen e de mirra dissolvut, o alcuna causa de suc de mentastre o de calament o semblant de lu.	And if it remains in that spot for a few days any blackness or greenness, do not notice it; and if you want to, pause on some cause of aloe and sage dissolved, or some cause of mint juice or bitter or resembling it.
E motas veguadas accideysso apostemas e eminencias deves fleubotomia de la basilica.	Then pimple spots occur so that bloodletting is performed from the basilic vein.
E donc pausa la tua ma sobre aquela, e si lahoras tu atrobas mollicia deves la tua compressio sobre aquela, lahoras aquela eminencia es malvada e mala; e adonc guarda te que pauses sobre aquela alcuna causa de aquo que havem dit, quar fort leu fluira de la arteria sanc.	Then pause your hand over that spot, and if you feel a softening of that spot, then let your hand be stopped on that cause of water that we have said, because a strong flow will come from the blood vessel.
E fay emplaustre am aquo en que es stipticitat, per que le loc sia endurat, e aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	Then make a wound with the water in which it is tightened, so that the spot be hardened, and then let you heal it with another healing.
E cove que extraguas del sanc a tot hom segon la quantitat de la sua vertut e segon la color vencent sobrc le sanc segon que appar.	Then extract from him according to the amount of his virtue and according to the winning color above the blood.
Quar si le sanc es negre, lahoras tu le layssa yssir entro que sia rog; e semblantment si tu le vezes gros, lahoras tu le layssa yssir entro que sia subtiliat; e semblantment si es agut, entro que sia ostada la acuitat de lu.	When the sun is black, leave it in the sun until it dries; and if it seems fat, leave it until it becomes thin; and if it seems acute, leave it until its acuity diminishes.
E cove ad aquel que es ple e fort e ha necessitat de extraccio de sanc en una veguada, que sia amplificada la fleubotomia de la vena e le fleubotomi sia lat.	And if someone is bloated and strong and needs extraction of urine in a single vein, let the haemorrhage from the vein be increased and let the haemorrhage flow.
E en aquel que es freul, sia fayt le contrari de aquel, e cove que extragua aquel en tropas veguadas, e que le trauc sia streyt.	And if it is hot, do the opposite of what has been said; and if the extraction is to be made in several veins, let the трауч be tight.
E le milhor que es administrat en fleubotomia de vena es que sia la seccio transversa, no punctura.	And the best thing that can be done in a vein haemorrhage is that it be transverse section, not puncture.
E aquesta manieyra de fleubotomia es salva de flux de sanc e de inscizio de nervi, e es pus lausabla e pus salva que fleubotomia segon latitut e longitut.	This method of haemorrhage is free from loss of blood and injury to the nerves; it is more praiseworthy and more save than haemorrhage according to length and width.
E a la qual es acostumat sobrevenir sincopi deves la fleubotomia, e cove que tu cures aquel denant la fleubotomia am un petit de pa infus en vi de milgranas o de oximel simple scalfat; e extratz a l u del sanc en tres veguadas o quatre.	And to those who are accustomed to fainting before haemorrhage, let there be given to them a little drink of water with grains of pepper or simple oxymel cut up; and extract the urine from him in three veins or four.
E si es enfregiditat de compleccio, lahoras prengua denant la fleubotomia pa infus en eyssarop de mirra o en eyssarop de mel aromatizat am specias ayssi cum am pebre, canela, gingiebre e semblantz, o en eyssarop aromatizat e mot odorant.	And if it is a fever, let there be given to them before haemorrhage an infusion in syrup of myrrh or in syrup of honey aromatized with spices such as cloves, ginger, cinnamon and others, or in scented and spiced syrup.
E si accideys sincopi deves la fleubotomia, e es causa de lu issiment de mot sanc, lahoras cove que prengua en beure aygua de carn e eyssarop mot odorant subtil; e use de aromaticitat am algualea, e sia linit le sieu pietz am aquela.	And if fainting occurs because of a sudden loss of blood, let there be given to them to drink water of the flesh and syrup with subtle spices; and use some perfumery, and bind their feet with those.
E usa de las autras causas que havem ditas en la divisio en le capitol de sincopi per evacuacio.	And use the other causes that we have spoken of in the division on fainting because of elimination.
E qui vol eventar le sieu bras e dissolver le sieu sanc segonda veguada, cove a lu del qual la fleubotomia es per mota evacuacio, e la vertut de lu es freol, que evacue le sanc petit a petit, so es segon la quantitat de la vertut en les dias continuables.	And who wants to ease his arms and dissolve his blood according to the second vein, let him be bled little by little, for this virtue is present in him; and if it is to be done continuously, do so in small doses.
Mays qui vol eventar le sieu bras, e gitar lo sieu sanc segonda vetz, e le sieu cors es fort, lahoras fassa aquo aprop vii horas o ix de la primieyra fleubotomia.	But if he wants to ease his arms and take away his blood according to the third vein, and his body is strong, let him be bled after seven or nine hours from the first haemorrhage.
Mays qui vol atirar le sanc del cors sieu al contrari de la partida a la qual declina, cove que sia eventat en le segon dia o le tertz.	But who wants to take away the blood of his body according to the opposite direction in which it is flowing, let him be bled on the second or third day.
Mays aquel cors en le qual es mot sanc ja scalfat e es acuit e fa accidir febre, cove que sia gitat de lu sanc en una veguada e sia de lu gitada gran cantitat e sia amplificada la apercio entro que accidesca sincopi, pus que tu auras conservadas totas las condicios de fleubotomia; e que pauses la tua ma sobre le pols de lu deves le cors del sanc, per que no endevengua mort en loc de sincopi, quar motas veguadas endeve aquo quan le fleubotomador es ignorant e negligent.	But that body in which there is much blood already lost and it is acute and causes a fever to rise, let him be bled in one vein and let a great quantity of blood flow; and let your hand rest on the pulse of his body, so that he does not die of fainting, because if the haemorrhage is sudden, such as it is, then the person will die.
E no cove quan tu voles desliar le bras e evacua le sanc segonda veguada, cum ja sia claus le orrifici de la vena e sia fayt difficil issiment del sanc, que tu premas subre aquel am vehemencia e encurvat sia extendut leugierament, quar aquo es trop mal.	And when you want to ease his arms and eliminate the blood according to the fourth vein, if it is already closed the orifice of the vein and difficult to extract the blood, then press below it with vehemence and extend your hand gently, because that is too bad.
Habantz le layssa entro que sia fleubotomat segondament; o remau aquo am la acuitat del fleubotomi que es coagulat del sanc en le orrifici de la vena; o pausa sobre aquel de tyriaca alfarach, o de sagzenea, e comprem aquel am compressio leugiera entro que·l sanc sia fora yssit.	While you are left until the second haemorrhage is complete; or if it is coagulated blood in the orifice of the vein, or if you have pressed it with a light pressure; or if you hold it between your thighs and gently press, so that the blood comes out.
E si la vena es apostemada, lahoras layssa aquela e no la toques entro que·l apostema sia sedat.	And if the vein is broken, then leave it alone and do not touch it until the bruise has subsided.
E si necessitat te provoca a evacuar le sanc segondament, e no es excusacio, lahoras tu sagna aquel sobre aquel loc o en l’autre bras en autra vena.	And if necessity compels you to bleed again, and it is not an excuse, then let him bleed on the same place or in another vein of his other arm.
E la vena apelada “funis del bras” es fleubotomada en loc de la fusca o de la basilica, quan no so atrobadas o so amaguadas, quar es composta de aquelas.	And the vein called "braca's sling" is bled in place of the "sling" or "arch", since it is not twisted or hidden, because it is composed of them.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute intrometa la sua ma en aygua cauda entro que·l focil se enrogezesca e que la vena apparia manifestament.	The quality of the haemorrhage is that the patient puts his hand in cold water, so that his skin becomes red and that the vein appears clearly.
E aprop sia strengut sobre aquel am liament am strictura migana; e aprop fleubotoma segon le tranvers petit, no latitudinalment ni segon la longitut.	And let it be bound tightly on him with a narrow bandage; and let haemorrhage be made transversally, not longitudinally or according to length.
E sia la apercio ampla e sia la tua fleubotomia am la qual tu fleubotomas aquela sobre la junctura de la ma un petit.	And let the opening be wide and let your haemorrhage be made with that by which you bleed him on the joint of his hand a little bit.
E si es prohibit le fluxs del sanc, lahoras tu itera la ma en l’aygua cauda e layssa le sanc correr en la aygua entro que consieguas la tua necessitat.	And if the flow of blood is forbidden, then you shall put your hand in cold water again and let the blood run into the water until you obtain your need.
Mays si tu eras en les dias d’estiu, lahoras tu yest excusat de la iteracio de la ma en l’aygua cauda, e le mes es pausat le cors del sanc en aygua cauda en temps de yvern.	But if you are in the winter days, then you are excused from putting your hand in cold water again; but let the body of the patient be put into cold water at that time when it is summer.
E la fleubotomia de aquesta vena es pus salva que de totas las autras venas, quar dejos lu no ha vena pulsatil, ni nervi.	And this vein's haemorrhage is more save than that of any other vein, because it has not a pulsating vein or nerves.
E la fleubotomia de la savatella de la ma dreyta es conferent a las malautias del fetge.	And the haemorrhage from the right-hand arm is different from that of the left-hand arm.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que tu strenguas la ma am liament o am la tua ma, pus que tu l’as mesa en ayga cauda, entro que la vena sia imflada e sia be demostrada al vezement; e aprop fleubotoma aquela transversan; e si inscidas aquela de tot no nozera aquo en re.	And the quality of the haemorrhage is that you bind it tightly with a bandage or with your hand, since you have put it in cold water, until the vein becomes inflamed and clearly visible; and let the haemorrhage be made transversely; and if it is heated, let it not be seen.
E conserve que no ultimes la tua ma am la fleubotomi, quar dejos lu so les nervis dels ditz denudatz de carn.	And remember that you do not tie your hand after the haemorrhage, because there are nerves under those naked pieces of flesh.
E aprop itera la ma en l’aygua cauda e laysse correr le sanc en aquela, quar si tu no iteras aquela en l’aygua cauda, le sanc sira coagulat en lo orrifici de la vena, e es prohibit de flux.	And let your hand be put again in cold water and let the blood run into that, because if you do not put it in cold water, the blood will clump up at the opening of the vein and its flow will be forbidden.
E cum es extrayt le sanc segon la quantitat de necessitat, lahoras tu pausa sobre la vena oli e sal, per que no sia consolidada coytadament; e semblantment cove que tu fassas en tot ram streyt.	And when the blood is extracted according to the quantity of need, then let you put your hand over oil and salt so that it does not harden completely; and apparently let you do all this in a straight way.
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de aquela de la ma senestra, es que es conferent a las malautias de la melsa.	But the improvement of haemorrhaging from his left-hand arm is that it corresponds to his own body.
E fay semblantment en la fleubotomia de lu ayssi cum has fayt en l’autra.	And do the same thing with haemorrhage from him by doing the opposite.
E le juvament de la vena sephena de la fleubotomia es a las malautias que so en la partida dejos del cos, ayssi cum so malautias de la mayre, e a retencio de mestruas, et a las malautias dels ronhos e ulceracios de coyssas e de cambas antiquas, e a lor semblantz de las malautias.	And the improvement of the vein is to those who are leaving their body; and if it is a mother's body, and if there is a retention of menses, and to the maladictions of the lungs and ulcers of the feet and legs, and the similarity of the maladictions.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute entrometa lo sieu pe en aygua cauda e fassa sobre aquel fricacio entro que be apparen las venas; e lia sobre la junctura del pe am correia; e le loc de la vena le talo apparent deves le dit pous, e de aquela so ramificatz en la facia del pe motz ramps.	And the quality of the haemorrhage is that the patient puts his foot in cold water and makes a friction on him until the veins appear; and let him bind his foot with a bandage at the junction of his foot; and may the vein be ramified in many places on the face of his foot.
E donc fleubotoma le pus ample ram o dejos la camba deves le talo deves la agreguacio de lu, quar es milhor e pus sal.	And so he bleeds him from the broadest place or if it is hidden under the skin, let him bleed him at the joint of his foot, because it is better and more save; and let him bind it tightly after bleeding.
E si fleubotomas aquela en la facia del pe, lahoras tu te guarda dels nervis que so dejos aquela sobre la facia del pe, e pausa la tua fleubotomia am la qual tu fleubotomas per le travers, quays cum si tu la volias inscidir.	And if you bleed him on the face of his foot, then let you be careful of the nerves that are under that place on the face of his foot; and let your haemorrhage be made transversely, as if it were to be cut.
E sia le fleubotomi vosil.	And let it not be slow.
Mays si es prohibit le issiment del sanc; lahoras tu itera le pe de lu en l’aygua cauda e layssa correr le sanc en aquela entro que sia evacuat.	But if the flow of blood is forbidden, then you shall put his foot in cold water again and let the blood run into that until it is evacuated.
E si le fleubotomador erra en la primieyra veguada, lahoras itera am le fleubotomi en sus un pauc, quar le loc es sal; e no temes de lu malician, mays que te guardes dels nervis ayssi cum havem dit.	And if the haemorrhage-maker has made a mistake in the first vein, then let him make it again slightly, because the location is good; and do not fear of it, but be careful of the nerves, as we have said.
E semblantment fay de la sophena del autre pe engualment.	And seemingly make the sole of the other foot a cup.
E de la vena sciatica, le loc ayssi cum havem dit es deves le talo dejos la cavilha de la partida silvestra.	And from the sciatic nerve, at that place we have said, let the tail be separated from the shell of the wild ox.
E le juvament de la fleubotomia de lu es a dolo de anca quan es per sanc caut.	And the relief of the bloodletting is at the hip when it is done by the sanctification of cautery.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute intre en banh, e festine e strenha la cueyssa de lu del latz de la ancha entro desus le talo desus quatre ditz an una benda longua subtil, quar no appar sino per aquo.	And the quality of bloodletting on him is that the patient goes into a bath, and he hastens and strengthens his thigh from the side of the hip through his tail with four thin pieces of leather made into a long and thin belt, for it does not appear except by this.
E donc quan appar, lahoras tu fleubotoma aquela segon cascun engen que es a tu possible e segon le tranvers, e es milhor; o inscidas aquela per inscizio o secces aquela per seccio, quar le loc de lu es sal.	And so when it appears, then do bloodletting at the second joint that is available and according to the cross, for that is best; or cut it with a cutting or cut it with a cutting, since its place is salt.
E ela es en motz homes mot ameguada; e si atrobas aquela, e no appar al sentiment de tot, lahoras fleubotoma alcun ram de lu, e es aquel que appar en le dos del pe enves le dit auricular e le anular.	And it is in the shape of a horse's foot; and if you find this one hard, and does not appear to all feelings, then do bloodletting on some limb of him, and that is which appears on the second toe of the foot behind the little finger.
E guarda te dels nervis, e fay correr del sanc la quantitat que voles.	And take care of the nerves, and run the sanctification according to what you want.
E aprop deslia la strictura e pausa sobre le loc de la fleubotomia coto e strenh le loc, quar leugierament es sanat.	Then return the tightness and rest on the place of bloodletting with a knot and strengthen the place, for little by little it is cured.
De ventozacio e de las qualitatz de uzar de aquelas.	Of ventilation and of the qualities to use from those.
Ventozas so de corns, o de eram, o de veyre.	Ventilated as with corns, or with warts, or with vermin.
E ventozacio es fayta segon doas manieyras: la una de lor es am scarificacio e extracio de sanc, e l’autra es ventozacio ses scarificacio.	And ventilation is done according to two ways: one is bloodletting and extracting the sanctification, and the other is ventilation through bloodletting.
E aquesta ventozacio que es ses scarificacio es segon doas manieyras, quar o es am foc o ses foc.	And this ventilation that is bloodletting through cutting is according to two ways, for either it is with fire or fire is with it.
E a las ventozas que so administradas am scarificacio e extraccio de sanc son xiiii locs del cors, dels quals la un en lo qual so pausadas ventozas es alnocrati, e es la deriera partida del cap; e le mieg loc d’el de doas partz del col ensemp; e ventozas del mento dejos la mandibula pus dejos de la boca; e ventozas de doas spatulas; e ventozas de alohoster, e es sobre la fi de la coeta; e ventozas de dos focils, e so de dos brasses; e ventozas de doas cavilhas; e ventozas de doas cuoyssas.	And the places of ventilation administered by bloodletting and extracting sanctification are twelve parts of the body, of which one is placed under the chin on the jawbone at the back of the mouth; and two spatulas; and two holes, and it is on the tail; and two firepits, and they are from two legs; and two hernias; and two joints.
E ventozacio no extratz le sanc sino de las venas menudas sparssas en la carn, e per aquo no catz la vertut per aquelas, ayssi cum es cazement per fleubotomia; ni no cove que ventozacio sia fayta am foc o ses foc en alcuna malautia fayta per replecio entro que le cors tot sia evacuat.	And ventilation does not extract the sanctification except from small veins in the flesh, and through them the virtue is not extracted by that, so it is not a fire made in any disease by repetition within; nor is it a fire made in any part of the body that all the body is evacuated.
Mays si necessitat provoca a ventozacio per malautia o per continua, aministrem aquela en tota hora al comensament del mes e en la fi de lu, e en le mieg loc de lu e en qualque temps sia.	Maybe if necessity provokes ventilation for disease or continuously, we will administer it at the beginning of the meal and at its end, and in the middle place and at any time.
La qual causa es quar dels homes es en les quals es sanc multiplicat entro que indigeys de extraccio de lu per ventozacio e atroba en le sieu cap graveza e soda; e de aquels es que atroba replecio e rogor en la sua cara e en le sieu cap, e en le sieu col; e de aquels es que atroba pruziment en la sua cara e en le sieu front e tenebrositat e hebetut en les sieus huels; e de aquels que gieta le loc de la sua ventozacio; e de aquels es que le lor ris es multiplicat; e de aquels es que atroba gustament de sanc en la sua boca, o que la lengua es apostemada e escup sanc; e de aquels es que lor dormir es multiplicat, e de aquels que vetz sanc en lo dormir rogor e antics e plaguas e autras causas a lor semblantz.	And the cause is that when there are people in whom sanctification is multiplied within so that they lack extraction by ventilation and become heavy and sodden in their head, and of those is that it is troubled in its face and in its forehead, and darkness and stupor in its eyes; and from which it gips the place of its ventilation; and of those is that its ris is multiplied; and of those is that it tastes sanctification in its mouth, or that the tongue is stuck to sanctification; and of those is that their sleep is multiplied, and of those that dream about sanctification when they sleep, and fever and other things similar to them.
E donc quan vezes en alcuna causa de aquelas, e propriament si es en le tertz o miga del mes, lahoras comandam ventozacio esser fayta pus que so passadas del dia dos o tres horas.	And therefore when it happens in any of these causes, and especially if it is in the third or half of the meal, then we order ventilation to be done rather than passed over two or three hours from now.
E juvament de ventozacio de la nuca es que quan aquela confereys a gravitat en le cap e ad aquo que es efondit als huels; mays cove que aquo sia aprop evacuacio de tot le cors.	And the relief of ventilation from the nape is that when it makes gravity in the head and falls into the throat; but if this be not evacuated from all the body.
E aquesta ventoza es en le loc de fleubotomia de la cephalica.	And this ventilation is in the place of bloodletting on the cephalic.
E no es legut que use de lu aquel que es de frega complecio, o en le qual es catarr, quar dona ad aquel gran nocument.	And it is not good that he uses the one who is a grating noise, or in which there is a catarrh, for it does great damage.
E per aquo no cove que uso de aquela les vielhs, e en les caps dels quals so malautias frejas.	And by that it is not good to use the one who makes noise with his old age, and in the heads of those who are diseases from the heat.
Mays ad aquel que sobre aquela es continuant sobre lu es fayta oblivio; e per aquo cove que tu comandes al ventozador que depause la sua ma un petit am la ventosa a las partidas dejos, temen de la generacio de oblivio.	Maybe to the one who uses it continuously on him is made oblivion; and by that you command the ventilator to pause his hand a little from the ventose at the ends, for fear of the generation of oblivion.
Mays ventozacio de alkehel es en loc de fleubotomia de la vena fusca e de la basilica: e per aquo confereys a asma, e a la constriccio de ale e a la scissura del sturment de ale, e a tos, e a replecio.	Maybe ventilation from ale is in the place of bloodletting from the dark vein and the basilica: and by that you confer with asthma, and with constriction of throat and with the splitting of the instrument of throat, and with coughs, and with swelling.
E cove que sia enpellida la ventoza alkehel un petit, quar si es pausada dejos, engendra debilitat en le cors e en le stomac.	And if ventilation from ale is stopped for a little while, because if it is paused from the sides, it generates weakness in the body and in the stomach.
E la ventozacio de alhagdahan confereys a las dolors accident en le cap e a obtalmia, e emigranea, e prefocacio, e a dolors en las razitz de las dentz; e es en loc de fleubotomia de la basiliqua.	And ventilation from ale makes the accidents of pain in the head and ophthalmia, and emigration, and pre-focus, and pains in the roots of the teeth; and it is in the place of bloodletting from the basilica.
E cove que comandes al ventozador que no prema la sua ma am scarificacio per que no inscida la arteria e accida fluxs de sanc.	And if you command the ventilator to not press his hand for fear that he does not cut the artery and causes a flow of blood.
E ventozacio dejos le mento comfereys a alcola en la boca, e a corrupcio de la gingiva, e a semblantz a lor de las malautias que so en la boca, e stan en loc de fleubotomia de aliheric que so en las doas labias.	And ventilation from the jaw makes alchole in the mouth, and corruption of the gums, and appearances of other diseases that are in the mouth, and stand in the place of bloodletting from elsewhere that they are on the two lips.
Mays la ventozacio que es fayta sobre las doas spatulas confereys a caphatan, le qual es fayt per replecio de caliditat.	Maybe the ventilation that is made over the two spatulas makes Caphothan, which is made by swelling with heat.
E la ventosacio de las doas partidas dedintz dels focils confereys juvament de la fleubotomia de tres venas, so es de la basilica, fusca e cephalica, quar aquela atratz le sanc de totas aquelas venas pus manudas que so en la carn, e aquelas venas menudas de las autras venas pus grossas entro que pervengua la atraccio a las tres venas.	And ventilation from the two spades inside the fire makes the juvament of bloodletting from three veins, and if it is from the basilica, dark, and cephalic, for that one attracts all the sanctification from all those small veins that are in the flesh, and these small veins from the other large ones within so that the attraction reaches the three veins.
E comanda al ventozador que trop no procezesca en scarificacio, quar le loc es denudat de carn, e dejos lu so nervis e arterias.	And you command the ventilator not to process in cutting, for the place is naked of flesh, and leaves it without nerves and arteries.
E es una ventoza am la qual es ventozat sobre alshosses e confereys a las emorroydas del cul e a las ulceracios pus dejos.	And it is ventilation that is made according to the same, and makes you to have venereal diseases and ulcers from the side of the leg.
E cove que comandes al ventozador que sia gran ventoza, e que sia de eram, quar le loc indigeys de fort seccio; e fort leu so traucadas ventozas subtils e sia scarificat am scarificacio.	And if you command the ventilator to be very strong ventilation, and that it is with warts, for the place does not endure strong separation; and strongly make the thin, subtle cuts of bloodletting by cutting.
Mays ventozas de las cambas minueysso per minuicio manifesta, quar atiran le sanc de tot le cors, e comfereysso a dolors antiquas dels ronhos e de la mayre, e de la vesica; e provocan las mestruas, e comfereysso a bothor e ademil; e stan en loc de fleubotomia de doas sophenas, e alahorcoben, e de doas cavilhas.	Maybe ventilation of the thin cambias by clear evidence, for they attract all the sanctification from the body, and make you to have old pains in the cheeks and in the mother's breast, and in the bladder; and they cause the menses to come out early, and make you thirsty and tired; and stand in the place of bloodletting from two toes, and alhorcoben, and from two hernias.
Enpero mot debelitan tot le cors e fan accidir sincopi en motz homes.	But they greatly harm all the body and cause fainting fits in horses.
E de las ventozas alahorcoben le juvament es propda al juvament a las ventozas de doas cambas.	And from the ventilation of alhorcoben, the relief is proportionate to the relief by the ventilation of two cambias.
E la qualitat de la posicio de las ventozas es que pauses la ventoza al comensament vueda e sucguas per succio temprada, e no prolongues la posicio de las ventozas, mays pausa aquelas leugierament, e reman aquelas coytadament, e que las humors venguan al loc per adveniment engual.	And the quality of the position of the ventilation is that you pause the wind at the beginning and let it flow quickly through a narrow passage, and do not prolong the position of the wind; but pause it gently, and remain in that position, and so that the humors come to their place by arrival in a hurry.
E no cesses iterar aquo e continuar entro que veja le loc ja enrojezir e inflar e que appara la rogor del sanc.	And do not stop doing it again and continue within so that you see the place already turning red and swelling, and the appearance of the sanctification's heat.
E lahoras tu scarifiqua e itera la succio pauc a pauc, e aprop considera en la dispozicio dels cors.	And so you should cut and scrape again and again little by little, and consider the position of each limb.
Quar aquel home que es de tendra carn de rars pors, cove que tu le scarifiques una veguada e no pus, per que le loc no sia ulcerat.	That person who has thick, tough skin should be cut once and not again, so that the area does not become ulcerated.
E comanda al ventozador que amplifique la scarificacio e pronde un pauc, e atempre la succio am facilitat.	And order the fan to intensify the scraping and add a little more, and ease the suction slightly.
E si en le sanc es grossitut, lahoras cove que scarifiques doas veguadas, quar en la primieyra veguada es uberta la via de subtiliacio al sanc e a la aquositat de lu.	And if the wound is thick, then you should cut it twice, for in the first cut the way of diffusion to the wound and the liquid that comes out will be opened up.
Mays en la segunda a la perscrutacio aquisida de la extraccio del sanc gros.	Then in the second, the diagnostic of the removal of thick matter is obtained.
E si le sanc es mot feculent, lahoras sia fayta scarificacio la tersa veguada per que consiegua le derier.	And if the wound is very foul-smelling, then you should make the third cut so that you obtain the final product.
E derierament, quan volem extrayre le sanc pauc a pauc o un petit, abasta a nos una scarificacio.	Finally, when we want to extract small amounts of matter or a little bit at a time, it is enough for us to make one cut.
E si volem extraccio de mot sanc, scarificam am mota scarificacio; e si nos conoyssem que·l sanc es gros, lahoras cove que scarifiquem per scarificacio preonda.	And if we want to extract a large amount of matter, then you should cut in one direction, and if you know that the wound is deep, then you should make a long cut.
E le terme de scarificacio en la qual es la profunditat de la codena tant solament.	And the term for cutting which is the depth of the wound alone.
E si aquel del qual la codena es grossa, dura, fusca, e les sieus pors so streytz, cove que les locs de las ventosas sian untatz lenitius, apertius resolutius; si es en temps d’estiu, ayssi cum es oli de aloen o oli de violat, o oli de amellas dossas, o oli de cemensa de coja; e si es en temps ivern, lahoras oli narci, o oli de liri, o oli de camamilla, o de sanc, e ad aquels semblantz.	And if the skin of that person is thick, hard, dark and the pores are tight, long, resolute; if it is in summer, then apply oil of aloes or violet oil, or mixed oil, or rosewater; and if it is in winter, then olive oil, or lavender oil, chamomile oil, or marjoram oil, and to those that resemble them.
E si la superfluitat es grossa, freja, lahoras le oli sia amaranti, o oli de balsamita, o oli de aloen, o oli aneti, e a lor semblantz.	And if the superfluity is thick and green, then apply oil that is bitter, or violet oil, or aloe oil, or yarrow oil, and to those that resemble them.
Mays si le ventozador es de amples pors de tendra carn, lahoras cove que sia prohibit de oli, e cove que ad aquest les locs de ventozas de lor aprop la ventozacio sian lavatz am ayguaros o am aygua freja de solatrum, o am aygua de coja, o am aygua de bordolaguas, e semblantz ad aquelas.	And if the fan is of average size and has thick skin, then it is forbidden to apply oil, and that the areas of the fan's blades come close together, then wash with cold water or very hot water, or with wine, or with rosewater, and to those that resemble them.
E aquel del qual le sanc es de mota humiditat, lava las suas ventozas am vi agre, o am aygua de mirt e sumac e semblant ad aquels.	And if the wound is of moist nature, then wash the fan' blades with grape juice or water from myrtle and pomegranate, and to those that resemble them.
E de aquel del qual las superfluitatz son grossas, lava las suas ventozas am vi antic, o am aygua de sansuc, que es majorana, o de decoccio de anet, o de camamilla, e a lor semblantz.	And if the excesses are thick, then wash the fan' blades with wine that has been aged, or water from sage, which is marjoram, or an infusion of fennel, or chamomile, and to those that resemble them.
E cove que la ventozacio sia guardada denant de banh; habantz cove que sia aministrada aprop issiment del banh per una hora o per doas, e cove que dorma aprop la ventozacio.	And that the fan be kept in front of a fire; and when it is administered close to the fire for an hour or two, and let it sleep close to the fan.
Quid est quo oportet ut regatur ventosandus aus phlebotomatus ante ventosationem.	What should be done so that the fan is operated on before bloodletting.
Cove que consideras al comensament: lahoras si le ventozador o aquel que·s deu fleubotomar es coleric e ventz sobre lu sanc agut e imflamacio, lahoras cove que prengua causas infrigidantz, ayssi cum milgranas acetosas, e endivia an vi agre e laytuguas, e secanabin, e julep, e a lor semblantz.	Then consider the beginning: if the fan or the one who is to be bled is coleric and acts on the wound acutely, then you should use cooling agents, such as milk with vinegar and lettuce leaves, and sitz baths, hyssop, and mint tea, and those that resemble them.
E pausa a lor viandas ayssi cum poletz, e carns de auzels serbiges, e viandas conditas am agras, e a lu semblantz.	And stop their meals such as grains, and meat of small birds, and prepared dishes that are spicy, and those that resemble them.
E de aquel del qual la compleccio es freja, cove que prengua en beure eyssarop almiva, o eyssarop de alsecanabin de semensas, e sumac, e vi mot odorant migier entre viel et noel; e que a lu sia comendat que use de paucitat de beure e de mangar, e pausa las viandas de lu poletz e canabir e pissers e petitz auzels e colombat.	And if the constitution is yellow, then take in honeyed syrup or almond syrup, and pomegranate juice, and a little of fragrant water; and to him it is forbidden to eat much, and stop his meals of grains, and canaries, and pisons, and small birds, and kolbrants.
E cove que en lo dia de ventozacio e de fleubotomia le beure sia major que la vianda.	And that on the day of fan operation and bloodletting, the liquid is greater than the meal.
E cove que sia donat en beure en alcunas horas ad alcus homes tyriaca alpharac, o medicamentz de musc, so es muscada, o alcelita denant la ventozacio o denant fleubotomia o aprop, per so que·ls membres principals sian confortatz e que·l sanc sia subtiliat; e no cove que prenguan aquela scalfatz.	And it is given to some men of the first order of wine mixed with honey, or medicine of musk, which is musk, before the fan operation or bloodletting, or close to them, so that the main limbs are comforted and the wound is diffused; and it is not forbidden for those who have a scalfice.
Mays las ventozas que so ses scarificacio sian ventozas que so pausadas sus le fetge, e sobre la melsa e podagra, e sobre le umbelic, en les locs dels jonolhs, e la pixida del ancha, quar aquestz membres no suffertan scarificacio sobre si.	Then the fan blades that are cut should be paused on the thigh, and on the feet, and on the heel, and on the navel, for these limbs do not suffer from cutting.
E no es querit per aquelas sino atraccio de sanc de membre, ayssi cum pausam ventosa sobre mamilha en malautia de flux de sanc del sanc de las nars; e usam de aquela per que sia dissolvuda ventositat freja inviscade del membre, ayssi cum pausam sobre le ventre e l’umbelic; quar aquela rarifique le membre e scalfa lu e ramau la dolor quar resolveys ventositat.	And it is not desired by those for the attraction of blood from a limb, then pause the fan on the mammary gland in the flow of blood from the limb of the breast; and use that which dissolves the fresh wind of the limb, thus pausing over the navel and the belly; for that one softens the limb and soothes it by diffusing the wind.
E ja es pausada sobre les ronhos quan accideys en lor opilacio o poyra, quar per vertut de atraccio fort leu huobre opilacio e erradica le poyra de son loc.	And it is paused on the cheeks when it happens in their operation or rain, for by the virtue of the strong attraction it helps the operation and removes the rain from its place.
E semblantment fa quan es pausada sobre le fetge e la melsa deves ventositat en aquels enclausa.	And it resembles when it is paused on the thigh or foot, that wind is diffused in those enclosed members.
E aquestas ventozas so administradas vuedas amb succio tant solament; e alcunas veguadas so administradas am foc.	And these fans are administered with water only; and some are administered with fire.
E alcunas veguadas so administradas plenas de aygua tebeza en las malautias de la melsa.	And some are filled with cold water in the flow of blood from the foot.
E aquo es per que la ventoza sia umplida e sia pus gran, so es aygua cauda sola o aygua en la qual sian cuytas herbas ad aquo convenientz.	And water is used to fill the fan, and it is added if it becomes strong, or in which herbs are cut with water suitable for this purpose.
Forma de ventoza aministrada am foc: sia la amplitud del orrifici de dos ditz, segon que nos la havem formada; e la quantitat del preon sia la maytat de un palm; e sia en lo latz de lu, en le loc que es en le circuit, la maytat de lu, le trauc sia petit segon la quantitat que intre en lu una agulha.	The form of the fan administered with fire: its width is twice as much as its height, and the quantity of fuel is twice that of a palm; and it should be in the center of the circle, the main part being near the edge, and the small part at the top. And if something goes into it, then put an iron needle in it.
Sia fayta de eram rog o citri, de grosses marges, leon, enguals e terses per so que no leda le membre deves la sua posicio sobre lu.	It should be made of wood or iron, of broad margins, lion's mouth, tongue, and third for the sake that it does not affect the limb in its natural position on it.
E sia al mieg de lu vergua transversa de eram o de ferr, on es pausada candela am lo foc.	And it should be made of crossbeams of wood or iron, and let it burn bright.
E ja sia aquesta ventoza gran major de aquela la qual havem recomtat; e la pauca mendre de aquela segon las malautias e la etat de aquel que usa de aquela.	And this large fan is greater than that which we have described above; and the smaller one, in accordance with the flow of blood from the limb and the condition of the person who uses it.
E las ventosas dels efantz e extenuatz so autres que las ventozas dels joves e de grosses corssas.	And the fans that are refreshing and relaxing are different from those for young people and broad-shouldered ones.
E la qualitat de pausar aquesta ventoza am foc sobre le membre es que extenda la meca am foc de lenha decentment denant una pauca candela de cera, e pausa aquela sobre le mieg de la vergua transversa en le mieg loc de la ventoza, per que le foc sia accendut enviro la partida dejos per que no sia comburit le cors del malaute.	And the quality of pausing this fan with fire on the limb is that you extend the beam with a good fire in front of a small candle of wax, and pause it on the middle crossbeam in the center place of the fan so that the fire does not burn up the limbs of the patient.
E aprop sia pausada sobre le membre del malaute, e le dit sia sobre le trauc que havem dit, entro que quan tenem las ventozas e non indigem que osten le dit e que yesca la vapor sobre aquel trauc, lahoras la ventoza sira tantost dissolvuda.	And it should be paused on the limb of the patient, and the fire should be directed at the angle that we have described, except that when the fans are present, and do not desire that they block the light from the fire, and the wind is diffused from it.
E prop igneys la meca segon la sua manieyra, e itera aquela si indigeyssas de aquela.	And light the beam according to its way, and repeat the operation if you do not desire that fan.
Mays en ventosa que es aministrada en la malautia de plauressi, am aygua, en la qual no ha vergua transversa ni trauc, e no es aministrada sino que sia umplida de aygua, e es pausada sobre le membre tant solament.	Then in a fan administered in the navel of a patient, with water only, and which is not filled except with water, and it is paused on the limb alone.
E aquesta es la forma de lu: E aquesta ventoza quant plus es gran, tant es milhor, per que puya recebre gran quantitat de aygua.	And this form of it: This fan should be as large as possible, so that it may receive a large quantity of water.
Capitol .xcvii.	Chapter 77.
Sanguissuguas no so administradas en motz membres sino en les membres en les quals non es possible posicio de ventosas, per la parvitat de aquels, ayssi cum le pot e gingiva e semblantz a lor; o en membre denudat de carn, ayssi cum le dit e·l nas e lors semblantz.	Sanguineous are not administered in large limbs but in the members where it is impossible to position fans, due to their size, such as the head and throat, or the limb devoid of skin, such as the nose and lips, and those that resemble them.
E la qualitat de usar de aquelas que si has trobadas sanguisugas que so en las ayguas dossas de poyredura mundas.	And the quality of using those which if you have found leeches that are in the water of the world of corruption.
E aprop sian layssadas le dia e la nueyt en aygua dossa entro que sian famolentas, e que no romangua alcuna causa en le ventre de aquelas; e aprop sia evacuat le cors en le comensament am fleubotomia e am ventozas; e aprop fregua le membre del malaute entro que s’enrojezesca; e aprop sian pausadas sobre lu.	And let them lie down in the water, warm, until they are hungry, and do not cause any pain in the belly of those; and let them be washed out with the cauls, and let the feet be scrubbed; and let them be placed on them.
E cum son umplidas e caso.	And when they are filled, and if need be.
E si es possible succio del loc am ventoza, es mays derier en juvament.	And if it is possible to suck the juice out of the place, it is more useful in healing.
E sino, lahoras lava le loc am vi agre e aprop am mota aygua; e sia freguat e expremut.	But if not, then wash the place with wine and rub it with water; and let it be fried and pressed.
E si es prolonguat le cors del sanc aprop le cazement de las sanguissuguas, e es aquo resudan, lahoras tu enfon un drap de li en aygua freja, e pausa aquel de sobre entro que sia abdida la resudacio.	And if the bodies of the patients are prolonged, then place a cloth on them in warm water, and let it remain there until the residue is removed; and then stick it on with a pin, so that the residue does not come out again.
E si le sanc es multiplicat, lahoras polveriza sobre lu vitriol trissat, o guallas e semblantz a lor de las causas stipticas, entro que·l sanc sia abscidit; o sian pausadas sobre le loc las maytatz de favas excocicadas, e sian layssadas entro que las favas aderescan al loc, e es le sanc abscidit.	And if the patient is numerous, then sprinkle on them three-part vinegar, or eggs and other things similar to their stinging causes, until the patient is cleansed; or let them be placed on the place where the may flowers of cooked beans are placed, and let them be placed there until the beans stick to the place, and the patient is cleansed.
E cove, si es necessaria, iteracio de sanguissuguas, quan es possible mudar aquelas.	And then, if necessary, an iteration of leeches, when it is possible to change those.
E si las sanguissuguas son prohibidas de suspenssio, lahoras sia freguat le loc am sanc recent o fique una agulha en les locs entro que yesca sanc; e aprop sian pausadas, quar aquelas quan sento alcun sanc tantost adarysso.	And if leeches are forbidden by suspension, then let the place be rubbed with the patient's fresh blood or a needle is inserted into the place where the blood comes out, and let them be placed there; because those who feel any pain so quickly as not to wait.
E quan voles que cajan, polveriza sobre aquelas un pauc de aloen trissat, o sal, o cendre, e cazo tantost.	And when you want them to fall, sprinkle on them a little of the dried aloe, or salt, or ash, and every now and then as well.
Ayssi comensa lo prolec de la tersa partida: de restauracio.	So begins the process of the third part: of restoration.
Aquest capitol es motas veguadas necessari en la art de medicina; e es restauracio de fractura e de dislocacio accident en les osses.	This chapter is very necessary in the art of medicine; and it is restoration of a fracture and an accidental dislocation in the bones.
O, filh, sapiatz que jactan se de aquest capitol les fols metges e les vulguars e aquels que degun temps no reguardero les libres dels Antics ni legiro de aquels una letra.	Or son true, and thou shalt know that those who praise this chapter are ignorant doctors and those who at any time have not regarded the free books of the ancients or read one letter of them.
E per aquesta causa es fayt que aquesta manieyra dels scients in terra nostra es privat; e yeu no ho e obliat en aquo degun temps be de tot; e no he adhibit aquo que apres, sino per longitut de lectio dels libres dels Antics e studi sobre le entendement de aquels, entro que extrayssi la sciencia de aquels.	And for this reason the way of the scientists in our land is hidden; and I have not forgotten it for a moment because of the reading of the books of the ancients and the study upon their understanding, until I extracted the science from them.
E aprop adirigui a experiment e studi en la longitut de la mieua vida.	And let experiments and studies follow in the length of my life.
E yeu ja he de aquo descrit en aquest capitol tot aquo que conte la mieua sciencia e sobre le qual es passat lo mieu experiment; pus que agui abreujat aquo a vos autres e deliuregui aquo de occupacio de elonguacio; e abreujegui aquo en la fi de abreujacio; et e monstrat aquo en la fi de declaracio; e formegui en aquo motas formas dels sturmentz que so administratz en aquel, cum es fayt per addicio de declaracio, ayssi cum he fayt en dos capitols precedentz.	And I have already described in this chapter all that concerns my science and on which my experiment passed; because it has renewed what was needed to you and freed me from the occupation of elaborating; and it has renewed what was needed at the end; and it has shown what was needed at the end of the statement; and it has formed in it the forms of the instruments that are administered in it, as is done by adding a declaration, just as I have done in two previous chapters.
Capitol primier.	First chapter.
Summae et collectiones ex esse fracturae ossium, ex eis quarum praemissio necessaria est, antequam incipiamus rememorationem membrorum fraftorum et diversorum si uniuscuiusque.	Of the essence and collection of fractures of the bones, from which the premiss necessary is taken before we begin to remark the broken members and different if of each one.
Cove donc que diguam en le prohemi de aquest capitol las summas del sermo; e les capitols al entendament dels quals en le comensament es forsat le artifexs e a stacio sobre la veritat de aquels; so es vos e aquels que so promptz que sapian o aprenguan aquesta art nobla autres de vos.	So, then, that I may say in the proem of this chapter the sum of the speech; and the chapters to the understanding of which it is necessary for the artisan to be standing on the truth of them; so are you and those who are prompt that they knew or learned this noble art of others, not yours.
E donc dic que quan accideys a alcu fractura o dislocacio o torcio o cazement, lahoras cove que tu te coytes al comensament am fleubotomia o aleyar aquel, o quascu ensemps, si no prohibeys alcuna causa, ayssi cum debelitat de vertut, o es aquel al qual accideys effant, o viel en decrepitat, o es temps de vehement calor, o de vehement freg.	And therefore say that when it happens to any fracture or dislocation or twisting or a fall, you then let there be a caulk with the caulking wax or a needle, or any instrument, if not prohibited by any cause; in this way as to destroy the virtue, or it is that which has happened to it, or old age, or time of violent heat, or violent cold.
E aprop sia content en vianda sieua de erbas frejas e de carns de auzels e de crabotz; e prohibem carns grossas e umplir si de viandas e de tota vianda que umple las venas de sanc, entro que siras segurat de apostema caut, e si no temes efusio de materia al membre.	And let there be placed in a warm drink of freshly cut herbs and meat of fowl and crabs; and prohibit the meat that fills the veins with blood, unless you are certain of the apoplexy, and if you do not fear the flow of matter into the member.
E lahoras retorne le malaute al sieu regiment primier am le qual corr costuma de lu.	And then return the patient to his first care with him who usually takes care of it.
E donc cum le os trencat comensa esser restaurat, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia pascut de viandas nutritivas de nutriment mot e gros e greu en les quals sia viscositat, ayssi cum so viandas faytas de froment cueyt am aygua, e ris, e caps, e pes, e ventres de vacas, e huous, e peys fresc, e vi gros e semblants ad aquels, e am aquest regiment es fayta coagulacio de fractura pus leugierament e miels.	And so begins the restoration of a broken bone; and then say that the patient is fed with nutritious food, thick and heavy and difficult to digest, as if it is cooked bread made with water, and ris, and beans, and fresh milk, and meat, and honey, and this food is made into a blood clot, gradually and smoothly; and this food is given in this way of diet.
E sapias que les osses trinquatz quan so en les homes que so en la primiera vilura e en los decrepitz, no es possible que sian continuatz e sian consolidatz segon lur natura per la exsiccacio dels membres de lor.	And you know that the bones heal when they are in men in their first youth and in old age; it is not possible for them to continue and be consolidated according to their nature by the drying of the limbs of them.
E son consolidatz e continuatz segon lor natura tot temps per la exsiccacio de aquels membres, e so continuatz e consolidatz aquels que so de lor en la fi de la lenitat, ayssi cum les osses dels petitz effantz.	And they are consolidated and continued according to their nature at all times by the drying of those limbs, and they are continued and consolidated as if they were one in the end of leniency, such as the bones of small children.
Mays empero natura ajusta e amnecteys sobre le os trencat de tota partida alcuna causa semblant a glut en le qual es grossitut que adhereys e strenh aquel entro que so ensemps conglutinatz e liatz ensemps, entro que venen la fi de fortitut e de fermesa, ayssi cum foc al comensament, entro que denguna causa no prohibeys aquel de las suas obres.	But nature adjusts and amends upon the broken bone of all parts any cause similar to glut in which it is thickness that adheres and strengthens it until it is joined together, unless there be a cause that prohibits it from its works.
E per aquesta causa es necessari que pauses las viandas del malaute, viandas en las quals so gravitat e viscozitat e grosseza, ayssi cum havem dit.	And for this reason it is necessary to stop the food of the patient, in the food of which there is thickness and viscosity and gravity, as we have said.
Mota diversitat de fractura segon diversitat del membre.	Diversity of fracture according to the diversity of the member.
E sapias que las specias de fractura son diversas segon la diversitat dels membres, quar fractura del os de la camba es diversa de la fractura del os del cap; e la fractura del os del pietz es divers de la fractura del os del dos; e semblantment totz les autres membres son diverses entre lor.	And you know that the types of fracture are diverse according to the diversity of the members, for the fracture of the neck bone is different from the fracture of the head bone; and the fracture of the leg bone is diverse from the fracture of the foot bone; and similarly all the other members are diverse among themselves.
E yeu venc am rememoracio de tota specia de fractura, expausada en le sieu capitol distincta del autre.	And I have already recalled all the types of fracture in a separate chapter, distinguished from the other.
Mota diversitat de fractura en si meteyssa.	Diversity of fracture within itself.
E son diversificadas las specias de fractura del os en lor meteyssas; quar es fayta fractura arcuada otra aquo que accidan en lu stellas; e alcunas veguadas es fayta fractura segon la longitut del os: e so las fracturas de lu satagia e astelhas e addicios procedentz e no-procedentz, ayssi cum es fayt en la pena quan es preparada a escriure, e es fractura am plagua e disrupcio en le cap, e es fractura fissura petita.	And the types of fractures of the bone are diversified in their own lengths; because it happens to fracture with an arch that is opposite from above; and some are fractured according to the length of the bone: and such as those that are made by a pen, and those that are made by a pencil, and those that are made by a quill; and such as those which are broken in the head, and those which are broken in the face, and those which are broken in the neck, and those which are broken in the arms, and those which are broken in the legs, and those which are broken in the feet.
E a tota specia es engen o turment propri en restauracio de lu segon que vindra rememoracio de lu distincta en les sieus locs.	And all the species is made or a torment proper for the restoration of it according to that which will come; and this is a reminder of it, distinguished in its place.
Mota senhal de fractura del os.	A symbol of fracture of the bone.
E per aquo es conoguda fractura del os: es tortuositat de lu, e de aquel eminencia e appericio de lu al sentiment, e so de lu quan compremes aquel am la tua ma.	And by this is known the fracture of the bone; it is a twist of it, and from that is the prominence and appearance of it to the sense, and such as it is when you touch it with your hand.
E donc quan no es en le loc tortuositat apparent ni so no es feyt deves le tieu tocament quan toques le os am agitacio e le malaute no atroba gran dolor, lahoras no es aqui fractura.	And then when it is not in the place of the appearance of a twist and it does not cause great pain when you touch the bone with agitation, and the patient does not change much, then it is not here that there is a fracture.
Habantz es possible que sia tortuositat o petita fissura, adon no cove que tu mauguas aquel am la tua ma e am compressio de tot; habantz pausa sobre lu de las medicinas de las quals ve rememoracio aprop aquel moment le qual conveneys al loc; e aprop sia streyt per strictura subtil.	And then it is possible that there is a twist or a small crack, unless you then feel it with your hand and press it together; and let there be placed on it the medicines of which you have a reminder; and let it be made tight by subtle tightening.
E sapias que·l loc quan es arcuat e no es scindit en dos o otra aquo que no accidan en lu satagie, cum es remauguda tota partida de la sua compar, lahoras cove que comenses de la tua hora a rectificacio de lu habantz que a lu accida apostema caut.	And know that the place when it is arched and not divided into two or another water that does not enter him in his seat, and all is revived from its part, then cover that you begin at your hour to correct him who caused it, so that it happens to him apoplexy cautery.
E si a lu accida apostema caut, lahoras layssa aquel per alcus dias entro que cesse le apostema; e aprop engualha aquel segon quascuna manieyra que podes de levitat e de engen.	And if it is caused to him apoplexy cautery, then leave that for a few days until the apoplexy ceases; and put that second in any way that you can of levitation and of engine.
E sapias que restauracio de lu e agulacio de lu es pus leugiera que del os en le qual accideysso sathagie.	And know that the restoration of him and his revulsion is lighter than bone in which he happens apoplexy satagie.
E aprop strenh aquel segon que vindra la rememoracio de lu.	Then strengthen that second when comes the remembrance of him.
Mays si en le os so satagias, lahoras es necessaria extencio de aquest membre trencat de doas partz, si es la ma o le pe; o am la tua ma si le membre es petit; o am doas cordas o am una corda e la ma.	May be if in the bone there are satagias, then is necessary an extension of this broken member from two parts, if it is the leg or the foot; or one rope or one rope and the main; or two ropes or one rope and the main.
E sia la tua posicio am la qual pauses le membre loc engual segon la sua figura natural, mentre que las partidas so extandudas del membre trenquat, lahoras te perforsa que fassas retornar aquelas addicios am engen e segon quascuna manieyra que poyras en lor locs.	And be your position to that you pause the member local placed according to its natural figure, while the parts are extended from the broken member, then know that you make points on them again in engine and according to any way that you can do it in their places.
E guarda te segon la tua forssa que no accida sobre le malaute per la tua operacio delor ni lesio; e perforsa te segon le tieu poder que tu appliques la un os am l’autre son companho segon lors milhors formas.	And watch according to your force that does not happen on the patient by your operation or injury of him; and persevere according to the good power that you apply the one bone to the other his companion according to their best forms.
E cove que en aquela hora aprofitablament tu toques am la tua ma aquel, e si vezes aqui alcuna causa diversa, rectifiqua aquel e enguala aquel per la quantitat de la tua vertut.	And when in that hour you can take advantage of him who touches your main hand, and if there is some other reason, then correct it and put it back for the quantity of your virtue.
E exquiva vehement extenssio e compressio, ayssi cum fan mots fols metges que motas veguadas fan accidir apostema caut per la sua operacio, o fan accidir contraccio en le membre ayssi cum havem vist aquo per la operacio de lor motas veguadas.	And do violent extensions and compressions, so that in this way funny metges are caused to happen apoplexy cautery by their operation, or cause a contraction in the member so that water is caused to happen through the operation of its funny metges.
E aprop annecteys, aprop equacio e decent operacio e strictura de aquel membre, e repaus e tranquilitat; amoneste le malaute sobre aquo e fay le squivar que no maugua aquel en la hora de las suas vigilias e del sieu dormir, e ves la sua revolucio e agitacio, e deves la sua egestio, e deves totz les sieus movementz am tota la sua vertut; e aguarda se que la posicio del membre sia posicio am la qual sia asegurada la dolor, la qual causa es quar quan sent en la disposicio de la posicio del membre delor o lesio; lahoras cove que permutes aquel ad autra disposicio de aquela am la qual non senta dolor; e guarda am aquo que la posicio de lu aquela sia dreyta e engual, per so que al membre non accida tortuositat quan es restaurat.	And put that second, put that again in the third operation and stricture of that member, and rest and tranquility; remind the patient on him and make him that he does not mauga it in his hour of its vigilias and his sleep, and watch his revolution and agitation, and know its egestion, and know all its movements according to all its virtue; and wait that the position of the member is a position by which you feel pain, which happens when you send it in the disposition of the position of the member delor or injury; and know that when you change that second into another position of this one, then do not feel pain; and know according to him that the position of that member is correct and put, so that no tortuosity happens to him when he is restored.
E la qualitat de la strictura del membre tranquat es aquela que yeu recomti; per que sapias que·ls membres trencatz so diversificatz en lor parvitat e en lor grandeza e en la forma de aquels.	And know that the quality of the stricture of the member is that which I recommend you; so that you know that broken members are different in their little one and in their big one and in the shape of those.
E de aquels que son petits ayssi cum le bras e·l dit e·l focil e semblantz ad aquels, lahoras cove que la envolucio sia de drap mol subtil.	And of those that are small so when the arm and the finger and the hand are close together and similar to those, then know that the wrapping is of a thin cloth.
Mays aquels que so grosses ayssi cum la cuoyssa o la camba, cove que en aquels sia envolucio lada e dura, quar la liadura lada connecteys le membre gran e strenh aquel de tota part am strictura engual, enayssi que en lu no intre macula.	May be those that are large so when the thigh or the chest is covered, then know that in them there is a wrapping all over and it is hard, because the tie all over connects the member that is big and strong with stricture, also knowing that in him there is not an imperfection.
E aprop comensa, aprop la tua evacuacio de equacio, pausar liament convenient ad aquo, sobre le loc de aquela fractura am tres envolucios o quatre segon que·l membre mereys; e strenh la tua ma un petit am le liament.	Then begin, then your evacuation of equation, pause carefully according to him, on the place of that fracture with three wrappings or four according to which member you want; and strengthen your main hand a little according to the tie.
E aprop ve am aquel a la partida pus sobirana del loc de la fractura, e strenh mens que no foc la tua strictura am la qual has strengut le loc de la fractura.	Then look at that one in the first place that is more dominant than the place of the fracture, and strengthen your tie that does not cut your stricture according to which you have strengthened the place of the fracture.
E aprop elongua te am envolucio del loc de la fractura un pauc, e mollifiqua la strictura petit a petit, entro que prenguas del loc sa una gran partida.	Then extend yourself a little according to the wrapping of the place of the fracture, and soften your stricture little by little until you get from the place a large part.
E aprop pren una autra benda e envolveys aquela autra veguada sobre le loc trenquat am envolucio, e aprop ve am las envolucios a la partida pus dejos de la fractura; e sia la tua operacio en la strictura de la envolucio e en mollificacio de aquela segon que havem dit en la envolucio primieyra desus.	Then take another object and wrap that one also over the broken place with a wrapping, and when you have finished with the first wrapping, then look at the wrappings in the first part that is more distant from the fracture; and be your operation in the stricture of the wrapping and in softening it according to what we said in the first wrapping.
E aprop pausa entre las volucios de stopa leon o drap am le qual sia engualada la tortuositat de la fractura, si en lu es tortuositat; e sino, no pauses en lu alcuna causa.	Then pause between the wrappings of leather or cloth according to which is put the tortuosity of the fracture if there is any tortuosity; and if not, do not pause because of any reason.
E aprop pausa sobre lu autra benda, e aprop enguala sobre aquestas envolucios stelhas decentment faytas tantost, si en le loc no es imflacio o apostema caut, e lahoras pausa sobre lu aquo que sede le apostema aquel e que oste la imflacio; e layssa aquela per alcus jorns; e lahoras tu strenh sobre lu las stelhas.	Then pause over another object, and put those second wrappings again gently made, if there is no inflammation or apoplexy cautery in the place, then pause over that water which causes the apoplexy of that one and which opens the inflammation; and leave that for a few days; and then you strengthen them according to him.
E sian las stelhas de la maytat de canna lada raza, e be formada saviament; o sian de fust de pi; o de ramps de palma ; e sia le ample de quascuna stelha segon aquesta forma e aquesta figura:	Then the sticks of a cane are smaller, and be formed wisely; or they are of palm wood; or of oak branches; and be the width of each stick according to this shape and this figure:
Empero cove que la astelha que es pausada sobre aquela fractura sia pus grossa e pus lada un petit que las autras astelhas, e la longitut de la stela segon qu’es legut al membre en magnitut e parvitat; e aprop strenh sobre las astelhas am autra benda segon la tua primieyra strictura; e aprop lia desus am fiel decentment segon que havem dit de strictura, e es que sia la tua strictura segon le loc de la fractura mes, e quant mes es alonguat de la fractura, es mendre la strictura.	However know that the stick that is paused on that fracture is more dominant and more distant than a small one of those other sticks, and the length of the stick according to its size and little one; then strengthen them over another object according to your first stricture; and pause again with a faithful fastening according to which you have strengthened; and it happens that the stricture is less as it approaches the fracture, and more as it is distant from the fracture.
E cove que les fils sian migiers en grossesa e subtilitat, e sian de li mol; e si les fils so grosses, ayssi cum yeu he vist per la operacio de alcus fols pausantz les lors fils de cordas de li tort, e es error gran, quan catz la strictura fora equalitat.	And know that the ropes are half-thick and soft, and if they are thick, then look at them according to their operation when you pause those rope parts of string; and it is a great mistake when the stricture is made equal.
E eyssament fils subtils no so convenientz, quar tu no consaguiras per strictura am aquels aquo que voles, e no cove que entre astela e astela haja mens de un dit.	And little ropes are not convenient because you cannot achieve a stricture with them, and it is not convenient that there is between one stick and another stick the measure of one finger.
E si le malaute es ledit per las extremitatz de las stelas aprop la strictura en les locs sas, lahoras pausa dejos aquelas de stopa leon o lana carmenada entro que aquo no li fassa lesio.	And if the patient is covered by the ends of those sticks according to the stricture in places that are more dominant, then pause from those second stick parts of leather or woven cloth within that water does not do an injury to him.
Alcunas veguadas fractura es am plagua, e accideys disrupcio en la codena, e yeu vindre am rememoracio en aquela en le capitol segon singularitat.	Some fractures are caused by laughter, and happens a disruption in the chain, and I come with the memory of that one in the second according to its uniqueness.
E sapias que ges tot membre trencat no es streyt am stelhas al primier dia; la qual causa es quar le membre, quan es gran, no cove que pauses sobre lu stelhas sino aprop v dias o vii o mays, segon la tua seguratat de adveniment de apostema caut.	And know that a broken member is not strict with the sticks on the first day; which happens because the member, when it is big, does not happen to stop on the sticks but from three to seven days according to your certainty about the coming of apoplexy cautery.
E aquesta es la manieyra dels emplaustres am les quals les Antics restauravan, les quals so pausatz sobre fractura e dislocacio e torcio.	This is the way of the old physicians who restore them, those that are paused on a fracture and dislocation and twisting.
Manieyra de emplaustra comu abruejat de restaurament de fractura, convenient a motas compleccios e majorment a las femnas e als efantz, quar es de aquo sobre le qual no ventz calor ni freg: e es que prenguas de polvera de moli, e es la medula de la farina que pen deves le movement de la mola en las paretz del moli.	Method of wrapping as a shower of water for the restoration of a fracture, with care to make it fit according to complicated forms and more so to women and young people because it is not hot on that part which you wrap; and know that you take flour powder, and it is the meal of the flour that does not change the movement of the miller in the places of the mill.
E comfeys aquel ayssi cum es, sino que cribelles aquel am album de huou, e pausa la comfeccio de lu no-spessa ni subtil; e aprop usa de aquela.	And put that second, then know that it is not a way to wrap him, but a way to rub him with an alb of cow, and pause the wrapping of this one that is not thin or subtle; then use it.
Autra manieyra de emplaustre restaurant fractura e dislocacio e torcio: recipe de assafetida, de lapdanum, de acacia, de enula, e migrach, que es razit de milgraner salvage, de totz ana drac. x; de mirra e aloen ana drac. v; alochil ana drac. xx; totz sian trissatz e cribellatz e sian mesclatz am aygua alichil o am album de huou si la compleccio del malaute es scalfada; e aprop usa de aquest emplaustre, quar es de bona composicio e restaura les osses trencatz leugierament, e confereys a motz homes.	Another way to make plasters that will heal fractures and dislocations and twists: take assafetida, myrrh, labdanum, acacia, and migraner salvage, all of which are called milgraner; myrrh and aloes, one dragon; all three are finely chopped and mixed with water or milk; if the patient's complex is scarred, use this plaster, as it has a good composition and restores broken bones gently, and gives strength to many people.
Autra manieyra de emplaustre le qual comfereys a fractura e torcio: recipe migrach e met de altea blanca ana drac. x; de mirra e de aloen ana drac v; de acacia drac. vi; de bol armenic drac. .xx.	Another way to make plasters that will heal fractures and twists: Take migraner and water or milk, one dragon; myrrh and aloes, two dragons; acacia and balsam, six dragons; all are finely chopped up.
Totz sian trissatz en mortier am mota contricio, e sian cribellatz, e sian comfitz am aygua o am album de huou e sia administrat.	All of this should be ground in a mortar and made into a paste; it should then be kneaded with water or milk and administered.
Manieyra de emplaustre a juncturas e osses separatz de lors locs, e seda dolor accident en aquels e a fissuras e fractaduras: sia presa lana sutza e sia submersa en vi agre e oli cuyt e sia pausat sobre le loc.	A way of making an ointment for painful joints and separated bones from their places, which causes pain in them and cracks and fractures: take sheep wool and soak it in wine and oil and place it on the area.
Mays en aquest emplastre no es vertut de restauracio, de apostema caut e expelleys dolors propriament.	May not be useful for restoring virtue, but it is useful for expelling a fever and pain in general.
Autra manieyra de emplastre que restaura os trancat: pren fuelas de figuier sort e fuelas de papaver salvatge; contereys tot e fay emplastre de lor.	Another way of making an ointment that restores broken bones: Take leaves of fig tree and leaves of wild poppy; crush them all together and make an ointment out of it.
Manieyra de emplastre abreujat aministrat deves la restauracio de fractura de os e quan tu voles resolucio del romanent de apostema: recipe razitz de altea, de camamilla e flors de violes, de farina de ers, de totz ana partida .i.; sian totz trissatz e sian cofitz am vi, si·l membre no es scalfat.	A way of making a refreshing ointment that is useful for the resolution of a fever: Take razes of alyssum, chamomile and violet flowers, flour of erysima, and all together; All of this should be kneaded together and applied to the body if the member is not swollen.
Mays si es scalfat, lahoras comfeys aquel am aygua de coliandre humit o am aygua e usa de lu.	If it is swollen, then apply cold water or cold milk; then use oil.
Autra manieyra de emplastra pus fort en resolucio que aquest primier, quan accideys apostema dur deves la restauracio del membre: recipe de razitz de altea e de semensa de li, e de balaustia, e mellilot, majorana, flors de viol, de camamilla, de totz ana partida i engual; totz sian trissatz e sian cofitz am aygua de sauze o am aygua dousa o am vi, tot aquo segon la qualitat del membre e le repaus de la color de lu.	Another way of making a strong ointment for this purpose, when a fever persists: take razes of alyssum and fennel, and senna, bilberry, marjoram, violet flowers, chamomile, and all together; knead them all together and apply to the body according to the quality of the member and rest of the body.
Mays Ypocras no diyssec en le sieu libre que sia pausat sobre le membre trenquat deves la restauracio de lu sino cerot fayt de cera e de oli e no autre causa; e recomtec que sia migier entre grossitut e subtilitat.	May not be useful in this case, but a ointment made of wax and oil may help; it should not be too thick or too thin; and remember that the quality of the ointment is important to heal the member properly.
Mays a Gualia es vist que sian pausatz sobre le membre trencat deves la restauracio de lu e las causas en las quals es exsiccacio am petit de caliditat so ayssi cum mirra, enses e semblantz a lor de aquelas causas que havem recomtadas.	May not be useful in this case, but it is clear that they should be applied to the injured member to help with healing; using small amounts of quality oils such as olive oil, almond oil, and other similar oils for this purpose.
Manieyra de emplastre que comfereys a lesio e dolor: recipe migat, de cezes, de pels de home inscizes o pena de auzel, e de altea, e sal, partidas enguals; sian trissatz e cribellatz e sian cofitz, e sia fayt emplastre.	A way of making an ointment that is useful for injuries and pain: take a little meat from the back of the neck, from the hair, or from the skin; also take some alyssum, salt, and parsley; knead them together and make it into a paste, then apply it.
Mays la quantitat segon la qual cove que romangua la liadura e aprop sia disliada, es que consideres si no es accidit dolor ni pruziment ni le os es trencat no es maugut de son loc, lahoras tu no deslies de motz jorns.	May the amount be according to the quality of the wound that needs to be cleaned and removed; consider if there is no pain or injury, and if the bone is not broken and it hurts in its place, then do not use this ointment.
E si accideys al loc dolor vehement o prusiment o imflacio, lahoras tu te coyte o deslie aquel en la hora, e osta le emplastre de lu.	And if there is pain or swelling in the area that needs to be treated with a ointment, then you can use it at any time; apply the ointment and cover it with a bandage.
E pren drap de li e spongia marina leon humida, e submergeys aquela en aygua tebeza, e am aquela lava le loc entro que cesse aquel pruziment e la dolor sia sedada; e aprop layssa repausar le membre per una hora; e aprop pausa sobre lu lana sutza submersa en vi agre e oli o oli rozat, e lia sobre lu per una nuoyt entro que sias segur de apostema caut, e que repause la imflacio del membre, e sia remauguda la dolor de lu.	And take a cloth and marine sponge and wet it with cold water; submerge that cloth in the bowl of oil and rub it; then apply the oil to the area until the swelling and pain subside; then leave the member at rest for an hour; then apply the oil again for one hour more; this will help to calm the swelling and pain.
E aprop itera aquela strictura subtil e emplastre petit e no·l strenhas per la tua constriccio primieyra, e subtilia am aquel entro que sia sanat.	Then repeat that gently and apply a small amount of ointment again; remember to apply it gently so that it heals properly.
E si vezes que le apostema e la rogor e la dolor e la imflacio e tots les accidentz ja so remaugutz de tot, e indigeysses de emplastre e de strictura, lahoras tu itera aquel ayssi cum has fayt al comensant engualment.	If the fever, pain, swelling and other accidents are all gone by themselves and you do not need any ointment or compression; then you can stop using it.
E si no accideys al membre alcuna causa de aquelas que havem ditas, lahoras no deslies aquel sino aprop tres dias o quatre o v o .vii.; e alcunas veguadas tot aquo es layssat per xx dias segon que a tu appar per la desliadura del membre, ayssi cum havem dit, entro que la fractura adhereys, e se acosta a la coagulacio de la carn sobre aquel.	And if there is no cause for the member's pain or swelling; then do not use it anymore, but only for three days or four or five or six. and some are left for twenty days according to what is necessary for the wound to heal properly; then apply it, taking care that the fracture heals correctly and that the skin does not come off over it.
E lahoras ajusta en la strictura mays que en la tua strictura primieyra tota, e ayusta en la engrossacio de la vianda del malaute, segon que es precedida la rememoracio de lu.	Then adjust the compression slightly more than before; match it with the thickening of the oil used previously; then remember that the healing process for this wound has begun.
Mays si tu vezes le loc de la fractura ja desiccar e extenuar mays que no cove, lahoras sapias que·l nutriment es prohibit pervenir ad aquel; e donc embroca aquel am aygua tebeza deves tota veguada que delias aquel; e sia aquo en totz tres dias; e alleuja la strictura un petit, e per aquesta operacio corr al membre le nutriment, e es sanat leugierament.	May the member of the broken part dry and become thinner than before; then you will know that this food is forbidden to it; so dip it in cold water regularly throughout the day; then keep it wet for three days more; then adjust the compression slightly; and for this operation, send food to the member, and it will heal gradually.
Mays aquo que fan les fols restauradors de la fractura del membre autra veguada quan no es restaurat al comensament, segon que cove, e es restaurat segon tortuositat, es error segon la operacio de lor, e temor gran, e si fos dreyturier aquo agrandit les Antics en lors libres e agueran am aquo obrat.	May the water help to restore the broken member and also to restore other members if necessary; then it will help to restore it according to its shape, which is an error in this operation, causing fear, and if it is a back injury, it will make the pain worse with movement.
E yeu no he vist ad alcu de lor aquo far, per que es pus razonable que aquo no fassa.	I have not seen such a thing happen before; so it is more reasonable to think that this does not happen.
Capitol segon: De fractura quan accideys en le cap.	Chapter about the fracture of the skull.
Las specias de fracturas son motas, e las figuras de lor son diversas, e las causas son distinctas, quar de fracturas alcuna es fayta per percussio de spaza, e la percussio osta tot le os entro al ciphac, le qual es dejos le os, ayssi cum fay ayssa en le fust, e per aquo aquesta specia es nompnada ascial; o la spaza inscideys alcuna partida del os, e inscideys la carn de lu e no passa la inscizio entro al derier de lu; e aquesta specia de fractura es nompnada levatio absoluta.	The types of fractures are different, and the causes are distinct, because there is a fracture due to impact with an object, and this impacts all the bones inside it, leaving them broken in pieces like a pot; or an object cuts some part of the bone, and it cuts into the flesh, and this type of fracture is called a complete or absolute fracture.
E la plagua de aquestas doas fracturas o es gran o pauca, e de fractura que es contricio o atricio; e causa de lu es percussio am poyra o cazement sobre peyra, e a lor semblantz.	The pain of these two types of fractures is great or slight, and the cause of this pain is impact with a stone or falling from a height, and it looks similar to them.
E aquesta fractura o es penetrant que ja apropinqua al pannicol le qual es dejos le os; o es en la facia del os, e la plagua de aquestas doas fracturas o es gran o pauca.	This fracture is penetrating the skin of the person whose skull it has broken; or it is on the face of the skull, and the pain of these two types of fractures is great or slight.
E de fractura es que es ameguada en le os, en la subtilitat del cabel petita, e per aquo es nompnada aquesta specia fractura capillar.	And there is a fracture that is hidden in the bone, which is very thin hair; and this type of fracture is called a hairline fracture.
E es fractura que es fayta o per cazement o per percussio de peyra e a lu semblantz, que fa intrar alcuna lamina del os a las partidas dedintz, e es fayta en le loc concavitat ayssi cum accideys als payroles de eram quan accideys a lor percussio e es partida de lor intrada a las partidas dedintz.	And this is a fracture that is caused by impact with a stone or falling from a height, and it looks similar to them; which makes a piece of the bone break into pieces and enter the concave part of the skull; when this happens due to their impact, they break into pieces inside the skull.
E majorment es fayt aquo en les cors de osses humitz, ayssi cum so caps de efantz.	And mostly it is broken in human bones, especially in the skull; such as the caps of teeth.
E so a totas aquestas specias fracturas satagias, so son pessas ayssi cum stelhas separadas.	And all these types of fractures are painful, and they cause pain when separated.
E yeu vindre am reremoracio de tot aquo en son loc.	And I have come to remember all this in its place.
E conoyssem totas aquestas specias de fractura per deteccio sobre aquelas e per inquisicio de lor am tentas e ostament de carn corrumpuda que es sobre lor.	I will describe all these types of fractures by detection, and by questioning their appearance and the corruption of the flesh that is over them.
E specia capillar es conoguda per aysso que es descubert sobre le os, e es abstergit, e linit sobre lu am tentha, quar la fractura appar negra.	The hairline fracture is recognized by its appearance on the bone and is removed, and it is covered with oil, because the fracture appears black.
Mays en la curacio de fractura considera al comensament les accidentz del malaute, e lahoras si tu vezes per los accidentz que signifique per significacio manifesta sobre paor, ayssi cum es vomit de colera, e extencio, e perdement de entendament, e abscizio de votz, e sincopi, e febre acuta, e eyssiment dels huels e rogor de aquels, e semblantz a lor dels accidentz en las majors disposicios, ses dopte no es sanat.	Here is the translation of the text:
E si vezes accidentz no-correntz tu speras salut, lahoras tu comensa la curacio de lu.	And if you do not expect these incorrect injuries to heal, then begin the patient's treatment.
La qual causa es quar si es vengut a tu le plaguat en le comensament cum es plaguat e aquo es en les dias de ivern, lahoras cove que tu studias en le ostament del os denant le dia xiiii segon tota disposicio.	This is the cause why if he has come to you with a plague in the beginning when it was in the winter days, then know that you must study the position of the bone before the thirteenth day according to all dispositions.
E si es en les dias d’estiu, lahoras cove que te coytes ostar le os denant le vii dia, habantz que aquo que es dejos le os sia corromput del pannicol, e que accidescan les accidentz que havem recomtatz.	And if it is in the summer days, then know that you must set the bone before the seventh day, letting it be corrupted by the membrane that covers the bone, and that the following injuries occur.
E si la fractura ja es pervenguda al pannicol cubrent le cervel, e es am partidas menudas e atricio, lahoras cove que inscidas la partida conminuta e atrita, segon que yeu recomtare a tu.	And if the fracture has already reached the membrane that covers the brain, and is broken into little pieces and torn, then know that you must drill the broken parts according to how I will advise you.
E es que tu razas le cap del malaute plaguat, e descuebres sobre le os segon costuma e manieyra a tu possible segon la figura de la plagua, e que sia leugier sobre le malaute.	And that you must cut the patient' hair that is infected, and discover on top of the bone according to custom and manner as I can advise you following the figure of the plague, and that it is lighter on the patient.
E si accideys a tu deves la deteccio del os, fluxs de sanc o apostema caut, lahora tu te oppausa a lu am aquo que cove, e es que huemplas le loc de draps infuzes en vi e oli rozat, e fassa repausar la plagua entro que sia sedat le apostema, e sies segur de fluxs del sanc; e aprop comensa en la circuicio del os e en la ablatio de lu.	And if an accident happens to you and you must remove the bone, and flow of blood or pus is seen, then pause for a moment and it is that you clean the place where the drape is soaked in wine and olive oil, and allow the wound to rest while you make sure there is no more flow of blood; and then begin around the bone and the ablation of it.
E aquo sia segon una de dos manieyras de operacio.	And this should be according to two ways of operation.
E la una manieyra es que tu inscidas le os am inscisori de streyt tal, e aquesta es la forma de lu: E aprop administra un autre inscissori aquest, un pauc pus lat que aquel; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And the first way is that you must drill the bone with a sharp chisel, and this is the form of it: And then administer another chisel on this one, a little less than that one; and this is the form of it:
E aprop administra mays le inscissori pus lat que·l segon.	And then administer more of the chisel that is less than the second one.
E cove que sia deves tu nombre de inscissoris diverses, dels quals alcus so pus latz que alcus autres; e alcus de lor so pus breus que·ls autres e sian en le derier de acuitat de las suas extremitatz, e sian de ferr indi o felod.	And then you must name various chisels, some of which are less sharp than others; and some of them are sharper than others and are made of iron or steel.
E usa de lor am facilitat en percussio sobre le inscissori per so que no concutesca le cap e leda aquel.	And use their ease in striking on the chisels that you do not feel pain in your hand and head.
E si le os es fort, dur, lahoras cove que perfores en le circuit de lu denant que tu administres los inscissoris am les taravels, les quals so nomnatz taravels no-profundantz.	And if the bone is strong and hard, then know that you must bore through it before administering the chisels on the surface, these are called superficial trays.
E no so nomnatz ayssi sino quar aquels no pausan le terme de l’os del test ad aquo que es aprop lu, per so quar al taravel es redonda extremitat o marge sobre aquel que es dejos le cap de lu agut semblant a marge o a cercle petit, le qual prohibeys esser submergit e passar la spissitut del os.	And they are not named as such because they do not stop the end of the bone from reaching water that is nearby, because the tray has a round extremity or margin on it that is left to rest over it that seems like a margin or small circle, which prevents it from being submerged and passing through the thickness of the bone.
E es convenient que tu prenguas de aquestz taravels gran nombre dels quals quascu convenesca a la spicitut de quascun os, entro que sia a tu present en tottz testz del cervel la extremitat del qual sia aguda, la quantitat en longitut e brevitat sia segon la quantitat de spicitut de aquest test.	And it is convenient that you take of these trays a great number of them, because each one is adapted to the thickness of each bone, and all are presented in all heads from the brain's end which has an acute extremity, the quantity in length and brevity is according to the amount of thickness of this test.
E aquesta es la forma de tres specias de teravels: La qualitat de perforar en le circuit del os trencat es que pauses le teravel sobre le os e revolvas aquel am les tieus ditz entro que sapias que l’os ja es penetrat; e aprop permuda le terevel ad autre loc, e pausa aquo que es entre tot trauc la quantitat de la grosseza del ray o enviro aquo.	And this is the form of three kinds of trays: The quality of boring through the broken bone is that you pause the tray on the bone and turn it with tweezers within what you know the bone has already been penetrated; and then move it to another place, and pause there while passing the quantity of the thickness of the ray or surround it.
E aprop inscideys am inscissoris aquo que es entre quascun trauc del os, e fay aquel pus subtil que podes sobre aquo en fi de levitat, ayssi cum havem dit, entro que erradiques le os, o am la tua ma, o am alcuna autra causa per alcus sturmentz les quals auras apparelhatz ad aquo, ayssi cum tanalhas e forceps subtils.	And then you must drill with chisels where each turn of the bone passes, and make it smaller than that which can be easily lifted in its end by levitation, as I have said, within what you remove the bone, or with your hand, or with any other cause using small instruments to do this at water, for example, tongs and forceps.
E cove que tu guardes am tota cautela que l’inscissori no toque alcuna causa del ciphac.	And then you must be very careful that the chisel does not touch any cause of the cyphers.
E donc cum auras circuit le os perforan, e sira separat del ciphac si es continuat am lu, e auras aquel extrayt, cove que razas e enguales aquel en la asperitat de lu de aquo que es en le os am autra sturment semblant a inscissori, mays empero cove que sia pus teon e pus subtil que les autres inscissoris.	And so after having bored through the bone completely, and separating it from the cyphers if it continues with it, then you extract it, and then insert it in the asperity of water that is in the bone with another instrument that seems like a chisel, but it is much larger and more sharp than the other chisels.
E si roman alcuna partida dels osses petitz e satagias, lahoras pren aquela am facilitat am aquo que es deves tu dels sturmentz; e aprop aquo cura la plagua am lichinis e enguentz les quals havem ditz.	And if any part of the small bones remains in the wound, then know that you must use this one with ease at water that is necessary for the instruments; and then clean there the plague with leeches and wash those which I have said.
E l’autra manieyra de operacio es leugiera, longinqua de paor, la qual diyssec Gualia e la lauzec per gran lausor; e aquest es le sermo de lu: necessari es a tu en le comensament que comenses descobrir la partida del os del loc en le qual es la fractura pus vehement e pus manifesta, entro que quan auras descubert aquela partida e auras pausat dejos lu la extremitat de aquest inscissori lent e alegre del qual aquesta es la forma:	And the other way of operation is light, far from fear, which I call the method of Galyia and the Louzeau by large lances; and this is its speech: It is necessary for you in the beginning that you begin to discover the part of the bone from the place where the fracture is most violent and most apparent, within what happens when you have discovered that part and have paused it with this chisel that is soft and light which this one is:
E es que la partida lenticular es leon e no inscideys alcuna causa, e la partida aguda es de lu en dos latz avantz en longitut, ayssi cum vezes; que la partida lenticular sia ajustada al ciphac am la facia de lu inscident aguda en le os.	And that the spherical part is large and does not cut any cause, and that the sharp part is divided in two parts before the length, so that it is divided from the bone's face with a sharp part in the center.
E aprop percuteys sobre le inscissori de una partida am un petit malhet entro que inscidas tot le os am facilitat ayssi cum es revolvut, e tu sias segur del pannicol que no accida en lu accident que temas en denguna manieyra, e si le medicant14 era le pus fol de totz les homes e le mays ignorant de lor; certament, e si era dorment.	And then hit the chisel on a part with a small mallet so that it drills all the bone with ease, and you will be sure of the membrane that is not happening in any way how to fear in any way, and if the medicine had been the most violent of all the men and the least ignorant about them; certainly, and if it was sleeping.
Lahoras si romania alcuna causa annexa al os del pannicol en alcus locs de os, inscidira aquel de lu am la extremitat del inscissori aquel lenticular, e deliuraria aquel de lu am facilitat, quar es deliurat de lu ses nocument e ses paor.	And if it has happened that a cause is attached to the bone from the membrane in some places of the bones, then you will drill it with this chisel that is soft and large, and remove it with ease, because it is removed from the bone's face which is not damaged or painful.
E si fractura del os no penetra entro al pannicol, e aquo que es abscidit o es ostat del os es la facia de lu, e roman en lu asperitat e satagias subtils, lahoras cove que razas aquela asperitat e erradiques aquelas satagias am razoris subtils per les quals tu has preparat le nombre, de diversas quantitatz per que sia a tu possible administrar de aquels en tot loc les pus convenientz de lor e le pus dreyt de aquels segon aquo en que te perduzeys la tua operacio aquel os trencat e la figura de lu.	And if the fracture of the bone does not penetrate within the membrane, and what is removed or remains with the bone is its face, and there is in it asperity and sharp parts that are small, then know that you will cut this asperity and remove these sharp parts with very sharp ones which you have prepared in different amounts so that you can administer them in all places as most convenient for your operation of that broken bone and the figure of it.
E cove que administres en la tua razio am la qual razes le os al comensament le pus lat de aquels razoris, e aprop usa aprop lu del pus subtil de lu, e no cesses far aquo segon continuitat entro que pervenguas ad aministrar le pus teon e·l pus subtil de totz aquels.	And if you administer in your hand with the chisel that is less sharp at the beginning of its work, and then use those very sharp ones which are the most sharp, and do not stop doing this until you have reached the end of its work, within what you can administer the most sharp and small ones of all.
Mays en quascuna de las autras fracturas petitas capillars e fractura subtil, cove que administres cura segon aquo que perduseys ad rectificacio de lu.	And in any other small hair fractures or subtle fracture, then know that you must work according to what you feel with your hand.
E es causa que no es ameguada sobre totz les quals han studi en aquela art.	And this is the cause why it is not applied to all those who have studied in that art.
E stec sobre aquo que nos scriut havem mostrat en grans fracturas.	And he writes on water that we have shown in great fractures.
E si le pannicol es retangut quan tu erradiques le os, lahoras cove que prenguas drap de li segon la quantitat de la plagua, e submergeys aquel en oli rozat, e pausa aquel sobre le orrifici de la plagua; e aprop pren autre drap doblat o triplicat e submergeys lu en vi e oli rozat e pausa aquel sobre drap prim e fay aquo al pus leugierament que podes sobre aquel, que no graves le ciphac; e aprop administra sobre aquel liament lat, e no strenhas aquel sino per quantitat que tengua la plagua tant solament.	And if the membrane is rectangular when you remove the bone, then know that you must take a piece of cloth according to the amount of the plague, and submerge it in wine and olive oil, and pause it over the opening of the plague; and then take another folded or tripled cloth and immerse it in water and oil, and pause it over the first one, and make the smallest cut that you can do on it, which does not hurt the cyphers; and then administer on it with sharp ones, and do not press it hard, but only for a quantity of plague.
E layssa aquel am aquesta cura per un dia o per dos entro que sias segur de apostema caut; e aprop deslia aquel e aprop aministra medicinas am las quals es superflua siccitat, ayssi cum razitz de lin e farina de errs, e polvera de enses e de aristologia, e de semblantz ad aquels.	And let him have this cure for a day or two until you are sure that the apoplexy is cured; and then go on to administer medicines in which there is no superfluous sapor, such as rice and flour, and also spice and herbal powder, and anything else of this kind.
E es que tu fassas de aquestas medicinas polvera que sia pulverizada sobre la plagua, ayssi cum son secas; e universalment, administra en aquel tota medicina de proprietat de la qual es que abstergesca e no mordique.	And you should make a powder of these medicines which is to be scattered over the wound when it is dry; and generally administer to him all medicine having a property by which he does not suck or bite.
E guarda te segon la tua vertut que la plagua en la tua curacio sia neta; e no sia en lu surdicia de enguent ni autra; ni no layssas agreguar virulencia en lu; quar quan es ajustada sobre le pannicol del cervel, corromp aquel e poyreys aquel, e accideys sobre le malaute aprop aquo malicia maligna.	And be careful also in your skill that the wound in the cure should be clean; and do not put any ointment on it or anything else that might corrupt it; for when it is applied to the skin of the neck, it corrupts it and produces an evil plague upon the patient.
E accideys en le ciphac del cap, cum de lu es mondificat le os e majorment quan es menspresada la cura de lu, e es negror en la superficia de lu; e donc considera lahoras si accideys al malaute les accidentz que havem ditz, sapias que es parnicios ses tot dopte.	And it happens in the skin of the head, and when it is washed with water the bone appears more clearly, as well as when the cure is finished, and the surface becomes darker; so then you must be careful, for it can give rise to many diseases even though it seems cured.
E si no accideys negror sino de la medicina que es pausada desus, e es en vertut de aquela medicina que fassa aquela negror, lahoras cove que tu prenguas de mel una partida e de oli rozat partidas .iii., e am aquels linieys un drap, e aprop pausa aquel sobre le ciphac; e aprop cura aquel am las specias de curacio que conveneys entro que sia sanat.	And if you do not see blackness except from the medicine applied to it, and if that is due to the virtue of the medicine itself, then take a piece of honey and a little rosewater and mix them together; And put a thin cloth over it; then apply the spices of cure to it as you think fit for its healing;
Capitol .iii.	Chapter III:
De restauracio del nas quan es trincat.	On the Restoration of a Broken Nose
Sapias que no es trencat del nas sino doas partidas ensemps pus sobiranas, o una de aquelas alcunas veguadas, per so quar en lu has dos osses, quar la partida dejos es cartillaginosa, e no es trencada e no accideys a lu sino atricio e tortuositat e sinuitat.	Know that the nose is not broken into two pieces apart from each other, or one of those corners that has been dislocated; for it has two bones, because the part that breaks off is cartilaginous, and not broken, nor does it cause pain, but rather a sense of stiffness and difficulty in breathing.
Mays si es trencada la una de las doas partidas de lu, lahoras cove que tu intrometas le dit petit en le sieu nas, e que engualhas aquela fractura dedintz am le tieu dit indic, e am le dit pous defora, entro que retorne le nas segon la sua figura natural.	But if one of the two pieces is broken off, then you must push back that little piece inside the other's nose, and press it with a small pin inside the nostril; and so bring back the nose to its natural position.
E sia fayt aquo per tu am facilitat, e guarda te que no caja per aquela tua operacio sobre le malaute delor.	Do this easily for him, and be careful not to hurt yourself in any way with your operations on the patient's nose.
E si la fractura es en la pus sobirana partida del nas, e le dit no perve ad aquela, lahoras cove que sia equat am la extremitat del ray en le qual sia petita grossitut.	And if the fracture is in the upper part of the nose, and the piece does not project, then make it equal to the end of the ridge where it is small in thickness.
E si la fractura es en doas partidas, lahoras tu fay le semblant de aquo.	And if the fracture is in two pieces, then you make a bridge for it.
E coyta te am restauracio de lu en le primier dia de la fractura, si es possible; e sino, lahoras aprop le vii o·l x deves le repaus del apostema caut.	And you should cure it with rest on the first day of the fracture if possible; and if not, then in seven days put it to bed for gout.
E aprop entromet en la extremitat del nas una meca de drap de li, si la fractura es en una partida, o metz doas calguas, si la fractura es en doas partidas, e sia en la calgua grossitut de tanta quantitat que umpla le trauc del nas.	Then introduce into the end of the nose a piece of cloth, if the fracture is in one part, or two pieces, if it is in two parts; and make it as thick as the nostril's ridge.
E diysso alcus dels antics restauradors que las calguas sian enfundudas en boder, e sian permudadas en tot dia, mays no es vist a mi; habantz cove que la meca sia enfunduda en album de huou comfit am polvera de moli; e aprop layssa la qualgua entro que l’os sia fermat e sia endurazida la cartillage.	And say to me of the old restorers that the calves are wrapped in cloth, and they are exchanged every day; but I have not seen it; provided that the cloth is wrapped in album with a little flour; then let the bone be held firm, and hardened the cartilage.
E alcunas veguadas sia entromes en le nas, en loc de calgua, pena de auca pus que es envolopada de drap de li leon; e sia que ja te la fractura del nas pus vehement e que le malaute no sia prohibit de inspiracio.	And some dislocations in the nose, instead of a calf, wrapped in a cloth that does not cover the whole nose; and that already has a fracture in the nose with great violence, and that the patient is forbidden to breathe deeply.
E aquesta causa no es a tu necessaria; e si voles, fay aquo, e si voles, fay calguas.	This cause does not require you; and if you want, make one, and if you want, make two.
E si accideys autra veguada apostema caut, emplastra le nas am cerot o am coto enfus en vi agre e oli rozat, o am diaquilon.	And if there is another dislocation of gout in the nose, inject it with cerate or wax mixed with vinegar and rosewater, or with diazolin.
Mays si no accideys apostema caut, lahoras cove que emplaustres aquel defora am farina de sizami e am polvera de enses cofitz am album de huou; e aprop pausa sobre lu stopa leon, e no lies le nas am alcuna causa.	But if there is no gout, then you must inject it from the outside with flour of sesame mixed with herbal powder and a little albumen; and place a cloth over it, and do not cure the nose for any reason.
Mays si so trencats les osses del nas am fractura petita o so conminuitz, lahoras cove que scindas sobre aquels, e extraguas aquels am insturmentz que conveno ad aquels; e aprop cos la scissura, e cura aquela am aquo que encarna e consolida, e am emplastres ad aquo convenientz.	But if the bones of the nose are broken or dislocated slightly, then split them with a sharp instrument, and extract them from between them; then sew them together, and cure it with water that soothes and hardens it, and injects it with oil.
E si accideys plagua dedintz le nas, lahoras cove que cures aquela am calguas e administra canulas de plom entro que sia de tot sanat.	And if there is a wound inside the nose, then cure it with calves and administer tubes of lead into it, so that it may be fully healed.
Capitol .iiii.	Chapter IV:
De restauracio de la mandibula quan es trincada.	On the Restoration of the Jaw When It is Broken
Quan la mandibula dejos es rompuda e la fractura de lu no es am plagua, reguarda lahoras si la fractura es deforas tant solament, e no es trencada en dos e es curvada a las partidas dedintz, lahoras la sua cognicio es leugiera.	When the jaw is broken and the fracture is from the outside only, not split into two parts, and it is curved towards the inside, then its knowledge is limited; but if there is a fracture that breaks through, then you must cure it as for the nose.
E cove donc, si la fractura es en la part dreyta, que tu intrometas le tieu indic senestre en la boca del malaute; e semblantment si la fractura es an la mandibula senestra, lahoras intromet le dit indic de la ma dreyta; e impelleys am aquel la gilbositat de la fractura dedintz am facilitat a las partidas defora, am la tua autra ma de la partida defora del os; am aquel decentment equa aquelam.	And then, if the fracture is on the right side, you must push the left indicator of the mandible into the patient' mouth; and imaginatively, if the fracture is on the left side, then push the right indicator of the mandible into it; and push it with ease towards the outside, with your other hand, towards the end of the fracture; and make it equal to the end of the mandible.
E si la fractura de la mandibula ja es separada en doas, lahoras cove que administres extensio de doas partz segon rectitut entro que sia possibla la equacio de lu.	And if the fracture of the jaw is already separated into two parts, then administer extension of two parts according to right angles, so that you can make it equal again.
E si accideys conmocio de dentz a disrupcio, lahoras strenh aquelas de las quals speras que romandran am fil de aur o de argent o de ceda; e aprop pausa sobre la mandibula trencada cerot, e aprop pausa sobre lu drap duplicat, e pausa sobre le drap gran stelha decentment fayta, o una pessa de sola engual a la longitut de la mandibula; e aprop lia aquela desus segon que a tu es apparelhada la liadura de lu e que conveneys la applicacio, entro que no es destruida.	And if there is a concussion of the teeth and a dislocation, then strengthen those that you hope will remain, with gold or silver or cedar; and place the cerate on the broken mandible, and place the double cloth over it, and carefully stretch it out, or tie it with one knot to the length of the mandible; and then apply your treatment as you think fit for its healing, so that it does not break.
E comanda al malaute que use de repaus e tranquilitat, e pausa la vianda de lu sorbicios leons.	And command the patient to use rest and tranquility, and let him drink hot drinks.
E si extimas que ja es alterada la figura en alcuna manieyra, lahoras tu te coyta e deslia aquel al tertz dia; e aprop rectifica aquo que ja es alterat de lu e emplaustra aquel am polvera de moli, am album de huou, o am farina de cisami, pus que tu auras ostat le cerot de lu, e pausa sobre le emplastra lana leon.	And if you suspect that the shape has already been altered in some way, then you should cure it for three days; and then make it right again, and inject it with flour, or albumen, or herbal powder, because you will have removed the cerate from it, and place over it the wool cloth.
E adonc cum sta annex e ajustat aquel emplastre sobre lu, e la disposicio del os no es alterada, layssa aquel, que no le deslies entro que sia sanat e strenh la fractura; quar motas veguadas aquesta fractura es streyta en tres sempmanas.	And then, when you have fixed the plaster in place, and the position of the bone is not altered, let it be; for this fracture does not heal in three weeks.
E si autra veguada accida apostema caut, lahoras administra aquo que havem dit motas veguadas en la sedacio de lu entro que sia sanat, e sia remaugut aquel apostema.	And if there is another dislocation of gout in the mandible, then administer water that has been used for the treatment of gout, and let it remain in the mouth; and do not cure the mandible.
E si la fractura es am plagua, lahoras considera si es pessa del os separada o satagias, lahoras tu te subtilia que ostes aquelas satagias am aquo que conveneys ad aquo en la remocio de aquelas dels sturmentz.	And if the fracture is in the bone, then consider whether it is a long fracture or not; and you should make those long fractures with water that you use for the treatment of such fractures.
E si le orrifici de la plagua es streyt, lahoras tu le amplifique am le fleubotomi segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	And if the hole of the fracture is small, then you should amplify it with a needle according to the quantity of your need.
E aprop quan tu auras ostat aquelas satagias, e de aquelas no sira remaugut re, lahoras tu cos le orrifici de la plagua si es ampla; e sino, pausa sobre aquela un dels emplaustres que conveneysso ad aquo e encarnan aquela, entro que sia sanada.	And then, when you have removed those long fractures, and if the hole of the fracture is wide, then sew it up with a needle that you have prepared for the purpose; and if there is another fracture in the same place, then do not cure it.
Capitol .v.	Chapter V:
De restauracio de la furcula quan es trinquada.	On the Restoration of the Fork When It Is Broken
Motas veguadas es trencada la furcula de la partida denant deves le muscle, e aquela fractura es fayta en una de tres manieyras.	The fork is broken in one of three ways: either at the end of a muscle that runs through it, or between the ends; and this fracture can be caused by falling or striking against something.
Quar o es trencada, o seperada, o es seperada en doas partz otra que no accidan satagias; e es leugier a la restauracio de lu; o es ayssi que accideysso en lu satagias, e es dificil a restauracio de lu; o es ayssi que la fractura es am plagua.	Here is the translation of the text:
E la operacio en aquela, quan la fractura es ses plagua, es que tu fassas esser present dos ministres, per so que la un tengua le adjutori e siegua la furcula trencada, e l’autre extenda le col ves aquela partida.	And the operation in this case, when the fracture is accompanied by pain, is that you make two ministers present, so that one holds the aid and secures the broken part, and the other extends the foot at that broken joint.
E aprop enguala la fractura am les tieus ditz entro que sia fayta la forma de lu segon que cove, e no sia en lu eminencia pauca ni concavitat.	And then you should bend the break towards the inside so that its shape is according to that, and not in its small prominence or concavity.
E si indigeysses mes de extencio, lahoras cove que pauses dejos le titillic del malaute spera de drap o de lana, e sia la grandesa de lu segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat; e exten e eleva la furcula e coarta la spera am la tua ma entro que enguales la frectura segon que cove.	And if you are in need of an extension, then do so by keeping the patient's thigh close to their body, using a cloth or wool, and make the length according to your need; and stretch out and raise the foot, and secure it with a bandage according to how it is broken.
E si no podes atirar la extremitat de la furcula a las partidas defora, per so quar es pervenguda al preon, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sua cervitz, e pauses sobre le muscle de lu un coyssi migier en grandeza.	And if you cannot throw the end of the foot outside the break because it reaches the knee, then do so that the patient's leg is supported on their thigh, and place a cushion halfway in size.
E le ministre prema le muscle de lu a las partidas dejos entro que l’os de la furcula sia elevat que es en le preon en sus, e lahoras tu rectifique la fractura e enguala aquela am les tieus ditz.	And the minister should press the muscle on the patient' side close to where the bone of the foot is elevated at the knee, and then you should straighten out the break and bend it according to that.
Mays si sentes satagias de la furcula e so maugudas, lahoras cove que fendes sobre aquela e extraguas aquelas satagias am facilitat.	Perhaps if you feel pain from the fracture and it is difficult to move, then do so carefully and pull out those pains with ease.
E si es retenguda en le os, lahoras tu ingenia inscisio de lu am un dels inscissoris les quals has apparelhatz ad aquo, pus que havias pausat dejos la furcula le sturment que serve le ciphac; e es sturment de fust o de ferr del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And if it is stuck in the bone, then do so carefully with one of the chisels you have laid aside for that purpose, since you have kept the foot away from the instrument which serves to cut it; and this instrument is made of wood or iron, and its shape is such:
E es semblant a culier del qual aquesta es la concavitat; e sia la sua latitut segon aquo que has necessitat de lu, segon la grandeza del os o la pauqueza de lu.	And it resembles a chisel of which this is the concavity; and its length should be according to the water you need for it, or the size of the bone or the thinness of it.
Mays la longitut de lu sia segon que es a tu possible a la operacio; que haja doas extremitatz ayssi cum vezes, e la una extremitat sia ample e l’autre streyta.	Perhaps the length should be according to your ability to operate; that there are two ends, one wide and the other narrow.
E si la disrupcio de la plagua la qual has inscidida quan has extraytas la satagia del os es ampla, e yest segur de apostema caut, lahoras tu ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura.	And if the pain of the injury that you have cut when pulling out the pain from the bone is wide, and it is certain that it is an abscess, then do so by joining the two lips of the wound with sutures.
E si la disrupcio es pauca, o temes apostema caut, lahoras tu uemple la plagua am draps e pulvils segon la quantitat de la scissura de la plagua.	And if the pain is little, or you are afraid of an abscess, then do so by using a cloth and powder according to the quantity of the wound on the skin.
E si accideys apostema caut, lahoras infon drap en vi agre e oli rozat e vi, e pausa sobre aquel.	And if an abscess develops, then dip a cloth in vinegar and oil, and place it over that.
Mays la strictura del os quan es ses plagua e ses seccio, es que pauses emplastre fayt de farina de moli am album de huou, e pausa sobre lu stopa leon, e aprop pausa la spera dejos le titillic de lu, si indigeyssas de aquela, e aprop pren humemate, so es torca la qual teno les Sarrazis , que sia mot longua, e sia latitut de lu de un palm o entorn aquel; e aprop pausa pulvils duplicatz sobre la stopa e l’emplastre; e aprop pren una stela de taula subtil de la qual la latitut d’ela sia de tres ditz e en longitut semblantment; e aprop envolopa aquela en drap, e aprop envolopa aquel drap am la stela en lo loc sobre le loc de la fractura; e aprop pausa humemati ayssi cum es revout, e revol aquela sobre le col de lu e dejos le titillic de lu sa e dejos le titillic de lu malaute, e reduzeys aquela sobre tota partida, e quan vezes que la strictura de la fractura am strictura descent, e es aquo que no es occultat sobre tu.	And the severity of the bone when it is fractured and cut is that you place a paste made of flour and egg on it, and place it over the heel, and if you are in need of it, then wrap a cloth double around it; and place a plate of thin wood with its length being three fingers long and according to its width; and then you should wrap that cloth around it, and place that cloth wrapped bone on top of the area where the fracture is located; and then turn it over, and wrap that again over the shoulder and back over the patient' thigh, and reduce it to the position when the severity of the fracture's strictness becomes less, and so that it does not hide itself under you.
E tot, que no sia mauguda la stelha desobre le os trencat; e per so cove que tu vejas le malaute quascun dia, que quan le liament es mollificat o vezas la stela ja esser remauguda, lahoras tu rectifica aquo e strenh la liadura.	And all of this, so that the stilet is not broken; and because you see the patient' leg every day, and when the ligament becomes soft or you notice that the stilet has been loosened, then do so by straightening it out and tightening the ligature.
E aprop pausa le dormir del malaute sobre le col de lu, e pausa dejos le titillic de lu deves le dormir de lu en la nueyt un petit coyssi; per so que am aquel sia elevat le adjutori de lu del latz de aquel, e donc es elevada la la fractura de la furcula a elevacio del muscle; o sia le bras de lu liat al col de aquel.	And then you should place the patient' leg to rest on their shoulder, and place a small cushion under it so that its height is slightly raised, so that the support for that leg is above the neck of it; and because it raises the fracture of the foot up to the level of the muscle; or when it raises the neck of it.
E no deslies le liament si no accideys en le loc prusiment o apostema, entro a xii dias.	And you should not loosen the ligament if there is no pain immediately or an abscess within twelve days.
E aprop renovelha le emplastre si has vista la facia de lu ad aquo, e ajusta en la strictura e restaura aquel e layssa entro que sia restaurat e sia coagulat la fractura de la furcula.	And then you should renew the paste if you have seen the face of it in water, and adjust it to the severity and restore it, and leave it until it is restored and the fracture of the foot has been made coagulate.
E es strenguda e comfortada segon le mes en xxviii dias, e alcunas veguadas en alcus homes es fayt en mens de temps de aquel.	And it is strengthened and supported according to the method in twenty-eight days, and some have recovered in a month of time.
Capitol .vi.	Chapter VI.
De restauracio de fractura de la spalla.	Of the Restoration of a Fracture of the Shoulder.
Spatula tart es trencada en le loc lat de lu e no so trencatz de lu sino les marges.	The Tart Shaping Knife is fractured in the patient' shoulder location and not broken from the shoulder but only from its edges.
E donc quan es trencat le loc de lu — e es trencat en le mieg loc de lu — e no es conogut sino per tocament, lahoras segon que es la figura de la fractura sforsa te la preparacio de lu e reduzir aquela segon la figura natural en tota manieyra de engen la qual es a tu possible.	And when it is fractured in the patient' shoulder location— and it is fractured in the middle of the shoulder— and it is not known except by touching, then according to the shape of the fracture as far as it allows you, prepare it and reduce it according to its natural figure in all ways possible so that it may be healed.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc polvera de moli am album de huou e stopa leon; e aprop pausa pulvil de drap duplicat; e aprop pausa sobre lu stela lada de taula subtil segon la quantitat de la spatula tota o mays un pauc.	And then you should place over that powder of flour and egg, and place a cloth double on it; and then place on the plate of thin wood according to the quantity of the spatula in its entirety or just a little bit more.
Mays si dejos la stela es concavitat en alcu dels locs de la spatula, lahoras tu enguala aquela concavitat am stopa leon, e aprop pueja la stela segon equalitat.	Perhaps if the plate is concave in some of the locations of the spatula, then do so by filling that concavity with egg, and then place the plate according to equality.
E aprop strenh desus am humemati longua ab constriccio decent e am fermesa de la stela entro que no sia remauguda del sieu loc.	And then you should tighten it using a long handle with a strong grip and the plate held firmly until it is not moved from its place.
E considera le liament en quascun dia; e totas veguadas que sia mollificat, lia autra veguada e stren le e equa la stela si es remauguda del sieu loc.	And consider the ligament every day; and all that you see it is soft, adjust it again and tighten it equally if it has been moved from its place.
E jagua le malaute sobre le sieu latz sa.	And do not rest the leg on top of itself.
E la spatula es restaurada en xx dias o en .xxv.	And the spatula is restored in twenty days or a month and a half.
E donc quan es complit aquest nombre, lahoras tu dissolveys le liament, e que tu scias ensegurat quar aquela es dels osses dels quals la cominicio no es temuda ni lor dissolucio.	And when that number is completed, then do so by dissolving the ligament, and so you may be assured that that is one of the bones whose beginning is not painful and whose end is not painful.
E si procezeys del loc del os pessa e pongeys dejos la codena, lahoras tu scindeys sobre lu, e osta le, e fay segon que havem dit en la fractura de la furcula de sadacio de apostema caut si accideys aqui.	And if you press on the location of the bone with force and keep your hand away from the joint, then do so carefully, and follow what I have said about the fracture of the foot because of a painful injury if it happens here.
Capitol .vii.	Chapter VII.
De restauracio de la fractura del pietz.	Of the Restoration of a Fracture of the Foot.
Le pietz alcunas veguadas es romput en le mieg loc de lu e aquo tart endeve; mays las extremitatz de lu mot endeve que so ciccadas e comminuidas.	The foot is sometimes broken in the middle of it and the end of it is twisted, or perhaps only the ends are broken and not the middle part.
E dels accidentz de lu quan es trencat le mieg de lu es que declina a las partidas dedintz e accideys a lu gran dolor, e dificultat en lo hale, e tos, e fort leu e vomeys sanc; e es declarada en lu cavitat en le os trencat e no es occulta al sentiment.	And of the accidents of the foot when it is fractured, that the middle part declines towards the broken parts and causes great pain, difficulty in walking, a loud noise, and vomiting; and is declared to be in its cavity in the bone which has been fractured and not hidden from feeling.
E la restauracio de lu es que sia resupinat le malaute sobre le sieu dos, e pausa entre las spallas de lu un coyssi; e aprop prem als muscles de lu, e ajusta las costas de lu am las mas de dos costatz, e subtilia te en la operacio de lu e en la equacio segon tota manieyra que es ad aquo possibla e que conveneys ad aquo, entro que retorne la figura del os segon que cove.	And the restoration of it is that the patient' leg be supported on their two legs, and a cushion placed between their thighs; then press the muscles carefully, and adjust the ribs according to two of them, and perform the operation carefully according to what is possible so that its shape may return according to that.
E aprop pausa sobre lu emplastre e estopa e pausa desobre astela de taula subtil de sauze o de caligi e de a lor semblantz en levitat, pus que tu envolopas aquela en drap; e aprop subtilia te en lian aquela sobre le os trencat que no sia maugut; e vay am liadura segon retonditat al dors alcunas veguadas, e strenh aquel am strictura decent; e aprop considera la liadura en tota hora, e quan es mollificada strenh aquela.	And then you should place the paste and cloth over that, and make the plate of thin wood to float in water, since you have wrapped that in a cloth; and then do so carefully with a tight ligature according to its roundness on the back side, and tighten it according to the severity; and then consider the ligature every hour, and when it becomes soft, tighten it.
E si necessitat provoca a desliament de aquela deves corrossio o pruziment, o dolor, o apostema que accideysso en le loc, lahoras tu coyta e deslia aquela e erradica le emplastre e rectifique aquo que accideys per aquo am manieyra de curacio de lu; e aprop reduzeys le emplastre, si vezes ad aquo la facia; e ajusta a lu strictura entro que sia sanat.	And if necessity causes confusion of those devils of corrosion or pruritus, or pain, or abscess that occurs in the area, then you should cut and separate them, and remove the poultice and correct what happens by the way of treatment of him; and return the poultice, if necessary, to it; and adjust the stricture until he is healed.
Capitol .viii.	Chapter VIII.
De restauracio de las costas quan son trincadas.	On the Restoration of Broken Bones When They are Cracked.
Sapias que fractura de las costas no catz sino en locs grosses que siegon le dos; e de las extremitatz de lor de la partida denant no accideys ad aquelas contricio sino per aquo quar so cartillaginosas.	You should know that a fracture of the ribs occurs only in large places that join two; and from the ends of them, from the front, there does not happen to those contusions unless because they are cartilaginous.
E cognicio de lu no es amaguada al sentiment deves la inquisicio de lu am les ditz.	And the knowledge of it is not hidden in the feeling of the devil but is discovered by investigation.
E la restauracio sia ayssi que enguales la fractura am les ditz segon la manieyra possibla, entro que sia engulhat segon que cove, e aprop emplastre e strenh le os trencat am stela, si indigeys de aquel.	And the restoration be such that the fracture is joined by the devils according to the possible way, until it is healed; and if necessary, apply poultice and strengthen the broken bone with a stake, and put it in a sling.
E si la fractura de las costas es declinant a las partidas dedintz, lahoras accideys al malaute dolor vehement e punctura, ayssi cum punctura que accideys ad aquel que ha pleureci, e per aquo quar le os ponh le velament; e accideys a lu difficultat de hanelit, e tos, e vomit de mot sanc; e aquesta es de dificil curacio.	And if the fracture of the ribs is declining to the ends inside, then severe pain and stabbing occurs in the patient, so that it happens to him that he has bled, and because of this the bone is covered; and difficulty of healing, and coughs, and vomiting for some reason; and this is a difficult cure.
E ja les Antixs so engeniatz en aquela am motz engientz.	And already the Ancients have devised in that way to heal them.
E de lor so que diso: cove que pauses viandas del malaute que engendro imflacio e ventositat, per que le ventre sia imflat e sia extendut, e la fractura sia impellida a las partidas defora.	And of them it is said: "Cover him up with food that causes inflammation and wind, so that his belly is swollen and extended, and the fracture is driven out to the ends."
Mays nos avoreyssem aquo per so que no sia causa leugiera a generar apostema caut, si no accideys; e si ja accideys, lahoras ja ajuda ad aquo.	But let us avoid that with him that it does not cause Leichtigkeit to generate abscesses, unless it happens; and if it already happens, then it is already helping in that way.
E diyssero alcus de lor que sia pausada desus ventoza e aprop que sucque am fortitut; e es semblant a ratiocinacio, mays empero es temut que la ventoza atire las superfluitatz al loc per la debilitat.	And some of them say that it should be covered up and kept from wind, and that it is like reasoning: but more, it is feared that the wind will throw away the superfluities to the area because of weakness.
E diyssero alcus de lor: cove que·l loc sia cubert am lana que ja es submersa en oli caut, e sian pausatz pulvils entre las costas entro que sia umplida, que sia la liadura engual quan envolopas aquela segon retonditat; e aprop sia curat le malaute am curacio de pleuresi de vianda e de medicina.	And some of them say: "Cover that area with wool that has already been submerged in oil and let it be between the ribs until it is filled, which is the shape of a ball when wrapped up; and let him be cured of the patient by treatment for pleurisy from food and medicine."
E si causa vehement constrenh le malaute la qual no sufferta, e le os punh le velament am punctura ledent, temem sobre le malaute, lahoras cove que fendam sobre le loc, descubram de la costa trencada, e aprop pausem desobre aquela instrument que conserve le ciphac, la rememoracio del qual es precedida, e que inscidam le os am facilitat, e extraguam aquel.	And if violent constriction causes the patient pain that he does not bear, and the bone is covered with a stake that hurts him, they fear for the patient, then let it be said that it splits onto that area, uncovers the rib that has been broken, and take out that.
E aprop que ajustem las doas labias de la plagua, si es gran, am cozidura, e curem aquela am emplastres entro que sia sanada.	And let us adjust the two lips of the wound, if it is great, with cauterization, and treat that with poultice until it is healed.
E si accideys dedintz apostema, lahoras tu coyta e enfon pulvils en oli rozat e pausa sobre le loc, e que sia curat le malaute am aquo que cove a la apostema dedintz.	And if an abscess occurs inside, then you should cut and pour rosin oil on it and place it over the area, and let the patient be cured with water that covers the abscess inside.
E sia ressupinat sobre le latz sobre le qual dorm, entro que sia sanat.	And he is to lie down on his back on a bed, until he is healed.
Capitol .ix.	Chapter IX.
De restauracio de fractura del spondil del dos e del col.	On the Restoration of Fracture of the Vertebrae of the Back and the Neck.
Alcunas veguadas endeve fractura als osses del col, e tart endeve a lor atricio, e semblantment als spondils del dos.	Some are affected with fracture in the bones of the neck, and also to their spine, and similar to the vertebrae of the back.
E cum aquo accideys ad alcu e voles saber si sara sanat o no, lahoras considera, quar si vezes las sieuas mas ja mollificadas e stupefaytas e mortas e no pot maure aquelas ni extendre ni strenher aquelas e quan constrenges aquelas am les tieus ditz o punges aquelas am agulha e no sent en aquelas dolor, lahoras sapias que no es sanat, e en las mes de disposicios es mortal.	And if water happens to it and you want to know if it will be healed or not, then consider, for if sometimes its sides have already become soft and stupified and dead, and those cannot be extended or strengthened; and when you force them with the fingers or pierce them with a needle, they do not feel pain in them, then you shall know that it is not healed, and in the middle of such dispositions, it is deadly.
E si mau aquelas e sent en aquelas constriccio am les ditz e punctura, lahoras sapias que la nucha de l’os es salva e que le malaute guereys am curacio.	And if those bones are crushed and feel pain in them when they are forced or pricked with the fingers, then you shall know that the vertebrae of the neck are safe, and the patient is to be cured by treatment.
E si ve als spondils del col le semblant ad aquo e voles saber si sira sanat o no, lahoras considera als pes de lu.	And if you see the vertebrae of the back similar to water, and want to know if it will be healed or not, then consider the weight of him.
Lahoras si tu vezes que so ja mollificatz, accideys ad aquels aquo que es accidit en las mas, e aprop quan jatz sobre le sieu dos, yeys ventozitat e egestio ses la sua volontat, e alcunas veguadas es resupinat sobre le sieu dos e vol urinar e no pot, lahoras sapias que es mortal, e adonc no trebales en la curacio de lu.	Then if you see that they have already become soft, it happens to those who are affected by water that happens in the middle of them, and when you sit on their back, wind and urine come out of their will, and some of them lie down on their back and urinate and cannot, then know that it is deadly, and do not treat him.
Mays si no accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, la causa es milhor e pus leugiera.	But if such a cause does not happen, the cause is better and less painful.
E la curacio de lu es que te perforses a la sedacio del apostema caut que pauses sobre le spondil atrissat oli rozat sol, o am mugols de huous asatz; pausa sobre aquela aquel alcunas veguadas le dia entro que sia sedat le apostema caut.	And the treatment of him is that you pierce into the sedation of the abscess, with oil of roses or with moly, and let it rest on that area for some time until it is sedated.
E lahoras pausa un dels emplastres confortantz e exsitans, e strenh sobre aquel am liament; e comanda al malaute que use de repaus e de tranquillitat e que no dorme sobre la partida am la qual atroba dolor entro que sia sanat.	And then let us apply one of the poultices that is available and existing, and strengthen it on that area with a ligament; and order the patient to rest and be tranquil and not sleep on the side by which he feels pain until he is healed.
E si accideys deves la atricio del os satagias o alcuna causa que ja es seperada de lu, lahoras cove que secces sobre la codena e que ostes aquel os; e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua, am sutura si es gran; e aprop cura aquela am alcu encarnatiu dels enguentz, entro que sia sanat.	And if severe fracture has occurred in the spinal bone or some other cause that is separated from it, then let us cut off the bone; and if the vertebrae have been broken, let us tie them up with a ligature, and if there is an abscess, let us apply poultice until it is healed.
Mays si es trencat le derier del os alhoses, e es la fi de la coeta, lahoras cove que tu entrometas le dit pous de la ma senestra en le cul, e que enguales le os trencat am l’autra ma segon que es possible per equacio segonda; e aprop pausa sobre lu emplastre e astelha, si indigeysses de aquels, e aprop strenh aquel.	But if the back of the bones is broken, and it is the end of the fracture, then let us enter with the right hand into the ma's chest from behind, and join the broken bone to the other as well as possible by way of a ligature; and let us apply poultice and bend over it, if you desire those, and let us strengthen it.
E si sentes satagias trencadas en lu, lahoras tu fen sobre aquela, e osta aquel, e cura la plagua am la curacio que es precedida entro que sia sanada.	And if you feel spinal fracture in him, then you should cut off that area and treat the wound with treatment that precedes until it is healed.
Capitol .x.	Chapter X.
De restauracio de la ancha.	On the Restoration of the Neck.
Les osses de las anchas tart so trencats, e si trencan, lahoras la fractura de lor no es sino communicio en las extremitatz de aquelas e son inscidas en la longitut e declinan a las partidas dedintz; e accideys al malaute dolor en le loc e punctura, e la camba es stupefacta quan es fractura.	The bones of the neck are to be crushed, and if they are broken, then the fracture is only communication in their extremities and is spread out in length and declines towards the ends; and pain occurs in the patient at the area, and the back is stupified when it is broken.
E la restauracio de lu es que tu extendas la tua ma sobre aquel entro que sia sobre la fractura qual es la figura de lu.	And the restoration of him is that you stretch your hand over him until it is over the fracture which is the shape of his; and here is the treatment:
E si fractura es en la extremitat de lu tant solament, lahoras tu enguala aquela segon que a tu es apparelhat per equacio engual entro que sia asemblat a la sua figura natural.	And if the fracture is only in one end of him, then you should cover that area according to your clothing for some time until it is put together with his natural shape.
Mays si la fractura es en le lonc o que ja declina a las partidas dejos, lahoras tu fay jaser le malaute sobre le sieu ventre entro que sia preparada a tu la restauracio de aquela fractura.	But if the fracture is in the long or already declines towards the ends, then you should have the patient work on his belly until he is prepared for your restoration of that fracture.
E donc quan auras engualada aquela, pausa sobre lu emplastre, e aprop pausa sobre aquel astela de fust o de codena, e strenh per strictura sobre la qual no temas punctacio de fractura ni remocio de la stelha.	And when you have covered that area, then let us apply poultice to it, and let us strengthen with a ligature on which there is no possibility of fracture or movement of the stelha.
E enguala la concavitat am aquo que uempla aquela entro que aquela prengua la strictura segon equalitat, e comanda al malaute que dorma sobre le sieu dos o desobre le sieu costat sa.	And cover the concavity with water that fills up that area until it is full, and order the patient to sleep on his back or open his side.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras tu cessa de extencio de lu e de la sua restauracio entro que sia sedat le apostema caut, e pausa sobre lu aquo que sede aquel segon que es precedit; e aprop retorna a la restauracio de lu, e strenh aquel ayssi cum cove.	But if an abscess happens, then you should stop the extension of him and his treatment until it is sedated, and let us apply water on that area according to what precedes; and then return to his treatment, and strengthen it there with a ligature.
E si accideysso en le os satagias o son comminuidas, lahoras tu las tratz.	And if they are broken or crushed, then you shall set them.
Capitol .xi.	Chapter .xi.
De restauracio de la fractura del adjutori.	Of the Restoration of the Fracture of the Adductor.
Adjutori es aquo que es entre le coyde entro al cap de la spalla.	Adductor is that which is between the rib and the top of the shoulder.
E si es trencat, lahoras la restauracio de lu es en una de doas manieyras, de las quals es la una que tu prenguas fust pla de migiera groceza segon aquesta forma:	And if it is torn, then the restoration of it is in two ways, of which one is that you take a piece of leather...
E sian liatz en doas extremitatz dos liamentz, e aprop sia suspendut del loc elevat.	And tie them on both ends with two pieces of rope, and hang it up high.
E segua le malaute sobre una sezela; e aprop gieta fora le sieu bras trencat sobre le fust entro que pervengua al titillic de lu en le mieg loc del qual sia annexa la curvitat del fust.	And follow the patient on a slab of wood; and pour [some] water onto the broken limb, so that it reaches the knuckle of the limb whereon it is attached to the bent part of the stick.
E aprop suspen sobre aquel alcuna causa greu, o·l minestre extenda aquel a las partidas dejos; e aprop le metge eque la fractura am las sieuas mas ensemps, entro que la fractura retorne segon que cove.	And hang it on something heavy to cause a bent, or the servant extends that [piece] of stick in two parts; and the doctor will join the broken part with the other, until the fracture returns as if it were not so.
E l’autra manieyra es que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sieua cervitz e suspen la ma del col de lu am liament; e aprop comanda a dos ministres que la un de lor tengua aquo que es desobre la fractura am las suas mas; e l’autre tengua le pus dejos de lu; e quascu de lor extenda a la sua partida.	And the other way is that the patient is lifted up by his neck and the stick bent, and the doctor joins the broken part with the other, until the fracture returns as if it were not so; and one of the servants holds water to open the fracture with its spray, and another holds pus to pour over it. And each of them extends their hand.
E si voles que la extencio sia pus fort, lahoras tu strenh sobre la fractura am liament e sobre aquela am autre liament, e quascu dels dos ministres extendan a doas suas partidas.	And if you want the extension to be stronger, then you shall tighten it with two ropes on the fracture and on that which is broken, and each of the servants extends their hand in two places.
E donc si la fractura es propinquada a la extremitat del muscle, lahoras cove que sia pausat la mitat del liament sobre le citillic e l’autre dejos la fractura deves le coyde.	And if the fracture is near the end of the muscle, then it should be suspended halfway on the stick and the other half on the patient's thigh.
E semblantment si la fractura es propdana al coyde, lahoras cove que sia pausat le liament sobre aquel loc e sobre aquel coyde.	And if the fracture is near the hip, then it should be suspended on that spot and on the patient'hip.
Enguala aquela am facilitat e ses trebal, e aprop quant sira engualada segon que cove e es applicada per bona applicacio, lahoras strenh aquela si no accideys apostema caut.	Take it easily at first, and if it becomes tight, then apply it with care; tighten it a little by little, so that it does not cause a swelling.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras layssa la strictura entro al vii dia, e pausa sobre lu lana sutza enbeguda en vi agre e oli rozat entro que repause le apostema, e lahoras tu stren aquela.	But if it becomes tight with care, then leave it within seven days, and place it over a woollen cloth dipped in wine vinegar and olive oil within that place where the swelling occurs, and leave it there; then you shall tighten it.
E la manieyra de strenher aquela es que pauses emplastre sobre la fractura, e aprop pausa envolopament de drap nau sobre le emplastre; e aprop ajuste le bras sobre aquel adjutori, e pause la sua ma uberta sobre le sieu muscle.	And the way to tighten it is that you place plaster on the fracture, and wrap a cloth around the plaster; and then adjust the arm over the adductor, and place your hand on its muscle.
E pausa le drap e strenh sobre le adjutori le bras per so que·l bras sia en loc de stelhas, si no prohibeys de aquo alcuna causa del os trencat.	And wrap that cloth and tighten it on the adductor so that the arm remains in place, unless you are forbidden by some reason of the broken bone.
E lahoras usa de stelhas.	Then use a stick.
E es que pauses sobre la fractura aquela stela que sia pus lada e pus fort de las autras stelas; e pausa entre quascuna stela la latitut del dit, e sia la longitut de las stelas segon la trencadura am addicio de tres ditz de tota partida.	And that is because you place over the fracture of that stick which is stronger and tighter than those on its sides; and place between each stick the thickness of three fingers, and the length of the sticks according to the fracture with addition of three fingers of the whole limb.
E aprop strenh sobre las stelas am la strictura la qual he dita al comensament del capitol.	And tighten it with that tension which has been described at the beginning of this chapter.
E es que la tua strictura sobre le loc de la fractura sia pus streyt.	And your tension on that spot of the fracture should be tighter.
E quant pus es alonguada la fractura sia la strictura menor.	And when the fracture is healing, then lessen the tension.
E donc si vezes le situament de las stelas e la strictura ayssi cum havem dit en la hora en la qual restauras le membre al sieu assituament, lahoras tu fay.	And if you move the position of the sticks and the tension as well at the same time that you restore the member to its seat, then do so.
E si temes apostema caut, lahoras tu layssa la strictura e las stelas entro al dia vii ayssi cum havem dit.	But if you fear a swelling with care, then you shall leave the tension and the sticks in place for seven days at that moment which I have said.
E aprop considera le liament en totas partidas per tres dias per so que no accida en le loc pruziment o imflacio; o es prohibida la vianda pervenir al membre per disposicio de superfluitat de strictura; e donc rectifiqua tot aquo segon que havem dit.	And you shall consider the limb in all parts for three days so that nothing happens to that spot of pressure or swelling, or if food is forbidden to reach the member by way of the obstruction of the tension; and then correct everything according to what I have said.
Mays si tu yest sobre confizanssa que no accida alcuna causa de aquo, lahoras no deslias la liguadura sino aprop tres dias o mays.	But if you are certain that nothing will happen to that spot of pressure, then do not remove the plaster before three or more days.
E sia la sua dormicio del malaute sobre le sieu dos, e las sieuas mas sian sobre le stomac.	And let the patient sleep on his back, and his feet should be supported against something.
E pausa sobre le adjutori cocena plena de lana engualment, e considera en tota hora de la nueyt o del dia que no sia deliada ni dissolta la figura del membre trencat, o que sia le liament mollificat, donc rectifica aquo tot am la tua vertut.	And place over the adductor a full bowl of wool wrapped up, and consider at that moment of the night or of the day whether there is no swelling nor melting of the broken member, or whether it is soft; then correct it with your skill.
E pausa la vianda del malaute segon le orde le qual havem denant mes, enayssi que la vianda sia subtil en le comensament entro que es comensat strenher; e lahoras cove que egrossas la vianda de lu.	And provide food for the patient according to the order which I have given before; and if the food is not too substantial at first, then it should be made heavier as time goes on; and if it becomes heavy all of a sudden, then you shall adjust it.
Quar de constuma del adjutori e de la camba de lu es que sian strengutz en xl dias; e lahoras cove que sian desliatz e sia administrat banh e sia medicat am enguentz los quals rectifican aquel.	It is the custom of the adductor and the patient' back to be strengthened in ten days; and then they are to be loosened, and bath administered with water which will be made stronger by adding herbs; and those herbs are to be adjusted.
E si la fractura es layha atrita, lahoras tu no deslies de aquela le liament e las stelhas entro a l dias o entro a dos meses.	And if the fracture is very painful, then you shall not remove the plaster and the sticks before a month or so; but if it is less painful, then do so.
Capitol .xii.	Chapter .xi.
De restauracio de fractura del bras.	Of the Restoration of the Fracture of the Arm.
Bras es compost de dos osses les quals so appelatz dos focils; dels quals la un es petit, e es aquel que siec le dit pous, e l’autre es gran e es aquel le qual es pausat dejos le petit dit, de la partida pus dejus.	The arm is composed of two bones which are called the forks; one of them is small and that is what hurts when it is broken, and the other is large and that is where it is held by the small one at its end.
E fort leu es trencat le focil major solament, o le petit, e fort leu son trincatz ensemps.	The large fork is broken when it is very strong, or the small one when it is very strong; and the two bones are joined together strongly.
E quan es trencat le focil petit desus, lahoras la restauracio de lu es leugiera, e la sanacio de lu es pus leugiera.	And if the small fork is broken on top, then the restoration of it is light, and its healing is faster.
E quan es trencat le focil de lu dejos la fractura de lu es mala, e la sanacio de lu es dificil.	And when the large fork is broken at the end, then the healing of it is bad, and its healing difficult.
E pus mala de aquela es quan son trencatz dos osses essemps.	Much worse is that if both bones are broken.
Donc si l’os le qual es trencat es le focil petit desus, lahoras es convenient al metge, deves la restauracio de lu, que pauze petita extencio am facilitat entro que aquel sia engualhat.	So if the broken bone is the small one at the top, then it is convenient to the doctor, for the restoration of it, to make a small incision with ease before that is wrapped up.
Mays si le focil gran es aquo que es trincat, lahoras cove que pause extencio pus vehement.	But if the large fork is broken which is the one at the end, then it should be cut with more force.
E si les dos focils so ensemps trincatz, lahoras cove que tu pauses la extritura mot pus fort.	And if both forks are broken together, then you shall tighten the joint with a strong knot.
E cove que pauses la figura de la ma deves la restauracio de lu e la extencio de lu estenduda sobre un coyssi, e sia le pols de la ma a las partidas desus, pus aut que totz les autres ditz, e le dit auricular sia pus bas dels autres ditz, e le malaute sia cezent sobre una cezela cayrada.	And let the shape of the hand be joined together for the restoration of it, and stretched out on a cushion, and your palm placed on its surface, higher than the rest of the hands as far as possible, and the knuckles lower than the others; and the patient' feet supported by something.
E sia un coyssi denant lu en la altetut o endreyt de lu, per so que·l malaute no encorra trebalh.	And a cushion before it in height or towards it, so that the work does not weigh on the patient.
E aprop le ministre extenda le bras de la partida pus dejos am la sieua ma o am liament, e autre ministre extenda desus semblantment.	Then the servant extends the arm from its end up to the hand or limb, and another servant extends above it.
E aprop le metge engualhe le os entro que redugua aquel segon la milhor figura que pot.	And then the doctor wraps the bone in place so that it does not come out; and he shall make the best figure of it which he can.
E si en la factura del os so satagias, lahoras te perforsa raduzir tota pessa en le sieu loc am la tua vertut.	And if the fracture is caused by cold humor, then you shall bring relief to it in its place with your skill.
E si appar en lu satagia separada que punh la codena e no es a tu speransa en la restauracio de lu, lahoras tu fen sobre lu e osta aquela segon la manieyra la qual havem dita desus.	And if the separation of the fracture is caused by a string and not as you hope for the restoration of it, then you shall pull it off from it and do so according to that which I have said.
Mays si la fractura es am plagua, yeu ja he fayt ad aquo capitol singular, e donc pren la curacio de aquel.	But if the fracture is caused by a fall, then you have already read the single chapter of that, and so take care of it.
E si accideys apostema caut al comensament de la tua restauracio, lahoras tu lineys un drap am cerot fayt de oli rozat e cera blanca, e sia migier entre specitut e subtilitat, e strenh drap sobre aquel am strictura subtil entro que le apostema sia cedat; e lahoras remau le cerot e pausa emplastre preparat de polvera de moli am clayre de huou, e aprop pausa stelhas; e sia la stela la qual es pauzada sobre aquela fractura pus lada e pus fort.	And if a swelling should happen at the beginning of your restoration, then you shall put a cloth which is slightly hot and slightly cold, and apply it to that spot, and place a cloth which has been soaked in oil with rosewater and olive oil, and make it thin between light and subtlety, and tighten it over that swelling until it stops; and then you shall remove the cloth and tighten the plaster prepared from powder of molasses with clay of honey, and wrap the stick; and let the plaster dry.
E sapias que·l nombre de las stelas del bras so vi en las majors disposicios, o sia la fractura en un focil o en dos focils ensemps.	And you should know that the name of the fractures of the arm is seen in major situations, or that fracture in one radius or in two radii together.
E aprop pausa la tua strictura sobre le loc de la fractura pus fort e pus vehement, e quan mays sira la extrictura a las partidas desus de la fractura o a las partidas pus bassas de lu, pausa la strictura un pauc pus molh segon que es precedida la rememoracio de lu en le comensament del capitol.	And then place your stricture on the site of the fracture as strongly and as vigorously as possible, and when the stricture moves from the upper part of the fracture or the lower parts of it, place the stricture a little less tightly according to what precedes the reminder of it at the beginning of the chapter.
E les draps que so envolopatz sobre la fractura sian draps mols humitz, e no sian durs ni aspres, e·l fiel am le qual es strenhut sia de li propriament migier entre subtil e gros, ayssi cum havem recomtat.	And the sheets that are wrapped around the fracture should be soft and moist textiles and not hard or rough, and the thread that is tightened should be of a good weight between thin and thick, thus having remembered it.
E considera le membre e·l liament aprop alcus dias.	Consider the limb to be dislocated for some time.
E si accideys alcuna causa de la qual rectificacio es necessaria, ayssi cum prusiment le qual accideys al membre, e lahoras cove que tu enbroques le membre am aygua cauda entro que cesse aquel pruziment.	And if any cause occurs for which correction is necessary, thus when you feel the pain in the member, and then cover that you put the member on water tail within that it ceases that pain.
E leysses le membre no costreyt entro que repause, e aprop torna la strictura.	And then release the member does not constrict within that it rests, and then return the stricture.
E si la extrictura ja es mollificada e l’os ja es remaugut e semblantz ad aquels, lahoras rectifiqua tot aquo am la tua vertut.	And if the stricture is already softened and the bone is already restored to its former shape, then correct it all with your skill.
E considera mays si le nutriment es prohibit pervenir al membre per superfluitat de strictura, quar lahoras cove que mollifiques aquel un petit e laysses aquel per alcus dias entro que corra ad aquel le nutriment, e aprop strenh aquel.	And consider more if the nutrition is forbidden to reach the member by superfluity of the stricture, for when it softens that one a little and leaves that one for some days within that it runs to that nutrition, and then strengthen that one.
Mays si al malaute no accideys alcuna causa de aquelas que havem ditas, lahoras no cove que sia desliat entro aprop xx dias o enviro de aquels.	More if there is not any cause of those that we have said, then do not cover that it is untied within about 20 days or surroundings of those.
E aprop sia suspenduda la ma del malaute per la sua vertut de movement agitatius, e fay aquel dormir sobre le sieu dos.	Then hang the man's hand for its movement-stirring power and make him sleep on his back.
E sapias que aquesta fractura es restaurada en xxx dias o en xxxii dias, o fort leu es restaurada en xxviii dias, e tot aquo es segon la disposicio de las compleccios e las disposicios de la vertut.	And you should know that this fracture is restored in 30 days or in 32 days, or strong it is restored in 25 days, and all depends on the complexions and the dispositions of virtue.
Capitol .xiii.	Chapter XIII.
De restauracio de fractura de la pinche de la ma e dels ditz.	Of Restoration of Fracture of the Wrist of the Hand and of Such Things.
Sapias que a la pinche de la ma e als nuzes dels ditz tart endeve fractura, e no accideys a lor sino atricio motas veguadas.	You should know that to the wrist and to the knuckles of the hand such things as these occur with a sudden fracture, and do not occur to them except by sudden motions.
E quan accideys a la ma fractura o atrissio, lahoras cove que·l malaute segua cayrat e denant lu lies cezent segon equalitat, e aprop pausa la ma de lu sobre aquela extenduda.	And when it is broken or twisted at the wrist, then have the patient continue to fall and in front of him spread out equally, and then place his hand on that spread out.
E aprop le ministre extenda les osses trencatz e·l metge engualhe aquels entro que sian congongitz am bona congoncio.	Then the minister extend the broken bones and the doctor crushes them within that they are well crushed with good crushed.
E lahoras cove que pause emplastre e estopa, si no accideys apostema caut; e aprop pausa stela desus segon la quantitat del loc, e tu ja has envolopada aquela en drap de li.	Then apply plaster and mud, if not put on a poultice; then place the stela on top according to the amount of space, and you have already wrapped that one in a drape.
Mays si la trincadura es en las partidas dedintz deves le ventre de la palma, e lahoras fay semblant de spera de drap, e comanda al malaute que strenha aquela am la sua palma trincada; aprop sia strenguda am drap lonc.	More if the fracture is within the inner parts of the hand towards the palm, then make a semblance of hope of drape, and order the patient that he tightens his palm with long drape; it should be strengthened with long drape.
E sia la stelha de cuer am drap en le qual sia levitat, per so que le cuer sia aplicat a la palma; e strenh aquela segon que cove.	Then the stela of leather is lifted up with drape, so that the leather is applied to the palm; and then tighten it according to what precedes.
Mays si la fractura es a las partidas defora, lahoras cove que pauses desus stela e autre estela de la partida dejos en la palma, per so que la ma sia uberta e dreyta; e aprop pausa la strictura, ayssi cum es revolvuda la ma a la rateta entre les ditz am liamentz.	More if the fracture is at the outer parts of the hand, then place stela above and stela on the outside of the fracture in the palm, so that the hand is open and turned away; and then place the stricture, thus when the hand is rolled to the knuckles with the joints.
E si accideys fractura a alcu dels nozes dels ditz, lahoras si es le dit pous, sia engualat segon que cove e aprop sia strenhut am la palma e si·t voles, pausa a lu astela petita dreyta per so que sia elevada la fractura e no sia mauguda.	And if any fracture occurs in one of the knuckles of the hand, then, if it is the little finger, is crushed according to what precedes and is tightened at the palm; and if you wish, place a small stela turned away so that the fracture is raised and not lowered.
Mays si la fractura es en les autres ditz, ayssi cum en aquel del mieg loc, o en le indic, o en le auricular, o en le anular, lahoras sia engualhat e liat am le dit sa le qual siec aquel; o sian totz liatz segon continuacio, e es milhor; o pausa sobre aquel stela petita, ayssi cum havem dit en le pous.	More if the fracture occurs in any of the other fingers, namely in that one of its middle joint, or in the index, or in the auricular, or in the ring, then it is crushed and tied with a good knot; or all are tied together according to continuity, and that is best; or place over it a small stela, as we have said for the little finger.
E considera, en la tua restauracio, e aprop aquela, la disposicio de apostema caut e oppose — am la tieua operacio — am aquo que cove quan accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, segon que es iterada la narracio de lu.	Consider in your restoration that which is mentioned above, and then place that one, the disposition of a poultice of mud and opposite to water, as when any cause occurs, according to what precedes in the description of it.
Capitol .xiv.	Chapter XIV.
De restauracio de fractura del os de la coyssa.	Of Restoration of Fracture of the Bone of the Thigh.
Le os de la cueyssa motas veguadas es trencat e es declarat al sentiment segon que es convertit a la partida denant e a la pus sobirana.	The thigh bones that are seen moving are broken and it is declared according to the movement in front and the upper part.
E la restauracio de lu se fa enayssi que·l liament es strenhut sobre la fractura e autre liament dejos la fractura, e le malaute sia prostrat sobre le sieu ventre e sobre la cara.	The restoration of it is done by stretching the joints above and below the fracture, and the patient is prostrate on his belly and on his face.
E aprop le ministre extenda tot le liament a la sua partida segon la qualitat, quan la fractura es en le mieg loc del os.	Then the minister extend all the joint according to its quantity, when the fracture is in the middle of the bone.
Mays si es propdana a la razitz de la cueyssa, lahoras sia le liament propda al denolh a la partida del pentenilh, per so que la extencio caja en sus, e le autre liament dejos la fractura.	More if it is at the root of the thigh, then place the joint downwardly on the fifth limb, so that the extension falls on them, and the other joint leaves the fracture.
E semblantment si la trencadura es propdana al denolh, lahoras sia fayt le liament propda al denol, e sia la extencio a las partidas dejos.	Then, if the fracture is at the root of the thigh, then make the joint face downwardly, and make the extension on the outside parts.
E aprop le metge enguale le os am amduas las sieuas mas entro que reduzesca aquel segon la semblansa natural e l’os es conjungit per bona conjunccio; lahoras cove que pauses emplastre e strictura, si no accideys al membre apostema.	Then the doctor crushes the bone on both sides within that it reduces itself according to its natural shape and the bone is joined by good joining; then place plaster and stricture if any cause occurs for the limb.
Mays si accideys en lu apostema, lahoras tu layssa aquel per alcus dias entro que l’apostema caut sia cedat, e aprop retorna a la tua curacio.	More if it is in your poultice, then leave that one for some days within that the poultice of mud is given up, and then return to your treatment.
La strictura de lu sia ayssi fayta: cove que envolopes sobre la fractura una benda dura, e dobla aquela dos o tres veguadas, e remaugua de lu superfluitat; e aprop envolopa la camba entro que pervengua al talo e a la razitz de la cueyssa.	Then the stricture of it is done thus: wrap a hard cloth around the fracture, and double it up two or three times, and remove the excess; and then wrap the back within that it reaches the tail and the root of the thigh.
E intromet lonc fiel entre la cueyssa e la camba prop del denol a las partidas dejos, e venguan las extremitatz del fiel de la partida pus sobirana de las doas partz, e aprop revolveys sobre la camba e la cueyssa aquo que superflueys de la benda.	Then place a long rope between the thigh and the band at the back within that it reaches the outside parts of the two, and then turn those two over the band and the thigh with water that runs out of the cloth.
E aprop pausa sobre la cueyssa en le loc de aquela fractura astelhas, e pausa de aquelas una stela sobre le os de la camba.	Then place that one on the thigh in the site of that fracture, and place a stela over the bone of the back.
E aprop uempli las vacuitatz entre la camba e la cuoyssa am draps mols, per so que sia coagulada la extrictura.	Then fill up the emptiness between the band and the thigh with soft rags, so that it is closed by the stricture.
E aprop comensa am strictura fort del mieg sobre le loc de la fractura am tres envolucios o quatre, e quant mays tu te alonhas am liament del loc de la fractura, la tua strictura sia menor e pus leugiera e pus molha.	Then begin with a strong stricture of the middle joint on the site of the fracture with three wrappings or four, and how much more you separate from the limb at the site of the fracture, then your stricture is smaller and less tight and less moist.
E aprop exten a doas extremitatz del fiel a las partidas dejos entro que pervengua a la cavilha del pe, e strenh amdoas las extremitatz de las stelhas del autra part per so que·l liament no sia remaugut del sieu loc.	Then extend the two extremities of the rope to the outside parts within that it reaches to the shell of the foot, and then tighten both extremities of the stela of the other part so that the joint is not dislocated from its site.
E aprop leyssa la strectura sobre aquel, don esta ayssi que no accideys al membre corrosio ni apostema caut ni emflacio e semblantz ad aquels; e si accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, adonc cueta te am desliament de lu, e rectifica aquo que accideys tot aprop, segon que havem dit motas veguadas.	Then leave the stricture on that one, and so it is not caused for the limb any corrosion or poultice of mud and opposite to water, and if it is not caused any cause of those things, then take care of you in your treatment, and correct what has occurred there completely, according to what we have said about broken bones.
Mays si en le os es pessa del os la qual pongua, lahoras cove que tu engualhes aquel segon que a tu es possibla; e sino, fen sobre lu e remau aquel, e cura am aquo del qual es precedida la rememoracio entro que sia sanat.	More if the bone is larger than that on which you are placing it, then do so as is possible for you; and otherwise, send it to another place and heal it with water from which the reminder occurs, within that it is healed.
E alcunas veguadas es strenhuda aquesta fractura de la coyssa otra aquo que sian ajustadas a lu stelhas, ayssi cum havem dit en le adjutori e·n le bras.	E some are strengthened by this fracture of the hip joint in such a way that they are adapted to them sheaths, as I have already said in the assistant and in the arms.
Mays empero en la restauracio de lu en tal manieyra fayta no accideys al malaute claudicacio; e si es restaurada sola, otra aquo que li sia applicada l’autra camba, lahoras es necessari que claudique aquel del qual es tostemps.	But in restoring it in such a way that the hip joint is not broken, there will be no walking disability; and if it is restored alone, then another that is applied to it the other leg, so it is necessary that this one walks at the same time.
E sapias que la coyssa es strenhuda en xl dias o un pauc mes o un pauc mens, e tot aquo es segon la diversitat de las compleccios e de las autras dispozicios.	And you should know that the hip joint is strengthened in ten days or a few less or a few more, and all this depends on the diversity of the complexions and other dispositions.
Capitol .xv.	Chapter .XV.
De restauracio de la fractura de la rodela del denolh.	On the Restoration of the Fracture of the Ankle Joint.
Sapias que fractura de la rodela del denol tart endeve, mays accideys a lu motas veguadas atrissio.	You should know that this fracture of the ankle joint is very painful, and it hurts to sit down or get up.
Mays si accideys a lu fractura, lahoras no es sino fissura o trauc en las suas partidas, e aquo es am plagua o ses plagua, e sobre aquo tot es estat am le sentiment.	But if there is this fracture, then it is not but a crack or a break in its joints, and that is a great pain or a terrible pain, and all of it is very painful to the sensation.
E la restauracio de lu es enayssi que sia engualat aquo que es romput de las partidas de lu am les ditz entro que sia agreguat e conjongit segon que es possible per equacio e facilitat e fabricacio.	And the restoration of it is that it should be made in such a way that what has been broken from its joints is joined and united as much as possible by means of a joint or connection, according to what is easy and convenient and expedient.
E aprop pausa emplastre e pausa sobre aquel stela redonda, si indigeysses de aquela; e strenh desus am strictura ad aquo convenient.	Then place plaster and a pad on that round stump if it is necessary for him; and tighten it very much so as not to be loose.
E aprop considera totas las disposicios las quals havem recomtadas en las autras fracturas, ayssi cum es apostema caut e semblant ad aquels enaissi que se oppause a tot accident am aquo que a lu es convenient entro que sia sanat.	Then consider all the dispositions that we have recommended in other fractures, so that it is prevented from any accident that may occur to the foot, and everything is done as much as possible to heal it within itself, until it is healed.
Capitol .xvi.	Chapter XVI.
De restauracio de la fractura de la camba.	On the Restoration of the Fracture of the Back.
Sapias que en la camba so dos osses dels quals la un es gros, e es le nompnat per nom de la camba; e l’autra es subtil, e es nompnat focil.	You should know that in the back there are two bones, one of which is large and is called the spine; and the other is small and is called the rib.
E accideys a quascus de las specias de fractura aquo que accideys als dos osses del bras, e per aquo es fayta restauracio de lu ayssi cum restauracio del bras engualment, e la operacio de lu es una.	And there is any kind of fracture of the bone that may occur to the two bones of the arm, and the operation on it is one; and the procedure for it is as follows:
E si so trincatz dos osses ensemps, la camba es convertida a totas partidas.	And if we break two bones together, the back is broken into pieces.
E si es trinquat le os pus subtil, la camba es convertida a las partidas Denant.	And if the smaller bone is broken from the side, the back is broken before it.
E si es trincat le os pus gros, atrobas aquel dejos, e es de aquelas causas que no so a tu ameguadas.	And if the larger bone is broken, it hurts more on that side, and it is of those things that you are not used to.
E aprop aministra extencio e equacio e liguacio de las astelas segon aquel engualment.	Then administer equalization, adjustment, and connection of the bones according to that joining.
Mays empero cove, si la fractura de la camba es laja havent motas satagias, que la extencio sia mendre e pus leugiera, e alleuja am la tua vertut.	But nevertheless, if the fracture of the back is not too serious, so that there are no signs of danger, and if it can be equalized by pressing it down and making it lighter, and if it pleases you, your virtue will be increased.
E en la camba es alcuna causa de operacio sobre le bras, e es quan tu engualas las stelhas e que comples tota la tieua operacio, lahoras tu prendras pessas de fustz de pi le qual es pausat dejos las cauzas las quals so pausades en solies, e so faytas eyssament de brancas de palma; aligeys de aquelas a las quals es petita groceza, e no sia ges de las manudas, e sia la longuesa de aquelas segon la longuesa de la camba, e del denol entro al pus dejos.	And in the back there is no need to operate on the arms, and this operation is performed when you join the bones and make them very light, so that they are held together with a stick placed between them, and they are tied up with strands of twisted wire; those strands are tied to those which are tied together at their ends, and they are tied together in such a way as to form a loop; then take care that there is no tension on the hands, and if it is necessary that it be larger or smaller, so it is according to the length of the back, and from the heel towards the head.
E aprop envolopa sobre quascuna drap en doas envolucios segon la longitut de lu, e pausa la una sobre la partida de la camba de la una part e l’autra del autra part, e sian del denol entro al pus bas loc del pe.	Then wrap each drape in two envelopings according to its length, and place the one over the joint of the back from one side, and the other over the joint of the back from the other side, and they are placed at the back from one foot to the other.
E aprop lias las doas stelhas en tres locs de doas extremitatz e al mieg loc, quar am aquesta strectura la camba es prohibida de clinar a la partida dextra e sinistra, e sta per bona stacio.	Then tie the two bones in three places of the two ends and at the middle, because with this structure the back is prevented from tilting to the right or left, and it stands firmly.
E ja es aministrat un brasset de fust segon la longuesa de la camba; e sia pausada en lu la camba per so que conserve aquel de movement.	And a breastplate of iron has already been administered according to the length of the back; and it is placed on it in such a way that it preserve its movement.
E majorment cove que tu fassas aquo en fractura, e quan am aquela es plagua propriament.	And most importantly, you should know that this fracture is very painful, and it is called by itself.
E aprop considera en quascun jorn la camba e studia am aquel per derier studi, e tu le guardes de apostema e de imflacio o de autres causas semblantz; e cum accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, lahoras opausa te a lu am aquo que cove entro que sia sanat.	Then consider the back every day and study it carefully, and you should guard against any accident or swelling or other similar causes; and if any cause of those occurs, then keep away from that foot until it is healed.
Capitol .xvii.	Chapter XVII.
De la fractura del talo e dels osses del pe e dels ditz.	On the Fracture of the Skull and Bones of the Head and Teeth.
Al talo no accideys fractura de tot; mays als osses del pe accideys fractura alcunas veguadas; e als ditz del pe pauc accideys fractura, e no accideys a lor sino atricio en las mes de disposicio.	The skull does not often break; but in the bones of the head there are some that break; and in the teeth there is little breaking, except for the molars in their grooves.
E si als osses del pe endeve fractura e vezes aquels osses esser elevatz sobre si entre lor, lahoras le malaute pause le sieu pe sobre la terra preparat ayssi cum anant.	If the bones of the head break and those bones are raised up on themselves, then it is customarily said that the patient falls face down on the ground, prepared in this way while moving.
E aprop pausa la un pe sobre aquo que es elevat de aquels osses, e aprop calca aquels, e prem, e engualha aquels entro que torno en los locs.	Then place one foot on that which is raised by those bones, and crush them, and join them together according to their places.
E aprop pausa emplastre e stopa desus, e pausa dejos le ventre del pe una petita taula a la qual sian dos caps plas.	Then place plaster and a pad on it, and place the small belly of the head on a little table, which has two flat surfaces.
E aprop strenh aquela am le pe am strectura descent, pus que tu has envolopada aquela am draps e am autres causes de las quals indigeys.	Then tighten that foot with a strong hold, because you have wrapped it in drapings and from other causes from which you suffer.
E cum a lu passan tres dias o quatre, lahoras tu deslia le liament, quar tu atrobaras les osses engualatz, o sian trincatz o sian dislocatz, e la operacio en aquels es ayssi co coneysses.	After three or four days, then loosen the joint, because you would not be able to see the bones that are joined together, or if they are broken or out of place, and the operation on those is done as follows:
Mays si alcus ditz son trincatz, lahoras restaura aquels, e enguala aquels ayssi cum yeu e recomtat a tu en la restauracio dels ditz de la ma.	But if any teeth are broken, then restore them, and join them together as much as possible by means of wires and strings, and recommend to you the restoration of the teeth in the mouth.
E aprop pausa al dit trincat stela segon la longitut del dit, e sia pus lada de lu un pauc; e aprop dejos le pe aquesta taula la qual e a tu recomtada, e strenh aquela am strictura decent.	Then place the broken tooth on this little table to which you were recommended, and tighten it very much towards the front of the head.
Mays si aquo que es trincat dels osses so dos o tres o mays, lahoras tu pausa sobre quascun dit astela de la sua quantitat envolopada en drap leon, e strenh la taula en le pus bas del pe, e sia stant sobre la un dels caps de la taula foro le ventre del pe per que la tengua am bona retencio.	But if the tooth that is broken off from the bone is two or three or more, then place it on a toothpick wrapped in a cloth, and tighten the table firmly at the back of the head, and let it stand on one of the flat surfaces of the table so that it holds it well.
E es convenient a tu que no oblides que no consideres totas las causas las quals que e ditas a tu en las autras fracturas dels accidentz que havem dit; e opausa te a tot accident am aquo que cove.	And you should remember that you should not overlook any cause that has been said to you in the other fractures of accidents that we have discussed; and keep away from all accidents with that foot.
Capitol .xviii.	Chapter XVIII.
De fractura del conh de la femna e del os del pentenilh e de la vergua del home.	On the Fracture of the Jaw of the Woman and the Skull of the Man and the Bone of the Penis.
Quan le conh de la femna es trincat, lahoras fay aquela ceser en cezela cayrada, e aprop enclina aquela a la partida del dos un petit, e sia tenguda detras.	When the jaw of the woman is broken, then make it be cut into two pieces, and incline that piece towards the front of the head slightly, and let it be held firmly behind.
E aprop la matrona umpla le conh de coto, e sia fayt en le conh de lu ayssi cum spera; e aprop la femna sia concutida, e eleva le dos de lu petit a petit, quar tot aquo es fora-getat entro que sia denant la partida del conh ayssi cum spera e l’os trincat retorna.	Then the mother should hold the jaw of the woman firmly, and make it be raised little by little, because all this is done in front of the jaw with her hand; and if the woman faints, then raise the two pieces little by little, because all this is done in front of the jaw with her hand, and if she faints, then place those pieces on top of each other, so that they are not separated.
E aprop pausa pulvils sobre le dos de lu, e quan vol urinar remaugua le coto am facilitat e aprop urine, e reduzeys e retorna aquel segon la manieyra segon la qual mezist aquel al comensament, e aprop retorne al sieu pulvil primier.	Then place powder on the two pieces, and when he wants to urinate, remove that which is put in a convenient way, and return it as soon as possible; and if the urge to urinate comes again, then prepare for him another powder, and if it does not come, then place that piece back on top of the other, so that they are not separated.
E fassa ayssi per vii dias o enviro aquels, quar aquel es restaurat.	Then heal this way for seven days or more, because it is healed.
E si voles, pren una vezica de ovela e strenh sobre le trauc de lu una canula de canavera; e entromet tota la vesica en le conh de lu, e aprop ensuffla en la canula am vertut entro que la vesica sia imflada dedintz le conh, quar la fractura retorna.	If you wish, take a bladder of oil and tighten it over the hole of the penis; and insert all of the bladder into the jaw of the man, and blow into the bladder with force within the jaw, because the fracture returns if it does not remain filled.
E aprop sia umplida de coto e estia per alcus dias segon que havem recomtat, entro que sia sanat.	And it should be filled with cotton and left for a few days according to what has been prescribed, until it heals.
E quan le os del pentenil de home o de femna es trincat, lahoras aministra en la restauracio e agulacio de lu aquo que havem recomtat en l’os del anca.	And when the bones of the pelvis of a man or woman are broken, then administer the treatment and injection that we have prescribed for the hip bone.
E aquo que es dreyt no es occultat en aquestas fracturas proprinquas e que pauc endeveno, majorment ad aquel al qual es alcun studi e us e enten aquest meu libre mot; quar aquela fractura significa a tu en las majors disposicios via dreyturiera en la restauracio e en la strictura de lu, e donc enten be.	And the right-hand side that is not hidden in these near fractures and which rarely happens, mainly to those for whom this study and use is well known; because that fracture means to you in the major ways of treatment and tightening it, and so understand well.
Mays en la vergua del home quan es trincada, pren guarguamela de auca, e met la vergua en aquela; e aprop pausa sobre lu envolucio de drap, e sia envolopada, e aprop sia layssada per tres dias o enviro aquels, e sia sanada.	On the side of the man when it is broken, take a cloth, and put the stick on it; and put it over the wrapping of the cloth, and let it be wrapped for three days or as long as necessary, until it heals.
Capitol .xix.	Chapter XIX.
De restauracio de fractura dels osses quan es am plagua.	Of the treatment of fractures of bones when they are swollen.
Convenient es ad aquel al qual accideys fractura am plagua, e majorment si le os es gran ayssi cum es le os de la cuoyssa o de l’adjutori, o semblant ad aquel, que tu te cuoytes e fleubotomes aquel tantost si las condicios de fleubotomia a tu o testifican ayssi cum desus havem dit.	Convenient is to him to whom the fracture has occurred, and more so if the bone is large, such as that of the pelvis or of the adjacent one, or similar to that, that you are careful and do not touch it much, if the conditions of the bloodletting to you or attested thus far we have said.
E si la plagua eflueys sanc, lahoras cove que tu te coytes a la retencio de lu enayssi que tu polverizes sobre lu zegi trissat, si a tu autra causa no es present.	And if the swelling subsides, then know that you should cauterize it before powdering it on the skin, and if another cause does not present itself.
E aprop comensa restaurar la fractura en aquel meteys dia, e no prolongues aquo, si no accideys apostema.	And then begin to restore the fracture in that same day, and do not prolong it, unless there is a burst.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras tu layssa la restauracio de lu entro al ix dia, entro que sia cedat le apostema, e no apropinques a lu en le tertz dia e·l iiii de tot, quar tu faras accidir mals accidentz.	Then if there is a burst of cauterization, then let the restoration be left for nine days, until the burst has passed, and do not approach it on the third day from the ninth, because you would make an accident happen.
Mays si le os trencat es eminent sobre la codena descubert, lahoras cove que te perforses reduzir aquel e engualar aquel am las tuas mas am facilitat e am pauca extencio.	Then if the broken bone is seen to protrude above the pubis, know that you should reduce it and draw it in with your hands easily and a little extension.
Mays si extencio no es a tu preparada e la equacio de lu am las tieuas mas, lahoras tu reduzeys aquel am las tuas mas am aquest sturment; e es sturment le qual es fayt de ferr, la longitut del qual es de vii ditz o de viii e la latitut del qual es segon la quantitat de la plagua; e per aquo es necessari al metge que prengua de aquels tres o quatre segon la quantitat que indigeys ad aquo en la curacio en tota specia de fractura.	Then if the extension is not prepared for and out of proportion to the bone, know that you should reduce it with your own hands easily in a certain way; and this instrument is made of iron, whose length is seven or eight fingers and whose width is according to the amount of swelling; and thus it is necessary for the doctor to take three or four, according to the quantity that you require to use in the treatment of any kind of fracture.
E sia redon, e sia en lu pauca groceza per so que no sia doblat deves la comprecio sobre aquel en la hora de la operacio.	Then return it, and be in a small quantity that it is not bent due to the compression on it at the time of the operation.
E sia de aguda extremitat al qual sia marge en las sieuas extremitatz; e sia le desus de lu a grossetut tendent, e de la maytat de lu entro a las partidas.	And be of sharp tip to the one that has a margin in its extremities; and the bloodletting of it to the greatness should be tending, and of the greater part of it within the splits.
E aquesta es la forma de lu:	This is how it is made:
E es nompnat en grec “labre volentz atelarem”, so es paleta pauca.	And it is called in Greek "labra volenz atelarem", which means little plate.
Per que cove que sia pausada la extremitat de lu acuda elevada sobre la extremitat del os eminent.	So that the end of it is raised above the end of the prominent bone.
E inpelleys aquel en una veguada entro que retorne le os, e sia engualat am alcuna equacio.	Then insert it into a slot within which the bone returns, and draw it up to a certain equation.
E donc esforsa te engualar las extremitatz de la fractura entre lor, e si la extremitat de lu trencada es subtil, e no pren aquela le sturment per bona axcepcio, lahoras cove que tu inscidas la extremitat de aquel os entro que l’insturment haja poder de aquo.	And then strive to draw the ends of the fracture together, and if the broken end is fine, and do not take the instrument for a good grasp, know that you should cut the end of that bone into which the instrument can enter.
Mays si no podes reduzir le os de tot am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras enscideys aquel am aquo que coveneys a lu dels inscizoris les quals havem ditz; o serra aquel am una de las serras en qualque manieyra sia a tu possible.	Then if you cannot reduce the bone with it, then cut it with one of the knives that we have described; or saw it with a saw in some way convenient for you to do so.
E aprop ratz aquel que roman en le os de asperitat e de scorsas menudas.	Then remove what remains in the bone of small sharp points and small scratches.
E cum le os es reduzit, e aprop la reduccio le malaute atroba dolor vehement ledent, lahoras sapias que le os no es retornat al sieu loc natural; e adonc fay aquo quar tu confereyses al malaute gran juvament.	And when the bone has been reduced, and the pain of the patient is great and burning, then know that the bone has not returned to its natural position; and therefore give it.
Cum es complida la tua restauracio la qual fas al os, e lahoras submergeys drap en vi stiptic negre, e propriament si es en estiu, e no pauses sobre la plagua cerot ni autre causa en la qual sia oli, per so que no fassa en lu accidir poyredura e corropcio.	Then dip a cloth in hot stinging black ink, and especially if it is in summer, and do not touch the swelling with your fingers or any other cause might occur, so that it does not cause infection or corrosion.
E aprop aministra stelas en la hora del tieu compliment de la restauracio de l’os, e layssa la plagua descuberta enayssi que inscidas le trauc am forfexs e uses de envolucios segon la quantitat de la plagua.	And then administer the treatment of the bone's completion, and leave the swelling uncovered in order to cut it with scissors and wrap it according to the amount of the swelling.
E guarda te am tota cautela que no strenhas la plagua am la fractura, quar motas veguadas an fayt aquo les fols metges, e fero accidir sobre les sieus malautes mort o malautia corrodent o zuthement, so es sania.	And be careful not to stretch the swelling with the fracture, for if you do not take care, bad things may happen; and fire causes death or severe corrosion or rot, which heals.
E si la tieua strictura leugiera, molli, diversa de la strictura de las autras fracturas.	Then if the tight binding is different from that of other fractures.
E si la plagua es gran o es plagua mala, e temes sobre aquel alcus accidentz mals les quals havem recomtatz, e atrobas dolor en le loc, lahoras no cove que pauses sobre aquel astelas, mays fay ad aquel envolucio de draps durs en loc de stelas e strenh lu am aquelas.	And if the swelling is great or is a bad swelling, and you fear that it might occur to him some other accident than those we have prescribed, and you feel pain in that place, then know that you should not wrap it in sheets, but rather wrap it in a cloth of wool; because it hurts.
E cum aprop un dia o dos vezes ja la plagua comensar, que en lu sia engendrat brac, lahoras tu osta desus le drap le qual havias pausat sobre aquel am vi, e aprop aministra calguas, enguentz am les quals de nostra constuma es que mediquem las plaguas, ayssi cum enguentz tetrafarmacon e semblantz ad aquel.	And when the swelling has begun once or twice a day already, let it be warm, because it is a good thing; then stop the wrapping cloth that you had placed on it with fire, and administer cold water to it, and wash it with soap as we have customarily done to swellings, so that it may heal.
E conveneys a tu que deslias le liament e considera la plagua en quascun dia mati e vespre entro que sia consolidada e fermada, e cove que·l membre sia preparat en tal manieyra que la poyredura corra de lu a las partidas dejos am facilitat.	And it is convenient to you that the limb be moved and consider the swelling in the morning and evening until it is consolidated and firm, and know that the member is prepared in such a way that corruption will run from it into the splits easily.
si a la plagua passan motz dias, e no es consolidada ni es abscindit de lu le brac, lahoras sapias que aqui so satagias de las petitas per que cove enquieras la plagua am tenta.	Then if the swelling passes more than a few days and is not consolidated or separated from it with ease, then know that it only hinders you; therefore, do not try this treatment again.
E de aquelas satagias aquelas que so separadas remau e extratz, aquelas que de lor no so separadas e pongen le membre e fan accidir dolor, perforsa te a inscidir aquelas segon que a tu aquo es possibla.	And of those that separate themselves and come off, those that do not separate themselves and put the member together and cause pain, strive to cut them in such a way as is possible for you to do.
E si accideys a la plagua zuchem o eluchen, so es stiomenios, o autra specia de corrupcio e de putrefaccio, lahoras cove que pauses a quada un de aquels am aquo que conveneys a lu de la curacio del qual es precedida narracio en le sieu capitol.	Then if the swelling becomes swollen or irritated, it is a sign of corruption and rot; then know that you should stop one of those by water as described in the previous chapter.
E de aquo en le qual cove que stia lo mieu sermo e tu fassas present la tua pessa: quan os gros es trincat, emineys sobre le membre ayssi cum le os de la coyssa e del ajutori e semblantz ad aquels dels membres grans, e que no presumas atraccio de lu, ni la extraccio de lu quar motas veguadas accideys per aquo la mort; habantz layssa aquel entro que poyresca, quar fort leu cayra per si aprop xx dias o .xxx.; e lahoras cura la plagua si a tu es vist, e si no layssa aquela.	And of that in which you should be quiet and present your question: when the bones are broken, administer it on the member as with the pelvis and the legs, and not assume attraction from it or separation from it, for if it is not done correctly, death may occur; then leave it wrapped up, because a strong bond holds it together for about ten days, or three hundred days. And then heal the swelling if you can see it, and if not, leave it.
Capitol .xx.	Chapter XX.
De la curacio de nodacio que accideys en le vestigi de alcuna fractura.	Of the treatment of a bruise that occurs in the trace of a fracture.
Motas veguadas accideys aquesta nodacio en le vestigi de sanacio de fractura, e majorment que es prop de las juncturas, e es orrasada per lu la figura del membre; e fort leu prohibeys le membre de la sua operacio natural.	Then this treatment occurs in the trace of the healing of a fracture, and more so if it is near the joints, and distorts the member; and a strong bond stops its natural movement.
Adonc considera si la nodacio es recent e aministra en aquela medicinas que han stipticat ayssi co es aloen, e enses, e mira, e sercacollo, e acrassia, e semblantz ad aquels; enayssi que prenguas de aquela alcunas o totas, e comfesiys aquelas am vi stiptic, o am album de huou, o am vi agre, e pausa aquela sobre la nodacio en estopa, e constringeys aquelas sobre lu per bona constriccio.	Then consider whether the bruise is recent and administer to it the medicines that have stifled it as such, and wash, and see, and smell it, and touch it; and if you take some of it all or all, and if you take some of it in a cloth, and bind it over the bruise in cloth, and tighten those over it with good constriction.
E leyssa extrictura que no deslies aquela per motz dias; e aprop deslia aquela e itera autra, entro que sia remauguda la nodacio; o strenh sobre aquela lamina de plom descentment, quar plom ha proprietat de remaure tot aquo que es imflat en les membres.	And then leave the tightening in place for a few days; and then remove it and repeat, until the bruise is removed; or tighten it over that plate of lead, because lead has the property of removing all the swelling that is inflated in the limbs.
Mays si nodacio ja es en peyra convertida e streyta es e nessessitat provoca a ostar aquela coytadament, e lahoras scindeys aquela per la partida pus sobirana de lu, e inscideys la superfluitat e eminent, o ratz aquela am alcus rezoris entro que sia remauguda; e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	If the pain is already severe and it is necessary to cut those parts that are more easily severed, then cut them with a sharp knife and cut off what is superfluous and imminent or remove it with an incision, and treat what remains with medicine so that it may be healed.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter .XXIII.
De restauracio de fractura quan es restaurada e aprop aquo roman le membre subtil e freul no segon la sieua natura.	The restoration of a fracture should be done with care, keeping the member in its place and not causing further pain.
Quan fractura de os es restaurada, e aprop aquo roman le membre subtil e freul, lahoras aquo no es fayt sino per motas causas: de las quals la una es multitut de solucio del liament e de la liguacio de lu fayta no segon que cove; o per superfluitat de strictura dels liamentz entro que·l nutriment sia prohibit correr al membre; o per multitut de embrocaccio superflua; o per movement superfluent no en la sua hora; o per pauquesa de sanc en le cors del malaute e per debelitat de lu.	When a bone fracture is healed, and the member is kept in place with ligatures, consider the following causes for which it should not be done: either because there is too much tension on the ligaments and the connection is not right; or because there is a blockage of nutrients to the limb; or because there is too much waste matter; or because there is excessive movement at the wrong time; or because there is pain in the body and to relieve it.
E curacio de aquo es dar a mengar al malaute e far le cor de lu tendre entro que·l sanc sia multiplicat en lu; e aministra banh; e entromet gaug e leticia sobre lu.	And treatment should involve making the patient eat and making his heart strong so that the pain does not increase in him; and give bath; and apply hot packs and pleasure to him.
E aprop pausa pegua sobre le membre, per so que la pegua atire a lu mot nutriment, o continua embrocacio de lu am aygua tebeza, entro que·l nutriment corr e retorne a la sua figura natural.	And place a cloth on the member so that the cloth brings heat to it, or continue to apply warm water to it, so that the nutrient liquid runs and returns to its natural shape.
Capitol .xxii.	Chapter.XXII.
De curacio dels osses trincatz quan so restauratz tortuozament e prohibeys la operacio de lor de aquo que cove.	The treatment of broken bones that have healed with a twist should be avoided, and the operation of removing them is not allowed if it causes pain.
Quan accideys al membre ja restaurat aprop la sanacio de lu de tortuositat e eminencia al os trincat e nodacio, e es per aquo fededa de forma del membre, mays empero le membre no es prohibit de la sieua operacio natural, lahora no cove que tu recipias la paraula de aquel que exsistima aquel membre sia de novel trincat.	When a member that has already been healed becomes twisted and برجسته due to the bone being twisted, and it causes pain, but the member does not prevent its natural operation, then do not take the word of one who says that a twisted member no longer exists;
Mays ja so statz motz fols metges e restauradors les quals han fayt aquo en nostra tera; e aquesta operacio es mot vituperable perduzent a gran temor le senhal de la qual es mortal.	But there are some foolish doctors and healers who have performed such operations on our land; and this operation is very shameful and brings great fear to those who perform it, and they risk their own life with it.
Mays si claudicacio e nodacio son recentz, lahoras cove que sian enbrocatz am aygua tebeza en la qual so coytas erbas mollificantz, ayssi cum son fuelas de altea e razitz de lu, e mellilot, e semblantz ad aquels; e sia fayt a lu emplastre am emplastre mollificatio ayssi cum dyallaquilon ben fayt; o que sia preza mucillage de razit de altea e sia contucida am gray de gualina o am oli de cirami, e sia emplastrat am aquel; o que sian prezes figuas grassas e sian trissadas am fems de colom, e semblantz ad aquels de las medicinas que son nompnadas amermans consolidacio.	But if claudication and pain have recently occurred, then let them be treated with warm water in which herbs are added that soften it; or with white wine and olive oil, and let it be bandaged with a soft fabric; or with the resin of oak tree, and let it be applied to it; or with the fat of the root of the nettle, and let it be wrapped in cloth; or with a mixture of butter and olive oil, and let it be wrapped in a cloth; or with a mixture of honey and the oil of the cherry tree, and let it be bandaged with a cloth; or with a mixture of honey and the resin of cypress, and let it be applied to it.
E alcunas vetz es dissolvuda am assidua fricacio leugiera que sia am las mas humidas, e sia administrat movement del membre a tota partida en totas horas.	And in some cases, it is dissolved with gentle friction that is kept moist, and it is administered movement of the member from the very beginning at all times.
Mays si tortuositat ja es anada denant e es fayta fort e convertida es en peyra e provocada es necessitat a curacio de lu am ferr, lahoras cove que sia le pus desus cecsat e la continuacio del os sia dissolvut, e sia inscidit aquo que superflueys de nodacio de aquel meteys am le os am inscissoris subtils, e sia aministrada facilitat en aquel am sollicitut e studi.	But if the twist has already occurred before and it is severe and has turned into pain and caused necessity for iron to be applied to it, then let the upper part of the bone that is affected by the twist be cut off with a sharp knife, and the part that remains of the bone be treated, and the soft tissue around it be cut, and ease be given to that which causes pain and study be made in the case.
Capitol .xxiii.	Chapter .XXXIII.
De sermo en dislocacio.	On speech in dislocation.
Dislocacio es eyssiment de alcuna de las juncturas del sieu loc, per que es prohibida de movement, e es orrezada la figura del membre, e fa venir sobre le malaute dolors e lesios grans.	Dislocation is when one of the joints of the body is moved from its place, causing pain and great damage.
Donc quan accideys ad alcu dislocacio, lahoras cove tantost perforsar que sia reduzit, e no tarde aquela reduzir, quar si es tardada, le loc es apostemat e fort leu am aquo es fayta dificil la reduccio de dislocaccio.	Therefore, when a dislocation occurs, it should be reduced quickly, because if the reduction is delayed, the joint will hurt and become difficult to reduce;
E per aysso no cove que sia maugut ni stendut en la hora de la apostemacio, quar motas veguadas fa venir spasme e dolors ledentz.	And therefore it should not be stretched or bent in the hour of reduction, because when some vision is seen, spasm and pain come to the body.
Mays quan aquo accideys, lahoras cove que tu te coytes a la flaubotomia del malaute, e aprop sia layssat entro que repause le apostema; e aprop le membre sia embrocat am aygua cauda e oli, e aprop sia reduzit am facilitat.	But when it happens to you, then you should hide yourself from the flabotomy of the patient, and let it rest until the spasm passes; and let the member be bathed with warm water and oil, and let it be reduced with ease.
E tot membre sia curat am aquo del qual la rememoracio vindra en son loc.	And all of the member should be treated with water in which memory will return to its place.
E yeu ja e ordenatz les capitols de dislocacio segon que es precedit en fractura; de la partida del cos pus sobirana entro a la partida pus dejos.	And the chapters on dislocation have already been read and ordered according to what precedes in fracture; from the upper part of the body to the lower.
Capitol .xxiiii.	Chapter.XXIV.
De curacio de dislocacio de la mandibula dejos.	The treatment of a dislocation of the jaw of the patient.
So dislocadas las doas mandibulas si no tart; e la dislocacio de amdos es fayta segon una de dos manieyras: que o son remaugudas de lurs locs per pauca remocio, e so mollificadas un petit; o so dislocadas per entiera dislocacio e complida, entro que sian mollificadas a la partida de la junctura entro que corro saliva del malaute e que no puesca tenir aquela ni puesca claure la sua boca, e la lengua de lu sia envolopada en sa paraula.	So the two jaws are dislocated if they are not tied; and the dislocation of both is done in one of two ways: either because they have come loose a little due to a small movement, or because they are completely dislocated and are softened at the joint; so that they do not stick together and their tongue does not close their mouth, and the tongue of him wraps itself around his words.
Mays quan la dislocacio de lu es pauca, lahoras en las majors disposicios retorna per si an pauca causa.	But when the dislocation is small, then in most cases it returns by itself for a little while;
Mays si la dislocacio es entiera e complida, lahoras cove que sia administrada reduccio de lu leugierament, e no sia tardada de tot.	But if the dislocation is whole and complete, then reduce it gently, and do not delay it at all.
E es que·l ministre tengua le cap del malaute, e entrometa lo metge le dit pous de la una sieua ma en la razit de la dislocacio de la mandibula dedintz la boca de lu, si la dislocacio es de la una part; o que entrometa les sieus dos pouzes ensemps, si la dislocacio es de doas partz, e les autres ditz de las mas de lu sian defora am les quals enguale; e comanda al malaute que cesse las suas mandibulas e absolva aquelas anar de quascuna partida; e le metge engualhe la mandibula e enpellisca la mandibula entro que retorne al sieu loc.	And the minister has the head of the patient, and he inserts it into his mouth at the part where the jaw is dislocated inside the patient's mouth, if the dislocation is on one side; or he inserts both of its jaws together, if the dislocation is on both sides, and the other parts are outside; and he orders the patient to cease his jaws and finish eating from any part; and he inserts the jaw back into its place so that it returns to its place.
E si dificil es la reducio de lu, e majorment si amdos las mandibulas so essemps dislocadas, lahoras aministra evoporacio am aygua cauda e oli, entro que sia fayta leugiera la reduccio de amdos e no tardes la reduccio de amdos de tot, ayssi quo havem dit.	And if the reduction is difficult, and even more so if both jaws are completely dislocated, then administer evaporated water with oil, so that the reduction of both is gentle and do not delay the reduction of both at all; for if we have said:
E donc cum retornam e so engualadas, e es clausa la boca del malaute e no es mollificada, lahoras pausa sobre aquelas polvils de drap am cerot, e sia fayt de cera e oli rozat; e aprop sia liat am facilitat am liamens mols.	And therefore when they return and are closed up, and the mouth of the patient is not softened, then place them on a cloth of cotton cloth, and let it be done with wax and oil; and let it be reduced gently with ease.
E sia le dormir del malaute sobre le sieu dos, e·l cap de lu sia stant entre dos aurelhes, per so que no maugue aquel a la partida dreyta ni a la sinistra; e no li fassas per forsa masteguar alcuna causa; habans la sieua vianda sia forbicio leon, entro que quan las dolors sian remaugudas e las mandibulas so nozadas, lahoras maugue aquo que vol.	And let the patient sleep on his two sides, and his head between two pillows, so that he does not stick to either side; and do not force him to eat for any reason; and have his food be a lion's paw, so that when the pains are relieved and the jaws are no longer stuck together, then make him drink what he wants.
E aquo sia aministrat am facilita, e no trebalhe sobre la apercio de la boca deves la comestio e beure e ocitatio, entro que la mandibula sia nozada e sanada.	And let it be administered with ease, and do not work on the patient' mouth when eating and drinking and speaking, so that the jaw is unblocked and healed.
E si es dificil la reduccio de duas mandibulas quan so dislocadas en alcuna hora e no so convertidas als lors locs, lahoras motas veguadas accideysso febres e soda assidua, e fort leu es alerguat le ventre del malaute, e fort leu e vomeys colera pura.	And if it is difficult to reduce two jaws when they are dislocated at any time and do not return to their places, then let there be seen some vision, and strong pain comes to the belly of the patient, and strong sweat comes from his forehead, and strong vomiting of pure bile occurs.
E quan tu vezes aquo, lahoras sapias que es perdicio; e motas veguadas mor aquel al qual accideys aquo en x dias.	And when you see it, then know that it is a loss; and remember the one to whom this happens in ten days.
Capitol .xxv.	Chapter.XXV.
De reduccio de la dislocacio de la furcula e de la extremitat del muscle.	The reduction of a dislocation of the furculum and the end of the muscle.
Furcula no es dislocada del latz dedintz per la sua continuacio am le pietz; e alcunas veguadas es dislocada a la partida defora, e aquo es declarat al sentiment.	The furcula is not dislocated from behind by its connection to the legs; and some become dislocated at the end, and it is felt.
E la restauracio de lu es que·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu dos e extenda les sieus brasses.	And the restoration of him is that the patient should lie on his back and extend his legs.
E aprop coarta le loc am la tua palma am fort coartacio, quar ela retornara.	Then cut the area with your palm firmly, for it will return to you.
E aprop pausa sobre aquela emplastre e pulvils e strenh aquela.	Then place a piece of plaster and dust on it and stretch it out.
Mays la extremitat de aquel que siec le coyde e·s continuat am aquel, no es dislocada en alcun dia; lahoras cove que sia reduzida e engualhada segon que havem dit e segon que es a tu aparelhat.	May the end of that which you cut be continued until it reaches that place, do not dislodge it at any time; then cover and join it according to what I have said and according to your equipment.
E aprop pausa sobre aquela emplastre, e pulvils, e extrictura, e comanda al malaute adherir a trenquilitat e a repaus entro que sia sanat.	Then place a plaster on it, dust it, and stretch it out, and order the patient to remain quiet and at rest until it is healed.
E am aquesta meteyssa curacio es reduzida la extremita del muscle quan es separada del sieu loc.	And in this cure the end of the muscle is reduced when it is separated from its place.
Capitol .xxvi.	Chapter.XXVI.
De la reduccio de la dislocacio del muscle.	Of reducing the dislocation of the muscle.
Sapias que·l muscle no es dislocat sino segon tres manieras, de las quals es la una que sia dislocat a la partida del titillic a la partida dejos.	Know that the muscle is not dislocated except in three ways, and one of these is that it is dislocated at the separation of the gluteal from the thigh.
E la segonda es que sia dislocat a la partida desus del muscle, e aquo es fayt tart; e no es dislocat a las partidas detras per la spalla; e no es dislocat a las partidas denant per les nervis.	And the second is that it is dislocated at the separation of the muscle from itself, and this causes a cramp; and it is not dislocated behind by the shoulder, nor in front by the nerves.
E majorment es dislocat e defora eyssit a las partidas dejos deves le titillic, e majorment en aquels dels quals las carns son paucas, leugierament es dislocat; mays en aquels en les quals so motas carns, es eyssit fora am dificultat.	And most often it is dislocated and comes out in front of the thighs towards the back, and most often in those whose flesh is thin, it comes out with difficulty; but it comes out in front with ease in those whose flesh is thick.
E fort leu accideys ad alcus homes percussio o cazement, e le muscle de lu es apostemat de apostema caut, e es cujat per aquo que ja sia dislocat.	And a great many times it happens to certain men that a blow or a bump causes them to swell, and the muscle of him is swollen with swelling caused by another muscle, and this one has already been dislocated.
Adonc cove que tu sproes aquo entro que estias sobre-sertetut de lu, e lahoras procesiscas en la curacio de lu.	Then, when you have put him to bed as you promised, and then proceed to the cure of him.
E es conoguda la dislocacio de lu quan es a las partidas dejos deves le titillic; per so que distingescas entre le muscle dislocat e·l muscle sa, quar tu atrobas entre aquels diversitat manifesta; e atrobas en le cap del muscle concavitat e dejos le titillic deves le tocament del cap del muscle ayssi quo un huou, e al malaute no pot redusir la sua ma a la sieua aurelha, ni maure aquela per totz movementz.	And the dislocation of him is known when it is in front of the thighs towards the back; but so that you can distinguish between the dislocated and healthy muscle, for you discern great difference between them; and you discern on the head of the muscle concavity and towards the back of the thigh from a certain point to another, and the patient cannot reduce his hand to his ear, nor can he turn it around all over.
Si es dislocat deves le pietz o ensus, e tu lahoras atrobas manifest tocament, e no es amaguat.	If it is dislocated, then it is at the feet or behind; and you will feel a strong touch, and it does not retreat.
E de aquesta dislocacio es fayta leugiera reduccio quan es fresca e le malaute es enfant.	And of this dislocation there is a slight reduction when he is fresh and the patient is child.
E la reduccio de lu es que·l ministre eleva la ma de lu a las partidas desus; e aprop pause les tieus pouses dejos le titillic de lu, e eleva la junctura am fortaleza en sus al sieu loc, e·l ministre eleva la ma de lu, e extenda aquela en sus; e aprop pausa aquela dejos quar ela retorna leugierament.	And the reduction of it is that the servant raises his hand to its top; and place the thigs behind the thigh of him with force in its place, and the servant raises his hand, and extends it behind; and then place those behind, for they return with difficulty.
Mays si per aquo que havem dit no retorna, e so del comensament que accidic la dislocacio, motz dias, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia banhat en aygua cauda e sia aministrada enbrocacio que mollifique e liniesca ayssi cum si so coytz razitz de altea, e fenugrec, e melillot en aygua, e sia administrada.	And if by a certain water it does not return, and only from the beginning that the dislocation has happened, then wait until the patient is bathed in warm water, and then give him brooches that soften and smoothen him as if they were cut nails from high places, and tarragon, and melilot in water, and administer it.
E aprop le malaute sia ressupinat sobre le sieu dos e sia pausat dejos le titillic de lu espera de lana que sia engual entre levitat e strictura, e aprop le metge pause le sieu talo sobre la spera, e eleva le cap del muscle am vertut, e atire la ma del malaute per que no sia mauguda a las partidas dejos, e autre ministre tengua le cap del malaute, que no sia maugut a las partidas dejos, quar aquela tantost retorna al sieu loc.	Then the patient should be placed on his back and held with a strap between his legs, waiting for the wool to be wrapped around him that is stretched between elevation and tension, and then the doctor should place his foot on the spine, and raise the muscle by force, and throw the hand of the patient so that he is not raised at the front of the thigh, and another servant hold the head of the patient, that is not raised at the front of the thigh, for it will return to its place.
E si voles, reduzeys aquel segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu fassas esser prezent un home le qual sia pus lonc que·l malaute, e estia de la part de aquel latz, e entrometa le sieu muscle dejos le titillic del malaute e eleve le titillic de lu a las partidas desus entro que·l malaute sia suspendut en ayre, e autre ministre tire la ma del malaute de las partidas dejos del sieu ventre.	And if you want, you can reduce this second way: and it is that you place yourself in front of the patient who is taller than him, and be on his side, and insert his muscle behind the thigh of the patient and raise the patient's muscle to its top until he is suspended by air, and another servant holds the hand of the patient from behind his waist.
Mays si le malaute es leugier, lahoras cove que am lu que autre causa sia suspenduda, per so que grave aquel, quar la dislocacio retorna tantost.	And if the patient is very heavy, then know that another cause may be his suspension, for this causes a return of the dislocation.
E es reduzit eysament segon autra manieyra: e es que sia ficat en terra un fust lonc le cap del qual sia redon de figura, ayssi cum pilo de mortier, que no sia gros ni subtil, e aprop sia pausat dejos le malaute; pus que so pausatz sobre·l cap del fust draps leons, e·l malaute sia stant segon la longitut del fust, e aprop sia extenduda la ma de lu a las partidas dejos del autra part; e sia extendut le cos de lu del autre part am fortaleza, quar la junctura retorna al sieu loc am velocitat.	And this reduction is only by another way: and it is that a long pole be placed on the ground with an egg-shaped figure at its end, as with mortar, which is not thick or thin, and is held behind the patient; for it is placed on the top of the pole, and the patient stands according to the length of the pole, and his hand is extended to its sides with force, for the joint returns to its place with speed.
E si es dificil reduccio de lu per totas las causas que havem ditas, lahoras usa de aquesta cura: e es que tu prenguas un fust la quantitat del qual sia en le lonc de dos brasses, e latitut de aquel sia de quatre ditz, e la grossetut de lu sia aleujat en le preon del tittilic segon aquesta forma:	And if the reduction of it is difficult by all the means we have said, then use this cure: and it is that you take a long pole whose length is twice as long as the arms, and whose thickness is four fingers wide, and its thickness is reduced in the form of the hip according to this figure:
E aprop sobre le cap redon sian liatz drap leons per so que·l fust no ledesca le malaute.	And then place on the top of the pole that it does not slip under the patient's head, and a long pole should be used that does not slide under the patient's head.
E aprop sia pausat dejos le titillic del malaute, e sia extenduda la ma o le bras sobre·l fust entro a las partidas dejos, e sia liat le fust sobre le adjutori e le bras e la extremitat de la ma.	And then the pole should be held behind the patient's thigh, and his hand or arm should be extended over the pole to its sides, and it should be kept steady by the assistant and his arm and the end of the hand.
Aprop sia pausat le bras sobre un scalo de scala segon la latitut, e la ma sia extenduda a las partidas dejos, e l’autre cos sia suspendut de l’autre part, quar la junctura intra tantost.	Then the arm should be placed on a step stool according to its width, and the hand should be extended to its sides, and the other side should be suspended from it, for the joint returns very quickly.
E cum le intrament de lu es complit segon quascuna maniera que es a tu possibla, e lahoras cove que tu pauses dejos le titillic spera de lana de engual quantitat; e aprop pauza emplastre perparat de polvera de moli am enses e album de huou sobre tot le muscle, ayssi quo es revolvut desus, e aprop strenh dejos le titillic am strictura decent; e le liament sia revolvut sobre le emplastre, e la ma de lu sia annectida al col de lu, e sia leyssat, e no sia mauguda la ma de lu per vii dias.	And when the instrument of him is complete according to each way that you can do it, and then, when you have put the wool around his leg, a certain quantity; and then place a plaster prepared of flour of moly and egg yolk on the muscle, so that it is rolled up from above, and then tighten it with force behind the thigh with a strap, and leave it alone for seven days.
E cove que sia pausada la vianda del malaute pauca, entro que·l membre sia confortat, quar es pus leugier a la sanacio de lu.	And when the patient's food is reduced little by little, then wait until his member is comfortable, for he is less painful to heal.
E aprop la vianda sia donada major aprop vii o v e sia exercitat un movement; e donc si es fermat e no es mollificat, lahoras ja es sanat.	Then the food should be given more and more by seven or eight days, and exercise should be made with a certain movement; and if it stops being soft and does not become firm again, then it is healed.
Mays si la junctura es dislocada motas veguadas per humiditat que accideys a lu o per autra causa, lahoras cove que en aquela sia administrat cauteri am tres traucs, segon que denant es dit en le capitol de cauteri.	And if the joint is dislocated by moisture that happens to it or by another cause, then know that this should be administered cauterization in three ways, according to what has been said in the chapter on cauterization before.
E si tot aysso es fayt e aprop vii dias es desliat le liament e la junctura no es fermada, e le emplastre e la strictura son reduzitz sobre lu alcunas veguadas, e no es fermada e catz e no pot elevar aquel bras a las partidas desus, lahoras sapias que·ls nervis de lu, les quals so al cap del muscle, ja so inscizes o extendutz o mollificatz, e sapia que la junctura nul temps no sira ficada en loc sieu.	And if all this is not healed and seven days are passed, then the ligament and joint are relaxed a little, and the plaster and tightness are removed from him a little, and he cannot raise his arm to its top, know that his nerves, which are at the head of the muscle, have been cut or stretched out or softened; and you know that the joint will not hold its place.
De la dislocacio de aquela qu’es fayta deves le pietz e la mamilha o las partidas detras, la reduccio es fayta am impulcio e extencio am las mas, entro que retorne.	Of the dislocation of that which is caused by pushing and stretching it from its sides, the reduction is made with a sudden movement and extension to its maximum, until it returns.
E sia administrada en aquela l’autra strictura, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	Then the other tightening should be administered to it, and the cure of that should be performed until it is healed.
E si accideys aprop la sanacio gravitat en le membre e tarditat en le movement de lu, lahoras le malaute uze de banh motas veguadas entro que aquela gravitat sia alleujada e que retorne a la natura de lu primiera.	And if there is great healing gravity on the member and delay in its movement, then the patient should use water that is warm and soft until this gravity is removed from him and he returns to his natural state.
Capitol .xxvii.	Chapter .xxvii.
De curacio de dislocacio del coyde.	On the Treatment of a Dislocated Shoulder
Sapias que la junctura del coyde es dislocada am difficultat e semblantment retorna am difficultat; e aquela es dislocada a totas partidas, e majorment a la partida denant a la partida detras, e la dislocacio de lu no es amaguada a tu quar es cazent dejos le vezement o dejos le tocament segon qualque figura sia dislocat, e quan ajustes le coyde disloguat am le sa, aquo es a tu declarat manifestament, quar la junctura es concavada e no pot doblar le bras, ni tocar am aquel le sieu muscle.	Know that the shoulder joint is dislocated with great difficulty and often returns with greater difficulty; it is dislocated at both ends, forward and backward, and when you adjust the dislocated shoulder with a certain movement, it is clearly declared to you, because the joint is concave and cannot bend the arm or touch with its muscle.
E cove que·t coytes, e reduzescas la dislocacio tantost denant que vengua a lu apostema caut, quar si ve a lu apostema caut, dificil es la reduccio de lu, e fort leu no es sanat de tot; e majorment quan es a las partidas detras, quar pus mala es de totas las autras specias de dislocacio, e de major dolor, e motas veguadas deyssen am aquela la mort.	And when you have stopped the bleeding, reduce the dislocation as much as possible in front so that it comes to a standstill, because if it stops with a standstill, the reduction is difficult, and it is not cured completely; and more so when it is at the back, because it is worse out of all the other species of dislocation, and of greater pain, and must be left for dead.
E la restauracio de lu, quan es aquela que es possibla reduzir, es que la ma de lu sia extenduda am doas mas, e le bras de lu sia expandut, e las mas del metge sian sobre le coyde e dejos lu, e el empellisca la junctura am les pouzes de las suas mas ensemps, o am la razit de la sua palma entro que torne en son loc.	And the restoration of it, when that is possible to reduce, is that the hand of it be extended to two sides, and the arms of it be spread out, and the muscles of the foot be placed on the shoulder and let it be pressed at the joints with their knuckles or within, so that it returns to its place.
Mays si la dislocacio es a las partidas denant, lahoras retorna ayssi que dobla la ma am la sua ma, entro que percuta le coyde am la razit de la sua palma.	More if the dislocation is at the front ends, then return it so that it doubles the hand with its own hand, before striking the shoulder with the knuckles of the hand.
E si la dislocacio no obezeys a la reduccio, lahoras aministra vehement extencio e mot fort.	And if the dislocation does not obey the reduction, then administer violent shaking and very strongly.
E es que dos ministres extendan le bras, e tenguan aquel eyssament dos ministres per so que no sia remaugut deves la extencio.	And it is that two ministers extend their arms, and have that extension of two ministers so that it is not shaken again by the shaking.
E aprop sia revolvut le bras deves tota part, pus que es envolopat drap doblat lonc sobre la ma de lu, o liament.	Then return the arms far apart, for it is wrapped in a long folded cloth over the hand, or otherwise.
E quant le metge toca la junctura am la sua ma, unte aquela am alcun oli per so que aquo sia aquelas causas las quals ajudan en lubricitat de la junctura am facilitat; e aprop empellesca la junctura am empulcio vehement entro que retorne.	And when the patient touches the joint with his hand, anoint it with some oil so that it helps in the lubrication of the joint with ease; and then press the joint with violent pushing until it returns.
E aprop la reduccio de lu cove que sia pausat sobre aquela empastre en le qual sia stipticitat e excequacio am album de huou, e sia extrenhut am strictura descent, e·l bras sia suspendut del col, e sia layssat per alcus dias.	And the reduction of it, when it is stopped on that paste in which it is stiffened and applied with egg white, and is pulled with strictness down, and the arm is suspended from the neck, and left for a few days.
E aprop sia desliat; e donc si la junctura es formada en le sieu loc, lahoras tu deslia le liament de lu e layssa aquela.	Then remove it; and if the joint is formed in its place, then remove the cloth from it and leave it.
E si vezas la junctura no be strenher, lahoras tu itera le emplastre e·l liament, e layssa aquela per alcus dias entro que sia extrenhuda; e aprop deslia aquela.	And if you see that the joint is not strong, then remove the paste and the cloth from it and leave it for a few days until it is pulled out, and then remove it.
Mays si accideys a lu gravitat aprop la reduccio de la junctura, e la disposicio de lu es en movement, lahoras aministra humectacio en banh e fricacio subtil, e comprecio, entro que sia aleujat; o pausa sobre la junctura aleliati, so es coyssa de moto grassa; e aprop sia liada, e layssa aquela sobre le os le dia e la nueyt.	More if gravity occurs on it during the reduction of the joint, and its position is in movement, then administer hydration in a bath and gentle friction, and compression, until it is relieved; or pause on the joint and let it lie; so that it is not moved again by gross motion; and then bind it, and leave it on the bone for a day and night.
E aprop osta aquela, e met aquel en banh; e quan suza, lahoras tu fregua la junctura am fricacio temprada, e aprop itera sobre aquela aleliati, so es ronhonal de moto, una veguada, e la segonda, e la .iii.a.,	Then remove that one, and put it in a bath; and when it is relieved, then you rub the joint with gentle friction, and then repeat on that relaxed, so that it makes a noise of movement, once, and a second time, and the third,
corrupcio ja es pervenguda sobre le denolam intrament de banh, entro que sia linit.	The corruption has already spread on the skin of the body in the bath, but it is limited.
E si voles, pausa sobre aquela fenda de vaca humida e scalfada am boder e stren sobre aquel; e fay aquo alcunas veguadas, quar aquela es humida e reduzeys a la sua disposicio.	And if you want, pause on that wound of the cow wet and sharp on it, and make it a few times, because that is wet and reduce its movement.
Capitol .xxviii.	Chapter .xxviii.
De curacio de dislocacio de malassen, so es de la junctura que es entre·l bras e la ma.	On the Treatment of a Dislocated Shoulder Joint Between the Arm and the Hand
Malassen de la ma alcunas vetz es deslocada, e la reduccio de la dislocacio de lu es leugiera, e·l contrari es de las autras juncturas, mays empero cove que sia velocitat en la reduccio de lu en la hora en la qual es deslocada, denant que le loc sia apostemat o que accida en lu apostema caut.	A few veins of the hand are displaced, and the reduction of the dislocated joint is slight, and the opposite is true for other joints; however, if gravity occurs on it during its displacement, or stops with a standstill, then speed up the reduction of it in an hour when it is displaced.
E la reduccio de la dislocacio de lu es que tu pauses la junctura de la ma del malaute sobre una taula e le ministre extenda la ma de aquel, e le metge pause la sua ma o o la sua palma sobre la iminencia de la junctura, e empellisca aquela entro que retorne al sieu loc.	And the reduction of the dislocated joint is that you stop the joint of the hand of the patient on a table and the minister extends the hand of it, and the foot of the patient stops its own muscle or its palm over the vicinity of the joint, and presses it until it returns to its place.
Mays empero cove que sia considerat si la palma ja es ostada al ventre de la ma, lahoras le malaute pause le dos de la sua ma sobre una taula deves la extencio e la reduccio; e si la dislocacio es precedent deves le dos de la ma, lahoras sia la posicio de la ma de aquel intrinicequement sobre la taula, per so que la ma del metge caja sobre aquela iminencia de la junctura.	However, if the palm is already covered by the hand of the patient, then place the two hands on a table for extension and reduction; and if the dislocation is before the two hands, then place the two hands of the patient intricately on the table so that the foot of the patient is over the vicinity of the joint.
E donc si retorna tantost, bon es; e sino, lahoras strenh aquela am empastre cedant le apostema e layssa aquel; e no iteres aquo, quar sino, no soferta ni no podes sobre la reduccio de lu pus que passan a lu dias.	And if it returns soon, then it is good; and otherwise, then bind it with a paste that stops the bleeding and leave it; and do not repeat this, for otherwise, it does not suffer or can not be reduced after a few days.
Mays empero la junctura roman segon la sua tortuositat; e no notz al malaute alcuna causa, sino que la ma es mollificada e no pot strenher alcuna causa; lahoras sapias que les nervis son trincatz o trissatz, e lahoras no es engen en lu sino que sia strenhuda am cauteri prop le cazament de lu e fort leu aquo confereys alcuna causa.	However, the joint is second according to its tortuosity; and there is no reason for the hand, but its palm is soft and cannot be strong in any way; then know that the nerves are sharp or threefold, and do not go into it, because if it is strong at the beginning of the treatment, it gives a reason, but if it is weak, it makes it weak.
Donc cum malassem es retornada, lahoras pausa sobre lu empastre le qual havem recomtat, e sia layssat e strenhut per v dias; e aprop sia desliat e sia layssat e la ma de lu sia excercitada.	Then, if it returns soon, then stop on that paste that I have mentioned, and leave it and strengthen it for a few days; and then remove it, and leave the hand exercised.
Mays si le movement de lu es ostat e accideys en lu alcuna gravitat, lahoras leniys aquela am aygua cauda e am fricacio alcunas veguadas, entro que sia alleujat.	And if its movement is excessive and it occurs in some gravity, then remove that one with water tail and gentle friction a few times, until it is relieved.
Capitol .xxix.	Chapter. xxix.
De la curacio de dislocacio dels ditz.	On the Treatment of Dislocation of the Throat
Alcunas veguadas so dislocatz les ditz a tota partida.	Some times the throat is dislocated at both ends.
E quan es dislocat alcun dit de aquels al dos de la palma o al ventre de lu, lahoras sten le dit e impelleys la dislocacio de lu am les tieus pouses, entro que retorne.	Then, when a word is dislocated from one of the two hands or the belly, then tighten the word and press the dislocation with the knuckles of the hand or the palm, until it returns.
E aprop sostenta le cap del dit, e suspen aquel deves la part a la qual es dislocat, e layssa aquel per dos dias.	Then support the tip of the word, and suspend that one from the part in which it is dislocated, and leave it for two days.
E aprop suspen aquel e exten aquel entro que dreyt sia engualhat en aquel sieu dia.	Then suspend that one and extend it within that day.
E quan sira noyt, lia aquel segon aquela narracio, e no cesses desliar aquel en le dia e exercitar am movement, e lia aquel en la noyt; e fay aquo per alcus dias entro que sia streyt.	Then when you hear the cry, continue with that story, and do not cease to remove it during the day and exercise it by moving it, and continue with that one at night; and make it rigid for a few days until it is strong.
E fay semblant am aquo, si es dislocat al ventre de la ma, e lia aquel ad aquela partida e fay am aquo la tieua primiera operacio, entro que sia sanat.	Make a similar thing to that one, if it is dislocated from the belly of the hand, and bring that one to the end and make the first operation with the knuckles of the hand, until it is healed.
E semblantment fay am aquo quan es dislocat a las autres partidas.	Similarly, do for that one when it is dislocated at the other ends.
Capitol .xxx.	Chapter. xxx.
De la curacio de dislocacio dels spondils del dos.	On the Treatment of Dislocation of the Vertebrae of the Back
Quan accideys ad alcun dels spondils del dos o del col dislocacio complida, e so remaugutz motz spondils de lors locs, lahoras en aquela no es curacio, quar la mort se coyta al malaute.	When a dislocation occurs in any of the vertebrae of the back or neck, and then the rest of the spine moves with it, then there is no cure for that one, because death comes to the patient.
E senhal de aquo es que la egestio del malaute es fora-eyssida ses voluntat, e no pot retenir aquela; e motas veguadas so mollificatz alcus membres de lu o doas cambas de lu o dos brasses de lu, o un de aquels; o es remaugut un spondil de son loc, quar motas veguadas es remaugut e motas veguadas es fayta la remocio de aquels a quatre partidas.	The sign of that is that the ejection of the patient is forced, and cannot be stopped; and some members of it or two pairs of its clothes or both are molified; or a spine moves from its place, because the sign is given, and the movement of those ones to four parts is made.
Donc aquela ja es remauguda a las partidas detras e es nompnada gelbozitat.	Then that one has already been thrown to the back parts, and it is called giddiness.
Mays la curacio de lu es que lahoras consideras si la gelbozitat accidey de puerissia, quar lahoras en aquela no es curacio ni de aquela no es sanacio de tot.	May the cure for him be that you consider if the gangrene occurs from putridness, because in that case there is neither cure nor healing of all.
Mays en aquela que ve per cazement o per percussio o per semblant ad aquels, ja diyssero les Antics las manieras de curacio am sermo prolixs, del qual lo mays retorna am profieyt; mays yeu ja e abreujat de aquel del qual lo pauc escusa del trop de lu, per la mieua propinquitat a la entencio mieua exposicio, am la qual he aquo expausat et format ex instrument divers de aquel am le qual mostrero aquo e espausero aquel.	May the cure for him be that you consider if the gangrene occurs from putridness, because in that case there is neither cure nor healing of all. If by chance or by accident or by a similar cause, already the Ancient ones have spoken about the ways of cure with long words, of which the least returns to profit; I have also and opened myself out on this one for which the few excuses it has from too much he, for my nearness to the thought, my own exposure, at which I have come out and formed an instrument different from that on which I will show you and have made known to it.
E dic que en gelbosita que accideys de la partida denant en le pietz, no es engen ni sanacio de aquela; e semblantment en aquela que es fayta a dos latz.	And say that in gangrene that occurs from the separation forward on the foot, there is neither understanding nor healing of that; and by analogy in that which is made to two legs.
E de aquelas no es curada sino aquela que accideys en le dos propriament am aquo que yeu recomti.	And those are not cured except that one that occurs on the two properly at him who I recommend it.
E es que·l malaute sia extendut sobre la sua cara sobre pug engual prop de paret, e sia extendut dejos lu esturment molh per so que no sia lidit le pietz de lu.	And that the patient be extended on his face on the floor close to the wall, and be extended from him an instrument wet with water so that the feet of him do not slip.
E aprop un fust dreyt sia pausat, ficat en la terra en la extremitat del pug entorn le cap de lu, e autra fust en aviro les pes de lu en l’autra extremitat del pueg.	Then a straight stick is placed, fixed to the ground in the extreme of the foot around the head of him, and another stick in the air under the feet of him on the other extreme of the foot.
E·l ministre tengua le fust, e no sia fermat en fossa; e autre ministre tengua l’autre segon aquela forma.	The minister should hold the stick, and not be placed in a pit; and another minister should hold the other one according to that form.
E aprop envolopa sobre le cap del malaute e dejos les titillic liamen leon ferm; e exten la extremitat del liamel al fust le qual es deves le cap de lu, e lia aquel en lu; e aprop strenh l’autre liament sobre las ancas de lu les denols de lu, e deves las cambas de lu; e aprop ajusta totz les liamentz e lia aquels en l’autre fust le qual es deves les pes de lu.	Then wrap about the head of the patient and leave the little bells to beat around his head with a lion's ferrule; and extend the extreme of the bell to the stick that is supposed to be the head of him, and tie it up; and adjust all the bells and tie those to the other stick that is supposed to be the feet of him.
E aprop le ministre cascu extenda le liament a la partida del fust, e no sian remaugutz les dos fustz e les liamentz dels sieus locs en les quals son ficatz, mays empero no so fermatz ayssi cum havem dit.	Then the minister drops down the bell and extends the bell to the end of the stick, and the two sticks and the bells of their places in which they are fixed should not be tied up at this point; however, I have said that we should not fasten them.
E le metge pause las suas palmas sobre le spondil am fortaleza entro que retorne, o que pause sobre aquela una taula, e aprop que ajuste sobre la taula les sieus pes entro que retorne.	And the doctor places his palms on the spine with strength until he returns, or that he puts down over there a table, and then adjusts on the table his feet until he returns.
Mays si no retorna per aquesta forma, lahoras pren una taula de la qual la latitut o la longitut sia en aviro de tres brassas, e cava en la paret de la qual havem dit que es prop le malaute un loc en le qual intre la extremitat de la taula.	May if it does not return with this form, then a table is taken from which the height or length is in the air of three brasas, and is dug into the wall of which I have said that it is near the patient a place where the end of the table enters.
E aprop pausa la maytat de la taula sobre le spondilh, e·l metge pause les sieus pes sobre l’autre extremitat, e estrenha be entro que le spondil sia coartat e que retorne al sieu loc.	Then the top of the table is placed on the spine, and the doctor places his feet on the other extreme part, and then extends it in such a way that the spine is pulled and he returns to his place.
E si tu voles, obre am torn le qual es revolvut am la ma; e es que tu fiques en terra deves le cap del malaute en le derier del pug dos fustz, la longitut dels quals sia d’un bras, e deves le cap de lu en le derier del pug eyssament dos fustz; e sia la longitut que es entre quascun fust un palm, e ja es fayt en quascun fust trauc en le qual corr torn, e quascun sia mot fermat en terra per so que no sia maugut.	And if you want, open the door which is turned with the hand; and it is that you are on the ground the head of the patient at the back of two sticks whose length is a braza, and the head of him is in the back of two sticks only; and its length is between each stick a palm, and it is made in each stick a hole through which run one, and each one is stopped on the ground so that it does not move.
E sia mes un fust redon en le qual es le torn, e sia revolvut en les dos traucs dels dos fustz.	And be also one round stick in which there is the door, and is turned in both ends of the two sticks.
E en la extremitat de lu es un trauc en le qual es format le fust, la longueza del qual es un palm am aquo que es revolvut; e en les dos autres fustz es semblant de aquel.	And in the extreme of him is a hole in which it is made the stick, and its length is a palm with which it is turned; and in the two other sticks is similar to that one.
E aprop strenh les liamentz que has streyt en le pietz del malaute en le trau le qual es deves le cap de lu, e les liamentz que has streyts en las coyssas de lu en le torn le qual es deves les pes de lu.	Then adjust the bells which you have put on the feet of the patient in the hole through which it runs, and is turned; and adjust the bells that you have put on the thighs of him in the door through which it is turned, and are similar to that one.
E aprop deves quascun torn e stia un ministre que torssa le torn am la sua ma, e le metge engualhe le spondil segon que havem dit.	And apropos any door and there is a minister who twists the door with his hand, and the doctor twists the spine according to what I have said.
E aquesta es la forma del torn:	And this is the form of the turn:
E aprop pus que le spondil es retornat, e le loc es engualhat, lahoras cove que pauses empastre exciccatiu am album de huou, e aprop estopa; e aprop pause sobre le empastre astela de taula de la qual la latitut sia de tres ditz o enviro aquels, e la longitut de lu sia quantitat que prengua le loc de la gelbositat, e sobre la partida del spondil sa.	Then as soon as the spine has returned, and the place is closed up, then put a dry cloth on a table, and then stop it with a mat; then pause over the cloth a table of which the height is three fingers or around that one, and its length is the quantity which takes up the place of gangrene, and over the separation of the spine see.
E aprop sia liat am liament le qual havem dit, e uze le malaute de nutriment subtil entro que sia sanat.	Then tie it with a bell which I have said, and use the patient for food subtle within that is cured.
E si roman alcuna iminencia en le loc en la fi de la sanacio, lahoras cove que sian aministradas medicinas que moilifico e liniscan am aministracio de la taula per lonc temps, la qual havem recomtada; e ja es aministrada en aquel loc lamina de plom.	And if there is any immediacy in the place at the end of the cure, then as soon as the medicine is soft and clears up for a long time, which I have recommended; and it has been given in that place a layer of lead.
E alcunas veguadas accideys imminencia en le derier dels spondils del dos, e es cujat per aquela dislocacio; e es aquel os le qual ja imineys per que no cove que sia fayta prosompcio a lu am aquesta medicina, quar fort leu fara a tu accidir mort.	And in some cases the immediacy occurs in the back of the spine of two, and it is caught by that dislocation; and that is the bone which you have already mentioned for that there is no need to do that medicine to him, because it will fort make him die soon.
Capitol .xxxi.	Chapter LXXXI.
De curacio de anca dislocada.	Of Cure for Dislocated Hip
Sapias que la junctura del ancha e la junctura del muscle no endeve sino dislocacio tant solament, e no accideys ad aquelas aquo que accideys a las autras juncturas de petita remocio e concavitat.	Know that the joint of the thigh and the joint of the muscle do not end only by dislocation, and do not occur in those which occur to the other joints with little movement and concave shape.
E la junctura de la ancha es dislocada segon quatre manieyras, quar es dislocada a las partidas dedintz, o a las partidas defora, o a las partidas denant, o a las partidas detras.	And the hip joint is dislocated according to four ways, because it is dislocated inwardly, or outwardly, or forwardly, or backwardly.
E majorment es dislocada a las partidas dedintz, e pauc a las partidas denant o a las partidas detras.	And mainly it is dislocated inwardly, and sparingly to the forwards or backward.
E senhal de la dislocacio de lu a las partidas de dintz es quar, quan tu ajustas la camba del malaute sana am la malaute, es pus longua e·l denolh es pus heminent que de la sana, e·l malaute no pot doblar le sieu pe deves le lenguonar, e es le loc que siec le lengonar apostemat de apostema caut, per so que·l cap de la coyssa ja es pervengut aqui.	And the sign of the dislocation of him to the insides is that, when you adjust the arch of the patient with his back being straight, it becomes longer and the spine becomes more curved than before; and the patient cannot bend his neck because it does not arrive at this place.
E·l senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio es a las partidas defora, es que les accidentz de lu so contraris ad aquest accident.	And the sign of that one in which the dislocation occurs is to the outsides, it is that the accidents of him are opposite to this accident.
E senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio a las partidas denant es quar expan la camba sieua segon compliment, mays empero no dobla aquela ses dolor que es en le denol, e si se perforsa ad anar e no pot sobre aquo a las partidas denant; e la urina de lu es retenguda e l’engonar de lu es apostemat, e deves la ambulacio de lu sobre le talo.	And the sign of that one in which the dislocation occurs to the forwards is that it expands his arch according to completion, but does not bend that side that hurts him, and if he goes on walking; and his urine is repressed and his back is more curved than before, and his walk is on the heels.
E senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio a las partidas detras es que no expande le denol, ni no puesca doblar aquel denant que doble le engonar, e la camba de lu es pus breva que l’autra, e l’engonar es mollificat, e·l cap de la coyssa es deves aquel loc.	And the sign of that one in which the dislocation occurs to the backward is that it does not expand his back, nor can he bend that side which hurts him, and if he goes on walking; and his back is shorter than before, and his back is more curved than before; and the neck of the patient is bent here.
Mays reduccio de las specias de aquesta dislocacio es que tu consideras, lahoras, si la dislocacio es vetusta et antiqua, que ja es anticada am le havent aquela aprop tu aministras reduccio de lu e roman segon la sua disposicio, lahoras no es en aquela curacio de tot; e adonc no cove que en aquela sia fayta prosompcio.	May the reduction of these spices for this dislocation is that you consider, then, if the dislocation occurs from old age and age, because it has already been cured with him that you administer a reduction to him according to his disposition; then do not consider that in that one should be done soon.
Mays en aquel del qual la dislocacio es recent, e es una de las quatre specias de dislocacio, lahoras te coyta ad aquo que volvas la junctura e extendas aquela a las partidas dedintz e a las partidas defora, e mau aquela a la dextra e sinistra, quar fort leu retorna e no indigeys de autra cura.	May in that one in which the dislocation is recent, and it is one of the four kinds of dislocation, then you cure him by turning the joint and extending it to the insides and outsides, and pushing it to the right and left, because it will return strongly and do not require any other cure.
Mays, si no retorna en aquesta manieyra, lahoras cove que tu prepares ministre fort e extendas la camba de lu de la partida pus dejos, o am las suas mas, o am liament lo qual es liat sobre la camba desus le denol; e autre ministre extenda la ma de aquel desus enayssi que meta las suas mas dejos les titillics de lu; e aprop strenha am liament leon sobre la razit de la coyssa, e tengua autre ministre ters le extremitat del liament.	Now, if it does not return in this way, then cover that you prepare minister strong and extend the back of him from the departure put down, or have its hands or am a link what is attached over the back above his head; and another minister extends the hand of him from the behind in the neck which makes the hands down his toes; and apropos tighten that one on the root of the thigh, and hold another minister the extreme end of the link.
E sia extencio de lu o de la partida dedintz a l’angonar a la partida de la furcula, o de la partida detras a la partida del dos.	And be removed from him or from the departure behind to the neck in the departure of the fork, or from the departure behind to the departure of two.
E sia la extencio de totz aquels en una veguada entro que·l malaute sia elevat am le sieu cos de terra e que romangua pendent.	And be removed from all these in one side that the patient is elevated on his back and that it remains hanging pendent.
E aquesta specia de extencio es specia cominal a totas quatre.	This type of extension is specific to all four.
E donc si la dislocacio retorna am aquo que havem dit, sira bo; e sino, lahoras es necessari a tota specia aquo que dire de la propria curacio.	And therefore if the dislocation returns at which we have spoken, it is good; and otherwise, it is necessary in all types of water that you speak of the own treatment.
En la reduccio de lu propria, quan es dislocada, e la dislocacio es a las partidas dedintz, cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre le sieu latz sa; e aprop pausa les liamentz sobre la razit de la coyssa en aquel loc le qual entre le cap de la coyssa e·l loc que es dejos le langonar; e aprop exten le liament en sus de la part del angonar a la pus auta partida de la furcula.	In the reduction of him himself, when it is dislocated, and the dislocation is in the departures behind, cover that the patient is raised on his back at its side; and apropos place the links on the root of the thigh in that location which is between the head of the thigh and the location which is behind the neck; and apropos extend the link to its side from the neck to the highest departure of the fork.
E aprop autre ministre fort prengua les brasses de lu, e amerme le loc gros de la coyssa malaute e extenda a las partidas deforo per extencio vehement, quar aquela retorna en le sieu loc.	And apropos other minister strong takes the hands of him, and tears the gross location of the patient's thigh and extends in the departures behind for violent extension, because that one returns to its location.
E aquesta specia es de pus leugiera curacio am la qual aquest membre es reduzit que las autres specias.	And this type is the least difficult treatment with which this member is reduced than the other types of treatments.
Mays si es excusat sobre tu e no obezeys al entrament am aquesta specia de curacio de tot, lahoras cove que sian liatz les dos pes del malaute ensemps am liament fort, leugier, sobre amdos les talos e amdos les denols.	But if it does not please you and does not obey to the treatment in all types of this treatment, then cover that they are attached both feet of the patient with a pointed link, lightly, on both toes and on both heels.
E sia la longitut de quascun de son par la quantitat de quatre ditz, e sia la camba malaute extenduda mays que l’autre per quantitat de dos ditz.	And be the length of each one of his four times, and be the back extended more than the other two times by the quantity of two times.
E aprop le malaute sia suspendut sobre le cap del fust, e que sia en la mayso; e sia la longitut de lu de la terra la quantitat de dos brasses.	And apropos the patient is suspended on its head and that it is in its largest; and be the length of him of the ground by the quantity of two arms.
E aprop comanda a un jove fort que minuesca le cap de la coyssa, e sia suspendut am le malaute autre jove, e l’autre jove minuent la coysa am fortaleza empellesca, quar la junctura retorna al sieu loc am velocitat.	And apropos order to a young man strong that it minimizes the head of the thigh, and be suspended on the patient another young man, and the other young man minimizes the thigh with a pointed link, because the joint returns to its location with speed.
Mays en la reducio propria, quan es dislocacio a la partida defora, cove que·l malaute jaga sobre pug segon que havem recomtat en le havent gelbozitat; e sia strenhut le liament sobre la camba malauta propriament e sobre le pietz de lu.	But in the reduction of him himself, when it is dislocated in the departure behind, cover that the patient keeps on his back second as we have spoken in the having been shaken; and be tightened the link over the back specifically and over the feet of him.
E aprop dos fustz sian pausatz, la un als pes de lu, e l’autre al cap; e aprop sian pausatz fustz ajustatz al mieg del pueg ficat sobre·l qual draps humitz sian envolopatz, per so que·l malaute no sia dampnajat per que·l fust sia entre las coyssas de lu, per que deves la extencio a las partidas dejos no sia atirat.	And apropos two servants are placed, the one on the feet of him and the other on its head; and apropos two servants are adjusted in the middle of the patient' thigh which is attached to it from behind so that the patient does not suffer because the fust is between the thighs of him, so that the extension to the departures behind is not pulled.
E aprop quascun ministre extenda a la sua part, e·l metge am la sua ma enguala la reduccio segon l’art.	And apropos each minister extends in its side, and the doctor takes his hand to the treatment according to the art.
Donc, si obezeys a revercio, sira bo grandament; e sino, pausa sobre aquela diligentment e ayssi quo havem dit en gelbozitat per aquela engualment.	So, if you obey in reverse, it is good greatly; and otherwise, pause on that one diligently and so that what we have said in the shaking of that one with the engagement of him.
Mays cove que·l malaute jagua sobre les sieus latz sa quetament.	But cover that the patient keeps on its side and is quiet.
E quan la dislocacio es a las partidas denant, lahoras cove que la camba sia extenduda leugierament, e es segon aquesta meteyssa narracio sobre pueg; e le metge pause la palma de la sua ma dreyta sobre·l langonar malaute, e aprop coarte aquel am l’autra ma, e am aquela coartacio pausa aquel extendut a las partidas dejos a la partida del denol.	And when the dislocation is in the departures behind, then cover that the back is extended lightly; and it is second according to this text about pueg; and the doctor pauses the palm of its hand right on the neck of the patient' side, and apropos cuts it with the other one, and the cut extends to the sides behind to the departure of the neck.
E si la dislocacio es a las partidas detras, lahoras no cove que·l malaute sia extendut a las partidas dejos, e es elevat sobre la terra; habantz cove que sia pausat sobre causa dura, ayssi cum cove le eyssament si l’ancha de lu es dislocada a las partidas defora, segon aquo que havem dit del jasement de lu sobre dos anchas; e es sobre la sua cara e les liamentz sian extendutz, segon que havem dit, no ha guayre.	And if the dislocation is in the departures behind, then cover that the patient is extended to the sides behind and is raised on the ground; but, because it is placed on a hard cause, so that the engagement of him is not broken if the two arms are dislocated behind, according as we have spoken about the engagement of his arms over two broad surfaces; and it is on its face and the links are extended, according to what we have said, it does not go down.
E cove que sia aministrada compressio am taula sobre le loc al qual yeys la junctura.	And cover that is administered compression on a table over the location which has the joint.
Donc cum la reducio es complida segon que cove — e·l senhal de la reduccio de lu no es amaguat a tu, e es que tu extendas del malaute doas cambas, e quan tu vezes aquelas enguals e le malaute extrenh la sieua camba e expandeys aquela ses excusacio, lahoras sapias que·l membre segon que cove es retornat — e lahoras tu ajusta doas coyssas e pausa empastre e extrenh am benda ayssi que la ancha no sia mauguda en alcuna de las partidas; e adheresca le malaute a repaus per tres dias o per quatre.	But, when the reduction is completed as we have spoken  — and the symbol of the reduction of him himself does not please you, and it is that you extend two backs of him, and when you see those they are engaged and he extends his back and the other one opens it, so that the wide surface is not broken in any of the sides; and adheres to him with a bandage for three days or four.
E aprop deslia le liament e l’empastre, e compara la una camba am l’autra.	And apropos take off the link and the bandage, and compare one back with the other.
Lahoras, si vezas aquelas enguals en vustament, lahoras sapias que la dislocacio ja es fermada, e adonc layssa le malaute anar.	And then, if you see those they are engaged in a vestment, it is good that the dislocation has already been stopped, and let go of the patient to walk.
E si vezas alcuna causa de mollificacio, lahoras tu retorna e emplastra aquel, e extrenh aquel segon la tua primiera strectura, e layssa aquel en tres dias.	And if you see a cause of softening, then you return and bandage that one, and open it according to your first stretching, and let go of that in three days.
E aprop deslia aquel, e fay aquel tardar en ambulacio sobre quascu per alcus dias, entro que sia confortat.	And apropos take off that one, and make that one walk slowly for some days, until it is comforted.
Capitol .xxxii.	Chapter 32.
De curacio de dislocacio del denolh.	Of Treatment of the Dislocation from the Neck.
Le denolh es dislocat segon tres manieyras, quar es dislocat a las partidas defora, e a las partidas dedintz, e a las partidas dejos mays a las partidas detras; e a las partidas denant no es dislocat.	The neck is dislocated according to three ways, because it is dislocated in the departures behind, and in the departures behind, and in the sides behind more than the sides behind, and not dislocated in the departures before.
E le senhal de dislocacio de lu es que comandes al malaute que aplique la sua camba am la coyssa; lahoras sapias que·l denol es dislocat.	The symbol of dislocation of him himself is that you order to the patient that it applies its back to the thigh; then know that the neck is dislocated.
E la restauracio de totas las manieyras de lu es que fassas cezer le malaute dreyt, enayssi que ja extenda la sieua camba, si pot sobre aquo; adherir le tieu dos a la cara de lu, e pausa le pe de lu entre les tieus pes; e aprop fay adherir le denol de lu am las tuas palmas, e rete aquelas entre les tieus ditz sobre le denolh de lu am fortaleza, e autre ministre extenda le sieu pe entro que·l denol retorne a son loc.	And the restoration of all types of him is that you pass over his head to the right side, in the meantime that he already extends its back, if it can do so on him; adhere his two hands to his face, and place the foot between his toes; and apropos make adhere his neck to your hands, and hold those between your fingers above the neck of him with force, and another minister extends his foot within that one until it returns to its location.
E senhal de reddicio de lu es que la sua camba adharesca am la coyssa am levitat no-laboroza.	The symbol of recovery of him himself is that its back adheres to the thigh with a light touch.
E aprop emplastra aquel e fay adhirir la camba am la coyssa, e aprop lia aquelas emsemps am una benda per tres dias o per quatre, e aprop deslia aquelas.	And apropos bandage that one and make adhere the back to the thigh, and apropos hold those for three days or four, and then take off those.
E no uze le malaute de ambulacio per alcus dias, entro que sia sanat e cofortat.	And do not use the patient' walking for some days, until it is comforted and healed.
Mays si la reduccio de lu a tu es excusada, lahoras aministra fort extencio am liamentz dels quals en la curacio de la hancha precedit narracio.	But if the reduction of him to you is excused, then administer extension with strong links in the treatment which has preceded the narrative about the hand.
Capitol .xxxiii.	Chapter 33.
De la curacio de la dislocacio del talo.	Of Treatment of the Dislocation from the Throat.
Le talo alcunas veguadas es remaugut per petita remocio, e alcunas veguadas es dislocat segon compliment, e la dislocacio de lu es fayta o a las partidas dedintz o a las partidas deforo.	The throat is sometimes reawakened by a small movement, and sometimes dislocated according to the compliment, and the dislocation of him is caused at the departures behind or in the departures before.
E le senhal de la dislocacio de lu es que vezes le talo imflat procedent a la partida a la qual es dislocat.	The symbol of the dislocation of him is that you see his throat inflate from the departure where it is dislocated.
Mays la curacio de la remocio de lu es de leugiera reddicio, e es que sia extendut am facilitat am las mas e sia engualhat entro que retorne.	The treatment of the reawakening of him is of a light recovery, and it is that he is extended with ease to his sides and engaged within that one returns.
Mays en la curacio de lu quan es dislocat segon compliment, cove que fasses cezer le malaute dreyt, e tengua aquel un ministre fort e valent de la partida detras del dos de aquel en le mieg loc de lu.	If the patient is dislocated according to the condition, then you must make a cut on his right side, and there should be a minister who is strong and skilled in the operation behind two of his sides in his middle position.
E aprop te tu am la tieua ma dreyta le pe de la pus sobirana part, e am la tua ma sinistra de la part pus dejos del pe en le loc de la cavilha.	Then you must place your right hand on the upper part of the foot, and your left hand on the lower part of the foot in the area of the instep.
E aprop atira le pe a tu am la tua ma dreyta, e aprop am la sinistra per dos veguadas, e aprop exten am la sinistra; e empelleys le pietz del pe am la dreyta deves la camba ses trebalh.	Then throw the foot to you with your right hand, and place your left hand on two veils, and stretch it out to the left; and fix the feet of the patient with your right hand towards the back of his legs.
E fay aquo doas veguadas segon que havem comtat.	Then make two veils according to what has been counted.
E aprop empelleys le pietz del pe a la camba la tersa veguada, e tu es a la cavilha.	Then fix the feet of the patient on the third veil, and you are in the area.
Donc si retorna en una veguada o en dos segon aquesta manieyra, e si vezes le pe engualhat, es bo; e sino, lahoras sobre lu itera la operacio, quar aquel retorna.	So if you return in one veil or two according to this manner, and if the foot comes out again, it is good; and if not, then repeat the operation on him, for he will return.
Mays si a tu es prohibida la reduccio de lu am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras fay jaser le malaute sobre le sieu dos sobre terra, e estrenh un paysel mot en terra fermat, e que caja entre las coyssas de lu, e tu ja has envolopat sobre lu drap per so que no ledesca le malaute.	If it is forbidden to reduce him on the ground according to what we have told you, then make the patient lie down on his back on the ground, and spread a blanket over him tightly, so that he does not move; and wrap a cloth around his legs, and you have already opened the space between his thighs, and placed a cushion under them.
E aprop le ministre de lu tengua las suas coyssas, e aprop autre ministre extenda le pe am las suas mas o am liament que lie sobre le col del pe; e aprop extenda aquel quascun ministre contre extencio del sieu par, e le payssel sia extant entre las coyssas del malaute retinent aquel, per so que·l cos de lu no sia atirat a las partidas dejos deves la sua extencio.	Then the minister of the patient should hold his legs, and another minister should extend the foot to him by its toes or by its heel; and another minister should place himself behind the patient's leg, and the blanket should be placed between his thighs, so that the skin does not move from its position; and the minister should place himself behind the patient's head, and the cloth should be spread under it.
E aprop le metge enguala la dislocacio am las sieuas mas, e autre ministre tengua la coyssa sana a las partidas dejos, quar la dislocacio retorna am la facilitat.	Then the doctor will absorb the dislocation with his hand, and another minister will hold the healthy part of the patient's leg, because the dislocation returns easily.
E donc cum retorna la dislocacio e es declarada a tu la sanetat de la reduccio de lu, lahoras pausa emplastre e extrenh aquela am liamentz fortment, e ligua le pe am liament a la camba.	So if the dislocation returns and you have declared to him the health of reducing him, then take out the cloth firmly, and bind the foot tightly with bandages; and bind the foot on the side of the leg.
E cove que temes o te guardes dels nervis les quals so detras sobre le talo, per que le liament sobre aquel no sia vehement e leda aquel fortment.	Then when you are afraid or guarded from the nerves that are behind on the foot, so that the bandage does not move and is held tightly.
E aprop layssa aquel per dos dias o per tres; e si le liament es mollificat, extrenh aquel.	Then leave it alone for two or three days; and if the bandage becomes soft, take it out.
E aprop deslia aquel en le ters dia o en le quart, e prohibeys le malaute de anament per xl dias.	Then remove it after three days, and forbid the patient from moving for ten days.
Mays si es forsat de anar denant aquel spazi, no es fayta segurtat que la dislocacio no sia sobre lu dissolvuda e corrumpuda, e aprop aquo que no recipia curacio.	If it is forced to move in front of that space, it should not be taken for granted that the dislocation has not been dissolved and corrupted, and do not give treatment then.
E si accideys a lu apostema caut, lahoras cove que tu aministre en la cedacio de lu aquo en lo qual precedic la nostra narracio, en autre loc de curacio e de embrocacio, entro que sia remauguda.	And if it happens to him an apoplexy, then when you have described the treatment of this disease in our narrative, in another place of cure and preparation, but not be repeated.
Capitol .xxxiiii.	Chapter.
De curacio de dislocacio dels ditz dels pes.	Of treatment for joint pain of the feet.
Cove que aquel qu’es dislocat sia engualhat am pauca extencio ses trebal; e aquo que no es dificil, abantz es leugier.	If the dislocated person is covered with a few veils, it should be taken off gently; and if it is not difficult, take it off quickly.
Mays si la dislocacio es en alcus nozes del dos del pe, lahoras cove que fassas cezer le malaute le sieu pe sobre loc engual de la terra o sobre taula, e sia estant ayssi cum si anava.	If the dislocation is in one of the two feet, then when you make a cut on his right side, and he moves like this, it is good; and if not, do not do so.
E aprop tu sta de pes, e pausa le tieu pe sobre aquo que imineys de las juncturas, e aprop calca aquel am le tieu pe am vertut entro que retorne, e que vejas aquel ja engualhat e no aparesca en le loc eminencia.	Then you should stand on the feet, and pause the right foot over this one that is in the middle of the joints, and place your hand firmly on it, so that it does not move; and see if it has already been covered and does not appear in the area of importance.
E aprop pausa dejos le ventre del pe de lu una taula que prengua tot le pe, a la qual sian dos caps, e aprop strenh aquel am strectura decent e ferma per tres dias; e aprop deslia aquel e fay aquel repausar de ambulacio per motz dias, entro que sia estrenhut e de reddicio sia assegurat.	Then pause the lower part of the foot on a table that takes all of it, to which there are two ends, and hold it in place with firm and strong hand for three days; then remove it, and let him rest walking for ten days, but not be repeated and assured recovery.
Capitol .xxxv.	Chapter.
De las specias de dislocacio que sian faytas am plagua o am fractura o am quascuna ensemps.	Of the types of joint pain that are caused by plague or fracture or some other thing.
Quan accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, e tu te perforssas en la curacio de aquela e en la restauracio de lu, motas veguadas succezeys la mort.	When such a cause occurs, and you are engaged in the treatment of that person and in restoring him, look carefully at his condition.
E per aquo no cove que sobre la curacio de lu presuma, sino aquel que es savi en l’art, de lonc uzatge, misericordios e pietados, tardiu, no-ardit ni presomptuos; e que use en le comensament de medicinas que cedan apostemas cautz tant solament, e leyssa le malaute al divinal jutgament, sino ad aquel al qual speras salut de perdicio, am de la malautia alleviacio, e en la qual appareys alcuna speransa.	And for the treatment of him do not assume that you have learned the art, but one who is wise in the field, long-suffering, merciful and compassionate, slow to anger and not proud; and who uses only the mildest remedies first, leaving the severe ones for later, and delivering the sick person to the divine judgment, but hoping for salvation from destruction, using the alleviation of the malady, and seeing some hope.
E adonc esforsa te tantost far de lu la reduccio en le comensament de la causa, denant que endevengua apostema caut.	Then try to reduce him as soon as possible in the beginning of the disease, before it becomes dangerous.
E adonc si le membre retorna segon que volem, lahoras aministra regiment le qual ceda apostema caut e cura la plagua am aquo que conveneys a lu dels enguentz desiccatius.	Then if the member returns according to what we have told you, then administer the medicine that causes an apoplexy and cures plague with the water of life.
E si dislocacio es am fractura e accideys en le os satagias separadas, lahoras tu perforsa le stement de lor, e fay en aquo so que havem dit en las malautias simplas de aquo que es precedit en les locz de aquels.	If the dislocation is caused by fracture and the bones are separated, then you should reduce their movement, and do in him what has been said about simple treatment for him who has fallen; and be careful not to damage his joints.
E guarda e esquiva segon la tua vertut aquel del intrament en las vias de temor segon que a tu es precedida la mia predicacio; quar aquo es milhor a tu deves le tieu Creator, e mays permanent a la tua gloria, e mays saludos al tieu cos verays aquels en le tieu temps.	And guard and avoid according to your ability the instrument in the ways of danger, as it has been described to you; because it is better for you to depend on God's help, and remain firm in his glory, and salute the true king in the true time.
Ayssi fineysso las paraulas de Albucasim perfieytament de las quals Dieus ne sia benezeyt.	Thus ends the words of Al-Bucassim, explaining perfectly the points that God desires.
Amen.	Amen.
