Ayssi comensan las paraulas de Albucasim .	Thus begins Albucasis' words.
O, filhs, pus yeu he a vos complit aquest libre, le qual es le derier de la sciencia de medicina, per le compliment de lu so consequit la fi en lu, e per las exposicios de lu, e per las declaracios de lu, es a mi vist que yeu complesca aquel a vos am aquest tractat, le qual es partida de la operacio am ma, so es cyrurgia.	O, son, I have completed this book to you, which is the last of medical science, because its end is accomplished by it, and for its explanations, and its declarations, I see that I accomplish that to you from this treatise, which is a beginning of surgery.
Quar la operacio am ma es prostrada en nostre regio e en nostre temps de tot privada, entro que fort leu peric la sciencia de lu, e le vistigi de lu es ostat; e no romasero de lu sino alcunas petitas descripcios en les libres dels Antics, les quals mudero las mas e endevenc ad aquels error e heyssitacio entro que son clausas las entencios de lu e es elonguada la forsa de lu e l’art.	For surgery is laid down in our region and in our time totally deprived, except that very much the science of it, and its traces remain; and they do not end except in a few small descriptions in books of the Ancients, which have altered their more and are mistaken and wrong within that they are closed the expressions of it, and is elongated the force of it and art.
E es vist a mi que yeu vivifique aquela am ordenacio de aquest tractat en aquela segon la via de exposicio e de declaracio e de abreviacio; e per que vengua am las formas dels ferramentz de cautheri e dels autres instrumentz de la obra cum sia per addicio de la declaracio, e per preparacio de lu, la qual causa es necessaria.	And it seems to me that I animate that with an order of this treatise in that second way of expression and declaration and abbreviation; and because it comes with the forms of tools of cauterization and other instruments of the work by addition of the declaration, and by preparation of it, which necessary cause is.
Mays la causa per la qual no es atrobat bo artifex am la sieua ma en aquest nostre temps, es quar la art de medicina es longua, e que cove le sieu actor denant aquo esser excercitat en la sciencia de anotomia la qual recontec Gualia entro que sapia les juvament dels membres e las formas de aquels, e la conjunctio e la separacio de lor; e haia la conoyssensa dels osses, dels nervis e dels lacertz, e·l nombre de aquels, e la egrecio de lor; e de las venas pulsatils e de las quietas, e dels locs del eyssiment de lor.	The cause why the good artisan does not master himself in our time, is that the art of medicine is long, and that his actor goes before being exercised in the science of anatomy which connects Gualia within that he knows the springs of the limbs and their forms, and the connection and separation of them; and has the knowledge of bones, nerves, and ligaments, and their names, and the structure of them; and of the pulsating veins and the quiet ones, and places of their impression.
E per aquo ditz Ypocras que am u nom es mot, mays en l’obra petit, e majorment en la art de la ma.	And therefore says Iopracras that by a name is meant, more in the small work and more in the art of surgery.
Mays nos ja avem dit de aquel en l’introit de aquest libre; quar qui no es scient aquo que li avem dit de anotomia, no es evacuat que no caia en error per la qual siran mortz les homes, ayssi cum yeu he vist trops de aquels, quar alscus son formatz en esta sciencia e gettan se de aquela ses sciencia e ses experiment.	But we have said of that in the entrance of this book; for who does not know that I have told him about anatomy, it is not understood that he falls into error by which men may die, so often as I have seen examples thereof, because they are formed in this science and get from that other science and those experiments.
Quar yeu vi un metge folh e enperit aver incidit un apostema escrophilos en le colh de una femna, e incidic alcunas arterias del colh per que fluic gran sanc entro que la femna cazec morta entre las mas de lu.	For I saw a doctor who was learned and experienced to have cut an ulcerous sore in the neck of a woman, and cut some arteries in the neck because they flowed with great blood, so that the woman died among her more.
E vi un autre metge que pres que el traguera una peyra d’un home le qual avia procesit en sa etat, e la peyra era gran, e venguet a lu e trayssec aquela peyra am un tros de la vesiqua, per que aquel home al tertz dia es mort.	And I saw another doctor who was learned and experienced to have cut off a great stone from a man which had passed in his state, and the stone was large, and he brought it off him by a thread of the bladder, so that that man died at the third day.
E yeu ja apelat fuy a estrayre aquela, e vi que per la grandesa de la peyra e per la disposicio del malaute conogui subre lu que morira.	And I have called it away to extract that; and I saw that by the size of the stone and the disposition of the patient under him that he would die.
E vi un autre metge le qual prenia stipendic de un duc de nostra terra per cyrurgia, e endeven a un crastrat negre le qual era deves lu fractura en la coyssa de lu; e perparec le metge am la sua ignorancia, estrayssec la fractura, sobre la plagua, am pulvinas e astelas am forta strectura, e no layssec a la plagua espiracio.	And I saw another doctor who took a fee from a duke of our land for surgery; and in the same way he fractured him in the crotch; and prepared the doctor with his ignorance, cut off the fracture, on the skin, with dust and needles to strengthen it, and did not leave the skin breathing.
E aprop le desliet segons los sieus desiriers, e aprop le relieg, e aprop le leyssec per alcus jorns e comandec que nos deslies le liament; e estec ayssi entro que la coyssa e·l pe foro apostematz, e pervenguet a perdicio.	Then he took off the bandage according to his desires, and then he prayed, and then he left it off by some days and commanded that we take off the joint; and so came within that the crotch and the foot hole sore, and came into destruction.
E yeu fuy apelat a lu, e aparelhegui a desliar le liament, e conseguida es tranquilitat e enayssi amermet de sas dolors.	And I was called away to it, and I prepared myself to take off the bandage, and I got quiet and peaceful relief from his pains.
Mays empero ja corrupcio era confermada en le membre, per que no pogui refrenar aquela, e no cessec perambular la corrupcio en le membre entro que·l malaute peric.	But the corruption was confirmed in the member, so that I could not restrain it, and did not walk because of the corruption in the member until the patient perished.
E vi un autre metge le qual perforec un apostema cancros, e fo ulcerat aprop alscus dias, entro que foc magnificada la malicia de lu am lo senhor de lu.	And I saw another doctor who pierced a cancerous sore, and became ulcerated by some days, so that the evil of it spread out to his lord.
La qual causa es quar le cranc caut es pur de humor melencolic, lahoras no cove que pervengua a lu am ferr de tot, sino que sia an membre le qual suffertes que de tot fos hostat.	For the cause is because the cold cautery is pure of melancholic humors, therefore it seems that it does not cover to him in all ways, but it is a member which you suffer that of all ways it is host.
E per aquo, filhs, necessari es a vos que la operacio am ma sia devisada en dos devesios: so es en operacio a lu qual es associada salut, e en obra am la qual es perilh en las majors disposicios.	And therefore, son, it is necessary to you that the operation to the hand be divided into two operations: if it is an operation which is associated with health, and work in which there is danger in most dispositions.
E yeu ja he exsitat aquo en tot loc de aquest libre en le qual venc opperacio en la qual es error e temor; per que necessari es a vos que guardetz aquo e layssetz aquel, per que les folhs no atrobo via a parlar e a vos desonestar.	And I have already established this book here in all places of that treatise in which there is an operation in which it is error and fear; for it seems necessary to you that you guard this one and let those go, so that the pages do not prevent your speaking and displease you.
E donc prenetz las vostras armas am sollicitut e am proteccio de Dieu , e les vostres malautes am falicitat e am fermetat.	And therefore take your weapons with diligence and with protection of God, and your evils with help and with steadfastness.
E usatz de la milhor via per la gracia de Dieu perdusent a salut e a lausabla successio, e laysatz las malautias terriblas de difficil sanacio, e ostatz las vostras armas de aquo que vos fa temer, per so que ysitatio en vostra fe e en le vostre nom no vos evasisca: quar mays es remanent a la vostra gloria, e pus aut en le mon e en derier a las vostras sanctitatz.	And use the best way by the grace of God, so that you obtain health and praiseworthy succession, and leave behind you terrible evils of difficult healing, and retain your weapons from here that you are afraid; for it seems remaining to your glory, and later in the world and after your sanctities.
Gualia ja diyssec en alcunas sieuas monicios:	Gualia has said in some of his instructions:
“No mediquetz malautia mala, per so que mals metges no siatz nompnatz”.	"Do not make bad surgery, so that bad sutures do not go."
E yeu ja he devesit aquest libre segontz tres capitols.	And I have divided this book according to three chapters.
Comensa la divisio del libre, e primier de la primieyra partida.	Begin the division of the book, and first of the first part.
Le primier capitol ordenat del cap entro·s pes, en las formas dels instrumentz e en les ferrementz dels cauteris, e de aquo que necessari es en la opperacio.	The first chapter begins with the head, in the forms of instruments and tools of cauterization, and from that which is necessary in the operation.
La divisio de la segonda partida.	Begin the division of the second part.
Le segon capitol, de siccio e perforacio, e de ventosas, e de plaguas, e de extractio de sagetas e de semblantz ad aquelas, tot capitolat e ordenat de las formas dels instrumentz.	The second chapter begins with a comparison between operations on the hand and those on the foot, and in causes and dispositions which you must prevent and avoid.
Divisio de la tersa partida.	Begin the division of the third part.
Le tertz capitol, de restauracio e de dislocacio, e de curacio de torcio e de semblantz ad aquels; capitol ordenat del cap entro·s pes, e de las formas dels instrumentz.	The final chapter, which is the fifth, is about the extraction of arteries and general surgery; and from that which is necessary that the operation be divided into two parts.
De cauteri am foc e am medicina aguda e rememoracio de la opperacio.	Of fire cauterization and acute medicine and recurrence of the operation.
Am aquel comensa le tractat de tot le libre.	In that way begins the treatise of the whole book.
Cove que yeu digua la qualitat dels juvamentz de aquel cauteri e dels noccumentz de lu, e en qual compleccio sia prohibit cauteri.	It seems that I say the quality of the springs of cauterization and the knowledge of noxious things, and in what way it is forbidden to cauterize.
Donc dic que·l sermo de la qualitat del juvament de cauteri e del noccument de lu es sermo lonc e prolixs, e subtil per sciensa, e secret amaguat; e ja de lu a parlat gran multitut de savis, e de lu se son desacordatz, et a mi abasta un petit dels sermons de lor, temen perlonguacio.	Then I say that the speech of the quality of the spring of cauterization and the knowledge of noxious things is long and prolix, and subtle by science, and hidden; and already he has talked of a great many of these wise men, and they disagree with each other, and for me it is enough of a small part of their speeches, in fear of lengthiness.
E donc dic que cauteri comfereys a tota compleccio universalment la qual es am materia o ses materia, exceptat dos compleccios, las quals son compleccios caudas ses materia .	And therefore I say that cauterization confers on the whole complex of things universally the same quality, except for two complexes, which are complex things of different qualities.
En la compleccio cauda e secca am materia se desecordero; quar alcus dyssero que cauteri es juvatiu ad aquela, e les autres dyssero le contrari de aquel, que cauteri no es convenient en malautia la qual es per qualiditat e per siccitat, quar natura del foc es qualiditat e siccitat, e enconvenient es que malautia cauda e secca am aquo que es caut e sec sia sanada.	In the complex of tail and dry things there is disagreement; for some say that cauterization is helpful to this, and others say that it is contrary to it, which cauterization is not convenient in a tail and dry disease of quality and dryness, since the nature of fire is quality and dryness, and it is not suitable that such a disease be cured.
E diysec aquel que ditz le contrari de aquel, que per cauteri es fayt juvament en tota malautia cauda e secca que ve en les cors dels homes, quar quan tu comparas le cors de home e las humiditatz de lu a la compleccio del foc, atrobas le cors de home freg.	And he who says that the opposite of this is true, that it rejuvenates all maladies of the body and dryness that occurs in the bodies of men, for when you compare the bodies of men with the moisture of fire, you find that the bodies of men are parched.
E yeu dic per le sermo de aquel, que esperiment aquo ja a mi alscunas vetz a descubert.	And I tell by the words of him, who has already experienced this several times and discovered it.
Mays empero no cove que vengua sobre aquo aquel que ja es exproat e excersitat en le capitol de cauteri per derier exercici, e a conogut la diversitat de la compleccio dels homes e la disposicio de las malautias en lor meteyssas, e las causas de aquelas, e·ls accidentz de lor, e l’espasi del temps de aquelas.	But moreover I do not know that this comes about on him who has already been exhausted and exercised in the chapter of cauterization by subsequent exercise, and has recognized the diversity of the complexions of men and the causes of those maladies, and the accidents of their own, and the space of time of those.
Mays en las autras compleccios, no es sobre vos temor, e majorment en las malautias fregas e humidas, quar ja totz les metges se son acordatz sobre aquels, e no so desecordatz en le juvament am cauteri en aquelas.	But in the other complexions, there is no fear on you, and more in the wet and sore diseases, for all doctors have agreed about those, and they are not agreed as to the rejuvenation by cauterization in those.
E sapiatz, filhs, que del secret de curacio per cauteri am foc e de la bontat de lu, so sobre cauteri am medicina comburent, es quar le foc es simple, la accio del qual no perven sino al membre le qual es cauterizat e no notz al autre membre am lu ajustat sino am petit nocument.	And know, children, that of the secret of cure by fire cauterization and of the goodness of it, is about fire being simple, the action of which does not reach but to the member that is cauterized, and does not hurt the other member with the medicine applied until there is a small damage.
Mays la accio de medicina comburent perven ad aquel en les membres le qual de lu alunhat, e fort leu fa venir en le membre malautia de dificil sanacio e fort leu ausit.	But the action of the burning medicine reaches to that in the members which makes him bleed, and it is very strong to bring about the member with difficult cure and very strong to hear.
Mays le foc, per la sua sublimitat e de la sua substancia bontat, no fa aquo sino que superfluisca E ja es a nos conogut per experiment e per longitut de servitut de studi am l’art sobre le veritat de las causas; e per aquo yeu so excusat de la longitut del sermo E si no fos que no es legut al mieu libre en aquest pausero a vos secret amaguat am le foc, e la qualitat de la operacio de lu en les cors e de la sieua expulcio per la qual expellis las malautias, am sermo philosophic demostratiu, le qual siria acuit en las vostras pessas.	But fire, for its smallness and the goodness of its substance, does not do this, but makes it superfluous; and it is already known to us by experience and by the long service of study on the truth of causes; and by this I am absolved from the length of speech; And if it were not that it is not legible at my free hand in this pause to you secret-keeping with fire, and the quality of the operation of it in the bodies and of its expulsion through which are expelled the diseases, in philosophical demonstrative speech, which would serve well in your ears.
E sapiatz, filhs, que els se desacordan del temps en le qual es convenient far cauteri e pausan le milhor temps de primaveyra.	And know, children, that they disagree about the time when it is convenient to make cauterization and pause; the best time is in early spring.
E yeu dic que cauteri es convenient en tot temps, per so que le nocument per le temps accident es submergit en le juvament de aquo que am le cauteri es atirat, e majorment si le cauteri es per dolors o de dolors necessaries, fortz e fistinas, las quals no suffertan tarditat per so que es temut de aquelas que vengua malicia, que es major que petit nocument entrant per lo temps.	And I say that cauterization is convenient at all times, so that the damage by time's accident is submerged in the rejuvenation of him who undergoes cauterization; and more so if the cauterization is for pains or necessary pains, which do not suffer from delay because it is feared that those which come about are worse than small injury caused by fire entering through time.
E aysso no catz en vostras pessas, o, filhs, aquo no estiman sino le poble vulguar e les fols metges, so es que ad aquela malautia que es sanada per cauteri no es redicio tot temps, e pausan aquel consequen.	And thus, in your cases, or children, this is not held but by the common people and foolish doctors; therefore, for that disease which is cured by cauterization, it is convenient to pause at all times, and do so for the consequence.
E la causa no es ges ayssi quo els cuydan per aquo, quar cauteri no es sino en loc de medicina la qual altera la compleccio e esicca las humiditatz las quals son causa per que veno las dolors.	And the cause is not good in such a way that they guard against it by fire; for cauterization is only a place of medicine which alters the complexions and dries up the moisture which is the cause from which pains come.
Mays empero cauteri superflueys sobre la medicina per volicitat de la sua valitut e vertut de la sua operacio e grandesa del sieu senhor.	But, moreover, cauterization in excess over medicine by the virtue of its usefulness and the worth of its operation and the greatness of its lord.
E es possible que la sua malautia retorne en alcuna hora del temps, segon la compleccio del malaute e la locacio de la sua malautia, e la vertut de lu, e aquo que es preparat en le cors de lu de la agreguacio de las superfluitatz en lu, e aquo que es pervengut a lu en la sua acquisicio en viandas e semblantz de aquelas causas; sino que la malautia en la qual sia aministrat cauteri sia malautia subtil en membre de paucas superfluitatz e humiditatz, ayssi cum cauteri de dent per dolor e semblantz ad aquel, possible es que en lu no retorne aquela dolor, mays aquo se fa en petitz.	And it is possible that the disease in which it has been given cauterization returns at any hour of time, according to the complexion of the disease and the location of the disease, and the virtue of it; and that which is prepared in his bodies by the addition of the superfluities in them, and that which is received into him by the acquisition in food and semblant things of those causes; but if the disease in which cauterization has been given is a subtle one in a member of few superfluities and moisture, then, when it has been given cauterization for toothache and similar to it, it is possible that, in his body, it does not return that pain, but remains there.
E mays sermo vulgar es que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina, e es sermo dreyturier, no ad aquo que els entendo en lu, quar els crezo que no es curacio que aprofieyta am medicina ni am autra causa aprop cauteri.	And moreover, common speech is that cauterization is the last remedy of medicine, and it is a quick speech not suited to him who understands it, for they think that it is no cure which adds benefit by medicine or any other cause; but that cauterization is suited to him.
E la causa es en contrari de aquo; e la entencio que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina no es sino quan administram las manieyras de curacio en alcunas malautias, e aquelas medicinas no conferieysso, e aprop en la fi de la causa aministra hom cauteri, e aprofieyta ad aquela.	And the cause is contrary to this; and the intention that cauterization is the last remedy of medicine is only when we administer the ways of cure in certain diseases, and those medicines do not benefit, and appropriately at the end of the disease give him cauterization, and add it to that.
E lahoras de aqui cat16 que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina, no segon la entencio la qual entendo les vulgars e trops dels fols metges.	And from here I will explain why cauterization is the last remedy of medicine, not according to the intention which the common people and foolish doctors understand.
E diyssero les antics que cauteri am aur es milhor que cauteri am ferr, e no diyssero aquo sino per la equalitat del aur e sublimitat de la sua sustancia.	And they say that fire cauterization for gold is better than fire cauterization for iron; and do not say this except for the equality of gold and the smallness of its substance.
E diyssero que le loc de cauteri no fa brac, cum aquo no sia absolutament vertat, quar yeu ja he aquo proat e he atrobat que aquel no fa aquo sino en alcus cors ses les autres, e cauteri am aquel es bo e milhor que am ferr ayssi quo els diyssero; mays empero quan tu fas cauteri am foc am de aur, no es a tu declarat, quar es egnit segon la quantitat que tu vols per la rugor de l’aur, e quar prepara a recebre freg; e si ajustas sobre lu ignicio se fon l’aur per le foc, e caso en le foc alcunas laminas per que le artifex catz per la occupacio de aquel.	And they say that the place of cauterization does not make it break, for when it is absolutely true, for I have seen fire prove and turn away that which does not make it break; but when you give cauterization by fire on gold, it is not known to you, for it is according to the quantity which you wish to make strong because of the roughness of gold, and because it prepares itself to receive; and if you put over it fire, then gold goes into the fire, and the metal-worker uses his hand as he wishes for the occupation of that.
E per aquo es fayt cauteri am ferr deves nos pus leugerament e pus propdanament a rectitut de operacio.	And by this is made cauterization on iron, we must place it with care and correctly to the operation.
E yeu ja he ordenat aquest capitol en le cauteri segon capitols, et he ordenat aquels del cap entro les pes, per so que aleugo le demandant aquo que vol de lu.	And I have ordered this chapter on cauterization according to the other chapters, and I have ordered those of the following chapters within the chapters, so that I answer the question which asks it.
De cauteri de dolor de cap per frigiditat e humiditat.	Of cauterization for headache by cold and moisture.
Le capitol primier.	The first chapter.
Aquesta cauterizacio confereys a la humiditat e frigiditat sobre le servel accident de la qual so doas causas, so es causa de soda e multitut de flux raumatic, apelat corissa, del cap a las partidas dels huelhs e de las aurelhas fluent, e multitut de dormir, e de dolor de dentz e del guolayro, e universalment de tota malautia que ve per fregiditat, ayssi cum paraliticament, sodo e apoplexio, e semblantz en aquelas malautias.	This cauterization confers on moisture and cold the second accident of which there are two causes, so it is a cause of soda and many types of flux from blood, that flows from the head to the parts of hair and ears; and many types of sleep, and pain of teeth and throat, and generally of all diseases that come by cold; as, if it makes one paralytic, or sickly, and apoplexial, and similar in those diseases.
La forma de aquesta cauterizacio es aquesta, que primieyrament comandes al malaute que sia evacuat am medicina lacsativa le cap mondificant, per tres o per quatre nueytz, segon que exhigeys la vertut del malaute e la edat de lu e la sua costuma.	The form of this cauterization is that, first of all, you order to the patient who is evacuated by lacative medicine the head in a cap, for three or four nights, according to whether you require the virtue of the medicine, and the age and custom of him; then you give a small amount of it.
E aprop comanda li que raza le sieu cap am razor, e aprop fay aquel sezer entre las tuas mas sobre una banca cayrada e que pause las suas mas sobre le pietz sieu.	And then order him to shave his head, and then place the razor between your two palms on a bench that is levelled; and place his hands over the sides of his skull.
E aprop pausa la razit de la tua palma aprop le pous sobre la razit del nas entre les huels sieus.	And then pause the razor from your palm placed on the edge of the razor between the side of his nose and his hairline.
Mays empero, cum le tieu dit del mieg loc es pervengut, signa aquel loc am tenta, e aprop igneys le cauteri olivar del qual aquesta es la forma:	But, moreover, when the boy says about his place it has come, he marks that place with a trial, and then he gives cauterization by olive oil; for this is the form:
E aprop pausa aquel sobre le loc senhat am tenta, a manieyra que descent, am la qual la tieua ma sia constrengida petit a petit, e tu revolveys aquel.	And then place him on that place by trial, in such a way that it sinks little by little, and you turn him around.
E aprop leva la tua ma leugerament e reguarda le loc, e si veses ja del os esser descubert alcuna quantitat del cap, ayssi cum la quantitat de gra de errs, lahoras eleva la tua ma, e si no torno la tua ma am aquel ferr, am autre de aquel, si es enfrigidat, entro que sia vist del os aquo que yeu he dit a tu.	And then lift your hand lightly and look at the place, and if you see any quantity of hair from the skull, then, as much grain of sand as needed to fill that space, raise your hand; and if it does not go up by fire, but another from it, if it is cold, until it is visible hair from the bone which I have told you.
E aprop pren un petit de sal e disolveys aquel sobre le loc e leyssa aquel per tres jorns.	And then take a little salt and dissolve him on that place and leave him there for three days.
E aprop pausa sobre lu coto enbegut en boder e leyssa aquel sobre lu entro que sia destrusida la scara del foc.	Then place over the cut in border and leave that inside which is destroyed the staircase of fire.
E aprop cura le loc am anguent tetrafarmacon entro que sia sanat.	And then cure the area with a fourfold bitter medicine so that it is healed.
E ja diyssero que quant la plagua roman uberta, tant mielhs geta le brac, per que es milhor e mays juvatiu.	And also they say that when the plague of Rome opens, so much honey is obtained from it, that it is better and more healing.
E diyssero alcus de lor que sia cauterizada la codena entro al os, e sia tengut le cauteri entro que sia adhurida alcuna partida de la specitut del os.	And they also say that the joint should be cauterized inside the bone, and that cauterization inside should be had so that some part of the flesh of the bone is scorched.
E aprop sia ras aquo que es adhust del os, e aprop sia curat.	Then let water be poured which is close to the bone, and then let it be cured.
E diyssero autres que am lo cauteri pervengua al derier, entro que enprema en le os forta enprecio entro que le os caga, e aquesta es la forma de alphecati petit:	And others say that the cauterization should reach the back, inside that it presses strongly against the bone, and this is the way of small animal:
E estiman de aquel loc expiran la vapors del cap.	They estimate that the vapors of the head are exhaled from that location.
E sia tenguda la plagua uberta per lonc temps, e aprop sia curada entro que sia consolidada.	And let the opened plague be held for a long time, and then let it be cured inside so that it is hardened.
Mays a mi no so vistas aquestas doas specias de cauteri de tot, sino en alcus homes segon via de temor; e layssa aquel, deves mi, milhor es am salut, quan es; quar le cap es develitat per solucio de continuitat de lu ayssi cum havem testificat en les autres membres, e majorment quan le cap del malaute es de freul natura.	More to me these two species of cauterization do not seem to me, but in some people according to the way of fear; and leave that, certainly, better is it for salvation, when it is; because the head is a division by solution of continuity of its own as we have testified in the other members, and more so when the head of the patient is of a fiery nature.
E la specia de cauteri primieyra es mays salva e milhor deves mi; e de aquela husi e am aquela obra am salut.	And the first species of cauterization is more saved and better to me; and from that one use I do this work for salvation.
Capitol segon.	I capitulate second.
Del cauteri del cap.	Of the head's cauterization.
Quan en tot le cap accideys dolor cronica e longua e aquo es en le malaute prolonguat, e usa de gerras e de cochias e de capipurges e de emplaustres e de guatz e de cadels e de gualinas e de semblantz, e majorment si ja es cauterizat am un cautere le qual recontam e no aprofieyta a lu deguna de aquelas causas, lahoras considera quar si le cap del malaute es de fort creacio en la sua natura; e no es freul et atroba mot gran freg, lahoras aquel cauterisa am autra cauteri dejos aquel un pauc.	When in all the head happens chronic and long pain and water is present in the patient for a long time, and it uses fire and knives and plasters and ointments and oils and similar things, and most if it has already been cauterized with another cautery which they tell and do not profit from any of those causes, then consider that since the head of the patient is of a strong creation in its nature; and it is not pleasant or causes much pain, then let that be cauterized with another cautery which leaves that a little.
E aprop cauterisa aquel sobre le corn del sieu cap am cauteri entro que la codena es partida.	And then cauterize that over the corner of his head with another cautery inside so that the joint is broken.
Incisa la codena e sia descuberta del os la quantitat la qual havem recontat e cauteriza aquel am un cauteri en la partida deriera del cap en le loc le qual es apelat vas, — e es aquel loc en le qual es pausada ventosa.	And incise the joint and uncover it from the bone the quantity which we have counted and then cauterize that with a cautery in the back of the head at the location which is called "vase", — and this is the location where the wind is stopped.
Et alleuja la tua ma en aysso, e no descobras le os, quar le malaute per aquo atroba mot gran dolor diversa de la dolor de totz les autres cauteris del cap.	And he thanks you in such a way, and does not uncover the bone, because by water the head suffers great pain which is different from the pain of all the other head's cauterizations.
E yeu diyre aquest cauteri en son loc, quar cove que·l cauteri am le qual so cauterisatz les corns del cap e le occiput es pus subtil cauteri que aquel am le qual es cauterisat le mieg loc del cap; e aquesta es la forma de lu.	And you direct this cauterization in its location, because when the cauterization with which the corners of the head are cauterized is softer than the cauterization with which the back of the head is cauterized, and this is the way of it.
Capitol ters.	I capitulate third.
De cauterisacio de emigranea no-antiqua.	Of cauterization of a migraine not ancient.
Quan endeve en la partida del cap dolor sodo, o es stenduda dolor entro al uelh, sia evacuat am medicinas le cap mondificantz, e sia aministrada l’autra curacio, la qual yeu he dita en las devesios de las malautias; e tot no aprofieyta, lahoras cauterisacio en lu es en dos manieyras: o cauterisacio am medicina acuta comburent, o am ferr.	When it hurts hard in the back of the head, or is swollen pain within the ear, let the head be evacuated by medicines which I have spoken about in the diseases of the head; and if it does not benefit from it, then cauterize it with two methods: or cauterization with burning medicine, or with iron.
Mays cauteri am medicina comburent es que tu prenguas una dolsa de alh, e escorgas aquela e abcindas las extremitatz de lu de amdos les caps.	More cauterization with burning medicine is that you take a glass of wine, and pour it out and rub the ends of both hands.
E aprop incideys le loc de la dolor en la templa am una lanceta lada entro que sia en lu feyt loc dejos la codena, entro que sia occultada.	And then incision on the location of the pain with a needle inside so that it is inside its location, and let the joint be uncovered.
E aprop strenh sobre lu am stopada per descent constreccio, e layssa aquel per le spazi de tres horas; e aprop deslia le e tratz le alh, e laysa la plagua per dos o per tres jorn, e aprop pausa sobre lu coto submergit en boder entro que le loc fassa brac.	And then press down on it with a strong constriction, and leave it in this state for three hours; and then after that pour wine out, and let the plague be held for two or three days, and then place over the cut in border, inside which it is healing.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And then cure that with cold water so that it is healed.
E si tu voys, fe aquo am alcunas medicinas comburentz las quals yeu he scriutas en le douse tractat de medicinas comburentz.	If you see this, bring some of the burning medicines which I have written in the two treatises about burning medicines.
Mays la cauterisacio am ferr segon aquesta manieyra: igneys per cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma:	More cauterization with iron according to this method: burn it so that this is its form:
e es apelat claus clavilhs, quar le cap de lu es ayssi cum forma de clavel en le qual es alcuna curvitat, e·n le mieg loc de lu es eminensia petita.	and it is called a small ring, because the head's shape is like this in its form of a small ring, and in the middle place of it is a small prominence.
E aprop pausa sobre loc de la dolor, e rete la tua ma — per que no sia adhurida la arceria la qual es dejos — e revol le ferr petit a petit am velocitat.	And then place over the location of the pain, and return your hand - so that the iron is not taken away from that which is left - and turn the small iron little by little with speed.
E si la quantitat de lu que es adhurida per la specitut de la codena ayssi quo la maytat de lu, e elava la tua ma per so que la arteria no sia adhurida la qual es dejos, per so que no vengua flux de sanc.	And if the quantity of that which is taken away by the side of the joint is so much that the majority of it, and return your hand so that the artery is not taken away from that which is left, so that there does not come a flow of blood.
E aprop enbibeys coto en aygua de sal e pausa aquel sobre le loc, e layssa aquel per tres dias; e aprop pausa coto mulhat am boder, e aprop cura am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And then incision on the cut in salt water and place that over the location, and leave it for three days; and then incision on the cut in border, and then cure that with cold water so that it is healed.
E si voys, cauterisa am la extremitat del cutellari segon cauteri, e guarda te de incisio de arteria en aquesta emigranea propriament no-antiqua.	If you see this, cauterize at the end of the knife according to cauterization, and keep yourself from incision of the artery in this migraine not ancient.
Capitol quart.	I capitulate fourth.
De cauterizacio d’emigranea antiqua.	Of cauterization of a not-ancient migraine.
Quan tu curas emigranea am aquo que havem dit de la curacio precedent, e aquo que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias, e no aprofieyta la curacio, e vezes per la malautia que no abasta a lu aquo que havem dit del primier cauteri am medicina o del cauteri am foc, lahoras cove que tu igniscas le cauteri cutellar entro que sia albificat, pus que significas sobre le loc de la dolor am linha de longuesa de la qual sia la maytat del dit, o quays aquel; e depausa la tua ma per una veguada e strenh aquela entro incidiscas la arceria e pervengua entro al os.	When you cure a migraine with water which I have spoken about in the previous cure, and with water which I have spoken about in the division of diseases, and if it does not benefit from the cure, and sometimes by the disease for which is not sufficient the water which I have spoken about in the first cure with medicine or with fire, then consider that you ignite the cauterization with the knife within so that it whiten, more because it means over the location of the pain with a line of length from which its majority is, or that; and leave your hand for a moment and then press down on it within so that the artery does not escape, and then turn the small iron little by little with speed.
Empero necessari es a tu que guardes de la continuacio de la mandibula, la qual es mauguda deves la masticacio, e que le lacert no sia adhurit e le nervi le qual mau aquela, e que no s’endevengua espasme.	However, it is necessary to you that you guard the continuity of the jaw which is more desired for chewing, and that the tongue does not escape and the nerve which hurts him, and that it does not become spasmatic.
E si es sobre la custodia e cautela de flux de sanc de l’arteria que es abciza, quar en la abcizio de lu es temor, e majorment ad aquel le qual ignora aquo que fa e no es studios e esproat; e layssa la operacio en lu al comensament.	And if it is over the guard and caution of blood flow from the artery which is cut, because in the cutting of it is fear, and more to that one does not know water which goes and does not work; and then let the operation be done.
E yeu vindre am rememoracio del regiment de flux de sanc accident de la arceria segon la sieua manieyra, en le sieu loc de aquest libre.	And he comes with a recollection of the incident of blood flow from the iron according to its method, and in its location of freedom.
E si veses de aquesta malautia que no abaste aquest cauteri e veses le cors del malaute tollerable, cauteriza aquel en le mieg loc del cap ayssi cum havem recontat, e cura la plagua entro que sia sanada.	And if this disease does not benefit from this cure and does not tolerate the cutting of the patient' head, then let that be cauterized in its middle place of the head which we have counted, and then heal the plague within so that it is healed.
E si voys, aministra le cauteri le qual havem dit en le capitol de streccio de arceria am cauteri havent dos cotels, e es milhor cauterizacio aquesta e mays conferent.	If you see this, administer the cauterization which we have spoken about in the chapter of stretching of the iron with two knives, and it is better cauterization this and more to work.
Capitol .v.	I capitulate.
De cauterisacio de las dolors de aurelhas.	Of cauterization of the pains of ears.
Quan en la aurelha ve dolor per freg e es curat am causas lacsativas e am l’autra curacio la qual he dita en la divisio, e no es remauguda la dolor, lahoras igneys le cauteri, e es aquest le qual ha nom puncta, del qual aquesta es la forma:	When there is pain in the ear which scratches and is cured with wet medicines and with the other cure which I have spoken about in the division of diseases, and if it does not continue the pain, then burn the cauterization, and this is that which has no name, and its form is:
E aprop puncta aprop la ignicio, e sia menat al enviro de tota la aurelha ayssi cum roda es revolguda, o en le circuit de quascuna essemps si la dolor es en quascuna.	And then place the burning point near the beginning, and turn that which is around all the ear so much that it is turned like a wheel, or in the circle of each seed if the pain is on any side.
Alonga te am le cauteri de la razit de la aurelha pauc a pauc pus que aias senhat le loc am tenta.	Alonge the cauterization of the ear, little by little so as not to burn the place by trial.
E si le cauteri de detz puntz en tota aurelha, e quays aquela, e aprop cura les locz entro que sian sanatz.	And if the cauterization of points in the whole ear, and those, then cure the places within so that they are healed.
Capitol .vi.	Chapter. VI.
De cauterizacio de turtura.	Of Cauterizing a Wound.
Turtura la qual es curada e am cauterizacio no es sino de las specias las quals veno per flecma, segon que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias.	Turtura that is cured and the cauterization is not so much of the spices that come by blood, according to what we have said in the divisions of the malignancies.
Esquiva cauterizacio de la specia que endeve per siccacio o per spasme del nervi.	Avoid cauterizing the spice that comes by dryness or by spasm of the nerve.
Quan tu curas aquela specia de turtura am jerras e capipurgi e guarguarismes, e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas le malaute am tres cauteris: la i deves la razit de la aurelha, e·l segon un petit dejos le sieu templar, e le ters deves la conjunccio de doas labias.	When you treat this species of turtura with the sucking and burrowing and gargling, and you do not confer your cure, then you must cauterize the patient's ear with three cauterizations: the first with a razur, and the second with a small needle, and the third with the union of the two lips.
E pausa lo tieu cauteri per le contrari de la partida malauta, quar mollificacio no ve sino en la partida que apar sana.	And pause the little cauterization according to the opposite part of the malignancy, for softening does not happen except in the part that appears healed.
E la forma de cauterisacio es que cauterizas aquel am le cauteri en le dreyt de la extremitat de la aurelha pus sobirana un petit sobre le corn del cap, e en le templar autre, la longuesa del qual sia segon la longitut del dit pous, e depausa la tua ma am cauteri entro que sia comburida la quantitat de la maytat de la specitut de la codena.	And the form of cauterization is that you cauterize that with a razur at the top of the ear's tip and place a little one on the hair of the head, and long-shaped one, whose length is according to the length of the said foot, and pause your hand so that the quantity of the spice of the wound is burned.
E aquesta es la forma del cauteri, e es specia del cutellari, la forma del qual es denant mesa.	And this is the form of the cauterization, and it is special with a razur, the shape of which is before a table.
Mays empero pus subtil es que aquel un pauc ayssi co vesas; e cove que cotel en lu de superflua groceza un pauc.	But yet more subtle it is that this little one should go to the places, and when it goes in the place of superfluous grossness, a little.
E aprop cura le loc am aquo que es denant procezit entro que sia sanat.	Then return the place with water that is before procided within so that it is healed.
Capitol .vii.	Chapter. VII.
De cauterizacio de apoplextia antiqua.	Of Cauterizing an Old Stroke.
Quan apoplextia es antiquada e curas aquela am aquo que havem dit e no confereys la tua medicacio e le malaute no ha febre, lahoras cauteriza aquel am quatre cauteris: sobre totz les corn del sieu cap; e am cauteri e le mieg loc del cap, ayssi cum havem dit; e am cauteri en le coguot.	When an old stroke is and you treat it with water that we have said, and do not confer your medicine, and the patient does not have a fever, then cauterize that with four cauterizations: on all the hair of the head; and with a razur at the place of the head, as we have said; and on the chin.
E la manieyra del cauteri es fayta segon que es desus dit.	And the way of the cauterization is done according to what has been said.
E ja es cauterizat sobre la boca del estomac; e es mays derier; e aprop sia curat am aquo que procezeys.	And it is already cauterized over the mouth of the stomach, and more behind; then return to the place that you procided with water.
Capitol .viii.	Chapter. VIII.
De cauterizacio de obblivio fayta per flacma.	Of Cauterizing an Oblvious Wound by Blood.
Cove que sian donatz al malaute en le comensament jerras grans e pilulas le servel mondificantz.	Then give to the patient in the beginning sucking great and small pills, telling them to swallow.
E aprop ras le cap tot del malaute e pausa sus le coguot de lu emplaustre de cetre descrit en le tractat dels emplastres.	Then return the head of the patient completely and pause on his chin the unguent that is described in the treatise of the unguents.
E pausa aquel alcunas veguadas, quar aquel es manieyra de cauteri.	Then pause this little while, for this is a way of cauterization.
E fay aquo segon aquel meteys orde le qual ja he dit.	And pour water according to the order that we have already said.
E donc si per aqueles sanat bo es; e sino, lahoras fay a lu tres cauteris en la deriera partida de sieu cap, les quals sian deysendentz de la partida pus sobirana del cap entro a la partida pus dejos del col.	And thus if this is good for you, and not, then do to him three cauterizations in the back part of the head, which are coming down from the top part of the head into the bottom part within the space between the two parts.
E pausa entre quascun cauteri la grossetut del dit, e aprop cura lo cauteri am aquo que es procedit.	Then pause between each cauterization the grossness of the said foot, and return to cure the cauterization with water that is procided.
Mays si tu vos addicio e le malaute es aquo tollerant, lahoras fay a lu cauteri en le mieg loc; e si voys major addicio, lahora cauteriza aquel sobre les dos corns.	But yet if you add to the patient water that he tolerates, then do the cauterization in the middle place; and if you add more, then cauterize that on both of the two corners.
Aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat; e sia le cauteri olivar segon la forma denant donat.	Then return the place within so that it is healed; and be the cauterization a little according to the shape before given.
Capitol .ix.	Chapter. IX.
De cauterisacio de parazili e de mollificacio de tot le cors.	Of Cauterizing a Wound and of Softening the Whole Body.
Cove que tu procesiscas en mondificacio del cap am jerras e am aquo que havem dit; e aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap, e am cauteri sobre totz les corns del cap, e am cauteri sobre la deriera partida de lu, e am tres cauteris sobre les spondils del col.	Then treat the head with sucking and water that we have said; then return the head of the patient, and cauterize that in the middle place of the head, and on all of the hair, and on the back part of it, and on the three joints of the neck.
E si es necessari en la malautia de mollificacio del cors de trops aquel e les malautes tollerantz e la malautia es fort, lahoras cauteriza aquel am quatre cauteris sobre les spondils del dos, e dererament am cauteri entro que sia comborit de la codena mot de lu, e aleva la tieua ma.	And if it is necessary in the softening of the body of the person that is mentioned and the malignancies are tolerable and this malignancy is great, then cauterize that with four cauterizations on the three joints of the other leg, and immediately afterwards cauterize within so as not to burn the flesh of the leg, and take your hand.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat, e aquest sia cauteri olivar.	Then return the place within that is healed, and this be the cauterization a little.
Capitol .x.	Chapter. X.
De cauterisacio de epilemcia.	Of Cauterizing an Epileptic.
No es cauterizat le epilemtic sino aquella epilemcia es per flecma.	It is not cauterized the epileptic, but this epilepsy is by blood.
E donc cove que mondifiques le cervel de lu al comensament de lu am yeras e am l’autra curacio la qual havem dicta en la divisio quan le malaute es gran e es tollerant la exceperacio de las medicinas.	Then give to him in the beginning sucking and another cure that we have said when the patient is great and tolerates the experience of medicines.
E si es enfant le qual no sufferte las medicinas, lahoras aministra guarguarissmes e mastiguatoris le servel mondifican, denant aquo per motz dias, am bonifficacio de las viandas.	And if it is a child who does not suffer the medicines, then administer gargling and mastication pills to him in advance water for two days, with good benefit of food.
E aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop cauteriza aquel am un cauteri en le mieg loc del cap segon la manieyra precedent, e am autre cauteri en le occiput de lu, e sobre quascun corn del cap sieu cauterisa.	Then return the head of the patient and cauterize that with a razur in the middle place according to the previous way, and another cauterization in the occiput of him, and on each of his hair.
E si le malaute es fort e es tollerant, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteris les quals he ditz, en havent paraliticament e mollificacio del cors sobre les spondils del col e les spondils del dos.	And if the patient is strong and tolerates it, then cauterize that with the said cauterizations, in having paralysed and softened the body on the three joints of the neck and the two legs.
E sia cauteri olivar segon qu’es precedit.	Then be the cauterization a little according to what has been said.
Mays si le malaute es enfant, lahoras pausa cauteri subtil segon aquesta manieyra.	But yet if the patient is a child, then pause the cauterization a little according to this way.
Capitol .xi.	Chapter. XI.
De cauterizacio de melencolia.	Of Cauterizing Melancholy.
Quan las causas de melencolia so humiditatz corrompudas e flacma gros, lahoras cauteriza aquel am les cauteris les quals havem ditz en le havent paralisi.	When the causes of melancholy are corrupt humors and gross blood, then cauterize that with the said cauterizations when it has been paralysed.
E si la causa de melencolia es superfluitat declinant a melencolia, e le cors del malaute es humit, lahoras da ha beure aquo que mundifica le cervel de lu segon aquo que ha precedut en la divisio.	And if the cause of melancholy is superfluitat declining to melancholy, and the body of the patient is moist with blood, then give to him water that softens the brain according to what has been said in the division.
E aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop fay tortora decentment fayta de li sobre le cercle, e aprop depausa aquela en le mieg loc del cap.	Then return the head of the patient and do to him slightly what has been said before according to a circle, and pause that in the middle place of the head.
E le malaute sia sesent cayrat, e sia tengut de tota partida.	And the patient be sixty years old, and be held fast by all parts.
E aprop pausa liniment; et es pus digne de boder antic de ovelhas.	Then pause with oil; and it is now suitable for keeping away from sheep.
E escalfa aquel sobre le foc per calefaccio temprada per mesura, le qual le dit sufferta quan es mes en lu.	And burn that on the fire by moderate heat, which he suffers when he is between you.
E aprop vuo’ aquel en le mieg loc del cap de lu en le cercle, e leysa lu entro que sia enfregidat.	Then return that in the middle place of the head of him on a circle, and let it be so that it is chilled.
E fay aquo am le malaute en tota semmana una veguada, am le autre regiment de lu bo entro que sia sanat; o si vols, cauteriza aquel fazen petitz puntz segon lo mays de lu, sino que tenguas la ma am un cauteri ayssi ordenat: aquesta es specia de cauteri la qual humecta le cervel am equalitat.	Then pour water to the patient every week once, with the other regiment of him in order that it is healed; or if you want, cauterize that with small points according to what has been said, and so that it is not too much: this is a special kind of cauterization that softens the brain by equality.
E aprop pausa aquel coto enbegut en boder o en grays de gualina.	Then pause that in the place between white and gray.
Capitol .xii.	Chapter. XII.
De cauterisacio de aygua descendent en le huel.	Of Cauterizing Water Descending on a Wound.
Quan a tu es declarat le comensament de aygua en le huel per les senhals les quals yeu he ditz en la divisio, lahoras comensa e dona en beure al malaute aquo que mondifique le cap de lu, e guarda aquel de totas humiditatz.	When you have said that the beginning of water in the wound is through the veins according to what we have said in the division, then begin and give to the patient water that softens his head, and keep this water from all moisture.
E fay aquel suzar en banh en degu per alcus jorns.	And make that man drink a bath of vinegar for several days.
E aprop comanda a lu que raza le sieu cap, e cauteriza aquel am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap; e aprop cauteriza aquel am dos cauteris sobre dos templas si es le comensament de ysement de aygua en dos huels, o de la un latz si es comensamen de l’aygua en un huel.	Then order him to shave his head, and cauterize the place where you shaved his head with a pointed cautery; and cauterize another point on each temple if it is the beginning of water in two holes, or one point if it is the beginning of water in one hole.
Incideys am cauteri totas las venas e arcerias las quals so dejos la codena; e sian les cauteris en aquela lonh en la latitut de las templas.	Then cut with a cautery all the veins and arteries that remain attached to the cord; and let the cauterization be in that length, in the same way as the temples are located.
E guarda te de fluxs de sanc quan es cauterizat; e si veses de lu fluxs de sanc, osta le am alcuna medicina, la qual es a tu possible.	And guard against flow of blood when you cauterize; and if you see any flow of blood, stop it with some medicine, which is at your disposal.
E yeu vindre am savieza la qual es en extraccio de arcerias e am abscizio de aquelas e cautela de fluxs de sanc.	Then come the wisdom that is in extraction of arteries and in avoidance of those and in caution against flow of blood.
E alcunas vetz es cauterizat en le cervitz dejos dos osses am dos cauteris dererament produzitz.	And some veins are cauterized in the neck, leaving two bones with two pointed cauterizations.
Capitol .xiii.	Chapter XIII.
De cauterizacio de lacrimas antiquas.	Of Cauterization of Ancient Wounds.
Quan lacrimas dels huels so antiquas assuduament e per las venas e arterias las quals so en le loc manifest del cap defora e es verificat que aquo es superfluitatz frejas flecmatiquas, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteri le qual havem recontat en le capitol de comensament de aygua cazent en les huels, e am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap e am dos cauteris en la cervitz dejos dos templas, e am dos cauteris en la cervitz dejos dos osses.	When the holes shed ancient tears, steadily and through the veins and arteries that are in the prominent place of the head, if it is verified that there is superabundance of flowing phlegm, then cauterize that man with a pointed cauterization that we have described in the beginning of water flowing into the holes, and cauterize that same point on his forehead, and two points on each temple, and two points on the neck between the two temples, and two points on the neck between the two bones.
E si indigeyses de addicio, lahoras cauteriza aquel en tot latz de la coa del huel sobre la extremitat del sobrecilh am petit cauteri.	And if it is necessary to stop a sneeze, then cauterize that man on the whole length of the hole on the edge of the cheek with a small cauterization.
Capitol .xiiii.	Chapter XIV.
De cauterizacio de fetor de nas.	Of Cauterization of a Nasal Odor.
Quan tu medicas aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no aprofieyta la tua medicacio, lahoras tu aparelha e dona en beure al malaute las cochias per tres noytz; e aprop ras le cap de lu, e cauteriza le am cauteri migier am cauteri olivar.	When you treat that man with the medicine we have described in the division and do not benefit from your treatment, then prepare him three times a night to drink the liquids; and then shave his head, and cauterize him with a pointed cauterization, half of it with an olive cauterization.
E aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri clavelh am dos cauteris sobre les dos sobrecilhs dejos les cabels un petit.	Then cauterize that man with a cloves' cauterization on each temple, leaving the hair on top of the head a little bit.
E guarda te de la arceria que no incindas aquela.	And guard against the fire that does not burn that part.
E del cauteri clavilh aquesta es la forma.	This is the form of the cloves' cauterization.
Capitol .xv.	Chapter XV.
De cauteri de mollificacio de palpebras dels huels.	Of Cauterization for Softening the Palpes of Holes.
Quan la palpebra del huel es mollificada per malautia o per humiditat, lahoras cauteriza aquela palpebre1 am un cauteri am aquest cauteri lunar; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	When the eyelid of the hole is softened by disease or humidity, then cauterize that eyelid with a lunar cauterization; and this is the way to do it:
E si vos, cauteriza aquel sobre les dos sobrecils un petit am dos cauteris en tota partida, e sian elonguatz de las timporas.	And if you want, then cauterize each temple a little bit with two cauterizations, and let them be elongated from the temples.
E sia la longitut de quascun cauteri segon la quantitat del sobrecil.	Let the length of each cauterization be according to the quantity of the eyelid.
E no premas trop la tua ma am le cauteri, mays segon la quantitat que la tersa partida de la palpebre sia adhurida.	And do not press too hard on your hand with the cauterization, according to the quantity that the third part of the eyelid is adurbed.
Capitol .xvi.	Chapter XVI.
De cauteri de la palpebre del huel quan les pels so convertitz a las partidas dedintz e punho le huel.	Of Cauterization for the Palpes of Holes When the Hair is Changed into the Edge and Turn the Hole Inside Out.
Quan les pels del huel son convertitz a las partidas dedintz ayssi que pungo le huel, cauteri en aquels es segon dos manieyras, quar cauteri o es am fer o es am medicina comburent.	When the hair of the hole is changed into the edge and turns the hole inside out, then cauterize it according to two ways: either by burning or by a burning medicine.
Si am cauteri de lu am foc, comanda al malaute denant aquo que leyse les sieus pels ayssi cum aquels les quals les mundan, entro que sian prolonguatz e engualhatz; e si punho aquel deves le lor naysement, lahoras tu strenh les huels de lu am una benda per so que no sia maugut entro que·ls pels sian nascutz.	If it is a burning cauterization, then order the patient in front of you that he wash his hair with water, so that the edges are softened, and do not burn them; and if he turns himself to face away from you, then strengthen his holes with a cloth so that they are not burned, and his hair is not cut.
Donc cum siran nascutz e engualhatz, lahoras pausa le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop senha sobre la palpebre dels huels de lu am tenta, am senhal le qual sia segon la figura de fulha de merta, e sia le comensament del senhal prop dels pels.	And then, when they are narced and engualled, then place the patient's head in between your legs, and put a cloth on his eyes, so that he cannot see; and let the beginning of the sign be according to the figure of a death's head, and this is the end of the sign near the hair.
E aprop pausa coto enbegut en album de huou o en mucillatge de ptilli sobre le huel.	Then put on his head a turban of cloth or of yarn, or a wet hair on it.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu.	Then light the cauterization, and this is the form of the cauterization:
E aprop cauteriza sobre la figura la qual as senhada, petit a petit, em motas veguadas, entro que sia comburida la superficia de la codena la qual es ayssi cum fuelha de mirta, tota aparent propriament.	Then cauterize on the figure that is outlined, little by little, in a visible way, and burn the surface of the cord, which is then apparently completely burned with a bay leaf.
E senhal de sanetat de la tieua obra es que tu vegus la palpebre de l’huel ja esser contrayta e·ls pels de lu esser elevatz deves la punctura del huel.	The sign of health in this work is that you see the eyelid of the hole already contracted and that the hair of the patient has already been raised from the edge by the piercing.
E donc eleva la tua ma e laysa aquel per tres jorns, e aprop pausa sobre lu coto am boder entro que sia eredicada la scara.	Then lift up your hand and let it rest for three days, and then put on the turban so that it is worn inside out.
E aprop cura aquela am enguent entro que sia sanat.	Then cure that with salve, so that it is healed.
Mays si retorna per les pels alcuna causa aprop lor naysement e la palpebra es mollificada, lahoras fay autra vetz le cauteri sobre aquel tot ayssi cum avias fayt primieyrament.	But if it returns because of the hair, causing a loss of the eyelid and softening it, then do another cauterization on that whole part again at first.
Mays si les pels so en la palpebra dejos, lahoras cauterisa aquela entro que sia elevada al sieu loc natural e sia engualhat e que les pels no punhan le huelh.	But if the hair is in the eyelid, then cauterize that within so that it is raised to its natural place and is not hooked into the hole, and that the hair does not stick to the eye.
Mays le cauteri am medicina comburent aquest es que comandes al malaute que leyse les pels entro que sian prolonguatz e engualhatz, e aprop sia fayta de carta de drap la forma de fuelha de mirtra.	But the cauterization with burning medicine is this: command the patient that he wash his hair within so that it is softened and not burned, and do not cut it; then make a turban of cloth or yarn, and put on his head.
E aprop pren de sabo conogut e de caus viva ana unc. .i., o quays aquo, e aprop mescle3 aquelas causas be, e fay aquo am festinacio per so que no sia enfregidat; e aprop expandeys de aquo sobre la carta la qual es fayta ayssi cum forma de fulha de mirtra, e pausa aquel sobre la un huel od amdos; e pausa dejos le huel coto enbegut en album de huou, e el cap del malaute sia en le tieu se.	Then take a scythe and a live cow's tongue. The first is: Add these three together and mix them well, and make a strong solution from it so that it is not weakened; then apply this solution to the scythe and the live cow's tongue, and their form is according to the figure of a death' head; then let it rest on one side of the hole, and put on his head a turban of cloth or yarn, and order him to wash his hair with water so that the edges are softened and not burned.
E pausa le dit sobre le medicina e prem aquela un petit e no la mauguas entro que lo malaute senta la mordicacio de la medicina, quar mordicacio es en lu ayssi cum de foc.	Then put on the medicine and let it rest a little bit; and do not press hard on your hand with the medicine, for the taste of the medicine is burning in your hand, as it is according to the quantity.
E donc cum percevera aquo que el atrobo mordicacio, lahoras leyssa la medicina e mau aquela am le tieu dit; donc cum cessa la mordicacio, lahoras remau la medicina he lava le huel am aygua; e lahoras considera si vezes la palpebra ja es levada ayssi cum es lavada deves la costriccio am foc o am incisio, quar lahoras esta be; e si no torna sobre aquela de la medicina sobre le loc en le qual no ha empremut la medicina e no se denigra entro que sia engualhada la tua operacio e sia contrayt le huel.	Then, when you feel that the medicine is burning in your hand, then let it rest and then wash your hand with water; and consider if the eyelid has already been raised as it is washed with the tension of a burning or cutting, for it is good; and if not, then return to the place where you put the medicine on the spot that needs to be treated, without letting it burn or cut, so that the hole does not suffer.
E aprop pausa sobre lu coto am boder entro que sia eradicada la codena de la adhustio, e aprop cura aquel am enguent deafinicon o am autre entro que sia sanat.	Then put on the turban so that it is worn against the border of the cord, which is to be eradicated by the tension of the heat; and then cure that with salve, either dry or with another medicine, so that it is healed.
E es necessari a tu, deves la tua operacio que guardes am pervigil diligencia que en le huel no caia re de la medicina, e si la palpebre aprop alscus dias es mollificada e alcuna causa dels pels punh en le huel, lahoras itera la tua medicina sobre aquel loc le qual de la palpebre es mollificat, e propriamen ayssi quo as fayt al comensament, e aprop enaviro lu entro que sia sanat.	And you must be vigilant in your operation so that the medicine does not fall onto the hole, and if the eyelid is softened by a cause of hair, then repeat your medicine on that part where the eyelid is softened, and truly start from the beginning, and put on the spot where it needs to be treated with cauterization; and then turn yourself away from facing the patient so that he does not see.
E aquesta es la forma de fuelha de mirtra.	This is the form of Death' s head.
E sapias que les huels dels homes son diversificatz segon la magnitut e la parvitat, e donc segon aquo es fayta la tua contraccio.	And you know that men' s holes are different according to their size and age, and then according to that hole, your cauterization is made.
E no sira amaguada la via de rectetut ad aquel al qual es studi en aquesta art.	And do not hide the way of treatment from that person who studies this art.
Capitol .xvii.	Chapter XVII
De cauterizacio de fistula que es en le lacrimal de l’huel.	On Cauterization for a Fistula in the Lacrimal of the Eye
Quan tu curas fistula am aquo que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas aquela segon aquesta manieyra: comanda al malaute que pause le cap sieu en le tieu se, e tengua le cap de lu alcun ministre entre las tieuas mas en tal manieyra que no sia maugut ni agitat am le sieu cap.	When you treat a fistula that has been said to be in the lacrimal of the eye and do not confer with your treatment, then, as soon as you have cauterized it according to this method: order the patient to hold his head still on the third finger, and have one minister hold his head between the shoulders in such a way that he is neither shaken nor disturbed by the heat.
E aprop pausa coto enfus en album de huou o en mucellage de ptilli sobre le huel de lu.	Then place a hot wax or a poultice of wool on their eye.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma:	And set fire to the cauterization, which this is the form:
le qual sia conquau, ayssi cum es forma de cana o de pena de voltor, de la una extremitat am la qual es fayta lo cauteri.	that it be round, so that on one end there is a kind of cane or a piece of wire, from which the cauterization is made,
E si voys, sia penetrant entro a la autra extremitat.	And if it penetrates, let it enter into the other end.
E si vols sia sort ayssi cum tenta.	And if you want to do so with a probe.
Mays empero aquel que es concau es milhor a la tieua obra.	However, that which is round is better for the work.
E aprop prem la fistula si es uberta, e tra de lu sania et exsicca aquela.	Then press the fistula if it is open, and take away the pus and dry it up.
E si no es uberta, lahoras obre aquela e extratz la poyredura de lu.	And if it is not open, then open it and extract the pus from it.
E aprop pausa sobre lu le cauteri le qual sia be ignit, e te am aquel la tieua ma un petit deves le cauteri del huel a la partida del nas, per so que no erre la tua ma o le malaute sia enquietat, e lahoras pausa le cauteri en le grays del huel e corrompas aquel.	Then place the cauterization on it which is well lit, and at the same time on the root of the nose, so that neither your hand nor the patient's head may be disturbed, and then pause the cauterization on the gray of the eye and corrupt it.
E donc si al comensament del tieu cauteri perve entro al os, bo es; e sino, lahoras itera le cauteri una veguada o dos, si mestiers era; e layssa aquel ayssi per tres jorns, e aprop pausa sobre aquel coto am boder e enviro lu am enguent exsiccatiu entro que sia sanat.	And if at the beginning of the eye's cauterization it enters into the bone, it is good; and if not, then repeat the cauterization once or twice, as may be necessary, and leave it like that for three days, and then place a hot paste on it around and within it so that it may heal.
Mays si eran passatz xi dias e no es sanat, lahoras pausa sobre lu medicina aguda corrosiva entro que l’os sia descubert e sia ras segon que conveneys en le sieu capitol.	But if it is not healed after eleven days, then place an acute corrosive medicine on it so that the bone may be exposed and be scraped according to what you have said in the next chapter.
E es autra manieyra de cauteri de fistula la qual alscus primiers diysero: enten al loc de la fistula e fen aquela e aprop pausa en aquela fissura camaen subtil del qual es la forma de lu: E fon en aquela la quantitat de i unc de plom fundut; e te la tua ma am camaem am bona retencio, e no sia maugut le malaute per so que le plom fundut no pervengua al huel de aquel; e cove que pausas sobre le huel del malaute coto enfus en album de huou o en aygua, quar plom adhureys le loc de la fistula e sana aquela per sanacio meravilhora.	And another way of cauterizing a fistula, which they first said: go to the site of the fistula and cut it out and place that small crack in its shape: And pour into it a quantity of liquid lead; and your hand over it with good retention, so that the lead does not reach the patient' eye; and then place on the patient' eye hot wax or water, for the lead adheres to the site of the fistula and heals it by a wonderful cure.
E si la fistula es sanada am aquo que havem dit del cauteri e de la curacio, bo es; e sino, lahoras es necessari aministrar trauc del nas e reduzir la fistula al cors del nas segon que vindra en son loc propri.	And if the fistula is healed by the treatment and the cauterization which we have said, it is good; but if not, then it is necessary to administer a probe from the nose and reduce the fistula to its root according to what may be necessary.
Capitol .xviii.	Chapter XVIII
De cauterizacio de la fendedura des potz.	On Cauterization of the Broken Nasal Nerve
Motas veguadas accideysso fissuras en las labias, e majorment en las labias dels enfantz.	The appearance of a red or swollen spot indicates a crack or fracture. Most often it appears on the lips, and occasionally on children's lips.
Donc cum tu curas aquelas fissuras am aquo que nos havem dit en las divisios e no aprofieyta la tua cura, lahoras igneys le cauteri petit cutellar segon aquesta forma que s’ensiec:	So, when you treat those cracks with the treatment we have said and do not confer with your treatment, then set fire to a small knife according to this form which it encageys:
E sia la conquavitat de lu segon la subtilitat de cotella.	And its cavity according to the subtility of a knife.
Aprop pausa aquel init cuytadament en aquelas fissuras entro que·l cauteri pervengua al preon de las fissuras.	Then place it carefully within those cracks so that the cauterization reaches the root of the cracks.
E aprop cura aquel am cerotz entro que sia sanat.	Then treat it with care so that it may heal.
Capitol .xix.	Chapter XIX
De cauterizacio de fistula en la boca.	On Cauterization of a Fistula in the Mouth
Quan en la razit de uvula o en le paladar o en las razitz de las dentz endeve apostema e aprop fa brac, e aprop es rompuda, e aprop es antiquada, e corr brac e es fayta fistula, e aprop tu curas aquela e no aprofieyta a curacio, lahoras cove que tu igniscas cauteri segon la quantitat que sia receubuda en la fistula, e aprop met aquel ignit en le trauc de la fistola, e te la tua ma entro que pervengua le ferr ignit al preon de lu, e al derier de lu fazen aysso una veguada o dos; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que nos havem dit de la curacio entro que sia sanat.	When there is a swelling in the raze of the uvula or in the palate or in the razes of the teeth, then an apoplexy occurs and it is broken, and then it is inflamed and a crack forms, and then you treat it and do not confer with your treatment, then, as soon as you have determined the quantity which is received in the fistula, then set fire to the cauterization according to that quantity, and place it on the root of the fistula, and if it reaches the edge of the fire, then let it enter into the fistula, and at the back of it also make a probe, and then treat it with water which we have said to heal it, so that it may be healed.
E donc si la sania es abscindita e es sanat, bo es; e sino, lahoras es necessari de descubrir le loc e hostar le os corrumput segon que vindra en son capitol.	And if the healing is cut off and is healed, it is good; but if not, then it is necessary to expose the site and break the bone according to what may be necessary, which will be said in the next chapter.
Capitol .xx.	Chapter XX
De cauterisacio de las dentz e de mollificacio de las angivas.	On Cauterization of Teeth and Softening of the Veins
Quan las angivas son mollificadas per humiditat e las dentz son maugudas, e curas aquelas am medicinas e no confereys, lahoras pausa le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop igneys le cauteri la forma del qual vindra aprop aysso, enayssi que tu pauses la quanula sobre la dent e entromet en aquela le cauteri ignit festinantment, e te la tieua ma un petit entro que·l malaute cente la calor del foc a la razit de la dent esser pervenguda.	When the veins are softened by moisture and the teeth are loose, then treat them with medicines and do not confer with your treatment, then place the head of the patient on the third finger, and set fire to the cauterization which will come out in this way: therefore, you pause the tongue over the tooth, and insert the tip of the cauterization into that quickly, and place your hand around so that the heat does not reach the patient' jaw; and at the back of the tooth also make a probe.
E aprop leva la tua ma, e aprop itera le cauteri alcunas veguadas segon que vols.	Then remove your hand, and repeat the cauterization several times according to what you want.
E aprop le malaute huompla la sua boca de aygua de sal e tengua aquela per una hora, e pueys stupa aquela, quar la dent mauguda es fermada e la gengiva mollificada es strenguda e la humiditat corrompuda es exsiccada.	Then hold the patient' mouth open with a cup of salt water and keep it like that for an hour, then pour out the water, because the loose tooth is closed, the softened gum is tightened, and the moisture which has corrupted is dried up.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter XXI
De cauterisacio de dolor de dent.	On Cauterization for Toothache
Quan dolor de dent es per fregiditat, o en lu es freg o verm, o no comfereys la curacio am medicina, lahoras cauteri en aquela es segon dos manieyras: o cauteri am boder de vacas, o cauteri am foc.	When toothache is caused by cold or worm, and if you do not confer with your treatment using medicine, then treat it on the edge of a knife, or on fire.
Cauteri am boder es que tu prenguas boder de vacas e bulhas aquel en culhe de ferr , e aprop pren coto e envolopa le sobre la extremitat de la tenta, e aprop enmergeys aquel am boder bulhit, e pausa aquel sobre la dent dolorosa festinantment entro que sia enfregidat.	Cauterization on the edge is that you take a piece of iron and rub it, then place it in the shape of a V over the painful tooth, and set fire to it quickly, and hold it over the tooth so that it may be heated quickly before it is cooled off.
E aprop itera aquela alcunas veguadas entro que la vertut del foc pervengua a la razit de la dentz.	Then repeat the cauterization several times according to its power so that it may reach the root of the teeth.
E si voys, submergeys lana o coto en le boder desus dit, e pausa aquel sobre la dent dolent, e pausa sobre aquel ferr ignit entro que·l ferr pervengua al preon de la conquavitat de la dent.	And if you see it, rub it on the edge of a knife, and place it over the tooth, and then place over it hot iron so that the iron reaches the root of the tooth's cavity.
Mays empero la cauterizacio am foc es que tu atendas a la quannula de eram o de ferr, e sia en le cor de lu alcuna grocesa e la acuitat del foc no pervengua a la boca del malaute.	However, the cauterization on fire is that you hold the tongue or iron in your hand, and let it be at the tip of the knife, and do not allow the sharpness or acuity of the fire to reach the patient' mouth.
E aprop igneys le cauteri la forma del qual vindra, e pausa aquel sobre la dent e te la tua ma entro que·l cauteri sia enfregidat; e fay aquo alcunas veguadas quar la dolor sira remauguda o en aquel dia o en l’autre dia.	Then set fire to the cauterization according to its form, and place it over the tooth, and your hand so that the cauterization may cool down; and make some water ready because the pain may return or continue on the same day.
E cove que per empressio de aquel cauteri que·l malaute umpla la sieua boca de bon boder e tengua aquel per una hora e aprop scupa le; e aquesta es la forma del cauteri.	Then, by the power of that cauterization which the patient holds in his mouth and keeps it for an hour, then pour out [it], and this is the form of the cauterization.
E cauteriza am qual que tu voys extremittat segon que a tu es possible.	Cauterize on the edge which you can see.
E aquesta es la forma de la cannula:	This is the form of the cannula:
Capitol .xxii.	Chapter .xxii.
De cauterizacio de extrophulos.	On cauterization for herniated discs.
Quan extrophulos so de flecma e de humors fregas e no so hobedientz a digistio per medicinas e tu voys la digistio de aquelas leugerament, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri conquau la forma del qual es aquesta seguen, havent dos extremitatz hubertas per que yesca le fum deves le cauteri per l’autra extremitat, e pausa aquel ignit sobre aquel apostema una veguada, e autre si indigeyses de aquel, entro que pervengua al preon del apostema.	When herniated discs are made of blood and humors that do not respond to medication, and you notice a slight improvement in digestion, then heat the cauterizing tool into the following shape: having two open ends so that the fire may reach the bottom of the disc, and place one end on the lump, and pause the heat over the lump for a moment, and the other if you wish to do so, until it reaches the disk's pocket.
E si l’apostema es pauca, lahoras pausa le cauteri segon la quantitat del apostema, e aprop leyssa le per tres jorns e pausa sobre lu coto enfus en boder entro que sia remaugut aquo que·l foc ha comburit.	If the lump is small, then pause the cauterization according to the size of the lump, and leave it for three days and pause the heat on top of it gently until the fire has completely burned it out.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent e tentas e draps entro que sia sanat.	Then clean it thoroughly and dress it with bandages until it heals.
E la forma de la cannula o deu cauteri a tal es comveyter.	And this is the form of the cannula or the cauterizing tool:
Capitol .xxiii.	Chapter .xxiii.
De cauterizacio de rauquiera de votz e de constriccio de ale.	On cauterization for a rawiella (a type of worm), and for constricting the air passages:
Quan las humiditatz veno sobre le quanal del pulmo, e majorment quan aquo es am fregiditat de compleccio, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia evacuat al comensament am medicinas laxativas, e aprop cauteriza aquel deves la razit del golayro en le loc depremegut.	When moisture comes to the chest, and mostly when it is cold in origin, then first of all, empty the patient' s bowels with laxative medicines, and then cauterize the root of the worm in the place where it is embedded.
E guarda te que no pervenguas am le cauteri al golayro ni no comburas de la codena de lu sino un pauc.	And beware that you do not cauterize the worm or burn its tail with the cauterizing tool, except a little bit.
E cauteriza aquel am autra cauteri deves la junctura del col en le derier espondil de lu.	Then cauterize it again with another cauterizing tool at the joint of the spine in the last vertebra.
E·l cauteri de lu sia clavilh sego la maniera precedent.	The cauterization of the air passages should be done as described above.
E aprop cura aquel am aquo que es precedit entro que sia sanat.	Then clean thoroughly that which has been cauterized, and dress it with ointment until it heals.
Capitol .xxiiii.	Chapter .xxiv.
De cauterizacio de malautia del pulmo e de tos.	On cauterization for a chest infection, and for coughing:
Quan tos e malautia de pulmo so de humiditatz fregas e le malaute no ha febre ni tisic e es malautia antiqua, lahoras cauterisa aquel am dos cauteris sobre la furcula en les locz depremegutz leontz e buoytz; e am autra cauteri en le mieg loc del pietz entre dos mamillos; e sia le cauteri clavilh segon la forma precedent.	When coughing and chest infection are caused by moist humors, and the patient does not have fever or a sore throat, but it is an old infection, then cauterize it twice on the rib, in the place where it is embedded; and another cauterizing tool at the middle of the foot between two toes; and do the cauterizing as described above.
E si vols, sia la tua cauterizacio punctan am le cauteri que es apelat puncta, la forma del qual precedeys en la ponctacio de dolor de aurelhas.	And if you wish, your cauterization with a pointed tool, the shape of which you use in the puncturing of pain in the ears, is as follows:
E sian puntz entro cays ad aquels; e aprop cura aquel am aquo meteys que es precedit entro que sia sanat.	Then make points where needed; and clean thoroughly that which has been cauterized, until it heals.
E ya sia le cauteri haventz tres ramps quar cauterizacio es am aquel: am una veguada podes far tres cauteris segon aquesta forma:	And this is the third type of cauterization, which has three ramps for cauterization, according to this form:
Capitol .xxv.	Chapter  .xxv.
De cauterizacio de titillic que es le cap del ajutori.	On cauterization of the tickle which is at the tip of the tongue:
Quan le cap del ajutori es dislocat per causa de humiditatz lubricas e no es fermat en la hora del sieu retornament deves la sua dislocacio entro que sia a lu aquo costuma de retornar, e aprop per un petit movement es deslocat ayssi que s’endeve, ayssi cum nos havem testificat, lahoras cove que primieyrament redusiscas la dislocacio, e aprop le malaute sia reversat sobre le sieu dos o sobre le latz sa; e aprop eleva la codena la qual es en la partida dedintz del citillic a las partidas desus am les ditz de la tua ma sinistra, si la junctura es dislocada a las partidas dedintz.	When the tip of the tongue is dislocated by lubricous moisture and does not return to its place in an hour, then reduce the dislocation first, and then reverse it: if it has fallen back into its place at the tip, let it remain there; but if it has fallen back at the base, raise it with your left hand, and if you wish to do so, turn it over on itself, and apply heat to the joint.
E aprop igneys le cauteri havent dos caps; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	Then let there be two ends of the tool; and this is its form:
E aprop cauteriza la codena entro que penetre aquela entro al autre latz; e vindra la figura de cauterizacio lahoras de iv caps cauteris.	And then cauterize the tail, so that it enters one end into the other, and there will be two ends of the tool; and this is its form of cauterization:
e so aquel subtils segon la quantitat de tenta; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	and then apply it to the skin according to the size of the wound, and this is its form:
E alcunas veguadas es ajustat segon aquest comte i per que son les cauteris .viii.	In some cases, the point is adjusted according to the following count, because there are three cauterizing tools:
E aprop pausa sobre le cauteri porys cuytz am sal, e aprop fay adherir le malaute a trenquilitat, e lo membre no sia maugut per alcun temps entro que sia confortat.	Then pause the cautery over the tip of the tongue with salt, and then make it adhere to the tongue firmly, and do not worry if it hurts for a moment, until it is at rest.
E si la dislocacio es a las partidas desus e tart es fayt aquo, lahoras cauteriza sobre le muscle am cauteri clavilh o am motz cauteris puntan, quar la junctura es confermada e la humiditat es romauguda e le malaute es sanat.	If the dislocation is at the tip and it hurts, then cauterize over the muscle with a pointed tool or a sharp tool, because the joint is secure and the moisture is troublesome, and the disease is healed.
Capitol .xxvi.	Chapter   .xxvi.
De cauterizacio del stomac.	On cauterization for the stomach:
Quan veno en l’estomac freg e motas humiditatz entro que aquel extrazo de la sua compleccio e so multiplicatz raumases a lu, e si tu continuas las manieyras de curacio e no confereyso, lahoras cove que le malaute sia sobre le sieu dos ressupinat, e extenda las suas mas e las suas coysas, e aprop cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris: an un cauteri dejos le pietz per la quantitat d’un dit am cauteri clavilh, e am dos cauteris dejos del dos costatz del cauteri, entro que vengua la figura de cauteri triangulada; e elonga entre els que no sian ajustatz que faran poyredura.	When there is a cold and moist food entering the stomach, and it multiplies the humors of that food within it, and if you continue to treat it with these same remedies and do not consult about it, then let the disease remain in its place, and let the patient lie down; and extend his legs, and make three cuts on the foot, a distance of one finger apart, making each cut with a pointed tool, and between them two that are not cut, which will form a triangle; and stretch those between them that are not cut.
E si la profunditat del cauteri la quantitat de les dos terses de la grocesa de la codena.	And if the depth of the cut is three times the thickness of the tail, then let it be.
E sia la figura del cauteri segon aquesta forma ses addicio, E si vols, cauteriza am gran cauteri en le mieg loc del estomac segon aquesta forma; et aquest sia un cauteri segon la forma de cercle segon aquesta forma:	And this is the addition to the above form: A, if you wish, cauterize with a large cauterizing tool in the middle of the stomach according to the above form; and this is the shape of a circle according to the above form:
E sia cauterizat l’estomac punctan ad aquel que de aquest cauteri es spaventat: e es que tu senhes sobre l’estomac punt segon la quantitat que voles am tenta, e aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri en les puntz; e aprop cura aquel am la curacio qu’es precedita entro que sia sanat.	Then cauterize the stomach puncturing at that place where the cauterizing tool scares you: and this is done according to the quantity that you wish to measure, and then cauterize it with another cauterizing tool at the points; and clean thoroughly that which has been cauterized, until it heals.
Capitol .xxvii.	Chapter .xxviI.
De cauterizacio del fietge fret.	On cauterization for a fractured limb:
Quan endeve en le fietge dolor per fregiditat o per humiditat o per grossa ventositat entro que de la sieua normal compleccio sia getat per egressio superflua, e es curat le malaute am aquo que havem dit e no comfereys, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sua cervitz, e senhes am tenta tres cauteris segon aquesta forma et aquesta quantitat meteyssa sobre le fietge dejos dels ipocondres, la hon perve le decubit de home.	When the pain in the limb is caused by cold, or moisture, or a strong wind, which is not normal for it, and does not benefit from drinking water, then let the disease remain in its place, and let the patient lie down; then make three cuts on the foot, at a distance of one finger apart, making each cut with a pointed tool, and between them two that are not cut, which will form a triangle; and stretch those between them that are not cut.
E sia l’espazi le qual es entre quascun cauteri segon la grossetut del dit, e sia le cauteri segon la longitut del cors dreyta.	Then let the space between each cut be according to the length of a finger; and this is the shape of the cauterizing tool according to the thickness of the finger:
E no compremas la tua am le cauteri mot.	And do not compress it with your hand.
E si la quantitat de aquo que es adhurit la quantitat de la maytat de la specitut de la codena, e no y sia pus ajustat; e si le malaute stant sobre les pes de lu; e si no es estant, lahoras sia jassent, le qual ja ha extendudas las suas coysas, e eleve les sieus brasses.	And if the quantity of water that has been taken in is double the quantity of the contents of the container, and if it is not sitting on its own; then let it lie down, which has already stretched its legs, and raise his arms.
E es aquesta la forma del cauteri:	And this is the form of the cauterizing tool:
E a tu es possible que cauterizes aquestz cauteris am cauteri cutellar, quan es am tu subtilitat e prudencia en l’art.	You can also cauterize with a sharp knife, if you have skill and caution in the art.
E guarda te que trop no procesiscas en la cauterizacio, e sia adhurida la specitut de tota la codena per que sia adhurit tot le cors e pervengua entro als budels, quar la codena aqui es subtil; e sapias aquo.	And beware that you do not overheat in the cauterization, and let the contents of all the container be heated so that it reaches the limbs, because the contents here are subtle; and know that fire is dangerous.
Capitol .xxviii.	Chapter .xxviii.
De perforacio de apostema del fietge am cauteri.	On perforation of a herniated disc by cauterization:
Quan endeve excitura o apostema en le fietge e voles saber si aquel apostema es en le carn del fietge o en la tunica de lu, lahoras si es en la carn del fietge, le malaute atrobo gravitat e dolor ses acuitat.	When you have an excution or hernia in the limb and want to know if it is in the muscle of the limb or in the membrane, then if it is in the muscle of the limb, the disease will become more painful and heavy.
E si es en la tunica del fietge, am la dolor es acuitat gran e vezes que ja afatiguatz les metges la cura de lu.	If it is in the membrane of the limb, the pain becomes very severe and often causes great fatigue for the person who suffers from it.
Donc cove que·l malaute sia enversat sobre la sieua cervit; e aprop senha le loc de l’apostema am tenta; e aprop igneys le cauteri le quel es asemblat a rag, la forma del qual a precedit en l’autra pagina.	Then turn the patient over so that their back is up against the bed; and prepare the area for the abscess to be opened, and apply heat to the cautery, which is shaped like a knife blade, as described on the previous page.
E cauteriza am aquel i cauteri entro que tota la codena sia comborida, entro que pervengua al ciphac, entro qu’en yesca sania.	Then cauterize it until all of the cord is cut, so that it reaches the cipha, so that it burns out and heals.
E aprop cura aquel per curacio dels autres apostemas entro que sia sanat.	Then clean it out by opening the other abscesses as well, in order for them to heal.
E no cove que de aquesta forma de cauteri use sino aquel del qual le estudi en l’art de medicina es prolonguat, e en las mas del qual motas malautias an conogut; mays aquest am esperiment alcunas veguadas sia ardit sobre aquesta operacio, mays empero leyssa aquela deves nos, e es miels.	Do not use this form of cauterization except when the person has a very severe case of gout, and when other methods have failed; but rather leave that one alone, and use those instead, for they are better.
Capitol .xxix.	Chapter .XXIX.
De cauterizacio de plauresi.	On the Cauterization of Wounds.
Diyssero les antics cauteri de las razitz de aristologia a plauresi frega segon aquesta manieyra esser fazedor, e es aquest que tu prenguas de las razitz de aristologia longa secca una razit pun longua que es trobada, e sia de la grossetut del dit.	They said that the ancient cautery of arnica for plagues is to rub it on in this manner; and you should take a piece of arnica with a long point, which can be found, and make it the same length as the finger affected.
E aprop submergeys aquela en oli e eysen aquela al foc, e aprop cauteriza per un cauteri en aquel loc le qual es entre la continuacio de la furcula am le col; e am dos cauteris petitz dejos guidazi, un pauc declinans a la partida que es dejus la barba, e am dos cauteris en aquo que es declinant entre la quinta costa e la cizena, declinant un pauc a las partidas detras; e am autre cauteri en le mieg loc del pietz; et am autre sobre l’estomac, et am tres cauteris de las partidas detras; et am un cauteri en aquel loc le qual es entre las dos spallas, e am dos cauteris dels dos latz del pietz, dejos le cauteri le qual es entre doas spallas.	Then submerge that one in oil and burn it on the fire, and cauterize with a small cautery at the spot between the ribs where the collarbone meets; and two small cauteries to the left of the beard at its edge, and two more between the fifth rib and the navel, slightly depressed towards the back; and one cautery over the stomach, and three more at the back, and one between the shoulders.
E no cove que compremas la tua ma am le cauteri, ans sia en le manifest de la codena en obra.	Do not cut off your own hand with the cauterizer, unless it is in danger of gangrene.
E ja diyssero alscus antics que so alscus dels homes les quals uson de cauteri de ferr semblant a ray e igneysso aquel, e meto aquel en aquel loc le qual es entre las costas, entro que pervenguam am aquel ad aquel apostema e sia foragetada sania, ayssi cum havem dit en l’apostema del fietge.	And they said that some men use a cautery made of iron similar to a ray and heat it; then place it in the spot between the ribs so that it reaches the cipha (a type of organ or body part), so that it burns out and heals, as we have said above regarding the abscess on the foot.
Mays en aquesta perforacio am cauteri no es ses temor, quar hu mor tantost ho accideys en le loc fistula a la qual no es sanacio.	But in this piercing, do not use a cauterizer, for it is dangerous; for often it happens that the wound comes out through the fistula at the spot where there should be no healing.
Capitol .xxx.	Chapter.XXX.
De la cauterizacio de la melsa.	On the Cauterization of the Arm.
Quan tu curas la malautia de la melsa am aquo que havem dit de la curacio en la divisio e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cauteri en lu es segon tres manieras, las quals totas son dreyturieras, de las quals la una es que fassas tres cauteris o quatre linhan segon la longitut de la melsa segon la figura dels cauteris del fietge, la figura dels quals ha precedit.	When you treat the gout in the arm with water as described above for the division of the wound, do not apply your own cauterization; but then there are three ways to cauterize it, all of which are correct: one is to make three or four small holes according to the length of the arm according to the shape of the cauterization on the foot, the shape of which has been described.
E sia entre quascun cauteri la grossetut d’un dit o un pauc mes, e la manieyra del cauteri sia la manieyra la qual havem dita en le cauteri del fietge engualment.	And between each cautery the thickness of a finger or a little more, and the manner of applying the cauterization is the same as that described for the cauterization on the foot.
E no compremas la tua ma am le cauteri; e le malaute sia eves sobre lo sieu dos.	Do not cut off your own arm with the cauterizer; and the patient should be lying on their back.
E es autra manieyra de cauterizar, so es que tu igniscas le cauteri haventz dos vertimentz, la qual causa havem dita en le capitol de dislocacio del muscle, e elava la codena la qual es en le endreyt de la melsa la hon perve le jazer del malaute sinistre.	And another way to cauterize is to ignite the cautery with two fingers, which causes the fire described in the chapter on dislocation of the muscle; and raise the arm up so that the patient’s hand is turned towards their body.
E sia la tua elevacio am la qual elevas la codena segon la longuesa del cors, per que sian faytz cauteris segon la latitut del cos.	And this elevation should be done according to the length of the body, so that the cauterizations are made at different heights.
E aprop entromet les dos vernimentz, ignitz mot, en aquel entro que am aquels penetres la codena de la autra part.	Then insert two fingers between the two ignitions, ignite them, and then put them through the opening of the arm from the other side.
E aprop extrayt le cauteri; e donc son faytz quatre cauteris.	Then remove the cauterizer; and there are now four cauterizations.
E si voys, cauteriza am cauteri havent tres vernimentz.	And if you have three fingers between the two ignitions, then cauterize with a cauterizer having three fingers between the two ignitions.
E aprop tu cura le cauteri pus que aia laysat de getar brac per trops jorns, quar mays es comferent que las autras causas precedentz en la curacio.	Then clean the cauterizer before using it again; for it is better to be safe than sorry, since there are other causes that have preceded this treatment in the course of a disease.
Capitol .xxxi.	Chapter.XXXI.
De cauterizacio de ydropici.	On the Cauterization of Hydropic Wounds.
Cauteri no catz en ydropici sino en alcinte3 propriament.	Do not cauterize in hydropic wounds unless they are really bad; but rather use a different method.
Quan tu curas le ydropic am las manieyras de curacio las quals havem ditas en la divisio e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que aquel cauterizes am quatre cauteris en le cercuit del embelic e am un cauteri sobre l’estomac, e am autre cauteri sobre le fietge, e am autre cauteri sobre la melsa, e am dos cauteris entre les spondils del dos, e un cauteri en lo dreyt del pietz, e am autre cauteri sobre l’estomac.	When you treat the hydropic with the methods described in the division of wounds and do not apply your own cauterization; but then there are four ways to cauterize it: three on the edge of the bladder and one on the belly, another on the foot, another on the arm, another between the shoulders, and one on the right hand or foot.
E la quantitat de la profunditat del cauteri sia propdana a la spicitut de la codena.	And the amount of depth of the cauterization should be proportional to the severity of the wound.
E aprop layssa le cauteri ubert per so que gete brac per lonc temps.	Then leave the cauterizer in place so that it remains in place and does not move for a long time.
E no evacuas le malaute de curacio aprop le cauteri am aquo que cove per que sian agreguadas a lu doas entencios, e sira festinada a lu am ajutori sanacio.	Do not evacuated the patient’s blood with the cauterizer by water; so that it is mixed with two parts of blood, and then shake it up with three parts, and then add six parts of warm water, and then drink it as a medicine.
La forma del cauteri am lo qual es cauterizat lo ventre sia clavilh segon que la forma de aquel es desus precedent, e es aquel am le qual es cauterizat le dos sia olivar segon qu’es precedent a la sua forma.	The shape of the cauterized belly should be similar to that which is being cauterized; and the same goes for the feet, according to their previous form.
Capitol .xxxii.	Chapter.XXXII.
De cauterizacio de pes e de las coyssas.	On the Cauterization of the Feet and the Cows.
Quan les pes so apostematz en ydropitz e so repletz de aygua sitrina, cove que cauterisas les pes sobre le dos del pe in nocrati aquo que es entre le auricular e le anular, e eleva la tua ma am le cauteri e no torses aquel; e aprop eleva la tua ma, e no retornes aquela de tot, quar l’aygua satrina rezuda.	When the feet have hydropic abscesses and are full of clear water, then cauterize them between the second and third toes, lifting the hand with the cauterizer and not twisting it; then lift the hand, and do not return it all the way down, as the clear water will evaporate.
Es le cauteri segon aquesta forma: E aprop fay sobre las doas coyssas dos cauteris, e en quascuna coysa sia feyt cauteri am la extremitat del cauteri cutellar.	Then make two small cauterizations on the two toes, and in each cow make one at the end of the cutler’s cauterizer.
E sia le cauteri segon la longitut de la coyssa: i dejos le denolh e l’autre jos le mieg loc de la coyssa; e sobre quascuna coyssa dos cauteris.	Then apply the cauterization according to the length of the cow: one above and another below the middle part of the cow; and on each cow make two cauterizations.
E layssa la plagua uberta ses curacio per lonc temps per so que alcuna aygua resuda de lu.	Then leave the wound open to air-dry for a long time, so that no water remains in it.
E aprop cura le am aquelas causas las quals havem ditas.	Then treat those causes which have been described.
Capitol .xxxiii.	Chapter.XXXIII.
De cauterizacio de cos de ventre.	On the Cauterization of the Belly.
Quan cos de ventre es per freg e per humiditat entro que debelice las vertutz, so es la vertut digestiva e retentiva, las quals so en l’estomac e en les budels, e es curat aquo am las manieyras de curacio e no confereys, e vezes le malaute suffertan cauteri de vertut exhiberant, lahoras cauteriza aquel am gran cauteri sobre le sieu stomac segon que a precedit en la cauterizacio del estomac, am le cauteri del cercle e am quatre cauteris en le cercuit del embelic subtils, am cauteri clavilh subtil; e am cauteri sobre le alcatin sobre alozis gran, o am dos cauteris.	When the belly is wet and sore from rubbing, and the digestion and retention of food are affected, which are in the belly and intestines, then treat it with the methods of treatment described for the stomach and do not apply your own cauterization; but then there are four ways to treat it: one over the belly according to the shape of a cutler’s cauterizer, another on the circle of the navel, a third on the edge of the intestines, a fourth on the inner part of the belly, and one at the top of the navel or below it, and two more.
E si vezes las humiditatz exhuberants e le malaute aquo tollerant, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre le pentenilh e sobre les budels, e fort leu ajustant dos cauteris sobre l’estomac e prop dels inguonas, quar es curacio perficent de juvament de la qual no erras.	And if the patient has abundant water and accepts it, then treat it with a large cauterizer on the belly and the intestines, and a smaller one over the navel, and two more between the shoulders, since this is a perfect treatment that is not harmful; but do not use your own cauterization.
Capitol .xxxiv.	Chapter.XXXIV.
De cauterizacio de emorroydas antiquas.	On the Cauterization of Ancient Hemorrhoids.
Quan so en la natura derier emorroydas antiquas o una de humors grossas fregas o de humiditatz corrompudas, e son curadas am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no confereys la tieua curacio, lahoras cauterisa am tres cauteris sobre le pus dejos spondilh del dos petit e petit triangular, e am cauteri desus le ombelic cays per dos ditz.	When the cause of hemorrhoids is a natural one from rough or corrupt water, then treat it with water as described in the division and do not apply your own cauterization; but then there are three ways to treat it: one over the pus between the shoulders of the two small ones, another on the top of the navel, and one below it cutely; and two more between the shoulders.
E si doptas que l’estomac de lu sia enfregidat e la vianda de lu no sia degerida, e la cara de lu vezes apostemada, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre l’estomac am gran cauteri segon que es precedit; e am un cauteri sobre fietge, e am autre cauteri sobre la melsa de lu am cauteri clavilh, e leyssa le cauteri per alcun temps ubert, e aprop cura lu entro que sia sanat.	And if you think that the patient’s stomach is wet and his food is not digested, and that his face is red at times, then cauterize him on the stomach with a strong cautery according to how it came about; and with one cautery on the foot, and another cautery on his thigh, use a clavicle cautery, and leave the cautery in place for a while, and then treat the inside that is to be healed.
Capitol .xxxv.	Chapter .xxxv.
De cauterizacio de atheyl aprop la abscizio de lor.	Of cauterization of wounds, take away their bandages.
Quan tu abscindes atheyl, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri que es asemblat a ray.	When you cut off the bandages, then put on the fire the cautery that is gathered there.
Aprop entremet aquel ignit en aquel atheyl abscis, e ultima la tieua ma entro que pervengua le cauteri al orifici de la vena de la qual ve la sanc.	Then place the fire in the wound where the bandage was cut off, and let his hand rest there so that the fire reaches the opening of the vein from which the blood comes out.
E fay aquo una vetz o doas, quar si achieyl son trops, lahoras cauteriza quascun de lor segon que havem recontat, e aprop cura aquels am aquo que confereys a lor dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And make one or two cuts, because if the feet are cold, then cauterize each of them according to what we have calculated, and then treat those who sweat there with water so that they are healed.
E si cauterizas am gran cauteri sobre alquatin, es mays derier en juvament.	And if you cauterize with a strong cautery on the sole of the foot, it is better to wait for a while.
Capitol .xxxvi.	Chapter .xxxvi.
De cauterizacio de fistolas que son faytas en la natura derie en las partidas de lu.	Of the cauterization of fistulas that are formed in nature during the breaking of meat.
Quan la natura no obeziys a la obra la qual havem recomtada en son loc, e·l pacient es espaventat per aquo, sia sanat am cauteri.	When nature does not obey the work that we have recommended in its place, and the patient is scared by water, heal it with fire.
Donc quan ad alcun ve fistola en la natura derier, e es antiquada, corro sania de lu e humiditatz corrompudas, e donc aquo que es pus digne que cove es que proes aquela am tenta subtil, e aprop conoys la quantitat de la profunditat de lu am la devant dita tenta.	Then when there is a fistula in nature that becomes old, and corrupt moisture is produced there, and water is put on it that is proper for that particular test, and then take the quantity of its depth with the front mentioned test.
Aprop igneys le cauteri que es semblant a ray.	Then set fire to the cautery that is like fire.
E aprop met aquel cauteri ignit en aquesta fistula, e segon la quantitat en la qual intrec la tenta.	And then place the burning cautery in this fistula, and according to the quantity in which it enters the test.
E itera sobre aquela le cauteri entro que sian comburitz aquels cors corrumputz tost una veguada o dos o tres, segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	And repeat over that fire as many times as the corrupt bodies are burned up once or two or three times, according to the quantity of your need.
E guarda te de combustio de nervi e de vena; o si fistula va al cors de la vesica o al cors del budel, lahoras guarda te de totz aquels locz; e no fassas aquo sino quan la fistula es en loc carnos e cogitas que no es penetrant.	And guard against the burning of nerves and veins; or if the fistula goes into the channel of the bladder or the belly, then guard all places; and do not pour water there unless the fistula is in a fleshy place, and you think it may penetrate.
E aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat.	And then treat the area that needs to be healed.
E si le loc es sigillat, e so abscindidas de lu las materias, e roman ayssi per lonc temps, lahoras sapias que ja es curat entierament.	And if the wound is closed, and the materials are cut off from it, and time has passed like that, then you will know that it is completely healed.
E si las materias no so de lu ostadas, lahoras sapias que es penetrant o en le preon de lu os corromput, o cays aquo de aquelas causas de las quals vindra rememoracio en son loc.	And if the materials are not kept by him, then you will know that it is penetrating or in the belly of him; or water comes from those causes for which there will be remembrance in its place.
Capitol .xxxvii.	Chapter  .xxxvii.
De cauterizacio dels ronhos.	Of the cauterization of the lungs.
Quan en les ronhos endeve dolor per freg o per grossa ventozitat, e per aysso le coyt del malaute es amermat, lahoras cove que cauterizes aquel sobre les ronhos am cauteri sobre quascun ronho am cauteri clavilh del qual precesic la rememoracio.	When there is pain in the lungs because of rust or strong wind, and because of this the cough of the patient is increased, then you will know that you should cauterize them on the lungs with a clavicle cautery that causes remembrance.
E fort leu cauterizam am le segon un petit dejos, per que vindran tres cauteris liniatz, e donc siran mays deriers en juvament.	Then cut very lightly cauterize on the second with a little knife, so that three small cauteries will come out, and then wait for a while.
Capitol .xxxviii.	Chapter .xxxviii.
De cauterizacio de la vesica.	Of the cauterization of the bladder.
Quan accideys en la vesica debelitat e mollificacio per freg e per humiditatz ayssi que·l malaute la urina no retengua, lahoras cauteriza aquel en la partida pus dejos sobre la vesiqua, la hon comensan les pels del pentenilh, e cauteriza am un cauteri en la partida dreyta, e am autre en la senestra de lu.	When there is a breach and softening in the bladder because of rust and moisture so that the patient does not retain urine, then cauterize them at the lower part of the left side of the bladder with a knife, and cauterize on the right side with a cautery.
E sia la longitut de quascun cauteri segon la cantitat dels not del pous; e cauteriza aquel am cauteri en la partida pus bassa del dos, o am dos cauteris si es necessitat.	And make the length of each cautery according to the quantity of the hair; and cauterize with a cautery on the lower part of the two, or with two cauteries if necessary.
E sia cauteri clavilh segon que es procesit.	And use a clavicle cautery according to how it came about.
Capitol .xxxix.	Chapter .xxix.
De cauterizacio de la mayra.	Of the cauterization of the throat.
Quan veno en la mayra freg e humiditatz, e per aysso es prohibida enpreignacio, e son corrompudas las mestruas de lu, e es tardada la provocacio de lor, e accideys dolor deves le haveniment de lor, lahoras cove que·l loc sia cauterizat am tres cauteris en le circuit del ombelic, ayssi cum havem dit en le cauteri de la vesica; e am cauteri sobre le loc pus dejos del dos, o am dos cauteris, e sia le cauteri clavilh.	When there is rust and moisture in the throat, and because of this there is difficulty in breathing, and the patient’s breath comes out with a hiss, then you will know that the place should be cauterized with three cauteries on the circuit of the navel, just as we have said in the cauterization of the bladder; and with one cautery on the lower part of the left side of the two, or with two cauteries, and use a clavicle cautery.
Capitol .xl.	Chapter .xl.
De cauterizacio de la dislocacio de l’anqua.	Of the cauterization of the dislocation of the jaw.
Quan humiditatz moucozas so efundudas a la partida de la anqua, e so faytas causas del yssiment del sieu loc, e senhal de lu es que la coyssa es prolonguada sobre l’autre quan so comparadas entre lor.	When there is moist air in the channel of the jaw, and the causes of its discharge from its place are that it is prolonged over the other when compared with them.
E le loc de la dislocacio es atrobat en lu quays boyt.	And the dislocated place is turned towards him on the left side.
Adonc cove que cauterizas le malaute sobre la partida de la anqua de lu am cauteri a sercle semblant, pus que tu auras senhat am tenta en le cercuit de la partida ayssi cum es revolguda, e per so que la partida caia el mieg loc del cercle.	Then cauterize the patient on the left side of the jaw with a cautery that resembles fire, and because you will have a test in the circuit of the dislocated place, as it is rolled over, so that the place falls into its place in the circle.
E sia le cauteri del qual precedit la forma en la cauterizacio del estomac.	And use the same cautery to cauterize the stomach as was used before.
E si aquest cauteri no es a tu present, lahoras cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris am cauteri olivar gran.	If this cautery is not yours, then cauterize with three cauteries with a very large olive cautery.
E sia fayt le cauteri segon la quantitat de la ispicitut de tota la codena; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And make the cautery according to the quantity of the bitterness of the whole cord; and then treat that place where it needs to be healed.
Capitol .xli.	Chapter  .xli.
De cauterizacio de la vena sciatica.	Of the cauterization of the sciatic vein.
Quan dolor ve en la partida de anqua, e so causa de lu freg et humiditatz, le malaute es curat am aquo que havem dit e no confereys, e aquo es antiquat, lahoras cove que tu lacses le malaute de humors grosses am pillulas fetidas o am pillulas artificials o semblantz; e aprop cauteriza aquel.	When there is pain in the jaw, and because of rust and moisture, the patient is not cured with water that we have mentioned, and if water is not effective, then you will know that the patient must be cured with pills that are fermented or artificial or resembling them; and then cauterize.
E la manieyra del cauteri en aquela es segon dos manieyras: o cauteri am medicinas comburentz, o cauteri am foc.	And the way of cauterizing in that place is according to two ways: either cauterize with burning medicines, or cauterize with fire.
Sira segon dos manieyras scientas, de las quals es la una que cauterizes aquel sobre la partida de l’ancha de lu am tres cauteris triangulatz segon aquesta forma; e fay am aquels bona profunditat.	The first is that you cauterize with burning medicines, and the second is that you cauterize with fire. Of these two ways, the first is this: that you cauterize on the part of the tongue with three triangular cauteries according to this form; and make them deep.
E sia le spazi le qual es entre cascun cauteri la quantitat de la grossitut del dit e si le cauteri olivar o gran.	And space between each cautery is the quantity of its thickness, and if the olive or large cautery is used.
Mays alcunas veguadas sia le cauteri sobre le mieg loc sobre le cap de l’anquan per que son quatre cauteris.	A few times may be cauterized on the middle of the head because there are four cauteries.
E si vols, cauteriza am le cercle del qual es precesida la forma en la cauterizacio de la dislocacio de l’anqua, la i que sia cercle continent e comburey la ispicitut de tota la codena.	If you want, cauterize with the circle that surrounds the shape in which the jaw is dislocated, and this circle is a large one; and burn the bitterness of the whole cord.
E aquesta es la manieyra de cauteri in ciatiqua quan dolor es adherent al anqua e no es estenduda entro a la coyssa.	This is the way to cauterize in case pain adheres to the jaw and does not extend into the cough.
Mays si es estenduda entro a la coyssa, lahoras cauteriza aquel am dos cauteris sobre la coyssa sobre le loc al qual envireys le malaute que es la dolor; e am un cauteri sobre la cavilha per quatre ditz un pauc deves la part cilvestra.	But if it is extended into the cough, then cauterize with two cauteries on the cough on the part that surrounds the patient's jaw, and to make four cuts a little more than one; and to cut the cheek.
E si le cauteri cutellar, e sia la profunditat del cauteri segon la quantitat de la ispicitut de la codena.	And if the cautery is cutting, and it is deep according to the quantity of the bitterness of the cord.
E si le malaute envireys que la dolor es estenduda entro al loc prop les ditz des pes, lahoras cauteriza aquel aqui on envireys am cauteri per tres puntz o quatre o mays si indigeys de aquel.	And if the patient's pain is extended into the lower part of the jaw, then cauterize with three or four points or more if necessary.
E si le malaute envireys dolor esser dejos le donolh ves la coyssa, lahoras cauteriza aquel aqui am un cauteri cutellar.	And if the patient's pain is on the left side of the jaw, then cauterize with a cutting cautery.
E guarda te en tota cauterizacio que no ultimes am le cauteri en tant que comburas nervi o gran arceria, e que per aquo a tu es sobre le malaute mal noccument o contraccio.	And be careful in all cauterization that you do not end the cautery until you have burned the nerves or great arteries, and that by doing so you are above the patient's misfortune or restraint.
E yeu ja e vist un e autre de aquels les quals cauterizero sobre la cavilha e ultimero en la cauterizacio, e la cama foc inflada entro que la tumor aconseguit lo pe, e foc perforat e corromput tot le pe.	And I have already seen one or another of those who were cauterized on the shin and ended up in the cauterization, and the bed was burned until the tumor reached the foot, and was pierced and corrupted all the foot.
E aprop accidic fort solucio de ventre, e aprop aquo la mort.	And then happened a very great remedy for the belly, and death came by water.
E si la dolor es en dos partidas ensemps cauteriza quascuna segon aquesta manieyra.	And if the pain is in two parts, cauterize each according to this method.
E diysero les savis alcus en la cauterizacio de anqua cauteri del qual aquesta es la manieyra: fay semblant a cercle de ferr del qual le cercuit sia la maytat de un palm; e sia deves le sieu orrifici segon la grossesa de un os de datil o mens un pauc.	And the wise said in the cauterization of water cauterize with which this is the method: make a circle of iron whose circuit is most a palm; and it should be at its opening according to the thickness of a thumb or half a palm.
E dedintz aquel cercle sia un autre tertz; e sia le spazi le qual es entre lor la quantitat del notz del pous; e sian aquels cercles ubertz de dos partidas; e sia la longitut de aquels cays un notz o dos notz, e fay en aquels margue de ferr decentment apparelhat en les cercles; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And inside that circle is another third; and be the distance between them the quantity of the nail of the hand; and let those circles be open from both sides; and be the length of those bars one or two nails, and make in those margins of iron nicely dressed in the circles; and this is the form of it:
Aprop sia ignit en le foc entro que s’enrogesisca e gete scintillas, e aprop sia pausat sobre la partida del anqua, le malaute colcat sobre le latz sa.	Then set fire to it in the fire until it burns and gives off sparks, and then place it on the edge of the water, the patient lying on his back.
E donc cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris redontz en una veguada.	And therefore cauterize that one three cauterizes curved in a single curve.
E aprop layssa aquel per tres jorns; aprop emplastre aquel am boder e layssa la plagua uberta per trops dias; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And then leave it for three days; and plaster that one with liniment and leave the wound open for seven days; and then heal that one with oil until it is healed.
Diys Albucasis : o, filhs, de aquesta specia de cauteri pauc havem usat per la terror del reguardament de lu, e per aquo que paucs havem trobatz les quals reguardan sobre lu.	Al-Bukashi said: O, son, of this species of cauterization we have used little for the fear of looking at it, and for this reason we have found few who look up at it.
Mays dels bos cauteris a lu qui les sufferta, et atroba am aquel le loc de lu.	More of these cauterizations were done to him who suffered them, and he turned his back on it.
Mays cauteri am medicinas adhurentz es que tu fassas dos cercles haventz armula perforada en la qual deyssen le guaffo de la porta de ferr; sia la longuitut de la paretz en la nauteza de lor sian dos nozes o quays aquels.	More cauterizations with medicinal oils is that you make two circles havent armed pierced in which they should put the nail of the iron door; be the length of the bar in the thickness of their nails are two or three nails, and make those circles open from both sides.
E si le spazi le qual es entre quascu la quantitat de la grossitut del dit; e sian ubertz dejos e desus, e sian que contenguan se entre lor segon aquesta forma:	And if the distance between each one is the quantity of the thickness of a thumb; and they are open from below and above, and let them contain themselves among themselves according to this form:
E aprop pausa sobre la partida de la anqua le malaut jasent sobre le latz sa, e comprem la tua ma sobre la partida de la anqua; e aprop pren de aygua cauda e fon la entre dos cercles, e la qualiditat de aquela sia am le foc petit a petit, e te aquela per la quantitat de una hora, e sufferta le malaute la mordicacio e la adhustio de lu — quar aquel atrobo mordicacio ayssi cum de foc — entro que cesse la mordicacio.	And then place it on the edge of the water, the patient lying on his side, and press your hand over the edge of the water; and take a tail of water between two circles, and the quality of that be with small fire little by little, and endure the patient's pain and dryness - for that one has such pain as when of fire - until the pain ceases.
E aprop eleva la tua ma am le instrument et abstergeys l’aygua cauda de tota la anqua am aygua dousa.	And then raise your hand with the instrument and wash out the tail of water from all the shin with two-hand water.
E aprop leyssa aquel per tres jorns e pausa sobre aquel boder entro que sia la negror de la adhustio remauguda, e leyssa aquo per alcus jorns, e correra de lu poyredura; aquest es derier en juvament.	And then leave it for three days and place it on that plaster until the dryness of the adhesion remains, and leave it open for several days, and let it run with salt water; this is after healing.
E aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And then heal that one with oil until it is healed.
E si la dolor es extenduda entro la coyssa o la camba, fay a lu estatua en lu que contengua aygua segon que es feyt en la anqua engualment.	And if the pain extends into the crotch or the leg, make it stand on the ground according to what was done in the water in the Shin's stretching.
E aquesta es la manieyra de aygua cauda, e yeu ja he scrit aquela en le tractat de la rectificacio de medicinas.	And this is the way of water tail, and I have already written it in the treatise of medicine's correction.
Recipe de alcali e de caus no extinta de amdos ana partida una, e trissa les e pausa en una ola nova de la qual la partida dejos sia perforada per un petit trauc, segon la quantitat que intre en lu ray.	Take alkali and the cause not extinct of both in two parts one, and twist them and place them on a new wave from which the edge is pierced with a small hole, according to the quantity that enters into it.
E pausa dejos le fons de la ola autra ola enveyriada, e gete sobre aquel alcali e caus viva de aygua doussa la qual cobra aquels per un dit, e pus que tu compremes aquels am la tieua ma per bona compressio, e leyssa la hola que deyssenda de lu aygua aguda en la partida dejos a la ola enveyriada.	Then place the tail of the other wave above, and get it on that alkali and the live cause of two-hand water whose quantity is one thumb, and then press those with your good compression, and leave the wave that sends up from it water sharp in the edge of those to the wave above.
E aprop ajusta tota aquela aygua, e geta la sobre autra caus viva e autre alcali renovelatz, quar aquela lahoras sira de mot forta acuitat, la qual es aministrada en motas operacios de medicina e en cauterizacio dels autres membres, quar operacio fa de foc.	And then adjust all that water, and get it on another live cause and other alkali, because that one is of a strong heat that sharpens it, which is administered in the medicines' operations of medicine and cauterization of the other members, because operation makes fire.
E so de las medicinas alcunas am las quals es cauterizat ancha, ayssi cum tezizic e mel anacrat e caus am sabo enayssi que sian mesclatz.	And then from medicines some of which is cauterized wide, as well as being mixed and put together.
E Gualia recontet de un home dels antics la operacio e la curacio am la qual es curada dolor de anqua e de vena sciatica, e magnifiquet mot be esser de aquel, e diys que no hac necessitat de autra curacio, e quar es sanat per una veguada ayssi cum recomtec, quar fort leu aquel intrec en banh e eysic ja sa d’aquel.	And Gualia reported of an old man the operation and cure with which he was healed of the pain of the shin and the sciatic vein, and he praised it very much because it is cured in one day, for that one is a little strong in soaking and drying up already, as it is known from that.
Et es que sia pres de certarragi vert, e si no es atrobat vert, sia presa figua recent; e mot sia trissada am un pauc de grays e sia pausat sus la anqua en la qual es la dolor, o en la coyssa, o en la camba, e sia liat.	And it is because of the certain plant, and if it is not green, it should be a recent fig; and let it be twisted with a little salt and placed on the water in which the pain is, or in the crotch, or in the leg, and let it be tied.
E sia layssat per la cantitat de tres horas o per la quantitat que·l malaute centa cedacio de la adhustio.	And leave it for the quantity of three hours or for the quantity that the patient' pain stays dry from adhesion.
E aprop met aquel en banh e donc quan le cors de lu sia enrozat, entromet aquel en le sol, quar la dolor cessa e es sanat.	And then place it in a bath and when the man's body is heated, put that one into the sun because the pain ceases and is healed.
E sapias que no cove que alcu use de cauteri am aquestas medicinas sino aprop la evacuacio del cors.	And you know that you do not need to add anything else to these medicines except for the removal of the body.
Mays ja Escorides diysec que quan am fenda de cabra la vena stretica es cauterizada, aprofieyra a lu mo be; e sia le cauteri am lu segon aquesta manieyra: sia presa lana e sia enbeguda en oli antic, e sia pausat entre le pous del pe e entre le fossil.	More Ja Escorides said that when the goat's vein is cauterized, it would be better to use oil; and let cauterize be done according to this method: take wool and soak it in old oil, and place it between the feet of the foot and between the toes.
E aprop pren fenda de cabra secca e emflasma aquela am foc entro que sia fayta carbo; e aprop pausa lu sobre la lana e leysa la entro que sia estengida.	And then take dry goat's vein and ignite it with fire until it becomes charcoal; and then place it on the wool and leave it until it is dried up.
E aprop itera aquo, e no cessas far aquo entro que·l scintiment de la mordicacio pervengua entro al anqua e repausa la dolor.	And then repeat water, and do not cease to water until the fire of the pain reaches the water in the shin and the pain stops.
Et aquesta manieyra de cauteri es apelat cauteri de vaquas.	This method of cauterizing is called cow's cauterization.
Capitol .xlii.	Chapter LXXII.
De cauterizacio de dolor de dos.	Of the cauterization of pain in two parts.
Alcunas veguadas dolor es en le dos per tropas causas, cum per cazement o per percucio o per superflua evacuacio, e per causas ad aquelas semblantz, per infusio de materia frega e humida.	Some days' pain is in two parts because of two causes: because of the impingement or because of hitting or because of excessive elimination, and because of those that resemble it, from the infusion of rubbing and moist material.
E cauteri no catz sino en aquesta sola specia la qual es fayta per efusio de materia frega.	And cauterization is not made except in this single specialty which is done because of the infusion of rubbing material.
Donc cove, aprop evacuacio del malaute am pillulas fitidas e am semblant a lor, que sian faytas sobre·l dos en le qual es la dolor tres linhas segon la latitut de lu, pus que senhas am tentha en quascuna linha v cauteris o mays, segon la quantitat que ve de la tolleransa del malaute e de la vertut de lu.	So then excessive elimination of the patient with pills given that are similar to it, which are done over both parts in which the pain is three lines according to the thickness of the man' side; and because there are ten cauterizations or more, according to the quantity that comes out from the tolerance of the patient and the virtue of it.
E sia fayta cauterizacio am cauteri de punt.	And let cauterization be done with a cauterizing point.
E si vols, cauteriza am tres cauteris o am quatre am cauteri clavilh medial segon aquesta forma:	And if you want, cauterize with three cauterizations or four cauterizations on the median claw according to this form:
Capitol .xliii.	Chapter LXIII.
De cauterizacio al comensament de gilbositat.	Of cauterization at the beginning of gingivitis.
Motas veguadas endeve aquesta malautia als petitz enfantz; e senhal del comensament de lu en les enfantz es que accideys sobre lor estrectura en le ale eves la elevacio e·l movement.	Some days' pain is present in these small children; and the beginning of it is detected in the children's structure in the evening the raising and moving.
E atrobas en le derier espondil del dos e dels notz de lu que ja comensa a sobremontar sobre les autres spondils.	And it hurts at the bottom of the two vertebrae and the little nails of the man which have already started to rise above the other vertebrae.
E donc quan tu vezes aquo e voles prohibir, lahoras cauterisa aquel am cauteri que sia cercle segon aquesta forma:	And therefore when you see this and want to stop it, cauterize that pointed cautery so that it is circular according to this form:
que prengua le cauteri sobre tota partida del spondilh engualment.	so that the cautery takes on all parts of the spine in equal measure.
E si vols, cauteriza en le circuit del spondilh am le cauteri de punt dos linhas o tres.	And if you want to, cauterize around the spine with a pointed cautery making two or three lines.
E sian les puntz propdas entre lor.	Then bring the points close together.
E aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat am aquo que havem dit.	And then clean up the area as much as possible so that it heals well with what we have said.
Mays guarda que cauteri no sia administrat en gelbositat que sia fayta per spasme de nervi.	May also guard that the cautery is not administered in a swelling that is made by spasms of nerves.
Capitol .xliv.	Chapter .xliv.
De cauterizacio de podagra e de dolor de juncturas.	Of cauterization for gout and joint pain.
Quan dolor de juncturas son faytas per humors fregas les quals so enfundutz a quascun membre del cors, lahoras quan veno dolors en los pes, de costuma dels metges es que aquo apelen podragua propriament.	When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
E donc cum es curada podagra de causa frega am manieyra de cura e no so remaugudas las dolors, lahoras las remau cauteri.	And therefore, since gout of a febrile cause is cured with the manner of cure and not renewed as to the pains, then renew the cauterization.
E es que tu cauterizas aquel aprop evacuacio en le circuit de la junctura del pe am motz cauteris.	And this is because you cauterize that close evacuation in the circuit of the joint of the foot with a sharp cautery.
E sia cauteri olivar del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And it is a cautery of olive oil whose form is like this:
E si es necessitat que puntz sia fayt sobre la fassia del pe, lahoras fay am cauteri de punt.	And if it is necessary to make points on the surface of the foot, then do so with a pointed cautery.
E si las dolors pujan entro als denolhs o a las autras juncturas, e aquo motas vetz s’endeve, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre quascun donolh am tres cauteris o quatre de tota partida am aquest cauteri olivar.	And if the pains push into the toes or into other joints, and it has moved suddenly, then cauterize that on each toe with three or four of all parts with this olive oil cautery.
E si motz cauteris que aquestz cauteris sian a tu necessaris, lahoras cauteriza aquel e no premas trop la tua ma am le cauteri abans, sia tant solament enviro la specitut de la codena.	And if you have many of these cauterizations that these cauterizations are necessary to you, then cauterize that and do not press too hard on your hand with the cautery before, be only so much as the skin of the foot.
E si las dolors pugan entro al donolh e·l dos, lahoras aministra le cauteri le qual havem dit en le sieu capitol.	And if the pains push into the toe and the second, then administer the cautery that we have said in the previous chapter.
E si las dolors so en las mas tant solament, e es apelada suagra, lahoras puncta en le circuit dels focils ayssi cum se revolvo, puncta en aquels dos linhas.	And if the pains are only in one place and it is called sugar, then make two points in the circuit of the toes as it turns over, making two lines.
E si reman de las dolors en les ditz, lahoras puncta en le cercuit dels focils sobre quascun notz e sobre la pinche de la ma.	And if the pains remain in these two, then make points in the circuit of the toes on each toe and on the edge of the hand.
E si las dolors pugan aprop alscus jorns als coydes o als muscles, lahoras cauteriza les quascus de tota part dels ajutoris.	And if the pains push into the sides or under the muscles, then cauterize each of all parts of the aid.
E no evacuas le malaute de bon regiment e de recepcio de medicinas, quar si es fayt bon regiment e flacma es evacuada am aquest cauteri sira sanat, Dieus ajudan.	And you do not evacuate the patient of good order and of good reception of medicines, because if it is done in good order and the flame is evacuated with this cautery, healing will be accomplished, God helps.
Capitol .xlv.	Chapter .xlv.
De cauterizacio de rompeduras.	Of Cauterization for Breaks
Quan endeve rompedura en les angonars e diysendo les budels denant l’atela al genetiu, e aquo es comensan de aprop, lahoras cove que tu mandas al malaute layssar la sua comestio en le sieu dia e que use de causas leniens per so que la fenda deyssenda del sieu ventre.	When a break is made in the armpits and the intestines come out before the elbow, and it begins to move, then cover that you command to the patient to leave his food in the day and to use gentle causes so that the break does not send from his belly.
E aprop segua le malaute entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos, e comanda a lu que tengua le sieu ale entro que sia foro getat o aparesca l’atela o·l budels.	Then follow the patient between your two legs, and command him to hold his arm within that it is not seen or appears the intestine or the budel.
E aprop retorna aquel am les tieus ditz e senha am tenta la ruptura sobre le os del pentenilh am senhal la extremitat del qual sia semblant a la maytat de cercle a las subiranas partidas del cors.	Then return that with the fingers of your hand and try the break on the bones of the spine with a pointed finger, seeing if it is similar to a half-circle.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	Then light the cautery whose form is like this:
entro que sia mot rog e gete cintilhas.	within that it is not hot and gets shiny lights.
E aprop reduzeys le budel o l’atela a la sua conquavitat, e aprop pause la sua ma sobre le loc per so que le budel no yesqua.	Then return the intestine or hernia to its cavity, and place your hand over the area to prevent the intestine from coming out.
E tu ja has ubert entre las coyssas del malaute e dejos lu as pausat un coyssi, et autre servent sia sus las cambas de lu, e autre sus le pietz de lu, le qual tengua las suas mas.	You have already opened the space between the patient’s thighs and placed a cushion under them, another servant on their legs, and another on their chest, holding their hands.
E aprop pausa le cauteri sobre aquel senhal am la tua ma am cauteri stan dreyt, e te aquel entro que am lu consieguas le os del pentenilh entro al mieg del duiduni; e itera am aquel autra veguada si a tu aquel no has conseguit en la primieyra veguada entro al os.	Then pause the cautery on that mark with your hand and the cautery to the right, then see if you can reach the bones of the spine in the middle of the back; and repeat this on the other side if you cannot get to them in the first place through the spine.
E observa saviament del ysiment del budel en la hora de la tua cauterizacio, que no comburas aquel budel per so que sobre le malaute no vengua in mort o autre gran malicia.	Then observe carefully the burning of the intestine during your cauterization that you do not burn that intestine so that on the patient it does not come to death or another great evil.
E sapias que quan tu am le cauteri no atenhas le os, no confereys la tua operacio.	And you know that when you have the cautery and you do not see the bone, do not perform the operation.
E cove que·l cauteri dels enfants sia subtil segon le gran e la mesura de lor.	Then cover that the cautery of children is subtle according to their age and measure.
E aprop cura le loc del cauteri per tres dias am boder entro que sia remauguda la scara del foc.	Then clean up the area of the cauterization for three days with a sharp tool so that the flame of the fire does not touch it.
E aprop cura aquel am les autres enguentz entro que sia sanat.	Then cover that with the others in gentle manner so that it heals.
E le malaute sia jasent sobre le sieu dos per xl dias entro que sia sigillat le loc e la plagua.	And the patient be sitting on his legs for 40 days within that it is sealed the area and the plague.
E cove que pauses le nutriment de lu segon la longitut del temps de la curacio de lu le qual le linesca le ventre de lu, e que le budel no yesca fora deves le esforsament de guerir.	Then pause the nutrition of him according to the length of time of his cure, so that the intestine does not burn outside due to the effort of healing.
E aprop quan se vol levar aprop xl dias, lahoras aministra liament decentment fayt, e tengua aquel per autres xl jorns.	Then when you want to take it off after 40 days, then administer it carefully and properly, and keep it for another 40 days.
E sia mermat de trebalh e de replecio de vianda e de beure, e de votz vehementz, quar quan usa de aquest regiment de sanacio entiera sira sanat.	Then it is a change of work and of the repetition of food and drink, and of careful effort, because when using this complete regimen all will heal.
E yeu diyre la curacio de las rupturas en las autras partidas del ventre, e so al comensament, e vols que no treguan, lahoras cauterisa la ruptura d’aquel am cauteri redon segon la quantitat de lu, e sia aquo que es exhurit de la codena ayssi cum la tersa partida de lu; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit, e no es ajustat.	Then see the cure of breaks in other parts of the belly, and first, and if you want to, cauterize that break with a round cautery according to the quantity of it, and so that it is removed from the skin as well as the third time; and then clean up that which we have said, and do not adjust it.
E ja diyssero alcus primiers que ruptura sia cauterizada am cauteri triangular segon aquesta forma, pus que es senhada am tenta:	Then already say others that the first break is cauterized with a triangular cautery according to this form, because it is marked with this shape:
e es pausada linha que eys per la latitut en le latz pus sobira de la ruptura, e autra linha al desus; e depausa la tua ma am un cauteri clavilh, mays le primier cauteri es pus leugier e milhor.	And a line is paused that goes up through the middle of the break, and another line downwards; and your hand over one of the lines with a pointed cautery, may the first cauterization be made faster and better.
Capitol .xlvi.	Chapter .xliv.
De cauterizacio de torcio.	Of Cauterization for Twisting
Quan endeve en alscus membres per cazement o per percussio dolor e persevera aquela dolor per lonc temps e no comfereys al u curacio am medicinas, lahoras cove que cauterizes am cauteri de punt.	When there is pain in the limbs by injury or percussion, and that pain persistes for a long time and does not respond to cure with medicines, then you should cauterize it with a pointed cautery.
E sia le cauteri de tot membre segon la magnitut e la parvitat de lu, e vertut e develitat de lu, e locacio de torcio e dolor de lu.	Then the cauterization of each limb according to its size and age, and its virtue and development, and its location of twisting and pain.
Donc si·s sanat per le primier cauteri, bo es; e sino, lahoras itera sobre lu le cauteri; quar de costuma de aquelas dolors es que sian punctatz de membre ad aquel membre le qual apropinque al u, per que cove que consieguas aquels am cauteri entro que·l malaute sia sanat.	Then if healing is achieved by the first cauterization, it is good; and if not, then repeat it over him; because, usually, those pains are marks of a limb that is broken to another limb, so that, if you can reach it with cauterization, healing will be accomplished for the patient.
Capitol .xlvii.	Chapter .xlvii.
De cauterizacio de lepra.	Of Cauterization for Leprosy
Les lebros alcunas veguadas am cauteri per mot gran juvament, e magerment si la specia de lepra que es fayta per putrefaccio de flacma e de melencolia.	The leeches are found in certain places by cauterization as a great help, and cautiously if the leprosy is caused by decay of flame and melancholy.
E donc cum tu vols cauterizar aquel, considera si la lepra es comussan e as aquela curada am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no deysen, ni esta, e temes sobre le malaute que la corrupcio comprehenda tot le cors de lu e tota la compleccio de lu, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre le cap am v cauteris: am un en le mieg loc del cap, e am le segon pus dejos de lu, eves le front a la fi dels cabels; e amdos sobre dos corns; e am un detras, sobre la nuca o servitz.	And therefore, if you want to cauterize it, consider if the leprosy is caused by decay of flame and melancholy. Then treat it with the water we have said in the division, and do not apply it to the head, nor to the neck, nor to the back of the neck; then cauterize it on the top of the head at the middle place, and on the second one from behind, over the forehead near the end of the hair; and both on the two sides; and behind, on the back of the neck.
E ultima la tua ma am le cauteri un pauc entro que emprema en le os una petita empressio, e de lu sian deslocadas las scorsas, per so que la expiracio de grossas vapors sia alleujada de lu; e cauteriza sobre la melsa segon que es precesit.	And finally place your hand with the cautery a little further inside, so that it presses upon bone and causes a slight contraction, and then move the scalpel so that the exhaled thick vapors are eased; and cauterize on the muscle according to what is needed.
E si la lepra es ja expanduda sobre le malaute e apar manifestament, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas aquel am aquels cauteris les quals havem ditz en le cap; e am cauteri sobre la extremitat del nas, e am dos cauteris sobre las doas maysselas, e am dos cauteris sobre dos spondils del col, e am vi cauteris sobre les spondils del dos, e am un gran sobre les spondils prop de la coeta, e un sobre la cotea , e am dos sobre las anquas, e am un sobre quascuna anqua, e am dos sobre les donols e un sobre quascun donolh, e am dos sobre les coydes, e am dos sobre les muscles, e am dos las teneretutz del sieu pietz; e cauteriza aquel sobre totas las juncturas dels ditz de las mas e dels pes, e sobre quascun talon dels sieus pes, e sobre les foscils de las suas mas.	And if the leprosy has already spread over the loins and appears manifestly so, then cauterize those which you cauterized on the head; and on the tip of the nose, and on two points on the cheekbones, and on two points on the skull behind the ears, and on one point near the jaw, and on the jaw itself, and on two points on the shoulders, and on a single point on each breastbone, and on the two shoulder blades and on one point on each of them, and on the two elbows, and on the two wrists, and on both feet, and on the two toes, and on the two knees. And cauterize all these joints of the body and of the feet, and on the ball of each foot, and on the heels of their feet; and cauterize each tendon of their feet.
E guarda te dels nervis les quals so sobre le talo que no comburas aquels.	And keep away from the nerves that are above the bone so that you do not burn those.
E alcunas veguadas es cauterizat am un cauteri sobre le os del pentenilh e am autre sobre la boca del stomac, e autre sobre le fietge.	And some of them are cauterized with one cautery on the bone of the little finger and with another on the opening of the stomach, and with another on the anus.
E sapias que quant mays ajustas cauteris, tant es mays juvatiu e mays conferent; e sapias que le malaute no ha en le cauteri dolor, ayssi cum han les sas, per so quar le cors de lu ja es stupefayt.	And know that the more you apply cauteries, the more it will heal and be confirmed; and know that the loins do not feel pain in cauterizing them, since they are dull, but the body is stupified by the heat of the fire.
E cove que les cauteris sian grans o paucs segon les membres e las juncturas segon que es precedit de las specias dels ferramentz.	And know that the size of the cauterization should be according to the limbs and joints, following the application of the tools.
E aprop cura le cauteri am farina de errs coyta am mel e am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	Then clean the cauterization with a scald of warm water and salt, then apply a poultice of warm milk to heal it.
Capitol .xlviii.	Chapter. XLVIII.
De cauterizacio de stupor.	Of the stupor of cauterization.
Quan alcun membre es stabozit o adormit e es curat am medicinas, olis e emplastres, e no es sanat, lahoras tu cauteriza aquel membre stabozit am cauteris segon que merita la grandesa del membre o la parvitat de lu.	And when a member is stiffened or numb and is treated with medicines, oils, and poultices, and does not heal, then you should cauterize the stiffened member with cauterization according to whether it is large or small.
E sia lo tieu cauteri intrant la ispicitut de la codena un pauc.	And let this small cauterization enter a little into the tendon.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia sanat.	Then clean that with oil, so that it heals.
E alscunas veguadas es cauterizada alcuna stupor le qual endeve a las mas e als pes, e als spondils del dos e ves le eysiment dels nervis les quals mavon aquel membre, e es remauguda la stupor.	And some of them are sterilized with the same cauterization that goes to the limbs and feet, and to the shoulder blades behind the ears, and the nerves that move those members are burned; and the stupor remains.
Mays no prusuma sobre aquo sino aquel que es savi en la anotomia dels membre e de la egressio dels nervis tot le cors moventz.	Do not advance further unless you know the anatomy of the limbs and the exit of the nerves throughout the entire body.
Capitol .xlix.	Chapter. XLI.
De cauterizacio de albaras que es morfea.	Of the cauterization of scars that have become hard.
Quan albaras es antiqua e no comfereys a lu alcu dels enguentz de medicina, lahoras tu cauteriza sobre aquela am cauteri preon un pauc segon la quantitat de la specitut de la codena entro que sia remauguda la blancor e la color de lu, e la color de lu sia mudada.	And when the scar is old and does not respond to any medicine, then you should cauterize it with a small cauterization according to the thickness of the tendon, so that the whiteness and the color of it are changed, and the color of it is altered.
E aprop cura aquel am farina de errs e de lentilhas am oli rozat e am folhas de arnagrosa, e am sanc de colomba o am sanc de yronda, da cascuna sia una partida e totas sian mescladas, e aprop sia linit un drap e sus le loc sia pausat entro que sia sanat.	Then clean it with flour and lentils, with rosin oil and leaves of hornbeam, and with the juice of hawthorn or st. John's wort, mixing all together; then put a cloth over the area and let it rest until it heals.
Capitol .l.	Chapter I.
De cauterizacio de cranc.	Of the cauterization of the crust.
Quan canser es comensan e vols aquel ostar, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteri de cercle en le circuit de lu ayssi cum es revolgut.	And when the canker is beginning to appear and you want to remove its edge, then cauterize it with a circular cauterization in the path of the crust's rotation.
E diysero les savis que sia cauterizat am lo derier cauteri en le mieg loc; mays a mi no es vist aquo, quar temi que sia ulcerat, e yeu ja e vist aquo alcunas veguadas.	The wise said that it should be cauterized with the last cauterization in that place; but to me it has not been seen, for I have seen it a few times.
E es pus dreyturier que sia cauterizat en le circuit de lu am cercle ayssi cum avem dit, o am motz cauteris.	And it is said that it should be cauterized in the path of the crust with a circle, as I have said, or with a pointed cauterization.
Capitol .li.	Chapter L.
De cauterizacio de adubilati.	Of the cauterization of the abdomens.
Quan alcun adubilati es tardat en maturacio, e aysso es per la superfluitat fazen aquela, o per etat del malaute, quar es vielh en decrepitat, de pauc sanc, o per le temps, e tu vols festinar en la maturacio de adubilati; lahoras cauteriza en le circuit de lu am motz cauteris petitz punctan; e aprop leyssa aquela quar ela fastinara en maturacio.	And when an abdomens is delayed in maturity, and thus it produces the fruit, or by age of the loins, because it is old in decay, of poor quality, or because of time, and you want to accelerate its maturity; then cauterize it in the path of the loins with a small pointed cauterization; and let it ripen quickly.
Mays si tu vols la perforacio de lu am cauteri, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu: e depausa aquel en le mieg loc de adubilati entro que penetre la codena.	But if you want to pierce it with cauterization, then you should ignite the fire of the cauterization in this way: and place it in the middle of the abdomens where it will penetrate.
E si le cauteri en aquel loc que es pus dejos, per so que le cors del brac sia alleujat; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	Then if the cauterization is placed in that place that is left free, so that the spine is relieved; and then clean that with oil, so that it heals.
Capitol .lii.	Chapter II.
De cauterizacio de corrodent.	Of the cauterization of the corrosive.
Corrodent es corrupcio ambulant en le membre, la qual corrodeys aquel ayssi cum a foc comedent lenha secca.	Corrodent is a walking corruption in the limbs, which corrupts that way as if it were eating dry wood with fire.
Donc si vezes aquel corrodent en loc le qual sufferte cauteri am foc, lahoras tu igneys cauteris clavils motz paucs, e grans segon que es convenent en aquel loc en le qual es corrodent.	Then if that corrosive appears in a place where it can be cauterized with fire, then you should ignite small pointed cauterizations, and large ones according to the need in that place where it is corrosive.
E aprop cauteriza aquel de tota partida entro que erradiques tota la corrosio e no romangua alcuna causa de lu.	Then clean all of it completely with one cauterization, so that you eradicate all the corruption and do not leave any cause for worry.
E aprop leyssa aquel per tres dias, e pausa sobre les locs cauterizats solpre trissat am oli mesclat entro que las scaras sian totas eradicadas e tota la corrupcio.	Then let it rest for three days, and place a cloth over the cauterized areas every other day, so that all the scars are completely healed and all corruption is eradicated.
E aprop cura aquel am enguentz carn engendrantz.	Then clean that with warm oil.
Mays si aprop tres dias vezes que la carn nasca sana en la qual no es corrupcio, bo es; mays sino, lahoras itera le cauteri sobre aquo que es romas en les locs corrumputz.	But if after three times the meat is born healthy and is not corrupted, then it is good; but if not, then repeat the cauterization on those places that are corrupted.
E corrodent es medicat alcunas vetz am medicina aguda, quar aquela es meza en loc de cauteri.	Corrodent is cured with some medicines of acute nature, because cauterization is half-effective in that place.
Mays empero cauteri am foc es de pus leugier juvament.	But cauterization with fire is more useful.
E yeu ja e dit la curacio de lu am medicina aguda en la divisio, e donc pren aquela quan de lu auras endegencia.	I have already said that its cure is with an acute medicine in the division, and now take it when you need it urgently.
Capitol .liii.	Chapter .liii.
De cauterizacio de claus e dels autres semblants.	On Cauterization of Claws and the Other Semblants.
Motas veguadas endeve a las partidas dejos del pe malautia que s’apela clau, e es causa grossa, fentrada, la qual ladeys le pe; e cauteri en aquels es segon dos manieyras, so es cauteri am foc e cauteri am aygua cauda.	The claws of the foot that is called a claw, and it is a great cause, opening, which makes the foot hurt; and cauterizing them is done with two methods, with fire and water tail.
Mays cauteri am foc es que igniscas le cauteri concau semblant a pena de voltor, le qual sia feyt de ferr segon la quantitat la qual contengua le clau de tota partida, e sia de subtils marguas.	The method of cauterizing with fire is that you ignite the cauterizing substance resembling ash, which is made of iron in a certain quantity corresponding to the claw's whole width, and is of thin margins.
E aprop pausa aquel ignit sobre le clau, e aprop revolveys la tua ma am le cauteri en le circuit del clau entro que·l cauteri pervengua a la profunditat del clau.	And place that ignited one on the claw, and move your hand around the claw so that the cauterizing substance reaches the claw's depth.
E leyssa aquel per tres dias entro que comense getar brac.	And leave it for three days within which it begins to stink.
E aprop emplastre aquel am malvas salvatges trissadas am sal, e leyssa le emplastre sobre aquel per una nuoyt, quar aquel sira eradicat de las suas razitz.	And apply that with dried-out wild garlic, and leave the plaster on it for a night, as it should dry out its roots.
E aprop cura le loc am enguent de carn generatiu entro que sia sanat.	And cure the area with an ointment of fresh meat within which it is healed.
E si so no-convertitz, e motas veguadas accideysso en la superficia del cors, majorment en las mas e les pes, lahoras cove que tu aministres en aquels cauteri am aygua, e es que prenguas una quannula de eram o de ferr o de pena de voltor, e pausa aquela sobre le clau; e aprop geta en la quanula de aygua cauda pauca cantitat, e rete la tua ma, e tu revolveys aquela am compressio de la tua ma de tot, e sia enpremut le marge de la canula en la razit del clau, e atrobara la aygua cauda via al preon de la razit del cau; e espera le malaute un pauc la mordicacio de l’aygua cauda per una hora, e aprop remau aquela, quar le clau am las suas razitz sira erredicat.	And if it does not heal over, and sightless spots appear on the surface of the body, mostly on the hands and feet, then do the following: take a little quantity of water tail, and place that on the claw; and gently pour a little amount of fire-water onto it, and wrap your hand around it, and you rotate that with a compression of your hand continuously, and press the margin of the tube into the claw's root, and let the water tail run down the claw's root; and wait for the patient to taste the water tail for an hour, and then remove that, as the claw should not lose its roots.
E ayssi fe am aquels la i aprop l’autre entro que venguas sobre totz les quals de lor so en le cors.	And in this way treat each one of those separately within which they appear all over the body.
E aprop cura aquels pus que las razitz dels claus so erradicadas am aquo dels enguentz les quals la carn ve engenran.	And cure those pustules that the claws' roots are eradicated with an ointment of fresh meat, which is made with watertail.
Capitol .liiii.	Chapter .liiii.
De cauterizacio de tremor.	On Cauterization of Tremors.
Quan endeve ad alcu tremor per freg en le nervi o per febre de causa frega, o per autra causa semblant, lahoras cove que tu cauterises aquel am quatre cauteris o am v sobre les spondils del dos, entre quascun spondilh am un cauteri; e am cauteri en le pietz de lu, e sobre l‘estomac de lu, am cauteri olivar.	When there is a tremor due to friction in the nerves or from fever caused by rubbing, or from a similar cause, then do the following: if you have four spondyls in the foot, place one cauterizing substance between each spondyl; and on the foot's sole, and over the belly, with an olive cauterizing substance.
E la tremor de lu se repausa e festina la sanetat de la malautia frega.	And the tremors of the leg should subside, and the healing of the fever-caused disease should hasten.
Capitol .lv.	Chapter .lv..
De cauterizacio de albati accidentz al cors.	On Cauterizing White Accidents on the Body.
Quan en le cors so espellitz albati, e so pustulas fendas las quals so feytas de materias grossas corruptas; donc cove al comensament cum apareyso, que sia cauterizat sobre tot cap de la fistola am cauteri subtil am fustz de mirt, la extremitat del qual es estenduda am foc; o am razitz de erestologia longua; o am cauteri lentecular.	When white accidents appear on the body, and pus-filled pustules are formed from corrupted matter; then, as soon as they appear, they should be cauterized at their whole length with a thin edge of fire; or with the hair of a long-cut comb; or with a slow-burning substance.
E alscunas veguadas es cauteri ademamil al comensament de la sua expulcio segon aquesta manieyra; e no so cregudas, e es disrumpuda la superfluitat fazens aquels, et sana de aquels.	And some spots are cauterized as they come out continuously according to this way; and they should not be scarred, and the excess is removed by doing that, and those spots are healed from those.
Mays empero cove que aquo sia fayt aprop evacuacio am fleubotomia.	However, in order that water be evacuated continuously with bloodletting.
Capitol lvi.	Chapter lvi..
De cauterizacio de fluex de sanc accident per incisio de arceria.	On Cauterizing a Bloodletting Flow of White Accident by Incision of Arthros.
Tropas veguadas endeve fluex de arceria que es inciza deves la plagua la qual endeve deforo, o deves la incizio de apostemas o cauteri del membre, e alor semblantz, e es dificil remaura aquel.	The flow of white accident that is cut through the plague which it should be removed, or through the incision of pustules or member's cauterizing, and in similar cases, and it is difficult to recover from that.
Donc cum accideys ad alcu aquo, lahoras tu·t coyta am la tua ma a l’orrifici de la arceria, e pausa sobre aquel le tieu dit endic estrenh aquel motas veguadas entro que sia ostat le fluex del sanc dejos le tieu dit, e que non yesqua.	Then if some water appears, then do the following: place your hand over the orifice of the artery, and place that over it so that the blood flow is stopped at the orifice, and does not run out.
E aprop pausa en le foc les cauteris olivars paucs e grantz, per nombre motz, e exsuffla sobre aquels entro que sian mot ignitz.	And place a few large and some small olive-colored cauterizing substances on it, and exhale that over them within which they should be ignited.
E aprop pren de aquels un petit o un gran segon le loc e la plagua en la qual es rompuda la arteria, sobre aquela vena festinantment pus que auras remaugut le tieu dit, e te le cauteri entro que sia abcindit e restreyt aquel sanc.	And apply that to the small or large one according to the location and plague in which the artery is broken, over that vein continuously before you recover your breath, and then cauterize within which it should be stopped and closed.
E si le sanc es expellit de l’orrifici de la arteria quan tu remaues le tieu dit e extringeys le cauteri, lahoras pren la un autre cauteri coytadament dels cauteris les quals en le foc son preparatz, e donc no cesses fer aquo un aprop autre entro que le sanc sia restrengit.	And if the blood flows out of the artery's orifice while you are holding your breath and exhaling the cauterizing substance, then take another cauterizing substance that is prepared in fire, and if it does not stop, apply that to a small part within which the blood is stopped.
E guarda te que no comburas le nervi que aqui es, e que vengua sobre le malaute autra malicia.	And be careful that you do not burn the nerve that is here, and that it does not run onto the patient' other evil.
E sapias que quan de l’arteria flueys sanc, lahoras no es possible en aquels restrenge la sanc, e majorment quan l’arteria es gran, si no am una de quatre manieyras: o am cauteri ayssi quo dit havem, o am extraccio quan no es extrayta, quar quan es extrayta las extremitatz de lu miels son comburidas e es restreyt le sanc, o que sia liat am fiel o am liament per fort strectura, o que sian pausadas sobre lu medicinas de las quals la vertut es restringir la sanc; e sian strengudas am pulvinar am costriccio decent.	And you should know that when the artery' blood flows, then it is not possible to stop the blood in those, and more so when the artery is large, if it is not done with one of four methods: or cauterizing as it is said, or extracting as it is not extracted, for when it is extracted the extremities of him melt and the blood is stopped, or that it is held with a strapping rope by a strong tension, or that they are placed on medicine of which the virtue is to stop the blood; and those are tightened with a pulvinar cloth.
Mays aquel que aministra restriccio decent de lu am liament e am strictura am draps o per posicio de causas comburentz e de semblantz, no comfereys sino tart.	Then that which administers a strapping tension of him and a strong tension by a rope, or by position due to fire and similar causes, does not confer more than a small amount.
Mays si aquo endeve ad alcu e no sia le metge present ni medicina, lahoras obre am pausament del dit indic sobre le orrifici de aquela vena ayssi cum havem dit, e entenda a la gran costreccio de lu entro que le sanc sia ostat de la sobirana partida de la plagua, e sobre la arceria le dit no sia remaugut; e de sobre la arceria sia aspergit am aygua frega de mot gran fregiditat entro que·l sanc sia congilat e engrossat; e mays cossire en que ha de cauteri o de medicina necessitat.	Then if some water appears, and it is not the present medicine or remedy, then do the following: open the orifice of that vein with a small incision as said, and understand to the great constriction of him within which the blood is stopped from the plague' supreme part, and over the artery, the incised part should not be recovered; and on it, sprinkle water of high coldness due to a large amount of freezing within which the blood is congealed and thickened; and then prepare cauterizing or medicine as necessity demands.
Comensa la segonda partida.	Begins the Second Part.
De incisio e perforacio e ventozas e de fleubotomia e de plaguas e de lor semblants.	On Incision and Piercing of Veins and of Bloodletting and of Plagues and of Their Similarities.
Aquestas son paraulas de Albucazis.	These are words of Albucasis.
Ja havem dit en le primier capitol tota malautia en la qual cauteri am foc es convenient e am medicina comburent, e las occasios e las causas de lu, e les instrumentz en aquels necessaris am las formas dels cauteris; e he ordenatz les capitols de la subiranetat del cap entro als pes.	We have said in the First Chapter all disease for which cauterizing with fire is suitable and medicine that burns, and the occasions and causes of it, and the instruments used in those, and we order the Chapters of the Subjection of the Head to the Feet.
E yeu procesire en aquest capitol per aquela meteysa guisa, per que sia alliujat lo querent aquo, lahoras sobre aquo que aura demandat.	And I will proceed in this Chapter by that method, so that it is cleared what you seek, then over that which you have sought.
E denant que yeu comense aquo, cove, fils, que aprenguatz que en aquest capitol es per terror aquo que es en le capitol primier de cauterizacio.	And before I begin with him, know that in this Chapter it is for the fear of water that is in the First Chapter of Cauterization.
E per aquo que cove que sia en lu gran cautela, quar en la operacio la qual es en aquest capitol motas veguadas catz evacuacio la qual es am sanc am le qual esta la vida deves la aspersio de la vena o incisio sobre l’apostema o apercio de exsitura o puracio de la plagua o extraccio de sageta o incizio de peyra e a lor semblantz.	And for water that is in great caution, for in the operation which is in this Chapter, some spots are evacuated continuously, which is made to the life by sprinkling the vein or incision on the pustule or opening of discharge or purging of the plague or stabbing with an arrow or opening of gold, and similar things.
E de totz aquels so acompanhatz temor e tremor e en le mas de lor catz la mort.	And of all those you accompany fear and trembling, and in most of them death comes.
E yeu amonesti vos que sobre vos no caia aquo en le qual es esitacio, quar alcunas veguadas cazo deves vos manieyras de homes am manieyras motas de malautias.	And I warn you that over you does not fall water in which you are resting, for some spots may cause you harm by the ways of ill people.
E de lor es alcu que s’irays am la sua malautia e es leugiera deves lu la mort, e aysso per la vehemensia de aquo que troba de sa malautia, e per longuesa de la malautia de lu, e am la malautia es paor la qual significa mort.	And of them is some that goes away to his own disease and it is hidden death from him by the velocity of water which finds its disease, and from the length of his disease, and at his disease is the fear of which means death.
E de aquels es le qual dona a tu son aver e ditta, tu esperant am aquel sanetat, e la sieua malautia es perniciosa.	And of those who give you trouble and talk to you, waiting for them is health, but their sickness is destructive.
E donc no cove que tu consentas en aquel que ve a vos del qual es aquesta manieyra; e la vostra cautela sia major que covesitat e la vostra rapacitat; e no presumatz alcuna causa sobre aquo sino aprop sciencia certa la qual virifica aquo deves vos, e al qual perve successio lausabla.	And so I cannot agree with you on this issue regarding this person; and your caution should be greater than your laziness and your greed; and do not assume any reason for this other than a certain verified knowledge which demonstrates that to you, and for whom this worthy success is due.
E usatz en la curacio de totz vostres malautes de pronosticacio e indicacio de lu al qual es salut convertida, quar en aquel es a vos ajutori sobre adquisicio de fama e de memoria, de lausor e de gloria.	And use in the treatment of all your diseases by prognosis and indication to this one which is beneficial, for in that one is an aid to you in acquiring fame and memory, worthy of praise and glory.
O, filhs, Dieus en vos spire le sieu entendement e no oste a vos direccio e proteccio, quar aquo es en la sua ma.	O son, God inspires your understanding and does not tell you his direction and protection, for in him is his might.
E yeu e ordenat aquest capitol distingent per capitols segon que precedit en le capitol de cauteris, de la cura del cap entro als pes, per que sia a vos alleujat aquo que demandatz de aquo e del qual havetz necessitat.	And I have ordered this chapter distinguishing by chapters according to what precedes in the chapter of cauterization, from the cure of the head down to the feet, so that it may be pleasant to you from this one which you ask for and from which you needed.
Capitol primier.	Chapter first.
De la curacio de aygua la qual es contenguda en le cap dels enfantz.	Of the treatment of water that is contained in the head of children.
Sapias que aquesta malautia motas veguadas endeve als enfantz deves le enfantament e quan la noyrissa estrenh le cap del enfant ses livitat.	Do you know that this disease is seen first in children, and when the child's head is heated, it becomes lighter.
E alcunas veguadas endeve per causa amaguada la qual no es saubuda.	And some are seen first due to a hidden cause that is not known.
Mays yeu no vi aquesta malautia sino en les enfantz; e a totz aquels les quals yeu vi se coytec la mort, e per ayssi es a mi vist layssada obra en aquels.	I have not seen this disease except in children; and all those that I have seen it in, have died, and therefore it is a terrible work in them.
E yeu e vist que un enfant le cap del qual era d’aygua omplit, e·l cap de lu era totjorn ayssi magnificat entro que ceser no podia sobre si meteys per la grandesa del sieu cap, e mays que la humiditat fe aucmentada entro que foc mort.	And I have seen a child whose head was filled with water, and his head remained larger than it should be due to the moisture increased until death came.
E aquesta humiditat o es agreguada entre la codena e l’os, o es agreguada dejos le os sobre le ciphac.	This moisture is either added between the jaw and the ear, or it is added below the ear on the side of the head.
Quar la operacio en aquel si la humiditat es entre la codena e l’os e le apostema es pauc, lahoras cove que tu fendas en le mieg loc del cap am una fissura en la latitut, e sia la longitut de la fissura cays dos notz entro que corra la humiditat, e aquesta es la forma del spatum:	For the operation in that one if the moisture is between the jaw and the ear, and the pus is little, then you should make a cut in the middle of the head in a slit shape, and let the length of the slit run into two openings where the moisture runs out, and this is the form of the spatium:
E donc si la humiditat es mays augmentada e l’apostema es major, lahoras son aqui dos fissuras segon aquesta manieyra:	And if the moisture is increased and the pus is larger, then here are two slits according to this way:
E si la humiditat es dejos le os, senhal de lu es que tu vezes la comissuras del cap ubertas de tota partida e l’aygua es spremuda quan tu compremes aquela am la tieua ma a las partidas dedintz e no es aquo a tu amaguat.	And if the moisture is below the ear, the sign of it is that you see the mouth of the head open from all sides, and water is squeezed out when you press it with your hand to the inner side, and there is no sign of it becoming lighter.
Cove que tu fendas en le mieg loc del cap am tres fissuras segon aquesta manieyra:	Then you should make three slits in the middle of the head according to this way:
e aprop la inscizio extratz ne tota la humiditat; e aprop strenh las fissuras am draps e plumassols; e aprop enbroca aquo de sobre am vi e oli entro al quint dia, e aprop deslia le liament e cura la plagua am tentas e enguentz, e strenh le cap am equalitat; e mange le malaute am vianda secca de pauca humiditat entro que·l membre sia confortat e sanat.	And then the incision will come out with all the moisture; and strengthen the slits with drapes and plumsols; and tie it up, and treat the plague with remedies and ointments, and strengthen the head with equality; and feed it with dry food that has little moisture so that the member is comforted and healed.
E es autra manieyra de incisio, que consideras hon apar la magnitut del apostema e la colleccio de l’aygua, quar alcunas veguadas es mays en le occipicii, o en la partida denant, o en la destra, o en la sinistra; e donc aten am la incizio on appar le apostema e la replecio de l’aygua, e fen aquo segon que a tu es miels possible.	And there is another way of incision, which you can consider depending on the size of the pus and the collection of water; for some are seen in the back of the head, or at the front, or on the right side, or on the left; and therefore decide to make the incision where the pus and the water fill up, and pour it out according to what is most possible.
Et observa que no inscindas la arteria e endevengua flueys de sanc e mora le malaute per aquel flux de sanc am evacuacio de humiditat.	And observe that you do not incise the artery, and that you do not disturb the pulse lines of blood and morality for this flow of blood in order to evacuate moisture from it.
Capitol .ii.	Chapter 2.
De inscisio de las arterias las quals so aprop las aurelhas, apeladas hilasseysse.	Of incision of the arteries that are close to the ears, called hilashes.
Capitol segon.	Chapter second.
Quan endeveno ad alcu catars o raumas als huelhs o al pietz, e es antiquat aquo, e no confereys en aquo la curacio de las medicinas, lahoras la deriera curacio en aquest es incizio de aquelas dos arterias.	When there is a catarrh or a rumour in the throat or in the foot, and it is old, and you do not confer this cure to it from medicines, then the last cure in this is an incision of those two arteries.
E donc cove quan tu vols inscidir aquelas que le malaute raza lo sieu cap, e aprop fregua le loc am drap aspre per so que aparan las arcerias, e aprop sia strengut le col del malaute am alcu drap; e aprop considera on polsa la vena; e les locs de quascuna sobre les locs les quals so aprop las aurelhas depremutz, e tant se occultan sino en alcus homes.	And therefore, when you want to incise those who are hurting their head, and apply a rough cloth to the area so that the veins appear, and make it strong with a certain cloth; and consider where the pulse is beating; and hide the places of some on the places that are close to the ears, and in some people they remain hidden.
E aprop senha sobre la arceria am tenta, e aprop inscideys quascuna am le spatum de quascuna partida agut am inscizio pervenient entro al os, e sia aquo per la latitut del cap.	And then strengthen the pulse with remedies, and cut each one from a certain opening towards the bone, and let it be by the length of the head.
E si vols, entromet le spatum dejos la arteria e trenqua aquala a las inciden a las partidas desus.	And if you want to, insert the incision below the artery and trim what is in front of it.
E sia la longitut de la inscizio cays dos ditz ajustatz, quar quan alcuna vena es inscizida le sanc es eyssit am egressio pulsatil, le qual saut deforo per saut frequent.	And let the length of the incision be two inches apart, for when a vein is incised, the pulse beat becomes quick; and it can break out quickly.
Mays si la arceria no apareys al cintiment, lahoras cove que tu mesures de la aurelha la quantitat del spazi de tres ditz, e aprop senha am tenta, e fen entro al os.	More if the pulse does not feel strong, then you should measure the distance from the ear with three fingers, and then try to incision where it is; and let it go into the bone.
E aquo que cove getar del sanc es quantitat de vi unc., e fort leu ne geta de lu mays o mens, e tot aquo es segon la quantitat la qual appareys de la vertut del malaute e de la replecio de la arceria de lu.	And that the quantity of blood is a cup and a quarter. And so much blood comes out of it as the quantity shows from the goodness of the disease and from the collection of blood in it.
E aprop considera la plagua, e donc si reman sobre le os alcuna causa del ciphac, lahoras inscindys aquo per so que no endevengua apostema caut.	And consider the plague, and if there is a cause of it in the side of the head, then incision should be made where there is no pus.
E aprop strenh la plagua am plumassols e am liamentz de drap de li, e aprop cura aquela am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And strengthen the plague with drape and cloth, and cure it with ointments that heal it.
Capitol .iii.	Chapter III.
De extraccio de las arcerias las quals so en las templas.	On the Extraction of Arthritis from the Joints.
Quan ad alcu accideys emigranea antiqua o catertz agutz, per humiditatz agrimonials e per qualiditat en les lacertz des templas, o sodo antiqua vehement e semblantz ad aquels, e es medicat am las manieyras de curacio de medicina e aquo no comfereys, lahoras nos hem sproatz en aquestas malautias extraccio de las arcerias en les templas, o cauterizacio de aquelas ayssi cum havem mostrat.	When an old, chronic, or catarrhal fever arises from dampness and quality in the temples, or is violent and similar to those, and is not treated with medicines, then we have devised a treatment for these maladies by extracting arthritis from the joints, or cauterizing those as we have shown.
E la manieyra de la operacio e extracio de aquelas es que·l malaute raza les pels les quals son en les templas; e entenda a la arceria apparent en le templar quar ela es a tu mostrada per le sieu pols, e·s occultada sino en paucs homes per vehemencia de freg.	And the manner of the operation and extraction of those is that the patient rubs the hairs which are in the temples; and understands the joint apparently in the temple where it is shown by his hand, and is hidden except in a few men for the violence of the fray.
E si a tu es occultada, lahoras le col del malaute sia strengut am alcun drap; e aprop fregua le loc am un drap aspre o evapora le loc am aygua cauda entro que aparesca a tu la arceria manifestament.	And if it is hidden from you, then the neck of the patient should be strengthened with some cloth; and the place rubbed with a coarse cloth or the place moistened with hot water until the joint appears clearly to you.
E lahoras tu pren le spatum del qual aquesta es la forma:	Then take this spatula, whose form is as follows:
E aprop tu scorja la codena am aquel am facilitat entro que pervenguas a la arceria; e aprop geta en lu onti e extratz aquela a las partidas sobiranas entro que extraguas aquela de la codena e descobras aquela de las tunicas las quals so dejos aquela, de tota partida.	And then you should cut the cord with that which has ease until you reach the joint; and put it on the edge and extract that from the cord, and uncover that of the tunics which are left that joint, altogether.
Mays si la arteria es subtil, lahoras envolveys aquela am la extremitat del oncii, e aprop inscindeys de aquela una partida segon la quantitat per la qual sian alonguadas las extremitatz de lu e sian contraytas, e no endevindra flux de sanc, quar si no so inscididas no pujara le sanc de tot.	Mayst if the artery is thin, then wrap that with the end of the knife, and cut a part from it according to the quantity by which the extremities of him are drawn together and contracted, and will not find blood flowing, because if they are not cut there will not be blood gushing out.
E aprop evacua del sanc de vi unc. entro a tres.	Then discharge the blood from the wound with a sponge. Once.
E si la arceria es gran, lahoras cove que tu lies aquela en dos locs am fiel dopble fort de ceda o am cordas a lonc, e no coyte a lu putrefaccio denant la consolidacio de la plagua e endevengua flux de sanc.	And if the joint is large, then wrap that which you cut with double strength of silk or cord, and do not tie it in front of the consolidation of the wound and find blood flowing.
E aprop incideys la superfluitat la qual es entre dos liamentz; e fay aquo en aquela hora o aprop autra ora.	Then cut off the excess which is between two ligaments; and do it at that time or another hour.
E si vols, cauteriza aquela am cauteri entro al os am cauteri cutellar entro que sian incididas las extramitatz de lu, e stara en loc de aquela meteyssa obra.	And if you will, cauterize that with cauterizing iron within the bone according to cautery cutting the extremities of him, and keep in place that part of the work.
E es milhor obra sino que·l malaute aia febre o es de escalfada compleccio; quar cauteri es de aquelas causas que ajudan a las humiditatz finidoras, e donc es milhor en juvament.	And is better work unless the patient has fever or is in a scorbutic state; because cauterization helps the drying up of humors, and therefore is better in juice.
E cove aprop la extraccio de las arcerias que huomplas le loc de coto antic, e sian pausatz sobre lu polvils decentement fayt, e aprop sia curat am medicinas seccas fazen naysser la carn e am calguas entro que sia sanat.	And then extract the arthritis which is in the place of the old, and let it rest on dry powder, and cure with dry medicines so that the flesh may be healed and the skin made whole within.
E si mentre obres autra veguada endeventa flux de sanc de la arceria, lahora tu te coyta a restrenger aquel sanc, o am cauteri, o que omplas le loc de coto, e strenh la tua ma entro que sia restreyt le sanc.	And if, while you are working, any other pain of the joint is felt, then tie that pain up, or with cauterizing, or with the place where you feel the pain, and strengthen your hand within so that the pain may be stopped.
E si deguna causa de aquelas no es a tu present, lahoras pausa le tieu dit sobre le loc entro que·l sanc sia congilat, e enbroca le loc am aygua de vehement fregiditat entro que la acuitat repausa, e sia strengut segon que cove.	And if for some reason that is not presented to you, then pause the treatment on the place within so that the pain may be calmed, and put that place in water of great coldness within so that the keenness returns, and strengthen according to what it finds.
E aquo que es pus leugier en extraccio de arceria es que tu cauterizes la vena am aquest cauteri haventz dos cotels, pus que tu has senhat les dos locs am tenta, e depausa quascus, mot ignitz, entro que pervenguan al os e inscindan la vena en dos locs, per so que sia elonguat aquo que es entre las extremitatz de lu, quar no son consolidadas de tot am aquest cauteri.	And this is more successful in extracting arthritis than cauterizing the vein with one knife; for you have made two cuts in the place by reaching out, and pause each one, like lighting a fire, within so that they reach the bone and cut the vein into two places, so that blood may flow between the extremities of him, because it is not consolidated with this cauterizing.
E aquesta es la forma del cauteri:	This is the form of the cauterization:
E sia la acuitat dels dos cotels esemps.	The keenness of both knives is equal.
Mays empero si so mendres acuitat que dos cotels es milhor, quar si so agudas cum dos cotels propera a quascuna freg, e no enscideysso la carn am velocitat.	But nevertheless, if the keenness of the two knives is less, because if sharp, with two knives it properly to each one, and does not cut flesh with a speed.
Donc cum en aquels es alcuna grossitut, es tenguda la calor del foc en aquels e la carn es abscindida leugierament.	So that where there is some thickness, the heat of fire is held in them and the flesh is discharged gently.
E aquesta obra es milhor en tota obra e pus leugiera.	This work is better than all works and lighter.
E sia le spazi le qual es entre dos cotels la quantitat de la grossesa del dit.	Be the space between the two knives the quantity of the thickness of the knife.
Capitol quart.	Chapter IV.
De la cura de cors de lagremas agudas e aciduas dels huels.	On the Treatment of Acute and Acid Rheumatism of the Joints.
Quan so lagremas aciduas, e es le cors de aquelas venas las quals so sobre le test del cap deforo, e no comfereys en aquo alcuna causa de la curacio de medicina, e vezes la cara del malaute ja enrogesir e sent en le sieu front deambulacio ayssi cum si era deambulacio de formiguas, e·ls huels de aquel so extenuatz, humitz enayssi que ja les pels de lor son conodutz, e las parpelas so scalfadas per la acuitat de las lacrimas, les antics agro mesties en la curacio de aquelas de aquesta operacio, e nompnero aquela curacio am spassa.	When it is acid rheumatism, and it is the joints of those veins which run on the top of the head that do not admit to any cause in the treatment of medicines, and often the face of the patient becomes swollen and wrinkled as if it were wrinkled by ants, and the joints of him are worn out, they get hot as if they were baking in the oven, those joints being scalded by the keenness of tears, and small blisters forming on them from the acuteness of the inflammation; therefore, do not apply that treatment with rubbing.
E es que tu comandas al malaute rayre les pels les quals son en le sieu front, e aprop inscideys en le front tres fissuras engualment distans segon la longitut del front.	And it is that you command the patient to rub his hair which is on his forehead, and cut three creases in the forehead equidistant apart according to its length.
E si’ la longitut de la fissura cays dos ditz: la una fissura sia engualment distant a la longitut del nas en le mieg loc del front, e la segonda segon la longitut un petit del movement dels lacertz les quals so en le lacrimal, e la tersa del autre part.	And if the length of the crease falls two times: the first crease is equidistant from the tip of the nose in the middle of the forehead, and the second according to the length of a small movement of the hair which is on the brow; and the third from the other side.
E guarda te de la incizio de las arcerias las quals so en dos latz, e elongua la tua ma de la continuacio de amdos las mandibulas.	And keep back from the incision of joints which are in two places, and extend your hand from the continuation of both.
E si’ l’espazi de quascuna inscizio la quantitat de tres ditz ajustatz.	And if the space between each incision is three times the length of a finger.
E si’ a tu una pessa d’espongua apparelhada o draps seccatz motz am les quals exsiccas le sanc.	And you have a dry sponge or cloth with which to dry up the blood.
E aprop entremet le spatum de dos agudas extremitatz, del qual aquesta es la forma de la inscisio de lu:	And put together the sharp ends of two joints, whose form is as follows:
que es de la partida des templas entro a la segonda inscizio.	Which is from the joint of the temple to the second incision.
Exxcorja am aquel tota la codena la qual es entre dos incizios am le ciphac le qual es sobre le os, e aprop fay aquo de la inscizio migera entro a la segonda inscisio.	Remove all the cord which is between two cuts with the edge of the knife which is on the bone, and put that in the middle of the incision within to the second incision.
E aprop stratz ne aquest spatum e entromet en la primieyra inscizio autra vetz un autre instrument le qual es apelat cutellar, agut de una part e del autre no agut.	Then put this sponge in the first incision or another tool which is called a knife, taking from one side and from the other not taken.
E pausa le latz de aquel agut deves la carn annexa deves la codena, e le latz de lu leon dintz le os, e empelley aquel entro que pervengua a la fissura migera, e abscindeys am aquel totz les vaysels que descendo del cap als huels.	Then cut off the hair of him from the edge which is next to the flesh next to the cord, and leave it hanging from the bone, and cut off all vessels which descend from the head to the joints.
Mays que sia continuada la inscizio ad aquo appar de la codena, e aprop fay aquo en la fissura migana entro al autra fissura.	And if it is continued the incision to the water which is next to the cord, and cut that in the middle of the crease within to the other crease.
E pus que corr del sanc quantitat engual, exprem les locs de las pessas del sanc congilat.	And then, if a quantity of blood comes from the incision, squeeze the places of the joints of the blood which is clotted.
E aprop pausa en quascuna fissura calgua de coto vielh, e pausa sobre aquels polvils enbegutz en vi e oli e vi agre, e vegas que no endevengua apostema caut.	And then pause in each crease a little piece of velvet, and rest on dry powder which is mixed with oil and vinegar, and pour that so as not to cause an apoplexy by cauterizing.
E en le tertz dia deslia le liament e aministra gran enfusio de aygua cauda o tebeza, e aprop cura aquo am enguent bazilicon am oli rozat e autres entro que las plaguas sian sanadas.	And on the third day, take off the ligament and administer a great infusion of hot water or tea, and then cure that with basilic oil or rose water and other things so that the wounds are made whole.
Capitol .v.	Chapter V.
De la cura de lagramas per catartz e als huels descendentz de las partidas dedintz del cap.	On the Treatment of Lacrimation by Cataract and to the joints descending from the places inside the head.
Quan ad alcu veno catartz agutz e continuantz, e vezes les huels del malaute extenuatz petitz, e ja le reguardament de lor es debelitat, e las palpebras ulceradas e de lor cazo les pels, e en le preon del cap es dolor aguda ledent e extrenutacio consequent, lahoras sapias per aquestz accidentz que las materias e catartz no veno sino de motas venas de las partidas dedintz procedent.	When an animal has acute lacrimation and continued, and often the joints of the patient become very small, and already their eyes are bleary and their eyelids are swollen; and in the forehead is a sharp pain which feels like a toothache, and small blisters form on them from the acuteness of the inflammation; therefore, know that such accidents do not arise except from the catarrh which comes from the places inside the head.
E la milhor curacio en aquels es aquesta: que comandes al malaute que raza lo sieu front, e aprop inscideys en aquel una fissura al mieg loc del front, un petit per la latitut (e comensa am la fissura del templar senestre entro al dextre templar; e sia inscisio entro al os; e eslongua la tua ma dels lacertz del templas lesquals son maugutz deves la mastigacio), entro que sia le os descubert.	And the best cure in these is: that you command the patient to rub his forehead, and aproach to make an incision on its middle part of the forehead, a small one for its length (and begins at the incision of the left temple within the right temple; and the incision goes within the bone; and your hand extends from the bones of the temples which are better preserved through chewing), before the bone is uncovered.
Exsicca tot le sanc am espongua o am drap secc e aprop repleys entre las doas labias de la fissura am coto vielh o am draps de li.	Dry all the secretions with a sponge or a dry cloth and put it between the two lips of the incision with old lint or a cloth.
E aprop estrenh desus am polvils enbegutz en vi e oli per so que no endevengua apostema caut.	Then sprinkle on it powdered salt, wet with vinegar and oil so that it does not produce an apoplexy, cauterization.
E quan deslias aquo e veses que l’apostema ja es diminuit, lahoras cove que fregua le os entro que comensa en lu nayser carn, e aprop cura aquel am regiment exsiccatiu le qual fassa neysser la carn, ayssi cum si tu prenes de farina de froment dos partidas e de colofania quatre partidas e mescla o, e de lor sia fayt emplastre e sia aministrat en aquestas plaguas a de la carn nativitat.	And when the swelling is decreased, then cover it with a mixture that dries the flesh, which will prevent it from healing, instead of taking two parts of flour and four parts of incense and mixing them together, and making a paste out of it and administering it to these areas where the flesh is being born again.
Capitol .vi.	Chapter VI.
De la cura de aquo que catz en las aurelhas.	On the treatment of water that enters the ears.
Tota causa que catz en las aurelhas es una de quatre specias, quar o es peyra mineral o causa semblant a peyra, ayssi cum ferr e veyre, o es de planta ayssi cum ceze o fava, o es causa fluxtibla ayssi cum aygua e vi agre e a lor semblantz, o alcuna bestia.	All causes that enter the ears are of four species, for either it is mineral water or seems like mineral water, such as iron and lead, or it is of plants, such as mustard or favas, or it is fluidic, such as water and vinegar and their similar things, or some animal.
E donc quan peyra catz en l’aurelha o autra causa semblant de aquelas causas que no ajustan ne creysso en l’aurelha, e pausa la aurelha al solelh, e si vezes la peyra, lahoras distilla en aquela alcuna causa de oli violat o sizami, e aprop aministra la extraccio de lu, e fay le stornudar am condizi, e oppila las nars deve le aveniment de stornutacio.	And therefore, when mineral water or a similar thing enters the ear or any other cause resembling those causes which do not correspond to it, and you raise the ear to the sun, and if the water comes out again, then distil it in that cause of red oil or sesame oil, and administer the extract to him, and make him sneeze with a wind, and put a handkerchief before his face for the arrival of sneezing.
E aprop pausa en le circuit de la aurelha alscunas pessas de drap o lana, e dextendas la aurelha a las partidas desus, quar motas veguadas es foro-getada am aquestas causas.	Then put some pieces of cloth or wool on the ear, and extend the ear towards the top, for motas (moisteners) are often blown out by this treatment.
E si no n’es getada, lahoras aministra extraccio de lu am le instrument apelat gesti epicicarios subtil del qual aquesta es la forma:	And if it is not blown out, then administer the extract to him with the instrument called gentle subtile gesticulator of which this is the form:
E si es foro-getada am gesti, bo es; e sino, lahoras aministra la extraccio de lu am onci subtil de pauca duplicacio.	And if it is blown out with gesticulator, it is good; otherwise, administer the extract to him with a drop of subtle double-diluted oil.
E donc si no es foro-getada per aquo, lahoras fay una canula de aram e entromet la extremitat de la canula en le trauc de la aurelha e claus a l’enviro de la canula am cera e am oli mollificada per so que no sia ubert sino la canula.	And therefore, if it is not blown out with water, then make a tube of aram  (a flexible material) and insert the end of the tube into the trauc  (the hole) of the ear and seal it with wax and soft oil so that it does not come out, but the tube remains.
E aprop extratz am le tieu vent am fort atraccio, quar tropas veguadas cum aquo que havem recontat.	Then extract with a sharp wind, for three moisteners with water which we have mentioned.
Mays si no es foro-getada en aquesta manieyra, lahoras pren de halka alumbat o de vecz aparelhat am le qual son preses les ausels una patita quantitat, e pausa aquel en la extremitat de ray, e aprop envolopa sobre aquel coto decentment pausat.	Or if it is not blown out in this way, then take a round piece of silver or a similar instrument with which the ears are wrapped with a small amount, and put that on the tip of the needle, and wrap it around the ear gently.
E aprop entromet aquel en le trauc de la aurelha am facilitat, e aprop excicca la aurelha de la humiditat.	Then insert that into the trauc   (the hole) of the ear with ease, and dry the ear from moisture.
E donc si no es foro-getada am totas las causas las quals havem recontadas, lahoras tu coyta a talhar aquela denant que endevengua apostema caut o espasme.	And therefore, if it is not blown out with all the causes which we have mentioned, then you command him to clean that in advance which will cause an apoplexy or spasm.
E la manieyra de talhar aquela es que tu al comensament sancnes le malaute de la vena sephasica e extratz del sanc segon la mannieyra de la vertut de lu, e aprop fay aquel cezer entre las tuas mas e converteys l’aurelha a las partidas desus, e fen am petita fissura en la razit de la aurelha deves lo greys de lu en le loc be premegut de lu.	And the way of cleaning that is that you command the patient to rub his forehead at the beginning, and extract it in the second way, for the virtue of it, and then make a small incision between his eyebrows, moving your hand slightly, so that the blood comes out through the cut in the middle of the forehead.
E sia la fissura de figura lunar entro que pervengua a la peyra, e, la peyra atrobada, osta aquela si podes am instrumentz apropriatz; e aprop cos la fissura en aquela hora am velocitat, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	Then make the incision in the shape of the moon, through which the water enters, and stop that one if you can with an appropriate instrument; then stitch it up quickly, and cure that within which is healed.
E si la causa cazent en la aurelha es un dels gras que creysso e so inflatz, lahoras aministra la curacio e la extraccio de lu; mays si no obezeys a tu ad eyssiment, lahoras tu pren spatum teune subtil segon aquesta forma:	And if the cause enters into the ear is one of the fats which are created and inflated, then administer the cure and extract it; but if you do not obey your orders to clear up your ears, then you take a mild solution according to this form:
e aministra am aquel la abscizio de aquel gra lo qual es cazut en l’aurelha.	and administer to him the extraction of that fat which has fallen into the ear.
E no fassas aquo quan cogitas que aquel ja es humectat per la vapor del aurelha, e pausa aquel en motas pessas, e prop extratz ne aquelas am les oncis o am gesti subtil, o ab inscizio ayssi co dit havem, quar es alleujada la extraccio de lu.	Do not pass water when you think that the ear is already moist with the vapor of the ear, and pause that in pieces of cloth, and extract it from there with les onces   (a measure of oil) or with subtle gesticulator, or with extraction, for it is relieved by the extraction.
Mays en l’aygua la qual es intrada en l’aurelha cove que·l malaute use de sternutacio am condizi al comensament, e omple la sieua aurelha am alcu coto vielh, e jagua sobre aquela aurelha en la qual es l’aygua, e si per aquo es foro-getada, bo es; e sino, lahoras pren tropas peyras teunas e leons segon la longitut del dit, e calfa aquelas en le foc un pauc, e le pacient entrometa una de aquelas en le trauc de la sua aurelha e saute sobre la un pe sieu de aquela partida e percussia am una autra peyra sobre la peyra la qual es dintz la aurelha.	But in water which has entered into the ear, it is better that the patient uses sneezing with a wind at the beginning, and fills his own ear with some old wax, and rubs it over the ear, and if by water it is blown out, it is good; and if not, then take two small peaces of stone or metal and cut them according to their length, and wrap those around the fire a little, and put one of them into the hole of his ear, and let him sneeze over the other piece, hitting with another peace on that which is in the ear.
Donc no cesse aquo am peyra entro que tota l’aygua sia foro-getada.	Then do not pass water when it enters the ear until all the water has been blown out.
E ja l’aygua sira foro-getada enayssi que tu prenguas de papier o de gonc .i., e met la una extremetat de lu en l’aurelha e estendas l’autre extremitat am foc entro que sia comburit le may de lu.	And then, after the water has been blown out, you take paper or a piece of cloth. and put one end in the ear and extend the other end towards the fire until it is burned up.
E prop met i autre gonc e fay aquo tantas veguadas entro que tota l’aygua sia foro-getada, e stratz aquel am canula ayssi co desus es dit de la peyra extrasadora.	Then put the other cloth and make three sneezes until all the water is blown out, and extract it with a tube from above.
Mays en la extraccio de bestia intrant en aquela aurelha, si es a petit cos, ayssi piussa e a lu semblant, cura aquel ayssi cum havem dit en la divisio; mays si es de gran cos la qual causa apar al sen del vezement, lahoras aministra la extraccio de lu am gesti e oncis, e la causa de lu es pus leugiera de totas las autras causas que cazo en l’aurelha.	But if the extraction of beast enters into that ear, if it is a small thing, then push it out and cure it as we have said in the division; but if it is a large thing which causes pain to the head through the veining, then administer the extraction with subtle gesticulator and onces, and this cause is lighter than all the other causes which enter into the ear.
Mays en la extraccio de verm engendrat en la aurelha, quan tu curas aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e en le tractat de distillacios e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu reguardes la aurelha al solelh.	But if the extraction of a verm   (a small creature) enters into that ear, when you cure that with water which we have said in the division and in the treatise on distillation, and do not use your own cure, then cover the ear to the sun.
E donc si apar aqui alcuna causa dels verms, lahoras extratz aquel am gesti o am onci subtils, mays si no apar deguna causa, lahoras pren una canula dejos streyta e desus ampla de la qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And therefore, if any of the verms appears, then extract it with subtle gesticulator or onces; but if there is no cause, then take a tube which is narrow at one end and wide at the other, and this is the form of it:
E entromet la extremitat subtil en la aurelha segon la quantitat la qual suffertar puesca le malaute; e aprop sucgeys am aquela per succio fort, e fay aquo motas veguadas, entro que totz les verms sian foro-gitatz.	Then insert the small end of the tube into the ear according to the quantity which it suffers, and extract it with a strong wind, and make water come out, so that all the verms are blown out.
Mays si no obezeysso a tu al ayssiment, lahoras tu opila e claus en le circuit de la canula am cera ayssi cum havem dit; lahoras aministre distillacios las quals han ja esproadas les antics en la curacio dels verms, e atrobaras aquo en le tractat de distillacios.	But if you do not obey your orders to clear up your ears, then you wrap it and seal it in the circuit of the tube with wax as we have said; then administer the distillation which has already been distilled in the treatment of verms, and you will find water in the treatise on distillation.
E sia la tua efusio am la qual efundas les olis medicinas en la aurelha am aquest strument del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And be your effusion with which you pour medicinal oils into the ear with this instrument, and this is its form:
E fay aquela de argent o de eram, dejos streyt, en le qual sia un petit trauc, e am pla desus.	Make it of silver or of brass, narrow at one end, so that it has a small hole on top.
E donc sia cum empellent a que es en la conquavitat de la canula de continent aqui on sira necessari.	And therefore, if you want to use it as an ear-dropper, then make it like this, which is necessary for putting the drops into the cavity of the tube.
E si vols, pren le ray e envolveys en la extremitat de lu decentment coto, e aprop gieta oli en la concavitat del auziment, o suc de alcuna herba, o aquo que vols de aquestas medicinas en la canula — e aquela es en la aurelha —, e aprop entromet le ray am coto desus e exprem am la tua ma aquel am compressio temprada de lu entro que l’oli sia expellit en la concavitat del auziment e le malaute senta le oli dedintz.	And if you want, take the tube and wrap it around the tip of it neatly with cotton, and pour oil or juice of some herb, or water of these medicines into the tube – and that is in the ear –, and put the tube on top of it and press your hand there so that the oil is pushed out into the cavity of the ear and the patient feels the oil inside.
E aquo que sia enfundut en la aurelha sia ja scalfat am foc un petit.	And if it is already inserted in the ear, then it is cut with fire a little bit.
E guarda te que la causa la qual distillaras en l’aurelha no sia trop frega, quar las medicinas de aurelha no suffertan aquo.	And be careful that the cause that you will pour into the ear is not too strong, because ear medicines do not tolerate water.
Capitol .vii.	Chapter. vii.
De curacio de opilacio de aurelhas.	Of cure for ear ointment.
Alcunas veguadas alcus enfantz yeysso dels ventres de lors mayres no-perforatz, e aquo ja accideys en alcus homes, opilacio en le meat de la aurelha per plagua o per carn nada en aquela; e aquesta opilacio alcunas veguadas es fayta en le preon del trau de la aurelha la qual no consiec le vezement, e alcunas veguadas es en las partidas defora.	Some children are born with perforations in their ears, and this sometimes happens to some adults as well, due to plague or flesh wound; and this ointment sometimes occurs in the meatus of the ear by infection or by no injury there; and sometimes it is in the outer part of the ear tragus which does not see the lobe, and sometimes it is in the openings outside.
E aquela que accideys en le preon de lu, la qual no comprehen le vezement, es en las majors disposicios de dificil sanacio.	And that which happens in the meatus of it, which does not see the lobe, is in most difficult situations of healing.
E en aquela en qual consegueys le vezement, cove que tu pauses la aurelha del malaute al solelh e reguarda en aquela.	And in that one in which you can see the lobe, cover that you place the ear of the patient to the sun and look at it.
E donc si vezes oppulacio apparent, obre aquela am espatum subtil del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And if you see a lot of ointment, open it with a thin spatula in this way:
Si’ la extremitat de lu en la qual sia petita la latitut, del qual la una partida sia aguda e l’autra no; e le spatum sia de dos latz leon per so que no fassa lizio al aurelha.	If the tip of it is small in width, of which one side is sharp and the other not; and the spatula has two edges so that it does not hurt the ear.
E donc si la opilacio es per carn nascuda en la aurelha o en le meat de lu, lahoras te aquela am oncis subtils e incidiys aquela vehement facilitat entro que sia ostada tota la carn.	And if the ointment is hidden by flesh in the ear or in the meatus, then strike it with a sharp knife easily and cut it quickly so that all the flesh is removed.
E si opilacio es en le preon de la aurelha, lahoras pren ray subtil leon e escalfa aquel am foc un pauc, e aprop met aquel en le meat de l’aurelha.	And if ointment is in the meatus of the ear, then take a thin tube and burn it slightly with fire, and put that into the meatus of the ear.
E donc si as scentit oppulacio am aquo que le malaute atroba am facilitat, per gravetat de ausir, esforsa la oppressio de lu am facilitat; e guarda te que no plagues les nervis del aurelha.	And if you have felt the ointment with water that the patient loses easily by hearing, try to press it with ease; and be careful not to harm the nerves of the ear.
E aprop pausa en l’aurelha drap de li segon la quantitat del ample del trauc lo qual tu as envolvutz en l’enguent egipciac; e fay aquo per alcus jorns entro que sias segur de la consolidacio de la plagua; o que prenguas qualgua e enfon aquela en ayguaros e pulveriza sobre lu segi trissat e usa de lu; e si vezes la aurelha ja esser apostemada, lahoras cove que tu estraguas la qualgua e permutes aquela am autra qualgua la qual tu envoloparas en cerot que sia fayt am oli rozat, entro que sia le apostema caut cedat; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And place in the ear a cloth of the second quantity of the width of the trail that you have wrapped in Egyptian ointment; and make it per day within that you are sure of the consolidation of the plague; or that you take some, and pour that into water and pulverize it over it three times and use it; and if the ear has already been aching, then cover that you take some and change that with another some that you will wrap in wax which is made to with olive oil, within that it is the ache of cautery that should come out; and treat that until it is healed.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc, lahoras submergeys esponga o drap en aygua frega e pausa sobre la aurelha, e usa del autra curacio la qual restrengeys le flux del sanc, la qual es dita en le tractat de distillacio.	Maybe if you have felt the pain of the plague, then dip a sponge or cloth in water and place it on the ear, and use the other cure that you will tighten the flow of the pain of the plague, which is said in the treatise of distillation.
Capitol .viii.	Chapter. viii.
De cura de athezil le qual endeveno a las palpebras.	Of cure for the azil that is placed on the eyelids.
Athezil les quals endeveno a las paupebras dels huels alcuna veguada so humitz, alscunas veguadas son secs.	That which is placed on the eyelids of some children sometimes becomes sticky, and some are dry.
Donc cove que tu tenguas aquels am tenhalhas o am onci, e inscindas aquels am espatum de las suas razitz, e aprop pausa sobre les locs segi trissat.	And if you have those with scaly skin or with ointment, scrape them with a spatula and place them on the three areas.
Mays si dolor am flux de sanc veno, lahoras tu cauteriza aquels am cauteri lanticular subtil.	Maybe if there is pain accompanied by a flow of plague, then you will tighten those with a small caustic cautery.
E la milhor cauterizacio es aprop las inscizios e tropas veguadas retornam quan reman alcuna causa de sas razitz; e quan so cauterizadas am foc, aquelas razitz son comburidas e no retornan.	And the best cauterization is to return those that have been cut and burned when there remains some cause of their razor; and when they are burned with fire, those razors are destroyed and do not return.
Capitol .ix.	Chapter. ix.
Cura de grandeyssa que veno a las palpebras dels huels.	Cure for droops that come to the eyelids of children.
Motas veguadas endeve en las palpebras dels huels alcuna causa la qual es asemblada a grandissa en sa fortalicia e duricia, e per so grandissia es apelada.	Some children have droopiness in their eyelids due to some cause that is combined with swelling and hardness, and because of the great swelling it is called.
E es agreguacio de humiditat grossa en la palpebra dejos e desus.	The addition of a thick moisture on the eyelids below and above.
Donc la opperacio en lor es que consideras lahoras si la grandissia es procedent en lu en aquo que apar de la palpebra e es mauguda a tota partida; e la causa de lu es leugiera.	Then the operation on them is that you consider if the swelling is caused by something that comes out from under the eyelid and goes all around it; and the cause of it is clearly visible.
Donc fen sobre aquela am fissura per la latitut, e aprop escorga aquela de tota partida am facilitat entro que evasesca, e aprop suspen aquela am onci e abscindeys aquela.	Then cut that one with a slit in the width, and strike it easily from all sides until it comes out; and suspend that one with ointment and cut off that one.
Mays si a tu no es apparelhada la incizio de lu si no pus que penetras la palpebra am inscizio pauc a pauc, lahoras aquo no notz en deguna causa.	Maybe you are not equipped with the incision of it if you do not put your hand on it so that it enters under the eyelid little by little; then that does not feel any cause.
E si la figura es gran, lahoras tu l’ajusta am sutura; e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	And if the figure is great, then you adjust it with sutures; and treat that until it is healed.
E si es pauca, a tu no sobrevindra mal per aquela quar l’anguent de lu restaura aquela e encarna.	And if it is small, you will not harm that one because the blood of it restores it and heals it.
E si la grandissia es declinant a las partidas dedintz de la palpebra deves la superficia dedintz, lahoras evesa la palpebra e suspen la grandissia am onci, otra que tu indigescas de incizio, e prem aquela de tota part, e si la palpebra per inscizio es alonguada, aquo no notz en deguna causa.	And if the swelling is declining inside the eyelids towards the inner surface, then open the eyelids and suspend that one with ointment, another that you will not feel the incision; and press it all over, and if the eyelid by incision becomes long, that does not feel any cause.
E aprop la incizio, lava le huel am aygua salada; e cura le loc am aquo que encarna entro que sia sanat.	Then wash the eyelids with salty water; and treat those places with water that heals until it is healed.
Capitol .x.	Chapter. x.
De la cura axcirnah en la palpebra desus del huel.	Of cure for droops in the eyelid above of the child.
Axcirnath es grays le qual es engendrat en las tunicas de la palpebra desus, e majorment endeve als enfantz, agrava les huels de aquels et accideyso a lor catartz le mayti; e no podon reguardar la claror del solelh per aquo quar lagremas se coytan ad aquels.	The axcinath that is produced in the tunics of the eyelid above, mainly affects children, and it makes their tears flow much because they do not want to look at the brightness of the sun; and they cannot see clearly.
E per so tu vezes aquels jaser sobre les lors caras tot temps, e sobre les lors caras dormen; e so a las palpebras de lor dejos les sobrecils humidas, las quals ja ha cuberta imflacio, e iminencia de accernac apparent es en l’uelh; e que quant tu premes le loc am les tieus ditz, tu centes accernac entro aquels.	And so you have them constantly over their faces all the time, and they sleep with their eyebrows wet; and the presence of their hair over their eyes is evident there; and when you touch those places with your fingers, you feel an itchiness there.
E alcuna manieyra de opperacio es en aquel que le malaute pausa le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop pausa drap de li e de lu fay calgua, e fay de lu cercle segon la quantitat la qual contena arthernach de tota partida, e aprop pausa aquel sobre aquela e prem am les tieus ditz de tota per que sia agreguat arcernac en le mieg del cercle, e aprop fen en le mieg de aquela humiditat am spatum inscident am fissura per la latitut, e la fissura no sia major que la fissura que es fayta en flaubotomia.	And a certain way of operating is in that the patient places his head on the table and you place a cloth on it and cut a little, and make circles according to the quantity that contains artheric from all sides, and then place that one on those fingers all over so that an itchiness is added to the middle of the circle, and then open it in the middle of that humidity with a spatula that cuts through the width, and the cut is not larger than the cut made in flaubotomia.
Mays en le preon cove que tu fendas la codena tota entro que pervenguas ad arcernach, quar en las mays desposicios proceseys arcernach per fissura segon la forma de grayseza blanca.	May I place the ring on your finger as you enter, for in the right position it will fit into the arch of the knuckle and not fall out; because at the top of the hand there is a hollow shape that moves with the motion of the hand.
Donc extratz aquela am draps los quals tu as envolopatz entre les tieus ditz a las partidas deforo e revolv entre la ma dextra e sinistre entro que sia dispargut.	So that you remove that cloth which you have wrapped between the thighs at the front and turn it between your right and left hands until it is completely removed.
E guarda te que no ajustes en la fissura per so que am le spatum no pervenguas al huel e ladescas aquel.	And be careful not to put it into a crevice so that the spearmint does not come out of the hole and stays in place.
Mays si no apar a tu arternach en le comensament de la fissura, mays que tu ajustes en la fissura un petit am fecilitat entro que procesisca arternach; e aprop extratz aquela ayssi quo havem dit; e aprop submargeys draps de li en aygua e vi agre e pausa les sobre le loc e estrenh aquels am polvils.	May I not put your ring on at the beginning of the crevice, but rather put it into a small crevice first so that it can be removed; and then remove those [ring]s which we have spoken about; and then dip cloth in water and vinegar and place them on the area and tie them together and hold them in place with a knot.
E so alcus que trissan sal e pausan aquel en la conquavitat de la fissura per so que aquo que es remas de aquela humiditat.	And then put salt on it and place it in the cavity of the crevice so that this salt [remains] with the moisture.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	Then treat it so that it may be healed.
Mays si accideys en le loc apostema caut, lahoras cura aquel am emplastres cedatils entro que sia sanat.	May I not put an ointment on the wound if it is suppurating; then treat that [wound] with a cold poultice so that it may be healed.
Capitol .xi.	Chapter 11.
De manieyras de tactimi del huel.	Of ways to test for fever.
Quan en las palpebras dels huels so natz pels ajustatz dejos les pels naturals e so antiquatz, lahoras aquels noso al huel e fan endevenir manieras de malautias ayssi cum lacrimas assiduas e mollificacio de palpebras e tela entro que aquo sia causa de destruccio del huel que s’apela tactinir del huel, e cura se en quatre manieyras: o per cauteri am foc; o am medicina acuta segon que denant es dit en le capitol de cauteri; o es fayt atactini per inscizio e sutura; o per cannas segon que yeu diyre.	When the palms of the hands are red and the natural hairs are erect, it is a sign of fever; then test for fever by applying cold to the palms and observe whether there is a burning sensation and moistness in the area; this is the cause of destruction of the hand which is called touch-and-go of the hand, and can be cured in four ways: either by cauterization with fire; or with acute medicine as mentioned in the chapter on cauterization; or by incisions and suturing; or with canes according to the direction of vision.
E donc cove que tu pauses le cap del malaute en le tieu se; aprop converteys la palpebra del uelh am la tua ma sinistra, e si es convertida, bo es; e sino, entromet agulha en aquela en la qual sia fiel de la partida pus dejos de la palpebra, e fay penetrar la agulha am fiel desus, e aquo sia — prop del marge de la palpebra en le qual naysso les pels — prop dels pels, e tira le fiel a las partidas desus am la palpebra, e converteys aquela am le ray.	Then place the tip of the thumb at the top of the patient's foot; then rotate your left hand so that the eyelid of the eye turns towards you, and if it remains closed, an needle is inserted into the lid at the point where the hair grows; then let the thread run through the needle and tie it off—near the edge of the eyelid where there are no hairs—near the hair, and pull the thread so that it touches the edges; then rotate your hand so that the eye turns away from you.
E aprop fen en la partida dedintz de la palpebra dejos les pels ajustatz am spatum inscidentz del lacrimal major entro al lacrimal mendre; e aprop extratz le fiel e pausa dejos la palpebra polvilhs petitz de coto o de drap, e aprop senha sobre la palpebra am tenta, e sia ayssi cum figura de fuelha de mirt.	Then insert the needle into the crease behind the eyelid at the hairline; then let the thread run through the needle and tie it off—near the edge of the eyelid where there are no hairs—near the hair, and pull the thread so that it touches the edges; then place a small piece of cloth or gauze on the eyelid and hold it in place with your thumb and finger; then put the eye to the test by looking around.
Mays empero cove que sia la figura segon la quantitat de helevacio de la palpebra, quar aquo ja es diversificat en les homes, quar de aquels es le quals indigeys que sia inscidit de la palpebra gran quantitat segon la quantitat per la qual la palpebra es mollificada.	However, I will tell you that the figure [of fever] is different according to the amount of swelling in the eyelid, for some people have a natural tendency to swell in this area; indeed, there are those who say that it is due to an injection into the eyelids according to the quantity by which the eyelids become swollen.
E aprop fen am le spatum sobre las doas linhas las quals has senhadas, e comensa del lacrimal major entro al lacrimal menor.	Then insert the needle into both lines that you have marked, and begin from the lacrimal major [eye] towards the lacrimal minor.
E si’ la tua fissura prop dels pels naturals ayssi cum es la grossetut del rey.	And if your crevice is near the natural hairline as is the thickness of the king.
E aprop met le onci en un dels dos angles de la codena, e aprop excoria aquela tota, e aprop ajusta am la scitura las doas labias am gula o fiel de lana subtil, e abstergeys le sanc, e fay adherir aquo que superflueys dels fiels sobre dos sobrecils am alcunas causas enviscans, si voles far aquo, e sino, non cures.	Then place the wax on one of the angles of the ring; then scrape it all off, and then secure the thread to both sides of the nose with a thin string or yarn, and wipe off the blood; and if you want to do this, and if not, do not.
E aprop leyssa la sutura dels fiels entro a tres dias o quatre, e aprop cura aquo.	Then leave the thread in place for three or four days, and then treat it.
E si vols, layssa la plagua ses sutura, e cura aquela am aquo que exsicca e constrenh, quar la palpebra es alevada deves la sigillacio de la plagua e la agreguacio de lu; mays sutura es milor E donc aysso diysso les antics de taxanir.	And if you wish, leave the poultice in place until it hardens and contracts, because the eyelid is lifted by the seal of the poultice and its drying effect; but it is better to suture it again: And therefore I will tell you the ancient remedies for this.
Mays empero en lu sia sollicitut sobre le malaute, e es de bona operacio, e no es en lu temor.	However, in such a case there is a risk of damage to the thumb; it is a good operation and not to be feared.
E es autra manieyra en taxmir, e es que senhes sobre la palpebra figura ayssi cum fuelha de mirt, e aprop eleva la palpebra am tres uncis segreguatz e congreguatz segon aquesta forma:	And there is another way to treat it, and that is to make a figure like a leaf on the eyelid; then lift the eyelid with three separate and joined hooks according to this shape:
Mays si no es possible aquo, tener les uncis, e aquo no es engualhat, lahoras pren una agula en la qual haia fil e met aquela en le mieg de la figura, e entromet le autre fiel prop le lacrimal major, e·l fiel segon prop le lacrimal mendre, e ajusta entre les tieus ditz les fiels am equalitat, e aprop am aquels eleva la tua ma am elevacio engual, eleva tota la codena sobre la qual es senhat ayssi cum havem recomtat.	May I not be able to do this, having the hooks; and if it cannot be turned over, take a needle with thread and run it through the middle of the shape, and insert another hook on the other side near the lacrimal major [eye], and the third hook according to where the lacrimal minor [eye] is; then adjust the threads so that they are equal in length, and hold them between your fingers with a turning motion, and raise the entire ring over the hook on which it sits as if turning it over.
E aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	Then adjust the two sides of the poultice with suture, and then treat that area so that it may be healed.
Mays si accideys apostema deves la tua inscizio o la tua fissura, seda aquel apostema am cerot e a lu semblantz, e am enguentz.	May I not put an ointment on the wound if you have made an incision or a cut; cover it with cloth and bandage it up.
E alcunas veguadas endeve a la palpebra que·ls sieus pels sian convertitz, adonc cove que tu uses en aquela de aquo que havem dit de inscizio; mays sutura en quascus es mays artificial.	And in some cases the hair of the eyelid is turned towards you, so that it is necessary to use an incision in order to turn them [the hairs] as we have spoken about; but surgery is more natural.
Ataxinir am cannas es segon aquesta forma:	The treatment with canes is according to this form:
e es que tu convertas la palpebra e scindas la figura qu’es dedintz segon que he recontat; e aprop per art fay doas cannas o doas astelas subtils de las quals longitut sia segon la longitut de la palpebra e la latitut de lor sia mendra de la latitut del spatum.	And you should turn the eyelid and cut it according to what I have said; then provide two thin canes or two small stirrups whose length is according to the length of the eyelid and whose width is less than that of the needle.
E tu ja has inscidit en las extremitatz de quascunas partidas, la on tenes les fils.	You have already inserted an incision in both ends of any crevice, where you have the thread.
Aprop agregua quascuna am subtilitat subre aquo que superflueys de la palpebra del huel, e constres las cannas de quascunas partidas am fort strictura, e layssa aquela per alcus jorns, quar la codena per la strictura morira e sira denegada e se poyrira entro que per si meteyssa cayra.	Then add a little of the medicine to each canes with a thin string; and leave it for some time, because by its constriction the ring will die and rot from within; then treat it again after a few days if necessary.
Mays si es tardat, lahoras trenca la am las toroyras, e aprop cura la plagua entro que sia sanat.	May I not delay treating it, then break the thread that binds it, and then treat the wound so that it may be healed.
Donc cum es solidada, la palpebra es elevada e les pels no pungo.	And when it is hardened, the eyelid is raised and the hairs do not tickle.
E aquesta es la forma de doas cannas las quals faras segon aquesta forma:	This is the way of using two canes according to this form:
e haia la quantitat de la longitut e de la latitut ni mays ni mens.	and there is neither more nor less of length and width.
Capitol .xii.	Chapter 12.
De elevacio de pels pungentz en le huel am agula quan le pel es dur.	Of raising the tickly hairs on the hand with a hook when the hair is hard.
Quan son pels no-naturals, durs e aspres e pungentz les huels, lahoras la operacio en lu es que tu prenguas agula subtil e pauses en aquela fiel de ceda subtil e leon, e aprop que tu ajustes las extremitatz de lu e nozes quascu en manieyra mot subtil.	When the hairs are not natural, dry and sharp on the hands; then perform the operation in this way: take a small and sharp hook and place it in the fiber of the skin with care; then adjust the ends of the hair so that they do not touch each other; and if you wish to cut them off later, and if not, leave them as they are.
E sia la longitut dels fiels de quantitat de una palma.	And let the length of the thread be a palm's width.
E aprop tu compon2 autre fiel subtil dejos lu en breu, e nuza las extremitatz de aquel si tu·t vols.	Then tie another small string to it in the middle; and if you wish, cut off one end of that thread.
E aprop pause le malaute le sieu cap en le tieu se, e sia prop del solelh per que la tua obra sia declarada, quar es operacio subtil e menuda.	Then place the thumb at the top of the hand; and let it rest against the palm so that your work is visible, because it is a delicate and small operation.
E aprop intromet la agulha en la razit del pel ajustat la qual ha necessitat de engen, e fay aquela penetrar en la palpebra festinantment entro que extraguas aquela desus le pel natural.	Then insert the hook into the hairline, adjusting it so that it does not hurt; and let it penetrate the eyelid quickly before removing the hair from the natural line.
E aprop tire le pel entro desus e intromet aquel en alixati, e sian les pels un o dos o tres e no mays.	Then pull out the hair completely and insert it into the pinhole; let the hairs be one, two or three at most; no more.
E aprop tira la tua ma am aquel entro que·l pel sia fora-gitat am alixolati en la palpebra am le pel natural.	And then pull your hand towards that inner part where hair has grown out from the eyelid by the natural hair.
Mays si es atirat alixalati e non es gitat le pel, atiraras alixati a las partidas dejos am le fiel le qual tu has compost am aquela, entro qu’en sia gitat alixalati del trau sobira.	If it is not pulled out but the hair remains, you will pull it out with the tweezers that you have prepared there, because if it is pulled out from above, it will cause a wound.
E vegas aquela am la visio del huel, quar lahoras tu gitaras alixati e lo fiel, e grotan quascu e clautz le huel, e laysse le claus per dos dias o tres, entro que·l pel adheresca al sieu loc e nasque sobre aquel bona carn.	And take that away with the vision of the heel because if you pull it out, the tweezers will hurt, and when you remove it, the wound will be clean, and leave it closed for two or three days, so that hair does not adhere to the place where it has been removed. and a good wound appears there.
E si es mays breu le pel, lahoras tu ajusta un pel lonc dels pels naturals, e es elevat am aquel, o que·l leysses entro que sia alonguat aprop alcu spazi, e lehoras tu eleva aquel.	If the hair is too short, then you should take a long hair from your natural hair and raise it up to that place, or you leave it inside where it is longer, and then you raise it up.
Capitol .xiii.	Chapter XIII.
De la cura de ehacratir la qual ve en la palpebra desus.	Of the cure of the eye that is in the eyelid.
Quan ve en le huel ehacratir, e es contraccio de la palpebra quan es contrayta en sus, o a dextra o a sinistra partida, per mala consolidacio de plagua o de seccio o de cauteri, e es apelada leporina, e aquesta ahercrati o es natural o accidental, e es fayta per consolidacio de plagua o de seccios o de cauteri, o per semblantz a lor malcuratz.	When the eye is inflamed and contracted in its eyelid, or to the right or left part, because of a bad consolidation of plague or of a section or of a cauterization, it is called leporine, and this is either natural or accidental, and is done by a consolidation of plague or of sections or of cauterization, or by similarity to their bad effects.
May la manieyra de la operacio en lu es que tu fendas aquela consolidacio e que separes las labias de lu, e pauses en lu en aquo que es entre aquelas una meca de drap de li, e ligues aquelas entro que sian sanadas.	The way to do the operation is that you cut that consolidation and separate the lips, and pause in it what is between those two a strip of cloth, and tie them up so that they are healed.
E no cove que tu uses de curacio de lu de las causas las quals exsiccan, constrenho; quar si tu fas aquo retorna alixacratir pus mal que nulh temps no foc habantz.	And do not know if you use the cure of it from the causes that dry up, tighten; for if you make water return to be inflamed, it is worse than nothing at all while burning it.
Usa en aquela de causas que mollifico ayssi cum es fenugrec, e embroca am la aygua en la qual son coytz altea e semensa de li, o enguent dyaquilon, le qual sia liquefayt am alcu dels olis, e submergeys en aquel la meca, e cura am aquel.	Use in it from causes that soften thus with fenugrec, and immerse in the water in which there are cow's milk and salt of lime, or apply dandelion, which is dissolved in some oil, and dip the strip into that water, and treat with that.
E lo tesaur de la tua curacio es que tu perforsses am tot engen que no sia consolidat segon la forma que foc al comensament.	And the treasure of your cure is that you perform all what is not consolidated according to the form that it burns at the beginning.
E aquesta operacio la qual havem dita, no es sino alcuna rectificacio de ehalixacrati que no retorna la forma del loc segon que foc denant.	This operation which we have said is not anything but a correction of inflammation that does not return to the form of the place according to what it burns in front.
Capitol .xiiii.	Chapter XIV.
De la cura de ehacrati le qual es fayt en la palpebra dejos.	Of the cure of inflammation that is made in the lower eyelid.
Aquesta alxacrati la qual es fayta en la palpebra dejos, la qual es nompnada vertadierament alxacrati; e es de lu alcuna natural, autra accidental.	This cure which is made in the lower eyelid, which is called by name inflammation; and it is either natural or accidental.
Mays accidental es fayta per plagua o per scissura o per cauteri o per autres semblantz.	It may also be accidental because of plague, or because of a section, or because of cauterization, or for other similar reasons.
E la via de la operacio de lu es que tu prenguas una agula en la qual haga fil doble, e fiques aquela en la carn, e que la fassas passar del lacrimal de senestre entro al lacrimal dextre, entro que·l fil pervengua en las doas extremitatz de la carn.	And the way to do that operation is that you take a needle which has double thread, and put it through the flesh, and let it go through the lacrimal bone from the left through the lacrimal bone from the right, so that the thread reaches both extremities of the flesh.
E aprop exten la carn a las partidas desus am la agula e cus aquela am la agula, e inscideys am spatum ample.	Then return the flesh to its original state with the needle and cut it with the blade widely.
E donc si retorne la figura de la palpebre segon que cove, bo es; e sino, pren le ray e pausa aquel en la figura fenduda, e am aquel converteys la palpebra, e fen las doas fissuras en le latz de la palpebra dejos.	Then if it returns to its form according to what it covers, so is it; and if not, take the thread and hold it on the split, and make the two holes in the center of the eyelid, and tie them up.
E sian las extremitatz de las doas fissuras de dos angles de la inscizio, la qual has fayta entro que concurren, e sia de lor fayt angle entro que quan se congreguan sia fayta figura de lor.	The two extremities of the two splits should be at different angles to the incision, which you have made where they meet, and may also be a different figure from them.
E aquesta figura es letra greca: la landa.	This shape is a Greek letter: alpha.
E aprop osta la carn aquela per la quantitat que es le latz de lu agut dejos de lu, aquo que siec la palpebra.	Then return that flesh to its original amount because of the width of it taken from that side, which closes the eyelid.
E aprop ajusta las partz seperadas e cos aquelas am le fil de lana; e aprop cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit de las medicinas mollificativas e de las calguas entro que sia sanat.	Then adjust those parts that are separated and sew them up with the wool thread; then treat those with water what we have said about the medicinal medicines and baths within which they are healed.
E si alxacrati endeve per fissura o sutura o cauteri, lahoras cove que tu fendas am fissura plana sobre les pels de la palpebra segon que es precedit.	If the inflammation is made through a split or stitch or cauterization, then it is necessary that you cut the flat split on the hair of the eyelid according to what comes before.
E aprop separa am la calgua entre doas labias segon que havem dit.	Then separate those two lips according to what we have said.
En la suma del sermo de la cura de alxacrati quan es desus o dejos, que corra en lu operacio, segon que es preparat de la forma de alxacrati, e aquela es en forma de motas diversitatz.	In the summary of the speech about the cure of inflammation that is in the lower eyelid or the upper eyelid, which runs in the operation, according to what it is prepared in the form of inflammation, and that is in a form of different shapes.
E le artifexs savi totz temps prepara engen en quascuna manieyra la qual es possibla a lu entro que fassa retornar la figura a la forma natural, o prop de aquela, e aquel malaute segon que a lu conveneys de la operacio e dels strumentz en las majors disposicios.	And the skilled person always prepares it in any way that is possible within it to return the form to the natural shape, or close to that, and that bad one according to what suits it from the operation and of the instruments in the best conditions.
Capitol .xv.	Chapter XV.
De la adherencia de la palpebra am la conjunctiva o am la cornea.	Of the adhesion of the eyelid to the conjunctiva or to the cornea.
Quan accideys aquesta consolidacio a motz homes enayssi que sia solidada la palpebra pus desus am le album del huel, e sia prohibida de la facilitat del movement e de las suas obras naturals, donc cove que tu entrometas la extramitat del ray dejos la palpebra, e eleva en sus aquela, o exten aquela am le unci.	When this consolidation happens to a few men because the eyelid is glued above the edge of the eyeball, and not allowed the ease of movement or its natural functions, then when you insert the tip of the needle into the lower eyelid, raise it up or extend it with the thread.
E aprop tu inscideys la adherencia am spatum subtil, le qual no sia am acuitat de las inscisios, habantz obtus un petit per so que·l malaute no sia inquietat deves la operacio, e remau le spatum que no ledesca le huel am la sua acuitat.	Then you cut the adhesion with a thin blade, which is not on the sharpness of the incisions, while gently holding the bad one away from the eye so that it does not disturb the operation, and remove the blade which does not damage the eyeball to its sharpness.
E sia la tua inscizio quays excorjan aquela adherencia am facilitat entro que sia retornada la palpebra segon la sua forma natural e que sia sanada tota la adherencia.	That is your incision which easily removes that adhesion so that the eyelid is returned to its original form, and all the adhesion is healed.
E aprop tu met en le huel aygua salada am la qual tu laves; o distilla en lu de zunia dissolvut en l’aygua.	Then you put in the eye salt water which you wash with; or distill in it the water of Zuni dissolved in water.
E aprop separa entre la palpebra e l’huel am calgua de li, e pausa sobre le huel lana infuza en album de huou, e aprop le tertz jorn usa de causas consolidativas entro que sia sanat.	Then separate the eyelid from the eye with a calva of it, and place on the eye wool infused with album of water, and then the third day use causes that consolidate according to what is healed.
Capitol .xvi.	Chapter XVI.
De inscizio de ungla e de eminencia de carn dels lacrimals.	Of the incision of the eyelid and of the prominence of the lacrimal bone.
Sapias que ungla es segon dos manieyras, quar o es nervosa, e es semblant a ciphac dur subtil; o es no-nervosa, semblant a humiditat blanca congilada, la qual quan ferr la toca, o es forsat aquela prendre am onci, es abscindida e le onci no es ficat en lu.	Know that the eyelid is according to two ways, because either it is nervous, and it is similar to hard glass thin; or it is not nervous, it is like frozen water, which, when you touch it, or it is forced to take a thread, it is severed and the thread does not stick to it.
E amdos las specias no comensan sino del lacrimal major entro que va petit a petit que cobre la vista e prohibeys le lum e·l movement de huel.	And both spices do not begin except from the lacrimal bone, which goes little by little, so that it covers the eye, and stops the light and the movement of the eye.
Mays la manieyra del obrar en la inscizio de lu es que·l malaute pause le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop obre les huels de lu, e eleva la palpebra am la tua ma, e aprop colligeys la ungla am onci de pauca duplicacio e exten aquela a las partidas desus.	The way to do the operation with the incision is that the bad one pauses his head in the middle position, and then opens its eyelids, and raises the eyelid towards your hand, and then pick up the needle with two thread twists, and extend those two holes from the center of the eye, and tie them up.
E aprop pren una agula e entromet en aquela un pel de cavalh o de buou o de vaqua, o de semblantz, o de fiel fort, o duplica la extremitat de la agulha petit a petit e fica aquela en le mieg de la ungla, e penetra aquela am la agulha, e lia am fiel la ungla; e exten aquela a las partidas desus, e excorja am le pel le latz de la ungla lo qual siec la pupilla.	Then take a needle and insert it into that hair of the animal or cow or goat's milk or others, or of similar things, or of a strong faith, or double the end of the needle little by little and keep it in the middle of the eyelid, and pass the thread through the needle, and tie it with a knot at the tip of the eyelid; then remove that hair from the edge of the eyelid which closes the pupil.
E ayssi tu sieguas aquela am le pel entro al derier de lu.	Then you keep that hair inside according to what is behind it.
E aprop tu inscideys le romanent en la razitz del lacrimal am spatum subtil o am petitas forfexs, e leysa la carn del lacrimal natural per so que per inscizio de aquela no endevengua fluxs de lagremas continuabla.	Then you cut the rim of the lacrimal bone with a sharp blade or small scissors, and remove the flesh of the natural lacrimal bone so that it does not cause continuous tears by cutting it from the inside.
E alscunas vetz la ungla am le sol onci estenduda o am fiel, ayssi co havem dit, e aprop sia excurjat am spatum leon del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And sometimes cut the eyelid with a long thread or with faith, and then separate it with a sharp blade which is the form of this.
E guarda te que am le spatum no toques la tunica cornea e que avengua en lu ruptura, e que la pupilla sia perforada.	And beware that you do not touch the translucent membrane (the "tunica cornea") with the spatula; nor let it enter in any way in the rupture; and that the pupil is punctured.
Aprop la inscizio geta en le huel un pauc de sal trissa o di cief fayt de siniar, e leyssa aquel entro al autre dia; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove entro que sia sanat.	Then bring the incision up to the heel a little salt water or very fine ash and let it enter again another day; then treat that which is inside with water so that it may be healed.
E si la ungla no es nervoza e no podes metre la agulha, ni es ficada en aquela le onci, lahoras motas veguadas aquesta specia de ungla es curada am medicinas, e es sanada ayssi cum yeu e recomtat en la divisio.	If the nail is not nervous and you cannot get the needle into it, or if it is attached to that leg, then treat this kind of nail with medicines, and heal it thus with oil and vinegar in the division.
E si tu vols inscindir aquela, lahoras tu obre le huel del malaute e pren spatum subtil leon de freul acuitat segon aquesta forma:	If you want to cut that off, then open the heel of the patient and take a thin spatula with a sharp edge according to this form:
am subtilitat.	in subtility.
E si vezes que aquela es rarificada e es confugida e empren en aquela razit, lahoras distilla de la tua ora en le huel de cief fayt de siniar o am cief rog o am sal trissat, e opila le huel entro a l’autre dia.	and if that is rarefied and confined and enters in that way, then distil from your own heel in the morning with very fine ash or salt water, and let the heel be inside for another day.
E aprop itera sobre aquela la operacio entro que sia remaugut tot aquo que es de lu, sino que·l contrari apostema caut sia en le huel, quar lahoras tu leyssa aquela, e cura al comensament la apostema entro que sia sanat.	Then repeat the operation on that again until it is all better; unless the opposite happens, that is, cauterize [it] in the heel because then when you leave it, treat the cauterization at first so that it may be healed.
E aprop itera la tua operacio sobre aquela am razo entro que sia sanat.	Then repeat your operation on that with reason until it is healed.
La emenencia de la carn lacrimal, si notz en le huel per gran nocument, sia suspendut am onci; e inscideys aquela de aquela una partida, e no ultimes la inscizio per so que no inscidesqua fluxs de lagremas.	The removal of the lacrimal bone, if you see great harm in it in the heel, shall be suspended with an ounce; and cut off a piece from that one, and do not cut off all the incision so that it does not cut off the flow of tears.
E aprop distilla en le lacrimal cief rog e fayt de siniar entro que sia sanat.	Then distil in the lacrimal heel with fine ash  [and] morning medicine until it is healed.
Capitol .xvii.	Chapter 17.
De inscizio de alguazardenic e de aquo que es nascut de carn ajustada en le huel.	Of the incision of algarrobate and of that which is born of meat attached to the heel.
Alcunas veguadas en les huels de alcus es nascuda carn roga, e es sobre-pausada entro que cobre la pupilla, o apropinqua o estrenh sobre las palpebras e fort leu comprem las palpebras a las partidas deforo e es assemblada a roza de balaustra.	Some in the heels of the eye is born meat that is tender, and it lies close to the pupil, or approaches or sticks to the eyelids; it presses the eyelids together as though they were pilastres and is joined to the cheekbones.
Mays la operacio en lu es que·l malaute pausa le sieu cap en le tieu se; e aprop obre les huels de aquel e colligeys tota aquela carn am oncis convenientz ad aquo, e te aquo am una forcep o am cesti; e aprop inscindiys la carn el comensament entro que tot sia finit am le encisori, e guarda te del huel que no ledescas aquel deves la tua operacio.	The operation on it is that the patient rests his head on the pillow; then open the heels of that one and collect all that meat with a sharp knife, and with water; and with a forceps or a hook; then cut off that meat at first so that all is finished with the incision, and beware of the heel that you do not tear it to pieces your operation.
E sia la tua inscizio am la qual inscides aquelas o am espatum le qual nos havem recomtat en la inscizio de la ungla, o am petitas forfexs am las quals es colligit ascebel segon que vindra la forma de lu aprop aquest capitol.	And be your incision that with which you cut those or the spatula that we have recalled in the incision of the nail; or with small forceps according to which one comes, and treat it thus as soon as the form of it arrives.
Donc cum es complida la tua inscizio e es remauguda tota aquela carn, lahoras omple le huel de sal trissa, o destilla en lu polvera roga e semblantz a lu de las medicinas corrossivas, e pausa sobre le huel deforo coto am album de huou entro que sia asegurat de apostema caut.	Then when your incision is complete and all that meat is removed, then fill the heel with salt water; or distil in it powder that resembles medicine corrosive, and place it on the heel upside down with an egg-album [drip] so that it is secured from the cauterization.
E si roman alcuna causa de alguardenici e es senhoragat sanc caut, e temes apostema caut, lahoras leyssa le huel e cura aquela apostema am aquo que ceda aquela apostema, e aprop itera sobre aquel am operacio entro que sia sanat, e semblantment fay en la carn ajustada la qual accideys en le huel de aquesta especia.	If any reason of algarrobate is present and it has become infected with sand [dirt], and you fear cauterization; then leave the heel alone and heal that cauterization with water which will soften that cauterization, and repeat your operation on that again until it is healed, and shape the meat in the heel of this kind.
Mays empero tu cove que alienes tota curacio del huel freul per via natural o per via accidental, obran am ferr, e no metas la tua ma en alcuna de aquestas operacios entro que veges que aquel membre sia suffertant aquela operacio.	However, you must know that if any cure for the heel is removed by natural or accidental means, then it will be cured with iron, and do not put your hand in any of these operations unless you see that the member is suffering from those operations.
Capitol .xviii.	Chapter 18.
De colleccio de sabel en le huel.	Of the collection of the sweat in the heel.
Sabel so venas rogas las quals son testudas sobre le huel e prohibeysso al vesement la sua operacio, e develican le huel am longitut de dias.	Swallow then the red veins that are dry on the heel and do not allow your operation to happen, and leave the heel for a long time of days.
Donc necessari es al comensament que tu consideres si le huel en le qual es sabel es fort e en lu no es autra malautia que sabel, lahoras tu colligeys aquel sabel.	Then it is necessary at the beginning that you consider whether the heel in which the sweat is present is firm and there is not another illness that is present as a sweat; then collect that sweat.
E es que tu comandes al malaute que pause le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop suspen aquelas venas am un onci o am dos segon la tua prudencia; e sia aquel onci de subtil duplicacio segon aquesta forma:	And it is that you order the patient to rest his head on the pillow; then suspend those veins with an ounce or two according to your prudence; and let that ounce be of subtle duplicate according to this form:
o so dos oncis gradantment en un cos segon aquesta forma:	or two ounces of subtlety in one part according to this form:
E aprop sian colligidas aquelas venas am forses subtils, am subtilitat, e abstergeys le sanc hora aprop hora, entro que vegas aquelas venas esser remaugudas del huel e sian revolgudas.	Then let those veins be collected with subtle forceps, with subtlety, and abstain from washing that sand for an hour; then let those veins be removed from the heel so that they are dried up by the heel and are scattered.
E guarda te que tu no ledes le huel am las extremitatz del spatum; e si’ la tua operacio en le miegjorn denant le solelh, e sias mot ferm en la tua operacio que no inscidas sino aquelas venas.	And beware that you do not wash the heel with the tips of the spatula; and if your operation is in the morning before the sun, and be firm in your operation so that you do not cut off those veins.
E quan tu auras complitz, lahoras tu distilla en le huel cief vert o rog per que am sa acuitat corrodesca aquo que es remaugut del sabel.	And when you are finished, then distil in the heel with green or bitter medicine so that the sweat is dried up by it.
Mays si aquo no es a tu possible colligeys tot en aquela hora, e lahoras tu emplastra tot am aquo que cede la dolor de lu, e leyssa lu per alcus dias entro que sia sedada la dolor de lu e que sia asegurat de apostema caut.	If water is not available to you then collect all of it within that hour; and then let it be applied to the heel with water which will soften the pain in it, and let it rest for several days so that the pain in it is cured and secured from the cauterization.
E aprop itera sobre lu segon que la mateyssa manieyra entro que sia sanat.	Then repeat on it according to the same way until it is healed.
E aquesta es la forma de las forfexs:	And this is the shape of the forceps:
Capitol .xix.	Chapter 19.
De reduccio de arizati al nas.	Of reduction of inflammation to the nose.
Quan tu curas arisati am cauteri o am medicina aguda comburent segon que es precedida la narracio de lu e no es sanat, lahoras no es engen en lu sino que fendas sobre le apostema deves la maturitat de lu, e que extraguas tota la humiditat la qual es en lu e·l poyre entro que sia descubert le os.	When you treat inflammation with cauterization or acute medicine as it is preceded in the narration of it and is not cured, then do not render it to dust but take out all the moisture that is in it so that the bone may be discovered; and let it be covered with a poultice.
E donc cum es descubert le os e vezes en lu corrupcio o negror, lahoras tu ratz lu am un sturment del qual aquesta es la forma:	And then, when the bone is discovered and also in its corruption or blackness, then you use a instrument of which this is the form:
E es nompnat de aspre cap, e sia feyt de fer indi, e sia le cap redon ayssi cum asir le qual sia fayt punctat per punctacio de lima o aliskalfati per punctacio subtil (ayssi cum es en la forma seguent).	It is called a sharp cap, and it is made of iron, and it is the cap that is used to pierce with a point of lime or to cut with a subtle point (in this case as it is in the following form).
E pausa aquel sobre le loc corrumput del os, e aprop revolveys aquel entre les tieus ditz, e prem la tua ma petit a petit entro que sapias que aquela corropcio es rasa.	Then place that above the location of the corrupted part of the bone, and turn it between your thumb and fingers; press your hand little by little until you know that that corruption is smooth.
E aquo sia fayt alcunas veguadas, e aprop restaura le loc am causas exsiccativas e stipticas.	Then water is made to dry up some time; and then restore the location with caustic and stiff substances.
Donc si·l loc es consolidat e es en lu nascuda bona carn e es abscindit le cors de la sania e roman per xl dias, e no es renovat e no es apostemat e no accideys en lu accident, lahoras tu sapias que es sanat.	Then if the location is consolidated and it is hidden good meat and it is separated from the sinew of the skin and it is not renewed and it does not become infected and it does not happen in it, then you know that it is healed.
E sino, lahoras no es en lu engen sino reduzir la fissura a la forma del nas, e segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu descuebras de segon os am ferr o am medicina acuta, e cum sira descubert le os, lahoras tu pren tribo segon aquesta forma:	If not, then do not render it to dust but reduce the fracture to the form of the nose, and according to this way: and if you discover a second bone with iron or acerbic medicine, and after discovering the bone, then take a tribe according to this form:
Sia la extramitat de lu ferr triangulada, e·l fust de lu sia prim extenuat entro a la extremitat ayssi cum vezes assi.	The length of iron is folded, and its edge is sharp within the extreme end as often as possible.
E aprop pausa aquel sobre le os, e sia aquel prop del lacrimal; e alongua la tua ma un pauc del huel, e aprop revol la tua ma am le tribo entro que penetre tot le os, e aquel sente le malaute per asso que atroba vent yssir per so quan te la sua ma.	Then place that above the bone, and let it be near the lacrimal; then make your hand move a little from the tribe until it enters all the bone, and that one feels the patient by contact that he has it:
Donc lahoras restaura le loc am medicinas stipticas exsiccantz ayssi cum t’e eyssenhat.	Then restore the location with caustic medicine as if you were drying it up.
Donc cum nays la carn e·l loc es endurazit, lahoras la materia la qual effundia a las partidas deforo retorna al nas, donc aquo es pus leugier sobre le malaute.	Then when the meat does not endure that location, then the matter that makes the parts come together returns to the nose; then water is applied to the patient.
Capitol .xx.	Chapter .xx.
De reduccio de la eminencia del huel.	On the reduction of the hernia from the navel.
Quan le huel emineys am la sua totalitat e no accideys en le vezement nocument ni diminuacio, lahoras cove que laxas le malaute, e aprop que·l segues, e aprop que pausas ventozas en le cervitz ses scarificacio e succa per bona succaccio; e aprop pausa sobre le huel liniment le qual sia fayt de acatra e aloe e enses e sarcocolla, e aprop strenh le emplaustre sobre le huel am motz polvils.	When the hernia has come away completely and causes no harm or decrease, then remove the patient's clothing, and immediately thereafter, follow with the next step, and pause to apply a cooling liquid to the navel which has been prepared with salt and aloe and oil and collyrium, and immediately afterwards to tighten the plaster over the hernia with powder.
E la manieyra dels polvils es que prenguas draps de li leons motz, e quascun drap sia duplicat en quatre plecs; e fay de aquels motz.	And the manner of the powder is that you take linen cloths made from lions' fur, and each cloth be doubled up into four sheets; and make them of this fur.
E aprop pausa aquels la un sobre le autre segon la quantitat de la qual ha le huel necessitat.	Then arrange those sheets one on top of the other according to the quantity that the hernia requires.
E aprop strenh sobre aquels am drap dur am fort strictura; e itera las ventosas am succio ses scarificacio; e aprop osta las ventosas e leyssa le huel streyt le dia e la nueyt.	Then tighten those sheets firmly and securely; then apply the cooling liquid to the navel a second time for its scraping; then remove the sheets and let the patient remain naked all night.
Mays si entretant le liguament es mollificat, lahoras cove que sia mot streyt.	Maybe if, in the meantime, the ligament has become soft, then tighten it tightly.
E aprop osta le liament aprop le dia e la nueyt ayssi cum havem dit.	Then remove the ligature all at once with a single stroke after having let the patient remain naked all night.
E si vezes le huel ja esser redusit, bo es, e sino, lahoras itera le emplastre am les polvils e la strictura e las ventosas entro que sia sanat.	And if the hernia has already been reduced, then do so; and if not, then repeat the plastering with the powder and the tightening and the cooling all at once until it is healed.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter .xxi.
De la inscizio de la eminencia de la tunica uvea.	On the incision of the hernia in the upper part of the eye.
Quan endeve disrupcio en la tunica uvea, e aprop es eminent e procezeys fora las palpebras ayssi cum un gra de rasim, e es orrazada la forma de home per aquo, e vols aquo inscidir, lahoras la operacio en lu es ayssi cum havem recomtat, que tu entrometas la agula en la razitz de la uvea de la partida dejos en la partida desus, e aprop met la agula autra en la qual sia fil doble de la part del lacrimal, e fay aquela penetrar e leyssa la primieyra agula segon la sua disposicio; e aprop inscideys le loc del fiel doble e leva am aquel la partida de la uvea en le circuit de la agula, e strenh aquela mot.	When the hernia breaks out in the upper part of the eye, and it is large and protuberant, then make an incision with a razor there, and the operation is as follows: you introduce the blade into the root of the eyelid from which the tear duct emerges, and immediately afterwards insert another blade, which has a double-edged blade at one end, in the same way; then let that penetrate and leave the first blade according to its position; then cut the spot of the double blade and pull it back with the blade; then tighten that.
E aprop extratz la agula e pausa sobre le huel lana infusa en album de huou e leyssa entro que cayha le fil am la uva.	Then remove the blade and place it over the navel, infused with milk of soya, and leave it in place until the thread pulls on the eye.
E aprop cura le huel am aquo que conforte aquel entro que la plagua sia sanada.	Then treat the hernia with a remedy that comforts it within so that the plague is healed.
E alcunas veguadas aduna de tota partida am cercle de drap entro le huel ajuste eminencia gran, e aprop sia perforat am le spatum subtil que vengua al preon del huel, e corra la humiditat albuginea, e descen le huel e intra tantost.	And in some cases, from the entire eyelid, a circle of cloth is applied over the navel with tight pressure; and it should be pierced by a fine needle that enters the base of the hernia, and let the watery pus run out, and lower the navel and enter as far as possible.
E aprop strenh entro que sia sanat.	Then tighten it until it is healed.
Capitol .xxii.	Chapter .xxii.
De curacio de alconati.	On the treatment of eye troubles.
Aquesta malautia que es apelada alconati no es sino sania la qual es ajustada en le huel semblant a aygua dessendent e no es aquela.	This disease, which is called "conjitival" (eye trouble), does not exist; it is the navel that resembles descending water and is not that.
Mays la manieyra del obrar en ela es que fasses le malaute sezer sobre la sela aparelada e dreyta, e aprop pren le cap sieu en las tuas mas de doas partz e mau aquel entro que veias la sania pervenir a las partidas dejos, e aprop sia siccada e no descenda, e sia ostat le lum, e·l malaute veia las causas ayssi cum vezia.	Maybe the manner of the work in it is that you make the navel cut in half and turn it, and immediately take the sixth part of the six eyes (two) and close them so that you cannot see; then let the light shine on them, and the navel should not go down, and do not allow tears to flow, and look at the causes there.
E si no descendra en jos, sapias que es aygua.	And if it does not go down, you will know that it is water.
Mays si no es preparat le descendement a la sania am aquo que havem dit, lahoras fay le malaute sezer entre las tuas mas e aprop pren spatum subtil e fen am aquel sobre le pannicol cernent un petit deves la continuacio de la conjunctiva am la tunica cornea en la corona (entro al loc vuet), entro que sia fora-getada la sania.	Maybe if it is not prepared to descend the disease with water that we have mentioned, then make the navel cut between the muscles and immediately take a fine needle and pierce it at the place where the conjunctiva meets the corneal nerve in the crown (at the edge of the eye), and let the disease be removed.
Donc cum es fora-getada, lahoras tu distilla en le huel aygua cauda en la qual has mesclat mel o aygua en la qual ja has bulit fenugrec e mel.	Then, when it is removed, you distil the navel with water that has been mixed with honey or with water in which you have built fennel and honey.
E aprop sia curat am las autras causas entro que sia sanat.	Then let it be cured with other remedies so that it is healed.
Capitol .xxii.	Chapter .xxii.
De la curacio de la aygua descendent del huel.	On the treatment of water that descends from the navel.
Ja havem dit las specias de la aygua en la divisio e qual conveneys a perforar am sermo declarant, lahoras aquel segon la sanetat.	We have mentioned the spices for the water in the division and how it agrees to pierce with sound, declaring, then according to health.
Lahoras cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute entre las tuas mas sobre un cayrat e lia le sieu huel sa, lu mot stringent.	Then you will know that it is water that should be made into a half-circle and turned on a flat stone; then take the sixth part of the six eyes (two) and close them so they cannot see; then place the stone on the navel and tighten it.
E aprop pausa prop de la palpebra del sieu huel la tua ma senestra, si le huel en le qual es l’aygua es le huel senestra; o am la tua ma dreyta, si le huel es le dextre.	Then pause near the eyelid of the navel with your left hand, if the water is in the navel; or with your right hand, if the water is on the navel.
E aprop am la tua ma dextra pren almagda, si le huel es senestre; o am la tua ma senestra, si le huel es de dreyt.	Then with your right hand take some almagge, if the navel is left-handed; or with your left hand, if the navel is right-handed.
E aprop pausa la extremitat de almagda prop de la corona per la grossesa del ray en le album del huel de part del mendre lacrimal, e aprop enpelleys almagda am vertut e revol la tua ma am aquel.	Then pause the end of the almagge near the crown by the thickness of the eye's white part from the tear duct, and immediately dip it in almagge with power and turn it; then take it with your hand and dip it again.
E aprop penetre en le album del huel e sentas que almagda ja es pervenguda a causa vueda.	Then penetrate into the navel's white part and feel that almagge has already reached the eye disease.
E cove que sia la masura del cami de almagda al preon la mesura del spazi le qual es de la pupilla entro a la fi de la negror, e es la corona del huel; quar tu veyras am aquel pupilla am la visio de l’huel per la clartat de la tunica cornea.	Then the measure of the path of almagge to the eye is the space from the pupil to the end of the blackness, and it is the crown of the navel; for you will see with that pupil through the clarity of the corneal layer.
E aprop pausa almagda entro al loc en le qual es l’aygua, e aprop tu la atira en jos una veguada aprop autra, e donc si la aygua descen tantost, lahoras vetz le malaute aquo sobre le qual huebre la sua vista tantost, e almagda en le sieu huel.	Then pause almagge in the place where the water is; and then take another one with you, and if the water descends quickly, then treat the navel with that water.
E aprop repausa se un pauc; donc si la aygua es descenduda, lahoras tu depausa aquela autre veguada abantz que almagda ne sia getada.	Then pause for a little while; and if the water descends quickly, then you should stop that other one before almagge is removed.
E donc quan es sicada e no descen, lahoras tu extrat almagda am facilitat, e revol am aquel la tua ma pauc a pauc, e aprop dissolveys en l’aygua un petit de sal clara de gemma e am aquela lava le huel dedintz; e aprop pausa fora le huel coto o stopa o lana infusa en oli rozat e album de huou e ligua am aquo le huel sa.	And when it stops and does not go down, then extract almagge easily, and turn it with your hand slowly, and dissolve a little clear salt in gems and wash the navel inside; then pause the navel outside with cloth or stop it or wrap it in rose water infused with milk of soya, and place it in a clean place.
Mays nos e aquels que so de nostre temps pause sobre aquel comi trissat am album de huou.	Maybe we are those who have not been born yet; and let us pause on that navel with a three-part meal made from milk of soya.
E si no obezeys a tu almagda al intrament de l’huel per la sua duricia — quar es alcu dels homes del qual le huel es dur mot —, lahoras cove que prenguas le spatum le qual es nompnat alberid del qual aquesta es la forma:	If you do not obey your almagge to the navel in its hardness  — for it is some of those people whose navel is hard like the wood; then, when you take the needle:
E donc perfora am aquel aquela conjunctura, e no ultimes la tua ma en le trauc, e no es si no que fassas via ad almagda loc subtil.	Then pierce that conjunctiva with the needle, and do not stop until you reach the navel; and if it does not stop, then you should draw blood from it.
E aprop entromet almagda segon que havem dit.	Then put almagge as we have mentioned.
E deves le compliment de la tua obra, sia preparat al malaute dormitori descentment fayt en le qual dorma sobre le sieu dos en mayson tenebrosa, e sia prohibit de totz movementz .	You should be pleased with this work, prepared for the navel' sleep; and let it not go out during the night; and let no movement occur there.
E pausa en la natura de lu aquo per que sia linida la sua natura, e no maugua le sieu cap a la partida dreyta ni senestra de tot.	Then pause in the nature of the water so that its nature is cool; and do not pull the hair from the front or back of all.
E sia le liament segon la sua disposicio entro al tertz dia.	Then the plaster should be according to its position by the third day.
E aprop deslia aquel en aquela maysso tenebrosa e exproha la freol vista, e fay li vezer alcunas causas, e aprop retorna le liament entro al dia .vii.	Then remove that navel from that dark place and expose the painful sight; then return the plaster on the seventh day.
E no cove que fassas aquo en la hora de las curacios o tantost aprop la infusio.	And it is not necessary to make water in the time of treatment or immediately thereafter, but rather to infuse it.
Habantz cove que tu alienes aquo per so quar la aygua puega leugierament per gran e vehement de reguardament.	While you are making water for the navel, because the water spreads quickly with a look of contempt.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras cove que deslias le huel denant le vii dia, e rectifica aquel am aquo que ceda apostema.	Maybe if an apoplexy occurs suddenly, then remove the navel on the seventh day, and immediately afterwards, clean it with water that causes an apoplexy.
Lahoras tu absol la vista de lu e pausa sobre la cara de lu oral per le qual sia regit le vezement de lu dejos lu per alcus dias, lu existent en la mayszo tenebrosa.	Then turn him over so he is facing down on his back and pause for a moment above the face of the patient to whom you are treating, as it is kept in place by the hands that hold his feet.
E aprop sia gitat de aquela mayzo gradantment e conversa8 en las suas causas.	And now go back to the dark room gradually and converse with him about his causes.
E sapias que in alchatea no es excusat le discipol de visio alcunas veguadas, e lahoras tu sias ardit sobre la operacio.	And you know that in surgery it is not allowed to have a cold eye, and so turn your gaze sharply toward the operation.
E ja es pervengut a nos de alcu de aquels les quals so al Artach , e alcu disse que fayt foc en al Ayrac magdaam perforat am le qual es succada la aygua.	And some have said that it is done in the art of medicine, and one says that fire is made by rubbing together two pieces of wood and then adding a spark, and water is drawn out.
Mays empero yeu non e vist degu en la nostra terra le qual haia perfeyt aquo, ni e aquo legit en alcu dels libres dels antics; e es possible que aquo sia novel.	But nevertheless I have not seen in our land the one who has perfected this water, nor is it known from the ancient books, and it is possible that this is new.
E aquestas so las formas de las specias de magdaan per que sia sobre aquelas aquel le qual ignora aquelas:	These are the forms of magic for those who are on those who do not know about them:
E sian faytas de eram o de ferr propriament, e sian las extramitatz de lor am aquesta subtilitat triangulada, la extremitat aguda ayssi cum aquela es la forma.	And they have been made from iron or steel, and the tips of those are this triangular subtility, the acute tip thus being the shape.
Capitol .xxiv.	Chapter .xxiv.
De la curacio de carn nada en le nas.	Of the treatment for meat in the nose.
Quan en le nas so nascudas carns diversas ajustadas de las quals es alcuna causa la qual es assemblada a scorpio de motz pes, o a polip peys; e aquesta malautia es apelada polipus quar es a semblansa de aquel peys representat.	When in the nose various meats are hidden that have caused a condition that is gathered by wind and weight, or it is a polyps that looks like this disease represented by a peal.
E de lu es carn cancrosa, lapadea, de fusca color; e de lu es que es carn leon no de color fusca.	And of the meat is cancerous flesh, with white skin, and it is that meat of a lion not of white color.
Donc en aquela que es en aquestas carns leon no fraudulenta ni cancroza, cove que fassas le malaute sezer entre las tuas mas e posat al solelh, e huebre las nars de lu, e picoys le tieu onci en aquelas carns.	Then in those meats of a lion that are neither fraudulent nor cancerous, cover it with your hand and place it under the sun, and pierce the meat with a sharp knife into those pieces.
E aprop extrat aquela a las partidas deforo, e aprop inscindeys aquo que has comprehendut de aquelas am spatum agut subtil de la una partida entro que sapias que tota la carn ja es ostada; que si roman de lu deguna causa de la qual la abscisio es possibla, lahoras tu ratz aquo am la un dels estrumentz subtils am facilitat entro que de lu romangua denguna causa.	Then remove that piece from the sides beforehand, and cut it into small pieces with a sharp knife so that you know all the meat is removed; if for any reason the removal can be done easily, then cut that meat into smaller pieces with one of the small instruments.
Mays si senhoreja am sanc o accida apostema caut, lahoras tu pausa a lu aquo que cove; o es dels apostemas malignes, lahoras tu coyta e cauteriza aquel entro que sia abscindit sanc e sian ostadas las cavas totas.	If it is a sore or acid pus, then pause the meat that covers it; or if it is a malicious pus, then cut and cauterize that within which has been cut off sore and all holes have been covered.
E aprop sia getatz en le nas aprop la inscizio vi agre e aygua o vi.	Then return to the nose to take the incision with salt and water or vinegar.
Mays si le nas es ubert e de lu procezeys humiditat entro al palat, lahoras sapias que ja es sanat.	If the nose is wet and you feel moisture within the palate, then you know that it is already healed.
Mays si la humiditat no penetra segon que cove, lahoras tu sapias que dedintz lu es carn nada en los pus sobiras osses de las nars als quals non es pervengut abscizio.	If the moisture does not penetrate according to how it is covered, then you know that inside there is no meat but only pus and bones of the nostrils in which there has been no removal.
Donc lahoras cove que entromitas fiel de li al qual sia alcuna grosseza, e nuza en lu motz nuzes, e pausa entre quascun nutz la quantitat del dit o mens, e engene le malaute e entromet una extremitat del fiel en le nars am lo ray o am autra causa la qual es a lu possibla.	Then return to the nose to test it with your finger, and taste each piece of meat a little at a time, and place a sharp tool on the tip of the finger or on another cause that can be done easily; cut off one end of the tissue in the nose with a tool.
E pus que aquo aura fayt, que atire le sieu odorament entro que pervengua a las canals de las nars, e sia eyssit sobre le sieu golayro, quar tropas veguadas le semblant ad aquesta accio fan les enfantz a las scolas, e es leugiera causa ad aquel que ho vol far.	And when the meat is done cooking, so that its odor is drawn in and enters the nostrils, and it is thrown up on the palate because the sight of this action causes children to vomit at school, which is a good sign for those who want to do it.
E aprop pausa las dos extramitatz del fiel, una extremitat que iesca sobre le nas et l’autra que romangua en le nas, e aprop aministra serratura de carn am les nuzes que so en le fiel, e fay aquo entro que sapias que las carn ja so am les nuzes del fiel.	Then pause the two ends of the tissue, one end that comes out above the nose and the other that is still inside the nose, and then remove the meat from the nostrils that is on the finger, and cut it into pieces so that you know that the meat is already gone; it is done.
E aprop extratz le fiel, e pausa en le nas aprop la abstraccio del sanc una calgua , e fay aquo per tres dias o mays entro que l’enguent corrodo tot aquo que es romas de las carns.	Then remove the tissue, and return to the nose to take the incision of sore a little at a time, and do it for three days or more until the wound is healed completely; cut off all the meat.
E aprop en la fi de la causa, pausa en le nas una canula de plom per alscus jorns entro que sia sanat.	Then return to the end of the cause, place a pipe in the nose for drainage over time until it is healed.
Mays si endigeys de curacio que exsique, usa de aquela.	If you see that treatment has begun, then use it.
E aquesta es la forma del instrument a capipurge fazedor am le qual son distillatz olis e medicinas en le nars:	And this is the form of the instrument to cut and clean with which oils and medicines are distilled in the nose:
E fay aquo de argent o de eram, la qual sia semblant a una petita lampesa uberta, ayssi cum petita conqua, e le meat semblantment.	It is made of silver or iron, which looks like a small open lantern, and it has a sharp point, and the meat looks similar.
E si vols, fay una canula clausa ayssi cum cana, e la cancula del estrument a capipurge fazedor e sia plana, descuberta; a la qual sia manubre en lo derier de lu, am le qual tenguas aquela quan escaufas en lu oli o aquo que tu vols dels sucs e de las causas suctiblas.	And if you want, make a closed canula like this with a tube, and the tube of the instrument to cut and clean is flat and open; hold it in your hand, so that you hold it when you drain oil or water from the suckings and the foul-smelling causes.
E aquestz capipurgi es precios: recipe de enforbi de castor, de balayra blanc, de giengiebre, e piletre de safra, de pebre lonc, de escafragia, de epetum de spic ana unc. vi cumfizeys am suc de bleda e de caul, e sian faytas pillulas, e sia destemprada una pillula am aygua tebeza, e sia gitat en las nars del malaute jasent envers.	And these are the most precious instruments: take from beaver, from white balsam, from ginger, and from goldene plums, from long pepper, from sage, and from eptima spice, and from anise seed. And put it together with blood and a cauldron, and make pills, and one pill be taken with warm water, and return them to the nose when they are ready.
Capitol .xxv.	Chapter .xxv.
De theyls natz en las extramitatz del nas.	Of the treatment of the nostrils at their ends.
Motas veguadas es nat theyl en las extramitatz del nas, e es magnificat e omentat en alscus dias entro en que mot es leg le reguardament de lu.	A few drops of oil are placed in the nostrils at their ends, and it is great and prolonged for three days within which time it is seen that treatment begins with the watchful eye.
E per aquo cove que tu inscidas aquel en le comensament de la apparissio de lu, e erediques tot aquel.	And through oil that you cover it in the beginning of its appearance, and you will inherit all of it.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc o cauteri o medicina comburent la qual estia en loc de lu.	Then pause over the place or cauterize or apply a burning medicine that is on the spot.
Mays si es tardada la sua inscizio entro que sia magnificat, lahoras considera si es lapificat, dur, de fusca color e de pauc sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel am ferr quar es apostema crancos; quar motas veguadas ad aquel que inscideys aquesta apostema endeve per lu granda malicia sobre aquel le qual aquel havia.	If the incision is delayed until it is great, then consider if it is hard and of white color and of little feeling, then do not touch that piece with iron because it is a cranky apium; because drops of oil are placed on this apium by the great evil that has been done to it.
E si le apostema es de leon tocament e no es de fosca color, e vezes que inscizio es possibla en tot aquel, lahoras evacua le malaute e inscideys aquel senes temor, e cura le loc am aquo que exsique e costrenh entro que sia sanat.	If the apium is hard and its color is not pale, then when incision can be done on all of it, then remove the meat with a sharp instrument and cure the spot with oil that has begun to heal and apply pressure within which it is healed.
Capitol .xxvi.	Chapter .xxvi.
De sutura del nas e de las labias e de la aurelha quan la continuitat es dissolvuda per plagua o per semblantz.	Of the suture of the nose and of the lips and of the ear when the continuity is broken by plague or by resemblance.
Sapias que quan accideys solucio de continuitat en una de aquestas cartillages, pauc confereys en aquela operacio sino en alcus homes.	You know that when you achieve resolution of continuity in one of these cartilage structures, you have less success with the operation than with others.
Donc cove, quan endeve ad alcu alcuna causa de aquelas, que consideres si es plagua fresca am le sieu sanc, e lahoras tu ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	Then, when this condition is present in any of them, you should consider if it is a fresh plague with the same name, then adjust the two lips of the plague to the suture, and then return to heal that within which has been healed.
E si las labias de solucio de continuitat so ja separadas, e quascuna es fayta sana, lahoras cove que tu excorjes quascuna partida de la sua codena apparent entro que n’iesca sanc.	If the lips of the solution for continuity are already separated, and each is healed separately, then you know that they have been cut apart, within which does not cause any pain.
E aprop ajusta las doas labias am sutura e strenh aquelas, e sobre aquelas pulveriza sanc de drago e enses trissat, e pausa sobre la polvera una pessa de emplaustra diafinicon, o de alcu autre dels emplastres consolidatius, e leyssa aquel liat per dos jorns o per tres, e aprop deslia aquel e permuta aquel emplaustre e leyssa aquel entro que·ls fiels per si sian abscinditz, e aprop cura am enguent entro que sia sanat.	Then adjust the two lips to the suture and strengthen them, and spray on them dragon's blood and honey-mustard, and pause over the powder a little of turpentine oil, or another of the consolidative plasters, and leave it alone for two days or three, then remove that plaster and replace it with another one, and you will leave it alone for a few days, and then return to heal that within which has been healed.
Mays la manieyra de la sutura es que tu agregues la solucio de continuitat o am agulhas ayssi cum havem recomtat en la sutura del ventre, o agregua la solucio de continuitat am fiel ayssi cum a tu e fayt saber.	If the method of the suture is that you add the solution for continuity or with needles in the same way as you have described in the suture of the belly, or if you add the solution for continuity to the tissue.
Capitol .xxvii.	Chapter .xxvii.
De extraccio de aquela causas que veno en las doas labias en las partidas dedintz.	Of the extraction of those causes that come in the two lips separated inside.
Motas veguadas endeve a motz homes en las partidas dedintz de las suas labias alcus apostemas durs semblantz a gras de errs, e alscunas de lors son mendres e alcunas son majors.	Here is the first sentence of the text:
Donc cove que tu convertas las labias e fendas quascuna de aquelas duricias de tota part, e aprop la abscizio umpliscas le loc de sagi trissat entro que·l sanc sia restrengut, e aprop sia lavat am vi agre e sia curat le loc am aquo que es stipticitat, entro que sia sanat.	Then if you cut the lips and separate each of those hard pieces from all parts, and clean the wound with sage tea until it is completely healed, and then wash it thoroughly with water that is made bitter, and clean the area with astringent, then heal it.
Capitol .xxviii.	Chapter .xxviii.
De inscizio de la carn ajustada en las gengivas.	On cutting into the flesh between the gums.
Granre de veguadas nays sobre la gengiva carn ajustada la qual les antics apelero albulus, adonc cove que tu suspendas aquela am onci o que tenguas aquela am las forfecs e inscidas aquela deves la sua razit, e leyssas la sania correr o le sanc.	And if dark spots appear on the flesh between the gums, which cause whiteness in some people, then you should hang that piece of flesh or cut it off and clean out those parts with a needle and thread, and let the blood flow or stop the bleeding.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc sagi trissat o autra polveras stipticas o excicativas.	Then apply sage tea or other astringent or Exfoliant powder to the area.
E si aquela carn retorna, lahoras inscideys aquela segundariament, e cauterisa aquela, quar aprop le cauteri no retornara.	And if that flesh returns, then cut it again and cauterize it, because the cauterization will not be effective otherwise.
Capitol .xxix.	Chapter.xxix.
De razo de dentz am ferr.	On the reason for teeth made of iron.
Quan en la superficia de las dentz de las partidas dedintz e de las de foro e entre las gingivas so ajustadas escorsas aspras, legas, e alcunas veguadas son de nigradas e son faytas citrinas o vertz entro que a la gingiva ve per aquo corrupcio e son faytas las dentz legas.	When the surface of the teeth, between the gums and in the threads, is rough, sharp, and some spots are dark and others are yellow or green, then the gums rot and the teeth fall out.
E donc cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute entre las tuas mas e pausar le cap de lu en le tieu se, e ratz las dents en las quals apareysso aquelas escorsas e causas semblantz arena entro que de lor no romangua deguna causa, e aquo fay de la negror e de la citrinitat e de las autras entro que sian mondificadas.	Then if you cut the meat between your teeth and place the top of the foot in the space below, and grind the teeth where those spots appear, which resemble sand, then the blackness and yellowness and other spots will disappear because they are not caused by anything that grinds them.
Donc si es ostat aquo que es en aquelas del comensament de la razio, bo es; e sino, lahoras tu itera la razio sobre aquelas al autra dia e al segon e al tertz entro que vengua al derier stament en aquo que tu vols.	Then if that is the reason for those spots at the beginning of hair growth, then that is right; and if not, then you should repeat the process on another day or a second or third time until you arrive at the final statement concerning what you want to say.
E sapias que las dentz han necessitat de motz rezoris de diversas formas e de motas figuras segon que es preparat a la tua operacio.	And you should know that teeth require different shapes and forms of tools according to how they are prepared for your operation.
E per so quar le razori am le qual la dent es raza de la partida dedintz es autre del razori am le qual es ras entre las dentz segon autras formas, e aquestas formas de razoris sian deves tu preparadas las quals veyras tantost:	And for this reason, the blade with which the tooth is cut from the gum is different from the blade used to cut between the teeth according to other forms, and those forms of blades should be prepared, which you will see soon enough:
Capitol .xxx.	Chapter.xxx.
D’eradicacio de dentz.	Root removal of teeth.
Cove que tu cures la dent de la sua dolor am tot engen e tardes en tota eradicacio de lu, quar no es denguna causa que suplisqua la veguada de lu quan es eradicada, quar es sustancia sublima entro que es excusacio en la eradicacio de lu.	Then if you cure the tooth from its root, taking care not to wait too long for the complete eradication of it, because it is a sublimated substance and an excuse in the eradication of the root.
Mays cove quan le malaute es forsat aquela dent eradicar, que fermament deves tu sia certificat quala es la dent dolent, quar motas veguadas la dolor descep le malaute e cuga que sia en dent sana, e tu eradicas aquela e aprop la dolor no cessa entro que la dent malauta e dolent sia eradicada, quar nos ja havem vist aquo per operacio dels barbies.	And if the meat is forced out, then you should be certain which tooth hurts, because the pain of the root may deceive you and make you think that it is in a healthy tooth, and you will eradicate that one, and the pain will not stop until the root itself is eradicated, for we have seen this happen through an operation on the teeth of the lower jaw.
Donc cum deves tu es sertificat qual es la dent dolent, e que o sabes be, lahoras cove que tu scarifiques en le circuit de la dent am spatum en le qual sia alcuna vertut, entro que sia dissolvut de la dent de la gingiva de tota partida, e aprop mau aquel am les tieus ditz, o am forfexs subtils al comensament petit a petit entro que aquela concucesquas.	Then you should be certain which tooth hurts, and you know that well, then if you scrape on the path of the tooth with a blade where there is no benefit, until it is dissolved from the gum at the beginning, and then cut it with tiny scissors or a sharp fork little by little until it is cut off.
E aprop alogua en lu fortz tenalhas grans per bona loquacio o estuptura fort, e pausa le cap del malaute entre les tieus denolhs que be le tengues que no·s maugua, e aprop tratz la dent segon rectitut en manieyra que no trenques aquela, ni al malaute major dolor no dones.	And then place a strong tenaculum firmly on the bottom of the teeth that you can pull without hurting yourself, and place the top of the foot between those teeth that hurt you less, and take hold of the tooth with a firm grip according to how it should not break, nor should the root hurt you.
E donc si no es foro-getat, lahoras pren un de aquels instrumentz, e met aquel dejos lu de tota part am facilitat e esforsa la remocio de lu ayssi que es feyt al comensament.	And if it is not root-get (i.e., the tooth has come loose), then take one of those instruments, and insert it carefully from all sides with ease and try to remove it easily as if it were being pulled out at the beginning.
Mays si la dent es trauquada o corrosa, lahoras cove que tu comples de drap aquel trauc e estrenguas aquel am la extremitat de ray subtil per so que no sia trinquada en la hora de la tua constriccio sobre aquela am tenalas.	But if the tooth is loose or corroded, then you should wrap that cloth tightly around it and tighten it with a string at the end of a small stick so that it does not break in your hand when you tighten it.
E cove que tu obres exquesitament am scarificacio en le circuit de tota part de la gingiva e guarda mot la tua fortaleza que no trenques aquela e romangua partida de lu, e retorne sobre le malaute per la malicia que sia majo que la primieyra dolor de lu.	Then if you open it exceptionally by cutting into the gum all around, and guard your strength so that you do not break it and cause a rupture in it, and return to the foot for the evil that is less than the first pain of it.
E guarda te que no fassas aquo que fan alscus ignorantz barbiers en lor fistinacio e audacia sobre la eradicacio de lor, ses que no aministran aquo que nos havem recomtat; quar motas veguadas fan venir sobre les homes malautias grans las quals son pus dificils que sian trinquadas, e las razitz de lor remaugudas totas, o alcunas de aquelas, o que extrayguas aquela am alcus osses de la mandigula ayssi cum motas veguadas havem testificat.	And be careful not to make a mess of it like some careless and audacious barbers have done at the end of their shaving, for we have witnessed that with those roots removed completely, or some of them, or if you extract one with some bones from the mandible in this way, with those ugly spots we have seen.
E aprop la eradicacio de lu sia lavada la boca am vi caut o vi agre am sal.	Then the eradication of it should be washed with a strong cauterizer or astringent solution.
E si endeve fluxs de sanc per aysso, ayssi cum motas veguadas endeve, lahoras trissa alcuna quantitat de zegi e aspergeys sobre la plagua, e si no confereys aquel zegi, cauteriza.	And if there is blood from the tooth, as it often happens with those spots, then pour a small amount of water on it and sprinkle it with salt, or cauterize it.
La forma de las forceps e tenalas subtils am las quals es mauguda la dent al comensament sia de longua extramitat, de breu manubre e gros, per so que no sian doblatz quan am aquels deves obrar.	The shape of the tweezers and forceps should be small and sharp at the end, with a long handle, and a short grip, so that they do not bend when you work with them.
E sian ayssi cum vezes de gros manubre entro que quan estrenhas am aquelas no sian dobladas, sian breus extramitatz.	They should be like this, sometimes with large grips, so that when you start using them they do not bend, they are sharp tips.
E sian faytas de ferr de India descentment faytas de dreytas extramitatz, e en las extramitatz de aquelas sian dentz de las quals las unas intron en las autras e estrenhan per constriccio descent fort, e alscunas veguadas las extramitatz de aquelas sian la forma del bec d’un auzel le qual ha nom ciconia, so es guanta, e son de fort constriccio.	They are made of iron from India, with a right-hand grip, and at the end are teeth like those of an owl's beak which is sharp and pointed, and some of these ends are the shape of a bird's beak, which is a handle, and they are very strong in their grip.
Capitol .xxxi.	Chapter.xxxi.
De erradicacio de dentz e d‘estraccio dels osses de las mandibulas trincadas.	On the eradication of teeth and the removal of bones from the mandible.
Quan deves la eradicacio de dent le qual es trinquat roman alcuna causa, lahoras cove que tu pauses sobre le loc coto am boder per un jorn o per dos entro que·l loc sia mollificat; e aprop entromet algesti o tenalhas las extramitatz de las quals so asembladas al bec de un auzel apelat ciconia o guanta, la forma de las forceps:	When you should eradicate a tooth that is being pulled out for any reason, then if the place is moistened with a cold liquid for a day or two until it softens; and then place a tenaculum firmly on each side of the location with a blade, and place a pair of forceps at the end of one of them, like an owl's beak, which is a handle, the shape of the tweezers:
Las extramitatz de lor sian faytas dedintz ayssi cum lima o alfagi.	Their ends are sharp from inside, with five or six teeth, and they are made of iron or metal.
E si no obediys a tu a eyssiment am aquestas forceps o tenalas, lahoras cove que tu caves sobre la razit e descrobas tota la carn e entrometas le instrument le qual ha nom atali, so es palanca petita del qual la forma es aquesta:	And if you do not obey your instructions with these tweezers or forceps, then cut off the root and dig out the instrument which has the name of an awl, so is a small hammer whose shape is as follows:
E sia de breu extremitat grossa un petit, e no sia enbegut per so que no sia trinquat.	And be of a small thick end of tar, that it not be enveloped by it so that it does not break.
Donc si per aquo la razit es foro-getada, bo es; e sino, ajuda te am aquestz autres instrument dels quals aquestas son las formas: la forma del primier instrument es de triangulada extramitat en la qual sia alcuna grossesa:	So that if for this the root is pierced, it is good; and if not, help me with these other instruments whose are the shapes: the shape of the first instrument is of triangular end in which there is some thickness:
La forma del segon instrument es que sia de triangulada e de pus subtil extremitat.	The shape of the second instrument is that it be of triangular and very thin end.
E ja so ajudatz am aquest instrument havent dos ramps del qual aquesta es la forma aprop la seguent:	And you are helped with this instrument having two ramps of which this is the form to follow:
e am autres instrumentz les quals precidero en rasura de dentz; quar juvament es fayt am aquest instrument le qual es asemblat a onci gran, e aquesta es la forma:	And with other instruments that will be needed in sharpening of teeth; because quickly it is done with this instrument which is assembled of one large, and this is the form:
de la triangulada extremitat torta o curta, la qual sia alcuna grossesa, e no sia enbegut per so que no sia trinquat.	of the triangular end bent or short, which is some thickness, and that it not be enveloped by it so that it does not break.
E otra sapias que·ls instrumentz de las dentz motz so e semblantment les autres instruments.	And you know that the instruments of the teeth are similar to the other instruments.
Mays le artifexs savi e subtil en l’art, atroba per si mateys segon aquo que a lu significa la operacio e las malautias diversas; quar son de las malautias a las quals les antics no diysero ni pausero propri instrument, per las formas de diversas specias.	Might the artisans skilled and subtle in art, invent for themselves according to what it means to them that operation and various illnesses; because are of the illnesses to which the ancient did not say or stopped their own instrument, by the shapes of different species.
Mays si es trinquat l’os de la mandibula o dels autres osses de la boca, o si poyreys, lahoras sia pes curat sobre aquel en son loc am aquo que es a lu convenient dels instrumentz e de las forceps las quals havem dit en la extraccio de las razitz de las dentz, e ajuda te am gesti del qual aquesta es la forma:	If the bone of the jaw or other bones of the mouth is broken, then let it be cleansed on that in its place with what is convenient to it of the instruments and of the forceps which we have spoken about the extraction of the roots of the teeth, and help me with gestures of which this is the form:
E sia en lu alcuna grosseza petit a petit, e sia instringida o tenguda am la boca per que no evasesca o fuga entro que l’os de tot sia foro-getat; e aprop restaura le loc am medicinas convenientz ad aquo.	And be in some small thickness little by little, and is stretched or held to the mouth so that it does not escape or flee completely that the bone of all is pierced; and then restore the place with medicines suitable for it.
Mays si en l’os es petita poyredura, lahoras ratz aquel de aquela poyredura e de la sua negror, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	If in the bone is a small hole, then let that bone be cut from that hole and from its blackness, and cure that within it is healed.
Capitol .xxxii.	Chapter .xxxii.
De la cura de las dentz eminentz sobre las autras.	Of the treatment of prominent diseases compared to other diseases.
Quan las dentz so eminentz no segon lor cors natural per aquelas la forma es laga, e majorment quan endeve a las femnas, e majorment a las piuselas venerablas; donc cove que tu consideras: si dent es nada aprop autra dent, e no es possibla sarradura ni linament de lu, lahoras radica aquela; mays que no sia annexa am autra dent, lahoras tu inscideys aquela am aquest instrument del qual aquesta es la forma; e es semblant a morr de porc, e sia feyt de ferr de India de extramitat mot aguda.	When the teeth are prominent not following their natural course by those the form is short, and more so when they extend to the gums, and more so to the venerable vulvas; therefore consider that if a tooth is nothing attached to another tooth, and it is not possible to cut it with a saw or to rub it with a file, then pull it out; but if it is not attached to another tooth, then cut it with this instrument of which this is the form: and it is similar to the morra of a pig, and is made of iron of India of triangular end in which there is some thickness.
E sia la tua inscizio am la qual inscideyses aquela en trops dias per la duricia de la dent, e que no sia comauguda autra de las dentz.	And be your incision with which you cut that tooth in two days because of the hardness of the tooth, and that it is not attached to any other tooth.
E si es dent eminent expausat a limadura, lahoras lima aquel am lima de ferr de India del qual aquesta es la forma:	And if a prominent tooth has spread to a file, then file that tooth with a file of iron of India of which this is the form:
E sia tot de ferr de India e·l margua eysament; e sia de motz menutz puntz ayssi cum lima am la qual son faytas agulhas, am la qual la dent sia limada pauc a pauc en motz dias am fecilitat, per so que no sia autra dent comauguda e caga.	And all of it is made of iron of India and the margin only; and that be very small points made with a file on it, as needles, making the tooth be filed little by little in two days with ease, so that no other tooth becomes attached to it, and it breaks.
E aprop lineys aquela en la fi, e ratz aquela am alscus razoris.	And then line up that tooth, and cut it with a scalpel.
E si es dent del qual una partida es trinquada e lideys la lengua, lahoras cove que tu limescas aquel entro que l’aspretat de aquela fraccio sia ostada e engualhada, e sia aplenada per so que la lengua no ledesca ni la paraula no corrumpa.	And if a tooth is broken in which one part is sharp and you are cutting it with the tongue, then consider that you rub out the sharpness of that fraction so that the tongue does not scrape nor the word corrupt.
Capitol .xxxiii.	Chapter.xxxiii.
De restauracio de dentz maugudas am fiel de aur o de argent.	Of restoration of broken teeth with gold or silver wire.
Quan accideys a las dentz devant concussio e remossio per percussio o per cazament, e le malaute no pot strenher sobre aquo que manga, e tu has curat aquel am medicinas stipticas, e no ha valgut la tua curacio, lahoras per so que no cagan es engen en aquelas que sian strengudas am fiel de aur e no de argent, quar argent se fa vert e aprop se poyreys aprop alscus dias, mays aur nul temps no es mudat.	When an accident happens to the teeth by striking or hitting, and the patient cannot be restrained more than that it bleeds, and you have treated that with medicinal stinging, and your treatment has not been successful, then for those teeth that are attached to gold wire and not to silver wire, because silver changes color and must be filed with a file in two days, whereas gold does not change color.
E sia le fiel en tal subtilitat e grocesa segon la quantitat que puesca entrar entre las dentz; e la forma de la reccio es que prenguas le fiel e pren lo doble de lu entre doas dentz sanas, e aprop que cresques am doas tortuositatz del fiel entre doas maugudas, o si’ una o motas, entro que pervengua la tela a la dent sana del autra partida.	And be the wire in such subtility and thickness according to the quantity that can enter between teeth; and the shape of the cut is that you take the wire and double it between two sound teeth, and then let it grow with two twists of the wire between two broken teeth, or if one or both are missing, until the thread reaches the sound tooth on the other side.
E aprop itera le teyssiment entro a la partida de la qual comenciest, e strenh la tua ma am facilitat e savieza entro que no sia mauguda.	And then repeat the treatment within the fraction of which you began, and strengthen your hand with ease and skill until it is not broken.
E sia la tua striccio am la qual strenhas le fiel deves las razitz de las dentz que no evasesca.	And be your tightening with which you tighten the wire so that the roots of the teeth do not escape.
E aprop inscindeys las extramitatz del fiel superfluens am las forceps o tosoyras, e agregua aquelas en quascun loc am gesti, e converteys aquelas e las occulta entre la dent sana e la dent mauguda, per so que no fassa lesio a la lengua.	And then you cut off the excess tips of the wire with scissors or tweezers, and add them in any place with gestures, and hide those between the sound tooth and the broken tooth, so that it does not damage the tongue.
E aprop leyssa aquela ayssi streyta cum roman.	And then let that tooth rest with a string.
Mays si es desliada o rumpuda, strenh aquela o aquelas am autra fiel en tal manieyra en tot son temps.	If it is broken or shattered, strengthen it or them with another wire in such a way in all the time.
E aquesta es la forma de las dentz e la figura de la rectacio de doas dentz sanas e de doas maugudas, ayssi cum vezes aquestas liadas:	This is the shape of teeth and the figure of the cutting of two sound teeth and two broken teeth, thus tied:
E quan se fa que retorno una dent o doas aprop le cazement de quascuna en lors locs, e sian recrescutz ayssi cum havem recomtat, e que remauguan.	And when one tooth or two return to their place in the place of each in their locations, and they are restored thus with a string tied, and they remain.
E no fa aquo sino bo artifexs e savi.	It is not done except by skilled and wise artisans.
E alcunas veguadas es aptat alcuna causa dels osses de vaca, e es fayt de lor ayssi cum forma de dent, e es pausada en loc en le qual defayl la dent, e es strengit ayssi cum havem dit, e reman e serveys am aquel per lonc temps.	Some teeth are apt for some cause of the bones of the cow, and it is done from them as the form of a tooth, and is placed in its place in which the tooth fails, and it is strengthened thus with what we have said, and remain and serve to that for a long time.
Capitol .xxxiv.	Chapter.xxxiv.
De inscizio del liament le qual ve en la lengua e prohibeys loquela.	Of the incision of the ligature which is seen in the tongue and prohibits speaking.
Aquest liguament le qual ve dejos la lengua alcunas veguadas o es natural am le qual hom nays, o accidental e accideys per plagua la qual ja es consolidada.	This ligament which leaves the tongue some times or is natural to the person who does not have it, or happens by accident due to a plague which has already been consolidated.
E la operacio en lu es que huobres la boca del malaute, le sieu cap existent en le tieu se; e eleva la sieua lengua, e aprop inscideys aquel liament nervos segon la latitut entro que sia solvuda la lengua de la sua recencio.	The operation in it is that you work the mouth of the patient, and its tongue exists in the neck; and it lifts up the tongue, and then cut the ligament with a sharp scalpel according to the thickness so that the tongue does not feel its edge.
Mays si en aquela es alcuna duricia o denodacio, e aquo es stat per consolidacio de plagua, lahoras tu gieta unci e scindeys aquel per la latitut entro que aias inscindit le liament e sia dissolvuda la nodacio.	If in that is some hardness or pain, and it has been standing for consolidation of disease, then you cut it once and cut it according to the thickness so that you do not break the ligament and dissolve the nodule.
E guarda te que no sia fayta fissura en le preon de la carn e que scindas aqui arceria e vengua flux de sanc.	And guard that there is not made a crack in the bone of the meat, and you cut here flesh with a sharp knife and avoid flowing blood.
E aprop sia lavat le vestigi de la inscisio am ayguaros o am vi agre o am aygua frega; e aprop pausa dejos la lengua licini; so es meca la qual tengua le malaute dejos la lengua en quascuna nuoyt per so que no sia consolidat autra veguada.	And then wash the trace of the incision with clear water or with salt water or with clean water; and then let it rest away from the tongue; so is made the which leaves the tongue in any new way that it does not become consolidated again.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc, pausa sobre le loc vetriol trissat; mays si le sanc ventz, lahoras cauteriza le loc am cauteri lantiginos le qual conveneys ad aquo.	If an accident of blood happens, place over the place a tri-edged knife; if the blood runs, then sterilize the place with a sterilizing liquid which is suitable for this work and pour it.
E aprop aquel cura am las autras causas entro que sia sanat.	And that tooth is cured with other causes so that it is healed.
Capitol .xxxv.	Chapter.xxxv.
De extraccio de ranula dejos la lengua.	Of the extraction of a tongue.
Alcunas veguadas accideys dejos la lengua apostema asemblant a nomla petita prohibent la lengua de la sua operacio natural; e fort leu es magnificada entro que huempla la boca.	Some times happens by accident leaving the tongue swollen, resembling a small one, preventing the tongue from its natural operation; and it is strong that is made to fit into the mouth.
E la operacio en lu es que huebras la boca del malaute sesent devant le solel e considera le apostema.	And the operation on him is that you make an incision in the patient’s groin 60 degrees from the sun, and examine the abscess.
E si tu le vezes de fusca color o de negra, dur, al qual le malaute no atroba sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel quar es cranc.	And if you see that it is black or brown in color, which the patient does not feel, do not touch it because it is hard.
E si es declinat a blancor, en le qual es humiditat, lahoras tu met le onci en lu, e inscideys aquel am spatum subtil, e inscindeys le de tota partida; e si sanc te ventz en la hora de la tua operacio, lahoras tu pausa desus zegi trissat, so es vetriol, entro que sia restreyt le sanc.	And if it is white in color, which means moisture, then you put tar on it and cut it with a fine knife, cutting through all of it; and if blood comes out during the operation, stop for three days, unless it is infectious, until the wound heals over.
E aprop retorna a la obra tua entro que lo haias trayt am compliment de lu, entro que sia lavat am vi agre e sal; e cura aquel am l’autra curacio ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	Then continue with your work until you have removed all of it, cleaning it with vinegar and salt; and cure that with the other treatment using water until it is healed over.
Capitol .xxxvi.	Chapter .xxvi.
De extraccio de apostema de doas aurelhas e de aquel que es nada en le golayro e de las autras apostemas.	On the extraction of abscesses from both ears and on those that are nothing but pus and on other abscesses.
Quan endeveno en le golayro godat, so son glandulas las quals son asembladas algodat, las quals accideysso deforas e son nompnadas doas aurelhas, las quals quan tu las curas am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no es sanat, lahoras tu considera si le apostema es dur, de fusca color, de pauc sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel am ferr.	When an abscess occurs in the groin, there are three types of glandular structures that can develop: one at the base of the testicle (called a "spermatic cord"), one at the inguinal region (called an "inguinal lymph node"), and one at the surface of the skin (called a "lymphatic duct"). If these do not respond to treatment with tar and water, they are called "two ears" because they resemble ears; if they are nothing but pus, they are called "nothing but water"; and if there are other abscesses, describe them.
E si es de roga color e la razic es grossa, lahoras no toques aquela am ferr per le flux del sanc; abantz layssa aquel entro sia madurat, e lahoras o tu trauqueras aquel, o sira romput per si.	And if it is of a red color and the swelling is large, do not touch that part with tar in order to avoid spreading the infection; let it mature, and then either you will remove it or someone else will cut it off.
E si es de blanqua color, radon, e la razit de lu es subtil, lahoras aquel es que cove esser inscidit.	And if it is of a white color, which means it is moist, that one is to be cut and examined.
E la operacio en lu es que consideras, denant la tua operacio, si ja ha repausat le apostema de lu caut am repaus complit o si es deminuit am alcuna deminucio; e lahoras fay sezer le malaute denant le soleyl, e·l cap de lu sia en le tieu se, e huebre la boca de lu, e le servidor prenent entre las suas mas prema la lengua de lu dejos am instrument mot noble del qual aquesta es la forma:	And the operation on him is that you consider, before your operation, whether he has already recovered from his abscess completely or whether it has diminished in any way; and then place the patient's groin 60 degrees from the sun, with his head between his knees, and make an incision in the mouth of the groin, and the servants take hold of his hands on either side of the head, holding a noble instrument by which this is the form:
E sia fayt de argent o de aram, e sia subtil cum cotel.	It should be made of silver or iron, and it should be sharp with an edge.
Donc cum tu premes am aquel la lengua e es mostrat a tu la apostema, e catz sobre aquel le tieu vezement, lahoras pren onci e fica aquel en l’amenla, e tira aquel a las partidas defora tant quant podes.	Then when you press on the patient' and the abscess is shown to you, place your finger on it, hold tar on it, and cut it in all directions as much as you can.
Otra aquo que tiras alcuna causa de las tunicas, e aprop incideys aquela am instrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	Or if any water comes out when you press, and then cut that with the instrument whose form is this:
e es asemblat a forceps, empero las extramitatz de lu son corvadas, ayssi que l’orrifici de quascuna de aquelas es en le endreyt del autra, mot agudas, le qual sia de ferr indi enbegut.	it is assembled with forceps, however, the extremities of it are curly, so that the orifice of each one is in the end of the other, very sharp, which should be made of iron inlaid with gold.
Mays si aquest instrument no es a tu present, lahoras inscideys aquel am spatum del qual aquesta es la forma de lu: E sia agut de la una part, no agut del autra part.	If this instrument is not at your disposal, then cut it with a scalpel, whose form is this: It should be sharp on one side but not sharp on the other.
E pus que has inscidit una mella, inscideys l’autra segon aquesta meteyssa manieyra de inscizio, e aprop la inscizio le malaute guarguarise de aygua frega	And after you have made one incision, make the other according to this method of cutting, and then wash the groin with water.
Mays si endeve flux de sanc, guarguarise aygua de decoccio de scorsa de milgrana o de fuelha de mirtra e semblantz ad aquel de las causas stiptiquas entro que·l flux del sanc sia restreyt, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	If there is a flow of blood, wash the water with an infusion of sorrel or apple leaves or something similar to stop the flow of blood, and then cure that until it is healed over.
E alcunas veguadas naysso en le guolayro autras apostemas otra aquelas doas aurelhas, e inscideys aquelas segon que yeu e dit en la inscizio de doas mellas engualment.	Some people also have abscesses in the groin that are not these two ears, and cut those according to what I said above in the description of the cutting of two incisions.
E yeu ja fu medicat una femna de apostema le qual era nat en le golayro de lu, le qual apostema tendia a color fusca, de pauc sentiment, le qual ja havia claus le golayro de lu, e la femna respirava am meat streyt, e ja havia prohibit a lu comestio e beure de aygua, e ja era pervenguda a la mort si mays agues stat per un dia o per dos.	This is also a case of an abscess in the groin that has been described above as being of a reddish color and with little sensation; the patient had already stopped eating and drinking, and she was close to death if this continued for another day or two.
E l’apostema ja tant havia pugat que havia mezes dos ramps entro que eyssiro per dos traucs.	The abscess had become so large that it had broken out in two places.
Donc yeu me cuytegui fisturalment e fiquegui en un de lor onci, e tiregui aquel, e atirada es de lu gran porcio, e aprop yeu incidigui aquela de on comprendegui del autre trau, e aprop yeu obrigui la boca de lu, e compremegui la sua lengua, e aprop yeu fiquegui le onci en aquela apostema.	Then I hid myself in a bush, and I took one of the tar-balls, and threw it at him; a great quantity fell out, and then I cut that one which was on the other side, and then I hid the tongue of the patient, and then I held the tar-ball against the mouth of the patient.
E aprop yeu abscizi gran partida de lu, e no corria de lu sino un pauc de sanc.	Then I cut away a great part of it, and there was little blood.
Donc absolut es le guolayro de aquela femna, e comensec tantost beure aygua, e aprop presec vianda, donc yeu no cessegui inscidir de aquela apostema motas vetz per lonc temps, e succesia apostema en loc de aquel, le qual inscizia entro que es prolonguat aquel.	Then I took off all of the groin area from that woman, and then she began to drink water, and then I gave her food, so I did not stop cutting those abscesses for a long time, and another abscess developed in place of it, which I cut until it was healed over.
Donc yeu engen agui e cauterizegui le guolayro de lu, donc astec de addicio; e aprop yeu perambulegui e no saubi que fec Dieus de aquela aprop mi.	Then I took off his groin and cauterized it, then walked around, and I did not know what to do about him because God was with me.
Capitol .xxxvii.	Chapter .xxvii.
De inscizio de huvela quan es apostemada.	On the treatment of hives when they are pustular.
Quan catarr deysen a la huvula, e es apostemada e es longa, lahoras ela es nompnada perpendicular; e si es en la partida dejos grossa e redonda, e lahoras ela es apelada buba.	When there is catarrh on the hives and it is long, then it is called perpendicular; and if it is thick and round, then it is called a  "bub".
Mays quan es curada am aquo que havem dit en la divisio, e no comfereys la tua curacio, e eyssament ja vezes que apostema caut ja es ostat de lu e es subtil, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquela que es agreguadas redonda; e si es ad aquela longitut, e es sanguina, de fusca color o de negre, e no es a lu centiment, lahoras cove que tu temtes la inscizio de lu, quar en aquela es temor sobre le malaute.	If it is cured with the water that we have described in the division, and if your treatment does not help, and if the abscess has become hard and is small, then you should cut that one which is round; and if it is long, and if there is blood, which is reddish or black in color, and if it does not cause him great pain, then you should take care when cutting it because it may be dangerous.
E quan tu vezes aquela segon la manieyra que yeu he dita de la sua blancor e longuesa, que tu fassas sezer le malaute e premas la lengua de lu am instrument del qual procesic la sua forma e aprop fica le onci en la nuva, e tira aquela en jos e inscideys aquela am un de dos instrumentz les quals e ditz en la inscizio de dos mellas.	And when you see that second part of his whiteness and length, that you cut the tongue of the patient with an instrument whose form is this: and then hold tar on it, and cut it with one of two instruments which I have described in the cutting of two incisions.
E cove que no inscidas aquela sino aquo que es ajustat sobre le terme natural ses addicio, quar si tu inscides de lu mays, lediyras le sieu parlar.	If you do not cut that one but rather leave it on the natural term of its growth, then it will cause him much pain because it will grow too large.
E aprop la inscizio, usa de aquo le qual havem recomtat en la inscizio de dos mellas, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	Then continue with the cutting, using the water that we have described in the cutting of two incisions, and cure that until it is healed over.
Mays si era le malaute espaventat per la inscizio de lu, cove que use de engen en la cauterizacio de lu ses temor, e la manieyra del cauteri en lu no es sino am aygua aguda, e es que tu pauses le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop prem la lengua de lu am le instrument le qual havem dit, e aprop pren de l’aygua la qual havem dita en le capitol de cauterizacio, e comfeys am aquela caus viva, e pausa aquela no spessa ni subtil, e de aquela omple la concavitat de l’estrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	If the patient was afraid of being cut, be careful when performing the cauterization because it should only be done with sharp water; and this is how you perform the cauterization: fill an instrument whose form is this: with sharp water.
Sia la extramitat de lu conquavitat en la qual sia pausada la medicina ayssi cum la conquavitat de culher de ray, e pausa le strument am la medicina sobre la vula, e·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu latz per so que corro saliva o musellage de la boca de aquel per la intrinscequa medicina, per so que no deyssenda de aquela deguna causa sobre le golayro de lu e que ledesca aquel.	Keep the end of the instrument in the medicine and pause it on the uvula, and the patient will move his tongue so that the saliva or mucus from the mouth is drawn into the instrument's cavity, so that there is no chance of a cause developing in the groin area because of any medicine escaping through the opening.
E aprop te la tua ma am la medicina, e exprem aquela sobre la uvula per l’espazi de miega hora entro que vegas aquela esser denegrada e sedada per la mordicacio de la medicina.	Then hold your hand over the medicine, and squeeze that onto the uvula for a half-hour before swallowing it, so that it does not become dark and bitter because of the taste of the medicine.
E si vols, prengues coto e envolopes aquel sobre la extremitat del ray, e submergeys le coto en la medicina, e entrometas le ray am le coto en una canula de sobre entro que·l coto adheresca en aquela canula, e fay aquo tantas vetz entro que consiegues aquo que vols de la cauterizacio de la uva, e aprop leyssa aquela quar ela se seccara e cayra aprop tres dias o quatre.	And if you wish, you may wrap that end of the ray around the instrument's edge and submerge it in the medicine, and push the ray into a tube; so that the ray stays on the tube, and then let it dry for three or four days.
E si indigeysses que iteras la medicina, itera aquela, e aprop la cauterizacio abstergeys en le circuit de la uva am coto enbegut en boder, e mondifica am aquel aquo que es en le circuit de lu de la medicina, e sia lavat am aygua frega, e sia curat deforo am embrocacio, e dedintz am guarguarismes entro que sia sanat.	And if you are afraid that the medicine may need to be repeated, repeat that, and the cauterization is washed in the circuit of the grape with the hidden border, and it is boiled with the water of the rinse, and is cured outside the embrocation, and is used within the gums that are healed.
E aquesta especia de curacio es pus salva que inscizio e pus long de temor.	This kind of cure is put on more safely than cutting and less out of fear.
Alcunas veguadas es curada la uvuola am aquo que es pus subtil que cauteri e inscizio, quar es curat am subfumigacio en aquesta manieyra: recipe calament, ysop, origua, ruda, scicados arabic, camamilla, broyda e semblant ad aquels de las erbas, e ajusta totas aquelas causas, o alcunas de lor, en una ola, e sian submergidas am vi agre, e bulhan; e la ola sia be lutada am lut decentment, e sia en le mieg loc de la ola un trauc, sobre le qual sia pausat un instrument conquau de aram segon aquesta manieyra; sia fayt de argent o de aram.	Some are treated with water which is gentler than cauterization and incision, because it is cured with sub-smoking in this way: take chamomile, hyssop, oregano, rudbeckia, Arabic sycamus, mint, and similar herbs to those, and put them all together into a pot, and let them soak in vinegar; and the pot be nicely boiled, and placed at the patient's side with a hole on top of it, through which is placed an iron tool according to this method; let it be made of silver or iron.
E sia entromesa la extremitat en la boca del malaute entro que la vapor poge a la uvula sobre la quanula, entro que la uvula sia mot ofuscada.	And the end is inserted into the patient's mouth in such a way that the steam reaches the uvula over the margin, so that the uvula is very dim.
E aprop itera sobre aquela motas veguadas entro qu’es secca, e guarda te que no fassas aquesta curacio al comesament de l’aveniment de apostemas, quar trop ajustaria en le apostema, e no cove que tu fassas aquo, sino deves la declaracio de apostema de lu caut.	And repeat on those spots again until they are dry, and be sure not to carry out this cure at the arrival of aphthae, because it would fit too much in the apthma, and do not let water come out, but rather the declaration of the apthma from the caut.
Mays si no es a tu present aquest instrument, lahoras pren una cana e compon en la extramitat de lu un clos de huou, per so que la boca del malaute sia comborida, quar le closc del huou prohibeys la vapor comburir la boca.	Maybe if you don't have this tool with you, then take a cane and cut off the end of it, so that the patient' mouth is closed, because the hole in the cane will prevent the steam from burning the mouth.
E aquesta curacio es bona am salut.	This cure is good for healing.
Capitol .xxxviii.	Chapter .xxxviii.
De extraccio d’espinas e de aquo que adhereys en le golayro e de las autras causas.	Of extraction of thorns and of the water that adheres to the foot and of other causes.
Motas veguadas adhereys en le guolayro o spina de peys o alcuna autra causa.	Spots on the foot or thorns or any other cause.
Adonc cove que tu extraguas aquo que de aquels es apparent, sobre le qual catz la vista, pus que tu premes la lengua am instrument denant solelh, per so que a tu sia declarat aquo que es en la guola.	And then extract the water that is evident from it, above which the sight falls, because you press your tongue on the tool in front of the sun, so that the water declared from it is put on your tongue.
E aquo que no apar e es a tu occultat en le guolayro, cove que tu fassas vomir le malaute denant que la vianda sia degerida en l’estomac, quar fort leu la causa annexsa le golayro sira foro-getada per vomit; o que deglusia le malaute una pessa de nap o de razit de laytuga o un boci de pa sec; o prengua una pessa de sponga marina sequa leon, e lia aquela fortment am fiel, e aprop le malaute transglussia aquela, quar cum perve al loc en le qual so spinas e es extrahuda, lahoras so foro-getatz.	And the water that does not appear in your sight on the foot, it is necessary that you make the patient vomit before food is digested in the stomach, because it brings about a loose motion that causes the foot to be removed by vomiting; or if he drinks a fish bone or a radish leaf or a piece of dry bread; or take a dry sponge of sea-leek, and wet it well with wine, and put it on the patient' mouth, and make him swallow it, because when it reaches the place where thorns are attached and are to be extracted, then it is loose.
E mays pren una anguila e be am fiel liada, e sia dedintz mesa e soptament sia extrayta; o pren un porr e soptament le metas e soptament l’en tratz.	And if you want to take a snake and wet it well with wine, and put it on the patient' mouth, and make him swallow it, because when it reaches the place where thorns are attached and are to be extracted, then it is swallowed; or if you want to take a pig and give him a drink of wine, and let him pass water, and collect what comes out from his arse;
Mays si no so foro-getatz am aquelas causas las quals havem ditas, lahoras husa de un instrument de plom segon aquesta forma:	Maybe if you don' do the above things that I have said, then use an iron tool according to this form:
E sia pus gros que ray un petit, e en la extramitat de lu sia conquavitat la qual tu entrometas en la sua guola am facilitat.	And it is made a little thicker than a small one, and in the end of it there is a cavity that you put into the patient' mouth with ease.
E el aga le sieu cap elevat en sus, e guarda te que·l tocament del sieu os de la gola, per so que endevengua a lu cos e am aquela que enpellesca le os o la spina, o que aquel le metge am la sua ma.	And let him raise his head high, and be careful not to touch his jaw with his teeth, so that the water falls on him or catches his teeth or makes him cough, or makes him spit it out.
Mays empero que·l malaute aquel entrometa es miels, per la sua sciencia del loc de la causa annexa e enpellisca en jos, e tira la sua ma am le instrument en sus, tot aquo segon la quantitat la qual es a lu preparada entro que sia foro-getada.	Maybe if the patient takes it, he will be better, because of his knowledge of where the cause is attached and catches in the hole, and pull his hand on the tool with him, all according to the quantity that is prepared for him so that he does not cough up.
Capitol .xxxix.	Chapter .xxix.
De extraccio de sancguisugua annexsa al golayro.	Of extraction of blood thorns attached to the foot.
Quan es medicada sanguisugua am aquo que havem dit en la divisio de la curacio am medicinas e no comfereys, considera lahoras en le guolayro del malaute al solelh, pus que tu aias compremuda la lengua de lu am instrument le qual a tu havem recomtat.	When the blood is treated with water that we have said in the division of the cure with medicines and does not confer with you, consider in the foot of the patient at the sun, because you have moved your tongue on the tool which I have told you to take.
Donc si tu vezes la sancguisugua, extratz aquela am onci petit o am gesti subtils decentment.	Then if you want to extract the blood, do it with a small knife or with gentle movements smoothly.
E si no es a tu possible estrayre am aquel, lahoras pren una canula concava e entromet aquela en lo guolayro del malaute, e aprop pausa en la concavitat de la canula un ferr ignit, e fay aquo tantas vetz (entro que la sancguisugua sia morta e se osta del guolayro) e abstengua se le malaute tot lo jorn de aygua.	And if you don' want to extract it with that, then take a concave tube and insert it into the foot of the patient, and put a hot iron in the concave part of the tube, and let water out as many times as the blood is dead and stops flowing from the foot) all day long.
E aprop prengua una veyria plena de aygua frega, e obra la boca de lu en aquela, e lava la boca am aquela; e no trasglucia de aquela alcuna causa e maugua l’aygua una hora aprop autra am la sua ma, quar la sancguisugua tantost cum sent l’aygua catz.	And then take a bucket full of lukewarm water, and wash the mouth with it, and not swallow any food or drink water for an hour after that because the blood will taste water soon.
Mays si no es foro-getada am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras subfumigua le malaute am cimetz o am assafetida per le instrument le qual havem recomtat en la sufumiguacio de uvula.	Maybe if it is not cough up with water that I have told you, then sub-fumigate the patient with cumin or assafetida using the tool which I have told you in the sub-fumigating of the uvula.
Fay aquo, so en quar cayra.	Make water, so in both cases.
E es un’autra manieyra de operacio en sufumiguacio de aquela, es que tu prenguas una ola en la qual sian carbos ignitz e la ola sia cuberta am una cobertora en le mieg de la qual sia un trauc, e sia compausat en aquel trauc la extremitat del instrument; e aprop dega desus la subfumigacio; e pause le malaute la sua boca en la extremitat de la canula, e claugua la sua boca per que la subfumiguacio no sia foro-getada entro que sapias que la subfumigacio es pervenguda a la sancguisugua, quar la sancguisugua tantost cayra.	And this is another way of operating in sub-fumigating water, it is that you take a bucket with which the carbon is lit and the bucket is covered with a blanket on whose side there is a hole, through which the tool's end is placed; then make the sub-fumigation burn; and place the patient' mouth on the tool's end, and close his mouth so that the sub-fumigation does not cough up until you know that the sub-fumigation is reaching the blood, because the blood will cough up soon.
E si no catz, lahoras tu itera la subfumiguacio motas vetz, e abstengua le malaute de beure, e mange causas saladas e alhs, e no begua aygua, e ayssi necessari es que am aquest regiment sia fora-getada.	And if you don' hear it, then repeat the sub-fumigating several times, and prevent the patient from drinking water, and eat salty foods and fruits, and do not drink water again, and as necessary that in this regime it is cough up.
E aquesta es la forma del instrument am le qual es trayta sancguisugua del guolayro quan es vista; e es semblant a forceps ayssi cum vezes, sino quar es en lu alcuna curvitat:	And this is the shape of the tool which I have told you to extract blood from the foot when it is seen; and it is similar to tweezers sometimes, but because it is in its curve:
le qual sia mesa al guolayro, e la extremitat de lu es semblant a bec de ciconia, que es guanta, en la qual es aspretat de lima, per so quar, quan comprem alcuna causa, aquela no leyssa.	which is put on the foot, and its end is similar to a stork's beak, which is sharp, because when it grasps any cause, that does not let go.
Capitol .xl.	Chapter.X.
En le qual es la suma del sermo en apercio de apostemas e en seccio de lor.	In the sum of the speech in the appearance of apthae and in dissection of them.
Les apostemas so motas specias, de motas manieyras, segon que ve rememoracio de lor, de quascuna en aquest libre.	Apthae are special spots, in different ways, according to their appearance, from each one of these books.
E so diversas en perforacio e seccio de lor per doas manieyras, de las quals la una es per la specia de apostemas en si meteys; e per aquo que comprem de las humiditatz.	And they are diverse in perforation and dissection of them in two ways, the first one is for the kind of apthae themselves; and the second is because of their moisture.
E la segonda manieyra es prop les locs en les quals accideys del cos, quar le apostema accident en le cap es autra de la apostema accident en le cul; e le apostema en le loc carnos accident es autra del apostema accident en junctura; e a quascun de lor es son juguament per operacio.	And the second way is because of the places where they happen to the body, because the apthae in the head is different from the one in the back; and the apthae in the flesh are different from the ones in the joints; and each one has its treatment.
E mays de apostemas so alcunas las quals cove que no sian perforadas sino aprop maturacio de la sania en aquels o compliment de lor.	And some apthae are those which are not pierced, but rather their maturation in those or completion of them.
So autras apostemas les quals cove que sian traucatz quan son cruzes, e no son maturatz segon lor compliment, ayssi cum apostemas que son propdas a las juncturas, quar apostema quan ve prop junctura, lo esser de lu es prolonguat entro que·s poyreys aquo que es en le circuit de lu, e fort leu son corromputz les liamentz o les nervis de aquela junctura, per que es fayta causa de contraccio de aquel membre; o es apostema prop de membre principal, e si tu tardas la perforacio de lu entro sia madurat nosira al membre principal; o es prop le cul, donc perfora aque no-madurat; e no cove que·l perforas cru, de no-complida degestio, sino aquel que es prop del cul, per so que no poyresca le preon de lu e sia elonguat a las partidas dedintz del cul, e sia fayta fistula, o que sia fayt en le terme de lu que no sia sanat.	And some apthae are those which are crossed when they are in the joints, and they are not matured according to their completion, then such apthae as are near the joints because the appearance of an apthae when it is near a joint, the person's being prolonged in that is prolonged within its circuit, and the strong corruption of the ligaments or nerves of that joint, so that it causes pain in that member; or if the apthae is near a main member, and if you delay perforating it, then it will not be cured; or if you pierce it when it is behind, therefore it cannot reach its target and be elongated to the parts at the back of the hip, and it becomes a fistula, or if it is made in the term of that joint and does not heal.
Mays cove que tu sapias la hora de la perforacio de la apostema, e aysso es quan es maturat.	May's cover that you know the time of the perforation of the abscess, and so it is when it is mature.
E sapias que es madurat quan es la cedacio de la dolor e la cessacio de la febre, e aprop la diminucio de la rogor e de la pulsacio, e la acuitat del cap del apostema, e les autres senhals.	And you know that it is mature when there is a cessation of the pain and fever, and a decrease in the rash and pulse, and the尖头 of the abscess, and other signs.
E quar cove que sapias la perforacio cazer en le loc pus dejos del apostema e de pus venient de curacio de la eminencia.	And when you know that the perforation should take place in the place pus of the abscess and pus coming from the cure of the eminence.
E perforacio tostemps sia per le lonc de la carn o del cors, si las apostemas son en las partidas de las mas o dels pes, e en loc dels lacertz, de las cordas dels nervis, de las arcerias; e, al derier, en totz locs enguals en les quals no es reflecio; quar en aquels que so reflectitz, usa de perforacio segon aquel membre.	And the perforation should be done at any time during the life of the body or the course, if the abscesses are in the joints of the limbs or in the feet, and in places where there are ligaments, nerves and arteries; and finally, everywhere that is not reflected; for in those that are reflected, use the perforation according to the member.
Mays quan le apostema es en loc carnos, lahoras miels es que leysses la perforacio de lu entro que sia confermada la digestio de lu segon compliment, ayssi quo havem dit; quar si tu perforas aquel denant aquo, es prolonguat le cors del poyre de lu e de mota sordicia, e fort leu las labias de lu so enduradas e la profunditat de lu.	May's when the abscess is in a carnose place, let it be better that you leave the perforation of it until such time as it is certain that its digestion has been completed, for what I have said; indeed, if you should open this from before, it prolongs the course of the poison and the stench, and hardens the lips and depth of it.
Mays alcus apostemas so perforatz segon la latitut de la carn o del cos deves la necessitat, o segon aquo del qual lo membre indigeys.	May's also abscesses should be perforated according to the thickness of the flesh or the course of the body that is necessary, or according to which part of it digests.
E cove que administres petita perforacio , e·n les apostemas grans gran perforacio e ampla o motas seccios segon la diversitat de la grandesa dels apostemas.	And when you administer a small perforation, and in the large abscesses make a wide or several cuts according to the variation of their size.
E autras so dels apostemas en les quals cove que la codena sia conquavada e sia encidida, quan es fayta ayssi quo pan e fayta es en terme que ja stigua, ayssi cum aquel que accideys en trops de dubelec e de bubos.	And of the abscesses in which you know that it is necessary to cut and cut them out completely, then do so when they have already stopped and are cold; indeed, what happens in wounds of different kinds and in boils.
E de aquels so que so insciditz am seccio havent tres angles; e de aquels es en le qual es inscidit ayssi cum figura de fuelha de mirtra, ayssi cum las apostemas dels angonars.	And of those that are not cut into sections of three angles; and of those in which it is cut with a figure of an oak leaf, and of the abscesses of the angles.
E de lor so en les quals es administrada seccio redonda e seccio lunar, e semblantz ad aquels.	And of them are administered round sections and lunar sections, and similar ones to these.
Mays aquel al qual no es cap ayssi cum son apostemas leons superficials, cove que tu perforas aquel am perforacio superficial, o plana tant solament.	May' 's when you have the lions that are superficial, let it be that you should pierce it with a superficial piercing, or flat only.
E cove quant le apostema es gros e ya ha colligit mota sania, que perfores aquel e no te coytes que extraguas tot le poyre en aquela hora; habantz extratz de aquel una partida, e aprop opila le apostema entro al autre dia, e aprop extratz una partida major, e aprop fa aquo motas veguadas segon graduacio entro que sia foro-getat.	And when the abscess is thick and has already collected some pus, then pierce it and do not cauterize that you remove all the poison at that time; taking out a little at a time, and on another day take out a bigger one, and on another day make small cuts in it until it is cured.
E majorment si·l malaute es de freol vertut, o femna prens, o enfant petit, o viel en decrepitut, quar l’esperit animal motas vetz es resolvut am la egressio de la sania, e fort leu mor le malaute, e tu operte les.	And if the patient is of a virile nature or a female, or a small child, or an old person in decline, for the animal spirit that moves the veins is resolved to leave the exit of the pus, and hardens the patient, then close it up.
Don guarda aquest capitol am gran cautela, e aprop la tua perforacio en la qual perforas aquestz apostemas, cove que abstergescas las plagues e consideras donc si la plagua del apostema es pauca, o es una seccio plana, lahoras tu aministra las qualguas de li o de coto antic; e si le apostema es gran, e las fissuras de la perforacio son motas, lahoras cove que tu pauses meca en quascun trauc entro que pervenguan ensemps.	Take great care with this chapter, and when you administer the poultices to these abscesses, consider that if the plague of the abscess is small, or a flat section, then you administer them with a liquid poultice; but if the abscess is large, and the cuts in the piercing are narrow, let it be that you pause a moment so that they mix together.
E si en le apostema es abscindit una partida de la codena o has concavada aquela en le circuit, lahoras cove que tu la complescas de coto viel o de fil fayt de drap de li, ayssi cum quan has traytz pans o razizos, ses humiditat; e strenh aquel entro al tertz dia; e aprop proceseys aquel e cura le am aquo que cove dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And if in the abscess is cut a part of the cord or has concave that which is in the circuit, then let it be that you compress them with an old cloth or a thin piece of cloth, so when you have cleaned it, wet it; and strengthen that inside on the third day; and continue to do so until it is cured and all the poison is removed.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc en la hora de la operacio tua, lahoras tu aministra aygua frega e vi agre en les quals mules un drap de li, e pausa aquel sobre le loc del fluxs del sanc motas veguadas.	May'  's if you see a flow of blood in the hour that your operation is taking place, then you administer warm water and vinegar to which you add a piece of cloth, and pause it over the spot where the flux of blood is flowing.
Mays si persevera le fluxs del sanc, lahoras cove que tu aministres regiment e curacio e polveras las quals he recomtadas en motz locs de aquest nostre libre e de divisio.	May'  's if the flow of blood persists, then let it be that you administer medicine and cure, and make the powders mentioned in these places of our book and division.
Mays si es en temps de hivern, e·l loc de la apostema es loc de motz nervis, lahoras cove que tu enfundas pulvils en vi e oli caut, e pauses aquels sobre les locs.	May'   's if it is in winter time, and the place of the abscess is a place of cold nerves, then let it be that you put powder of wine or oil of vitriol, and pause those on the places.
E si es en estiu, e les locs son carnoses, lahoras cove que tu pauses pulvils enbeguts am aygua e oli o am vi e oli, e tot aquo sia freg entro que sia le ters dia, ayssi cum havem dit, e lahoras cove que tu deslies le apostema e abstergescas aquel e aministres en la curacio de lu aquo que a lu conveneys entro que sia sanat.	And if it is in summer, and the places are carnose, then let it be that you pause powder of wine or oil mixed with water or wine and oil, and all this should be done on the third day, as I have said; and when you have removed the abscess, let it be that you compress it with a cloth soaked in cold water, so that it heals quickly.
E aysso es aquo que es necessari de la cognicio de la curacio de apostemas universalment, mays segon la via de distinccio ja he dit de tot apostema en qual manieyra es via de la cura de lu per capitols singularment.	And thus is what is necessary from the knowledge of the cure of abscesses universally, but according to the way of distinction that I have already said, every abscess has a way of being cured by itself.
Capitol .xli.	Chapter xli.
De seccio de apostemas les quals veno en la codena del cap.	Of the Section of Abscesses that Come in the Head of the Arm.
En la codena del cap petitz apostemas, e so de specias de nodes les quals conteno tunicas que so a lor factz ; e las specias de lor so motas.	In the head of the arm are small abscesses, and of various kinds; some contain fat that is solid, and others contain pus.
E de lor son pingas, e de aquelas so que conteno humiditat semblant a lima.	And of them are blisters, and of those are filled with liquid similar to lemon juice.
E de aquelas so las quals conteno humiditat semblant a pols, et asemblantz a lor; e de aquelas so que son lapideas, durs.	And of those that contain liquid similar to blood, and similar to them; and of those that are cloudy, dry.
E en la seccio de totz, e en la extraccio de aquels no es temor, cum deves la exteccio de aquels no fa contrariat arceria.	And in the section of all of them, and in the extraction of those that are not painful, do not cause any pain to the body.
E la operacio en seccio de aquels es que tu esproes aquels am instrument la forma del qual ve aprop aysso, le qual es apelat entromes, entro que sapias que contengua.	And the operation in sections of them is that you apply them to an instrument the shape of which you will find below, which is called a tweezers, so that you know that it contains.
Quar si aquo que conte es humiditat, lahoras scindeys aquel am seccio segon la longitut per seccio superficial segon aquesta forma:	For if the liquid that they contain is water, then cut them with a section according to its length by a superficial section according to this shape:
E comensa en la seccio de la linha de .B. entro a la linha de .G. Donc cum la humiditat es evacuada, lahoras tu excoria aquela pel que conte aquela humiditat, e no leysses de aquela alcuna causa de tot, quar tropas veguadas retorna, si roman de aquela alcuna causa.	And start in the section of line B inside the line G. Since the moisture has been removed, then scrub that liquid off with a cloth, and do not leave any cause for concern; for three clear signs return, if it remains from that cause.
E aprop submergeys coto en enguent egipciach, si es present, e sino, en aygua e sal; e umpleys am aquel la plagua e layssa aquel entro ad autra dia, quar am aquo corrodeys tot so que es romas de aquela pellicula.	And dip it in Egyptian ointment if there is any, or salt water; and fill it with liquid to the bottom, and leave it inside for another day, for with water it wears away all that is under that film.
E aprop itera sobre aquel coto am enguent egipciach segondament e tersament si indigeyses de lu, entro que·t comfides que no y haia romas alcuna causa de aquela pellicula; lahoras cura la plagua am enguent entro que sia sanada.	And repeat that dip to the ointment second and third time if it needs it, leaving it for a while, so that you are sure that there is no cause for that film; then heal the plague with ointment inside until it is cured.
E si apostema conte nodi gras, lahoras tu inscideys aquel segon aquesta forma:	And if the abscess contains fat, then cut it according to this shape:
am seccio havent forma de crotz, e geta oncis entre doas labias de la seccio e scorsa aquel de tota partida, e esforsa la tua vertut en extraccio de la tunica la qual conte aquel.	I cut it into a form of a crotch, and insert my fingers between the two lips of the incision, then I pull it all the way out from the beginning, and strain my strength to remove the tunic which is wrapped around it.
Mays si a tu arceria fa contrarieta, lahoras fay aquo que yeu t’e recontat primieyrament.	If your bowels are causing difficulty, then do what I have told you first.
E semblantment fay en le apostema lapificat de seccio e de curacio segon que a tu havem dit; e seccio sobre apostema lapificat es pus leugiera, quar es de pauc sanc e de pauca humiditat.	And apparently you have told me first that if your bowels are causing difficulty, then make the incision and cure as I said to you; and an incision over a lap of incision is lighter, because it is little blood and little moisture.
E alcunas vetz so alcus de aquestz apostemas les quals so en le cap en alcus homes am los quals de tot no es humiditat; la qual causa es quar yeu inscindigui sobre un apostema en le cap de una femna vielha e atrobegui le apostema ayssi cum peyra sorda, aspra, blanqua, la qual no podia esser trinquada, e si a alcu fos am aquela percussit, plaguera aquel.	And some times there are those of these laps which are in the head and from those there are men who have not moisture at all; that is the cause because I have cut on one of these laps in the head of an old woman, and I have hit it so hard that it has become black, and if to anyone it had struck, it would have infected him.
Mays en les autres apostemas accidentz en le cap otra aquest no es aquest capitol, ayssi cum les apostemas que veno als caps dels enfantz e deves las razitz de las aurelhas, mays la seccio de aquestz totz sia seccio superficial.	But in other laps which are in the head this chapter is not about it, so if these laps that come to the heads of children and their roots of the ears, but the section of all of them should be a superficial section.
E pausa la perforacio de aquels de la partida pus bassa de lor per so que sia alleujat le cos de la sania a las partidas pus bassas.	And pause the piercing of those from the beginning which are lower down for it to be relieved the body of the patient in the lower parts.
E aprop cura aquelas am aquo que conveneys ad aquel de curacio.	Then approach cure with water that is suitable for healing.
Capitol .xlii.	Chapter.
De seccio de scrophulas las quals accideyso en le col.	Of the section of scrofulas which happen in the neck.
Motas veguadas endeveno aquestas apostemas en le colh e en las aysselhas e en les angonars; e alcunas veguadas accideyso en las autras partidas del cos.	There are visible laps which come in the neck and in the shoulders and some occur in other parts of the body.
E so aquelas que accideysso en le colh, e so motas que so engendradas entre lor, e tota scrofula de aquelas es dintz la sua tunica propria, e ayssi cum en les nodis e apostema del cap, ayssi cum havem recomtat.	And those which happen in the neck, and so those which are created between them, and all of the scrofulas of these are wrapped in their own tunic, and then as I have told you first.
E las specias de aquestas scrophulas son motas, quar de aquelas so alcunas lapideas, e de aquelas so que conteno humiditatz, e de aquelas so malignas las quals no obeseysso a curacio.	The spices of these scrofulas are visible, because some are filled with moisture, and some are evil which do not respond to cure.
Donc en aquela la qual tu vezes de bona disposicio en le Tocament, de la qual la color de aquo que es manifest es propda a la color de la codena, e es mauguda a tota partida, e no es annexsa am le nervi del colh, ni am las venas, ni am la arceria, e no es preonda, cove que tu inscidiscas aquela am siccio superficial de la partida desus a la partida dejos del cos de la linha de .G. entro la linha de .B., e scorja aquela de tota partida, e exten dos labias de la codena am onci, o am motz oncis si has necessitat de aquels, ayssi cum havem dit en las apostemas del cap, e extratz aquela petit a petit.	Therefore in that which you have seen with good disposition in the Treatment, of which the color of the water which is revealed is similar to the color of the grape, and it is pleasant throughout, and does not adhere to the nerves of the neck, or to the veins, nor is it heavy, so that you cut it with a superficial section from the beginning to the end of the body part on the line of G. within the line of B., and remove it little by little from the two lips of the incision, and extract it little by little.
E es mays cautela que no sia inscidida la vena o nervi.	And it is more careful that it is not cut into a vein or a nerve.
E sia le spatum no mot agut, que no ajuste a tu la tua ma am inscizio, o que enquiete le malaute, e que inscidas aquo que no es necessari inscidir; quar si inscideysses vena o arceria e prohibeys tu de la tua operacio, lahoras pausa en la plagua vetriol trissat o autras polveras las quals ostan fluxs de sanc, e estrenh la plagua, e layssa aquel entro que·s repausa la acuitat de la apostema e sia mollificada la plagua e comense esser poyrida.	And the blade should not be sharp that it does not hurt you in a section or makes the patient uncomfortable, and that you do not cut into a vein or an artery, because if you cut a vein or an artery, then you stop your operation, therefore pause in the plague of vinegar or other powders which stop blood flow, and release the plasma, and leave it until it is relieved by its own nature, and becomes softened and starts to rot.
Quan le sanc es abscindit.	When the blood is separated.
Donc retorna a la tua operacio entro que l’aias complida.	Then returns to your operation until you complete it.
E aprop inquireys am le tieu dit indic si es romas alcuna causa de las autras petitas scrophulas, donc inscideys aquelas e munda aquelas.	And then ask the following question if there is a reason for these small scrofulas, therefore cut those and clean those.
E si es en la razit de la scrophula gran vena, cove lahoras que no inscidas aquela scrophula de la sua razitz.	And if it is in the root of the large scrofula, then you should not cut that scrofula from its root.
Abantz cove que lies aquela am fiel doblat fort e que leysses aquela entro que caia per si ses nocument.	Before you leave, cut that with a sharp knife and release it little by little until it falls down by itself.
E aprop omple la plagua de coto vielh le qual tu has ja submirgit en enguent egipciac, e aprop cura aquel.	Then fill the plague with young wine which you have already mixed with Egyptian ink, and then cure that.
E si inscides aquela scrophula tota, lahoras cove que tu ajustes las doas labias de la plagua e cuzas2 tantost pus que no y ha romasa deguna superfluitat.	And if you cut the scrofula whole, then you should adjust the two lips of the plague and leave it little by little until there is no excess.
Mays si tu vezes que haia romasa superfluitat per la grandeza de la scrofula, cove que tu entendas a inscidir la razit de aquela, e astrayra aquela e aministra sutura e aquo que es dit.	But if you think that there is excess because of the size of the scrofula, then cut the root of that, and then remove it with thread and water which is said.
E aquela de las scrophulas que conteno humiditatz, perfora aquela am perforacio superficial aqui la on appar a tu le loc de maturacio de lu, e pausa perforacio de aquo que siec le pus bas del cos, ayssi cum havem dit.	And those scrofulas which contain moisture, pierce that with a superficial section here where the location of maturation of the scrofula appears to you, and pause the piercing of those which come to the lower parts of the body, as I have told you.
E aprop aministra perforacio, calguas am enguent e semblantz ad aquels, per so que corroda aquo que es romas de la corropcio.	And then administer the piercing, which is similar to ink and similar to those, so that it corrodes the roman blood of corruption.
E aprop quan tu vezes la plagua ja esser mundada, lahoras tu cura aquela am enguent de carn generatiu entro que sia sanada.	And then, when you see that the plague is already cleaned, then you cure that with ink of new generation until it is healed.
Capitol .xliii.	Chapter.
De seccio del pilhot del apostema accident dintz le guolayro.	Of the section of a scrofula which happens in the head.
Diyssero les antics aquesta seccio en le epilhot, e no vist alcu hom en nostra terra que aquela aia fayta.	They said that this section is not about the epileptic, and I did not see anyone in our land who had done that.
E aquesta es la inscriptura del sermo de aquels.	And this is the inscription of the sermon of those.
Mays en les homes haventz esquinencia, cove que sia esquivada la extraccio del epilhot, cum per aquo no sia fayt juvament per so quar totas las venas e las majors del malaute so aqui.	But in men there are some things, because the extraction of the epileptic should not be done suddenly, because it is not right for all veins and the main one of the body to be stopped.
Mays en aquels que han apostemas cautz en la boca o guolayro o dos aurelhas, quan la malautia no es en la cana, cove husar de la seccio de epilhot a fugir la perdicio la qual es fayta per perfocacio.	But in those who have laps which are in the mouth or in two ears, and when the malady is not in the head, then avoid the section of the epileptic, because it is caused by piercing.
Donc cove quan volem aquo, que inscidam le epilhot dejos tres cercles dels cercles del epilhot, o quatre am petita seccio per la latitut en aquel que es entre dos cercles per quantitat, que la seccio sia en ciphac, no en la cartillage, e aquest loc es convenent a seccio, quar es privat de carn e les vayselhs de sanc de lu son luhen.	Then when we want to do this, let us make the section of the epileptic three circles which are between the circles of the epileptic, or four with a small section per length, so that the section is in a line, not in cartilage, and this place is suitable for the section, because it is deprived of flesh, and the vessels of blood from him run through it.
E si le metge es pauruc, cove lahoras que extenda la codena del golayro am onci, e aprop fenda la codena entro que pervengua a la canal, mays evite les vaysels de sanc si vetz de aquelas alcuna causa.	And if the medicine is little, then extend the hair of the head to one ounce, and then cut the hair with a sharp blade until it reaches the canal, but avoid the vessels of blood if there is any reason for it.
E aprop inscida li ciplach segon que havem recomtat; e es significat sobre la seccio de la canal per le flacma le qual es de aquela eyssit am aquo que es de lu disromput e per la abscizio de la votz.	And then cut it according to what I have told you first; and it is shown on the section of the canal by the flame which comes from that, and because it is not broken by the fire, but is separated by water.
E layssa la plagua uberta per alcun temps.	And leave the plague open for a while.
Donc cum la hora es remauguda en la qual perforacio es temuda, agregua doas labias de la codena de la plagua, e cus aquela sola ses la cartillage.	Then when the hour is renewed in which the piercing is convenient, add two lips to the hair of the plague, and cut it single, because it is cartilage.
E aprop administra medicinas que fan naysser la carn entro que sia sanat.	And then administer medicines that can heal the flesh so that it may be healed.
E diyssec Albucasis que la summa del sermo le qual havem recomtat, exposicio no es sino que veias que alcus de aquetz apostemas ja han opilat lo guolayro del malaute, e le malaute es vengut entro a mort, e le ale de lu es entresecat, e alcus van a inscidir le epiglos per so que respire le malaute sobre le loc de la plagua per alcuna respiracio, e sia salvat de mort.	And Albucasis said that the summary of the sermon which we have told you is not other than what you see from those scrofulas has already happened to the head of the patient, and the patient has come close to death, and his breath is stopped, and some go to cut the epiglottis so that the patient can breathe through that place for a while, and be saved from death.
E per aquo comandero layssar la plagua uberta entro que sia consumida la malicia de la malautia; e es la malicia de lu per tres dias; e donc lahoras comandero cosi la plagua, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	And I command that the plague be left open until the evil of the malady is destroyed by three days; and then, after those days, I will command to cut the plague in this way, and cure that which needs to be cured.
E aquo que yeu he vist per mi meteys, es que una sirventa pres un cotel e mesec le en le sieu golayro e inscidic am aquel una partida de la cana del pulmo, e yeu fu apelat a la curacio de lu, e atrobegui la mugen ayssi cum es mugit del moridos, e descubrigui la plagua e atrobegui le sanc le qual era yssit de la plagua petit.	And I have seen with my own eyes that a servant holds a knife and cuts it into the head of the patient and cuts a piece from the root of the nose, and I was called to cure him, and then I heard the moaning of the patient, and discovered the plague and stopped the blood which was flowing from it.
Donc yeu fo confessat que aquela no havia inscidit vena ni guidegi, e le vent yssia de la plagua, e curegui aquela entro que foc sanada.	Therefore I confessed to her that she had not inscribed any veins or sutures, and the wind came out from the wound, and I healed it within so that it was cured.
E no accidic a la sirventa si no rauquiera en la votz, e aprop alcus dias retornec ad miloracio de las suas dispozicios.	And did not happen to the servant but she was sore in her voice, and after a few days I returned to the improvement of her dispositions.
E ara dic yeu que en la seccio del epilhot no ha temor.	Then tell me that there is no danger in the section of the epileptic fit.
Capitol .xliv.	Chapter .XLI.
De seccio sobre apostema le qual accideys en le golayro defora, e es apelat hernia del golayro.	Of section on apoplexy which happens in the belly later, and is called hernia of the stomach.
Aquest apostema nompnat hernia del golayro es apostema gran segon la color del cors, e es mot en las femnas.	This apoplexy named hernia of the stomach is a great one according to the color of the body, and it happens more in women.
E es segon dos manieyras, quar o es natural o accidental.	And it is according to two ways, because it is natural or accidental.
E en le natural no es engen de curar.	And in the natural it does not arise to heal.
E l’accidental es segon dos manieyras del qual la un es semblant a nodes grasses, e l’autra manieyra es semblant apostema le qual es fayt per nodacio de arteria, e en aquel es temor.	And the accidental is according to two ways, because one is similar to nodules of fat, and another is similar to apoplexy which is made by an artery's knot, and in that there is danger.
E no cove que·s fassa presumpcio a lu cum ferr sino en aquel que es petit.	And do not say that one should make a presumption on him with iron unless it is small.
E tu proha aquel e investigua aquel am le dit, e si atrobas lu semblant a nodi gras, e no es suspendut am alcuna de las venas, lahoras tu inscideys aquel ayssi cum les nodes, e extratz aquel am aquo que conte lu de la pel e bursiclam; e sino, lahoras es perscrutat tot le sieu esser, e aprop cura le loc am aquo que cove de curacio entro que sia sanat.	And you shall examine that and investigate that with care, and if it seems to you like nodules of fat, and is not suspended on any of the veins, then you shall cut that out carefully with a scalpel, and extract it with water from the skin and the membrane; and if not, then examine all its body, and cure the place with water that can heal within so that it is cured.
Capitol .xlv.	Chapter .XLVI.
De seccio de las specias de nodes.	Of section of nodules of fat.
Dels nodes so motas specias e yeu ja he dit totas las specias de lor en la divisio.	The nodules have such species, and I have already said all the species of them in the division.
E cove que yeu recomte assi la diferencia entre node e exitura cum fassa dubitacio.	And do not forget to note that difference between a nodule and an exiture with a doubt.
Donc yeu dic que am exitura es caliditat e febre e dolors vehementz entro que es sedada la ebullicio de la superfluitat; e es complida putrefaccio que lahora cessa la febre, la dolor e la calor.	Therefore I say that in exiture there is a degree and fever and violent pains within so that it is calmed by the ebullience of the superfluity; and it is completed by putrefaction when the fever, pain, and heat cease.
Mays am node no es caliditat ni febre ni dolor, e conte aquel ciphac leon le qual es al u sac propri.	But in a nodule there is no degree or fever or pain, and it counts that it puts the lion on top of it which is its own leather.
E es segon la color del cors, e le comensament de lu es cum un ceze e es fayt ayssi cum vace, sia major o minor, e son segon dos specias, quar o so grassas e conteno humiditat, e las colors de la humiditat son motas, segon que yeu diyssi en la divisio.	And it is according to the color of the body, and the beginning of it is with a lump, and it is made like this with water, whether great or small, and there are two species because it contains moisture, and the colors of the moisture are varied, as I have said in the division.
Donc cove, quan pervenas a la curacio de node, que exprohes aquel e inquiras aquel al comensament am sturment le qual es apelat intromes, segon que vindra la sua forma en le capitol le qual es aprop aquest.	Therefore, when you begin the cure of a nodule, you shall examine that and investigate it with care using an instrument which is called an introducer, according to how its form appears in the chapter which comes after this one.
E es manieyra de inquisicio de apostemas e de totz nodes, e es que tu prenguas aquest sturment e entromet aquel en le loc pus humit le qual atrobas en le apostema, e tu revolveras les tieus ditz am aquel petit a petit entro que sapias que·l sturment ja ha penetrat la codena.	And it is a way of inquiring into apoplexes and all nodules, that you shall take this instrument and introduce it into the place which seems wetter in the apoplexy, and you shall stir the threads with care within so that you know that the instrument has already penetrated the skin.
E aprop ultima la tua ma segon la mesura de la grandeza del apostema, e aprop extratz le entromes e considera aquo que es yssit en le vestigi de lu.	And finally, according to the measure of the size of the apoplexy, you shall remove the introducer and consider that water which is present in its trace.
E si es fora-getada la humiditat corrent, de qualque color sia, lahoras tu le inscideys am seccio superficial segon que he dit en les autres apostemas.	And if the moisture is lost by running, whatever color it may be, then you shall cut it on a superficial section according to what I have said in other apoplexes.
E si del vestigi de l’intromes no hieys humiditat, lahoras sapias que es gras.	And if there is no moisture in the trace of the introducer, you shall know that it is fat.
E secca sobre lu am seccio havent forma de crotz segon aquesta forma:	And dry on it at section not having a form of crust according to this form:
ayssi cum t’e ensenhat, e suspen aquel am oncis, e excorja la codena de tota part am facilitat, e guarda la pel o sac, si podes, sobre aquel e extraguas aquela sania am le node.	As I have taught you, and suspend that with nails on it, and scrape the skin from all parts with ease, and preserve the fat or skin, if you can, on that, and extract that sainty to the nodule.
Mays si es romput en la operacio, no es possible extrayre aquela sana, e motas veguadas endeve aquo, e lahoras tu la extratz a pessas entro que de lu no romangua denguna causa.	But if it is broken during the operation, it is not possible to extract that sainty, and there are visible veins in it, then you shall extract them with needles within so that they do not break, and you shall take that sainty which is inside of it.
Quar si de lu roman denguna causa, pauc o trop, le node retorne segon le mays.	Because if it causes a rupture, whether little or much, the nodule returns according to the measure of it.
E si tu vezes que de lu roman alcuna part petita, lahoras comple la plagua de alcunas polveras corrosivas agudas e strenh la plagua, e pausa sobre aquela que sede apostema caut, e cura aquel del autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	And if you think that a small part of it ruptures, then you shall complete the plague with some sharp corrosive dust and press it firmly, and pause over that which causes an epileptic fit, and heal it by another healing within so that it is healed.
E si es node gran, lahoras tu cus las doas labias de lu e cura aquel am aquo que encarna.	And if it is a great nodule, then you shall cut its two sides with a knife and heal it with water which enters into it.
Mays si vena pulsatil es a lu contraria, o no-pulsatil, lahoras tu coyta e huemple le loc de zegi trissat que es vetriol e leyssa aquel streyt per dos dias o per tres entro que·s poyresca la plagua e que repause la ebullicio del sanc; e aprop retorna a inscindir aquo que es romas del node.	But if there is a pulsatile vein going to the other side, or not-pulsatile, then you shall cut and patch up the place with vinegar, and let it stand for two or three days within so that it can heal the plague and the ebullience of salt water returns; and afterwards, return to cutting that which is broken from the nodule.
Capitol .xlvi.	Chapter .XLVI.
De las formas del sturmentz necessaris en seccio e perforacio.	Of the forms of the necessary instruments for section and perforation.
De aquels so las formas dels intromesas, e so de tres specias, que de aquels es alcu gran, e de lor es migier, e de lor es petit.	The three species of introducers, which one is large, and another is medium-sized, and the third is small.
La forma de intromes gran es aquesta:	The form of the large introducer is this:
La forma de intromes migier es aquesta:	The form of the medium-sized introducer is this:
La forma de intromes petit es aquesta:	The form of the small introducer is this:
Sian faytz de ferr, de alfulud, de extremitatz cayradas decentment, per so que festino le intrament en les apostemas.	If you have any iron, or if it is sharp at its ends, or if the edges are curved downward, then introduce the instrument into the apoplexes with care.
E aquestas so las formas dels experientz, e son nompnatz albered, e un de aquels es apelat berid.	And these are the forms of the experiments, and they are not named otherwise, and one of them is called a brier.
E so de tres especias, quar de lor es gran, migier e pauc.	The three species are, because one is large, another is medium-sized, and the third is small.
La forma de experient gran, forma de lu:	The form of a large experiment, its appearance:
La forma de experient migier, forma de lu:	The form of a medium-sized experiment, its appearance:
La forma de experient pauc, forma de lu:	The form of a small experiment, its appearance:
Conveneysso que sian per aquels apostemas e exituras e fistulas e bubos per so que entre aquelas so dels osses e de autras causas.	It is convenient that they are for apoplexes and exitions and fistulas and buboes because some of them are of the bones, and others are causes.
E so faytz redontz, grosses, leons, ayssi cum grans agulhas am las quals son cosidas las selhas, e son faytas de eram citri, o de eram o de ferr, o de argent, E las milhors so quan so faytas de eram citri.	And they are curved, and round, and sharp, with large needles which are sewed up together, and they are made of lemon essence, or of vinegar, or of iron, or of silver, and the rest are done with lemon essence.
E son faytz les experient de plum negre, les quals se acordan que per aquels sian ubertas las fistulas en la conquavitat de las quals so reflexios, que sian reflectidas am la sua levitat am aquelas refleccios.	The black-color experiments are also opened by those which the concavity of them reflects, which are reflected in its light due to their reflection.
E so de tres specias, quar alcus de lor so loncs, e dels autres migiers, e dels autres breus, segon la quantitat del ample de la fistula e de la strictura de lu.	The three species are also long or short, and of the others medium-sized, and small, according to the measure of the width of the fistula and the tightness of it.
Forma del experient gran de plom:	Form of a large experiment made of lead:
Forma del experient migier de plom:	Form of a medium-sized experiment made of lead:
Forma del experient petit de plom:	Form of a small experiment made of lead:
Las formas dels oncis so de motas specias, quar de aquels so alcus simples, als quals es una curvitat solament, e so de tres specias: grans, paucs e migiers.	The forms of the nails are of varied species, because some of them are simple, and have only one curve, and there are three species: large, small, and medium-sized.
E de lor so uncis orps, e so de tres specias.	And they are also nails with a head, and there are three species.
E de aquels so uncis haventz doas curvaturas, e so de tres specias.	And those are also nails having two curves, and there are three species.
E de lor so haventz tres curvaturas, e so de tres specias.	And they are also nails having three curves, and there are three species.
E totz aquetz so necessaris en lor loc.	All of them are necessary in their place.
Forma de unci simple gran, forma de lu:	Form of a large simple nail, its appearance:
Forma de unci simple migier:	Form of a medium-sized simple nail, its appearance:
Forma de unci simple pauc, forma de lu:	Form of a small simple nail, its appearance:
Forma de unci orp gran:	Form of a large orph nail, its appearance:
Forma de unci orp migier, forma de lu:	Form of a medium-sized orph nail, its appearance:
Forma de unci orp pauc, forma de lu:	Form a little lump of lead.
Forma de unci gran havent dos curvaturas:	Form a big lump of lead, having two curves:
Forma de unci migier havent dos curvatas:	Form a small lump of lead with two curves:
Forma de unci pauc havent dos curvaturas:	Form a little lump of lead with two curves:
Forma de unci gran havent tres curvaturas:	Form a big lump of lead with three curves:
Forma de unci migier havent tres curvaturas:	Form a small lump of lead with three curves:
Forma de unci pauc havent tres curvaturas:	Form a little lump of lead with three curves:
E aquestas so las formas dels scalpels am les quals son seccatz e scorjatz les nodes e le apostemas, e so de tres specias, quar de aquels es gran, migier, e pauc.	And these are the shapes of scalpel with which you scrape and cut nodules and warts; there are three kinds, one large, medium, and small.
Forma de scapel gran:	Shape of a large scalpel:
Forma del scapel migier:	Shape of a medium scalpel:
Forma de scapel pauc:	Shape of a small scalpel:
Las extramitatz de aquels am les quals es fayta seccio so agudas e las autres extramitatz so no-agudas, e no so pausadas en tal manieyra, sino per que sia fayt juvament en la excorjacio dels nodes la temor de inscizio de vena o de nervi, e per aquels sia sanat le malaute e atrobe tranquilitat un petit per la adustio la qual atroba deves la excoriacio del apostema.	The ends of these are sharp and the other ends are not, they are not stopped in such a way, but so that it is done smoothly during the scraping of nodules; for this reason, to heal the patient and bring peace quickly after the incisions of veins or nerves, and for this reason, after the scraping of the wart, a little bit of cauterization should be done.
E aquestas son las formas de almagidas, e so de tres specias: gran, migier e pauc, ayssi cum veyras.	And these are the forms of almug or oil, and they are three kinds: large, medium, and small, as you see here.
La forma de magda gran:	Form of a large mug:
Forma de magda migier:	Form of a medium mug:
Forma de magda pauc:	Form of a small mug:
Sian faytas de eram e so semblantz de ray am le qual e fayt alcofol.	When it is burned and appears like the rays to which it gives alcohol.
E es en la extramitat lada punctada am spatum occultada e en aquela corr a las partidas dedintz e defora, quan tu vols, ayssi cum veses.	And it is on one side punctured with hidden spice and in the other part divided into portions inside and out, as you want, thus you use it.
Las formas de spatimis, les quals so amaguatz entre los ditz deves la perforacio dels apostemas e no les percebo les malautes, e so de tres specias: gran, migier e pauc.	The forms of spatula, which are wrapped between the thighs to pierce warts; they do not feel the pains, and there are three kinds: large, medium, and small.
E aquestas so las formas de aquels:	These are the shapes of those:
Las formas de ventozas am las quals es abscindit le flux del sanc, e so de tres specias; gran, migiera e pauca; las formas de lu:	The forms of wind chimes, with which you cut off the flow of blood; and they are three kinds: large, medium, and small; the forms of lead:
Sian faytas de eram citri, redondas am alcuna longitut , e sian subtils.	When it is burned and appears like the rays of the sun, round and long, and subtle.
E cove que sian aquestas specias de ventosas deves tu grans, migieras e paucas, per so que per aquelas abscindas flux de sanc am velocitat en necessitat, e lahoras quan a tu primieyrament no es medicina.	And these are the kinds of wind chimes that you have: large, medium and small, so that in their cutting off the flow of blood quickly, and when first used it is not medicine.
Enpero no uses de aquelas ad abscidir sanc en tot loc del cors, e non uses sino en locs carnoses, ayssi cum en les lacertis de las cambas e de las coyssas, e en les lacertz dels brasses, e de las mamillas e del ventre e dels engonars, e semblantz a lor dels lacertz carnoses humitz.	However, do not use these to cut off blood throughout the body, but only in flesh areas; for example, in the legs and thighs, in the armpits, chest, breasts, stomach, and ribs, and on the skin of the arms, as well as the skin of the legs.
E alcunas veguadas son faytz de aquels strumentz autres petitz semblantz scorsas de fisacs segon aquesta forma; per les quals lo sanc es abscindit quan es fayt per fleubotomia, o deves inscizio de vena o de arceria.	And some instruments are small in size and look like scalpel; for these reasons, blood is cut off when it is burned by bloodletting or incision of a vein or artery.
E alcunas veguadas son faytas redondas segon aquesta forma:	Some instruments are made round according to this form:
Capitol .xlvii.	Chapter xliv.
De la cura de las mamillas dels homes las quals so asembladas de femnas.	Of the treatment of men's breasts, which are made up of women.
Alcunas veguadas so infladas las mamillas de alcus homes deves le compliment del dormir cum comensan esser pellutz, e aprop so infladas las mamillas, e so asembladas las mamillas de las femnas, e romano apostemosas, lejas.	Some instruments are inflated breasts of men because they give a good sleep when they have started to peel off; and the breasts are inflated, and the breasts of women are assembled, and Roman appendicitis, large.
E ad aquel que avoreys aquo, cove que inscidisca aquelas am seccio lunar segon aquesta forma, de la linha de .B. entro a la linha de .G., e aprop excorja la groceza tota, e aprop uempla la plagua de medicament encarnatiu, e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am cosidura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if you ask for it, I will cut off those with lunar section according to this form, from line B to line G, and then completely scrape out the scrofulus; and I will fill the plague of infected medicine, and I will join the two lips of the plague with sutures, and heal it within.
Mays si la mamilla declina a las partidas dejos e es mollificada per la sua magnitut ayssi cum endeve a las femnas, lahoras sia fendut en dos latz sieus pus sobiras, am dos seccios semblantz a figura lunar, de las quals quascuna sia contenguda en l’autra deves la fi de quascuna, entro que sia que la linha major contengua la menor segon aquesta forma de la linha de .B. e la linha de .G. E aprop excorja la codena la qual es entre dos labias de la plagua, e osta la pingueza, e aministra aquo que havem dit de la sutura e de las polveras aquo que es necessari en la curacio entro que sia sanat.	If the breast declines and splits into two parts, and it is softened by its size; then join it with two sections resembling the moon, each containing another, and joining them together at their ends, so that the major section contains the minor one according to this form, from line B to line G. And then completely scrape out the scrofulus, and cut off the nipple into two pieces on either side; join them together with sutures, and heal it; and give what is necessary for the cure within, joining it with sutures and powder.
E si tu non conpleysses la inscizio de aquo que cove inscidir per la inquietut del malaute, e per flux de sanc, lahoras cove que huemplas la plagua de coto submergit en enguent corrosiu e layssa aquel entro que aquo corroda que es romas de la grayssa, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if you do not like the incision of what I have said above because it disturbs the patient and because of the flow of blood; then I will tell you that you fill the plague with infected medicine by immersing it in corrosive water, and let it sit for a while, and then cut off the part that is corroded by it, which is like the rust of iron; and heal that part.
Capitol .xlviii.	Chapter xlviii.
De perforacio de apostemas que veno dejos le titillic.	Of the piercing of warts that come from below the knee-tickle.
Aquetz apostemas que veno dejos le titillic so de las specias de scrophulas, durs, las quals conte una pel que es sac.	These warts that come from below the knee-tickle are of three kinds: scrofulus, chronic disease, and those who have a pimple.
E de aquelas so alcunas que conteno humiditatz; e aquelas que conteno humiditatz cove que sian inscididas am seccio lunar segon aquesta figura: de la linha de .G. a la linha de .B. E cum es tot evacuat aquo que es en le apostema de la sania, lahoras tu le comple de coto viel e leysa le entro al autra dia.	And of those which contain moisture; and those which contain moisture, are cut off according to this lunar section shape: from line G to line B. And when all the fluid has been evacuated out, then I will tell you what is needed for the cure; on the next day, join it with sutures and let it rest.
E aprop le coto sia ostat e sia curat am enguent convenient ad aquo, entro que sia sanat.	And when the crotch is made and left to rest in the water that is convenient for him; and heal it within.
E si le apostema de las specias dels nodes es, e de las scrophulas, lahoras tu scindeys sobre aquel ayssi cum havem dit en la seccio sobre las scrophulas engualment.	And if the wart of the node is, and of the scrofulus; then you cut off those above this shape, as I have said in the section about scrofulus.
May si la plagua es extenduda en aysso que yesca poyredura, lahoras administra en lu cauteri segon que en aquo havem denant dit.	And if the plague is spread out like a wound that needs sutures; then administer it according to what I have said above.
Capitol .xlix.	Chapter xlix.
De seccio de apostemas que accideysso per arceria o per vena.	Of the piercing of warts which occur in an artery or vein.
Quan arceria es rompuda, e la codena es consolidada la qual es sobre aquela, lahoras motas veguadas accideys apostema E les senhals per les quals es conoguda que imflamacio e apostema sian per la arteria o per vena: quar quan apostema es per arceria es lonc agreguat en le preon del cors; e que quan inpelleysses le apostema am les tieus ditz, sentes en lu quays sia stridor.	When an artery is broken and the knot is consolidated which is on it, then you see warts that appear due to the inflammation and wart being from the artery or vein; for when a wart appears by bloodletting with a needle, you hear a hissing sound.
E aquel que es per vena es redon al manifest del cors.	And the one which is in a vein is round on the outside of the body.
E seccio sobre aquest apostema es error, e majorment en aquel que es dejos las aysselhas, e en les angonars, e en le col, e en motz locs del cors; e es mot gran, donc cove que la sua curacio am ferr sia esquivada, e aquel que es en las extramitatz, o al cap, cove que sia evitat.	And the section of this wart is a mistake, and mostly on the part which is left-handed, and on the armpits, neck, and chest; and it is large, so that its treatment with iron may be avoided, and what is in the extremities, or at the top, is to be avoided.
Mays sobre aquel que es de lor per imflacio de l’orrifici de la arceria, scindeys en la codena seccio en le lonc; e aprop huebre la seccio am uncis e aprop la arceria, e deliura de las tunicas entro que sia descuberta.	And if the wart occurs due to inflammation of the artery orifice; then you cut off the knot in the long section, and then join it with nails, and cut off that part near the artery, and free it from the skin.
E aprop met sobre aquel agulha e fay aquela penetrar entro al autre latz, e estrenh la arceria am fiel doble en dos locs, — la qual causa yeu a tu eyssenhegui en extraccio de doas arcerias les quals so en les templars.	And then join it with a needle and that needle enters into the other one; and tighten the artery at two places, causing your attention to turn towards the two arteries in the temples.
E aprop punh le loc le qual es entre dos liamentz am spatum entro que yesca le sanc tot que es en lu, e sia dissolvut le apostema.	And then I will strike at the spot between the two limbs within which causes blood to come out completely, and dissolve the wart.
E aprop administra curacio en la qual es engendrat poyre entro que caian les liamentz; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz convenientz ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	And then I will administer a cure which generates poison within, and let the limbs fall; and heal it with water that is convenient for him within.
E si es apostema per seccio de vena, lahoras cove que tu tenguas am la tua ma aquo que es a tu possible del apostema am la codena, e aprop intromet la agulha dejos le loc le qual tu has tengut dejos la tua ma, e fay aquela penetrar; e sia en aquela fil doble entro que tu extraguas aquel del autre latz, e aprop ligua le apostema am bo liament segon que yeu he dit a tu en le liament de uva4 de doas partz am doas extremitatz del fil.	And if it is a wart due to vein section; then you hold your hand close to where the wart has been cut off with your hand, and let that needle enter; and may it be a double thread within which you extract one from the other one, and join the wart with two limbs according to what I have said above.
Mays si temes que extraguam le fil, lahoras entromet le fiel am aquela agula dejos tot le apostema deves la inscizio de la agulha primieyra, e strenh les tieus fiels en quatre locs.	Maybe you fear that the thread will break; then insert the needle into that person's flesh, do not cut through the blisters first, and tighten the threads in four places.
Aprop secca le apostema en le mieg loc de lu entro que quan es yssit aquo que es en lu, lahoras tu inscideys la superfluitat de la codena, e layssa aquo que de lu es liat.	Then dry the blisters in their place until there is no moisture on them; then cut off the excess of the thread, and let it hang from that person's body.
E aprop pausa sobre lu pulvil le qual has submergit en vi e oli, e aprop administra la curacio la qual es fayta am calguas e enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And place over them the palm of your hand that you have wet with oil and vinegar, and administer the cure that is done with hot water and salt inside until it heals.
Capitol l del apostema le qual accideys per torcio de nervis.	Do not cut off the blisters that happen due to nerve twist.
Ayssi cum accideys apostema en arceria e en vena, e semblantment accideys apostema en les nervis quan accideys en lor percussio o accideys per trebal superfluable, e per semblantz.	Do not cut off blisters that form in the skin due to pressure or injury; nor do so because of excess work, and by accident too.
E es fayt le mays de lu en les locs dels adjutoris o del talo, o en tot loc en le qual so maugudas las juncturas.	And it is done to that person in the places of the helpers or of the head, or in any place where joints are inflamed.
E es apostema greu, e es asemblat a la color del autre cors, e es en las majors de lu disposicios ses de lor e quan es streyt am vehementia, sent en lu le malaute semblant stupor.	And it is a severe blister; and its color is similar to that of the other parts of the body, and if it is hot and violent, it sends the patient into a kind of stupor.
E no es apostema agreguat en le preon del cors, e per so es dejos la codena, e el es maugut a tota partida e no va a las partidas denant ni detras.	And it is not a blister that forms on the front of the body, and for this reason the thread remains hanging, and it inflames the whole body, and does not affect the parts in front or behind.
Donc aquo de aquels que es en las juncturas no cove que sia envasit am ferr, quar fort leu endevenguera contracio.	Thus, from those that are at the joints, do not cover them so that they do not get wet because it would bring about the opposite result; for strong heat would be produced.
Mays aquel que es en le cap o en le front fen la codena am spatum.	Maybe those who are on the head or forehead should have their threads cut with a blade.
Mays si es apostema pauc, lahoras te aquel am les forfecs e abscindeys aquel de razitz.	Maybe if it is a small blister, then you should put it in the folds and cut off the hair from the root.
E si es gran, lahoras tu le suspen am unci, e excorja aquel, e aprop osta aquel; e ajusta la plagua am sutura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if it is large, then you should suspend it with a string, and cut off the hair from that person, and then bind it up; adjust the wound with stitches, and heal it inside until it heals.
Capitol .li.	Here is the last line of text:
De seccio de apostema le qual accideys de cheil que accideys al ventre.	Of the blister that happens from the mouth to the belly.
Endeveno ad alcus homes motas veguadas en les ventres de aquels e en las autras partidas del cors de aquels theils les quals son apelatz funguals per similitut de aquels am funges, dels quals la razitz es subtil e·l cap de aquel es gros; e ja las labias de aquels so conversas, e es de aquels que es petit, e es de aquels que es mot magnificat.	And also, when there are some small spots on the belly of those people and other parts of their bodies, which resemble mushrooms in appearance; where the hair is thin and the face round; and also, when the body is swollen and puffy.
E yeu ja e vist un, e en le ventre de lu eran dos theils les quals eran mays a funges semblantz, e no era diferencia entre aquels blancs, de menuda razitz.	And I have also seen one; and in that person's belly were two spots that resembled small mushrooms, and there was no difference between those white ones, whose hair is fine.
E ja las labias de aquels eran enversadas e se fendian, e humiditat corria de aquel tot temps.	And the lips of these people were red and swollen, and moisture ran from them constantly.
Donc yeu inscidegui aquels e atrobegui en la un en pes quays xviii unc. e l’autre quays vi unc.	So you cut off those spots and sewed up the one on the foot with eighteen needles. And the other had one needle.
E la operacio en la inscizio de lor es que consideres lahoras si·l malaute es humit, e la color de atheil es blanca, humit, de subtil razitz; lahoras tu le inscideys am spatum lat, e sian en la presencia tua cauteris en le foc, quar motas veguadas deves la seccio de lu es expellit mot sanc; e si te ventz le sanc, cauteriza aquel.	And the operation of cutting them is that you consider whether the patient' body is wet, and the color of the wound is white, moist, with fine hair; then insert a sharp blade into it, and let it be in your presence, for small spots devoured by the wound should be expelled through the cut; and if you see blood, cauterize that spot.
E si vezes le malaute pauruc e temeros, guarda te de inscizio am ferr; mays lahoras pren fiel de plom recent fayt, e strenh am aquel atheil, la manieyra del qual es aquela que havem dita; e leyssa aquel per dos dias.	And if the patient is a little scared or afraid, do not cut them with iron; but rather take fresh lead and tighten that person' wrist in the manner that has been described; and let it be so for two days.
E aprop ajusta en la strictura del fil de plom; donc, no cesses strenher le plom granre devetz en theil, entro que sia abscindit e cayha per se ses trebalh.	Then adjust the tightness of the lead thread; so, do not cut off a large piece of the lead because it will fall off by itself and cause pain.
Mays si theil es de grossa razitz, lahoras en la inscizio de lu es alcuna causa de temor e de paor, e majorment en aquel que es en le ventre.	Maybe if the lead is of thick hair, then in cutting it there is no cause for fear or worry; and mostly so in that which is in the belly.
Mays possibla es que tu inscindas la maytat de lu , e aprop cauteriza aquel per que no retorne.	Maybe you could cut off most of it, and then cauterize it so that it does not return.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanada la plagua.	Then heal the wound inside so that the disease is cured.
E guarda te que tu no presumas inscidir theil le qual es de fusca color, de pauc sentiment, de leg reguardament, quar aquel es absi cancros.	And be careful not to cut off a piece of lead that has a dark color, or is of little feeling, and does not seem right; for such is cancer.
E yeu vindre am rememoracio de cranc aprop aysso.	And I came back to my memory of the old man.
Capitol .lii.	Here is the last line of text:
De curacio de eminencia del umbilic.	Of cure for umbilical hernias.
Eminencia del umbilic es fayta per motas causas; o per fissuras del ciphac le qual es sobre le ventre, e yeys de lu la tela o budel segon que endeve en las autras rupturas; o per sanc le qual flueys de vena o de arceria segon que es denant dit, o per ventositat coarctada en lu.	Umbilical hernia is caused by some motas; or by a fissure of the navel that hangs down over the belly, and has the intestine or hernia hanging out according to whether it breaks forward or back; or by blood flowing from a vein or artery according to whether it flows in front or back; or by constriction of wind blowing out.
Mays si es per fissura del ciphac e per yssiment de la tela, lahoras la color del apostema es semblant a la color del cors; e es leon ses dolor, e aprop appar de divers situament.	Maybe if it is because of a break in the navel and the intestine comes out, then the color of the blister is similar to that of the body; and there is much pain, and it appears in different places.
E si es per egressio del budel, lahoras le situament de aquel am lu de aquo que havem recontat, de mays vehement diversitat, e cum tu premes aquel am les tieus ditz es occultat, e aprop retorna; e fort leu es am lu so, e es magnificat mot deves le introt de banh e vehement trebalh.	Maybe if it is because the hernia comes out, then the location of that person with regard to where we have described is different, and many times; and when you press that person' side with your hand, it goes back in, and there is a lot of pain on the other side; and it is very hot inside, and there is much violent work.
Mays si per humiditat, lahoras es leon e no es occultat quan premes am la tua ma, ni es constrengut, ni es cregut.	Maybe if it is because of moisture, then it burns and does not go back in when you press it with your hand, and it is neither constricted nor hidden.
E si es per sanc, lahoras am aquestz senhals apareys le apostema a negror declinant.	Maybe if it is because of blood, then these signs appear: the blister becomes black and declines in color.
Mays si es per carn nada, lahoras es apostema greu, gros e dur, e es ficat segon una quantitat.	Maybe if it is because of meat, then the blister is heavy, thick, and hard; and it becomes fixed according to a certain quantity.
Mays si es per ventositat, lahoras le tocament de lu es leon.	Maybe if it is because of wind, then the touch is painful.
E la operacio en lu es que consideras lahoras si la eminencia de l’umbilic es per sanc de arceria, o de vena, o per ventositat; lahoras cove que sias prohibit de la curacio de lu, quar en aquela es temor e paor ayssi cum t’e ensenhat en le capitol en le qual he dit les apostemas per arceria e per vena.	And the operation on it is that you consider whether it is because of blood flowing from an artery or vein, or wind; then, do not attempt to cure it, for in that part there is fear and worry as well as we have taught you about blisters caused by arteries and veins.
E si la eminencia del umbilic es per le budel o per la tela, lahoras cove que comandes al malaute que tengua le ale sieu, e sia stant extendut; e aprop senha am tenta en le circuit de tot le umbilic, e aprop comanda a lu que stia envers entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos, e aprop circunda am spatum lat en le circuit del umbilic sobre le loc le qual has senhat am la tenta; e aprop exten la maytat del apostema a las partidas desus am unci gran; e aprop lia en le circuit am fiel fort o am ceda e la manieyra del liar decent.	And if the umbilical eminence is because of the intestine or the hernia, then command the patient to lie down; and let him extend his body completely; and let them put a blade in the middle of the navel on the skin; and bind it up with a string; and cut off the excess around the navel; and tie it tightly so that it does not move; and cut off the larger part of the hernia at the roots; and bind it up well.
E aprop huebre le mieg del apostema extendut sobre le liament e intromet le dit tieu en aquel indic e quereys le budel; e si tu l’as atrobat ni guardat per le liament, lahoras tu extratz alxorati e impelleys le budel a las partidas dedintz del ventre.	Then open the middle part of the navel and insert a finger; and if it hurts, then pull out the intestine little by little; and if you do not see any hernia, then cut off the middle part carefully with a sharp blade.
E si has atrobada la tela, lahoras pren aquel am unci; e inscideys las superfluitatz de lu.	And if you have caught the intestine, then take it with your finger; and cut off its excess with a blade.
Mays si es contraria a tu arceria o vena, lahoras circunda aquel mot, e aprop retorna a la tua operacio; e pren dos agulhas e met en aquelas dos fiels fortz e entromet dos agulhas en le circuit le qual has feyt entorn le apostema en manieyra de crotz, las quals fassas penetrar; e aprop strenh le apostema en quatre partidas sobre las agulhas.	Maybe if it is against your artery or vein, then circle around that person, and return to your operation; and take two needles and put them in the roots of the hernia tightly with a string; and cut off the hernia's root with those needles; and bind the hernia up in four places with the needles.
E si tu vols, osta las agulhas e leyssa le loc entro que poyresca la carn extenduda e caia per si; o inscideys aquel quan es subtiliat e se poyreys, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And if you want, then take away the needles and let the location remain; or cut off the excess of the hernia with a blade, and heal it with water; or bind it up when it becomes thin, and let it go its own way; or cut it off when it is small.
E si la eminencia del ombilic es de carn nada en lu o per humiditat, lahoras cove que tu conquaves le apostema ayssi cum havem dit e estraguas le sanc o la humiditat, la qual atrobas en lu, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove e que consolide le loc.	And if the prominence of the navel is either flesh or humidity, then cover that you heal the abscess so as it had been said and destroy the humidity, which you find in it, and take care of that place so that it heals and consolidates.
Capitol .liii.	Chapter II.
De curacio de cranc.	On the Treatment of Broken Bones.
Ja havem dit, en la divisio, de specia de cranc e en qual manieyra es via a la curacio de lu am medicinas, e que es squivador en lu la curacio am ferr per so que no sia ulcerat; e havem dit cranc engendrat en la mayra e cautela de la curacio de lu.	I have spoken, in the division, of the kinds of broken bones and in what way they are to be cured with medicines, and that it is dangerous in their cure to use iron so as not to ulcerate; and I have spoken of the generation of cranks through the carefulness of their cure.
E diyssero les antics que alcunas veguadas cranc es en loc on es possibla la eradicacio de lu, ayssi cum de cran le qual es en las mamillas o en la coyssa e a lor semblantz dels membres allocat a estrayre tot aquel, e majorment quan es comensant petit.	And they said to me that some broken bones are in a place where it is possible to remove them entirely, so as the bone which is in the breasts or in the crotch and similar to the limbs placed there, and especially when they are just beginning;
Mays quan es antiquat e es gra, no cove que te propries a lu, quar yeu non pogui sanar de aquel alcu ni no he vist autre, ni que sia pervengut ad aquo.	Not when it is old and big, do not cover that you approach it, for I cannot heal that bone nor have I ever seen such a thing, nor that it has come to water.
E la operacio en lu es quan es allocat ayssi cum havem dit, es que tu precedescas e laysses le malaute e purgues de colera negra alcunas veguadas, e aprop sagna aquel, si es atrobada replecio manifesta.	And the operation in it is when it is placed so as I have said, that you precede and lay down the patient, and purge him of black cholera with some pills, and then tie him up if there is manifest swelling.
E aprop prepara le malaute am preparacio en le qual sia locat am operacio, e aprop prohiceys en le trauc uncis les quals cove ad aquel; e aprop concava de tota part am la codena sego bona perexcrutacio entro que no romangua alcuna causa de las razitz de lu.	And then prepare the patient for the operation, where it is placed, and draw out with a hook the nails which are in that; and then dig with all carefulness within so that there does not remain any cause of the patient's wounds.
E layssa correr le sanc, e no abscidas aquel leugierament, e exprem les locs, e abstergeys le sanc gros tot am la tua ma o am instrument am le qual es a tu possible dels instruments.	And let the swelling run down, and do not allow that urine flow out, and squeeze the swellings, and abstain from drinking great amounts of water all at once or with the help of an instrument which is in your power of the instruments.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat de sanc gros inscizio de vena o de arceria, lahoras cauterisa aquela entro que·l flux del sanc sia cessat, e aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	But if there is contrariety of great swelling in a vein or artery, then cauterize that within so that the flow of the swelling ceases, and take care of that with other cure within so that it is healed.
Capitol .liv.	Chapter IV.
De curacio de ydropici.	On the Treatment of Hydropic Diseases.
Nos ja havem recomtat, en la divisio, de las specias de ydropici de l’aygua, e les senhals de quascuna especia, de la curacio de lu am medicinas.	We have already spoken, in the division, of the kinds of hydropic diseases of water, and of the characteristics of each kind, on the treatment of them with medicines.
E aquela la qual es curada am ferr no es sino la specia de althitas sola, e no es aproximat am ferr a la specia de timpanistres ni a la especia de yposarcha, quar aquo es mortal.	And that which is cured with iron is not but the kind of alkalines alone, and it does not approach the kind of timpanites nor the kind of hyposarcia, because water is deadly.
E quan tu ja has medicat aquesta especia de ydropici timpanistre am medicinas e no comfereys la tua medicacio, lahoras considera, quar si al malaute ja es conseguida debelitat, o es am aquel autra malautia otra ydropici, ayssi cum si es en lu tos o cos de ventre e semblant ad aquels, lahoras guarda te que no le mediques am ferr, quar temor es sobre aquo.	And when you have already healed this kind of hydropic disease with medicines and do not confer with your medicine, then be careful, because if it is in him a fever or pain in the stomach similar to those, then do not give him iron, for there is great fear about it.
Mays si tu vezes le malaute de vertut exuberant, e am lu no es autra malautia sino ydropici tant solament, e no enfant ni vielh, lahoras la manieyra de la operacio de lu es que tu eleves le malaute entre las tuas mas, e le ministre aprop lu exprema le ventre de lu am la sua ma, enpellen la aygua a la partida dejos del pentenilh, e aprop pren spatum spinos segon aquesta forma:	But if you see that the patient has an abundant virtue, and there is no other malady but hydropic disease alone, and neither child nor old man, then the way of performing the operation on him is that you raise the patient between your hands, and the minister squeezes his belly with his hand, driving the water out of a hole in the penthouse, and then takes a spike according to this form:
sia de dos partz agudas lonc, de aguda extremitat ayssi cum spatum; mays empero sia en lu alcuna brevitat petit a petit, per so que en la operacio am aquel no passes entro al budel, e que ledas aquel.	It is of two sharp parts long, with one sharp extremity so as to take a spike; but nevertheless it is in him a little brevity from little to little, so that in the operation on him there does not pass into the bowels, and that you hold him fast.
E aprop considera si la generacio de ydropici es de part dels budels, quar lahoras cove que tu am la seccio te alonhes del ombelic per la quantitat de tres ditz a las partidas dejos, en le dreyt de lu sobre le pentenilh.	And then consider if the generation of hydropic disease is from part of the bowels, because it is said that you have to raise three fingers from the navel, on the right side over the penthouse.
Mays si la generacio de hydropici es per malautia del fietge, lahoras la tua seccio sia sinistra del ombilic per tres ditz.	But if the generation of hydropic disease is from the illness of a child, then your section is on the left side of the navel for three fingers.
E si la generacio de lu es per la melsa, lahoras la tua seccio sia en le las dreyt.	And if the generation is by himself, then your section is on his right side.
E no cove que la tua seccio sia sobre le costat sobre le qual vol jaser le malaute per que no corron las superfluitatz ad aquel loc freul.	Do not cover that your section is on the rib over which you wish to operate on the patient so that the superfluity does not run into that place.
E aprop perfora am le instrument tota la codena, e aprop entromet en aquela seccio, e eleva la tua ma am le spatum entre la codena e·l siphac, e tu excorja aquel; e si’ la quantitat de una ungla o enviro.	And then pierce with the instrument all of it, and then insert it into that section, and raises his hand to the spike between the bowl and the syringe, and you squeeze him out; and if the quantity is of a little amount.
E aprop perforo le ciphac entro que pervengua le spatum al loc vuoyt, e es loc de l’aygua.	And then pierce the syringe so that it comes to the spike in the desired place, and this is a place of water.
E aprop extratz aquel e entromet un instrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	And then squeeze him out and insert an instrument, whose form is as follows:
e es semblant a canula de argent subtil; es fayt de argent o de eram o de lato leon, al qual en la partida pus bassa de lu es un petit trauc, e en les costatz de lu so tres traucs: dos de una partida e un del autra partida; e fayta es la extremitat de lu insciza segon la manieyra de pluma, ayssi cum vezes:	It is similar to a silver tube of thin diameter; it is made of silver or bronze or lead, and in its end there is a small hook, and in the sides there are three hooks: two from one side and one from the other; and its extremity is sharp according to the shape of a feather, as often as possible:
E en la extramitat de lu pus sobirana es armilla, quar quan le instrument perve al aygua, lahoras aquela tantost deysen sobre le instrument, donc evacua de l’aygua en la ora miega quantitat, quar si tu evacuas de aquela mes que no cove en la hora, fort leu mor le malaute per resolucio del sieu spirit animal, o accideys a lu cincopi que es appropinquada la mort.	And in the extremity of it is an armlet, because when the instrument touches water, then immediately it gives back to the instrument, at the rate of half a droplet, because if you give back from that less, very strongly you will harm the patient with its resolution by his animal spirit, or you approach him to five times that are approaching death.
Mays evacua de aquela segon la quantitat de la vertut de lu e segon que significan a tu las disposicios del malaute de la vertut del pols de lu e de la bontat de lu.	But evacuate from it the second quantity of its virtue and second what I have said to you about the dispositions of the patient's virtue and the goodness of him.
E aprop extrats le instrument, e rete l’aygua la qual causa es quar tantost es retenguda per la codena la qual rete le trauc que es sobre le ciphac del qual e recomtat a tu que perfores aquel segon aquela manieyra.	And then squeeze out the instrument, and hold back the water which causes it because so much is held back by the bowl over which the hook comes, which is on the syringe of which I have spoken to you that you pierce according to that form:
E aprop itera le instrument al autra dia si vezes le malaute tollerant aquo, e extratz de la aygua petita quantitat, e fay aquo per alcus jorns sobre temor, e guarda te de error entro que no romangua de l’aygua sino pauc.	And then repeat the instrument to the other day if the patient tolerates water, and squeeze out a little quantity of water, and make it run over by a certain time on account of fear, and be careful not to do so that it does not flow out of water but a little.
Mays si tu temes sobre le malaute, e leyssas de l’aygua gran quantitat, lahoras cura aquel am sepultura en arena cauda, e mota suzor en banh, e al solelh espere per lonc temps; e cura aquel am medicinas dessicativas entro que sia sanat.	But if you fear for the patient, and let a great quantity of water run out, then take care of him in the sand tail, and stir up the water with the hand, and wait for a long time; and take care of him with drying medicines so that he may be healed.
E cauteriza sobre le stomac, e la melsa e·l fitge aprop la extraccio de l’aygua, segon que yeu he recontat en aquo que es precedit.	And then cauterize over the stomach, and the illness and the child take away water from it according to what I have said in it that is preceded.
Capitol .lv.	Chapter V.
De la curacio dels enfants les quals so natz les locs de la urina no-perforatz.	On the Treatment of Children Who Are Born with Bladder Diseases That Do Not Puncture.
Alcunas veguadas alcun dels enfantz es eyssi del ventre de la sua mayre e·l cap de la sua mixtio no es perforat (o es trauc streyt o no es en son loc).	Some of the children are born in the belly of their mother, and the head of their mixture is not pierced (or it is a straight hook or is not in its place).
Donc cove coytar am perforacio de lu tantost que es nascut am spatum mot subtil segon aquesta forma:	So therefore pierce with a sharp spike as soon as he is born, according to this form:
E aprop pausa en le trauc un clavil subtil de plom e ligua aquel, e te per tres jorns o per .iiii.tre.	And then insert into the hook a small lead pin and tie it up, and for three days or for four.
E quant vol urinar sia remaugut e hurine; e aprop retorne aquel.	When he wants to urinate, let him rise and urinate; and then bring him back.
E si tu no pauses le plom, ja es possible que la urina la qual va sobre le loc, no leysa aquest claure.	And if you do not stop the lead, it is possible that the urine which runs over the place does not stay closed.
Mays aquel del qual le trauc es streyt sia medicat am clavil de Plom, ayssi cum havem dit, per trops dias entro que sia amplificat.	And the hook of that child who is straight is to be cured with a lead pin as I have said, for three days so that it increases.
Mays aquels en les quals es le trauc no en son loc, so leditz, la qual causa es quar de aquels, aquel que es nat e·l trau es deves la fi del cap de la vergua per que no pot urinar a las partidas dedintz, entro que eleva la vergua am la sua ma a las partidas desus; e no es a lu generacio, per so quar le sperma no pot pervenir a la mayre segon rectitut, e es malautia mot laga.	And those who do not have their hook in its place, let them be led, which causes it because from those comes the urination to the inside of him, and he raises his urine to his mouth through the opening; and it is not a generation, for the sperm cannot go into the mother according to its direction, and it is a disease.
E la manieyra de la operacio en lu es que·l malaute sia envessat sobre le sieu dos, e aprop exten le cap de la vergua de lu am la tua ma sinistra am vehement extraccio, e inscideys le cap del cap de la vergua del loc del perpucii am spatum agut, ayssi cum es inscizio de pluma, o que tu ne razas alcuna partida, per so que·l mieg de lu vengua semblant al cap de la vergua e que le trauc caia en le mieg loc segon que cove.	And the technique for performing the operation is that the patient be placed on their back, and their head raised up by two pillows, so that the right side of their face is close to your left hand with a violent extraction, and you insert the point of the scalpel into the hole at the nose with a sharp edge, or if you cut off any hair, so that the half of the patient's face is similar to the head of the scalpel and that the thread falls in its correct place as it falls.
E guarda te que en la tua operacio de flux de sanc, quar motas vetz accideys aquo; e pausa te a lu am aquo que abscindeys le sanc, e cura la plagua entro que si’ sanada.	And be careful that in your operation of the bleeding of the nose, for there can happen to it what happened there; and pause with him until you cut off the nose, and heal the wound before it is healed.
Capitol .lvi.	Chapter .lvi.
De albater le qual accideys en le prepucii en le cap de la vergua e de corropcio e negror e adherencia del prepucii del cap de la vergua.	Of the birth that happens in the foreskin at the head of the penis and of corruption and blackness and adhesions of the foreskin at the head of the penis.
Motas veguadas accideys aquest albater en la vergua e es eminencia de carn laga.	There are seen these birthmarks on the shaft and is prominence of meat lag.
E de aquela una es maligna e autra es no-maligna.	And of that one is malicious and the other is not-malicious.
No-maligna, cove que suspendas am unci subtil e abscindas aquela entro que aquela mondes tota; e aprop pausa sobre aquela coto submirgit en enguent egipciac; e aprop aquel, cura le am enguent diafinicon entro que sia sanat.	Not-malicious, then you pause with a small needle and cut off that one within that it is completely removed; and then apply to that, cure it with pure oil within that it is healed.
E si albater es maligna, de lega color, lahoras cove que tu aministres cauteri aprop la inscizio de lu e la razio de lu.	And if the birthmark is malicious, of a dark color, then you pause with him that you administer to it a pointed cautery and its rasping.
Mays si albater es en le prepuci del cap de la vergua no-circumcis, e la una partida de albater es dedintz le prepucii e l’autra partida es defora, lahoras cove que tu ostes albater le qual es dedintz al comensament entro que es consolidat; e lahora tu cura aquel deforo, quar quan tu curas aquel ensemps le prepuci, no es asegurat que no sia trinquat.	Maybe if the birthmark is in the foreskin at the head of the penis, and one part of the birthmark is inside the foreskin and the other part is outside, then you hold the birthmark that is inside until it is solid; and then you heal that which is outside, because when you heal that, if you heal that with a sharp edge, it is not certain that it has been circumcised.
E ja eysamen accideys en les genetius e en le prepuci negror e corruccio, adonc cove que tu conquavas tot aquo que ja es denigrat e que ja se vol corrompre o que ja es corrumput; e aprop lineys sobre aquel aprop aquo am mel, le qual es contusit am farina de scorsa de milgrana e de errs trissatz e crivellatz.	And it is seen in the thighs and in the foreskin blackness and corruption, then you hold all that has already been stained and is beginning to corrupt or has already been corrupted; and then you line with it towards that which has been cut with flour of sour milk and with three times crushed and sieved.
E aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sana.	And then heal that with the other healing within that it is healed.
Mays si endeve flux de sanc, lahoras aministra cauteri lunar segon aquesta forma:	Maybe if there is bleeding from the nose, then administer lunar cauterization according to this form:
quar cauteri juvatiu es a dos disposicios ensemps, so es a flux de sanc e a la plagua quan es corrumpuda.	because the younger cauterization is in two positions together, that is, for bleeding from the nose and for corruption when it is corrupted.
E si le cap de la vergua es corrodut e es destruit tot en la hora, lahoras cove que tu intrometas en lo meat del prepucii una canula de plom per so que le malaute urina per aquela.	And if the head of the penis is corroded and completely destroyed in that hour, then you pause with him that you introduce into the meat of the foreskin a tube of lead so that the patient urinates through it.
En la adherencia del prepucii am le cap de la vergua (et aquesta adherencia no accideys sino en aquel del qual le prepucii es sa, e sobre lu no es exhigida circumcizio; e quan accideys adherencia per plagua o per apostema) cove que excorjas am spatum obtus entro que sia dissolvut le liament e sia deliurat le cap de la vergua de tota partida.	In the adhesion of the foreskin to the head of the penis (and this adhesion does not happen except in that which the foreskin has, and on it circumcision is not required; and when adhesion happens by corruption or by abscess) then you cut with a blunt edge so that the ligament is dissolved and the head of the penis is completely freed.
E si es dificil desirnir aquelas exquisidament, lahoras cove que tu excorjes am spatum alcuna causa del cap de la vergua e del prepucii, e aysso es quar le prepucii, quan es subtil, fort leu es perforat per la sua subtilitat leugierament.	And if it is difficult to cut those carefully, then you cut with a blade the root of the head of the penis and of the foreskin, and thus because the foreskin, when it is subtle, is pierced easily by its subtlety.
E aprop separa entre·l prepucii e·l cap de la vergua am dra7 de li subtil, le qual ja es mulhat en l’aygua frega per que no adherescan autra veguada.	And then separate between the foreskin and the head of the penis with a small blade, which is already wet with water so that it does not adhere to anything else.
E aprop sia curat am vi stiptic entro que sia consolidat.	And then be cured with the fifth ingredient within that it has been consolidated.
Capitol .lvii.	Chapter .lvii.
De mundificacio dels enfants e de la curacio de aquo que accideys ad aquels de circumcisio.	Of the cleaning of children and of the healing of that which happens to those who are circumcised.
Circumcisio no es solucio de continuitat ayssi cum las autras plaguas: mays empero cum sia de la nostra operacio e de nostra voluntat, e lus de aquela sia propriament en les enfants, es necessari que asignem en aquela milhor operacio e via pus leugiera perdusent a salut.	Circumcision is not only a solution for those who are circumcised: however, because it is part of our operation and our will, and for those whose circumcision is properly done in children, it is necessary that we assign them to the most appropriate operation and with lighter steps that bring about salvation.
Donc dic que les antics no diyssero circumcisio en alcu dels lors libres, quar no n’usan en las suas leys, e no es sino quar havem aquisit per speriment, la qual causa es que yeu he atrobat la major partida dels artifexs e dels barbies usar circumcisir e mundificacio am novacula e am torores; e usan de liament am fiel e de inscizio am la ungla.	Therefore, I say that the children do not say circumcision in some of the free times, because they do not have it in their laws, and it is only because we have acquired it through experience, which causes me to surprise most of the craftsmen and barbers use circumcision and purification with a needle and cutting with a sharp edge.
E yeu ja he prohadas totas aquestas manieras e no atrobegui milhor mondificacio am forfexs, am liament am fiel que en mondificacio cum la ungla, quar motas vetz efugeys la codena pus desus, quar la codena del prepucii a dos tunicas, e roman la tonica pus dejos, e fort leu es forsat ad autra inscizio e dolor sicura.	And I have seen all these ways, and I do not find better purification with scissors, with a sharp edge in purification with the needle, because the thread of the foreskin is divided into two tunics, and the string is cut off completely, and it is forced with another cutting and a certain pain.
E am mundificacio le qual es fayta per alphecati, e es digital, del qual usan les sabatiers, no es segurada la inscizio de la extremitat del membre viril, quar fort leu intra en le trau de lu.	And in the purification that is done by alpecatation, which is a digital one, which is used by barbers, it is not secure to cut the extreme end of the male member, because it is forced into the trail of it.
Mays en la operacio am ungla, fort leu obazeys ferr e corromp la tua operacio.	Maybe in the operation with the needle, a strong man forces and corrupts your operation.
E la codena del enfant es breu per natura, e motas veguadas nays en tal manieyra que no ha necessitat de mondificacio, e yeu he vist aquel.	And the thread of the child is short by nature, and there are seen in such a way that it does not require purification, and I have seen that one.
Mays de la mondificacio que·s fa am forfexs e liamentz am fiel, la bontat, experiment descrobic a mi, quar las forfexs so de proporcional inscizio, per aquo quar la acuitat que es desus es ayssi cum la acuitat que es dejos; e donc cum tu premes la tua ma so proporcionadas dos acuitatz, e inscideysso segon una comperacio en un temps; e es fayta compressio del fiel am figura contenent la codena de la vergua de tota partida, am le qual no catz error de tot.	Maybe of the purification that is done with scissors and a sharp edge, goodness, experience tells me that, because the sharpness that is used is so sharp, therefore when you press your hand in proportionated two sharp things, and then cut it according to a comparison at a time; and a compression of the string is made to contain the thread of the penis completely, and with which there is no mistake at all.
E la manieyra de la operacio primeyra es que tu fassas estar le enfant majorment si es de aquels que entendo un petit, que no fassas sino que tu lies le fiel en la sua vergua tant solament, e que leysses aquel entro al autra dia.	And the technique of the first operation is that you leave the child very much if it is a small one, and that you do not cut but that you put the string on its penis only, and that you let go of that within another day.
E aprop fay aquel alegrar en tota aquela manieyra que es a tu possibla de aquo que recep la sua intelligencia.	And then he rejoices in all that way which is your possible way from it that receives its intelligence.
E aprop fa aquel estar entre las tuas mas estatuir preparadament, e no sia ges cezent; e occulta las forfexs en la tua ma o dejos le tieu pe, que l’enfant no veia aquelas ni degun autre dels instruments.	And then he makes himself ready to stand between your two hands, and does not get tired; and hides the scissors in your hand or leaves the little child, so that the child does not see those or anyone else's instruments.
E aprop entremet la tua ma a la vergua de lu e suffla en la codena, e tira aquela entro que sia eyssit le cap de la vergua, e aprop mondifica aquel de aquo que es agregat en ela de sordicia.	And then you place your hand on the penis of it and blows on the thread, and pulls that one in which it has been added to it of sordor.
E aprop lia le loc signat am fiel dobla, e aprop ligua pus bas de aquel un petit le segon liament, e aprop te am le dit pous e endic tieu le loc del liament dejos am bona retencio, e inscideys entre dos liaments.	And then he pulls the knot signed by the string twice, and then he ties it with another small string of the second string, and then you put him between two strings well-kept, and cut it between them.
E aprop eleva la codena sus leugierament e estratz le cap de la vergua; e aprop leyssa le sanc corre petit e petit, quar es milhor ; e pausa polvera desus e sobre la polvera pausa drap en le qual es spandut mugol de huou coyt en ayguaros concosit am oli rozat recent bo; e layssa aquel sobre aquel entro al autra dia; e cura aquel am curacio entro que sia sanat.	And then he raises the thread gently and strips off the head of the penis; and then he lets the nose run a little, because it is better; and then you pause with powder on it and over the powder apply oil of rose recently boiled; and then he leaves that one within another day; and cure that one with purification within that it is healed.
La forma de las forfexs a mondificacio, aquesta es la forma:	The shape of the scissors for purification, this is the form:
Sian las unas extramitatz no-talhantz e las autras sian talhant, que non sia yssit le ram del clau, e sia la longitut de las doas acuitatz ayssi cum la longitut de dos manubres engualment.	If the extremities of the scissors are not sharp and the others are, so that it is not cut on the side of the claw, and the length of the two sharp things is as the length of two hands clasped together.
Mays la error en mundificacio es quar fort leu efugeys la codena intrinseca tota, o partida de lu deves la inscizio.	Maybe the error in purification is that it is forced with a thread completely inside, or a part of it has to be cut.
Donc cove que tu extendas aquela de la tua hora am la tua ungla denant la apostemacio del loc e que inscidas aquela segon equalitat.	Then you hold that one of your hand in front of the apostenacy of the place and cut it according to equality.
E si no la podes tenir am la tua ungla, lahoras extratz aquela am unci e inscideys aquela.	And if you cannot hold it with your finger, then extract it with a pin and pierce it.
Mays si son passatz tres dias, e roman aquo que es imflat dejos la vergua apostemat, lahoras tu leyssa aquo entro que sia cedat le apostema caut, e excorja aquel am fecilitat, e inscidex aquel segon que a tu es preparat.	May the pain have lasted for three days, and then let it be that the pus is discharged from the wound; then leave it there until it is cured, and pierce it with a sharp tool and extract it with ease, and then pierce the second one as well, as if it were prepared.
E guarda te del cap de la vergua, quar no nosera a lu aquo.	And beware of the head of the stick, for it will not be given to you.
E donc cura aquel am aquo que la plagua consolida de las polveras las quals havem recomtadas en le tractat de las polveras.	And therefore take care that the plague does not spread from the powder, which we have talked about in the treatise on powder.
E si es inscidit de la codena sobre mesura, e obezeys a las partidas desus, aquo no notz a lu.	And if it is pierced with a sharp object more than necessary, and you follow the instructions of this chapter, then do not give up hope.
E mays cura aquel am aquo que havem dit entro que sia sanat.	And take care that the pain does not last long, for I have said that it should be cured.
Capitol .lviii.	Chapter LVIII.
De curacio de urina retenguda en la vesiqua.	Of the Treatment of Urine Retained in the Bladder.
Retencio de urina en la vesica es fayta per oppulacio fayta per peyra o per sanc congilat, o per poyre o per carnada, e semblantz ad aquels de aquo que havem dit de las manieyras de curacio en la divisio.	Retention of urine in the bladder is caused by obstruction due to stones or a dilated ureter, or by pollution or fecal matter, and is treated in accordance with the methods described in the chapter on treatments of the division.
E si no es dissolvuda la urina, e veses retencio de lu esser per peyra le qual ja es en le col de la vesica, lahoras cove que le malaute sia encorbat sobre les sieus denolhs.	And if the urine is not dissolved and the retention of urine is caused by a stone that is already in the neck of the bladder, then let the patient be seated on a chair.
E aprop conponeys les pes de aquel sobre le sieu dos e extendas le sieu ventre de la partida pus desus del sieu dos, e le malaute estrengua le sieu ale tant quant es a lu possible.	Then bring the feet of the patient together on his two legs and extend his abdomen by pushing upwards from under the thighs, and strain the patient's anus as much as possible.
Donc lahoras le col de la vesica es costreyt ha espulsio de la peyra a las partidas detras, per que la urina es absolta.	Then let the neck of the bladder be constricted by the application of pressure from behind, so that the urine is completely discharged.
E si no es dissolvuda am aquo que havem dit he vehement es fayta la causa sobre le malaute, lahoras cove que aministres extraccio de lu am instrument le qual es apelat siringua, del qual aquesta es la forma: Sia de argent e sia subtil leon conquau, ayssi cum canula de pena de ausel am subtilitat de ray lonc en similitut d’un palm e mig, al qual sia cana subtil en le cap de lu.	And if the urine is not dissolved by the treatment described above for the patient, then extract it with an instrument called a syringe, which has this shape: It is of silver and thin, like a needle made of fine bronze, about half the length of a palm, with a thin tube at one end, like the tip of a feather.
E la manieyra del eyssiment de la urina per aquel es que prenguas le fiel doblat e lies en la extramitat de lu lana o coto per bona liadura; e entrometas las extramitatz del fiel en la partida dejos de la ciringua, e inscideys am las forfexs si superflueys alcuna causa de la lana, mays intromet la en la canula am vehemencia E aprop enongeys la ciringua am boder e am album de huou.	And the way to introduce the urine into the syringe is this: bend the tube and tie it at its end with a good knot; then introduce the two ends of the tube, one after the other, into the opening of the bladder, and pierce them both with sharp scissors if there is any need for cutting away any hair from the opening; but first insert the tube into the urethra with force.
E fay cezer le malaute sobre la selha, e embroca la vesiqua de lu e la vergua am olis umitz, e oli de oliva e ayguaros.	Then let the patient lie on his back and place a pillow under his feet; anoint the bladder with olive oil and water, and with oil of olive and vinegar.
E aprop entromet la ciringua am facilitat entro que pervengua a la razit de la vergua; e aprop dobla la vergua desus a la partida del embelic; e aprop empelleys la ciringua dintz aquela; e aprop empelleys aquela entro que pervengua a la vesica, e aquela centa le malaute esser pervenguda a la causa vuoda, e no es fayt asso segon aquest orde, sino le meat en le qual va a tortuositat.	Then insert the syringe with ease until it reaches the root of the penis; then double the tube upside down from the opening; and then pierce that one until it reaches the bladder, and this one must be inserted in the order described above, unless there is some obstacle to its progress.
E aprop exten le fiel am la lana petit a petit, quar la urina siec la lana.	Then stretch the tube little by little, for urine causes hair to grow.
Aprop extratz aquela e fay per curacio urina, e usa ciringua, no cesses fer aquo e usa ciringua entro que sia evacuada la vesica e le malaute atrobe alleviacio.	Then extract that one and use it to pass urine, and use the syringe if there is difficulty in passing urine, and with the help of the syringe until the bladder is completely emptied and the pain relieved.
Capitol .lix.	Chapter LIX.
De qualitat de clisterizacio de la vezica am clampcedra e am semblantz instrumentz les quals sian acordants ad aquo.	Of the Qualities of Bladder Irrigation with a Cistern and Similar Instruments.
Quan accideys en la vesica ulceracio o apostema, o sanc congilat en aquela, o es coartat poyredura, e vols en aquela destillar ayguas e medicinas, lahoras sia fayt am instrument le qual es apelat clampcedra, e aquesta es la forma de lu:	When an ulcer or abscess appears in the bladder, or there is a sudden swelling due to an injury, and you want to irrigate the bladder with water and medicines, then use an instrument called a cistern, which has this shape:
sino que en la extramitat de lu es sorda, so es clausa.	It is closed at one end, like a jar, and has a hole in its side for a pipe to pass through.
Et en aquela so tres traucs: dos de la una partida , ayssi quo vezes.	There are three openings in the top: two smaller ones next to each other, and a larger one between them.
En le comensament es loc concau, en le qual es aquo que es enpellit, e sia segon quantitat que oppile aquel, ses addicio, entro que quan alcuna causa es ab aquel tirada de las humiditatz, sia atirada, e quan es expellida, am aquo sia atirada, e quan es expellit lonc, segon que fa clampcedra am la qual es phicat naphta en las batalhas de mar.	At the beginning it is placed in a wet place, and according to the amount of urine produced; if any cause makes it flow, then let it flow with urine, and when it is expelled, let it be collected with water; and when it is expelled far away, according to how the cistern is shaped, so that it flows back into the bladder with urine, and when it is discharged from the body, according to the shape of the cistern, as if it were applied in a battle at sea.
Donc cum tu vols prohicir humiditatz en la vesica, entromet la extremitat de clapcedra en la humiditat, e atira am aquel aquo que es empellit a las partidas desus, quar la humiditat es atirada en la conquavitat de clapcedra.	Then when you want to introduce humid air into the bladder, insert the end of the pipe into the moisture in the cistern; for the moisture is introduced into the bladder with the air that is forced upwards.
E aprop entromet la extramitat de clapcedra en la vergua segon que havem recomtat en la ciringua; e aprop empelleys la humiditat am aquo que empelleys, quar aquela humiditat perve a la vesica tantost, e le malaute cent aquela.	Then insert the end of the tube into the penis, as described for the syringe; then let the moisture be forced with air, for that moisture will pass to the bladder and also to the man, for the moisture is forced by the air.
Forma del cristeri subtil am le qual la vesica es cristerizada, e es aquela la forma:	This is a shape of cistern made of subtle metal, so that the bladder can be irrigated with water and medicines; this is its shape:
E sia fayta de argent o de lato, de la qual le cap pus aut sia semblant a petita pluma, e dejos lu cana dedintz liament.	It is to be made of silver or lead, the top part being like a small feather, and having a tube extending inside; and let it have a cover.
E aprop pren vesica de moto, e pausa en aquela la humiditat que vols cristirizar en la vesica, e aprop lia aquela entre dos am fort liguatura am fiel doble, e escalfa aquela humiditat sobre le foc.	Then set the bladder in motion, and let the moisture that you want to infuse be placed between two folded tubes; then heat that moisture with fire.
E aprop entromet la extremitat del cristeri en la vergua.	Then insert the end of the cistern into the penis.
E aprop estrenh la tua ma sobre la vesica am la humiditat am strectura descent entro que·l malaute centa que aquela humiditat ja es pervenguda a la vesica.	Then take your hand off the bladder with the tube attached, and let the moisture reach the bladder; for that moisture will be forced by the man's movement.
Mays si a tu no es present vesica, lahoras tu pren una pessa de parguames e fay de aquel cercle; e perfora aquel de tota la sua retonditat; e aprop entromet fiel fort en aquels traucs, ayssi quo so revolgut; e aprop agregua le cercle ayssi quo es agreguat alsofatur, pus que tu pausas en aquel aquo que tu vols de las humiditatz, e olis e ayguas.	And if you do not have a bladder, then take a pig's bladder and make it into a circle; then pierce that circle throughout; then insert the tube strongly into the openings, turning them as you go along; then add the circle to the end of the tube, as soon as it is pierced, so that there will be no leakage; but first place the tube in water and oil.
E aprop tu lia aquel en le instrument e fay am aquel ayssi cum has fayt am la vesica, e exprescio am la tua ma entro que la humiditat pervengua a la vesica.	Then take that instrument and place it on the bladder, and express the moisture onto the bladder, so that it reaches the bladder; for that moisture will reach the man by movement of the bladder.
Capitol .lx.	Chapter LXI.
De extraccio de peyra.	Of the Discharge of Urine.
Nos ja havem dit en la divisio las specias de peyra e curacio de lu am medicinas, e la diferencia entre peyra engendrada en los ronhos e peyra engendrada en la vesica, e les senhals de aquela.	We have already talked about the types of urine and the treatment of it with medicines, and the difference between urine produced in the lungs and that produced in the bladder, and the signs of each one.
E havem dit la peyra en la qual catz operacio am ma, e seccio.	We have described the types of urine according to its smell and color, and the treatment of it with medicines; we have also spoken about the operation of cats and section.
E la peyra engendrada en la vesica propriament es aquela que es ficada en la vesica.	Urine produced in the bladder itself is that which is retained in the bladder.
E yeu so narrant aquel am exposicio manifesta e abreviacio.	We have described this urine with manifest description and abbreviation.
Donc dic que peyra engendrada en la vesica majorment ve als enfantz; e dels senhals de lu es que la urina que es eyssida de la vesica es semblant a aygua en la sua subtilitat, e apar en aquela arena; e le malaute fregua la sua vergua, e motas veguadas pen, e aprop es dressada; e am aquo yeys foro le cul en motz de aquels.	Then let me tell you that urine produced in the bladder is mostly passed by children; and the signs of it are that the urine passed from the bladder is like water in its subtility, and appears on the skin; and the man rubs his penis, and then it looks like sperm; and at the moment of ejaculation it appears like a thread.
E es laugiera la sanacio dels enfants de aquela entro que han conseguitz xiiii ans; e es dificil curacio en les viels.	This treatment is good for children for twelve years, and difficult to treat in the elderly.
Mays en les joves es migiera per aquo quar es entre aquels.	It is halfway between water and urine in young people, as it is somewhere between these two ages.
E de aquel del qual la peyra es major e la curacio es pus leugiera; E si es pauca, es contraria ad aquela.	And of that which produces the least urine and has the most treatment; and if there is little, it is opposite to that.
Donc cum pervenem a la curacio de aquela, cove al comensament de aquela que mondifiquem le malaute am cristeri le qual extragua tota la fenda la qual es en les sieus budels; quar aquela fenda alcunas veguadas prohibeys la envencio de la peyra deves la inquisicio de lu.	Then let us come to the treatment of urine, let us examine the man from head to foot; for that hole in the bladder may sometimes be a cause of the disease through which urine passes; for those holes sometimes prevent urine from being discharged.
E aprop sia pres le malaute am les sieus pes e sia contosit e maugut enjos per so que la peyra descenda al preon de la vesica, o que saute de loc aut alcunas veguadas.	And place the patient on their side and press them with your feet and hold them in this way so that the pain does not move to the front of the bladder or jump from one place to another.
E aprop fay aquel cezer entre las tuas mas preparat, e las mas de lu sian dejos las coysas de lu, per so que la vesica tota sia fayta declinant a las partidas dejos.	And place this hook between your legs, and the legs of the patient be left open, that the whole bladder may decline into the parts which are left open.
E aprop perquier aquela e tota aquela deforo.	Then turn around and lie on your side with your feet towards the window.
Donc si sentes la peyra en l’espazi, lahoras tu te coyta tantost am seccio sobre lu.	Then if you feel pain in the space, then turn yourself over onto your back with your legs open.
E si no catz de tot dejos le tieu tocament, lahoras cove que tu untes am oli le tieu dit indic de la ma sinistra, si malaute es enfant, o le dit miga si es jove complit, e entrometas aquel en le sieu cul.	And if you do not completely free the patient's treatment, then cover yourself with a blanket and anoint him with olive oil from the left side, if he is a child, or with the oil of the day if it is an adult, and enter him in his buttocks.
E perquier de la peyra entro que stia dejos le tieu dit.	Then turn yourself over so that the pain is on the left side.
E converteys aquela petit a petit entro al col de la vesica.	And slowly turn that little hook little by little towards the neck of the bladder.
E aprop prem sobre aquel am lo tieu dit, e expelleys aquel a las partidas defora ves le loc del qual vos la seccio.	And press on it with your hand from the left side, and expel that little hook to one side through the opening where you have turned yourself over.
E comanda al ministra que prema la vesica am la sua ma; e comanda a un autra ministra que am la sua ma dextra extenda les genetius a las partidas desus, e am la sua autra ma remaugua la codena la qual es dejos les genetius, en partida del loc en le qual se fa la seccio.	And order the minister to press on the bladder with his hand; and order another minister to open the legs at their ends, and to push back the pubic bone from the opening where you have turned yourself over, in front of the leg.
E aprop entromet espatum be inscident del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	Then enter the spatalum blade that is not sharp which has this form:
e scindeys en lu aquo que es entre·l cul e·ls genetius, no en le mieg loc, abantz al latz de la coyssa sinistra; e sia la seccio sobre aquela peyra e·l tieu dit sia en le cul, e sia fayta seccio transversa, per que la seccio defora sia ampla e dedintz streyta segon la quantitat que egrecio de la peyra sia a lu possibla, e no major, quar fort leu comprem le tieu dit le qual es en le cul la peyra deves la seccio, e es foro-getada ses defacultat.	Then cut him in half with that blade between the buttocks and the legs, not in the middle, moving towards the left side of the crotch; and make a transversal section there, so that the opening from behind is wide and smooth according to the amount that pain allows you to do it, and no more, because if you press too hard on the bladder it may burst.
E sapias que de la peyra es alcuna a la qual so angle e margers, per que le eyssiment de lu es fayt deficil per aquo.	You should know that there is no pain which does not cause difficulty in turning yourself over, since it becomes difficult to enter with the hook.
E de aquela aquo es leon semblant a glan, e es redonda, e es fayt de lu leugier eyssiment.	And of that water is like a lion's roar, and it is round, and is very difficult to enter with ease.
Donc si es aquela al qual so angles e marger, ajusta en la fissura.	Then if it is that which has no angles or edges, adjust it in the opening.
E si no es ayssi foro-getada, lahoras cove que tu engenes sobre aquel, o que strenguas sobre aquel am gesti decentment, la extremitat del qual sia ayssi cum lima am le qual strenguas sobre la peyra, e no evasesca de lu; o que entrometas dejos lu instrument subtil de curvada extremitat.	And if it is not easily entered thus, then cover yourself with it or hold it gently against your body, the tip of which is pointed at the place where you feel pain, and do not remove it from there; or enter a thin hook from one side.
Mays si tu no podes sobre aquel, lahoras tu amplifica le trauc un petit, e si tu veus flux de sanc, abscindeys en strenh aquel am vitriol trissat.	Maybe if you cannot turn yourself over, then increase the stretch a little, and if you feel pain in your feet, cut it with a sharp three-sided instrument.
Mays si la peyra es mays de una, lahoras al comensament tu impelleys la ma a la boca de la vesica, e aprop inscideys sobre lu; e aprop impelleys un petit aprop aquo; e semblantment fay si son motas mays de doas.	Maybe if the pain is more than one place, then at first you press your hand to the opening of the bladder and cut yourself on it; and then press a little hook into it; and make a small cut if there are more than two places.
E si es peyra mot gran, lahoras ignorancia es que tu inscidas aquel am gran seccio, quar accideys al malaute una de doas causas: o que mora o que endevengua a lu destillacio de urina continuabla, per aquo quar le loc no es de tot consolidat.	And if the pain is very much, then ignore that you cut it with a large section, because such things happen to the patient when there are two causes: or because the bladder is full, or because the urine runs continuously, since the opening is not completely closed.
Mays aministra expulcio de lu entro que sia fora-getada, o engenia en la fractura de lu am las forfexs entro que extragua aquela en pessas.	Then minister expel from him whatever is inside that is not easily removed, or enter with a hook to cut it into pieces.
Donc cum tu auras cumplit la tua opperacio, lahoras omple la plagua de enses de aloe e de sanc de drago, e strenh aquel.	Then when you have finished your work, then fill the wound with plant juice of aloe and dragon's blood, and press it.
E pausa sobre aquel drap enfus en oli e vi, o en oli rozat e aygua frega, per so que apostema caut sia cedat.	And place a cloth over yourself made of linen, or of rosewater, or of soap water, that the blister may not burst.
E aprop resupina le malaute sobre le sieu col, e no deslias le liament entro al tertz dia.	Then turn the patient on their side and do not release the ligature within three days.
E cum aquel auras desliat, embroca le loc am aygua e mot oli, e aprop cura aquel am enguent diafinicon e am enguent diabazilicon entro que sia sanat.	Then when you have removed the ligature, dip the wound in water and some oil, and then cure it with a mixture of turpentine and saltpetre, and with a mixture of caraway and calamine within which is cured.
Mays si en la plagua accideys apostema caut, adhust e corrosiu, e de aquel semblantz ayssi cum si le sanc es en la vesica congelat, e per lu es la hurina prohibida (e aquo es conogut per la egressio del sanc am urina), a donc entromet lo tieu dit en la plagua e extratz aquel sanc, quar si roman provoca la vesica a corropcio de la vesica e de lu putrefaccio.	Maybe if you have a blister that bursts, it will become painful and the bladder will be damaged, and it may cause corruption of the bladder and decay; enter with your hook into the wound and extract the piece of skin, since if it is not removed it will lead to the death of the bladder.
E aprop lava la plagua am vi agre, aygua e sal, e am opposicio a tota specia, am aquo que conveneys a lu de la curacio entro que sia sanat.	Then wash the wound with vinegar, water, and salt, and in opposition to all kinds of medicine, with water that brings the cure within itself so that it is cured.
E cove en las horas de tota la curacio que tu lies amdos las coyssas e ajustes las medicinas las quals so pausadas sobre le loc.	Then in the hours when all the cures are finished, place both cushions and adjust the medicines which have been placed on the wound.
E si la peyra es petita e es en le meat de la vergua, e es ficat en lu, e eyssement de urina es prohibit, lahoras cura aquel am aquo que yeu recomti denant que pervenguas a seccio, quar tropas veguadas per aquesta curacio yest acusat de seccio; e ja yeu e esproat aquo, e es que tu prenguas un perforador de ferr alfelut, del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And if the pain is small and it is in the middle of the penis, and is stuck there, and there is no urine coming out, then cure that with water that you drink before starting the section, because three veils have been removed for this treatment; and already I drank some, and now I will drink some more. And this is how one cuts with a knife in such cases:
de triangulada extramitat, agut, ficat en fust.	a three-sided tool, taken up, fixed, placed at the tip.
E aprop pren fiel, e lia am aquel la vergua dejos la peyra per so que no retorne a la vesica.	Then take it firmly, and lay it on the patient's side so that the pain does not return to the bladder.
E aprop entromet le ferr en la vergua, perforant am fecilitat entro que·l perforador vengua ad aquela peyra.	Then enter the knife into the penis with ease, piercing easily at its tip:
E revolveys le perforador am la tua ma en aquela peyra petit a petit, e tu perforsa la perforacio de lu entro que fassas aquel del autra part penetrar; quar la urina tantost es absolta.	Then turn the knife around in that same place little by little, and you will open the hole there if it does not come out easily, since the urine comes out at times.
E aprop prem la tua ma sobre aquo que es romas de la peyra de la partida deforo de la vergua, quar aquela es trinquada, e es foro-getada am la urina, e le malaute es sanat.	Then place your hand on that which is at the back of the penis' opening, because it is curved, and it is easily removed with urine, and the patient is healed.
Mays si aquesta curacio no es a tu aparelhada per alcuna causa la qual prohibeys de aquela, lahoras lia un fiel dejos la peyra, e autra fiel desus la peyra.	Maybe if this treatment does not suit you for some reason which prevents you from using it, then place one fid on the patient' side, and another fid on their back.
E aprop encideys sobre la peyra en aquela vergua entre doas liaduras.	Then enter two fid's on the wound between two ligatures.
E aprop extratz aquela.	Then remove that.
E aprop deslia le liament e mondifica le sanc congilat, le qual es fayt en la plagua.	Then release the ligature and cure the blistered skin, which is done in the wound.
E no es necessari liament de fiel dejos la peyra, sino per que no retorne a la vesica, e l’autre liament desus sino, quar quan es desliat le fiel aprop la egrecio de la peyra, la codena retorna a son loc e cobra la plagua.	It is not necessary to place a fid on the patient' side in order to prevent it from returning to the bladder, but rather so that it does not move; and when the fid is removed, the cord returns to its place and heals the wound.
E per aquo es a tu necessari quan lias le fiel desus, que tu eleves la codena a las partidas desus, o que retorne deves le tieu compliment, e cobra la plagua ayssi co havem dit.	It is necessary to support the cord on top of the patient' side when you tie it up, so that the cord does not move; or return it towards the front, and mend the wound like this:
Capitol .lxi.	Capitol 31.
De extraccio de peyra de las femnas.	From the extraction of women's pain.
Peyra en las femnas pauc es engendrada.	Pain in women is rare.
Mays si ve peyra ad alcuna de aquelas, lahoras dificil es la curacio de lu, e es prohibida per tropas manieyras.	Maybe if you have any of that pain, then the treatment for it is difficult and requires special methods.
La una de lor es quar la femna fort leu es verges.	One of them is because a strong woman's laughter is annoying.
E la segonda es quar tu no trobas femna be scient que descroba si meteyssa al metge quan es casta, o es de las femnas haventz maritz.	Another reason is that you do not find any beautiful woman who can discover whether she is married or not, or if she has been married before.
La tersa es quar tu no hatrobas femna be sabent aquesta art, majorment la operacio am ma.	The third reason is that you do not know any beautiful woman who knows this skill, mostly the operation with her hands.
E la quarta es que·l loc de la seccio sobre peyra en las femnas es longinc del loc de la peyra, per que indigeys de seccio preonda, e en aquela es temor.	The fourth reason is that the place where you cut on women is far from where the pain is, so it hurts more, and there is fear in that.
Mays si necessitat provoca a tu ad aquo, lahoras cove que tu prenguas una femna metga be scient, e pauc es atrobada.	Maybe if necessity compels you to do this, then you will find a good wife who is not afraid.
Mays si tu es privat de aquela, lahoras cerca metga quast e subtil, o presenta una femna matrona be esenhada en le feyt de las femnas, o femna que en aquesta art ennueys partida del art.	If you are lacking one, then seek out a middle-aged woman with a slender and gentle figure, or the lady who is being carried in this article's treatment of women.
Donc fay aquela present, e comanda a lu que fassa tot aquo que tu li mandaras, de la enquisicio sobre la peyra al comensament; la qual causa es que reguarde si la femna es verges, lahoras cove que meta lo sieu dit en le cul de lu e quiera la peyra.	Therefore, have her present herself and command her to do whatever you send her to do, from the inquiry about the matter until the beginning; this is because she will look whether the woman is a virgin, then cover that she places her foot in his buttocks and wants the matter.
Donc si atroba aquela, coarte aquela dejos le sieu dit, e lahoras comanda a lu que inscida sobre aquela.	Therefore, if you are able to get her, remove those from her, and then command her to mark her.
Mays si no es verge, lahoras comanda a la matrona que entrometa lo sieu dit en le conh de la malauta e enquiera sobre la peyra, pus que pausa la sua ma sinistra sobre la vesica, e comprem aquela am bona comprecio.	If she is not a virgin, then command the middle-aged woman to insert her foot into the patient's crotch and mark it out, also that she puts her left hand on the bladder, and the servant holds her firmly.
Donc si atroba aquela, lahoras cove que gradantment maugua aquela de l’orrifici de la vesica a las partidas dejos am somman de la sua vertut entro que pervengua am aquel a la razit de la coyssa.	Therefore, if you are able to get her, then cover that she gently touches the orifice of the bladder at the sides while summoning a small amount of her juice; this is because it reaches the edge of the cushion.
E aprop inscida sobre aquela apposicio de la maytat del conh deves la razit de la coyssa de qualque part sia a lu parada e cent la peyra en aquela partida, e·l dit de lu no sia remaugut de la peyra coartan dejos lu.	And then mark that position of the middle-aged woman' head at the edge of the crotch from which some part comes out to him stopped and centered the matter on that part, and this saying of him is not remanded due to the matter coming out by cutting those from him.
E la seccio sia pauca al comensament; e aprop entrometa lo ray sobre aquela seccio, e si sent la peyra, lahoras ajuste en seccio segon la quantitat la qual sap que la peyra sira getada de aquela.	And the incision should be little at the beginning; then he inserted the ray on that section, and if he feels the matter, then adjust the section according to the quantity which I know that the matter will go out of it.
E sapias que las specias de peyra son motas: quar de aquelas es pauca e gran, e leon e aspra, e longua e redonda, e havent ramps.	And you should know that the matter of the matter is small: for there are some that are little and great, and fierce and sharp, and long and round, and have spines.
Donc tu sapias quantas specias so de lu per aquo que tu signifiques sobre aquo que vols.	Therefore you should know how many species of it are for the water that you intend to place on this that you want.
E si tu veus flux de sanc, ajusta en le loc vetriol trissat e te aquela per una hora entro que sia abscindit le sanc, e aprop retorna a la tua operacio entro que la peyra sia fora-getada.	And if you want to remove the pain quickly, then adjust in that virulent place three times and hold it there for an hour until it is removed, and then return to your operation before the matter comes out.
E fay que prepares am tu dels instrumentz les quals e ditz en la extraccio de peyra en les homes, per so que sias ajudat per aquels en la tua operacio.	And make sure that you prepare the instruments which he says in the extraction of matter in men for you to be helped by them in your operation.
E si tu veus flux de sanc, e sabes que la expulcio del sanc es de la arceria que es insciza, lahoras tu pausa polvera sobre le loc e estrenh aquel am pulvils e strictura descent, e no iteras aquo; e layssa la peyra e no extraguas aquela, quar fort leu morira la malauta.	And if you want to remove the pain quickly, and you know that the extraction of the matter is from the incision, then you pause dust on the place and stir it with powder and stricture down, and do not repeat this; and leave the matter behind and do not extract that, for a strong person will die.
E aprop cura la plagua.	Then heal the plague.
Donc cum es cedada la acuitat del sanc aprop alcus jorns, e·l loc se poyreys, lahoras tu retorna a la tua operacio entro que la peyra sia fora-getada.	Therefore, when the pain becomes less acute, he recovers in that place, then you return to your operation before the matter comes out.
Capitol lxii.	Chapter 62.
De seccio sobre ernia acoza.	About Section on Hernias.
Hernia ayguoza no es sino agregacio de humiditat en le ciphac blanc lo qual es dejos la codena dels genetius contenent le huou, e es nompnat ciphac.	Hernias are nothing but an accumulation of moisture in the cipha (a white fluid), which leaves the cord of the genitals containing water, and is called cipha.
E alcunas veguadas es en le propri pannicol le qual a lu preparec natura en la partida del huou, entro que sia cuyat que ja es autre huou; e es la codena del genetiu entre le ciphac blanc le qual havem dit, e no es aquo sino tart.	Some are in the proper pannicula (a white fluid) which nature has prepared at the joining of the genitals, before it is a different baby; and this is the cord of the genitals between the cipha (white fluid) which we have mentioned, and is not water but tar.
E la generacio de aquest hernia es per debelitat la qual accideys als genetius, per que ad aquels es efundunda aquesta materia, e alcunas vetz accideys per percuscio fayta sobre les genetius.	The generation of such a hernia is due to the weakening that occurs in the genitals, so that this substance is enfused on them, and sometimes it is caused by trauma made on the genitals.
E aquesta humiditat es havent motas colors, quar la color de lu o es declinant a citrina o a sanguinent, o rog, o es negra feculenta, o es ayguosa blanqua, e es aquo que es mays.	And this moisture is not colored, for its color is changing to yellow or blood, or rust, or black, or it is white and moist, and is water which is more.
E les senhals per les quals es saubut on es aquesta agreguacio de aygua so aquestz: quar si es en le ciphac blanc le qual havem dit, lahoras le apostema es redon declinant un pauc a longitut ayssi cum figura de huou, e appar le genetiu, quar la humiditat conte aquel de tota part.	And the signs by which this accumulation of water can be detected: for if it is in the cipha  (white fluid) which we have mentioned, then the apoptope is slightly red towards the end, and has a cow's shape, and appears between the genitals, since that moisture contains all its parts.
E si la humiditat es en le propri pannicol, lahoras le apostema es redon am partida del huou e per aysso hom estima que es autre huou.	And if the moisture is in the proper pannicula  (a white fluid), then the apoptope is slightly at the joining of the baby and thus one can estimate that it is another baby.
E si la humiditat es entre la codena dels genetius e·l ciphac blanc, lahoras catz dejos le centiment.	And if the moisture is between the cord of the genitals and the cipha  (white fluid), then it is half a centimeter long.
E cum tu vols la cognicio de la color de la humiditat, lahoras tu esproa la color de la humiditat en le apostema am entromes cayrat del qual la forma es precedida; e segon aquo que es eyssit en le vestigi del entromes, jutga de aquo que es dedintz lu.	And if you want to know the color of the moisture in the apoptope on the sides of which the shape is preceded; and according to what it has come out in the trace of the side, judge that it is inside it.
Donc quan nos vinem a la curacio de lu am ferr, lahoras cove que comandem al malaute que sia fleubotomat si aquo es a tu possibla, e vezes le cos de lu ple.	Therefore when we come to the healing of him through the drinking, then cover that we order the dog that he is drinking if water is possible for him; and wash his fur.
E aprop sia resupinat sobre le sieu dos sobre alcuna causa un pauc auta, e pausa dejos lu motz draps.	Then he should be put on his back for a little while or two, and have left him alone, and cover him with a few sheets of linen.
E aprop setz tu sobre la part sinistra de lu, e comanda al ministra que segua a la dextra de lu, le qual extenda la sua vergua a hun de dos latz a la codena dels genetius e a la partida del mirac del ventre.	Then set yourself on the left side of him, and command the minister to follow the right side of him, which extends his staff between the cord of the genitals and the marvel of the womb.
E aprop pren spatum lat e scindeys la codena dels genetius del mieg loc per la longitut entro prop le pentenilh.	Then prepare a knife and cut the cord of the genitals from their place along the length up to the pentennill.
E sia fayta la seccio segon rectetut engualment distant de la linha que deveseys la pel dels genetius, entro que pervengua al ciphac blanc comprehendent.	Then the section should be made according to a guide that is equally distant from the line that you want to follow on the fur of the genitals, so that it reaches the cipha   (white fur) all at once.
E excorja aquel, e observa, e guarda te per aysso que tu no inscidas aquel; e la tua excoriacio am la qual aquel excorjas per partida jassia que sia suspenduda am le huou mays e subtilment escruta am la excoriacio segon la quantitat a tu possibla.	Then peel it, and observe, and keep it aside for such a thing that you do not peel it; and your peeling of it on the side that is peeling from the baby as much as possible, and gently examine the peeling according to the quantity that you want.
E aprop perfora le ciphac ple de aygua am perforacio ampla, e extratz tota l’aygua.	Then he should pierce the cipha   (watery fur) with a wide piercing, and take out all the water.
E aprop separa entre doas labias de la seccio am uncis, e exten le ciphac a las partidas desus; e no toques la codena les genetius comprehendent, e inscideys le ciphac en aquela manieyra que es a tu possible.	Then separate the two sides of the section by a nail, and extend the cipha    (white fur) at its sides; and do not touch the cord of the genitals all at once, and cut the cipha   (white fur) in the way that you want.
E inscideys aquel am la sua totalitat o en pessas, e majorment le sieu latz subtil, quar si tu no perscrutas exquisidament la inscizio de lu, no es fayta segurtat que la aygua no retorne.	Then cut it in its entirety or in parts, and most importantly, the sides of the cipha   (white fur), since if you do not scrutinize carefully the cutting of him, the water will not return.
Mays si le huou procezeys de aquela defora de la sua codena en la ora de la tua operacio, lahoras quan tu auras complida la seccio del ciphac, retorna dedintz aquel, e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la codena dels genetius am sutura, e aprop cura aquel ayssi cum las autras plagua, entro que sia sanat.	If the baby is removed from the cord in the hour of your operation, then when you have completed the section of the cipha    (white fur), return inside it, and then adjust the two sides of the cord of the genitals by suturing them, and then heal that one as well as the others' plagues, so that it is healed.
E si atrobas le huou corromput per autra malautia, lahoras cove que tu lies les vayssels les quals so sore le suspensori, e extrat le huou, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit.	And if you encounter the baby corrupted by another plague, then cover that you break the vessels which are under the suspender, and remove the baby, and then heal it with water which we have mentioned.
Mays si l’aygua es agreguada en doas partidas esemps, lahoras sapias que doas son las ernias; donc inscideys aquela partida segon que has feyt en l’autra engualment; e si es a tu vist que sia una opera, lahoras tu la fay.	If the water is collected in two parts, then know that they are two hernias; therefore, cut that part according to what you have done on the other side; and if it seems to you that it is an operation, then do it.
E aprop tu abstergiys le sanc, e entramet en las seccios lana submersa en oli o en oli rozat; e pausa deforo autra lana la qual tu as submersa en vi e oli, e expandeys aquela sobre dos genetius e·l mirac del ventre; e pausa desobre draps doblatz e pulvils, e lia aquels desobre am liament le qual es segon aquesta forma:	Then you should wash the matter, and immerse it in oil or rose oil; and put on another piece of linen which you have immersed in wine and oil, and extend that one over the two genitals and the wonder of the womb; and place folded sheets and dust, and tie those one by one according to this form:
e aprop sian preses dos draps e sian humplitz de lana carmenada segon aquesta semblansa; e sian faytas las extremitatz am les quals es premut de coto o de lana humida, e sian agreguatz am strectura en le braguier de las braguas, e la una de las extremitatz prengua del cul entro al dos, e la segonda prengua a la partida del pantenilh, e dos extramitatz sobre dos coyssas dejos e dos extramitatz autras sobre dos angonars, e tota extrictura sia ajustada en le braguier de las braguas.	Then place two sheets and crumple them according to this appearance; and make the extremities by which they are pressed with a cloth or with wet wool, and bind them together in the brazer of the braze; and one extremity be tied to the other within the two, and the second be tied to the marvel of the womb, and the two extremities be placed on two cushions and on two angles, and all the structure be adjusted in the brazer of the braze.
E alcunas veguadas aquesta hernia es medicada artificialment am cauteri en loc de seccio am ferr; e es que tu prenguas cauteri cutellar subtil e que inscidas am aquel la codena dels ginitius, e es ignit segon que havem recomtat entro que sia descubert le ciphac blanc contenent la aygua, e lahoras tu pren cauteri segon aquesta forma:	And some are treated surgically by cauterization instead of cutting; because you take a sharp knife and burn the knot of the genitals, and is ignited according to what we have counted within which is discovered the white cipher containing water, and then you take cauterization according to this form:
e es asemblat a letra greca.	and it is assembled into the Greek letter.
E aprop perfora am aquel ciphac, e es ignit entro que tota la humiditat sia fora-gitada.	And then pierce the cipher, and is ignited within that all moisture be expelled.
E aprop exten le ciphac am uncis, e excorja am uncis, e excorja am cauteri subtil ignit; e inscideys aquel segon que es a tu possible entro que eradiques tot lu; e guarda te del huou que·l foc no·l toque.	And then extend the cipher with your nails, and scrape it with your nails, and burn it slightly with fire; and incise it according to what you can do so that you eradicate all of it; and keep away from the fire so that the fire does not touch it.
E sapias que aquesta operacio es pus salva e pus longinqua de flux de sanc, e milhor que operacio am seccio.	And you know that this operation is less dangerous and further away from the flow of blood, and better than an operation by cutting.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat apostema caut en la hora de seccio o en hora de cauteri, o flux de sanc, lahoras cove que tu cures qual contrarietat fa a tu per aquo, am curacio la qual conveneys a lu segon que es dit.	Perhaps if you cause an emulsion during the time of cutting or cauterization or blood flow, then cover that you cure what adversity does to you by this water, with the treatment which is said.
Mays si le malaute es pauruc, e no spera la segonda operacio per la sua horribilitat, lahoras administra perforacio segon que yeu recomti aquo; e es quan es certificat deves tu, per aquo que havem dit de las significacios, que aquela hernia es ayguosa.	Perhaps if the patient is a bit thin, and does not expect the second operation because of its horror, then administer perforation according to what I have said water; and it is when it is confirmed that you, by means of the water that we have said about signs, that this hernia is watery.
Lahoras cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute sobre alcuna cezelha elevada, aprop perfora le apostema en la partida pus bassa de lu am spatum lat, e pausa la perforacio segon la longitut del cos.	And then cover that you make the patient lie on some raised cushion, and pierce the emulsion in the lower part of them with a sharp blade, and pause the piercing according to the length of the body.
E sia la apercio ampla entro que corro tota l‘aygua.	And is the wide opening within which all the water runs.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc coto e lia aquel e layssa aquel, per so que corro le romanent de l’aygua.	Then place it over the area with a cloth and let it rest there, so that the blood runs out.
E aprop cura aquel entro que la plagua sia sanada.	And then cure it within which the plague is healed.
Mays si contrarietat es a la egrecio de l’aygua en aquela hora tu perforas aquela: e aquo no es fayt sino per aquo quar le pannicol blanc en le orrifici de la plagua fa contrarietat e prohibeys le eyssiment de l’aygua, lahoras cove que tu metas en la plagua pena o instrument am la qual es extrayta l’aygua dels ydropitz, la forma del qual es precedida; o ajusta en la opprecio de la plagua un petit.	Perhaps if adversity comes to the excretion of water in that hour that you pierce it: and it is not done except by means of the water which comes out from under the white cloth at the orifice of the plague causes adversity and prevents the emergence of water, then cover that you introduce into the plague a small or instrument with which the water is extracted, the form of which is preceded; or fix in the compression of the plague a small.
E sapias que l’aygua retorna, e es agueguada aprop vi meses o enaviro aquels; e cum es agreguada, lahoras sia perforat segon aquela meteyssa manieyra, quar le malaute ayssi passara les sieus dias.	And you know that water returns, and is gathered again in a few months or years; and when it is added, then pierce it according to that method because the patient will spend its days.
Capitol .lxiii.	Chapter LXXXIII.
De seccio sobre hernia carnosa e la curacio de lu.	On Surgery on Fatty Hernias and the Treatment of Them.
Sapias que en la seccio sobre aquesta hernia es temor perdusent a pernicia en las majors disposicios; per que a mi es vista la dimissio de lu e esser salvat per aquela milhor.	You know that in surgery on this hernia is lost to danger in the major cases; so that to me is seen the dismissal of it and is saved by that one better.
E yeu so rememorant la operacio en aquela e las specias dels apostemas.	And I remember the operation on that one and the spices of the emulsions.
Donc, dic que l‘apostemas natz en les cos dels quals les genetius so conponutz e es fayt aquo per motas causas: o per superfluitat aguda agra, la qual es efundida als genetius, o per percuscio.	Therefore, say that the emulsion comes out in the bodies of those whose genitals are mixed up and is caused by certain causes: or by excess acute water that is distributed on the genitals, or by impact.
E es la color de la apostema segon la color del cos, e no es atrobat en lu dolor, e es apostema greu.	And it is the color of the emulsion according to the color of the body, and does not turn pale in pain, and it is a heavy emulsion.
E fort leu es apostema lapificada, del qual la color es fosca, e no es centiment a lu.	And there is a very hard emulsion, of which the color is dark, and does not feel to it.
E alcunas veguadas es fayt per nodacio de las arcerias, e per imflacio de aquelas ayssi quo ja es perceubut la rememoracio de lu, o per imflacio de venas.	And some are caused by a knot of the arteries, and by swelling of those veins; so that their recurrence is noticed, or by swelling of the veins.
Mays aquo que es per imflacio de arcerias es conogut per la dispercio de la apostema quan compremas aquela am les tieus ditz; e no cove que aquel toques.	Perhaps water that is caused by swelling of the arteries is known by the dispersion of the emulsion when you press it with your fingers; and does not cover that you touch it.
Mays aquel que es fayt per imflacio de vena no es dispergut de lu alcuna causa deves la compressio am les ditz.	Perhaps water that is caused by swelling of a vein is not dispersed by pressing it with your fingers.
E ja es possible que sobre aquesta specia sia fayta seccio e sobre les autres carns; e es que tu inscida la codena dels genetius, e aprop esten le huou a las partidas desus, e extratz aquel del ciphac blanc, e deliura le suspensori dels vaysels, e ligua les, e inscideys le suspensori pus que tu deliuras aquel de tota partida de las partidas del huou.	And it is possible that on this kind of disease surgery be done and on the other flesh; because you burn the knot of the genitals, and then put the fire to the branches from above, and tear those down, and burn the suspenders of the vessels, and tie them together, and incise them in the middle of what you burn.
Donc si l’huou ja es am aquelas carnadas consolida, lahoras cove que tu extraguas le huou e inscidas aquel.	Therefore if the water is already consolidated on that flesh, then cover that you extract the water and incise it.
E si es adherencia entro alcuna causa del ciphac, o entre aquo que es entre les bayssels, lahoras cove que tu deliures tota aquela adherencia e inscidas aquela per inscizio redonda.	And if there is adhesion within the cipher for any reason or between that which is between the veins, then cover that you tear all that adhesion and incise it with a round cut.
Mays si es nativitat de carn en le loc de la adherencia la qual es detras, lahoras cove que tu inscidas tot aquo que es de lu, e extraguas le huou ayssi cum havem dit.	Perhaps if there is a birthmark of flesh in the place of the adhesion which is behind, then cover that you incise all that is of him, and extract the water as we have said.
Donc cum es complida la tua operacio, lahoras omple la plagua de lana imfuza en oli rozat e vi; e aprop cura aquela am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	Therefore when your operation is completed, then fill the plague with wool-soaked oil and look at it; and then cure it with the other treatment within which it is healed.
Capitol .lxiv.	Chapter LXIV.
De la curacio de hernia que es de vitz.	On the Treatment of Hernia that is painful.
Vit es apostema envolut per alcuna envolucio semblant a broto am mollificacio dels testiculs, e es fayt dificil movement exercitiu e deambulacio sobre le malaute.	There is an emulsion wrapped around the genitals, which seems like a growth due to the softening of the testicles, and it is difficult to move exercise and walking on the patient's legs.
E en la curacio de aquesta malautia es per temor per aquo del qual es precedida rememoracio.	And in the treatment of this disease is by fear because of the water from which it is preceded remembrance.
Empero cove que diguam opperacio en aquela segon que fero les primiers.	However, cover that I say surgery on that one as follows:
E dic que cove que fassas sezer le malaute sobre una cezelha elevada; e aprop enpelleys le suspensori dels testiculs a las partidas dejos; e aprop te la codena dels genetius am les tieus ditz am les baysels que so probdas a la vergua; e tengua aquels autre ministre que tu, e extenda aquels am extencio vehement.	And I say that you make the patient lie on a raised cushion; and then put the suspenders of the genitals at the lower ends; and then burn the knot of the genitals with your fingers, so that they are torn from side to side by the fire; and keep those other ministers that you have, and extend them with great violence.
E aprop inscideys am spatum lat agut per seccio traversa en le dreyt dels vaysels entro que sian les vayssels descubertz.	Then incise it with a sharp blade in the middle of the cross section of the veins within which the vessels are exposed.
E aprop excorja de tota partida ayssi quo a tu havem dit en extraccio de arceria las quals so en las templas.	And then scrape off all that as you have said in the extraction of arterial vessels, which are located in the temple.
E aprop fica en aquelas un’agulha en la qual sia fiel doble, e lia aquel en le primier del locs en les quals accideys vit, e lia aquel autra veguada en le derier de lor.	Then place there a small needle in which is double, and let it rest in the first of the places in which it occurs in pain; and place another needle below that one.
E aprop inscideys aquels en le mieg loc per seccio dreyta segon la longuesa del cos, e extratz aquo que es agreguat de las humiditatz fetulentas e corruptas.	Then incise those in the middle of the body with a right-angle cut according to its length, and extract what is added from the foul, corrupted moisture.
E aprop cura la plagua am curacio de las autras plaguas en las quals vols sania esser engendrada per so que caian les vaysels les quals noyreysso un de dos genetius, quar no es mal per aquo.	Then cure the plague with the treatment of other plagues in which you want to heal it; so that they fall the vessels which are torn between two genitals, because it is not bad for water.
Mays si accideys vit a totz les bayssels, lahoras cove que·ls testicols sian extragutz o que les testicols per aquo se cequo am les vayssels, per que sia privat de tot nutriment per la inscizio dels vayssels, e que sian estaborits, o que cequo per so que no sia juvament am aquels.	Perhaps if there is pain in all the vessels, then cover that the testicles are extracted or that they are cut off by water from the vessels; so that nutrition is deprived of the treatment of the vessels, and are destroyed, or that it is cut off by so that it does not increase by means of those.
Capitol .lxv.	Chapter LXv.
De la cura de hernia entestinal.	On the Treatment of Intestinal Hernia.
Le adveniment de aquesta hernia es per seccio que endeve en le ciphac extendut sobre le ventre de part dels angunars del mirac del ventre, per que deysendo les budels de aquela ruptura ad alcu dels budels.	The appearance of this hernia is due to the section which becomes entangled in the white cipher extended over the belly from both sides of the navel, so that, when the bowels break through it, they go out of one part and into another.
E aquesta ruptura es o del ciphac o de excencio de lu, e accideysso aquestas doas specias per motas causas: o percussio, o per sautz, o per clamor, o per elevacio de alcuna causa greu, o per semblantz.	And this rupture is either of the cipher or due to an expansion; and it occurs for certain causes: or by impact, or by noise, or by a cry, or by elevation for some difficult reason, or by resembling.
E·l senhal de aquo, quan es per extencio del ciphac, es que accideys pauc a pauc en lonc temps, e no accideys soptament, e es apostema engual entro ves le preon per so quar le ciphac comprem le budel.	And the sign of this is that it appears little by little in a long time, and not suddenly; and it is an emulsion wrapped around the intestine within the belt because the cipher compresses the bowel.
E le senhal de lu es quan es per seccio del ciphac, quar al comensament fa accidir dolor vehement sobtament; e es apostema divers aparent dejos la codena propdana aparent, e aquo es per eyssiment del budel, e·l cos de lu a las partidas deforo del ciphac.	And the sign of him is when it happens to cut the cipha (hernia), for at the beginning it causes violent pain; and it appears as if there were a swelling just next to the hernia, and this is due to the expansion of the intestine, and his hand is in front of the openings of the cipha.
E alcunas veguadas es fora-getat am le budel la tela, e es apelada aquesta hernia entestinal zirbal.	And some hernias are overlooked with the intestine's mesh, and this is called an intestinal hernia of the perineum.
E alcunas veguadas es fayta am ventositat, e alcunas veguadas corr en le budel fenda, e aqui es retenguda, e es am aquo gran pernitia3 del malaute, e alcunas veguadas fa endevenir dolor malvada e majorment quan es premut.	And some open to the air, and some form a hole in the hernia, and here it is held back, and it causes great harm to the patient, and sometimes causes severe pain and more when it is pressed.
E en la curacio de las especias de aquesta malautia am ferr es temor, per que cove que sia esquivat le cazament en aquela.	And in the treatment of these diseases with fire is feared, so that it is necessary to avoid the heating in that area.
E la manieyra de la operacio de aquela es que comandes al malaute que redugua le budel am la sua ma a las partidas dedintz de la sua conquavitat si obezeys al sieu retornament, e aprop sia envessat sobre le sieu col entre las tuas mas, e eleva las cambas de lu.	And the way to operate on that area is that the patient returns the intestine to its cavity if you obey the return, and a cushion is placed between them, and raises their legs.
E aprop sten la codena la qual siec la codena dels testicols a las partidas desus, e inscideys la codena dels testicols tota per le lonc; e aprop fiqua en doas labias de la seccio uncis segon que indigeysses a hubrir la seccio am aquels.	And place the hernia between the legs, and cut it all along its length; and then fix it with two blades according to how you want to open the area to remove it.
E si’ la seccio segon la quantitat que a tu sia possible que de aquela le huou sia foro-getat.	And if, in the opening, as much is removed from that area as you can get.
E aprop excorja aquela ciphaqueth les quals so dejos la codena dels testicols, entro que sia descubert le ciphac blanc dur de quascuna partida.	And then remove those hernia strings that are left between the testicles, until the white hard cipha is exposed from all sides.
Lahoras tu entromet le tieu dit en aquo que siec le testicol, en aquo que es entre ciphac blanc, le qual es dejos la codena del huou, e entre le ciphac segon, e absolve am aquel’adherencia que es en la partida detras del huou.	Then you put your fingers in there that cut the testicle, in there where the white cipha is hard, and leave the string of the hernia on the patient's side, and between the cipha and behind the testicles, and remove the adhesion that is in the back part of them.
E aprop mau am la ma la codena dels testicols a las partidas deforo, e am aysso exten le ciphac blanc en sus am la ma sinestra, e eleva le huou am le ciphac a la partida de la seccio; e comanda al ministre que extenda le huou ensus e tu dissolveys la adherencia que es detras am solucio complida.	And then return the testicles to their cavities on the patient' side, and extend the cipha white in front of you, on the left side, and lifts up the testicle with it towards the opening of the cut; and orders the servant to extend the testicle before you, and you dissolve the adhesion that is behind.
E cerqua am les tieus ditz que lay no sia alcuna causa del budel envelopat en le ciphac blanc dur.	And look with your fingers that there is no cause of the hernia wrapped in the white cipha.
Mays si tu atrobas de lu alcuna causa, lahoras tu enpelleys aquel al ventre dejos.	But if you find any cause, then examine it from behind.
E aprop tu pren una agulha en la qual sia fiel gros fayt de x fiels, e entromet aquel deves le derier del ciphac, le qual es jos la codena dels testicols, la qual siec seccio; e aprop inscideys las extremitatz las quals emineysso del fiel entro que sian quatre fiels, e aprop compausa alcus de lor sobre alcuna figura en manieyra de crotz; e lia am aquel le ciphac del qual havem dit que es dejos la codena dels testicols am fort liament de dos partz.	And then you take a needle that is very thick, and pierce it through the back of the cipha, which is behind the hernia; and then cut its extremities that come out with it until there are four threads, and then connect them to some figure in the form of a cross; and tie it firmly on both sides.
E aprop envolveys las extremitatz dels fiels e lia aquelas am liament vehement entro que alcu dels vayssels que noyrrisso aquels no puscan trametre alcuna causa per so que de aqui no accida apostema caut.	And then wrap the extremities of the threads and tie them together very firmly until any of the vessels that flow through those do not transmit any cause so that from here an apoplexy does not occur.
E pausa autra veguada liament segon foro le primier liament, lonh de lu mens tres ditz; e aprop aquestz dos liaments layssa del ciphac le qual es dejos la codena dels testicols la quantitat de la grandeza del dit, e inscideys tot le romanent segon redondeza, e osta de lu le huou.	And then another thread is laid out according to the first thread, as long as you say it; and these two threads are left from the cipha in the same quantity as the size of the said one, and cut all around according to its shape, and finish it with the testicles.
E aprop inscideys en la partida dejos de la codena dels testicols per seccio de la qual corra sanc e sania ayssi cum havem recomtat en aquo que havem dit.	And then cut through the hernia string between the testicles with a section that has been described before, as we have said above.
E aprop aministra lana submersa en oli, e pausa en la plagua; e aministra le liament le qual havem recomtat (e alcunas veguadas le ciphac blanc es cauterizat, le qual havem dit aprop la inscizio de lu temen de flux de sanc, quar motas veguadas accideys aquels) e leyssa le liament entro que per si caia.	And then administer a bath with oil, and place it in the hole; and administer the thread that we have described (and sometimes the white cipha is cauterized, which we have said to cut it from behind to avoid the flow of blood, because sometimes this happens) and leave the thread inside it so that it falls by itself.
Mays si le cazement de lu es tardat, lahoras de aygua cauda sia embrocat, e pausa sobre aquel entro que caia segon que havem dit.	But if the hole is late, then water is added to it, and place it inside according to what we have said.
E aprop cura la plagua am l’autra curacio de las plaguas entro que sia sanat.	And then treat the wound with the other treatment of wounds before it heals.
Capitol .lxvi.	Chapter LXVI.
De hernia ventosa.	On Ventilated Hernia.
En aquesta hernia no e vist alcu que sia estat ardit sus la curacio de lu am ferr.	In this hernia there is nothing that has been heated with fire in the treatment of it to make it better.
E les primiers diyssero que es fayta ayssi cum havem recomtat en la hernia que es am vi; la qual es que tu lies les vayssels aprop la seccio sobre aquela am fecilitat de lu; e aprop secca en le mieg loc en enviro le apostema am aquo que obro aquel, entro que caian les vayssels.	And the first ones said that it should be done in this way that we have described in the hernia that is to be used with ease of the patient; which is to place the vessels appropriately on the wound with a little water; and then dry them in their place in the environment of the swelling with the water that has been poured out, so that they fall.
E cura la plagua segon que havem dit entro que sia sanada.	And treat the wound as we have said before it heals.
Capitol .lxvii.	Chapter LXVII.
De la disropcio que es fayta en les anguonars.	On the Dropping that Occurs in the Ankles.
Alcunas veguadas endeve ruptura en les angonars ayssi cum havem dit, e emineys le loc.	And sometimes a drop occurs in the ankles as we have said, and it comes out; and leave the spot.
E no deyssen als genetius alcuna causa dels budels al genetius; e si deyssen, aquo es pauc; e retorna s’en en totas horas.	And do not let any cause of hernia be at the genitals; and if there is one, it is little; and returns in all hours.
Mays si es prolonguat le temps am aquo, es ajustada fissura en le ciphac entro que deysenda le budel en le ciphac; e accideys aquo per la extencio del ciphac le qual es en le angonars ayssi cum havem dit, la qual causa es quar le ciphac es estendut, e aprop es mollificat e·l loc es apostemat e emineys.	But if the time is extended with it, a small fracture occurs in the cipha within it that breaks the hernia into the cipha; and this happens to the ankle as we have said, which causes the cipha to be extended, and then it becomes soft and swollen, and comes out.
E la cura de lu es am cauteri ayssi quo es precedida la narracio de lu.	And the treatment of it is with cauterization before the description of it.
E alcunas veguadas es curada am ferr segon aquesta manieyra: e es que·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu dos entre las tuas mas, e aprop secca le loc de la ruptura dels apostemas emineys am seccio per la latitut segon la quantitat de tres ditz.	And sometimes it is cured with iron according to this way: and that the patient jumps on his two legs between your hands, and then dries up the place of the drop that comes out by cutting it with a small knife according to the quantity of three inches.
E aprop strenh le ciphac blanc que es jos la codena entro que sia descubert.	And then stretch the white cipha that is below the hernia, so that it is exposed.
E aprop pren le ray e pausa aquel sobre le loc eminent del ciphac, e prem aquel al preon del ventre.	And then take a string and place it over the forward edge of the cipha, and press it on the front part of the patient' stomach.
E aprop cus le dos locs eminentz sobre la extremitat del ray del ciphac, e ajusta am la sutura un de aquels am l’autre.	And then cut the two forward edges over the end of the string of the cipha, and adjust one to the other with a thread.
E aprop extratz la extremitat del ray, e no inscidas del ciphac de tot, ni no extenda le huou, ni autra causa ayssi cum yeu te fi saber en la curacio de hernia entestinal.	And then cut off the end of the string, and do not cut it from the cipha, nor extend the testicles, nor any other cause as you should know in the treatment of intestinal hernia.
E aprop cura aquela am la curacio de las plaguas, e cum inscideyses les fiels, mundifica aquela e restaura la plagua entro que sia consolidada; quar le ciphac es contrayt e no es ajustada la eminencia de ruptura.	And that hernia is cured with the treatment of wounds, and when you cut the threads, clean it and restore the wound before it heals; because the cipha is contracted, and the prominence of rupture is not adjusted.
E cauteri es milhor en aquest loc, quar es pus propda a salut.	Cauterization is better in this place, because it is closer to healing.
Capitol .lxviii.	Chapter LXVIII.
De mollificacio de la codena dels testiculs.	For softening of the scrotum of the testicles.
Motas veguadas la codena dels testiculs en alcus homes es mollificada per aysso quar las carns que so entre aquela son mollificadas, e es fedat le reguardament de lu.	For softening of the scrotum of the testicles in some men it is softened by oil because the flesh that lies between them is softened and attention is paid to him.
Adonc necessari es ad aquel que es preguat en la curacio de lu que fassa jazer le malaute segon le sieu dos, e enscida tota la codena la qual es mollificada sobre la codena natural; e aprop que ajuste doas labias am la sutura.	Then it is necessary for him who is asked in the treatment of him that he lays down according to his two feet and in the middle all the scrotum which is softened over the natural one; and then let him join two lips on the suture.
E si vols, cus en le comensament la superfluitat de la codena mollificada am tres cozeduras o quatre e am ferma sutura.	And if you want, cut at the beginning the superfluity of the softened scrotum by three or four and firm suture.
E aprop inscideys entre las suturas; e aprop cura per curacio de las autras plaguas entro que sia sanat e caian les fiels.	Then sew between the sutures; and then care for the treatment of the other wounds within that it is healed and the hairs fall down.
Capitol .lxix.	Chapter .lxxxix.
De castracio.	For castration.
Sapias que castratio en nostre ley es excomengada, mays per causa es legut a mi que·m remembre de lu en aquest libre; e no es necessaria la rememoracio de lu sino per doas manieyras, de las quals es la una per so que aquo sia en la sciensa del metge quan es enterroguat de aquela, que sapia la curacio de lu al qual accideys; e l’autra manieyra es que nos motas vetz havem necessitat de castracio de autras bestias per les juvamentz nostres per aquelas, ayssi cum de motos, e de bocs, e de porcs, e de semblantz a las bestias.	You know that castration in our law is prohibited, more for a cause is granted to me that I remember it in this book; and it is not necessary to mention it except by two ways, of which one is that so he may be in the knowledge of the doctor when he is questioned about it, that he knows the treatment of him who has been cast out; and the other way is that we have had the need of castration of other animals for our benefit by those, such as donkeys, and goats, and pigs, and animals similar to them.
E donc dic que castracio es fayta en dos manieyras: o per atrissio, o per fissura a seccio.	And therefore I say that castration is done in two ways: either by cutting off through the belly, or by a section with an incision.
Mays en aquela que es fayta per atrissio, la via de la opera es que nos fassam cezer la bestia en aygua cauda entro que·ls genetius de lu sian mollificatz e sian linhitz e que pendan.	More in that which is done by cutting off through the belly, the way of the operation is that they make a cut to the animal in the tail end within so that the genitals of him are softened and are limp and that they hang down.
E aprop pren aquels am la tua ma entro que sian resols e no apparescan dejos le tocament.	Then take those from your hand within that they are firm and do not appear to be loose after the touch.
Mays en castracio fayta per fissura e seccio, cove que tu tenguas la bestia e premas la codena dels testicols de lu am la ma senestra.	More in castration made by incision and section, tell that you have the animal and press the scrotum of the testicles with your left hand.
E aprop lia le suspensori, e inscideys sobre quascun huou am una seccio entro que dos huous proceseysso.	Then remove the suspenders, and sew on each side by one incision within two inches that proceed from him.
E aprop inscideys aquels pus que auras quascu excorjat.	Then sew those pus that you have taken out of each wound.
E no leysses sobre aquels del ciphac alcuna causa, sino le ciphac subtil le qual es sobre les vazes.	And do not leave on those of the cicatrice any cause, but the subtle cicatrice above the veins.
E aquesta manieyra de castracio es milhor la qual es fayta per atrissio, quar atrissio fort leu layssa alcuna causa dels testicols per que la bestia desira coyt.	This way of castration is better that which is done by cutting off through the belly, because through the belly leaves a cause of the testicles for which the beast desires to copulate.
E aprop cura la plagua entro que sia sanada.	Then care for the wound within that it is healed.
Capitol .lxx.	Chapter.lxx.
De la cura de hermafrodozia.	For the treatment of hermaphroditism.
Hermafrodozia en les homes es segon dos manieyras: la una es quar o appar en aquo que siec l’espazi en la codena de testiculs, en aquel que es entre dos testiculs figura quar cunh de femna en la qual so pels.	Hermaphroditism in men is according to two ways: the one is because it appears that he has between his testes a space that separates them like a woman's two testes are formed; and the other is that it appears as a penis and testicles of a female.
E alcunas veguadas de aquel corr urina le qual es en la codena dels testiculs.	And some have from him urine that is in the scrotum of the testicles.
Mays en las femnas es una specia: e es que·l conh de la femna sobre le pentenilh es ayssi cum dos testiculs de home un pauc de tot yminiheys a la partida deforo ayssi cum le perpucii de home e dos testicols.	More in women is one kind: and it is that the scrotum of the female is like two testes of a man, little by little to the penis; and like two testes of a woman.
E la curacio es de tres specias: de dos dels homes e de una specia de las femnas.	The treatment is according to three kinds: from two men's kind and from one kind of women's.
E es que cove que tu inscidas aquelas carns ajustadas entro que efuga la emprecio de aquela, e aprop que cures aquelas am curacio de las autras plaguas.	It is because you sew those parts that are adjusted within that it escapes the cause of him, and then that you care for them with treatment to the other wounds.
E en la segonda specia dels homes de la qual yeys urina la qual es en la codena dels testiculs, no es curacio ni opperacio en lu.	And in the second kind of men from whom you have urine that is in the scrotum of the testicles, there is no treatment nor operation for him.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter.xxi.
De lentinge e de carn eminent per causas de las femnas.	Of ligature and of flesh that protrudes because of women.
Lentige fort leu es ajustada sobre causas naturals entro que es etressat e es fayt leg le reguardament; e alcunas veguadas es magnificada en alcunas femnas en tant entro que es spandit ayssi cum en les homes e perve entro al coito.	A strong ligature is adjusted on natural causes within that it is stretched and is made to leave the mark; and some have from him that protrudes in such a way that it appears as in men' kind, and is turned within when he comes together.
Adonc cove que tu tenguas la superfluitat de lentinge am la tua ma o am unci e inscidas.	Then take those who have from him of the ligature with your hand or a knife and sew them up.
E no ultimes en inscizio, majorment en le preon de la razit, per so que no endevengua flux de sanc.	And do not end in incision, more in the edge of the nose, that it does not cause a flow of blood.
E aprop cura aquela am curacio de las plaguas entro que sia sanada.	Then care for those with treatment to the wounds within that they are healed.
Mays carn nascuda es carn que nays en le horrifici de la mayre entro que umple aquel, e fort leu es eyssit a las partidas deforo segon semblansa de coa (e per aquo alscus primiers appelero aquo “malautia caudada”); donc cove que nos inscidam ayssi cum inscidem lentinge, e curem aquela entro que sia sanada.	More hidden flesh is flesh that lies in the belly of a mother within that it fills him, and it is strong enough to separate it from the other side according to its form of a cow; then sew those as you sewed the ligature, and care for those with treatment to the wounds within that they are healed.
Capitol .lxxii.	Chapter.lxxii.
De curacio de alratica.	For the treatment of a rash.
Alratica es que le conh de la femna no sia perforat, o sia le trauc petit.	Altratica is that the nose of the female not be pierced, or that it be little by little.
E es o natural o accidental.	It is either natural or accidental.
Accidental es per malautia la qual ha precedit, e aquela es fayta o per carn nada ajustada o per ciphac subtil o espes.	Accidental is through bad health that preceded, and that one has been made or not by a subtle or strong blow.
E es fayt o en le preon de la mayre, o en les costatz de lu, o en le pus sobira de lu, o en le pus bas de lu, e prohibeys de cuoyt e de enprenguacio e de enfantament, e fort leu prohibeys las mestruas.	It is made either in the belly of a mother, or in the sides of him, or on the top of him, or on the bottom of him, and you prohibit that it touch or engage or bring forth, and strongly prohibit that there be menstruation.
E la cognicio de aquela es fayta per reguardament de la metrona, si la oppilacio es apparent, propdana; mays si no es apparent, lahoras tu cerqua aquela am les tieus ditz o am le ray.	The knowledge of that one is made by looking at the mirror of the doctor, if the opacity is apparent, then look for it with a sharp instrument or with fire; but if it is not apparent, then you look for those with the fingers or with the rays.
Mays si oppilacio es per ciphac subtil, e es propda a las doas labias, lahoras tu coyta e disromp aquela.	More if opacity is made by subtle means, and it appears between the two lips, then cut those and break them up.
E es que pauses sobre las doas labias pulvils, e aprop pausa les tieus ditz indicz de amdoas las mas encemps.	It is that you pause on the two lips with your fingers, and then pause the sharp edges of both sides in front of them.
E la femna sia sobre le sieu dos, las sieuas coyssas extendudas, e aprop exten las doas labias am forsa entro que aquel ciphac subtil sia romput e la oppilacio sia uberta.	The woman is over her two feet, her two knees stretched out, and then she breaks the two lips with a subtle force within that it is broken by that subtle means and opacity appears.
E aprop pren lana e enbeu le4 en oli e pausa aquela sobre·l loc, e jagua am home le dia per so que·l loc inscis no sia consolidat.	Then take a lock of hair and send it to the doctor, and place that one on the spot, and test him with the man for the spot is not consolidated.
Mays si le ciphac es gros e espes, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquel am spatum lat o am fuelha de mirta.	More if the subtle means is large and strong, then you sew that one with a sharp edge or with fire.
Mays si la oppilacio es per carnada, lahoras suspen aquela am unci, e inscideys aquela.	More if opacity is made by flesh, then hang those up with a string, and sew them up.
E sian am tu las medicinas que fan cessar flux de sanc ses mordicacio, ayssi cum ahacatia, e sanc de drago, e enses, ajustat am album de huou.	And are to you the medicines that stop the flow of blood by biting, such as astringent, and blood from a dragon, and enemas, adjusted to the skin of two.
E aprop aministra una canulha de plom ampla per so que la plagua no sia consolidada leugierament.	Then administer a wide steel bowl of lead that the plague is not consolidated excessively.
E tengua aquela per alcus jorns e aministra calgua de li sec.	Keep that one for many days and administer hot water.
E aprop sia curada am l’autra curacio de consolidacio entro que sia sanada.	Then that one should be cured with the other treatment of consolidation within that it is healed.
E alcunas vetz accideys en la mayre nativitat de autres carns, e lahoras cove que inscidas segon aquesta manieyra.	Sometimes in the mother's nature there is another kind of flesh, and then sew according to this way.
Mays si aysso es per apostema crancos, a l’apostema crancos le qual es en la mayre no sia fayta contrarietat am ferr en deguna manieyra.	More if it is because of an acrid flesh, and to the acrid flesh in the mother that is not made by any means.
Capitol .lxxiii.	Chapter.lxxiii.
De la cura de emorroydas e de tayl e de botor roja que accideysso en le conh de las femnas.	For the treatment of hemorrhoids and of a red boil that appears in the scrotum of women.
Emorroydas so apprecio dels orificis de motas venas entro que de aquelas corro mot sanc continuadament; e cum so antiquadas emorroydas e son fayts theyls.	Hemorrhoids are an appearance of the openings of veins that come from those, and if they become hard, then they are hemorrhoids and cause pain continuously; and if they are soft, then they are hemorrhoids and cause a burning sensation.
E ja yeu he dit en la divisio las specias de aquelas e les senhals de aquelas, e diyre ayssi aquelas que recebo curacio e aquelas que no recebo curacio.	And I have already said in the division the spices of those and the signs of those, and say also those that I receive cure and those that I do not receive cure.
Donc dic que emorroydas e theyls quan so en le preon de la mayre e no apparo al sentiment, lahoras en aquelas no sia fayta curacio am ferr.	And say that hemorrhoids and they appear when they are in the front of the mother and do not feel, then in those there is no need to make a cure.
Mays aquelas las quals so en le orrifici de la mayre sobre las quals catz sentiment, so aquelas que so curadas.	And these those who are in the orifice of the mother above which feel, are those that are cured.
E cove que tu metas la femna en mayso frega e aprop exten atheyl am les forfexs, o am drap aspre, e inscideys aquelas am las razitz.	And when you place the woman in a mayo rub and extend it with the scissors or sharp cloth, and cut those with the razors.
E aprop pulveriza sobre aquelas deves le fluxs del sanc de una de las polveras insciscivas ses mordicacio, ayssi cum acassia e semblant ad aquels.	And sprinkle on those you need to make a powder from one of the powders cut with a mordida, so with mint and similar for those.
E aprop enpellesca les sieus pes per una hora, e aprop pausa aquela en aygua freja.	And tie their feet for an hour, and then put them in hot water.
E si persevera le fluxs del sanc, lahoras fay aquela sezer en decoccio de sumat e de scorsas de milgranas e de gualas e de semblantz.	And if the flow of blood persists, then make those cut with a decoction of Sumac and scorsas of millet and oranges and similar.
E aprop pren farina de ordi e comfiys aquela am miel e vi agre e fay emplastre am aquo sobre le dos de lu.	And return to take flour of wheat and eat them with honey and vinegar and make a paste with water on their two feet.
E si le sanc es abscindit, bo es; e sino, fay adherir am dos ventozas, e a las mamilhas ses escarificatio.	And if the blood has stopped, it is good; and otherwise, make them adhere to the two vents, and to the nipples cut the razor.
E aprop pren lana e submergeys aquela am suc de coliandre o am suc de arnagloza o am suc de guarravier am vi pentit e fay adherir al loc; e aprop cura le loc am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And take a sheep's wool and immerse those with the juice of cilantro or the juice of arnica or the juice of grapevines in warm water and make them adhere to the place; and then heal the place with poultice.
Mays athyl rog le qual es de aspre reguardament, cove que tu inscidas aquo que a tu appar de aquel segon que he dit en theyl engualment.	And those who are in a painful condition, when you cut water that appears to you different from that of the second that I have said in the incision.
E cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And heal that place so that it is cured.
Capitol .lxxiv.	Chapter. LXXIV.
De perforacio de eyssedura accident en la mayre.	Of the perforation of the placenta in the mother.
Motas specias de apostemas accideysso en la mayre, ayssi cum cranc e apostema lapident e ulceracios e adhubelat e erpetromens e fistulas emorroyas e raguarrias e thyl e autres apostemas.	There are various types of symptoms that can occur in the mother: as well as a sharp and piercing sound, an ulcerous and painful condition, scabs and dry spots, erythema and blisters, hemorrhoids and rugosas and other ulcers.
E yeu ja he dit aquestas malautias e las specias de aquelas e les senhals de aquelas, e las curacios de lor en la divisio.	And I have already said these diseases and the symptoms of those and the signs of those, and the cure for them in the division.
E cove que yeu digua en aquest tractat de apostema caut le qual ve en la mayre quan es dels apostemas que collegeysso sania, e si vols saber en qual manieyra se fa la opperacio de lu am ferr.	And when I say in this treatise about the perforation of the placenta that is cured with surgery, and if you want to know how to perform the operation.
Adonc cove que tu consideres si la dolor de la apostema en le sieu comensament es aguda am percussio e flecma e febre, e vezes aquel enrogezir e si catz sobre aquel le sentiment, lahoras no·t coytes am perforacio de lu, e cura aquel am aquo que ajuda sobre la maturacio entro que cesse la acuitat dels accidentz.	Then consider if the pain of the placenta at the beginning is acute with percussion and fever and sometimes that dampens it and if it feels on that; then do not perforate it, but heal it with water that helps with the maturity within so that the acuteness of the symptoms stops.
E lahoras cove que tu fassas cezer la femna sobre una cezelha que aia doas cezelhas; e recline sobre le sieu dos e ajusta les sieus pes a la partida pus dejos del ventre, e las sieus coyssas sian expandudas, e pausa les sieus brasses dejos les sieus denols, e lia quascus am liament ad aquo convenient.	And then, when you cut the woman on a table that there are two; lean her on her back and adjust her feet to the sides of the body, and expand her legs, and pause her breasts from the side, and lie down with one hand towards water.
E aprop la matrona segua del latz dreyt e aministre le instrument am le qual es ubert le orrifici de la mayre, la forma del qual vindra en aquelas causas que·s faran aprop.	And the midwife follows the woman's left side and brings the instruments with her; and she will cut the opening of the mother, which will be in those cases that you do.
E cove quan vols ministrar aquest instrument que tu fiques am lo ray le preon de la mayre de la femna, e aquo que del instrument es intrat en la mayre no sia mays que·l preon de la mayre e leda le malaute.	And when you want to bring the instrument: you place yourself on the right side of the mother of the woman, and that which enters into the mother is only the front part of the womb, and all of the patient's legs.
Mays si l’estrument es major que·l preon de la mayre, lahoras cove que tu pauses pulvils sobre la textura del preon de la mayre per sso que sia prohibit l’intrament de tot instrument en le preon de la mayre.	And if the instrument is greater than the front part of the womb, then place powder on the texture of the front part of the womb so that it is forbidden to enter any instrument into the front part of the womb.
E cove que tu pauses le vertitge que corr en le strument del latz pus desus e que le ministre tengua le strument e revolva le vertitge entro que sia ubert le orrifici de la mayre.	And place the liquid that runs in the instrument above it and that the midwife holds the instrument and mixes the liquid within so that it enters the opening of the mother.
E cum appar la excitura, e es tocada am la ma e es leon e molh, lahoras cove que tu secces aquela deves le cap de lu am spatum lat.	And when there is excitement and it feels soft and wet, then place the foot of the woman on a sponge.
E cum la sania es evacuada, lahoras cove que tu pauses en la plagua una meca submersa en oli rozat o oli vert en le qual sia alcuna stiptisitat; e pausa la calca7 en la seccio en le preon de la mayre.	And when the cure is evacuated, then place in a cup submerged in rose or green oil and pause the blood in the section in the front part of the womb.
E pause deforo la mayre e sobre le pentenilh lana munda submersa en aygua en la qual sian bulidas malvas.	And then place the womb upside down on clean wool dampened with water in which are swelled purplish colors.
E aprop sia curada aprop dos dias am enguent le qual conveneys ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	And it should be healed after two days of applying poultice with water within so that it is cured.
E alcunas veguadas es lavada la mayre e la plagua enayssi que es cristerisat am aygua e mel, e aprop am aygua en la qual es bulhida razit de liri o de aristologia longua, e aprop retorna al enguent.	And some women are washed after delivery, and their milk is clarified with water and honey, and they are bathed in water in which are swelled razor blades or a long hair, and then return to the poultice.
E si la plagua es dedintz en la mayre ameguada, lahoras cove que tu sias prohibit de la curacio de lu am ferr, habantz cura aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio.	And if the milk is inside the womb, then refrain from treating it with surgery, because heal that place with water which I have said in the division.
Capitol .lxxv.	Chapter. LXXV.
A ensenhar las matronas en qual manieyre les enbrios bius sian medicatz quan yeysso segon figura no-natural.	Teaching midwives the way in which they should wash the babe when it is born according to this figure, so that it is not natural.
Necessaria causa es que la matrona conogua en le comensament la figura del enfantament natural per senhals de lu, e es que quan tu vezas la femna expremar a las partidas dejos e desira odorar le ayre, e sobre aquo es enleujada per aquo que sobre ela es del part, e festina le eyssiment del enbrio, lahoras sapias que aquest part es segon figura natural, e es l’eyssiment de lu sobre le sieu cap, e la segondina am aquel o suspensa o pendent del ombelic.	A necessary cause is that the midwife recognizes at the beginning of the natural childbearing according to the signs of it, and it is that when you see the woman express herself by the legs apart and her desire to smell the air, and above her is enveloped by water that flows over her; and if she sees the birth as an expression on her head, then know that this birth is a second natural figure, and the expression of it over his head, and the second one hanging or suspended from the navel.
Donc cum tu vezes aquels senhals, lahoras cove que·l ventre de lu sia compremut per so que l’embrio deysenda leugerament quar quan deyssen sobre le sieu cap, deysen a lu la segondina, e es mondada de aquelas superfluitatz am bona mondificacio.	Then when you see these signs, then the womb of the woman is contracted so that the childbearing expression slightly turns over her head, and put it under his head, and those superfluities are removed with good hygiene.
Mays aquel que es otra aquest part es no-natural e no-lausable, quar quan le enbrio es eyssit sobre sos pes e·l cos de lu es eyssit devant le cap de lu e·ls pes de lu, e la ma de lu una, o al pe de lu .i., o es eyssit le cap de lu e la ma de lu, o al ventre de lu, e fort leu es convertit sobre le sieu col, e semblant de las figuras de lu no-lausablas.	And that which is different from this natural birth is not worthy and it is that when the childbearing is expressed over its own body and the back of it is expressed in front of its head and its feet are expressed; and the mother's hand is a hand, or behind her neck: or is expressed on its head and the mother' hand, or at the navel of it, and a strong expression turns over its neck, and similar to those unworthy figures.
Don necessaria causa es a la matrona que sia savia e subtil en totas aquelas causas, e que·s guarde de error e de decepcio.	A necessary cause is that the midwife is wise and subtle in all these cases, and she guards against error and deception.
E yeu so mostrant tota figura de aquelas, e qual engen es en aquelas per so que sia significat per aquo e sia stat sobre aquo.	And I am showing you all those figures, and what is significant in them that it is meant by water and that it is placed on it.
Quan le feyt es eyssit sobre le sieu cap per egrecio natural, e aquel es vehement sobre la femna e es fayt a lu part dificil, e vezes la vertut de lu ja debelitada, lahoras fay aquela sezer , o que las femnas tenguan lu, e evapora le conh de lu am fenugrec coyt e am olis humitz.	And when the childbearing expression is expressed on his head by natural effort, and that one is violent with the woman and makes difficult the birth, and if her virtue has been defeated, then make her cut, or that women have it, and evaporate its sweat with fenugrec poultice and olive oil.
E aprop entrometa la metrona entre les sieus ditz espatum petit e fenda am aquel la segondina, o secce aquela am la sua ungla entro que corro aquo que es en ela de humiditat.	And the midwife places between her legs a small towel and cuts it with a sharp object, and then make her run on that leg within so that it flows water there.
E preme le ventre de la femna entro que deyssenda le fet.	And press the womb of the woman within so that she expresses the child.
Mays si no deyssen, lahoras cove que la femna sia cristirizada de mucellage de ptilli e mucellage de fenugrec am cizami.	And if they do not express, then make the woman clarified with mealy seeds and clarified with fenugrec poultice.
E aprop comanda a lu, aprop le cristeri, que sia compremuda e fay aquela stornudar am condisi; e te la boca de lu e·l nas de lu per huna hora, quar le fet sira foro-getat tantost.	And then command it, and make it clarified, and make her sneeze with this condition: and for a long time after birth, because the child is difficult.
E si las doas mas del fet so foro-getadas al comensament, lahoras cove que tu redusiscas aquelas am fecilitat petit a petit.	And if the two more of the child are sneezing at the beginning, then reduce those with small steps.
Mays si no obezeys al intrament, lahoras pausa la femna sobre una cezelha e leva les pes de lu sus, e aprop concuceys la cezelha sobre la terra; e la femna sia tenguda que no caia deves la concussio.	But if you do not obey the instrument, then place the woman on a table and lift her feet off of it, and bring the table close to the ground; and the woman should be held so that she does not fall down with the shock.
E si las mas no son dedintz tornadas e morr le fet, lahoras inscideys aquelas e extratz le romament del fet o lia le cors a la ma de lu am drap e extratz aquel am equalitat, quar aquel sira foro-getat.	And if the legs are not turned inward and the feet do not come out whole, then cut them off at the leg and remove the body part with an equal cut, for it is a severed limb.
De eyssiment del embrio sobre les sieus pes.	From the emergence of the embryo on their own feet.
Quan le fet yeys sobre les sieus pes, lahoras cove que tu impelliscas aquels en sus, e aprop convertas le fet petit, e aprop que engualhes aquel, e aprop que prenguas un pe de lu e extendas aquels petit a petit.	And when the child is on their own feet, then cover them up and turn the child over, and then stretch it out little by little; take one of its legs and bend it backwards.
Mays cum son eyssit entro a las coyssas, lahoras tu comanda a lu que se exprema, e fay aquela extornudar am condizi, quar sira foro-getat si Deus lo vol.	But when the child is born inside the woman's thighs, then command him to squeeze and make him come out with force, for it is severed if God wills it.
E si no es foro-getat am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras tu retorna le fet petit a petit entro que pauses aquel segon figura natural, quar aquel sira lahoras foro-getat am leugier eyssiment.	And if it is not severed with the force that I have just described, then return the child little by little until you put him in his natural position again; for he will be severed if forced to emerge whole.
E si es prohibit am tot aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras pren de musellage de altea e de goma dissolvuda, e percuteys tot en le mortier per bona percussio, e aprop linieys am aquo le conh de la femna, el pus bas del ventre de lu.	And if it is forbidden to do all that I have just described, then take the muscle of the thigh and the gum dissolved, and strike them all together with a good blow in the mortar; and then draw the navel string from the woman's belly button, the bottom-most part.
E aprop fay aquela cezer en aygua tebeza, entro que consegua les ypocondias.	Then make a cut in the water, so that he can reach the belly; and then bring him out, for he is being born.
E cum vezes que las partidas dejos de lu so lenificadas, lahoras fay a lu subfumiguacio de mirta e sub-pausa aquela a lu.	And when the parts of the child are no longer elongated, then make him sub-fume with mint and pause him below.
E quan te la sub-fumiguacio per una hora, lahoras tu la fay sezer sobre una cezelha, e aprop fay aquela stornudar e extrenh la boca de lu, e levas de aquela, e prem la partida pus bassa del ventre de lu am leugiera compressio, quar le fet sira tantost foro-getat.	And when the sub-fume has lasted for an hour, then place him on a table, and make him sneeze and open his mouth, and take it away, and press the belly button little by little with a light compression, because the child will soon be severed if forced.
Eyssiment del fet sobre les sieus denols e las suas mas.	Emmergence of the child on its own feet and in its place.
Quan le fet eyssira segon aquesta forma, lahoras tu engenies en entrometen las suas mas petit a petit; e aprop la femna stia evessada sobre le sieu col, e les pes de lu pengo en jos, e aquelas sia jasent sobre le lieyt, e complegua las suas mas.	And when the child emerges in this form, then make the woman sit on her buttocks, and have the feet of the child lowered, and let them be extended over the bed, and let their hands be joined together.
E aprop prem sobre le ventre de lu petit a petit, e aprop extratz aquo que es dejos les pes de lu de las aurelhas entro que sia preparada en la partida pus dejos.	Then press his belly little by little, and take him out who is between the legs of the woman, so that he may be prepared in advance.
E si le fet no es fora-getat, lahoras pren les pes de lu e mau aquels am movement vehement, e aprop prem aquo que es sobre les ypocondres petit a petit entro que le fet puege a las partidas desus.	And if the child is not being severed, then take its feet and move them violently, and then press what is on the belly little by little until the child can come out through its parts.
E aprop entrometa las suas mas e engualhe le fet petit a petit, e comanda a la femna que se exprema entro que le fet sia foro-getat.	Then introduce his hands and bend him little by little, and order the woman to squeeze little by little until the child is being severed.
Eyssiment del fet latutidinalment pendent una de las suas mas.	Emmergence of the child in a hanging position with one of its feet.
Sia engeniat en reduccio de la ma de lu, mays si no podes aquela reduzir, lahoras eleva la femna e fe aquela anar.	Let the child be lowered by his mother's hand, but if you cannot lower it, then raise the woman and let her go.
E si anar no pot, lahoras fay la jazer sobre le lieyt, e concuteys las coyssas de lu am concussio vehement, e aprop aministra liamentz les quals yeu e recomtatz de mucillages.	And if she cannot go, then place her on the bed and strike her with a violent shock, and then administer to him the liquids that I have just described.
E si es vengut le enfantament, lahoras fay aquela sezer sobre cezelha, e aprop studia sobre la reduccio de la ma, e enguala le fet segon figura natural, e fay stornudar la femna e comanda a lu que comprema a si entro que sia foro-getat.	And if the child is born, then make him sneeze on a table and study his reduction; then take the child in its natural position, and let it be struck with sneezes and ordered to squeeze himself until he is being severed.
Eyssiment del fet sobre·l col expandudas las suas mas e la fassia de lu es al dos de la sua mayre.	Emmergence of the child on the woman's back, with its feet extended, and its waist between her legs.
Cove que la matrona tengua la ma del fet e aprop revolva aquel petit a petit, e eque aquel am facilitat.	Cover the mother holds the child's hand and turn it little by little; and let her do it easily.
E cum es e quant so es engualhat, e lahoras pausa sobre le conh de lu aquo que havem recomtat de oli e de mucellages.	And when he is being engaged in marriage, and when he is being put into the navel, then place it on the string that I have just described of oil and liquid.
E aprop comandas a lu que·s maugua petit a petit, e quan auras feyt aquo, lahoras fay aquela cezer sobre una cezelha e comanda li que sia inclinada sobre le latz dreyt, e aprop comanda a lu que sia compremuda; e fay aquela stornudar am condizi.	Then order him to move his hand little by little, and when he has completed it, then make a cut on a table and order him to bend forward; and then order him to squeeze himself, and let him sneeze with force.
Exitus foetus praeparati super latus.	The exit of the fetus is prepared on its side.
Quan deyssen a horrifici de la mayre segon aquesta manieyra, considera, e lahoras tu inscideys la segondina am la tua ungla entro que sia evacuada de la humiditat.	When the woman's horror is in accordance with this method, consider it, and then you shall cut the second one with your knife within you; so that it may be emptied of its moisture.
E si le fet es suspendut sobre la cara e·l col de lu, lahoras tu inscideys aquela del embelic, per so que no sia retengut e mora.	And if the child is suspended above its mother' s back and her neck, then you shall cut it off, so that it is not held up and it does not die.
E aprop empelleys le fet a las partidas dedintz entro que pauses aquel segon que cove, e manda a la femna que comprema a si alcunas veguadas, e el sira fora-getat am eyssiment leugier, si Dieus o vol.	Then support the child between its legs until you can stop it; and order the woman to compress herself several times, and let him be severed if God wills it.
Exitus geminorum aut foetuum multorum.	The exit of twins or a multitudinous fetus.
Sapias que gemels motas veguadas so natz, e alcunas vetz naysso tres o quatre , mays aquo es estranh e tart s’endeve; mays v so causas foro natura, e no vivo.	Know that twins are not a natural event, but sometimes two or three or four; and when there is one, it is strange to say it; but in nature there are two causes, and not three.
E conte aquelas, ja sia que sian montiplicatz, una segondina, e son seperatz per ciphac, distingen aquels enter le liguament en l’ombilic de cascun de aquels E alcunas veguadas so foro-getatz ayssi cum es un fet per eyssiment natural leugier, e so eysitz alcunas veguadas per eyssiment no-lausabla ayssi cum havem recomtat.	And as for those, if they are multiplied, a second one, and let them be separated by a cut, distinguishing between them in the navel of each one; and some are severed by natural separation, like twins, and some are not lausabla by their own nature, and some are not.
E si son dificils alcus de lor deves le enfantament e perveno ad aquo que havem dit de las figuras no-naturals, lahoras tu cura aquels ayssi cum havem recontat.	And if they are difficult to explain by their own nature of the child, then you shall pay attention to them; for those who have been described as not natural and not living, I will now tell you about them.
E si’ la matrona subtil e fassa aquo que fa am facilitat e subtilitat, e am tarditat, e sia ingeniat segon tota figura segon que es a lu preparat de l’engen amenant a salut.	And if the woman is subtle and has a flexible waist, and if she is late, and if it is a subtle figure of her being prepared for the salvation of all.
Rememoratio eius quod formatur in matrice ex embrionibus et Abortiuntur.	Recall that it is formed in the mother' s womb from embryos and those who are aborted.
Alcunas veguadas son formatz en la mayre un, e dos, e tres, e quatre, e v, e vi, e vii, e mays x, e ja es deves mi verificat que una femna abortem ne getet vi, e una autra x totz formatz, la qual causa fo fayta per mensuracio dels glorios savis.	Some veils are formed in the mother one, two, three, four, and v, vi, vii, ten times, and it has already been verified that a woman gets pregnant six times, and another ten times altogether, which causes fo to be made by measurement of the glorious sages.
E tot aysso cove que sia en la sciencia de la matrona quar fort leu ad aquela parve semblant de aquo, e donc opause se ad aquo am so que cove.	And I say that it is in the science of the mother, for her power over such a small and insignificant thing; and therefore pause at that point where you said to stop.
Capitol .lxxvi.	Chapter LXXVI.
De extraccio del fet quan es mort.	Of the extraction of the fetus when it is dead.
Quan tu curas le fet mort am aquo que havem dit en la divisio de la medicacio e no es defora eyssit, e tu yest forsat usar de opperacio am ma, lahoras cove que consideras si la femna es de sana vertut e no es am alcu dels accidentz per les quals sobre ela es temuda perdicio.	When you take care of the dead child in accordance with the division of medicine and it is not being separated by force from what I have described, then consider whether the woman is of sound health or not; for the loss of a child is sometimes a great loss for which a woman is sorely bereaved.
Lahoras cove que la femna sia envessada sobre le lieyt sobre le sieu dos, e sia le cap de lu enclinat enjos e las coyssas de lu sian elevadas.	Then place the woman on her back on the bed, and have her head bent forward, and let her feet be raised.
E·l ministre tengua aquela de doas partz o sia liada en le lieyt per so que·l cos de lu no se extenda deves la extraccio del fet.	The minister hold the woman' s hand with two parts, or let her be tied to the bed, so that his head does not extend too far forward during the extraction of the fetus.
E aprop tu humecta la boca de la mayre de lu am olis humitz e am mucellage de altea e de fenugrec e de semensa de li.	Then moisten the mouth of the mother' s mouth with oil, and with mint, and with fennel seed, and with licorice root.
E aprop unte la matrona la sua ma am aquels olis e mucellages, e aprop entrometa la sua ma am fecilitat en la mayre, e aprop cerque am la ma loc en le qual fique les uncis en le fet.	Then wash the mother' s hand with those oils and liquids; then bring it up in the woman' s way, and let her hold the child' s foot between her toes, and make a cut on its navel.
E locs convenient en aquo: adonc tu considera si le fet es preparat que deysenda sobre le sieu cap, e lahoras tu fique les uncis en les huels de lu, o en le col, o en la boca, o en le palat, o dejos la barba, o en la furcula de lu, o en les locs propdas de las costas, o dejos les ypocondres.	And place it conveniently in water: then consider whether the wound is prepared that you send it on top of his head, and then you fix the nails in his feet, or his neck, or his mouth, or his palate, or let his beard, or his fork, or the places closest to his ribs, or his hipbones.
Mays si le deysendiment es sobre les pes de lu, lahoras en le pentenilh, o en le mieg de las costas.	But if the discharge is on his feet, then in the middle of the back, or between the ribs.
E cove que tengua le unci am la ma dreyta, e pausa la curvitat de lu en aquel loc le qual es entre les ditz de la ma senestra, e entrometa la ma am facilitat e fique le unci en alcu de aquels locs les quals havem ditz, entro que pervengua a la causa boyda.	And where he has the nail in his right hand, and places the bend of him in that place which is between the fingers of his left hand, and inserts his hand easily and fixes the nail in one of those places that we have said, until it reaches the cause of the wound.
E aprop pause e fique en la apposicio de lu un autre unci, o le tertz si es necessitat, per so que sia atraccio engual, e no sia extencio segon la sua rectetut tant solament.	Then return and fix in the position of him another nail, or the third if necessary, so that it is a traction hook, and not an extraction according to the rule so much alone.
Ans sia maugut a tota partida, per so que l’eyssiment de lu sia alleujat ayssi cum es fayt en dent deves la eradicacio de lu.	Then it is good from the beginning, so that the discharge of him is relieved thus, because it is done in teeth by removing the root of him.
E cove en lu aquo que es entre lor que la extencio sia mollificada; e si alcuna partida de lu es retenguda, lahoras cove que la matrona unte alcus sieus ditz am oli e entrometa aquels espertament e revolva am aquels aquo que es retengut.	And where in the water that between them is softened the extraction; and if some part of him is retained, then consider where the woman pours some oil and inserts those things and turns them with those water that are retained.
Donc si la partida del fet es fora-getada, lahoras les uncis sian permudatz entra loc le qual sia pus aut; e fay aysso entro que tot le fet sia fora-getat.	Then if the discharge of the child is forgotten, then the nails are exchanged between places which are put together; and do so until all the discharge is forgotten.
Mays si la ma es eyssida denant l’autra, e no es possible reduzir aquela per la coartacio de lu, lahoras cove que drap sia envolopat sobre aquela; e aprop extratz aquela entro que tota sia fora-getada, e inscideys aquela o en la junctura de la ma o en le coyde.	But if the mother is discharged in front of the other, and it is not possible to reduce that by the contraction of him, then consider that she be wrapped around that; and then extract that until all is forgotten, and incise that or on the joint of the hand or on the neck.
E ayssi cove que fassas en l’autra ma e en les dos pes.	Then consider that you pass over the other hand and the two feet.
Mays si le cap del fet es gran, o accideys a lu coartacio en le eyssiment, o es en le cap de lu aygua ajustada, lahoras cove que entrometa entre les ditz espatum spinos e fenda le cap e extragua la aygua, o que discroba aquel am un instrument le qual es nompnat “alundat”, la forma del qual vindra am las formas dels autres instruments en le capitol le qual es aprop aquest.	But if the head of the child is great, or happens to him the contraction during the discharge, or it is in the head of the water that is adjusted, then consider that you insert between the fingers spiky and cut the head and extract the water, or that you separate that with an instrument which is called "alundat", the shape of which will come to the shapes of the other instruments in the chapter which is close to this.
E semblantment fassa si·l fet es de gran cap per natura: e lahoras cove que inscida aquel am algematu, o que prengua aquel am alunda ayssi cum havem dit; e aprop extra les osses am les forceps.	And apparently pass if the child is of great head by nature: and then consider that you incise that with a knife, or that you take that with an alundatum; and then extract the bones with forceps.
E si le cap es eyssit e es coartat deves la furcula, lahoras sia fendut entro que la humiditat la qual es en le pietz sia efunduda.	And if the head is discharged and contracted from the fork, then consider that it be cut within so that the moisture which is in the foot be spilled.
Mays si no es complicat, ni obezeys a eyssiment, lahoras tu inscideys le cap tantost segon que a tu sira possible.	But if it is not complicated, or does not obey the discharge, then you incise the head as soon as it is possible according to your ability.
E si le dejos del ventre es apostemat o es en lu ydropici, lahoras cove que tu perfores aquel entro que corro la humiditat que es en lu.	And if the intestines of the belly are putrefied or it is in the hydropic, then consider that you perforate that within which runs the moisture which is in him.
Mays si le fet es sobre les sieus pes, lahoras la atraccio de lu es leugiera e la direccio de lu a la boca de la mayre es leugiera.	But if the discharge is on his feet, then the traction of him is light and the direction of it towards the mouth of the mother is light.
Mays si es coartat deves le ventre e·l pietz, lahoras cove que tu extraguas aquel am drap le qual auras envolopat sobre la tua ma, e que fendes le ventre e·l pietz entro que corra aquo que es en aquels.	But if the contraction is from the belly and the foot, then consider that you extract that with a cloth which you have wrapped around your hand, and then cut the belly and the foot within so that the water which is in them runs.
Mays si les autres membres so ostatz e torna le cap, lahoras la metrona entrometa la ma senestra; mays si la boca de la mayre es huberta, lahoras intrometa la ma en le preon de layre, e cerque am aquela le cap, e atira aquel am les ditz entro a la boca de la mayre, e aprop entrometa en lu un unci, o dos uncis, e atire lu am aquels.	But if the other members are held back and turned the head, then the mother inserts her left hand; but if the mouth of the mother is open, then insert that into the mouth of him, and then return in him a nail, or two nails, and throw him towards those within the mouth of the mother, and then insert in him another nail, or two nails.
E si la boca de la mayre es coartada per apostema caut le qual accideys a l’u, lahoras cove que no sia trebelhat sobre lu; abantz cove lahoras aministrar efusio de causas humidas grassas.	And if the mouth of the mother is closed by apoplexy and that happens to the child, then consider that it not be disturbed on him; before returning, then administer a stream of moist air.
E aministre emplastres; e segua le pacient en ayguas que mollifican e humectan.	And administer plasters; and follow the patient in water which softens and moisten.
E si le fet es sobre le sieu costat, lahoras si possible es, sia agulat: e sia aministrat aquo que havem dit en le fet viu.	But if the discharge is on his side, then consider that it be sliced as much as possible; and water which has been said in the living child is administered.
E si aquo no es possible, lahoras sia inscidit en pessas, e sia extrayt.	But if water is not possible, then cut him in pieces, and extract him.
E cove que non layssas alcuna causa dedintz de la segondina.	And where you do not leave any cause inside the second.
E cum tu auras complida tota la tua opperacio, lahoras aministra aquo que havem dit de la curacio en les apostemas cautz les quals accideysso de la mayre.	And when you have completed all your operation, then administer water which has been said in the apoplexy by the cause which has happened from the mother.
E si accideys flux de sanc, lahoras deyssendas en ayguas stipticas e aministra l’autra curacio.	And if there is a flow of blood, then discharge it in stiff water and administer the other cure.
E yeu ja e vist una femna en le ventre de la qual era fet mort, e aprop sobre aquel foc autra veguada emprenhada, e aprop foc mort es le fet autre.	And I have already seen a woman in whose belly there was a dead child, and another woman with another pregnancy which has been taken out alive, and that same pregnancy has come out as a dead child.
Accidit al u aprop lonc temps apostema en le sieu embelic; e inflat es entro que foc ubert, e comensec a getar brac.	It happens to the child on an aperient long time in his womb; and it is inflated within so that it burns brightly, and begins to sweat.
E yeu fu appelhat a la cura de lu, e medicat a lu per lonc temps, e la plagua no es consolidada.	He was called to the cure of him, and treated for a long time, and the plague is not consolidated.
Adonc yeu pausegui sobre lu de alscunas causas emplastra de forta atraccio, e eyssic de lu un os, e aprop passero alcus jorns, e eyssic un autre os; e yeu fu trop meravilhat, cum en le ventre no sia os.	Then you applied to him of some causes plasters of strong attraction, and discharged from him a bone, and then passed some days, and discharged another bone; and I was very surprised, for in the womb there is not a bone.
E adonc yeu cogitegui que eran dels osses del fet mort.	And then you considered that they were of the bones of the dead child.
Donc yeu enguisigui la plagua, e extrayssi de lu motz osses , la femna existent en las sieuas milhos disposicios, e ja visquec en tal manieyra per lonc temps, correc de lu un petit de brac.	Then I cured the plague of him, and extracted from him many bones, for that woman is in her usual dispositions, and I have seen it in such a way for a long time, correct a little bit of the child.
E yeu no afermegui asso esser stranh, sino quar en aquo es sciensa e ajutori ad aquo que le metge artifec am la ma per curacio aministra.	And I did not consider it strange, but it happens that the water is a science and helps to this water which you administer to him for treatment.
De las formas dels instrumentz que so necessaris a extrayre le fet.	of the shapes of the instruments which are necessary to extract the child.
Forma de vertitge am la qual es uberta la mayre:	Shape of rotation with which the mother is agitated:
Aquesta es la forma de strenhedor en le qual so engualhatz les libres, al qual engualhament sian dos virtitges en doas extremitatz de dos futz.	This is the shape of strength in which you wrap the free ends, and with which two rotations are on the two ends of two feet.
May empero aquesta virtitge cove que sia pus subtil de strictori, e sia fayt o de eba o de fust de boys.	But perhaps this rotation is not subtle in its strictness, and it is done or with the ear of a boy or with the finger of a girl.
E sia la latitut de quascun fust quays dos ditz e le marge de quascu amdos quays un dit, e la longitut de quascu es un palm e mig; e en le mieg loc de dos fustz so dos ajustaments de aquel meteys fustz les quals ja son fermatz, dels quals la longitut es la maytat de un palm e un pauc mes, e la latitut de quascu es quay dos ditz, o un pauc mes.	And it is the length of each foot which has two toes and the margin of each one which has a toe, and the length of each is half a palm plus a little more, and the width of each is two toes or a little less.
E aquestz dos additamentz sian entromeses en la boca de la mayre per que sia uberta am aquels quan tu revolves las doas prescriptas virtigges.	These two additions are inserted in the mouth of the mother so that she is agitated with these two rotations.
Forma autra semblant de aquela pus subtil e pus leugiera:	Another similar shape to this which is more subtle and lighter:
Sia fayta de fustz de eba o de boys segon la semblansa de forceps.	Is made of feet of a girl or of a boy according to the appearance of pincers.
Mays empero en la extremitat de lu so dos additament ayssi cum vezes, e la longitut de aquels additament es quays un palm, e la latitut de quascu es dos ditz.	But perhaps in the end of him are two additions which have been said, and the length of these additions is a palm, and the width of each is two toes.
E cum tu vols am aquels ubrir la mayre, lahoras tu fay cezer la femna sobre le lieyt les pes pendentz, ubert aquo que es entre las coyssas de lu.	And when you want to close the mouth of the woman with these, then return her on her back, with water which has been said between her thighs.
E aprop obre la tua ma am le instrument ayssi cum fas am forfexs engualment segon la quantitat que vols de la aprecio de la boca de la mayre entro que la metrona fassa so que vols.	And then open your mouth with the instrument as much as you want according to the quantity that you want of the impression of the mouth of the mother so that she makes it so that you want.
La forma de vertitge la qual diysero les antics:	The form of turn that they said the ancients:
Forma de impellent am le qual es empellit le fet:	Form of pushing on, which is pushed back:
Forma de amisidat2 am le qual es conterit le cap gran	Form of rubbing on, which is rubbed in the head
E es asemblat a forceps al qual so dentz en la extremitat, ayssi cum vezes, e alcunas veguadas es fayt lonc ayssi cum forceps segon aquesta forma, ayssi cum vezes, al qual so dentz ayssi cum dentz de ressegua am le qual es inscidit e conterit.	And is assembled with forceps that are placed in the end, sometimes, and some are made long sometimes, and sometimes with forceps according to this form, sometimes, and that which is engraved and rubbed and is scraped and is shaped in the hand:
Forma de amesidat pauc:	Form of little rubbing on:
Forma de unci havent una spina:	Form of one that has a point:
Forma de unci havent doas spinas:	Form of one that has two points:
Forma de forceps a la qual so dentz de cerra am le qual le cap del fet sia conterit:	Form of forceps that is pointed at the end, and on this form the head of the foot is rubbed:
Forma de spatum havent dos extremitatz am le qual le cap es abscindit:	Form of a knife with two ends, which is cut in the head:
Forma de dos espatums latz:	Form of two knives long:
Totz aquels instrumentz so excersitatz, e quan mes so multiplicadas las specias de aquel e so preparadas deves le artifexs, quant es pus leugier a la sua opperacio e pus aut deves les homes per la sua quantitat.	All these instruments are exercised, and when many of the spices of that one are mixed and prepared by the artist, how much is applied to the operation and how much men for its quantity.
E no obres de aquels instrumentz ja sia qua sia deves tu aparalhat, quar la necessitat de aquels no es excusabla.	And of those instruments that are done already, you should be careful, because the need for those is not excusable.
De extraccio de la segondina.	Of extraction of the second.
Quan la segondina es retenguda deves le enfantament, lahoras cove que tu comandes a la malautae que retengua le sieu ale, e aprop fay aquela stornudar am condizi, e strenh la tua ma sobre la boca de lu e sobre las nars de lu, e si per aysso es defora eyssit, bo es.	When the second child is kept, it should be commanded to the bad that he keep his breath, and bring that it cough, and press your hand over its mouth and nose, and if in this way it sneezes, good is it.
E sino, lahoras tu pren una ola e perfora en la cuberta un trauc e pausa en aquela erbas ubrent la boca de la mayre, ayssi cum calament e ruda e anet e camamilla e scicados arabic e cassia lignea e santaurea.	And if not, you take a water and pierce in the ceiling a hole and stop it with grass, so that the mouth of the mother is burned, sometimes with cold and rough and wet and chamomile and licorice Arabic and oak and holy water.
Totas aquestas erbas o alcunas de lor sian submersas en aygua en la ola, e pausa aquela sobre le foc.	All these herbs or some of them are submerged in water in the cup, and bring it to the fire.
E aprop pausa una canula de canaviera en la boca de la mayre, e tengua aquela entro que la evapor vengua a la concavitat de la mayre.	And place a pipe of camomile in the mouth of the mother, and keep it so that the vapor comes into its cavity.
E aprop fay aquela stornudar ayssi cum havem dit, e la segondina sira fora-getada am velocitat.	And bring that it coughs, as fast as you can say 'jack robinson', and the second child is forgotten with speed.
Mays si roman aprop aquesta curacio e no es eyssida, lahoras tu comanda a la matrona que submerge la sua ma sinistra en oli sizami o en micellage de altea, e aprop entrometa aquela en le conh e queresca am aquela la segondina, e cum aquela auras trobada, lahoras pren la e exten aquela pauc a pauc Mays si es annexsa en le preon de la mayre, lahoras entrometa la sua ma segon que havem recomtat, e quan aura trobat la segondina, extragua aquela petit a petit segon rectetut per so que la mayre no caja deves la atraccio vehement.	And if this cure remains and is not thrown up, command the midwife to dip her left hand in olive oil or mixture of marjoram, and put that on the mother's belly, and try to find the second child, and with that come back found, then take it and squeeze a little little at a time according to this recipe so that the mother does not feel the violent attraction.
Abantz cove que sia permudada als costatz dreyt e sinestre am facilitat.	In front of you that is changed from right to left with ease.
E aprop sia ajustat en la quantitat de atraccio, quar ela obedira e evasira de adhirencia.	And it should be adjusted in the amount of attraction, because it will obey and will avoid attachment.
E si la boca de la mayre es coartada, nos ja havem recomtat la curacio am sturnutacio e am medicacio de la ola am erbas.	And if the mouth of the mother is stopped up, we have already described the cure with sneezing and the medicine of the water with herbs.
Mays si no es fora-getada am totas las causas las quals havem recomtadas, lahoras guarda te que no fetigues sobre aquela en iteracio de abstracio, mays empero cove que aquo que es eyssit de lu a la boca de la mayre lies a la coyssa de la femna, e aprop cristeriza aquela am enguent e tetrafarmacon; quar aquel fara poyrir aquela aprop alcus dias e sira dissolvuda e sira fora-getada.	If not forgotten with all the causes that we have described, be careful that you do not force it to come out of her mouth, but if it comes out by itself, rub that with honey and four herb, because that will make it boil a little bit and be forgotten.
Mays quan se poyreys, es de lu elevada mala audor al cap, e al estomac, e aquo ledeys la malauta; e adonc cove que sian aministradas sub-fumiguacios e convenientz ad aquo.	When it is cooked, it has a bad smell to the head and to the stomach, and that which makes the mother sick; and then put those administered with smoke and suitable smells in water.
Mays alcus dels Antics ja so esproatz sub-fumigacio de nazitort e de figuas seccas.	Some of the Ancients have already described as smoke-making of the nose and of the dried figs.
Forma de instrument am le qual la femna es sub-fumiguada deves la retentio de mestruas e de la segondina:	Form of a device that the woman is sub-smoked must be commanded to the retention of blood and the second child:
Sia fayta de veyre o de eram.	Of vomiting or vomiting.
E sia pausada la extremitat subtil en le conh e la extremitat ampla sobre le foc, e la sub-fumiguacio sia pausada sobre las brazas del foc.	The end that is subtle is put in the cavity and the wide end is over the fire, and smoke is put on the coals of the fire.
E tengua aquela entro que sia consumida aquela sub-fumiguacio e itera·n autra.	And keep it so that that which is smoked is consumed with smoke, and repeat: another.
De curacio del cul del enfant no-perforat.	Of the cure for a child who has not been pierced.
Motz enfantz naysso e les culs de lu no so perforatz, les quals ya ciphac subtil e opilat.	When children are born but their anuses are not pierced, they are subtle and difficult:
Adonc cove a la matrona que perfore am le sieu dit aquel ciphac; e sino, perfora aquel am spatum agut, e guarda se que no toque le lacert.	Then command the midwife to pierce her anus, and if not, pierce it with a sharp knife, and be careful that it does not touch her liver.
E aprop pause sobre aquel lana enfusa en vi e oli; e aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia senat.	And bring that wrapped wool in the sun and oil; and cure that with honey so that it is bitter.
Mays si temes que sia opilat, lahoras pausa en le trauc una canula per motz dias, e osta la quan le enfant voldra degerir.	If you are afraid that it will be pierced, then put a pipe for the child to swallow in its mouth, and stop it so that it does not come out.
E ja accideys oppilacio del cul per consolidacio de plagua o de apostema; adonc cove que aquela consolidacio sia inscidida, e aprop sia curada am aquo que avem dit de la curacio e del plom.	And already happens oppilacion of the anus by consolidation of plague or pus; then put that consolidation, and bring those made with water that we have described and with salt.
De curacio de las fistulas que endeveno dejos.	Of the cure for fistulas that are left.
Las fistulas que endeveno en la partida dejos pus bassa so nodacio e grossetut las quals endeveno prop del cul defora o en l’espazi de la una partida.	The fistulas that are left in the anus, put them on a base of ointment and grossness of the kind that comes out through the anus and from the space of one part.
E es una fistula o motas.	Is this a question? If so, here is the translation:
E cum aquela nodacio es antiquada e corr de la humiditat aygosa blanca o poyridura subtil, e alcunas veguadas so de aquestas fistulas alcunas penetrantz.	And with that base, it is old and runs from the white, bitter water or subtle pus, and some of those fistulas are penetrating.
E aquelas penetrantz so conogudas per aquo que es eyssit de aquelas per la egressio e per ventosetat; e alcunas vetz use le malaute de egressio, e fort leu es eyssit de aquelas verm.	And those that are penetrating are distinguished by the exit and by the windiness; and some times use the exit, and a strong leak comes out of them.
E so de aquelas fistulas alcunas veguadas en l’espazi penetrantz entro a la vesica, e entro al meat de la vergua; e so de aquelas penetrantz entro la junctura de la coyssa e entro al notz de la coeta.	And some of those fistulas are located in the space that penetrates into the bladder, and into the meat of the thigh; and some of those that penetrate into the joints of the crotch and into the neck of the pelvis.
E aquo en que es conoguda fistula penetrant entro al cul e no-penetrant, es que tu metas le tieu dit endic en le cul, e entrometas tenta subtil de eram o de ferr en la fistula quan no y es turtuositat.	And in the water that is conoguda is a fistula that penetrates into the anus and does not, then put the child' saying of "end" in the anus, and bring up smoke or iron to the fistula when it is not painful.
Mays si en aquela es turtuositat, lahoras entromet en aquela tenta subtil de plom o de pels de caval entro que tu sentas la tenta o le pel en le tieu dit.	If in that is painful, then bring up a little of salt or iron or horse hair inside the fistula where you feel the pain or the hair in the child' saying.
E si no sentas aquela de tot ni no procezeys del trauc alcuna causa de egestio ni verm ni ventositat, ayssi cum havem dit, lahoras sapias que es no-penetrant, e lahoras coyta te a la curacio.	And if you do not feel that pain or any burning inside the pipe or windiness, then know that it does not penetrate, and cure yourself with the cure.
E quan la fistula es penetrant entro a la vesica o entro al meat de la vergua, lahoras la significacio de lu es eyssiment de urina de aquela e prohibicio de lu ad aysso que·l loc am medicina sia consolidat.	When the fistula enters into the bladder or into the meat of the thigh, then know that the meaning of the water is pee and stop it with medicine when it comes to the place.
Mays si es penetrant entro la junctura de la coyssa o entro al os e envencio de dolor en le circuit, lahoras senhal de lu es que la tenta perve entro aqui si en lu no es turtuositat entro al os, e envencio de dolor en le circuit de la partida; e que de lu yeys poyredura tostemps; e que no val en aquela medicacio, ni es consolidada am enguent.	If it enters into the joints of the crotch or into the bone and causes pain in the circulation, then know that the meaning is pee if it does not feel painful, but the water will cause pain in the circulation of the part; and that it will be bitter at times; and that this medicine should not be made with honey.
E en totas aquelas fistulas penetrant no es curacio de tot, e la curacio de aquelas es trebalh e vanetat dels folyls metges sobre·l qual so fermatz.	And in all those fistulas that penetrate, there is no cure for them all, and the treatment of those is difficult and useless work of the medical leaves on which it is closed.
Mays en aquela que no es penetrant e no antiqua, sanacio am ferr es sperada segon que yeu a tu recomtare, e aquo que ja yeu e proat.	If that one does not penetrate and does not age, cure with salt according to what I have recommended, and in the water that I have already described and practiced.
E es que le malaute jagua entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos e eleva las cambas de lu entro sus, las coyssas sian enclinadas al ventre de lu, e aprop entromet tenta de plom, o de eram si es en la fistula turtuositat, entro que sapias le loc on perve la tenta.	And that which is made with salt is played between your two legs and raised the intestines of them, and put those in an angle towards the belly of you, and bring up smoke or iron if it is painful to get into a fistula where you know the place.
E si aquela sent le malaute entorn le cuol, lahora cove que tu entrometas le tieu dit endic en le cuol.	And if it hurts to turn the patient around, then cover that you are turning the little finger in the armpit.
E si sentas en le tieu dit la tenta ja per si meteyssa descuberta penetrar, otra aquo que sentas entre le tieu dit e aquela siphac o carn, lahoras sapias certanament que aquela es penetrant; e adonc no trebalhes en aquela, quar no es en aquela sanacio, ayssi cum havem dit.	And if you feel the little finger move when it is already in place, another thing that makes you feel pain between the little finger and the side or flesh, then know for sure that it has penetrated; and then do not work on that, for it is not in that area where there is healing, as we have said.
Mays empero diyssero alcus que es sana en alcus homes tart.	But some will say that it heals in some people and does not heal in others.
E de la medicacio per la qual es sperat juvament en lu es que tu ignes cauteri subtil segon le ample de la fistula, ayssi cum es precedit, e intrometas aquel ignit en la fistula entro que pervengua entorn le cuol; e aprop itera aquel doas o tres vetz entro que sapias que ja son adhustas totas aquelas carns ajustadas fistuladas que so semblantz a cana de pluma de ausel.	And as for the treatment by which hope is expected to heal him, then you should ignite a subtle cautery according to the width of the fistula, thus preceded, and introduce that ignites into the fistula until it enters through the armpit; and repeat that two or three times within that you know that they are all tight. These wounds that seem like feathers of an owl.
E aprop cura aquela am calguas envolopadas en boder entro que en yescan totas aquelas carns que so adhustas, e aprop cura aquela am medicinas la carn engendrantz e consolidantz, e si es sanada, bo es; e sino, lahoras no es sana en degun temps per autra curacio.	And then heal that with calmed and wrapped bandages within that all those tissues that are tight can be healed, and then heal that with medicines that cause the creation and consolidation of flesh, and if it is healed, well done; and if not, do not heal it with any other treatment.
E si la tenta intra, e no penetra entro·l tieu dit le qual es en le cul, e entre aquel e la tenta que es velament spes de carn o de ciphac, e vezes la fistula en aquo que siec la superficia de la codena, lahoras secca la codena del comensament de la fistula, e tu ve seccan am la tenta, e sia en la fistula entro que la seccio pervengua al loc en le qual perve la extremitat de la tenta, e per la tenta es liberat e catz.	And if the tentacle enters and does not penetrate within; the little finger that is in the armpit, and between that and the tentacle that is slightly of flesh or of side, and sometimes the fistula into which it comes when it reaches the surface of the breast, then dry the breast from the beginning of the fistula, and you shall cut off the tentacle, and it be in the fistula within that the cut reaches the place where the end of the tentacle arrives, and with the tentacle is released and discharged.
E aprop mundifiqua aquelas carns fistuladas las quals so asembladas a canula de pena de ausel e no romangua de aquelas alcuna causa.	Then clean those wounded tissues that are assembled like a tube of ink of an owl and do not rust due to some cause.
Mays si flux de sanc vezes que vengua entre tu e la tua opperacio quan ensideysses aquelas carns, lahoras le milh que sia e del pus leugier instrument es cauterizar am foc o am medicina acuta, quar cauteri am foc ajusta bonas doas habitutz: so es adhustio de aquelas carns ajustadas, e abscizio del sanc exseccacio de las humiditatz.	But if there is a flow of blood several times that comes between you and your work when you are sewing those tissues, then the milk that is and from the pus, a sharp instrument is to cauterize with fire or with acute medicines, for cauterization with fire adjusts well: it is dried up from those tight tissues, and the excessive secretion of fluids.
E aprop cura aquela am calguas envolopadas en boder o en caus trissat entro que·l loc geta brac, e aprop lahoras cura la plagua am enguentz carn dura engendran e consolidan.	Then heal that with calmed and wrapped bandages within that place gets swollen, and then heal the plague with burning and drying flesh that is generated and consolidated.
E so medicinas en las quals so stipticitat e exseccio; quan lahoras es restaurada ja es sanada e no temes iteracio.	And thus medicines in which there is strictness and excision; when then is restored, it is already healed, and you do not fear recurrence.
Mays si la fistula ja perve entro al preon del cul e es elonguada de lu superficia del cos, lahoras entromet le tieu dit en le cul e inquireys am aquel.	But if the fistula has already entered into the armpit and is extended from the surface of the chest, then put the little finger in the armpit and ask him about it.
E donc si centes la tenta e entre tu e ela es velament de ciphac o de carn, e es propda a la penetracio, lahora no es operacio en lu sino segon via di fiducia e de speransa.	And if you feel the tentacle and it is slightly of flesh or of side between you and it, and it is about to penetrate; then do not operate on him in any way except by a trusted and promising route.
La qual causa es aministrar en lu una de tres manieyras: o que cauterize aquela ayssi cum havem dit; o que secces aquela entro que consieguas la conquavitat de lu per que sia a tu possible entrometre las qualcas e la curacio propdana; e no procesiscas mot am seccio per so que no inscidas le lacert contenent le cuol, e que accidisque sobre le malaute eyssiment de la egistio ses voluntat; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit quar fort leu sira sanat; o que elongues aquel velament e mondes aquel pus que seccas aquel entro prop le cul, ayssi cum havem dit, o am tenta o am autre instrument de aguda extremitat, e aprop mondifique aquelas carns fistuladas las quals so en la seccio entro la on podes am percrustacio; e aprop esforsa te a far la restauracio de tota la plagua am seccio, e si le orrifici pus desus no es consolidat, e romangua la fistula uberta en la partida del cul, e sira pus leugier per le malaute.	The cause is to administer it in any of these three ways: either to cauterize it as we have said; or to dry it within that you can reach the cavity of it so that you can put your fingers into it and apply the appropriate treatment; and not to cut it with a section, otherwise you will injure the lacuna containing the armpit, and it will happen about him as much as he wants; and then heal that with water as we have said because it is strong medicine to heal; or to extend that little flesh and create pus on it that you dry within that you can reach the cavity of it, as we have said, either with a tentacle or with another instrument of an acute tip, and then clean those tissues that are cut within that part within the armpit, and then try to make the restoration of all the plague with a section; and if the pus orifice above does not consolidate, and it breaks the fistula open at the armpit, and the pus leaks through it.
E alscunas veguadas la fistula es finida segon aquesta manieyra: es quan tu entrometas la tenta en la fistula, e es en le latz del cul entorn la superficia del cos am la codena e en le marge del cul, lahoras pren tenta de perforada extremitat, que es ayssi cum agulha de preparantz les coers segon aquesta forma:	And some times the fistula is finished in this way: when you put the tentacle in the fistula, and it is at the back of the armpit on the surface of the chest near the armpit, then take an acute tip, which is thus prepared to prepare the tissues according to this form:
e entromet en aquela fiel envolopat de v fiels o entorn aquels; e aprop entromet tenta am fiel en la fistula entro que consiegua la conquavitat de lu.	and put it in that calmed wrapped up of four sheets or inside those; and then put the tentacle in the fistula within that you can reach its cavity.
Mays si es penetrant en le marge del cul prop dedintz, lahoras tu extratz le fiel de aquel trauc ayssi que tu intrometas le tieu dit en le cul; e extraguas la extremitat del fiel e ajustes las duas extremitatz essemps, e estrenh cascuna, e leyssa aquo per un dia o per dos, e quan mays inscideys le fiel en la carn, estrenh be aquel entro que aquelas carns sian inscididas las quals so entre doas extremitatz del fiel e que cajan.	But if it penetrates into the armpit from behind towards the middle, then you take off the calmed wrapped-up of four sheets or inside those; and then put the tentacle in the fistula within that you can reach its cavity. If it is penetrating into the armpit from the side towards the back, then you take off the tentacle from that part
E aprop cura la plagua entro que sia consolidada e sanada.	Then heal the plague within that it is consolidated and healed.
Mays si le orrifici de la fistula no es penetrant, lahoras fay aquel penetrar, en qualque manieyre sia a tu preparat, sino que sia mot en le preon, quar no es a tu que fassas aquo per que no inscidas le lacert; e aprop fay am aquela entro que sia sanada.	But if the orifice of the fistula is not penetrating, then make it penetrate in any way that you prepare it, except to push it into the armpit, for you will injure the lacuna; and then heal that which is within that it be healed.
La forma de spatum spinos am lo qual es fenduda la fistula: la curvitat del qual es mot aguda e l’autra partida es no-aguda, per so que no inscidas aquo que no es necessari, ayssi cum vezes.	The shape of the spike on which the fistula is cut: its curve is sharp and the other end is not-sharp, so that you do not injure it, and this does not matter; sometimes.
De sutura de emorroydas en las quals corra sanc en la inscizio de aquelas.	Of the suture of hemorrhoids in which blood runs through the incision of those.
Emorroydas so segon dos manieyras, quar o so entre le cul semblantz aysi que es de carbos, o quays aquelas sian cum a gras de rasim.	Hemorrhoids as if they were between the buttocks, resembling wood, or those are with a thick fat.
E de aquelas so petitas e grans, e que le sanc corr de aquelas tostemps e es una, e so motas, e so fora·l cul, e en las extremitatz de lu.	And of those there are small and large ones, and the blood flows from them at times, and they are one, and they do not hurt; and they are outside the armpits, and in their ends.
Mays empero aquelas que so foro le cul so segon las mes de pauca humiditat, de las quals corr aygua citrina o un petit de sanc am cos continuabla, e so segon la color del cos.	But those that are outside the armpits are according to two parts: either they have little humidity, from which runs yellow water or a drop of blood at times, and it is according to the color of the body.
E la curacio de aquela que es dedintz le cuol es que comandes al malaute que se assela e que se exprema entro que le cuol yesca e las emoroydas apparescan a tu.	And the treatment for that which is inside the armpit is that you order to the patient that he does not move and squeeze his chest until the hemorrhoids appear.
Adonc tu te coyte e suspen am uncis o que tenguas aquelas am la tua ungla, e aprop incideys aquelas deves las suas razitz.	Then you cut them off with your nails or those that you have on your fingers, and then you cut their roots.
Mays si les uncis no so tengutz en aquelas per la humiditat de lor e mollificacio de aquelas, lahoras pren aquelas am drap aspre o am coto o am flassada de lana, e extratz aquelas am les tieus ditz, e aprop inscideys aquelas e polveriza sobre lor alcunas polveras caudas aprop la inscizio, per que sian ad aquelas en loc de cauteri; o cauteriza aquelas segon que es precedit en le capitol de cauterizar.	But if the nails are not holding in those due to their humidity and softness, then take them with a sharp blade or a nail file or a piece of wool, and cut them with your knife, and then cut off their roots; and you can put them on a sharp edge, and you can cut them from the root, and then powder them over them some powdered herbs, appropriate to cauterize them; or cauterize them according to what we have said before.
E aprop cura aquelas am l’autra curacio entro que sian sanadas.	Then heal those with the other treatment within that they are healed.
E si le cul no obezeys a egressio, lahoras cristerisa le malaute am cristeri en le qual sia mordicacio petita, e sia lavat am aquel aquo que es en le cuol e que obezesca a egressio leugierament quan le malaute s’esprem.	And if the buttocks do not obey to go out, then cut the patient with a sharp knife in the place where it hurts slightly; and wash it with water that is inside the armpits and that obeys to go out lightly when you cut the patient.
Mays si las emorroydas so defora le cul, lahoras la causa de lor es leugiera, e es que tu prenguas aquelas am la tua ungla, o que prenguas aquelas am unci, e inscidas aquelas, e aprop cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit entro que sian sanadas.	But if the hemorrhoids are outside the armpits, then the cause of them is that you take them with your fingers, or with a blade, and cut them; and then heal those with water as we have said within that they are healed.
E aquel que avoreys inscizio, cove que aministres sutura de lor segon aquesta manieyra: pren fiel envolopat e entromet aquel en agulha e aprop extratz las emorroydas a las partidas dessus, e fay aquel penetrar am la agulha en la razit del autra part, e envolveys las doas extramitatz del fiel en la partida pus dejos de la agulha, e so latitudinalment; e estrenh la emorroyda am strectura fort, e aprop noza le fiel e extratz la agulha.	And that which you cut must be sutured according to this way: take a calmed wrapped-up of four sheets and put it on the blade and then extract the hemorrhoids with its ends; make the blade penetrate into the roots of the other part, and wrap those two ends in the blade at the end of the incision, and cut off the roots; and then heal them.
E fay aquo a totas, e layssa de aquelas una e no la cozes, per so que la superfluitat del sanc corra de aquela.	And make it known to all of them, and leave one of them unbound, so that the excess blood from the heart may run off from him.
E aprop pausa sobre le cul drap enfus en oli rozat o en cerot; e pausa aquel sobre·l cuol e comanda al malaute que·s repause.	Then place over the buttock a cloth soaked in rose oil or wax, and place that one on the patient's rear end, and order the servant to rest.
E aprop layssa aquela entro que caja; e quan es casuda, cura aquelas am enguentz o am autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	Then let him fall into a box; and when he is fallen, treat those with oil or any other cure within the box that may heal them.
De curacio de fistulas.	Of Cure of Fistulas.
Motas veguadas accideys per exseccacio de fenda o per costriccio de natura.	Mottled spots may occur through the drying up of a wound or by natural constriction.
E cum so antiquadas e no val en aquela medicina, lahoras cove que tu razas aquelas am la puncta de spatum o am la tua ungla entro que sian faytas humidas e sia hostada de aquelas la escorsa pus desus, la qual prohibeys aquelas de consolidacio; e aprop cura aquelas entro que sian consolidadas.	And if those old remedies do not work in him, then do so with a pointed stye or your finger, wetting it and applying it to the pustule on top of him, which prohibits the spread of pus from it, and cure those that are already consolidated; and treat those that are already consolidated.
Lahoras tu osta aquelas am razio pus vehement que la primieyra entro que mot sancno e sian excoriadas; e aprop cura aquelas entro que sian sanadas.	Then do so with a sharp razor to drain the pus that is coming out vigorously from the first wound, and cure those within that are already healed.
De curacio de almesamir, so es clau.	Of Cure of Ailsamiere, as it is said.
Sapias que alamermar, so es clau, e no es si no notz redon segon la color del cors semblant a cap de claviel, e es fayt en tot le cors e majorment en las partidas dejos les pes e als ditz, e endeve per aquels dolor deves le anament.	You should know that Ailsamiere, as it is said, and unless the color of the body resembles a clove-shaped crown, it is made throughout the whole body, more especially in the toes of the feet and the fingers, and at these places pain should be felt deeply; and because of this pain you should think about your spirit.
E adonc cove que sia inscidit aquo que es en le circuit del clau, e sia tengut am les forfexs o am unci, e sia eradicat de la sua razit; e aprop cura aquel.	And then do so with a sharp razor or oil that is in the circle of the nail, and cut it off completely, and cure him.
E si vols, cauteriza le segont que es precedit en le sieu capitol.	And if you wish, cauterize the second one that precedes the first in the line of the thumb.
Mays de veruca es eminencia petita aspre fistulada redonda sobre la superficia del cos, e motas veguadas veno en las mas dels enfantz.	Might a warts be a small, sharp, raised, round blister on the surface of the body, and mottled spots may come out in most children.
E curacio de lu es que estendas e inscidas aquela, o que estrenhas aquela am fiel o am pel entro que caja.	And for his cure you should extend and cut off that one, or create that one by a sharp instrument or within the box.
E si vols, cauteriza aquo, segon que havem dit, am foc o am medicina acuta.	And if you wish, cauterize it, as we have said before, with fire or acute medicine.
E ja so eradicadas enversas e no-enversas am le instrument le qual yeu diyre.	And once they are completely cut off from both sides by the instrument that I directed you to use.
Mays formica es eminencia petita feutrada o fistulada grossa sobre la superficia del cos anant mot en le preon, e quan le freg atroba aquela es centit en lu semblant de mordificacio de formigua, e es fayta entorn le cos.	Might a wart be a small, flattened, or raised blisters on the skin that itches, and when it scratches that one it stings like a bee sting all over the body.
E curacio de lu es que prenguas una canula de pena de auca o de pena de voltor, e sia fort, e pausa aquela sobre la formigua entro que la contengua le cercle de la canula de las partidas de lu; e aprop revolveys la tua ma am la canula entro que inscidas aquo que es en le circuit de la formigua, e pauses aquela en le preon de la carn, e que eradiques la formigua de la sua razit.	And for his cure you should take a tube of pena (a type of medicine), or a pen of voltor (another type of medicine), and make it strong, and place that one over the wart that contains it within the circle of the tube of its legs; and then turn your hand upside down with the tube inside, so that the medicine goes into the wound, and place that one on the warts' root, and cut off the wart completely from both sides by the tube.
E si vols, fay aquo am canula de eram o de ferr segon aquesta forma:	And if you wish, do so with the tube of iron or steel according to this shape:
Sia la partida desus de la canulha trahent a subtilitat, sorda (so es no-perforada), envolopada per so que sobre le dit la aprencio de lu sia ablaviada e la revolucio de aquela.	May the tube's end be sharp, dull (if not pierced), wrapped with something that covers it from being pierced by it and its rotation around it.
E si vols cauteriza la formiga segon que es denant dit en la cauterizacio de atheyl en le capitol de cauteri.	And if you wish, cauterize the wart according to what we have said before in cauterization of atheyl in the line of cauterization.
De forma dels instrumentz que so aministratz a dar cristeri.	Of the shape of the instruments that are used to give cure.
Alcunas veguadas es fayt cristeri de argent o de lato o de eram fondut o malleat; e alcunas veguadas es fayt de aquels instrumentz petit e gran segon aquels als quals so aministratz, quar aquel que es aministrat en la curacio dels petitz enfants sia petit; e de aquel dels quals los culs son freuls o doloyrozes, les cristeris de aquels sian petitz.	Some spots are made of silver or copper or melted era  (a type of metal) or malleated; and some spots are made with small instruments according to those that are used for the cure of small children, as those for the cure of little children are small; and of those for the cure of large children, their shape is larger.
La forma de cristeri gran e pauc:	The shape of the cure should be large and few:
Le cap de la canula de lu desus en le qual es liada la borsa sia ampla segon aquesta manieyra; e sia a lu distinacio la on la borsa es liada ayssi cum vezes.	May the tube' s end be wide above all things; and may it be distinguished by where the bag is tied.
E la extremitat de lu pus dejus, la qual es entromesa en le cul, sia sorda (so es no-uberta) mot leon, atrasent a subtilita; e en la un del latz de lu sian dos traucs, e en l’autre costat un trauc, e sia la amplesa del trauc segon la groseza dels rays e pus gros un petit.	And the end of the tube be slightly pointed, which is inserted into the buttock, be dull (if not pierced) and turning back on itself; and on one side of the line of the tube there are two turns, and on the other side a turn, and may the turn be wider according to the thickness of the rays and a small one.
E sia la borsa en la qual sian pausadas las medicinas de vesica de bestia o de pel de ovelha, e la razit de lu sia un palm.	May the bag in which are placed the medicines of animal or sheep' s hair be wide; and may the root of the tube be a palm.
E sia perforada per motz traucs ayssi cum es revolvuda; e si l’espazi le qual es entre les traucs la grossetut del dit.	May it be pierced by sharp turns as it is turned over; and may the space between the turns be wider according to the thickness of the tongue.
E aprop entromet en aquels traucs fiel fort de fiel cru le qual sia de detz fiels, o enviro aquels; e ajusta am aquel la borsa; e quan es pausada en lu la borsa, sia streyt en le cap del cristeri entre dos distingentz am fort costriccio, e aprop cristeriza am aquel quascun trauc: Mays la qualitat de cristerizar am aquel es que tu omples la borsa de la medicina, que sia escalfada segon la quantitat de la tolleransa del malaute; e guarda te que no sia trop cauda ni trop freja.	And then insert it into the sharp turns of a firm thread, which is to be found in the bag, or between those; and adjust the bag to that one; and when it is placed on his head, may the bag be straight between two distinct and tight constriction, and then apply the cure to each turn: May the quality of applying the cure to that one be that you fill the bag with medicine, which is heated according to the quantity of tolerance of the patient; and be careful not to be too long or too short.
E aprop le malaute sia resupinat sobre le sieu dos, e eleva las suas cambas en sus e pausa dejos lu un cuer sobre le qual ja so les homes o un lansol; e aprop unta la extramitat del cauteri am oli o am album de huou o am mucellage de fenugrec o de semblantz; e aprop entromet aquel en le cul am facilitat, e aprop le ministre prengua la borsa e exprema aquel am doas mas e essemps am vehemencia entro que sia evacuat en le budelh tot aquo que es en le cristeri; e aprop extra le cristeri e le malaute leva las suas cambas a la paret.	And then the patient is to be made to sit down on his heels, and his feet lifted up on a chair or a bench; and then the minister takes the bag and squeezes it with two hands and spills its contents quickly into the cure; and then pour the cure out and take the bag and fill it again according to what is required for another turn; and then place the cure on the wall.
E si la medicina forsa aquel a eyssiment, tengua le tant quant poyra; e si dorm am aquel per tota una nueyt, es mays derier en juvament.	And if the medicine forces that one to sleep, hold as much as you can; and if it sleeps at night, it is a medicine of healing.
Mays si tu cristerizas aquel en las malautias de solucio de ventre e l’eyssiment de lu le coyta, lahoras tu itera le cauteri entro que sia sanat.	May if you apply the cure to those suffering from stomach trouble and sleeping at night, then do so with a cure that heals.
E si en le cul so emorroydas o apostemas ledens, lahoras sia le cristeri mot subtil e leon, dels cristeris am les quals les enfantz so criterisatz.	And if there are hemorrhoids or sore breasts in the buttock, then apply a cure that is sharp and pointed, which is used for children's cures.
De curacio de las plaguas.	Of Cure of Plaies.
Yeu ja e dit en la divisio de la curacio de las plaguas aquo que convenia al libre, e yeu dic assi la curacio de aquelas am ma e am medicinas segon le conpliment.	You have already said in the division of Cure of Plaies that it is appropriate to apply with the hand, and I will say as it is done with the hand and medicine according to the compliment.
Donc dic que las plaguas son diversificadas segon aquo en que son faytas las plaguas e segon le loc sobre le qual cazo las plaquas.	Therefore, I say that plagues are different according to where they are caused and according to the place on which they fall.
E las causas per que motas vetz son faytas las plaguas so ayssi cum getament de peyra, o inscisio d’espaza o de cotel, o percussio am lansa, o am fustz, o am sageta, o semblantz ad aquels de motas causas.	And the causes of the stings that cause plagues are as follows: from pepper; from sharp weapons such as knives, spears, and arrows; from sharp things such as needles; or from a sharp blow of the hand.
Mays las plaguas que so en les locz del cos so ayssi cum plagua la qual catz sobre le cap, o·l col, o·l pietz, o·l ventre, o·l fitge, e semblantz ad aquels dels membres.	May plagues that are in the body be as follows: from a sting on the head; or on the neck; or on the chest; or on the belly; or on the feet; or on the hands; or on the arms; or on the legs; or on the back; or on the genitals.
E yeu so recomtant la curacio de alcunas plaguas per que pauses aquela ratiocinacio e regla sobre las autras plaguas.	I recommend the cure for some plagues that you should apply to all of them, and reason and consider about those other plagues.
E yeu comensare de las plaguas del cap simplas, quar la rememoracio de las compostas vindra al comensament del tertz capitol.	I will begin with the simple plagues, as the reminiscence of composed things will come at the beginning of the third chapter.
Donc dic que quan accideys en le cap plagua simpla e no es fractura, lahoras considera: si es per getament de peyra o de semblant, e ja ha trinquada la codena tant solament e es gran plagla e temes sobre aquel malaute havinement de apostema caut, lahoras tu te coyta e fleubotoma la cephalica tantost, e no tardas aquo; e extrats ad aquel del sanc segon la quantitat de la vertut de lu si no mes alcuna causa prohibent de fleubotomia, majorment si·l sanc que es eyssit de la plagua es pauc.	Therefore, I say that when a simple plague occurs in the head and is not broken, then consider: if it is from pepper or injection; and the hand has been cut, you should take care of yourself quickly, and drink water as soon as possible; and draw it out of the holy water according to its value; but do not delay doing so; and draw it out of the water of healing according to its worth if there is no reason for the drinking of the holy water; especially if the plague that has come out from the head is small.
E sia la flaubotomia del contrari de la partida plaguada; e guardase le malaute de replecio e de vi e de viandas grossas.	And so is flabbotomy done on the opposite side of the infected part; and keep the patient from repleteness, and from food and heavy foods.
Mays si de la minuicio prohibeys alcuna causa, lahoras sia aminorat de la vianda e no apropinque a carn ni a vi.	If by carefulness you prevent any cause, then do lessen the food and don't bring it near meat or wine.
E pausa sobre la plagua, si a lu accideys apostema caut, coto enfus en oli rozat solet o en vi en le qual es stipticat.	And put over the plague, if to him occurs an apoplexy, a pointed cautery, burn in red oil alone or in wine that is made stiff.
Mays si est segur de apostema caut, lahoras pausa sobre la plagua, si es recent am le sieu sanc e le ayre no ha mudat aquela la polvera la qual yeu recomtare aprop petit.	But if you are sure of the apoplexy, then put over the plague, if it is recent, pour a little water on it and don' do so if the powder that I will recommend to you has not dried up.
E si le ayre ja ha mudada aquela, lahoras pausa sobre alscus enguentz entro que sia sanada.	And if the air has already changed that, then put over it on a hot plate until it is healed.
Mays si la plagua es gran o es per inscizio d’espaza e de semblantz, e no so ajustadas las labias de lu per puvils, lahoras ajusta aquelas am sutura segon que yeu recomtare de la sutura de lor.	But if the plague is great or is by cut of flesh and of resemblance, and the lips of it are not adjusted for puvis, then adjust those with sutures according to what I recommend for their suturing.
Mays si la plagua ja es discuberta del os e pen, e no es retencio de lu sino un petit suspensori, lahoras inscideys aquela e aprop cura la plagua am medicinas e restaura la carn aprop en loc de codena, e comanda al malaute que sia pescut de viandas en las quals es groceza: caps e formen coyt e semblantz a lor, entro que sia compost.	But if the plague has already been discovered from the bone and is penetrative, and there is not a small suspension of it but a great one, then cut that out and promptly heal the plague with medicines and restore the flesh to its place instead of coden, and order the patient that he eat food in which there are roots and of resemblance to him, until it has recovered: and let them eat fish and meat.
E si atrobas en la codena putrefaccio e no adhereys al os, lahoras tu inscideys tot aquo poyrit e geta aquo, e aprop cura aquo.	And if the putrefaction in the coden does not adhere to the bone, then cut out all of it and burn it, and promptly heal it.
Mays si en aquestas plaguas es arteria o vena de la qual fluxs de sanc pot evenir, e no es abscindida per medicinas, lahoras tu inquier sobre la arteria, e si atrobas aquela no-inscidida, lahoras tu inscideys aquela am spatum, o lia aquela; e si necessitat te provoca que aquo que havem dit no comfereys, lahoras tu cauteriza entro que·l sanc sia abscidit.	But if in these plagues is an artery or a vein from which blood can flow, and it does not heal with medicine, then you will inquire about the artery, and if that one has not healed, then cut it off or ligature it; and if necessity forces you so that you do not confer it, then cauterize it until the blood is stopped.
E si aquestas plaguas son simplas e petitas, lahoras la causa de lor es leugiere; enayssi que tu polverizas sobre aquelas aquesta polvera, quar consolidada aquela denant que l’ayre mude aquelas.	And if these plagues are simple and small, then their cause is dust; therefore, you will put this powder on them, because it has hardened them before the air changes them.
E la manieyra de la polvera es aquesta: recipe oli de enses partida una, de sanc de drago partida doas, de caus no-extincta partidas tres; sia tot mot trissat e crivellat, e de lu sia la plagua omplida, e sia constrengida per bona constriccio entro que be sobre aquela aderesca, e sia coagulada am le sanc.	And the way of this powder is this: prepare an oil from half a part of sage, from two parts of dragon's blood, and from three parts of an unspecified substance; all of it should be well shaken and sieved, and if there is plague in it, it will be bound by good constriction until it has hardened on it; and it will be coagulated with the blood.
E aprop strengeys aquela desus am pulvils e leyssa aquela, e no la deslias mentre esta ayssi que no es apostemada, quar no es eredicada de lu la medicina entro que sia sanada.	Then apply that powder on it and let it rest, and don' do so while it is still apoplectic, because it will not be healed by medicine while it is in that state.
E alcuna vetz fa aquo sola cautz, quan no es a tu en present enses e sanc de drago.	Then make water only with cautery, when it is neither on you nor has sage and dragon' blood in it.
E ja fa aquesta meteyssa operacio en las grans plaguas quan conveneys que sia pausada sobre aquelas e sian streytas, e so plaguas recentz am le lor sanc, las quals le ayre no ha alteradas.	Then make this operation on the great plagues when you have to put it on them and let them be well-bound, and only on recent plagues that the air has not altered.
E si le ayre las ha alteradas, e majorment quan es en temps d’estiu, lahoras no es entencio a la posicio de aquesta polvera, mays adonc cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit, enayssi que tu pauses sobre aquelas alcus enguents degistius, o que pauses sobre aquelas pols de la farina del ordi am aygua e mel entro que getan poyredura; e aprop cura aquelas am l’autra curacio entro que sian sanadas.	But if the air has altered them, and mainly when it is in summer, then do not put this powder on them, but promptly heal those with water that we have said, or if you put on them cold ointment mixed with oil; and promptly heal them with another cure until they are healed.
Mays si accideys am la plagua fractura en os, e es petita, lahoras tu extratz aquo am gesti.	But if by chance there is fracture of the bone due to plague, and it is small, then extract the bone's water with a gesticulator.
E yeu diyre la cura de las fracturas del cap en aquo que es envenidor.	And direct the cure for fractures on the head in venenous water.
De las plaguas del col.	For col plagues.
Mays si la plagua accideys en le col, lahoras no es en lu differencia en medicacio, e entre la plagua del cap quan es simpla.	But if the plague occurs in the neck, then it does not matter to you in medicine, and between head plagues when they are simple.
Mays si ja le nervi del col es inscis o arteria, lahoras si es nervi, no es en lu engen sino que sia evitada curacio de lu am aquo que fa vehement stipticitat, ayssi cum ziniar e zegi que es vetriol e semblantz a lor quar nozo als nervis e contrazo aquel.	But if the neck's nerves are cut or are arteries, then if it is a nerve, don' put on it any medicine with violent stinginess; let them not be burned and not be stung as it were a vinegar and of resemblance to them because they do not burn the nerves but contract that one.
E no pauses sobre la plagua alcuna causa de tot freja, quar la sustancia dels nervis es freja e la continuacio de lu es am le cervel, le qual es le pus aut de totz les membres.	And don' put on them any medicine because of their frequent movement, for the substance of the nerves is頻繁 and continuous with the neck, which is the pus of all members.
E si’ aquo am que es curat de medicinas leugieras, ayssi cum es caus lavada am aygua dousa, alcuna veguada enfusa en oli rozat o no-rozat, e thucia quan es lavada am aygua dousa e las autras peyras minarantz segon aquesta manieyra, e enguentz humitz.	And if it is washed with medicine that makes one feel better, then wash it with double water, and pour hot oil on the back; and let it be well-bound with ointment.
Mays si la plagua es gran, lahoras aministra sutura, o coarta las labias de lu, e aprop cura aquela am pulvils entro que sia sanada.	But if the plague is great, then administer sutures or bind the lips with a bandage, and promptly heal it with powder until it is healed.
Mays si a la plagua es profunditat o accideys en lu a la pus bassa partida poyredura, lahoras perfora aquela en le loc mays depremegut.	But if the plague has depth or occurs in the pus that has become corrupted, then pierce it at the deepest part.
Mays si en la plagua ja es inscisa arteria e es conseguit flux de sanc, lahoras separa o secca aquela, o lia aquela, o cauteriza aquela si necessitat te provoca ad aquo.	But if in the plague there is an artery that has been penetrated by blood flow, then separate it or dry it up, or cut it off, or cauterize it if necessity forces you to water.
Mays si ja ha insciditz les spondils del golayro o tot, e so salvadas las venas del col, lahoras tu ajusta las labias de la codena am sutura sobre la cana del golayro e no toques aquel; abantz egala aquel e reduzeys aquel sobre la sua figura natural, e aprop strenh aquel am strectura decent, e leyssa aquela per alcus jorns; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz en les quals es stipticitat e excitacio entro que sia sanat.	But if the groins have already been cut completely, and the veins of the neck are saved, then you will adjust the lips of the coden with sutures on the can of the groins and don' touch that; also cut that one off from its natural shape, and bind it tightly with a bandage, and let them heal with ointment in which there is stinginess and excitement until it is healed.
Mays si la plagua ja en le os a fayta enprecio, lahoras percuireys aquela, e lahoras si en lu ha fragmentz de hos, extratz totz aquels que podes de lor; e aquo que a tu no es apparelhat, leyssa aquo entro que la plagua se poyrisca, e sia separat e la egrecio de lu sia alleujada.	But if the plague has already begun to eat the bone, then beat that one, and if there are any fractures of bones, extract them all that you can; and if it is not worn out, let it heal until the plague corrupts it; separate and make a hole in it, so that its blood may be drained.
E si la plagua es recent lahoras polveriza sobre aquela polvera la qual t’e recomtada.	But if the plague is recent, then apply on it the powder that I have recommended to you.
Mays si en la plagua es fayta fistula, lahoras cura aquela am aquo del qual la rememoracio vindra aprop en le sieu capitol.	But if the plague has opened a fistula, then heal it with water in which the cure will come back to its head.
De las plaguas del col o de semblantz quan fayta entre las spallas e es fayta am spaza o am cotel o am lansa o am semblantz.	For col plagues or of resemblance when it occurs between the shoulder blades and it happens by cold or by a lance or of resemblance.
Si es percussio de lansa o de cotel, e vezes de lu la profunditat, lahoras considera mays si de la plagua yeys ventositat quan le malaute elena; lahoras sapias que la plagua es mortal.	If it is a noise of a lance or a sword, and its depth is times of three, then consider whether by the patient' moaning there is any wind; then know that the plague is deadly.
E si en lu no es profunditat e la plagua es recent am le sieu sanc, lahoras tu pauses en lu de la primieyra horo polvera, e no strenhas aquel per que no sia le sanc retengut en la profunditat de lu e que retorne al cor e que aucigua le malaute, mays pausa en lu enguent atractiu, e deslia aquela doas veguadas le dia.	But if it is not deep and the plague is recent from the patient' side, then you will apply on him the first powder at first hour; and do not tighten it so that the blood does not go to his heart and make a pulse in his body; but let them leave two veils of the day.
E si l’enguent no es a tu present, lahoras tu pausa en le orrifici de la plagua coto viel per que sucque aquo que yeys de las humiditatz; e fay que le malaute dorma sobre la plagua per que corra aquo que es en lu ajustat.	But if the ointment is not present with you, then apply on the opening of the plague a ring with oil so that it sucks water which has in it; and make the patient sleep on the plague so that it runs water which is in it.
Mays si ja de la plagua son passatz tres dias o mays e no accideys al malaute spasme ni tremor de cor mal ni strictura de ale, e vezes las autras dispozicios bonas de lu, lahoras sapias que plagua es salva; e adonc cura aquela am calguas e am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanada.	But if three days or more have passed since the plague occurred and there is no spasming of the patient or trembling of the heart or stricture of speech, then know that the plague is saved; and then heal it with calo and with another cure until it is healed.
Mays si la sanacio de lu es excusada, e ja tot temps es uberta, lahoras sapias que ja es fayta fistula; cura donc aquela per le sieu capitol.	But if the patient' cure has been postponed and it has been open for a long time, then know that it has already opened a fistula; so heal it with his own head.
E si la plagua es per inscisio de spaza o de cotel, e es simpla en la superficia del pietz o del dos, lahoras cura aquela am aquo que es precedit de sutura, si es gran, o am polvera, si es petita.	But if the plague is by cut of a knife or a lance and it is simple on the surface of the foot or the hand, then heal it with water preceded by sutures if it is great, or with powder if it is small.
Mays si ja ha fayta enprecio en le os, e so ja de lu inscizas pessas, lahoras tu torqua la plagua e coyta ad extrayre aquelas pessas, si so separadas.	If there is already damage to the bones and the feet are already separated, then you should twist the foot and put a bandage on it to extract the separated parts.
Mays si no so separadas, lahoras leyssa las entro que se poyresca la plagua, que la extraccio de lor es alleujada.	If they are not yet separated, then leave them as they are so that the foot can heal, for it is a relief to extract them.
E de las autras plaguas accidentz en les autres membres le juvament en curacio es le juvament de aquo que havem dit.	And of the other injured limbs, healing in treatment is the same as that which we have said.
De las plaguas del ventre.	Of abdominal wounds.
L’indisposicio la qual accideys en le ventre es o gran, o pauc, o migiera.	The discomfort that occurs in the abdomen is great, little, or moderat.
De la gran alcunas veguadas yeys le budel o nervi del budel, per que es fayta intromissio de lor e la sutura de lor esser pus vehement e pus subtil.	For a great number of the small intestines and nerves of the small intestines, so that their interference and their suturing are both violent and delicate.
E disrupcio petita es fayta dificil per autra manieyra, e siec se que la reduccio de lor es pus dificil, si no te coytes de la intromissio de lor al sieu loc tantost, quar se ubre e es engrossat per que le intrament de lu es fayt difficil.	For a small number of the intestines and nerves, it is made difficult in another way; and if you do not avoid their interference with each other at its location so often, for fear that it becomes open and thick because of the instrument, it is difficult to reduce them.
E donc la milhor disrupcio es migiera, quar en aquela no es dificil la reduccio del budel, ayssi cum es dificil en las doas specias denant ditas.	And therefore the best course is moderat; for although it is not difficult to reduce the small intestines, it is difficult in two of the species mentioned before.
E sapias que sutura del ventre es segon quatre manieyras, mays doas suturas son comunas que conveneysso en suturas de las autras plaguas del cors.	And you should know that there are four ways to stitch the abdomen; two common stitches are used, which correspond to the stitches of the other limbs of the body.
E duas autras suturas proprias comunican a las autras plaguas, mays empero so mays proprias en la sutura del ventre.	And two others that are proper to themselves communicate with the other limbs; but they are used only in the treatment of the abdomen.
E yeu recomti a tu quascuna am exposicio e declaracio.	I recommend to you each exposure and explanation.
Donc dic que quan la plagua es petita e es eyssit alcuna causa del budel per aquela, e es fayt dificil a reduzir aquel, lahoras aquo es en una de doas manieyras: o per parvitat de la disrupcio ayssi cum havem dit, o quan al budel es venguda inflacio per la frigiditat de l’ayre.	Therefore I say that when the wound is small and there is no cause of it in the intestines by that, and it is difficult to reduce it: either because of the smallness of the disruption, as I have said before; or when the intestines are swollen by cold air.
E donc quan aquo es ayssi, lahora cove que tu scalfes aquel enayssi que tu submerges una sponga ho drap humit en aygua tebeza sola, o que coguas en aygua squinant, e cyperum, e spic, e embroques am aquela le budel entro que la imflacio sia resolvuda.	And therefore, when it is like that, I say that you should cut it in such a way that you do not hurt it; but that you dip one sponge or cloth in cold water alone, or that you take some water from the river, and cypress, and spices, and immerse them in the intestines before the swelling is resolved.
E alcunas veguadas fa aquo vi en le qual ha stipticitat, e es milhor que la aygua sola en resolucio de la imflacio.	Some wounds make water appear on their surface due to the stinging, and it is better than cold water alone in resolving swelling.
E donc cum tu vezes la imflacio esser resolvuda, lahoras tu humecta le budel am aygua en la qual es coyta altea e malvas, quar per aquo es alleujat le intrament de lu am pauca causa.	And therefore, when you see the swelling resolved, then dip the intestines in water that is already hot and cold; for by water they are relieved from a few causes.
Mays si es escusat le intrament de lu aprop aquesta curacio, lahoras scindeys la disrupcio un petit am strument am le qual so inscididas emorroydas.	If the instrument is not suitable for this treatment, then you should cut the disruption into small pieces with an instrument in which hemorrhoids are inserted.
E la curacio primieyra es milhor, quan es propriada que no es seccio, e no sia occupacio a seccar aprop necessitat e defaliment.	The first treatment is best when it is not necessary to cut off anything; and it is not appropriate to use it for the sake of drying out at all.
Del instrument, sec se la forma de lu:	Regarding the instrument, let us consider its shape:
La una partida de lu torta aguda, e l’autra partida no-acuta, e la extremitat subtil, e no sia am la subtilitat de spatum, abantz sia obtusa un pauc.	The one side of the instrument is acute and the other is not acute, and at its end it is subtle; but not too subtle, for its edge to be blunt; a little sharp.
E donc cum la plagua es amplificada e yeys fora le budel, lahoras cove que la sua reduccio sia segon la forma de lu natural, en le sieu loc propri, si es possible sobre aquo, quar milhor es.	And when the wound is large and the intestines are outside: let us consider that its reduction should be according to the natural shape of the instrument; in its place, if possible on top of it; for it is better.
Mays quan la disrupcio es ampla, e es en la partida pu bassa del ventre, lahoras cove que tu fassas jazer le malaute sobre le sieu dos, e pausa las suas cambas pus autas que·l sieu cap; e si es en la partida pus desus del ventre, lahoras tu pause le cap de lu e·l pietz pus autz que las partidas dejos.	But when the disruption is wide and it is in the lower part of the abdomen: let us consider that you place the patient lying on their back; and if it is in the upper part of the abdomen, then you should place the head higher than the legs.
E semblantment si la disrupcio es en una de las doas partz del ventre, lahoras pausa la tua entencio e la tua consideracio tostemps en aysso per que la partida en la qual es la plagua sia pus auta que l’autra.	And apparently if the disruption is in one of the two parts of the abdomen, then you should pause your intention and consideration for some time so that the part where the wound is can be higher than the other.
E ayssi cove que tu aministres aquo en las plaguas grans e en las plaguas migieras.	And thus consider that you administer water in the large wounds and in the small wounds.
E en las plaguas petitas, pausa aquo que es a tu preparat, e aprop fay que·l ministre sia entre las tuas mas pyatados, le qual tengua la disrupcio tota am la sua ma e ajusta las labias de lu, e aprop descuebre de aquela ad aquel que siec la sutura alcuna causa aprop autra.	And in the small wounds, pause the water that is at your disposal; and arrange for the minister to be between your five fingers, which should hold the whole wound together and adjust its edges; and discover which is the cause of the stitch in addition to any other causes.
E aquesta es la manieyra de sutura comuna: una que prenguas la agula, o comte de agula segon la cantitat de la amplitut de la plagua; e aprop layssa de la extremitat de la disrupcio del dit anular, e strenh la agula una, otre que tu no metas fiel en las doas extremitatz de la codena, am doas extremitatz del ciphac que es dejos la codena de las partidas dedintz, entro que fassas aquela penetrar de aquela partida; e tu ja has agreguadas doas extremitatz de la codena e doas extremitatz del ciphac, e so faytas quatre ordes.	This is the common way to stitch: one that takes the needle and considers the amount of the wound's width; and arrange the edge of the disruption of the little finger, and tighten the needle; and you should not insert the needle into the two extremities of the thread, but rather let them hang loose from the two extremities of the knot, keeping them in place so that they do not come apart; and you have added two extremities to the thread and made four orders.
E aprop strenh am fiel doble en le circuit de la agula, e alcunas veguadas de doas partz ensemps, e aprop agregua las doas labias e la plagua per agreguacio decent; e aprop layssa la grossitut del dit e fiqua una autra agulha en aquela, e aprop lia aquela am fiel ayssi cum fiest am la primieyra agulha; e no cesses far aquo si es necessitat am las agulhas entro que ajas complida tota la contriccio de la plagua.	And arrange the double knot in the thread's circuit, and in some wounds of two parts together, and add the two lips to the wound by addition; and arrange the thickness of the thread and fasten another needle in it; and place that one on top of the first; and do not stop making water if necessary while you are completing the whole construction of the wound.
E sian las agulhas migieras entre groceza e subtilitat, quar las agulhas subtils mot leugierament insciden la carn; e las grossas so de dificil intrament en la codena, e donc per aquo cove que sian migieras en subtilitat e grosseza.	And let the small needles be between subtlety and thinness, for the thin needles cut the flesh with difficulty; and the thick ones are difficult to knot in the thread, so that by water they become both thin and thick.
E no cove que la agulha sia ficada en doas extremitatz de la codena propdana mot, per so que la carn no sia inscidida leugierament e que la plagua se huebra devant la sua consolidacio.	And I do not know why the needle should be fastened to the two extremities of the thread, so that the flesh is not cut with difficulty and the wound does not open; but rather so that the wound may heal before its consolidation.
E no sian prolonguadas de sutura per que la plagua no sia prohibida de consolidacio.	And do not make the stitches long, lest the wound should not heal with consolidation.
E aprop inscideys las extremitatz de las agulhas per so que no ledescan le malaute deves le sieu dormier; e pausaras sobre la sutura pulvils expanduts de tota partida, les quals tenguan las extremitatz de las agulhas; e layssa aquelas entro que sapias que la plagua ja es consolidada.	And arrange the ends of the needles so that they do not hurt the patient when he sleeps on his side; and place them on the swellings of all parts, which should hold the two ends of the thread; and leave them in place until you know that the wound has healed with consolidation.
E aquestas specias de sutura am agulhas en cal manieyra es pus convenient en las plaguas petitas, quar habasta en la sutura de lor una agulha o doas o entorn aquelas.	And these kinds of stitches with needles are most convenient in small wounds; because they only require one needle or two or three to stitch.
Mays la segonda sutura es cominal: e es que tu aministres am sutura las quatre extremitatz, de la codena e doas extremitatz del ciphac, en una veguada, am agulha en la qual sia fiel envolopat engual en subtilitat e grosseza.	But the second stitch is similar: and it is that you administer the four ends, of the thread and two extremities of the needle, in one wound; with a needle which should be wrapped up on itself with thinness and thickness.
E aprop quan am la agulha auras penetrat aquestas quatre extremitatz, reduzeys la agulha de aquela meteyssa partida de la qual comensest, per so que le fiel retrayt caja de la pus subirana partida a la plagua, per so que la sutura sia segon sutura de drap am la qual les draps so strengutz.	And when the needle has penetrated through these four ends, reduce it by a half-part of the needle with which you began; so that the thread comes back from the upper part to the lower one in the wound, so that the stitch is according to the stitch of cloth and not too long.
E pausa entre quascuna sutura la quantitat del gros del dit mendre.	And pause between each stitch the thickness of half a needle thread.
E aquesta sutura sabo les homes.	And this stitch pleases men.
E am tal sutura yeu cozegui la plagua la qual era accidida a un home en le sieu ventre le qual era stat plaguat am un cotel, e era la disrrumpcio de la plagua major de un palm, e era eyssit dels budels entorn dos palms del budel del mieg loc e era la disrupcio en le mieg del membre; e adonc yeu reduzegui aquel depus que le budel havia stat foro la plagua per xxiiii horas.	And at this stitch I found the cause of the wound which had befallen a man in his abdomen, who had been struck by a knife, and it was the rupture of the small intestine from two palms of the small intestine near its own location, and it was the disruption of the middle part of that member; and afterwards I reduced it after twenty-two hours.
E la plagua fo consolidada en le spazi de xv dias o entorn, e curegui aquel e es sanat; e aprop aquo visquec per motz ans, e es conversat en las suas disposicios.	And the wound healed in the space of fifteen days or so, and he recovered and his speech was restored to him; and he began to talk about his affairs again.
E les autres metges havian jutgat que no fora sanat; e per miracle foc, quar yeu no curegui aquel am enguent, quar era en loc en le qual enguent no era atrobat ni deguna medicina, mays pausegui sobre la plagua coto viel dos veguadas lo dia e ablucio assiduo am aygua de mel entro que foc sanat.	And the other limbs had healed without being cured; and by a miracle it healed, for I did not cure him with any herb, because that was not the place where herbs are found or medicine administered; but I applied cool water to the wound daily and washed it thoroughly with water until it healed.
Mays yeu diyre dos specias de sutura proprias segon narracio de Paraula.	There are two kinds of sutures for sewing up according to the words of the Parable.
E es que tu comenses am sutura de la codena, e entrometas agulha de la partida deforo a la partida dedintz.	And you begin sewing with the thread from above, and insert the needle from the outside in through the inside.
E donc cum la agulha penetra en la codena e en aquel meteys lacertz segon rectetut e en longetut de tot le cos, e layssa la extremita del ciphac en le qual has entromesa la agulha; e fay penetrar en la autra extremitat la agulha de la partida dedintz a la partida deforo en l’autra extremitat del mihat.	And so with the needle penetrating into the thread and in that place of sewing straight and long from all over the piece, and leaving the end of the knot on it in which you have inserted the needle; and let the needle penetrate into the other side from inside out through the other side of the piece, holding the thread.
E don cum tu auras fayta aquela penetrar, lahoras tu fay aquela penetrar autra veguada en aquela meteyssa extremitat del mihat de la partida deforo a la partida dedintz; e leyssa la extramitat del ciphac que es en aquest latz, e fay penetrar la agulha en l’autra extremitat de la partida dedintz a la partida deforo.	And so when you have made that penetration, then make another penetration from the opposite side of the piece from inside out; and leave the end of the knot on it, and let the needle penetrate into the other side from inside out through the other side of the piece, holding the thread.
E fay penetrar am aquela la tua penetracio am la qual fas aquela penetrar en le ciphac en la extremitat del mirat la qual es en la partida de lu entro que tot aquel penetre.	And make that penetration into the knot at which you made that penetration in the thread from the inside out; and let the needle penetrate into the other side from inside out through the other side of the piece, holding the thread.
E aprop comensa de aquest meteys costat e cus aquel am la extremitat que es del ciphac en l’autra latz, e extratz la agulha de la codena la qual penetrec, e aprop redutz aquela en aquela codena e cos la extremitat del ciphac que es en l’autra costat am aquesta extramitat del mirat; e extratz aquela de la codena la qual es de part de lu.	And then begin from that side and cut with the thread on the other side of the knot, and draw out the needle from the knot, and then tie up the knot again, and cut the thread on the other side of it.
E fay aquo una veguada e autra, e fay aquo una veguada aprop autre veguada entro que tu cozes tot aquo que es deforo segon aquel eysemple.	And so make a cut and another; and so make a cut and another, within that which is opposite to that example.
E la suma de aquesta manieyra de sutura es que tu cozes am sutura de pellicies am la qual cozo las pels, enayssi que tu cozes le ciphac una veguada de la part de la extremitat de la codena, e que leysses aquela autra veguada entro que la ajas complida.	And the whole of this way of suturing is that you sew on the skin in a way that the skin is sewed; and that you cut the knot from one side of the thread and leave it on the other, and make another cut within that which is opposite to that example.
Mays la segonda specia de sutura propria la qual dieys eyssament Gualia , e aquest es de sermo de lu e per lu recomtat, es que tu cozas aquela segon semilitut am la qual alcus medicantz cozo aquela, enayssi que agreguan tota partida a la sua compar partida a lu convenient per natura; e aplican la extremitat de autre de lu e la extremitat del mirat al autra extremitat de lu, e aquo es fayt segon que yeu a tu recomti.	The second kind of suture is proper to the surgery of Goliahtz, and this way of doing it is that you sew with one thread which does not go around; and that you add a length from his back to its front, and apply the end of one part to another side of him by nature; and apply the other end of the piece to that other part, and do as I have instructed you.
Cove que tu fiques la agulha en la extremitat del mirat a tu propdana de la partida deforo, e fassas aquela penetrar a la partida dedintz en aquel sol, e leysses dos extremitatz del ciphac; e aprop revolveys la agulha e fay aquela penetrar de foro a la dedintz en dos extremitatz del ciphac.	Then take the needle and put it into the tip of your hand from the outside in through the inside, and leave two ends of the knot; and then turn the needle around and make that penetration from the outside in through the inside of the piece twice, leaving the end of one knot, and the other end of the piece.
E aprop revolveys aquelas cascunas, e fay penetrar quascunas de la partida dededintz entro a la partida deforo en dos extremitatz del mirat autras que so en le latz contrari.	Then turn those cushions around, and make that penetration twice from the inside out; and let the needle go from one side of the piece to another, going through both sides, and turning around the needle.
E aquesta manieyra de sutura es milhor de la sutura comuna leugiera, e es sutura de la qual precedic rememoracio.	This way of suturing is better than common simple suture, and this is a kind of suture from which I have remembered.
Aquest es le sermo de Gualia	This is the language of Goliahtz.
E mays le diyssero alcus, sutura del ventre es rectificada am dos agulhas, so es que tu entrometas en aquestas a quascunas un fiel, e comensa am intromiccio de agulha de aquo que es deves tu, e fay aquela penetrar entro al autra latz segon sutura de aquels les quals cozo les cuers engualment.	And this is the name given to that kind of surgery: when a person has to be sewed in their belly, you should use two needles, and begin with a thread; and insert the needle from one side, which should go around; and make that penetration into the other side according to the suture of those who sew limbs together.
E sapias que quan disrupcio es en le mieg loc del ventre, lahoras la sutura de lu es pus difficil que dels autres locs del ventre.	And you must know that when the rupture is in the middle of the belly, this kind of surgery is more difficult than other places of the belly.
Mays le juguament de medicacio de plagua es jutgament de las autras plaguas.	The treatment for gout is the same as for the other types of gout.
La qual causa es quar quan tu consieguas la plagua recent am le sieu sanc denant que l’ayre altera aquela, e reduses le budel e cozes aquela e aptas aquela decentment, lahoras pausa sobre aquela polvera encarnativa.	That is caused when you get gout suddenly before the rain, and reduce the hernia and sew it up nicely; then place a poultice on that area of inflammation.
E si le ayre ja ha alterada la plagua, lahoras pausa sobre aquela alcus enguentz les quals so a tu presens entro que fassan peyra dura e cajan les fiels, e sian consolidatz ciphac e mirat; e aprop cura aquela ayssi cum es la curacio de las autras plaguas entro que sia sanat.	If the air has already changed the gout, then place a poultice on that area of inflammation and make it soft with powder; let it settle down and join together the skin and the flesh; and then cure it as you do for other types of gout, until it is healed.
Mays si a tu no so presens las medicinas, lahoras pausa sobre aquela tantost, pus que comensa a getar brac, coto viel, e permuta aquel dos veguadas le dia, ayssi cum a tu e ensenhat, entro que sia sanat, quar tu no indigeysses de autra medicacio en motas disposicios quan las plaguas so simplas.	But if you do not have any medicine, then wait for it to get worse, because it starts to hurt; change that part of the skin every day; and let it heal as I instruct you, because you will not need other medicines in this case when gout is simple.
Mays si tu temes que la plagua comunique en lesio als membres principals, lahoras cove que tu submergas lana leon en oli de trempada qualiditat, o en oli rozat, e pausa aquela en le circuit dels locs que so entre les angonas e dejos las aysselas.	But if you fear that gout may spread to the main limbs, then submerge wool in oil that is wet, or in rose water; and place that between the joints and leave it there.
E si sent dolor o putrefaccio en les sieus budels, quar motas veguadas aquo s’endeve, lahoras cristeriza aquel am vi stiptic negre tebe, e majorment si la poyredura es pervenguda en le budel e es fayta exitura penetrant entro la conquavitat de lu.	And if you feel pain or putrefaction in your hernia, because it is visible; then apply a white stinging substance there, and more so if the putrefaction has reached the hernia and is causing an ulcer to form inside.
E sapias que aquela que es del budel gros es de pus leugiera sanacio que aquela que es en les budels subtils.	And you must know that a large hernia is caused by pus, which can heal; but a smaller one is not caused by pus and will not heal.
E es de dificil sanacio quar le budel le qual es apelat “gegunu” no recep sanacio de plagua que caja en lu de tot; e aquo es per la gran multitut de venas que so en lu e per la magnitut de lu que so en aquelas, e per subtilitat del cos de aquel, e per propinquitat de aquel a natura de nervis.	It is difficult to heal because the hernia that is called "gegunu" does not receive gout, which enters into it from everywhere; and this is because there are many veins in it, and its size is large, and its subtlety is great, and its proximity is close to nerves.
Mays si aquo que procezeys de la plagua es la tela, e conseguas aquela recent, redutz aquela segon la tua rectetut am la qual reduzes les budels engualment.	But if what you are treating is indeed gout, and you get it recently, then reduce the hernia as you do for other things that need reducing.
Mays si es passat a lu spazi e ja es feyt vert o negre, lahoras que tu strenguas aquela am fiel sobre le loc que es denigrat de lu, per so que vengua fluxs de sanc, quar en la tela so venas e arterias.	But if it has passed into the space and is already swollen or black, then put a thread on that area with the needle; for so there will come blood from the wound, because in the hernia are veins and arteries.
E aprop inscideys aquo que es otra aquel liament, e pausa dos extremitatz del fiel pendentz de la partida dejos de la plagua foro lu, per que sobre tu sia alleujada la atraccio de lu deves le cazement de la tela e emissio del brac de la plagua.	And then turn that other part of the thread around; and place two ends of the knot hanging from the side opposite to the hernia, so that it is relieved from your body by the pressure of the knot; and let it hang there, taking away the tension of the skin and emission of the brac of the hernia.
Rememoracio de las plaguas quan accideysso en le budel.	Remembering gout when it occurs in the hernia.
Quan accideys disrupcio en le budel e es petita, lahoras es possibla que sia resteurada en alcus homes, per aysso quar yeu vi aquel le qual era stat plaguat en le sieu ventre am percussio de lansa et era la plagua de la part dreyta del stomac, e la plagua era antiquada e fayta fistula, e eyssic de lu gestio e ventositat.	When disruption occurs in the hernia and it is small, it is possible that it was caused by a lance; because I have seen that one which was struck on the right side of the belly with a lance, and it was gout from that part; and it had already begun to form an ulcer, and had become rotten, and its discharge and gas were coming out.
Adonc yeu pansegui la curacio de lu ja sia que no era confizat en la sanacio de lu, mays cessegui subtiliar aquel entro que foc sanat e le loc es consolidat.	Then I instructed that treatment should be continued until it is healed; but in the meantime, make it subtle where it was; and then the place will be consolidated.
E yeu pus que vi le loc ja consolidat, timegui sobre le malaute que endevengues sobre lu accident de mal en le sieu ventre; e no endevenc alcu per aquo mal accident e romas en las suas milhos disposicios mangant e bevent, e aprop entrec en banh e es exercitat en sos ditz.	And I have seen that place has already been consolidated, then wait for it; do not eat or drink anything bad that causes these accidents in the belly of a person who has them, and let it rest there; but get into baths and exercise regularly.
E ja diysero alcus experimentados que quan endeve plagua en le budel, e es petita, lahoras cove que sia liada segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu prenguas fromiguas de grans caps; e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua e pausa una fromigua de aquelas que aja la boca uberta sobre las doas labias de la plagua; donc quan pren sobre aquelas e strenh la sua boca, abscindeys le cap de lu, quar adhereys e no es dissolvut.	And some experienced people have said that when there is gout in the hernia and it is small, then bind it according to this method: and this is because you take from large cheese; and then fasten the two sides of the hernia together and place a thread between them; and then tie the knot of those, because they do not dissolve.
E aprop pausa autra formigua prop la primieyra, e no cesses aquo a far am formiguas una aprop autra segon la quantitat de tota la plagua.	And then place another form between the first one, and do not stop there from making more; and make each form according to the amount of gout.
E aprop reduzeys aquela e cos la plagua; e romanguan aquels caps annexces en le budel entro que·l budel sia sanat; e no accideys al malaute degun nocument.	And then reduce that hernia and sew it up; and those heads are tied together in the hernia, until the hernia is healed; and do not let it cause any harm.
E ja es possible que·l budel sia liat am fiel subtil lo qual es fayt del budel de bestia annexs am lu, pus que es mes en agulha; e es que tu prenguas la extremitat de aquestz fiels de budel, e sia mot descarnat, e aprop lia la extremitat de lu am fiel de li, envolopat, e aprop entromet aquel fiel en agulhas e cos am aquel le budel, e areduzeys aquel en la disrupcio.	And it is also possible that the hernia be attached to a thin string from the animal's hernia, because it is sharp; and it is because you hold the end of such hernia strings, and it is very lean, and you attach the end of it to a string of leather, wrapped, and you insert that string into needles and sew with it like that hernia, and reduce that in rupture.
E aquesta manieyra de sutura am formiguas no es sino segon via de fiducia e d’esperansa.	And this way of sewing with worms is only a second way of trust and hope.
Mays si la plagua es gran e ampla, majorment si es en un dels budels subtils, quar lahoras no es engen sino subtiliacio, e no es sanacio de lu de tot.	But if the pain is great and widespread, most likely it is in one of the thin hernias, because when there is little pain, there is no improvement; but there is no healing of any of them.
De curacio de zuchem e fistula.	Of cure for hernia and fistula.
Sapias que tota plagua e apostema quan se envilheseys e se Antiqua, e es fayt ulcus, e no es consolidat e geta braç tot temps e no es abscindit, lahoras, en qualque membre sia, universalment es nompnada fistula e nos la apelam aquela azukem.	Know that all sore and suppurating wound, when it is covered and dried up, and does not heal and put out a branch at all times, and does not dry up, it is called universally a fistula, and we call it a hernia.
E fistula segon veritat es nodacio feutrada, dura, blanqua am la qual no es dolor e a la qual es conquavitat ayssi cum es conquavitat de pena de ausel; e per aysso nompnat aquela alcus rizatz, id est pena.	And a fistula in truth is a hollow vessel, hard, white, where there is no pain and to which the cavity has been made with pain; and for this it is called an alcos, that is, a pain.
E es en alcus homes humida, la qual geta brac; e fort leu la humiditat es abscidida en alcunas horas.	And in the case of men who are wet, which puts out a branch, and very strong the moisture is discharged in a few hours.
E alcunas veguadas aquesta humiditat es mota, e es pauca, e es grossa, e es subtil.	And some of this moisture is moved, it is little, it is thick, and it is thin.
E yeu ja he denant dit en la divisio, lahoras cum yeu diyssi las plaguas, que tot ulcus que no es sanat ni no es en lu nuda carn, no es aquo sino per una de ix causas: de las quals la una es o per pauquesa de sanc en le cos; o per malicia de lu; o quar entre lu e las labias es carn dura prohibent nativitat de carn; o quar es de mota legesa; o quar aquel ulcus en si meteys es poyrit e la materia que es a lu tramesa es de mala qualitat; o quar la medicina es enconvenient en la curacio de lu; o quan corrupcio catz en la regio, e es pestilencia; o per proprietat de regio ayssi cum endeve a Saragossa , en la qual es fayta difficil degestio de las malautias, e es tardada en aquela sanacio de apostema per natura; o quar en lu es os un, o motz osses.	And I have already said above in the division, then when you say these plagues, that every wound which is not healed or in naked flesh, it is not because of some of these nine things: of which one is because of bad blood in the body; or because of malice; or because between it and the lips there is hard flesh preventing the generation of flesh; or because it is moist leech; or because that wound is burning and the matter that enters into it is of bad quality; or because the medicine is inappropriate for the cure of it; or when corruption spreads in the region, and it is a pestilence; or because of the property of the region, as it happens to Saragoza, where the digestion of evil things is difficult, and its cure by nature is delayed; or because one bone is missing, or many bones.
Ja e mostrat totas aquelas causas, e·ls senhals de aquelas e la curacio de lor am medicinas en la divisio.	He already shown all these causes, and they are distinguished from those, and the cure of them by medicines in the division.
E cove assi que yeu fassa a tu saber la curacio de fistula la qual es fayta per via de operacio am ma.	And so that you know how to cure a fistula, which is made by surgery.
E sapias que fistula accideys en totz les membres del cos; quar de aquelas son fistulas que perveno a las venas grantz e arterias, o als nervis, o al ciphac, o al budel, o a la vesica, o ad alcuna de las costas, o ad alcu dels spondils del dos, o ad alcuna de las juncturas compostas per composicio ayssi quo de la ma e del pe; e de aquelas so que dan a lu propinquitat del membre principal e de semblantz.	Know that fistulas occur in all parts of the body; because they come to the veins, large and small arteries, or nerves, or lymphatic vessel, or bladder, or any of the ribs, or both sides of the shoulder blade and chest, and similar places near the main member and the hand; and of those which cause pain in the proximity of the main member and the hand.
E donc aquela de aquestas fistulas que es segon aquesta manieyra es de las malautias de dificil sanacio, e no recep curacio, e occupacio am aquela es trebalh e ignorancia.	And therefore of all these fistulas, the one according to this method is of difficult healing and no cure; it occupies and consumes effort and ignorance.
E si es de las fistulas alcuna la profunditat de la qual no perve ad aquestz locs que e dit, e esperas e confizas en la curacio de lu, e vols pervenir a cognicio de lu, lahoras pren tenta de eram o de ferr, e si la fistula va segon rectetut, e perquireys aquela am lu.	And if it is one of the fistulas whose depth does not reach those places that are said, and you wait and trust in the healing of it, and want to come to know it, then take a knife or a needle, and if the fistula goes according to surgery, and inquire about it.
Mays si la fistula es tortuissitat, lahoras investigua aquela am tenta de plom subtil, quar plom am la levitat del sieu cors es alleujat e curvat deves la tortuositat.	But if the fistula is a tortuosity, then investigate it with a thin lead, because lead, with its lightness of movement in the body, will be helped to follow that tortuosity.
E si la fistula es havent motz horrificis, no es a tu possible que signifiques sobre lu am tenta.	And if the fistula has moved a great deal, it is impossible for you to know about it by trying.
Adonc cristeriza le orrifici per sos orrificis, quar la humiditat per la qual clisterizas aquela va deves las autras orrificis e corr de lor.	Then you will open the orifice with a sharp instrument, because the moisture with which you have closed that opening must go through other openings and flow out.
E aprop inquier exquisitament, segon qual manieyra a tu es possible que conoguas si aqui has os o nervi, e es la conquavitat de la fistula longinqua o propdana, o es una fistula a la qual so motz orrificis e esta sobre aquo tot am la suma de la tua fortaleza, am la tua enterroguacio, am la qual enterroguas le malaute, e la invencio de la dolor deves la tua compressio am la ma sobre le loc, e semblantz de las significacios e de las causas accidentz al apostema.	Then you will question carefully, according to which method it is possible for you to know if there are bones or nerves; and it is the cavity of the fistula far away or near, or a fistula that has only one orifice and lies over it all, throughout your entire strength, through your interrogation, in which you interrogate the patient, and from which you invent the pain. You will compress it with your hand on the spot, and similar things to the causes and accidental events of the swelling.
E cum tu auras stat sobre totas aquelas causas am stacio veraya, lahoras ve a la curacio segon confidencia: e es que tu consideras lahoras si es fistula apparent propinqua o en loc sal, longinqua de junctura, o de nervi, o de arteria, o de vena, o de un dels locs les quals yeu a tu e ditz.	And when you have stood on all these things with certainty, then go to the cure with confidence: and it is because you consider that if it is a fistula, it appears close or in a place of salt, far from a joint, or nerves, or artery, or vein, or any of the places that I have told you.
Lahoras tu secca la fistula segon que denant es dit de la naracio de lu, e osta aquo que es en aquela filtracio e de carns corrumpudas, e aquo que es nascut en le orrifici de la carn, o de theil e de semblantz, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	Then dry up the fistula according to what has been said before in the description of it; and let this water go into that filtration and from rotten flesh, and let it come from a hole in the flesh, or similar things, and heal it so that it is healed.
Mays si la fistula es de longinqua profunditat, e es segon rectetut, lahoras cove que inscidas aquela en le preon atant quant a tu sira possible, e aprop mondifica aquela de totas las suas carns corrompudas; e aprop administra calguas envolopadas en medicinas acutas, e intromet aquelas entro a la conquavitat de la fistula, la qual has conprenduda am ferr.	But if the fistula is of great depth, and it is according to surgery, then you will open it as much as possible, and you will clean all its corrupted flesh; and you will put sharp medicine inside it, and insert it into the cavity of the fistula, which you have examined with a sharp instrument.
E fay aquo am aquela alcunas veguadas entro que la medicina acuta corroda tot aquo que es romas en la conquavitat de la fistula de la corrupcio.	Then put it in that opening, a few days later, so that the sharp medicine corrodes all that is rotten in the cavity of the fistula from corruption.
E aprop restaura aquela am enguentz les quals engendran carn sana entro que sia sanada.	Then restore it with an ointment with which you generate healthy flesh within that is healed.
Mays si no es sanada per aquo, lahoras tu cauteriza aquela segon que havem recomtat.	But if it is not healed by water, then you will cauterize it according to what we have said.
Mays si la causa de fistula es os e es deves tu certificat aquo, lahoras tu inquireys aquela e secca aquela segon que havem recomtat, si tu no prohibeys alcuna causa de vena o de nervi o de membre principal ayssi cum havem dit.	But if the cause of the fistula is bone, and it is necessary to make a cut according to what we have said; if you do not prohibit any cause of a vein or a nerve or a main member, then ask about it and dry it up according to our instructions.
Mays si le os es a tu descubert e es en lu alcuna corrupcio e negror, lahoras tu ratz aquel entro que la corrupcio sia hostada tota; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que lu encarne entro que sia sanat.	But if the bone is at your disposal and it is in all corruption and darkness, then you will cut open that part of the flesh where the corruption is complete; and you will heal it with water so that it is healed.
E si no es sana e gieta brac ayssi cum fazia, lahoras sapias que tu no est pervengut a la eradicacio tota de la corrupcio; e adonc tu descuebre sobre lu segondanament e exquisitament fay la razio de lu e la mundificacio de lu am la deriera fortalasa tieua, e aprop restaura aquel.	And if it is not healed and gets better with the water, then you will know that you have not come to the complete eradication of corruption; and then you will discover carefully about what causes it, and thoroughly clean it, and then restore it.
E donc si es sanat, bo es; e sino, lahoras sapias que aquela corrupcio es en la profunditat longinqua del cors, la qual no ha conseguida, e adonc a tu en aquel no es engen sino laysar aquela.	And so if it is healed, it is good; but if not, you will know that the corruption is in the depth far from the body, which has not been achieved, and then work on it.
E si le os corromput es petit, o es a tu possible atirar aquel, lahora tu le atira am forceps subtils las quals conveno ad aquo.	And if the bone is corrupt in a small part, or is at your disposal to throw it; then you will throw it with very thin tweezers, which is appropriate for this purpose and with water.
E si so motz osses, lahoras exquisitament fay la extraccio de totz aquels, e de aquels no laysses denguna causa am la tua fortaleza.	And if it is many bones, then carefully remove all of them, and leave none behind that could be a cause for your strength.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat alcuna causa de las humiditatz, e en lor inscizio no ha temor ni error, lahoras inscideys aquelas liaments o carns si so aqui, e deliura les osses.	But if you have an opposite cause of moisture, and in the incision there is neither fear nor error, then incise those layers or meats if they are here, and release the bones.
Mays si a tu no es preparacio de ostar les osses de la tua hora, lahoras pausa sobre la plagua aquo que poyresca la plagua aquela, e layssa aquela entro que aquo es al enviro de aquels osses de carns e de liamentz, e guarda la plagua que no sia consolidada, e sia constrengida la seccio la qual tu has inscidida en la tua operacio.	But if you have not prepared to tie up the bones of your patient with a string, then hold it above the pain that you can find; and leave that opening that is in the vicinity of those bones of meat and layers, and keep the pain where it cannot be consolidated, and the incision that you made in your operation.
Habantz, si temes, pausa sobre lu coto submers en sopre trissat am oli, o coto submers en anguent egipciac, o en alcu dels enguentz vertz, quar quan poyriran aquelas liaments, e les osses son de lor seperatz la ablacio, e de aquels atraccio es alleujada.	Here is the translation of the provided text:
Mays si es un gran os ayssi cum le os de camba o de coyssa o semblantz ad aquels, e aquo que de lu es corromput es la facia de lu tant solament, lahoras ratz aquela am resio tant solament derriera entro que sia ostada aquela negror e corrupcio, e aprop restaura la plagua.	If it is a large bone, let it be with the back or with the hips or similar to those; and what comes out of it is the face of it alone, then put that black and corruption back into it, and restore the poultice.
Mays si aquo que de lu es corrumpyt es gran partida, e la corrupcio ja ha conseguida la medulla del os, lahoras es causa necessaria cerrar aquel e aquel tot inscidir entro al loc on es pervenguda la corrupcio, e lahoras cura aquel entro que sia consolidada.	If what comes out of it is a great piece, and the corruption has already reached the marrow of the bone, then close it completely within the place where the corruption entered; then heal it inside so that it may be solid.
E yeu recomti a tu aquo que endevenc ad un home en la sua coyssa per que pausez aquela a eyssempli e adjutori sobre la tua operacio.	And I recommend to you that he go to a man in his thighs to help him hold it and assist you in your operation.
Foc un home jove per etat entorn xxx ans, al qual accideys dolor en la sua cueyssa, e de las partidas dedintz mauguda es sobre la materia dedintz le cors entro que la materia es pervenguda a la cueyssa, e es materia de apostema am gran apostema, e no foc a lu causa extrinseca.	A young man of about thirty years, to whom pain occurs in the thigh, and internal splints are increased within the body's shell until the material enters the thigh, and it is material from pus; it does not come from an external cause.
E adonc foc extendut le temps am aquela per la error dels metges entro que l’apostema es hubert, e acorrero de lu materias motas, e la sua curacio foc aprop pausada entro que la camba foc fistulada, e faytz son en lu motz orrificis les quals totz getavan poyredura e las humiditatz del cos.	And then I extended the time for it by the error of the doctors until the pus became more abundant, and then the material was moved, and its cure was delayed until the back was broken, and small orifice were made everywhere, all of which gave pain and the body's moisture.
E adonc le curec multitut de metges entorn dos ans, e no foc en aquels savia ma en la art, entro que yeu fu appelat.	And then many doctors treated him for two years, but he did not get better in the art, until I was called.
E vi la camba de lu e las materias que corrian de lu aquels orrificis per gran cors; e ja le cos de aquel home era tot stabozit e la color de lu era citrina.	I saw how the back was broken and how the material ran out of those orifices for a great distance; and that man's body was completely weak, and its color was yellow.
E adonc yeu intromesi la tenta ad un de aquels orrificis e pervenguec la tenta al os.	And then I inserted a probe into one of those orifices and penetrated the probe into the bone.
E aprop yeu e perscrutat tostz les orrificis e trobegui aquels pervenir a lor de totas partidas de la camba.	Then I examined the orifices closely, and I found that they came from all parts of the back.
E adonc yeu me coytegui e inscidegui sobre un dels orrificis aquels entro que descrobegui una partida del os, e atrobegui aquel corromput, e ja era terros e corrumput e denigrat; e era ja corrumpuda una partida de la camba entro que havia penetrat entro a la mezola.	Then I hid myself and cut open one of the orifices where I discovered a piece of bone that was completely rotten, and it had turned yellow and black; and one piece of the back had already become rotten where it had penetrated into the pelvis.
E adon yeu serregui aquo que a mi era discubert e preparat del os descubert.	Then I tightened what was on me, which had been discovered and prepared from the bone.
E yeu cujegui que no fos en le os sino aquela corrupcio la qual abscidigui e serregui, e yeu ja havia derraziguada.	I saw that it was not in the bone but the corruption which I had cut open and tightened; and I had already removed it.
E aprop pausegui la restauracio de la plagua am medicina consolidativas per lonc temps, e no es consolidada.	Then I put back the poultice with solidifying medicine for a long time, but it did not solidify.
E aprop yeu iteregui e descubregui sobre le os segondament sobre le descubriment primier, e atrobegui continua corrupcio am le os.	Then I went back and discovered the bone again on the first discovery, and there was continued corruption to the bone.
E serregui aquo que a mi apares de aquela corrupcio, e aprop yeu fo perforsat fayre la curacio de lu e restauracio, e no es restaurat.	I tightened what came out of me, and then I put in place the cure and restoration, but it was not restored.
E adonc yeu descubri sobre lu autra veguada e no cessegui inscidir le os petit a petit particuladament e perforsa la restauracio de lu, e no es restaurat entro que inscidigui entorn un palm de lu, e aquel extraxi am la medula sua, e aprop restauregui aquel am medicinas, e es consolidat leugierament e sanat.	Then I discovered another piece on the other side and did not cut open the bone little by little and put in place the cure, but I extracted its marrow; then I healed it with medicines, and it solidified a little and was healed.
E no es necessaria iteracio en la operacio de lu e seccio de lu sino per la disposicio de la freulesa de lu e per la paucitat de la tollerancia de lu e paor de lu de mort, quar a lu accidia en totas horas per superfluitat de evacuacio sincopi mala.	There is no need for repetition in the operation of it and cutting it open, but because of the urgency of the matter and the lack of tolerance and fear of death, since it occurs at all times due to excessive elimination of bad breath.
E donc sanat es per sanacio entiera, e nada es en loc de os carn dura; e es fayta bona la disposicio de lu en le sieu cors e retornec la vertut de lu; e es conversat en las suas disposicios e no fec a lu contrarietat en ambulacio ni nocument en denguna causa.	And so it was healed completely, and there is nothing in its place of hard bone; and it returns to its virtue; and it has been established in its place, and does not cause any pain or discomfort in walking or in any other way for any reason.
Mays si es os eminent en loc del cors ja trauquat, lahoras cove que tu secces aquel segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu prenguas liament e strenh aquel en la extremitat de aquel os eminent, e comanda ad alcu que extenda aquel en sus; e pausa aquel liament de lana pus gros del primier liament; e aprop lia aquel sobre la carn que es dejos le os, e exten la extramitat de lu per que atires la carn a las partidas dejos, e tu descuebras la carn sobre le loc le qual voles serrar per que la serra no leda la carn.	If the bone is prominent in place of the body, then do this according to this method: and that you carefully hold that at the end of that bone; and order someone to extend it further; and carefully take out a thick piece of wool from the first piece; and put that piece over the flesh that is left of the bone, and extend the end of it so that it may come off the place where you want to cut it; and discover the flesh under that piece so that the saw does not cut the flesh.
E pausa fust o taula dejos le os decentment, quar quan tu fas aquo no es prohibida la serra que no secce la carn corrumpuda.	Then place a table or board on both sides of the bone, for when you make that cut it is not forbidden to cut the rotten flesh.
E cove que sia la serradura sobre le loc corrumput petit a petit, quar si es en la concavitat del os corrupcio e no appar en la sua apparicio al sentiment, e forssa a serratura de lu autra veguada.	Then carefully place the saw on that place little by little, because if it is in the concave part of the bone and does not appear in its appearance to the sense, and force the cut again on another side.
E si le os es corrumput e no-eminent, abantz es la una partida continuada am la autra, e la corrupcio es al mieg loc o en partida de lu, lahoras tu descuebre la carn de totas partz tota; e aprop pausa fust dejos, e aprop serra aquel de la primiera partida la on es la corrupcio entro que sia continuada la serratura del autra partida.	If the bone is rotten and not prominent, then move one piece continuously towards the other, and the corruption is in its place or in another part; then you discover all the flesh; and then place it on both sides, and cut that piece where the corruption is so that it may continue to be cut on the other side.
E sia la serradura segon le loc de la corrupcio un petit, segon que havem dit.	Then carefully place the saw according to the location of the corruption; a little bit is enough, as we have said.
E si la corrupcio es en la junctura, inscideys aquela junctura corrumpuda, e serra le os la on es continuat del autra part.	And if the corruption is in the joint, then cut that joint that is rotten, and cut the bone where it continues from the other side.
E si de la corrupcio es en la continuacio de doas juncturas, lahoras no es en lu razio sino engen.	And if the corruption is in the continuation of two joints, then it is not in reason but in danger.
E si la corrupcio es en le pecte de la ma o del pe, es mot dificil; empero cove que tu inquieras la corrupcio en qual manieyra appareys a tu, e que abradas aquela, e mondes aquela segon quascuna disposicio la qual es a tu possibla, e am cascum engen sia rectificat a tu, quan no fa a tu contrarietat vena o nervi.	And if the corruption is in the chest or foot, it is difficult; however, if you ask about the corruption in which way it appears to you, and if you cut that piece, and do that according to each case as is possible for you, and according to each possibility is corrected for you, so that it does not cause any pain or discomfort in walking or in any other way.
E sapias qual es inscididors e las serras a inscidir aquestz osses son motz segon le situament dels osses, e la preparacio de aquels, e la grosseza de aquels, e la subtilitat e la grandeza e la parvitat de aquels, e la duricia e la lor raritat; per que cove que tu prepares a tota specia de operacio estrument convenient ad aquela opperacio.	You know what is necessary to cut these bones, and the tools that are suitable for this operation; prepare them according to each case, and be careful in preparing them, and pay attention to their size and subtlety and their greatness and their smallness and their hardness and their rarity; so that you prepare all kinds of operations with specialized instruments.
E sapias que aquela operacio significa a tu sobre la specia del strument del qual indigeysses; quan am tu es gran studi e lonc e conoyssensa de las manieyras de aquesta art, e testimoni de manieyras de malautias, quar lahoras ja tu las avias per tu meteys aquo que es convenient a lu dels sturmentz a tota malautia.	You know that this operation requires you to have the right instrument; and you are a great student and patient and aware of the ways of this art, and a witness to the consequences of mistakes, since you have already experienced them in yourself through what has been done to you; so choose wisely the instrument that is suitable for all cases.
E yeu so a tu formant en la fi de aquest capitol le nombre dels instrumentz les quals pausaras cum eyssimples am les quals proceziras a la tua prohibicio la qual experimentaras sobre las autras.	And I will teach you at the end of this chapter the number of instruments that you can use with ease, and with which you will deal with your prohibition, which you will experience on other people.
Forma de serra:	To cut bones, one needs a sharp saw. The saw should be able to cut through the bone easily and smoothly. One should choose a saw that is appropriate for the size of the bone and the area where the cut needs to be made. The saw should also be clean and oiled before use. It is important to make slow and steady cuts, applying gentle but firm pressure. One should avoid over-exerting force, as this may cause damage to the surrounding tissues.
Forma de autra serra:	Another form of the saw:
Forma de autra serra:	Other form of the saw:
Forma de autra serra gran:	Other great form of the saw:
Forma de ray:	Form of a ream:
Sia le cap de aquest ray segon la forma de cap de clau stellat, e les puntz de lu sian segon la forma dels puntz alstefegi.	The shape of this ream is according to the form of the star-shaped head, and the points of it are according to the form of the points asterged.
E no conveneys sino que am aquel sian confricadatz les caps de las juncturas quan so corrumpudas, o es la boca gran ampla.	And they should not be used unless the joints are crushed when rotten, or if the large mouth is open wide.
Forma de razori major dels autres:	Form of the major razors of the others:
Forma de razori menor:	Form of the smaller razors:
Forma de razori lat:	Form of the lateral razors:
Forma de serra autra decentment fayta: sia fayt arc de lu pus sobira e la acuitat de lu de ferr, e le membre de lu de boys punhal descentment fayt.	Other form of saw in a decent way: It should be made of the iron wire and its edges sharp, and the member of it pointed decently.
Forma de lu:	Form of it:
Forma de razori en la qual ha concavitat:	Form of the razors in which there is a cavity:
Forma de razori autra subtil:	Other subtle form of razors:
Forma de autra razori de curvada extremitat:	Other form of curved razors at the extreme end:
Forma de rasori petit semblant a tenta:	Form of small razors resembling a tentacle:
Forma de incisori am le qual so inscidit les osses:	Form of the incisors where the bones are etched:
Forma de inscisori autra minor:	Other smaller form of incisions:
Forma de un autra inscissori; aquest semblant a ray, e la extremitat de lu es cum serra, e es exhibit en motz locs en la razio dels osses:	Form of another incision; resembling a saw, and its end is like a chisel, and it is displayed in the motion of the bones:
Forma de ray lo qual conveneys a rasio de aquel que es perforat dels osses:	Form of a saw that corresponds to the perforation of the bones:
E la extremitat de lu es triangulada e de aguda extremitat.	And its end is triangular and has an acute point.
E es fayt de ferr de India , e semblantment cove que totas las causas que havem ditas de rasoris e de inscissoris e de serras.	It is made of Indian iron, and resembling a curve that all the causes that we have said of razors, and of incisors and saws.
De inscizio extremitatz e de la serratura dels osses.	Of incision extremes and the locking of the bones.
Las extremitatz se poyresso o per causa intrinseca o per causa extrinseca, o cum tu auras medicat aquela corrupcio per curacio de aquelas medicinas e la curacio no comfereys, o vezes la corrupcio anar deves le membre la qual no percuteys denguna causa, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquel membre entro aquo la hon acossec la corrupcio, per que le malaute evasesca per aquo de mort o de malicia que es major defeliment del membre.	The extremities can be cured either by intrinsic or extrinsic cause, or as you treat those medicines and the cure does not confer with them, or sometimes the corruption goes to the member that does not hit any cause, then it is said that you cut off that member within which the corruption occurs, so that the badness of the member escapes through water of death or of malice which is greater in destruction of the member.
E le senhal de aquel al qual accideys, es que·l membre es fayt negre entro que sia cujat que foc la ja comburit, o se poyreys aprop la negror entro que la poyredura aquela ane entro aquel membre que siec lu e que prengua tot le cors; e donc coyta te am inscizio de aquel.	And the sign of that member that happens to you is that it is made black within which it is said that fire has burned it, or it is burned close to the blackness of that one within that member that burns it and takes all the body; and therefore you should cut off that member.
E semblantment si es causa de la corrupcio percussio de alcunas causas venenosas ayssi cum de scorpio mari o de vupera o de rutela e de semblantz.	It is said that if it is caused by the corruption of a poisonous impact of some causes such as of a scorpion, or of an owl, or of a weasel, and resembling:
E si la corrupcio o la percussio es en la extremitat del dit, lahoras tu inscideys le dit e no dones spazi a la corrupcio per que ane entro a la ma.	And if the corruption or impact is in the end of that, then you cut off that one and do not give space to the corruption so that it goes on to the main body.
E semblantment si accedeys a la ma, lahoras tu inscideys aquela de la razit del focil, e no dones spazi a la corrupcio entro que prengua en le focil del bras.	And if it happens to the main body, then you cut off that one from the fire's edge, and do not give space to the corruption so that it takes hold in the fire of the arm.
E si envezeys aquel, lahoras inscideys le bras entro al coyde en la junctura.	And if you instead of that one, then cut off the arm at the junction.
E si passa otra la corrupcio e la vezes enviro le coyde, lahoras en aquel es la mort del malaute; e aministrar autra causa otra aquo en curacio es quantitat de vertut.	And if the corruption passes from that one and surrounds the junction, then the death of the patient is certain; and other causes are added to that one in cure, which quantity of virtue.
E semblantment fay del pe quan corrupcio envezeys le dit del pe, lahoras tu inscideys aquel entro ad un dels nozes.	It is said that if corruption happens to the foot instead of that one, then you cut off that foot from a knuckle; and:
E si pren en la pente del pe, lahoras tu inscideys tot le pe.	And if it takes hold in the angle of the foot, then you cut off all the foot.
Mays si pueja entro al denol, lahoras tu inscideys la camba entro a la junctura del denol.	May also be within the knee, then you cut off the knee joint.
E si la corrupcio ja es pervenguda sobre le denol, lahoras en lu no es engen sino dimissio, e layssar le malaute a la mort.	And if corruption has already taken hold on the knee, then it is only to be cut off, and let the patient die.
E la manieyra de inscidir le membre o de serrar lu es que tu strenhas le liament en la partida pus dejos la qual voles inscidir, e strenh autre liament sobre le loc; e extenda le ministre un liament a las partidas dejos, e extenda le ministra autra liament en sus; e tu separa la carn la qual es entre dos liamentz ain spatum lat entro que sia descuberta tota la carn; e aprop sia inscidit o serrat.	And the way of incising the member or sawing it is that you strengthen the joint in the part where you want to cut, and strengthen another joint over that location; and extend the minister a joint to the split parts, and extend another joint on them; and you separate the meat which is between two joints in such a way that all of the meat is exposed; and it is incised or sawed.
E cove que sia pausat drap de li de totas partidas per so que no toque le loc sa, e que vengua al malaute lesio ajustada e apostema caut.	And as soon as you cut off the joint completely so that it does not touch the location, and bring to the patient's injury a correct apothecary and blister.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc quan obras, lahoras tu cauteriza le loc coytadament, o pausa sus lu alcunas polveras restrenhentz le sanc; e aprop retorna a la tua medicacio entro que sia complida.	May also happen to you a flux of blood when it works, then you cauterize the location carefully, or pour on it some powders that restrain the blood; and return to your medicine as soon as possible.
E aprop lia le membre plaguat am liament al u convenient, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And tie up the troubled member with a strong joint, and cure that one within which it is healed.
E yeu recomti a tu aquo que endevenc a un home en le sieu pe, aquest meteys accident le qual yeu e a tu recomtat, le qual es quar accidic a lu negror en le sieu pe am adustio que era asemblada a combustio de foc.	And I will tell you that in an old man's foot, this accident which is said to have happened to him is due to the heat of a fire, and it is said that he is not able to walk.
E aquela corrupcio accidic primierament en le sieu dit entro que tendec tot le pe.	That corruption first happened in his foot while it was extended.
E adonc aquel home preparec per si meteys pus que vic la curacio anar al membre am la vehemencia de lu que atrobec de dolor e de adustrio de lu, e el inscidic aquel pe entro a la junctura, e foc sanat.	And then that man prepared himself for this purpose that the cure would come to the member with the urgency of his pain and the rustling of him, and he cut off that foot at the junction, and fire healed it.
Lonc temps accidic a lu aquela meteyssa corrupcio en le dit de la ma indic.	Long time ago, an accident happened to him in his leg while he was walking:
E adonc venc a mi, e so me perforsat repercutir aquela superfluitat am aquo que pausegui sobre la ma de las medicinas, aprop la mundificacio del cos de lu; e no es repercussa la superfluitat e comensec anar al autra dit entro que comensec en la ma.	And then he came to me, and so I repaired myself by applying those medicines to the body of him, according to his need; and that superfluity did not recur to me, and I began to apply it in another leg which had begun to hurt in my body.
E el apelec me a inscidir la ma de lu, e yeu no volgui far aquo sperant sobre la repercussio de aquela superfluitat, e mays que temegui deves la inscizio de la ma de lu mort, quar la vertut del malaute era sobre cazement.	And he called me to cut off his body, and I did not want to do so in the hope of preventing that superfluity from recurring to him, but rather I killed him first, because the virtue of the patient was over death.
E pus que el se desperec de mi, es retornat en la sua terra e pervenguec a mi que aquel home preparec e inscidic la sua ma tota, e es sanat.	And then he left me in peace, and he returned to his own land, and I healed him by cutting off all of his body, and it was healed.
E no he adhuzida aquesta narracio sino per que sia adjutori sobre aquo que catz de aquesta malautia, e que sia significacio per la qual sia significada e segon la qual sia obrat.	And I will not add to this story unless it is helpful for me to explain what this malady means and how it relates to the other; and according to that I will speak.
De cura sinuum et qualitate clisterizationis cum medicinis.	Of cures, their qualities, and the use of blistering.
Quan accideys apostema en alcus membres carnozes e·l spazi de l’apostema es prolonguat entro que fa colleccio de sania, e aprop es romput e perforat, e es eyssida de lu la sania, e roman le loc vuoyt quays cum si era vayssel, e la codena que es desobre lu ayssi cum drap subtiliat, e no es pervengut a deriera corrupcio, e no inprimeys en le os o en nervi ni en liament, es apelat sinu, e no es nompnat fistula.	When an apothecary is applied to large joints of the body and the blister is extended within that location, then it is broken and pierced, and the blisters are opened by applying a soft cloth, and it does not spread to the bone or to the nerves or joints; it is called a pimple, and it is not called a fistula.
Mays empero si le spazi es prolonguat entro que la corrupcio enprema en alcun membre, lahoras es appelada fistula e no zukem.	May also be if the space is prolonged before the corruption goes forward to some member, then it is called a fistula; and it does not get worse.
E la cura de lu es que inscidas aquela codena tota ayssi cum es revolvut, e majorment quan es subtiliada e es fayta cum drap, e comfizas que no adhereys al loc per la sua corrupcio.	The cure of it is that you cut off all of the blister as it is coming out, and mainly when it is softened and cut with a cloth, and confirm that it does not stick to the location because of its corruption.
Mays si tu speras que la codena adheresca e que aquela corrupcio no aja conseguit per deriera consecucio, e en la codena ha spassitut de cara, lahoras tu cura aquel am clisteri.	May also be if you hope that the blister will adhere and that the corruption has not spread to the next location, and in the blister is opened from the back, then you heal it with blistering.
E es que consideras al sinu, e lahoras si es gran, e·l brac que yeys es de fetent odor, lahoras clisteriza aquel am medicament egipciac le qual es de oli e vi agre e ziniar recebent partidas enguals, e sian ajustadas en un vayssel, e sian coytas sobre le foc entro que’l medicament se fassa rog e pervengua a specitut de mel.	And consider the skin, and if it is large, and the arm that you hold is of a fetid odor, then cut it with an Egyptian medicine consisting of oil, vinegar, and honey; let it be split into two parts, and let them be tied on a board, and let them be placed over fire so that the medicine becomes robust and spreads to the skin.
E aprop tu pren de lu aquo que es necessari e dissolveys lu am aygua e mel; e clisteriza am aquel le sinu, e strenh le orrifici de lu, e layssa la medicina en lu per la quantitat de doas horas.	And you give him this water that is necessary and dissolve it with honey; then clistenize his sinews, and tighten the orifices of his body, and leave the medicine in him for two hours.
E aprop extratz aquela am sprecio; e fay aquo per tantz dias entro que sia mundificat le sinu e sia remauguda la pudor.	And remove that with waste; and make water for so many days within that it purifies the sinews and restores the humors.
E alcunas veguadas es clisterizat am aygua de cendre, quan no es a tu prezent aquest medicament; e es que tu prenguas la cendra de vitz, e met sobre lu aygua; e aprop cola aquela e clisteriza aquel am ela entro que te confizes que·l sinu lahoras es ostat.	And some are clistenized with ash water, when you do not present this medicine to him; and it is because you take the ash of wine, and put on it water; and clistenize that within him so that he tells you that the sinews will go away then.
E si le malaute no ha tollerancia sobre le medicament egipciac ni l’aygua de la cendre, lahoras clisteriza aquel am aygua e mel e quays sia mesclat ziniar trissat, e clisteriza aquel am vi e mel mesclat, quar de proprietat de mel es que mondifique e lave, e le vi fa adherir le sinu, e majorment quan en le vi ha superfluitat de stipticitat e de siccitat.	And if the patient does not have tolerance for Egyptian medicine or ash water, then clistenize that with honey water and mixed zingiber three times, and clistenize that with wine and honey mixed, because of the property of honey is that it purifies and washes, and the wine makes the sinews adhere, and most when there is excess of stipticity and dryness.
E cum tu fas aquo alcunas veguadas e te comfizes que·l sinu ja es remaugut, lahoras clisteriza aquel am aquo que fa naysser la carn en lu.	And when you make water a few times and are convinced that the sinews have been restored, then clistenize that with water that makes the flesh come out of him.
E es que prenguas de enguent dyafinicon e dissolveys aquel am oli rozat e vi stiptic; o que clisterizas aquel am alcunas medicinas e enguentz autres que hajan las proprietatz les quals ja he yeu scritz en le tractat dels enguents.	And it is because you take dyaphinic ointment and dissolve that with rose water and wine stiptic; or you clistenize that with some medicines and ointments that already have the properties that I have written in the treatise of ointments.
E si le orrifici del sinu es streyt en le qual no es recebuda la canula del clisteri, lahoras tu le amplifique aquel am ferr petit a petit, e pausa en lu calgua envolopada en enguent egipciac o en enguent basilicon entro que sia amplificat.	And if the orifices of the sinews are narrow in which the canal of the clisteric does not enter, then you widen that little by little, and pause it with a little envelope of Egyptian ointment or basilic ointment so that it is widened.
E semblantment si le orrifici es ample, lahoras tu agregua las labias de lu am sutura e layssa de lu quantitat en la qual intre le clisteri ses addicio.	And if the orifices are wide, then you add a stitch to his lips and leave the quantity in which the clisteric is added.
E si le orrifici de lu del qual corr le brac es elevat a las partidas desus, lahoras secca aquel en le pus bas loc que es en lu per que le brac corra entro dejos, quar quan le brac es coartat en la preondeza de sinu la carn esser en lu engendrada.	And if the orifice of his leg that runs up to the thigh is high in the middle of it, then dry that place with a hole that is in him so that the leg runs into it, because when the leg is constricted in the sinew's thickness, the flesh is raised up.
E si no es a tu possible seccar le sinu entro al enviro del os pus bas segon que voles, lahoras te perforssa que prepares le membre am preparacio per la qual corr de lu le brac leugierament segon que es a tu apparelhat e que no sia en lu retengut alcuna causa del brac.	And if it is not possible for you to dry the sinew within the area of the bone according to your will, then pierce that member with preparation so that the leg runs out smoothly according to what is appropriate for your clothing and does not hold back the leg for any reason.
E pren medicinas consolidativas que sian pausadas sobre le sinu convenientz ad aquo que vols exxten aquelas sobre drap de li.	And take consolidating medicines that are placed over the sinew conveniently with water that you want to extend those on a cloth.
E le drap sia de tan gran quantitat cum fa la comunicacio de tot le sinu; e aprop inscidey am las forfexs en le dreyt del orrifici del sinu un trauc pus ample un pauc que l’orrifici del sinu; e aprop exten sobre autre drap de li dels enguentz leons segon la quantitat del trauc, e pausa le sobre aquel per posicio longinqua del orrifici del sinu per que sia aleujat le eyssiment del brac de lu e no ostes le drap gran sino aprop alcus dyas una veguada.	And the cloth be of such a quantity that it makes communication with all the sinew; and you cut a little pair of scissors on the right side of the orifice of the sinew a very small piece that the orifice of the sinew; and you extend over another cloth of him the leon ointments according to the quantity of the cut, and pause it on him for a distant position from the orifice of the sinew so that the leg does not feel any pain, and do not hold back the cloth except after a few days.
Mays aquel que es sobre le orrifici del sinu, le qual remauguas en tota hora per so que yesca aquo que es ajust en lu del brac.	And remove that which is on the orifice of the sinew, which you restore in all hours so that it does not hurt that leg.
E per que sapias si aquo que corr de lu del brac es mot o pauc, o es digest, o es no-digest.	And so that you know if the water that runs from his leg is much or little, or whether it digests or does not digest.
E am aysso tu considera le loc de aquel sinu, si en lu sent le pacient dolor o no, e si es en lu apostema.	And consider the place of that sinew on him, if the patient feels pain there or not, and if it is in apoplexy.
E cum la tua medicacio es prolonguada en la tal manieyra, e vesas la matiera que es gitada sobre le orrifici del sinu ja adhereys, o se apropria adherencia, lahoras le mayti tu le deslia o le tertz dia, e quan deslias la plagua, lahoras muda le drap per autre e renova le enguent.	And when your medicine is prolonged in such a way, and you see the matter that is adhering to the orifice of the sinew already adheres, or appropriates adherence, then change the cloth after two days, and when you change the cloth, replace it with another and renew the ointment.
Mays si del sinu aprop lon spazi yeys virus subtil, lahoras no te desperes de la adherencia de li, quar la sanacio de lu se apropria, quar so alcus homes en les quals tarda generacio de carn en las lors plaguas, e de aquels so en les quals es fayt le contrari de lu.	May if from the sinew comes a long thin virus, then do not despair of the adherence to him, because the cure appropriates itself, for such men there is a generation of flesh in their joints plagues, and of those is made the opposite.
E si del sinu aprop motz dias es yssit brac indigest, lahoras sapias que·l sinu no adhereys; e si es tardada la adherencia del sinu e es la causa prolonguada, lahoras tu ajusta en exsiccacio de las medicinas, e si las medicinas so humidas en lor substancia e en la sua vertut, son seccas ayssi cum enguent dyafinicon, quan es en lu ajustada superfluitat de addicio de zegi.	And if from the sinew comes a lot of days' indigest leg, then you know that the sinew does not adhere; and if the adherence of the sinew is prolonged, then adjust in desiccation of medicines, and if those medicines are wet in their substance and virtue, then they are dried with ointment of dyaphinic, when there is a surplus of addition of zigi.
E le mays derier am le qual es curat, es que prenguas de enguent dyafinicon e sia dissout en oli rozat, e sia sobre lu vojat vi antic engual en la sua substancia, e aprop comfeys aquel am lu, e usa de aquel.	And the following to cure him is that you take ointment of dyaphinic and dissolve it in rose oil, and put on him wine of stiptic in its substance, and use that; and use it on him.
E ja fa semblant en aquela accio, quan no y a brac, enguent dyafinicon, mel quan es coyt entro que sia engrossat, e usa de lu; o que prenguas mirra e aloen e enses, e trissa tot e polveriza sobre le mel quan es sus le foc, e aprop lineys aquo sobre drap e strenh aquel sobre le sinu; e lineys aquel am le mel le qual has cuoyt entro que es engrossat, e polveriza sobre drap e strenh aquel.	And it already makes a similar thing, when there is no leg, ointment of dyaphinic, honey when it is thick inside that it be thick, and use that; or you take myrrh and aloe and knead it, and triss all and powder it over the cloth, and pour water on it over a cloth, and tighten that on the sinew; and pour the honey that has gathered inside, and powder over the cloth, and tighten it.
E alcunas veguadas so administratz am lu aristologia longua e razitz de lili celesti (e es lili celesti) e farina de errs e centaurea, e usa de aquels simples o ajustatz, trissa aquels e cribela e polveriza sobre le mel le qual he recomtat; e husa de lu.	And some are given him long Aristotle and razines of celestial lily (and it is the lily celestial) and flour of eres and centaurea, and use those simple or adjust them, and triss those and sift them and powder over the honey that has been remembered; and use that.
E si es prolonguat le sinu, e no es sanat per aquesta curacio, lahoras sapias que la corrupcio es en le preon de lu, e ja fa enquisicio en les osses o en les autres membres durs o als liaments; lahoras tu le cura am curacio fistular, ayssi cum desus es dit.	And if the sinew is prolonged, and does not heal with this cure, then you know that the corruption is in its head, and has already been made an investigation in the bones or in other hard members; then you treat it with a cure of fistular, such as when the sun rises.
De curacio de panarici et unguis attritae et incisione digiti additi et sectione.	Of cure of paronychia and scraped nails and cutting the finger added and sectioning.
Panarici es apostema le qual nays dejos la ungla del dit pous de la ma o del pe, e fort leu nays en les autres ditz, e cum es prolonguat e la sua curacio es mens prezada, o es apostemat de apostema caut, o es corrumput, e gieta brac entro que corrodeys la razitz de la ungla, e fort leu corromp aquela tota, e fort leu perve la sua corrupcio al os entro que es a lu odor fetent, e es fayta la extremitat del dit lada, e la color de lu es fayta fusca.	Paronychia is an apoplexy that does not separate the nail of the toe from the foot of the hand or from the leg, and strongly hurts it in the other toes; and when it is prolonged and its cure is a painful thing, or is an apoplexy of apoplexia, or is corrupted, and the nail is cut, and strongly hurts that whole, and strongly changes the color of it.
E donc quan tu auras aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu inscidas am ferr tota la superfluitat que es romasa de la ungla e aprop cauteriza la plagla aprop aquo, quar cauteri mot es juvatiu en aysso.	And therefore when you have that water which we have said in the division and do not find your cure, then remember to remove all the surplus of the nail and cut it with water; because cauterization is helpful in plagues.
Mays si le os es sa e la ungla es sana, e las addicios de la ungla vuoydas ja compremen las carns a las partidas dedintz, e comensan lu punger e ledeysso aquela, lahoras cove que tu pauses ray subtil dejos le angle de la ungla que pungeys la carn, e impelleys aquela sus e inscideys aquela carn am facilitat, e pausa sobre aquo que roman de la carn de las medicinas comburentz corrosivas entro que sia tot remaugut; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	May if the bone is healthy and the nail is sound, and the additions of the nail have already affected the flesh at its beginnings, and it begins to hurt and it hurts those, then remember that you pause a thin thread from the angle of the nail that hurts the flesh, and push that above; and push the flesh above and cut it with ease; and pause over that water from the medicine that burns corrosively so that it is all healed; and cure that with ointment.
Mays si la corrupcio ja enprem en le os, lahoras cove que tu inscidas le os aquel e le extraguas, car nul temps no es sanat que sia en lu le os corrumput.	May if corruption has already entered the bone, then remember to remove that bone and extract it, for no time is cured that is not in its bone corrupted.
E si vezes la corrozio e la corupcio anar en le dit, lahoras tu inscideys aquel en un dels nozes segons que es premesa la sua rememoracio, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if corruption and corruption go into the finger, then you cut that in one of the nuts according to what is appropriate for its memory; and cure that within that it be healed.
Mays si a la ungla endeve percussio o atricio, e endeve en aquela dolor vehement, lahoras cove que tu al comensament fleubotomes le malaute, e aprop secca la ungla am spatum agut am seccio transversa desus en jus, e guarda te que la seccio no pervengua entro a la carn que es dejos la ungla, quar tu faras accidir al malaute dolor vehement, e sira causa a nativitat de la carn ajustada superflua en le loc; e aprop cura aquel loc am aquo que ceda dolor.	If however the nail has been struck by a hammer or an awl, and there is great pain in it, then when you begin to bleed the patient, dry the nail with a sharp scissor cut across it from above, and take care that the cut does not go into the flesh which is underneath the nail, for you would make more severe pain in the patient and cause the birth of excess flesh at that site; and then treat that site with water which softens the pain.
Mays dit ajustat, le qual es nat en las mas de alcus homes, fort leu es carnos tot, e fort leu so en lu osses, o fort leu es en lu ungla.	Then put it on a flat surface, which is born in the flesh of most people, very firm is the flesh everywhere, and very firm is the bone, or very firm is the nail.
E alcus de lu son natz en la razit de la junctura, o es la nativitat de lu en alcus nozes dels ditz.	And some of them are born in the root of a joint, or their birth is in some nuts from this.
Mays aquel que es nat en alcus nozes del dit no se mau, e aquest que es nat en las juncturas fort leu es maugut.	Then that which is born in some nuts of the above is not bad, and that which is born in joints is very hard to be cut.
E de aquels que son natz carnoses, la seccio es leugiera, e es que tu inscidas aquel deves la sua razitz am spatum lat.	And of those that are born flesh, the cut is light, and it is because you cut the root of this with a sharp scissor.
Mays de aquel que es nat en la razitz de la junctura, la curacio es dificil; e donc guarda te de la abscizio de lu.	Then from that which is born in the root of a joint, the cure is difficult; and therefore you should guard against the cutting off of it.
Mays en aquel que es nat en dit deves les nozes, cove que tu inscidas al comensament la carn de lu am inscizio redonda entro al os, e aprop serra am una de aquelas serras convenientz ad aquo, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	Then from those nuts of the above, when you begin to cut the flesh of it with a round scissors into the bone, and then tie it up with one of those cords to water, and then treat that inside which is healed.
Mays consolidacio la qual accideys als ditz entre lor motas veguadas o per nativitat del home que nays enayssi, o per consolidacio de plagua o per combustio de foc, o per semblantz, adonc cove que secces aquela consolidacio entro que les ditz retorno a la sua forma natural.	Then the consolidation which happens to these between certain muscles or by the birth of a person who has not yet been born, or by the consolidation of plague or by fire, or by similarity, so that you dry up that consolidation within which those things return to their natural form.
E aprop pausa entre lor draps de li enfuzes en oli rozat per que no sian consolidatz leugierament, e separa entre aquels, o pausa entre aquels una lamina de plom subtil entro que sia consolidat segon que cove.	Then leave between them, or a leaf of lead between them, so that it is not consolidated lightly, and separate between them, or leave between them a thin layer of lead within which is consolidated as needed.
E semblantment si accideys consolidacio en alcus ditz am la palma, lahoras tu secca aquela consolidacio segon que es preparada e conveneys a la figura del membre.	And if consolidation happens in some nuts by the palm, then you dry up that consolidation according to what it is prepared and adapt it to the form of the limb.
De inscizio de vices, so son varicas.	Of scissor cuts, such are varicose veins.
Vices so son varicas, e so venas envolutas grossas plenas de superfluitatz melencolicas las quals veno en motz dels membres del cors, e le major adveniment de lor en las cambas, e majorment en las cambas dels itinerantz e dels laborantz e dels portantz.	Then such are varicose veins, and those are thick veins full of superfluous melancholy blood which comes to the legs, and most of all in the legs of travelers and laborers and carriers.
Adonc cove que tu administres purguacio del cors de colera negra alcunas veguadas am expulcio fort, e aprop sangna le pacient de la vena basilica.	Then you administer a purge of black cholera several times a day by strong vomiting, and then draw blood from the patient's basilic vein.
Mays la curacio de lor am ferr es segon dos manieyras: la una es que sia inscizas e sia atirat aquel sanc negre, e l’autra manieyra es que sia elevada la vena e sia extrayta tota.	Then the cure of them by iron is according to two ways: one is that it be cut and that black blood be drawn from it, and the other way is that it be raised and all that blood be drawn out.
La seccio de lu es segon aquesta manieyra: embroca al comensament la camba am aygua cauda mot entro que le sanc gros sia resolvut, que es feculent de la camba, e aprop strenh la camba del malaute a la partida pus sobirana de la coyssa entro a la partida dejos del denol am una benda, e aprop secca la vena en un loc, o en dos, o en tres am seccio ampla, e aprop eleva le sanc negra am la tieua ma de la partida dejos de la camba entro en sus, e desus en jus, entro que del sanc sia yssida la quantitat que voles e que vezes habastar, e la qual tollera la vertut del malaute.	Then the cutting of it is according to this way: immerse at the beginning the foot in cold water so that black blood is resolved, which is ferment from the foot, and then tighten the foot of the patient with a bandage at the top of the foot up to the toe, and then dry the vein in one, or two, or three places by cutting it wide, and then raise the black blood to the top of the foot up to the toe, and then take out the same quantity that you want and which is sufficient for the medicine, and that tolerates the power of the patient.
E aprop lia aquela, e comanda a lu que abstengua de las viandas colera negra engendrantz.	Then you prepare it, and order to him that he abstains from black cholera-producing foods.
E itera la curacio per fleubotomia quan las venas so umplidas e aquo notz al malaute.	Then the cure is by bleeding when veins are filled with blood, and feel the patient.
Mays la elevacio de lor es segon aquesta manieyra: tu que razas la camba del malaute, si en lu so motz pels, e aprop met le en banh e embroca la camba de lu am aygua cauda entro que s’enrogesesca e las venas sian exuberadas; o que sia exercitat per exercici fort, si banh no es a tu present, entro que·l membre sia scalfat.	Then the raising of them is according to this way: you that you rub the foot of the patient, if it is wet with water, and then immerse the foot in a bath and dry the foot with a cloth so that it cools off and the veins swell; or that it be exercised by strong exercise, if a bath is not at your disposal, so that the limb is scarred.
E aprop secsa la codena en le dreyt de la vena per seccio en le lonc o en le derier de lu deves le denol, o en le pus bas de lu deves lo talo.	Then dry the vein on the right side of the blood vessel by cutting it from behind to the front or from the back to the front of it, or cut it at the top or bottom of it with a sharp scissor.
E aprop uobre la codena am uncis e excorja la vena de tota part entro que appara al sentiment, e es deves la appericio de lu que vezes aquela roga declinant a negror.	Then cut the vein with nails and squeeze the vein from all parts until it appears on the surface, and it is necessary that that blood be black.
E donc cum evazeys e de la codena tu vezes aquela blanca quays sia corda.	Then therefore you empty, and of that vein sometimes that white thread is drawn out.
E aprop tu met dejos aquela le ray entro que sia elevada e sia gitada de la codena, e sospen aquela am onci orp leon.	Then you take off that bandage so that it is lifted and taken away from the vein, and suspend that with an orange-colored cord.
E aprop secsa autra seccio aprop aquela seccio per tres ditz, e aprop excorja la codena de la partida desus de la vena entro que apparia.	Then you dry another cut near that cut, and then squeeze the vein from above the vein where it appears.
E aprop eleva aquela e inscideys aquela en deriera seccio deves le talo, e aprop extratz aquela e eleva aquela entro que sia yssida per la seccio segonda, e aprop extratz aquela de la seccio que es sobre aquela.	Then you raise that and cut it from behind where the vein appears at the top of it, and then take out that from the second cutting where it appears, and then take out that from the cutting which is above it.
E fay aquo entro que extraguas aquela de la seccio que es pus sobirana o pus auta de totas las seccios, entro que tota es yssida; e lahoras inscideys aquela.	Then draw that out where you take it out of the second cutting which is higher or lower than all the cuts, so that all of it is taken out; and then cut it.
E si no obezeys a tu ad extrayre e elevar, lahoras intromet una agulha am fiel fort doble e ligua aquela e extratz la, o intromet dejos lu le ray e revolveys la tua ma a tota part entro qu’en sia getada.	Then if you do not obey me in taking out and raising it, then insert a double sharp hook into the vein with force and take it out, or turn the patient's hand over completely so that it is raised.
E guarda te que no sia inscidida; quar si es trencada, es fayt a tu dificil elevar aquela mot e es vengut sobre le malaute per aquela nocument.	Then take care that it is not cut; for if it is torn, then it is difficult to lift that part and it comes back on the foot by that wound.
E cum aquela tota auras fora-gitada, lahoras pausa sobre le loc de la plagua lana submerssa en vi e oli rozat e oli no-rozat, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	Then when all of it is taken out, then you leave that place where plague lies in water and oil red and not red, and cure that inside which is healed.
E si la vit es contrayta havent tortuositat a la qual sia envolucio a las partidas, e no es segon rectitut segon que havem dit, lahoras cove que tu fendas sobre aquela a tota partida de tortuositat de lu e als locs de envolucio de lu, e aprop suspen aquela am uncis entro que eleves aquela tota.	Then if the wine is contracted by tortuosity on which those parts are wrapped, and it is not according to rectitude as we have said, then when you cut that completely at all parts of that tortuosity and those sites where those things are wrapped, and then suspend that with nails so that it is raised completely.
E guarda te deves la tua seccio que no inscidas la vena e que no plagues aquela, quar dificil sira a tu elevar aquela; e serva la tua prudencia en aquela.	Then you take care that your cutting of the vein does not hurt it and do not wound that, for it is difficult to lift that; and then serve your prudence in that.
Forma del inscident am le qual es seccada vit:	Form of the Scissor which is Dried Wine:
Forma de unci orp:	Form of Orange Cord:
No es a lu accuitat ayssi cum als uncis ni es de aguda extremitat per so que no plague la vena; e es de grossa flexibilitat leon, quar si era subtil, inscidira la vena per la sua subtilitat; habantz es en lu superflua grosseza ayssi cum havem dit.	It is not at your disposal accuti with nails, or it is of acute extremities so that the vein does not plague; and it is of coarse flexibility, for if it were subtle, it would cut the vein because of its subtility; it has superfluous coarseness in this way as well.
De extraccio venae cruris.	Of Vein Ex extraction
Aquesta vena es engendrada en las cambas en terras caudas ayssi cum al- Ategi en terra de Arabics e en las terras de India caudas e aridas de pauca teneritat e en las quals no nays erba ni aybre.	This vein is generated in the legs in tail-like shapes so that it is not at your disposal, as we have said, and in Arab lands and arid lands of little moisture and where there is no grass or shade.
E fort leu es engendrada en autres locs del cors otra las cambas.	Then very firm is generated in other parts of the body besides the legs.
E la gestacio de lu es de putrefaccio que ve dejos la codena ayssi cum venen dedintz le cors serpentz e vermps e scarides e verms engendrantz entre la codena e la carn.	Then the conception of it is from decay which comes from within the body, as we have said, and from snake-like, worm-like, scaly, and vermin-like things that are generated between the vein and the flesh.
E senhal de la suscepcio de l’adveniment de lu es de aquesta vena que accideys en la camba enflammacio vehement; e aprop le loc es vesicat; e aprop comensa la vena yssir del loc de aquela vesicacio quays sembla razit de planta.	Then the indication of the coming of it is from this vein which happens in the foot with violent swelling; and then that place is irritated; and then the vein swells from that place which seems like a root of a plant.
E adonc cum appar de lu la extremitat, lahoras cove que tu envolvas sobre aquela una pessa de plom del qual sia le pes de una drac. entro a ii drac., e noza aquela e layssa le plom suspendut de la camba.	And then bring out the end from him and cover it with a silver ring of which the weight is one dragon from two dragons, and let it hang from the chest.
E tantas veguadas cum yeys de lu alcuna causa a las partidas defora, envolveys aquo em plom e noza aquel.	And when you see any cause of the matter outside, wrap it in plumm and now take that.
E si mot es prolonguat, lahoras tu inscideys una partida de lu e envolopa le romanent; e no inscidas aquela de razit entro que sia fora yssida, quar si inscideys aquela es contrayta e intra en la carn e fa accidir apostema e poyredura en le loc e ulceracio mala.	And if it is prolonged, then you shall incise a part of the leg and wrap it around; and do not incise that which is inside unless it comes out, for if you incise that which is inside it will contract and go into the flesh and cause pus and corruption in the place and a bad ulcer.
Per que cove que sia tractada suaument e sia extrayta petit a petit, entro que sia fora-gitada del derier de lu e no remangua de lu alcuna causa en le cors.	So that it be treated smoothly and be taken out little by little, unless it comes out from behind the leg and does not remain stuck to anything in the body.
E de aquesta vena es yssit en alcus homes que es en la sua longitut de v palms e de detz e ja es pervengut a mi que yssic un de xx palms.	And of this vein I have seen in certain men who are of the length of five palms and of these I have already seen one that is of twenty palms.
E si es inscidida en la hora de la sua medicacio, lahoras intromet lo ray en le trauc de lu e perfora aquela am lonc trauc am le cors, entro que sia evacuat tot aquo que es en la materia, e administra putrefaccio del loc per alcus dias am medicinas; e aprop cura aquela per la curacio de apostemas.	And if it is incised at the time of its medicine, then you shall insert a long tool into the leg's hole and pierce that with a long instrument through the body, so that all the matter be evacuated, and administer corruption of the place for some days by medicines; and afterwards cure that by the cure of ulcers.
E aquesta vena alcunas veguadas ha motz ramps, e majorment quan apar a la junctura del pe o en le pe, e veno a lu motz orrificis, e es yssit de quascu orrifici ram.	And this vein sometimes has ramification, and more often when it appears in the joint of the foot or in the foot itself, and comes out through certain orifices, and from each orifice comes a ramification.
E donc cura aquela ayssi cum havem dit en la divisio e am aquo que es desus dit.	And therefore cure that in this way as we have said above in the division and at the water that is above it.
De sectione super vermes generatos sub cute et dicitur aegritudo bovina.	Of the section over worms that are generated under the skin and is called bovine disease.
Aquesta malautia es nompnada en alcuna terra deves nos malautia bovina per so quar motas veguadas endeve als bious e es verm pauc un le qual es nat entre la codena e la carn, e va en tot le cos pujan e devalan, e es mostrat al sentiment deves le sieu anament de membre en membre entro que disromp la codena e yeys fora.	This disease is called in certain countries bovine disease because the worms are found only in cattle and are born between the skin and flesh, go throughout the body and break the skin and come out.
E la generacio de lu es per putrefaccio de alcunas humors ayssi cum accideysso verms e serpentz e lombrics e ascaridas en le ventre.	And the generation of these comes from the corruption of certain humours, as when worms and snakes and earthworms and ascarians come into the belly.
E es temut per la malicia de lu, quar quan el va en le cors e es elevat al cap, e es pervengut al huel, lahoras fort leu uebre en lu e intra e destruzeys le huel, e aquo endeve motas veguadas.	And it is feared because when it enters the body and rises to the head, and comes out into the air, then a strong fever will fall on it and destroy the brain, and in that place certain worms are seen.
E donc quan tu voles curar aquel e extraire lu, lahoras no se fa si no deves la sieua ambulacio e apparacio de lu al sentiment, e adonc cove que tu strenhas aquo que es sobre lu e aquo que es dejos lu am liament e constriccio fort, e aprop secca sobre lu e extratz aquel.	And therefore when you want to cure that and remove it, then do not go there unless you are aware of its movement and appearance, and afterwards tie what is above it tightly and with a strong grip, and then dry it out on it and take it away.
E si es preondat en la carn e no le atrobes, lahoras tu pausa cauteri am foc sobre le loc entro que mora, e la major causa que es temuda es corrupcio de lu am la qual corrump le loc ayssi cum havem dit.	And if it is hidden in the flesh and does not appear to you, then you shall make a cauterization on the place where it is, as we have said above. And the most common cause is the corruption of the wind that corrupts the place in this way.
May si tu vezes aquel esser pervengut al cap prop del huel, lahoras strenh sobre le sobrecil am fort strictura, e aprop secsa sobre lu, e extratz aquel; e cove que·l malaute use de mondificacio del sieu cors am medicinas evacuantz humors putridas malas, e guarda se de viandas generantz putrefaccio.	And if you find that it has come out to the head close to the belly, then tie it tightly above it with a strong grip and then dry it out on it; and when the patient uses digestive medicines to expel rotten bad humours, and keeps away from foods that generate corruption.
De sectione super aegritudinem nafir.	Of the section over the disease of nafir.
Aquesta malautia es nompnada en nostra terra nafir, e es dolor la qual ve en alcus membres, e aprop es permudada de membre en membre.	This disease is called in our country nafir, and it is a painful disease that appears in several limbs, and sometimes changes from one limb to another.
E yeu ja e vista aquela segon que yeu te recomtare.	And you have already seen this as I recommended to you.
Yeu fu apelat a una femna malauta ad una vila, e descubric le sieu bras e vi una imflacio petita en la vena funis del bras, e pus que fu romas per una hora, vi aquela imflacio anar ayssi cum va verm pujan ad aquest, mays pus leugierament que esser por, ayssi cum si fos argent viu quan corr de loc en loc.	A woman with the disease was brought to a town, and I discovered her arm and saw a small swelling in the vein of the arm, and after an hour it had become much bigger, as if it were living silver running from place to place.
E adonc anet s’en la dolor de aquel loc e fiquet se en le muscle, e aprop aqui stec per una hora.	Then he sat down in that place of pain and put it in the muscle, and after an hour it became smaller.
E aprop correc en l’autre cors entro que pervenc al autre bras.	And then it healed in the other side, reaching the other arm.
E aprop recomtec a mi que revolvia se per tot le cors sieu segon que yeu vi; e fo trop meravelat de la permutacio de lu e de la velocitat de membre en membre.	And then I told him to turn himself around from side to side as you have seen me; and he was very amazed by the change of place and the speed from one limb to another.
E yeu ja havia vist denant aquo en les mieus huels segon aquela manieyra, empero yeu he vistz motz les quals atroban dolor esser permutada de membra a membre.	And you have already seen ahead of me in this way, but you have not seen the many changes that I make when the disease changes from one limb to another.
Mays no vi aquo am les huels ayssi cum en la femna.	However, in that woman.
E yeu no cogiti esser aquo sino que es per aquo quar la femna era de viela, on so de secs cors e de venas descubertas, e en aquesta apparec al sentiment aquela ventositat permutada.	And you did not think that it was me, but by the water because the woman was of an age when the body is dry and the veins are exposed, and in this way the disease appears to the sense.
E es necessari que no apparesca segon aquesta retro-curacio en aquels que son delicioses e am cors humitz de venas ameguadas.	And it is necessary that you do not appear according to this reverse cure in those who are delightful and have soft veins.
E cum tu voles la curacio de lu, e le pacient sent aquela dolor, lahoras no es a tu aparent al huel ayssi cum havem dit, lahoras tu strenh sobre aquel e dejos lu leugierament e secse sobre aquel entro que sia yssida aquela ventositat coartada, e cauterize le loc.	And when you want to cure it and the patient feels pain, then do not appear to him at the water as we have said above; then tie it tightly and dry it out on it, and then stop the wind by cauterizing the place.
Mays si tu no la vezes am los tieus huels, alhoras tu cura aquel am excussio del cors e am aquo que expelleys ventositatz, e carmina aquelas am pillulas fetidas e am pillulas de serapi e semblantz.	However, if you do not see it in the exposed veins, then heal it by draining the body and expelling the winds, and use pills of fermented wine and similar ones.
De extraccio de sagetas.	Of the extraction of arrows.
Sagetas son diversificadas segon las specias, e segon les locs dels cors en les quals cazo, quar la lor diversitat es que de aquellas so que han grans puntas, e petitas, e concavas, e sordas, so es solidas; e de lor so que han tres angles, e de aquelas a las quals so que han lenguas; e de aquelas a las quals so astelas.	Arrows are different depending on the type of wood they are made from, and depending on their position in the body, since their variety is that some have large points, others small, and concavity, and others flatness, and some have three angles, and those to which it has tongues; and those by which they are star-shaped.
E aquela que es segon les membres e las pessas en las quals cazo es segon dos manieyras: quar les membres o so membres principals concaus, ayssi cum le cervel, le cor, e·l fitge, e le pulmo, e les ronhos, e les budels, e la vezica, e a lor semblantz; e donc quan catz en alcu de aquestz membres e aparo a tu senhals de mort, la qual causa yeu recomtare aprop, lahoras cove que tu evites extraccio de aquela sageta en aquels quar la mort siec aquel en le qual en las majors disposicios, e quan a tu no appareysso aquestz mals senhals, e la sageta no es amaguada en la profunditat del membre, lahoras tu extratz aquela e cura la plagua.	And that which is according to the limbs and feet in which it appears is according to two ways: because these members or principal members are concaved, as the brain, heart, neck, lung, air sacs, bowels, bladder, and their likenesses; and then when you avoid the extraction of that arrow from those who die with the symptoms of death that I have recommended, then, if you do not appear to these evil signs, and the arrow is not buried in the depth of the member, then extract it and heal the plague.
E dels senhals del servel es quan catz en lu sageta, e trespassa le os, e es yssit del cyphac le qual es sobre le cervel, quar accideys per lu soda vehement, e scotomia, e vertige, e rogor en les huels, e imflamacio e rogor de la lengua, e spasme e permixtio de entendament e vomi de colera, e fort leu es abscindida la paraula e es destruida la votz, e es yssit del loc de la plagua humiditat blanca semblant a pols, e yeys de lu semblant ad aquositat de la carn.	And of the signs of death are when an arrow pierces the skull, and passes through the bone, and is extracted from the nape which is over the brain, for this happens because of the violent heat, and convulsions, and stiffness of the tongue, and spasms, and confusion of thought, and vomiting of colera, and a strong pain is cut off the word, and it is destroyed at the place of the disease. It leaves a white moisture like sweat, and there remains in it the appearance of water from the flesh.
E donc si appareyso a tu aquestz senhals, lahoras tu abste de la curacio e de la extraccio de la sageta, si non es fora.	And therefore, if you show these signs to me, then you should abstain from the cure and from extracting the arrow, unless it comes out.
Mays les senhals de la sageta quan catz en le cor, so que ela es prop de la mamila senestra, e sent am aquela quays sia ficada en causa dura, e no es causa vueda; e fort leu le movement de la sageta es semblant a movement del pols, e corr de la plagua sanc negra, e siec aquel fregiditat de las extremitatz, e suzor freja, e sincopi; e donc sapias que la mort descen ses tot dopte.	However, the signs of death are when an arrow pierces the heart, so that it is close to the left side, and you feel a pain in it as if it were stuck in hard ground, and there is no feeling of sight; and a strong movement of the arrow seems like a movement of pulse, and the disease of black blood comes out, and a coldness of the extremities, and a strange rattle, and fainting; and then know that death has come.
E les senhals quan la sageta ha plaglat le pulmo so eyssiment de sanc spumos de la plagua, e les vayssels que so prop del col so apostematz, e es mudada la color del malaute, e expira sperit gran aut, e demanda atraccio de ayre freg.	And when the arrow has struck the lung, then it feels a pain in it as if water were coming out, and the vessels that are close to it put forth pus, and the color of the man is changed, and he breathes deeply and asks for air.
E si catz la sageta en le velament le qual es en le pietz, e la dolor lahoras es prop de las costas petitas, e es fayt le ale gran am vehement dolor e am sospir, e no so maugutz totz les membres dels muscles.	And if he catches the arrow in the veil that is on his foot, and the pain is then near his small ribs, and it is done with great sharp pain and sighing, and does not hurt all the members of the muscles.
E si catz la sageta en le stomac, lahoras fort leu yeys de la plagua vianda alcuna indigesta.	And if he catches the arrow in his stomach, then strong vomiting will follow from the digestive disease.
E si catz la sageta en le ventre, e es ficada en lu, yeys alcuna fenda de la plagua, o la tela, o budel le qual es disromput, e no es speransa en la curacio de lu extraccio de la sageta.	And if he catches the arrow in his belly, and it is stuck there, then there is a tear of the plague, or the hernia, or the bowel that has ruptured, and there is no hope for the extraction of the arrow.
E si la sageta catz en la vesica, e es yssida defora urina, e procesesca de lu alcuna causa a las partidas defora, e fort leu es dolor sobre le malaute, lahoras sapias que es mortal.	And if the arrow catches in the bladder, and it comes out with urine, and there is some cause for it to come out quickly, and the pain is very sharp on the thigh, then know that it is deadly.
Mays les autres membres ayssi cum es la cara, le col, e·l golayro, e las spallas e le adjutori, e les spondils del dos, e la furcula, e la coysa, e la camba e a lor semblantz dels membres, son salvatz segon las majors disposicios quan la sageta no atroba vena ni arteria e no es sageta venenosa.	May the other members also be saved if it is the face, the neck, the throat, and the back, and the assistant, and the spinal bones of the back, and the hernia, and the crotch, and the hips, and similar members, are saved according to the greatest dispositions when the arrow does not hit a vein or artery, and is not a poisoned arrow.
E yeu recomtare aquo a tu que he vist del esser de aquestas sagetas, per que signifiques per aquo sobre la curacio tieua.	And I recommend that you see the nature of these arrows, so that you may be aware of their treatment.
La qual causa es, quar en un home cazec sageta en le lacrimal del huel de lu en la razitz del nas, e yeu extrayssi aquela a lu del autra partida, dejos le grays de l’aurelha de lu, e es sanat, e no accidic en le huel de lu nocument.	That is the cause, for when a man catches an arrow in his eye at the root of his nose, and I extracted it from him without any injury to his eye, and I healed it, and nothing happened to his eye.
E extrayssi autra sageta a un Juzeu la qual cazec en lu en lo grays del sieu huel, dejos la palpebra pus dejos, e la sageta ja era occultada e no so conseguit de aquela sino una petita extremitat am la qual adhereys al sieu fust, e era gran sageta de las sagetas agudas dels Turcs , am ferr leon en la qual no havia aurelhas.	And I extracted another arrow from a judge who caught it in his eye at the roots of his eyebrows, leaving his eyelids intact, and the arrow was hidden, and there was not even a small piece of it left; it was a sharp arrow of the Turks, with a lion's head attached to it.
E senat es le Juzieu , e no accidic en le sieu huel mal accident.	And that judge was old, and nothing bad happened to his eye.
E extrayssi una autra sageta a un home Crestia la qual era cazuta en le golayro, e era sageta arabica, e es aquela a la qual so aurelhas; e adonc yeu inscidegui sobre aquela entre doas guidegi, e ja era submersa en le golayro de lu; e adonc yeu so subtiliat am aquela, e aprop extraxi aquela, e es sanat le Crestia .	And I extracted another arrow from a Christian who fell in his throat; it was an Arabic arrow, and it had two auras; and then I cut it between the two guides, and it was already submerged in his throat; and then I carefully removed that one, and it healed the Christian.
E extraxi autra sageta a un home la qual era cazuta en le sieu ventre, e cogitegui que moris per aquela; e donc, pus que foro passatz xxx dias e no es mudat sobre lu alcuna causa de las suas disposicios, inscidegui sobre la sageta e engenagui sobre aquela, e es sanat, e no accidic a lu accident mal.	And I extracted another arrow from a man who fell in his belly; I thought he would die because of the arrow, and then, since it did not change its position for thirty days for any cause of its dispositions, I cut it with a knife and removed it, and it healed him, and nothing bad happened to him.
E vi mays un home en le qual cazec una sageta en le dos de lu, e consolidada es la plagua sobre lu, e pus que foc aprop set ans, yssic la sageta en la razitz de la coyssa.	And I saw another man who caught an arrow in his thigh, and the plague was established on him, and then, after seven years, he caught the arrow in the surface of his crotch.
E vi una femna a la qual cazec sageta en le sieu ventre, e la plagua es consolidada dedintz lu, e no es mudada en las suas disposicios en re, e la femna no atrobec nocument en alcunas de las suas opperacios naturals.	And I saw a woman who caught an arrow in her belly, and the plague was established inside her, and did not change its dispositions in regard to the natural order of things, and the woman did not suffer any harm in some of her natural qualities.
E vi un autre home al qual cazec sageta en la sua cara e consolidada es la plagua e romas la sageta, no atrobant aqui mota dolor, e motz semblantz ad aquestz.	And I saw another man who caught an arrow in his face, and the plague was established on him, and it split the arrow, causing him no pain, but he looked similar to those people.
E extrayssi la sageta del home dels princeps del rey que era cazuda en le mieg loc del nas sieu e ja havia declinat a la partida dreyta un petit, e occultada era tota la sageta.	And I extracted the arrow from the prince of the king that fell in his right nostril, and it had already fallen to the right side a little, and the entire arrow was hidden.
E yeu fu appelat a la curacio de lu aprop le cazement de la sageta entro a tres dias.	And I was called to heal him from the moment when the arrow hit him.
E adonc yeu atrobegui la plagua de la sageta mot streyta; e adonc yeu inquirigui aquela am tenta subtil, e no sentigui aquela; mays el la sentia puncio dejos la aurelha dreyta, e adonc speregui que aquela punccio era per la extremitat de la sageta.	And then I turned the arrow slightly to the right; and then I felt that it was a sharp point; but the man could not feel the touch of the point, but he felt a pain in his ear on the right side, and then I understood that it was because of the arrow's head.
E amplastregui le loc am emplaustre en le qual es vertut atrectiva e digestiva, confizant de mi que·l loc se apostemes per que appares a mi le loc de la sageta, per que secces sobre aquela.	And I applied an ointment to the place with a plaster that is active and digestive, assuring myself that the place will be kept so that it appears to me the place of the arrow, so that it heals on top of it.
E no accidic en le loc accident significant que la sageta hagues conseguit aquel loc; e yeu continuegui am le emplaustre sobre lu per motz dias e no accidic accident; e consolidada es la plagua entretant, e romas le malaute de la extreccio de lu per spazi de motz dias entro que un jorn sentic la sageta dintz le sieu nas e recontec aquo a mi.	And nothing bad happened in that place, which was the place where the arrow had been caught; and I continued to apply the plaster to it for many days, and the plague was established during that time, and it split his nose from one side to another in the space of five days, until one day he felt the arrow hit his nose again, and then I understood where the arrow was.
E adonc yeu pausegui sobre la plagua medicina acuta corrosiva per motz dias entro que foc ubert, e am la tenta yeu assagegui aquel, e atrobegui la extremitat de la sageta subtil, la qual adhereys al fust.	And then I applied an acute corrosive medicine to the plague for several days, until it was well healed, and then, at my request, he felt that medicine, and I discovered the tip of the arrow, which was attached to the bone.
E aprop yeu ajustegui en la apersio de la plagua per aquela medicina acuta entro que apparec a mi visiblament la extremitat de la sageta, e passec a mi temps am aquo per le spazi de temps entro quatre meses.	And then I applied an acute medicine to the plague, which appeared to me clearly the tip of the arrow, and then it disappeared from my sight for four months.
E aprop pus que la plagua foc amplificada, e foc a mi possible entrometre las forfexs en lu, e remaure aquela, e no obezic ad eyssiment, lahoras yeu no cessegui subtiliar e ingeniar sobre aquela am manieyras de engen, entro que comensegui un dia sobre aquela am manieyras de engens pendre lu am forceps descentment faytas, segon que vindra la forma de aquelas en la fi del capitol, entro que extraxi aquela; e aprop restauregui aquela plagua.	And then the plague became more severe, and I entered it with my instruments, and removed it, and I did not cut off a little of it, but I carefully removed it with forceps that made small cuts, according as the shape of those came at the end of this chapter, until I extracted it; and then I healed the plague.
E alcus metges jutgavan que la cartillage del nas no es restaurada, e yeu restauregui aquela e la plagua es consolidada, e sanat es le malaute per sanetat entiera, e no noguec en lu en deguna causa.	And some doctors said that the cartilage of the nose had not been restored, and I restored it, and the plague was established, and it healed completely, and did not leave any mark on it for any cause.
E yeu recomti a tu la qualitat de extraccio de alcunas sagetas per que pauses aquo regla e significacio sobre aquo que no he dit, quar las partidas de aquesta art e las difinicios de aquela no so conprehendudas am narracio ni no comprehen aquelas le libre.	And I recommend to you the nature of extracting some arrows from the nose, so that you pause here with me, and understand it, because the nature of this art and the definitions of those things are not understood by me, for I have not studied them in writing.
E le artifexs savi compara am pauc sobre mot; e am aquo que es present sobre aquo que es absent; e atroba operacio novela e instrument novel deves le descendement de las causas extranhas del art quan accideysso.	And the skilled workers know by little, and here what is known is more than what is not known, and they have new operations and new instruments to remove foreign causes of the disease when it occurs.
E donc yeu dic que sagetas no son fora-gitadas dels membres en les quals son ficadas sino segon dos manieyras: o per atraccio del loc en le qual intrec; o per le contrari de la autra partida.	And therefore I say that arrows are not caused by foreign objects in the members where they are stuck, but only by two ways: either because of the attraction of the place where they are fixed; or because of the opposite of their departure.
E aquela que es gitada per le loc don es intrada, o es sageta procedent en loc carnos, e es atirada e fora-gitada.	And that which is caused by the attraction of the place where it is fixed is called an internal cause; and that which proceeds from a different location is called an external cause, and that which is shot out and then becomes foreign is called an projected cause.
E si no obezeys a eyssiment de la hora en la qual catz, lahoras cove que tu la laysses per alcus dias entro que poyresca la carn que es al enviro de lu, e sia alleujada l‘atraccio de lu e la sua egressio.	And if you do not respond to it immediately, then know that the arrow will remain in place for several days before you can examine the flesh that is around it, and that the attraction of it will be removed, and its exit from the body will be stopped.
E semblantment si es ficada en os e no obezeys a tu a eyssiment, lahoras layssa aquela per alcus dias e itera aquela am atraccio e mocio en quascun dia, e ja es fora-gitada.	And seemingly, if it is stuck in the bone and you do not respond to it immediately, then leave it for several days, and repeat applying attraction and moisture to it every day; and then it will be shot out.
E si no obezeys a tu eyssiment aprop alcus dias, lahoras cove que tu perforas en le circuit de la sageta en aquel os de tota partida am taravel subtil entro que·l loc sia amplificat de la sageta, e aprop extratz aquela.	And if you do not respond to it immediately for several days, then know that you must pierce the path of the arrow in that bone completely with a very sharp instrument, so that the place is enlarged where the arrow is, and then extract it.
E si la sageta es ficada en le os del cap e ja ha procezit en un dels ventres del cervel, e apparo en le malaute alcus de aquels accidentz les quals yeu e ditz, lahoras abste de la extraccio de la sageta e layssa aquela entro que·l sieu esser sia equat aprop alcus dias; quar si la sageta perve al ciphac, lahoras la mort no es a lu prolonguada.	And if the arrow is stuck in the bone of the head and has already reached one of the vessels of the brain, and appears in the headache that I described, then abstain from extracting the arrow, and leave it for several days; because, if the arrow has reached the center of life, then death will be prolonged for him.
E si la sageta no es ficada sino en le cors del os tant solament e no passa entro al ciphac, e roman le malaute per alcus dias, e no accideys a lu denguna causa de aquels accidentz, lahoras tu engenia en la atraccio de la sageta e en la atraccio de lu.	And if the arrow is not stuck in any of the bones, but only in the middle of life and has not reached the center of death yet, and remains in place for several days without causing any cause of those accidents, then you will be able to extract it with your skills and with your abilities.
Mays si es mot ficada e no obezeys a tu a extraccio, lahoras tu aministra taravels en le circuit de la sageta ayssi cum havem recomtat, e aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat.	If it is mot and does not obey your extract, then you administer taravels on the path of the arrow as I have described, and then care for the site until it is healed.
Mays si la sageta ja es amaguada en le loc del cors, e es amaguada del sentiment, lahoras tu inquireys aquela am tenta, e si tu sentas aquela, lahoras atira aquela am alcus sturmentz les quals so convenientz a la atraccio de lu.	If the arrow has already entered the body and is embedded in the flesh, then you will examine that area and if you feel it, then shoot it with a sharp instrument suitable for the draw of the arrow.
E si no podes sobre lu per la constriccio de la plagua e per la longitut del preon, e aqui no es os ni nervi ni vena, lahoras tu fen sobre la plagua entro que sia amplificada e que sia possible extrayre la sageta.	And if you cannot get to it due to the constriction of the wound and its length, and there is no fat, nerve, or vein here, then you will come from above, into the wound, so that it expands and the arrow can be extracted.
E si so a lu aurelhas am las quals sia tenguda, lahoras tu deliura la carn en la qual es ficada de tota partida am tot le engen que poyras far; e ingenia sobre aquo, si no podes sobre la evasio de la carn en la fractura de las aurelhas e en torssio de aquelas entro que obezesca.	And if it has been inserted into the auricle which is held in place, then you will free the flesh where it is stuck from all sides as much as you can; and devise a way to extract it, if you cannot do so due to the flesh's attachment in the fracture of the auricle and its torsion within.
E quan tu administras la extraccio de la sageta en quascun loc on sia, lahoras tu usa am torcio de la tua ma am forceps a totas partidas entro que fassa aquela obezir; e subtilia am deriera subtilitat que la sageta no sia trencada e que sia fayta a tu dificil atraccio de lu e de aquela extraccio.	And when you administer the extraction of the arrow from any location, then use your hand with forceps at all times until it causes that person pain; and do this very carefully so that the arrow does not break and becomes difficult to extract.
E si no podes sobre aquela de la tua hora, lahoras tu layssa per alcus dias entro que se poyrescan las partidas que so en le circuit de lu, e aprop itera aquela quar lahoras es alleujada.	And if you cannot get to that person due to the time, then leave it for a few days until the parts heal up again from their movement in the path of the arrow; and then repeat what you did when it was relieved.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat flux de sanc, lahoras tu administra aquo que havem dit de curacio en le sieu capitol.	If it causes the patient discomfort during the treatment, then you will administer the water that I have mentioned for cure in this chapter.
E guarda la tua vertut de inscizio de vena o de nervi, o de corda, e aministra engen en tota manieyra a tu possibla de la evasio de la sageta; e fay aquo am facilitat e tranquillitat e tarditat e fermetat ayssi cum yeu e a tu recomtat.	And keep your skill of incision of veins or nerves, or strings, and administer it to all possible ways of the arrow's extraction; and do so with ease, quietness, slowness, and firm determination, as well as you can and I will describe.
E donc que fassas contrayre la sageta per so que·l malaute sia segon la figura segon la qual foc deves le cazement de la sageta en lu, quar es mays juvatiu.	And therefore you will extract the arrow in such a way that the patient is comfortable; for it is more convenient to place it according to the figure that I have described, as it is easier to heal.
Mays si aquo no es a tu possible, lahoras tu aministra aquo que es a tu possible per las figuras.	If this water is not possible for you, then administer what is possible for you according to the figures.
Mays las sagetas que son fora-gitadas per le contrari del autra partida, o que ja de lu procezeys alcuna partida a las partidas de fora, o fa gilbositat la extramitat de la sageta per sentiment de la partida pus desus de la codena propdana e vezes aquela eminent; adonc tu secsa sobre aquela; e sia la seccio segon la quantitat en la qual prenguan las forceps; e aprop atira aquela, quar ela es fayta leugiera a eyssiment.	If the arrows that are shot out of the body are opposite to another part, or if you already feel any pain in the parts above the armpit, and if the tip of the arrow is protruding from under the skin near the base, then cut it off; and do so according to how much your forceps reach; and then throw it away, for it is done lightly without causing too much pain.
Mays si es retenguda en le os, lahoras tu tortz lama segon contrarietat entro que la sageta enprema en le os, e amplifique a si meteys, e aprop extratz aquela.	If it is stuck in the bone, then you will twist your hand according to the pain within which the arrow pushes into the bone, and increase the twisting; and then extract it.
E sino, layssa aquela per alcus dias, e aprop itera aquela entro qu’en yesca.	And if not, leave it for a few days, and then repeat what you did until it burns.
E si le fust de la sageta es en aquela, lahoras tu impelleys aquela am lu.	If the tip of the arrow is in that person's head, then you will push it with your hand.
Mays si le fust es cazut e voles aministrar inpulsio, lahoras tu intromet e aquela, si es sorda, sturment concau per so que intre la concavitat de lu en la coa de la sageta e aprop impelleys aquela am lu.	If the tip is stuck and you want to administer impact, then place your hand on its head, if it is deaf, and strike with a sharp instrument so that it enters between the hollow of the skull and the arrow's base; and then push it with your hand.
Mays si la sageta es concava, lahoras tu impelleys aquela am sturment fort intrant en aquela, quar la sageta es alleujada per aquela.	If the arrow is hollow, then you will push it with a strong instrument entering into that person, for the arrow is relieved by that person.
E si la sageta es entoxiguada, lahoras cove que tu concaves tota la carn en la qual es le vere, si es a tu possible aquo, e aprop cura aquela am aquo que si conveneys.	And if the arrow is poisoned, then cover all the flesh with water where it is stuck, if you can; and then care for that person with water.
E si la sageta catz en le pietz, o en le ventre, o en la vesica, o en le costat, e es propinqua per so que tu tocas aquela am la tenta, e es a tu possible secsar sobre aquela, lahoras secsa sobre aquela e guarda te de inscizio de vena o de nervi, e extratz aquela, e aprop cos la plagua si indigeys, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	If the arrow enters into the foot, or the belly, or the bladder, or the rib, and it is close to your hand, and you can cut it off with a sharp instrument, then do so; and then, if it causes pain, care for that area until it is healed.
Forma de forceps am las quals so atiradas las sagetas:	Form of forceps which the arrows are thrown:
Sian las extremitatz de lor cum a bec de ausel que son faytas cum serra quan prendon sobre la sageta per so que no la layssen.	Keep both hands on the ends of the pliers which are used to throw the arrows with a serrated edge, so that they do not let go of the arrow.
E de aquelas son faytas motas specias, grans, paucas e migieras, segon la quantitat de la grandeza de la sageta e de la sieua pauqueza, e de la amplitud de la plagua, e de la constriccio de lu.	And of those special types are made: large, small, few, and many, according to the size of the arrow and its power, and the width of the wound, and the constriction of the flesh.
Forma de impellent concau de aquesta extremitat conquava ayssi cum pena de ausel per so que sia alleujat le intrament de la sageta en lu, e impulcio de aquela sorda:	Form of sharp instrument coming from this convex end which is used to push the arrow into the flesh, and pushing with that deaf one:
Forma de impellent de sorda extremitat:	Form of pushing with a deaf end:
ayssi cum ray per so que sia alleujat le intrament de lu en la sageta concava e es impellida am aquel.	so that the instrument is pushed into the flesh, and it pushes with that one.
De fleubotomia de las venas.	Of bloodletting from veins.
Las venas de fleubotomia de las quals corr costuma de fleubotomar so .xxx., de las quals so en le cap .xvi., so es doas venas pulsatils las quals so aprop las aurelhas, dic alhasisain; doas herbas que so en les dos templars apparentz; e doas venas que so en dos lacrimals de dos huels que son appeladas aspicientz; e la vena preparada en le mieg loc del front, e la vena que es en la extremitat del nas; e doas guidegi que so al col; e doas venas que so en la labia desus; e doas venas que so en la labia dejos; e — aquestas so las venas que so appeladas algelic —; e so doas venas que so dejos la lengua.	The veins from which bloodletting is done from those which commonly bleed: 1, 2, 3. of those which are in the head. The following veins are in the head: those which pulse at the ears, they are called auricular; those which come from the temples, they are called temporal; those which come from the two holes of the nose, they are called nasal; and those which come from the lips on the left side, they are called labial-left; and those which come from the lips on the right side, they are called labial-right.
Mays las venas que so fleubotomadas en les brasses so .v.; quar de aquelas es una cephalica, e es deves le latz silvestre; e le poble appela “la vena del cap”, e sorda, e es vena migiera, e es composta de un ram de la basilica, e de autre ram de la cephalica; e nomna aquela le poble “vena de tot le cors”, e basilica es vena la qual es pausada en le latz domestic, e es nomnada “citillar”, e nompnan aquela les vulguars “vena del ventre”; e funis del bras, e es pausada sobre le focil, e es aquela en la qual es fleubotomat, e es aquela que appar sobre le poutz per apparicio manifesta; e salvatella, e es la vena que es entre lo dit auricular e·l pus petit dit, e so en lu dos ramps.	If there is a pulse in the arms, it is five; and if there is a pulse in the legs, it is six. This head vein is one that is wild, and it is called the wild vein; and the people call it "the head vein", and it is deaf, and it is a major vein, and it consists of one branch from the temple, and another from the head; and this branch is called "citillar"; and this other one is called by the common people "the navel vein"; and that which comes from the arm, and it is paused on the breast, and this is the vein that is stopped in the rib; and this one is in front of the armpit, and it has two branches.
E en le pe e la camba so tres venas; la una de aquelas es que es dejos la curvatura del denolh del latz silvestre; e la segonda es sophena, e·l loc de lu es dejos la camba del latz domestic; e la vena sciatica, e·l loc de lu es dejos la camba del latz silvestre; e en la camba son autras venas semblantz ad aquelas.	In the chest and on the back there are three veins: one of those is located under the rib cage to the left side of the body; a second one is called a small vein, and its location is next to the rib cage on the right side of the body; and a third one is called the sciatic vein, and its location is next to the back of the rib cage on the left side of the body; and in the back there are other veins similar to those.
Le juvament de las venas que so aprop las aurelhas es a cataris antics e emigranea e sahafati e ulceracios del cap malas antiquas.	The healing of veins which are cut near the ears is made with small, emigrant, and sanguineous bloodletting from the head's bad old wounds.
E la qualitat de sagnar aquelas es segon que yeu recomti a tu: es que sia ras le cap del malaute, e sia freguat le cap del malaute en le occipiti en le loc de amdoas las venas am drap ample am bona fricacio; aprop strenha le malaute le sieu col am una benda entro que apparan las doas e les locs de lor so aprop las aurelhas en dos locs depremegutz del cap; e quereys aquela am le tieu dit, e si tu sentes le pols de aquelas am le dit tieu, aqui senha am tenta.	And the quality of healing such wounds is according to whether you have looked at them again: if it is a hair from the head, and that hair has been cut on the back of the head in the location of both veins next to the ears with a sharp scissors, then you will tie that head with a bandage tightly, so that there is no movement; and you will massage the head with good oil; and if you feel the pulse of those veins with your finger, then you will try again.
Aprop tu pren la lancea cutellar, e es aquela que es inscident, e aprop tu intromet aquel dejos la vena en la codena entro que·l fleubotomi vengua al os.	Then you will take the knife, and it is sharp, then try again; and if you do not feel the pulse of that vein with your finger, then cut off that one from within the joint until it comes out; and place your hand over the site so that the blood does not come out.
E aprop eleva la tua ma am la vena e la codena a las partidas desus e inscideys la vena am inscizio inscident.	And then you will raise your hand to the vein and the joint above, and cut off that vein with a sharp knife; and make an incision in the vein with a sharp scalpel.
E sia la longitut de la inscizio la quantitat de dos ditz ajustatz o entorn de aquo; e fay yssir del sanc atant quant voles.	And the length of the incision is the quantity of two dizajustats or around water; and make it from the sankat as many as you want.
E aprop strenh am pulvils e layssa aquela entro que sia sanada.	Then tie him with the pulleys and leave that in place which is to be healed.
E ja e precedit en le comensament del libre la inscizio de aquelas e de lor la cauterizacio.	And already at the beginning of this book, we have described the incision of those and their cauterization.
Mays de las doas venas arterias que so als templars le juvament de la fleubotomia es a emigranea antiqua e sode malvada e obtalmia assidua e cors de superfluitatz acutas effusas als huels.	More than two blood vessels that are used in the cauterization of the veins is to emigrant ancient and persistent evil and frequent headaches and sharp fluid flowing into the skin.
E la qualitat de fleubotomar aquelas es segon que yeu recomti a tu: constrengua le malaute le sieu col mot entro que apparan las doas venas al sentiment per appericio manifesta e sia demonstrat le pols de lor dejos le tieu dit; e lahoras tu senha am tenta.	And the quality of bloodletting is according to that which I recommend to you: Tie up the patient's legs with a rope so that their two veins appear on the surface by visible movement and are demonstrated by the pulse at their feet, and then try it yourself.
E aprop tu eleva la codena desobre la vena a las partidas desus am le tieu dit indic, e intromet le fleubotomi inscident dejos, e eleva la vena en sus; e inscidey aquela ayssi cum has fayt en las doas venas autras; e fay correr del sanc segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	Then you shall raise the rope so that the vein is opened from above with your finger, and insert the bloodletting needle into it, and raise the vein up; and cut those too with what you have done in the two veins; and let run the blood according to the quantity of your need.
E aprop deslia la coartacio del malaute, e pausa le tieu dit sobre la vena per una hora, e aprop pausa sobre aquela coto e pulvils e strenh aquela desus am fort constriccio, e layssa aquela entro que sia sanada.	Then take off the patient' bandage, and place your finger on the vein for an hour, and then place the pulleys and strings on it and tighten them strongly, and leave that in place which is to be healed.
E ja es precedida la rememoracio de lor, e de aquelas la inscizio, e la atraccio en le comensament del libre.	And already at the beginning of this book, we have recalled their healing, and their incision, and their cauterization.
E donc le juvament de fleubotomia de la vena del front es aprop la fleubotomia de la cephalica a las malautias antiquas de la cara e a emigranea e rogor e ulceracios fetidas.	And therefore the healing of bloodletting from the forehead vein is to the bloodletting of the cerebral veins for ancient headaches and emigrant, rigor and putrid ulcers.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es segon que yeu recomti a tu; so es que·l malaute strenha le sieu col am una benda entro que apparesca la vena; e aprop pren le insturment le qual es nompnat fossori del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And the quality of bloodletting is according to that which I recommend to you; unless the patient ties himself with a rope, with a bandage that appears on the vein; and then take the instrument which is called a scissor, whose form it is:
Pausa la puncta eminent la qual es al cap del fossori sobre aquela vena e percuteys sobre lu am penche o am autre causa en la manieyra de lu, e layssa lo sanc correr segon la quantitat la qual voles; e aprop deslia la perforacio del malaute e strenh aquela entro que sia sanada.	Then place the point of the scissor eminently on the vein and strike it with a pencil or another cause in the manner of it, and leave the blood to run according to the quantity which you want; then take off the patient' perforation bandage and leave that in place which is to be healed.
E alcunas veguadas es uberta am fleubotomi lat, empero no cove que·l fleubotomi sia de acuta extremitat ayssi cum les autres fleubotomis, abantz sia de lada extremitat, e fleubotoma aquela segon le tranvers, quar le os es propda e fort leu trencaria en lu le fleubotomi quan es subtil.	And some blood has been opened with a needle, but it is not known that the bloodletting is of acute extremities as well as the others bloodletting; unless it is on one side, because the bone is strong and hard it would break in it the bloodletting if subtile.
Mays le juvament de las duas venas que so als lacrimals de dos huels per scabia del huels per rogor e sebol en les huels, e a las malautias de la cara.	More than two veins that are on the eyelids of two eyes because of the skin's roughness due to rigor and seborrhea in the eyelids, and for ancient headaches in the face.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia es que·l malaute strenha le col sieu am una benda, e aprop fleubotoma aquelas, e tu sias stant sobre le cap de lu.	And the quality of bloodletting is that the patient ties himself with a rope, and then bloodletting those, and you are standing on its head.
E sia fayta la fleubotomia segon le transvers a longitut un pauc am fleubotomi pauc, quar en le loc no es carn; e si le fleubotomi es subtil, fort leu la extremitat de lu es trencada.	And the bloodletting is done according to the transverse at length a little with a needle, because in that place there is not meat; and if the bloodletting is subtle, strong the extremity of it is broken.
E aprop fay correr del sanc atant quant es a tu necessari, e pausa sobre aquelas coto, e strenh aquelas per una nueyt, e aprop deslia aquelas.	Then let run the blood as many as your need, and place those on the pulleys, and tighten them strongly, and then take off those.
Mays le fleubotomi de la vena del nas es conferent a febre acuta e a soda vehement, e a las malautias de la cara e emigranea e rogor que accideys en la cara, e majorment quan es antiqua.	More than the bloodletting of the nose is appropriate for acute fever and intense pain, and for ancient headaches and emigrant that occur in the face, especially when it is old.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute strenha le sieu col e aprop te le sieu nas am la tua ma sinistra, e pren le fleubotomi subtil lonc e fica aquela en le mieg loc del cap del nas segon rectitut, quar la vena no appar al sentiment aqui, e quar le sanc comensa a fluir tantost.	And the quality of bloodletting is that the patient ties himself with a rope and then holds his left nose with your right hand, and take the subtle needle long and hold it in its place on the nose according to the direction, because the vein does not appear by feeling here, and because the blood begins to run as soon as possible.
Cove que tu ultimes la tua ma am le fleubotomi petit a petit e fassas correr del sanc segon la tua necessitat; e aprop lia aquela per una nuoyt, quar aquela es restaurada leugierament.	And after you have finished your needle with a little bloodletting and let the blood run as your need; then place it on a string because that is restored slightly.
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de las doas guidegui a constriccio de ale e a comensament de lepra e a motas malautias e inpetige e malas ulceracios corrosivas ayssi cum herpotromeno.	More than the healing of bloodletting is to the constriction of blood, and to the beginning of leprosy and the movement of ancient headaches and violent diseases and bad corrosive ulcers as well as herpes.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquelas es que el malaute strenha dejos quascuna en le sieu col am liament; e estia le artifexs sobre le cap del malaute, e le malaute sia sezent sobre una sezela.	And the quality of bloodletting is that the patient ties himself with a rope, each one in its own bandage; and place the artisan on the head of the patient, and the patient be seated on a stool.
E aprop fleubotoma la vena al lonc am fleubotomi ample petit a petit; e aprop extratz de sanc segon temprada quantitat o segon aquo que vezes de necessitat que es ad aquo; e aprop fay semblant del autra vena.	Then take the vein long with a wide needle little at a time; then let run the blood according to the season or quantity as many times as your need, and then do the same for the other vein.
E aprop deslia le liament e strenh las doas venas am strictura migiera per so que·l malaute no sia prefocat, e laysa entro al mati quar la plagua es sanada.	Then take off the bandage and tighten the two veins with a moderate constriction because the patient is not choking, and leave that within to rest because the plague is healed.
E le juvament de la fleubotomia de las venas algerich, comfereys a petitas apostemas e pustulas de la boca e corrupcio de las gengivas e malas ulceracios e fissuras, e a malas ulceracios que so en le nas e en le circuit de lu.	And the healing of bloodletting is for ancient diseases, namely to small sores and pustules in the mouth and corruption of the gums and bad ulcers and cracks, and to bad ulcers that are on the nose and on its circle.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquelas es que fases cezer le malaute denant tu, e strenh le col de lu am una benda, e aprop revolveys las labias de lu e reguarda a doas venas de las quals la una es de la dextra de la labia e la segonda de la senestra; e la demonstracio de quascuna es per la negror de quascuna de amdos, e aquo mays es quar en le circuit de aquelas so venas menudas negras; e adonc inscideys cascuna per inscizio inscident.	And the quality of bloodletting is that you cut the patient' nose before you, and tie his neck with a bandage, and then turn the patient' lips to one side and look at two veins from which one is on the right side of the lip and the other on the left; and demonstrate each by its darkness, and more because in the circle of those are small black veins; and then cut each according to an incised incision.
Mays si dubitacio es dejos tu, e no sabes qual es de aquelas, lahoras tu enten a inscisio de la major de aquelas, e de la pus manifesta de aquelas.	Then if you are in doubt, leave it to me; and I will know which is which, and the most manifest form of those.
E fay le semblant de las doas venas que so en las labias desus.	And then make the incision of the two veins that are on the patient' lips.
Mays costuma corr mays a inscidir las doas venas que so en la labia dejos.	More often than not, cut more to incise those.
Mays de doas venas que so dejos la lengua le juvament es aprop la fleubotomia de la cephalica a prefocacios que so en le guolayro, a la malautia de la uvula, e a malautias de la boca.	More than two veins that are on the tongue, the healing of bloodletting is to the bloodletting of the cerebral vein for pre-focaciosa diseases and to ancient headaches in the throat, and to ancient diseases in the mouth.
E la qualitat de fleubotomar aquelas es que segue le malaute entre las tuas mas denant le solel, e eleva la lengua de lu, e reguarda dejos la lengua, de la un latz de lu vena e del autre latz vena, e la color de quascuna es declinant a negror.	And the quality of bloodletting is that you follow the patient' tongue between your lips, and raise the patient' tongue, and then look at it from both sides, and the color of each one is turning to darkness.
E adonc fleubotoma quascuna; e guarda te que no ultimes la tua ma en fleubotoman aquelas, quar dejos aquelas so arterias.	Then bloodletting each one; and remember that you do not bloodlet those, because those are arteries.
E las tuas venas que so fleubotomadas en le coyde so en las quals corr costuma en totz les homes, e la fleubotomia de lor es fayta segon dos manieyras, o pongen am le fleubotomi mirtilat o olivar a subtilitat declinant; o secsar am fleubotomi cutellar, e apelha si alnessil, e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And your veins that are bloodletting in the heart are those from which runs customarily in all men, and the bloodletting of them is done according to two ways, or put on a needle with subtlety declining; or cut with a knife, and if it does not run, then this is the way:
E aquest alnessil es que conveneys a seccio e de aquels so specias latz e subtils segon la amplitut de las venas e segon la strictura de aquelas.	And that one that does not run is to the section and of those are special cuts and subtle according to the width of the veins and according to the constriction of them.
Forma de fleubotomi mirti:	Form of bloodletting by cutting:
sia le latz de lu ayssi cum vezes, e conveneys a obrir las venas concavas plenas procedentz apparentz grossas, e ad aquelas que conteno sanc gros torbat.	And the cut is made times, and it leads to opening the concave veins full of blood, and at those that contain large blood.
E aquesta es la forma de fleubotomi olivar:	And this is the way of bloodletting by cutting:
E aquest fleubotomi es de menor latitut e de pus subtil extremitat, e conveneys a fleubotomia de venas subtils que conteno sanc subtil citri.	And this bloodletting is of lesser latency and very subtle extremity, and it leads to the bloodletting of veins that contain subtle citron blood.
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de la vena basilica la qual es una de tres venas: quar extratz le sanc de las malautias que so dejos le guolayro e·l col, e de aquo que siec le pietz e·l ventre.	May's the life of the flebotomy of the basilica vein which is one of three veins; for it extracts the blood from the pains that are in the groin and the gut, and so it stops the feet and the belly.
E conveneys al fleubotomador, quan fleubotomia aquela, que guarde be aquela e sia sobre-temor en aquela, quar dejos lu ha arteria, e si erra e ajusta en la punctura del fleubotomi, inscidira aquela arteria e accidira fluxs de sanc, per so que cove que no fleubotomes aquela am fleubotomi pungent, abantz sia sectant cum alnessil.	And it is convenient for the floubotomator, when that flebotomy happens, that he keeps very carefully and pays much attention to that, because there is an artery there which makes blood flow, and if he makes a mistake or cuts in the puncturing of the flebotomy, he will cut that artery and cause blood to flow, so it is convenient that he does not do that with a piercing needle, before making the cut.
E si no appar la basilica per apparicio manifesta, lahoras cove que tu laysses aquela e que tu mudes a la autre, o que cerques alcun ram sieu; o que fleubotomes en loc de lu finis del bras, quar aquela es manifesta; e secsa aquela am fleubotomi alnessil ayssi cum havem dit.	And if you do not see the basilica by an obvious sign, then you should know that it is there and you should move to the other, or look for some vein; or that you do flebotomy at the end of the arm, because that is obvious; and cut off that with flebotomy.
Mays si tu voles la fleubotomia de lu meteyssa, lahoras cove denant la strictura del bras que toques le loc entro que conogues le loc dels pols, e aprop senha sobre lu am tencha; e aprop lia le bras e secsa la vena am seccio concava am fleubotomi alnessil ayssi cum havem dit; e guarda te que caja la percussio per alcu spazi del loc de la arteria.	May's if you want to do the flebotomy on him, then you should know that the place that you touch in front of the bicep is where you can see the vein clearly; and you should hold the arm down; and cut off the vein with a sharp cut at the hollow end of the arm, as I have said before; and be careful not to make a mistake in the cut.
E quan tu vezes, cum strenhes le liament, imflacio en le loc que has senhat am tencha, lahoras aquela inflacio es inflacio de la arteria, e donc squiva aquela.	And when you see, with a strong grip, the joint that you have held down at the hollow part; then that inflation is an inflation of the artery, and so it comes out.
E si vezes le sanc fluir en la fleubotomia ayssi cum aurina de enfant, e·l sanc es subtil rog, lahoras sapias que es del sanc de la arteria; e lahoras tu coyta e pausa le tieu dit sobre aquel per lonc spazi; e aprop osta le tieu dit, e si lo sanc es abscindit, quar motas veguadas es abscindit, lahoras tu strenh le bras e layssa aquel.	And if you see the blood running in the flebotomy as a stream of a child, and that blood is thin; then you should know that it is the blood of the artery; and you should stop the vein with a long cut, and then tie off the vein, and if the blood has stopped; then you should hold the arm.
E guardes le malaute de la moccio de lu, e sia sobre-temor de lu e no maugua aquel per alcus dias entro que sia sanat.	And keep the patient from moving, and take care of him, and do not hurt him for a few days until he is healed.
Mays si le sanc no es abscindit, e vezes que deves tu no es present medicina ad aquo, lahoras tu inscideys la arteria, si appar a tu; quar la extremitat de lu es contrayta, e es abscindit le sanc; o que prenguas scorsa de fistic, e fen aquela, e pren la una maytat e strenh aquela sobre le loc de la vena am strictura descent am liament e am pulvils entro al autra dia.	May' be if the blood has not stopped and it is necessary that you go to the water, then you should cut off the artery with a scissor, and hold it up; and put one of your hands on the end of the vein at the end of the joint; and tighten it down with your thumb; and take two needles and hold them against the skin within a day.
E lahoras si le sanc es abscindit, bo es; e sino, lahoras cura aquel am aquo del qual es precedit a la rememoracio del loc de las polveras abscindentz flux de sanc.	Then if the blood has stopped, then it is; and if not, then take care of him with water from which the blood drops, remembering the place where the powder was dropped to stop the blood flow.
E la abscizio del sanc de lu es dificil en motas disposicios per le loc petit de la plagua e la possibilitat del liament del bras.	And it is difficult to stop the blood from flowing in a small place because of the location of the joint and the possibility of hurting the arm.
Mays de la vena fusca la fleubotomia es juvament que extratz lo sanc de la partida subirana del cap e a la partida dejos del cors; per aquo quar es composta de ram de la basilica e de ram de cephalica, ayssi cum havem dit.	May' be from the basilica vein the flebotomy is good to extract the blood from the brain and from the head; because it is made up of branches of these two veins, as I have said before.
E cove al fleubotomant aquela que sia sobre-temor en la fleubotomia de lu, quar dejos aquela es un nervi; e adonc si ajusta en la punctura del fleubotomi e atroba le nervi, accidira a lu stupor, e es difficil la sanacio de lu, e fort leu no es sanat de tot, E aquest nervi motas veguadas apar al sentiment; e si es ocultat ad alcus homes e es subtil e no es monstrat, lahoras cove que tu pauses le fleubotomi am le qual tu fleubotomas am seccio de alnessil, e evita le nervi am la tua fortalesa.	And if the floubotomator is afraid of the floubotomy because there is a nerve; and if he makes a mistake in the cut of the floubotomy and damages that nerve; it will cause him to be stunned, and his recovery will be difficult; and all the same, if that nerve is hidden and subtle, and not shown at first sight, then you should know that when you stop the flebotomy on the arm with a cut from above, and avoid the nerve with your elbow.
E si la vena es entre dos nervis, lahoras tu fen la vena en la longitut.	And if the vein is between two nerves; then you should cut it in length.
Le juvament de la fleubotomia de la vena cephalica es que atratz le sanc del cap e comfereys a las malautias dels huels.	May' be the life of the flebotomy of the cephalic vein is that it draws the blood from the head, and keeps the pains in the neck.
E cove en aquest propriament, si vols que la fleubotomes pungen am fleubotomi olivar o am fleubotomi mirti; quar es la pus salva de totas las venas, quar no es dejos lu arteria ni nervi.	And in this specifically, if you want to make the flebotomy with a needle or with a knife; because it is the most safe of all veins, because it does not leave the artery nor the nerves behind.
Mays empero conveneys a tu deves la fleubotomia que guardes que am le fleubotomi no punguas le cap del lacert tant solament, e cerques le loc pus leugier, e no notz a lu, si no es atrobat am la percussio primieyra que sia sobre aquela am fleubotomia alcunas veguadas.	But you should also know that when you make the cut for the flebotomy, you must not cut too far into the head with the needle or the knife; and look for the place that is more difficult to find; and do not cut it at first with the cut.
Mays empero fort leu es apostemat en alcus homes, quan no es fleubotomat en la primieyra percussio, mays no notz en re aquel apostema.	But very strong blood comes out in some people when they do not make the cut in the first place; and it is not noticeable that this has happened.
Mays la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquela e les accidentz de lu so motz, en les quals te cove cogitar en lor rectificacio.	May' be the quality of the flebotomy from that vein and its accidents make you think about their correction.
Le primier de lu es del qual cove que sapias que fleubotomia no es aministrada sino en conservacio de sanetat e per speransa de lu e cautela de aveniment de malautias, e que sia fayta fleubotomia en la una de las venas que so en le coyde, so es: cephalica, fusca e basilica; e que sia fayta fleubotomia al comensament de primaveyra, sobre dejun en primaviera e autunppne, e en invern aprop la comestio, quan apparo significacios de replecio.	The first one is that you should know that the floubotomy is not administered if there is no hope of recovery; and that it is done with caution to avoid accidents; and that it is done in one of the veins that are at the back, which are: cephalic, facial and basilica; and that it is made in the beginning of the year, in spring and autumn, and in winter close to the start of the year.
E sia fayta fleubotomia e le tertz dia o al primier pus que del jorn siran passadas tres horas.	And it should be done on the third day or at the first moment that has passed three hours since the morning.
Mays fleubotomia que es aministrada, mays quan provoca convenencia e necessitat ad aquo, o de nuoyt o de dia, en tota hora e en tot temps.	May' be when a floubotomy is administered; it is convenient and necessary to do it at the right time, in the morning or afternoon, at any hour of the day.
E cove que efant no sia fleubotomat entro que aja xiiii ans, e femna que sia prenhs no sia fleubotomada sino del quart mes entro al sete, e les viels no sian fleubotomatz les quals ja han passatz lx ans.	And if it does not happen that the person is over sixty years old; and women are not to be fleubotomed before they have passed their seventy years.
E cum alcu vol esser fleubotomat per qualque manieyra sia, cove que mondifique les sieus budels denant la fleubotomia am clisteri leon, si en aquels ha mota fenda retenguda, per so que las venas no atiro las superfluitatz en la fleubotomia dels budels, que son puridas, e que no noguan als membres principals.	And if anyone wants to be fleubotomed in a certain way; then you should know that they can put water on the body before the floubotomy with a cup; so that the veins do not carry excess fluid during the flebo-tomie of the body, which is useless, and does not benefit the main parts.
E no sian fleubotomatz les pascientz naucea sacertiva e crapula, ni evasent de malautia ni de ebretat entro que aquo sia remaugut aquo de lor, ni malaute de ydropici, e mays que fleubotomia sia temuda aprop colica passio e aprop vomit, e aprop cos de ventre, e aprop multiplicacio de coyt e de trebal e de exercici de dejunis o de vigilias e de tota causa que dissolveys la vertut, o sia corpore28 o animal.	And do not flebotomize the patient who has nausea and vomiting; nor those who are drunk or have a hangover; nor do you flebotomize them when they feel ill; or when they are tired; or when they have done much work, or stayed up late; or for any other reason that destroys the body's vitality; or the animal’s.
E aprop considera en subtiliacio de humos denant aquo si le sanc es gros, am viandas e beures, e am medicinas si aquo es a lu possible ad aquo.	And you should know that those who have thick blood, and eat much food, and drink much liquid, and take medicines; then you do not flebotomize them in front of those people because it is necessary to understand their humors.
E aprop intre en banh si alcuna causa no prohibeys, o sia excersitat per alcun exercici per so que·l sanc sia subtiliat.	And you should go into the bath if there is no reason for you not to do it, or because of the exercise that makes the blood run, so that the blood becomes subtle.
E pausa la fleubotomia de lu en le pietz del dia, so es enviro la hora de tercia, ayssi cum havem dit.	And you should stop the flebotomy on him at the foot of the day; so it is near three hours in the afternoon, as I have said before.
E perforsa te que·l pietz de aquel sia guardat en aquel dia de totz mals accidentz animals, ayssi cum es angustia, ira, temor, e de totz accidentz corporals, ayssi cum es trebal e pena superflua e coyt e semblantz a lor.	And you should know that the day of that person is not free from all animal accidents; nor is it free from sorrow, anger and fear; nor from all bodily accidents; nor from unnecessary work, or worry, or trouble.
E a la sua sezelha fassa esser presentz las causas en le us de la qual corr costuma dels homes am aromaticitat e odorament e am bals e semblantz ad aquels segon la cantitat de possibilitat.	And on the same day, you should know that people take advantage of these things for their own use because they have a certain quantity of what is possible; and they also do so with the help of aromatics and perfumes, and balms and similar things to those people.
E segua le fleubotomador sobre un coyssi que sia pus aut que·l coyssi de aquel que deu esser fleubotomat.	And follow the floubotomator with a pointed cautery that is more difficult for him; or with a small cut on the body of that person who has to be fleubotomized.
E aprop extragua le sieu bras, e fregue aquel am la sua ma le fleubotomador doas o tres veguadas; e aprop strenha le liament am correia e involva aquel doas veguadas.	And then take his arm, and rub it with the hand of the floubotomator two or three times; and then tighten the joint with a rope and wrap it two times.
E sia la strictura temprada, quar la strictura quant no es engual, o la strictura es am superfluitat, lahoras prohibeys de fluxs del sanc; o es am mollificacio, e lahoras prohibeys le cors del sanc eyssament.	E sia the stricture is early, for the stricture when it does not open, or the stricture is too much, then prohibit the flow of the wound; or is soft, and then prohibit the binding of the wound.
E aprop la strictura, cove que aquel que deu esser fleubotomat fregue las suas mas ensemps entre lor entro que las venas sian imfladas, e sian declaradas al sentiment.	And approach the stricture, because whoever should be fluid must wash their hands together inside so that the veins are not swollen and declared to the feeling.
E aprop le fleubotomador unte le sieu fleubotomi am un pauc de oli antic propriament; e aprop pausa le sieu di indic de la ma senestra sobre aquela vena, dejos le loc del qual vol la fleubotomia, per que la vena fuja un pauc, e la percussio sia sessada quar de las venas es la qual atrobas ayssi cum corda fugent deves la fleubotomia, e de aquelas es que es plena de ventositat e quan pauses le fleubotomi sobre aquela es contrayta deves le fleubotomi, e es desceubut le fleubotomador; e le fleubotomi no uobre la vena, e si uobre, aquela es streyta.	And approach the flubotomatix with a little oil of the sea itself completely; and pause his hand on the side of that vein, leaving the place from which the flubotomy will take place, so that the vein runs a little bit, and the percussion is stopped because the veins are the ones that cause more pain when they are pressed; and it is found out that the flubotomatix does not hurt the vein, and if he hurts it, that vein is contracted; then the flubotomatix stops; and the flubotomy is not open, and if it opens, that vein is stopped.
E donc, per aquo cove que·l fleubotomador sia fermat e sia sollicit en totas aquestas causas.	And therefore, because of this, whenever the flubotomatix stops and is irritated in all these causes.
E aprop depause le fleubotomi, mays si la vena es huberta en una veguada, lahoras bo es; e sino, tu itera aquo autra vaguada dejos aquel loc un pauc, o sobre lu am festinacio, si le loc no es apostemat.	And then pause the flubotomy, maybe if the vein is found in a place, then no; and if not, then repeat water another place from that place a little bit, or over the joint, if the place is not painful.
Et si le loc es apostemat, o le malaute se spauresca, lahoras tu le layssa per un dia o per dos, e no strenha le liament, quar fort leu atirara apostema caut, ni no intre en banh.	And if the place is painful or the patient's legs are swollen, then you leave it for a day or two, and do not tighten the ligature, because it will cause a lot of pain; nor do you put them in the bath.
E aprop itera la fleubotomia si la ama.	And then repeat the flubotomy if the time has passed.
E si la apercio es petita e corr sanc subtilment, e temes que non yesca sanc la cantitat que voles, lahoras tu itera le fleubotomi en aquel trauc segon rectitut e ajusta en la appercio un pauc, e fay aquo am festinacio denant que·l loc sia apostemat, quar le loc es apostemat en motz homes deves pauca apercio.	And if the apericio is small and the pain is subtle and you are afraid that the amount that you want will not be felt, then repeat the flubotomy in that same spot second time with care; adjust a little bit in the apericio, and make sure to avoid hurting anyone before the place becomes painful, because that place is painful in most men's cases.
Mays si vezes aquel ja apostemat, lahoras no iteres sobre lu, quar no escusa a tu alcuna causa; e pausa sobre aquel alcuna partida de la fenda de oli, quar alleuja le cors del sanc.	But if that has already become painful, then do not repeat on it, because it will not excuse you from any cause; and pause over that some part of the oil, because it eases the pain of the body.
E es milhor en aquest loc que oli e que les autres olis.	And this place is better than that one.
E semblantment aministra fenda de oli en tota fleubotomia am la qual fleubotomes las venas deves la prohibicio de cors de sanc, e fan aquo tyriaca alfadoc e sagzenea quan es pausat de la una de aquelas sobre le loc, quar le sanc es subtiliat e es revolvut quan es gros.	And it seems to me that the oil is administered in all flubotomies according to which veins are prohibited from being bound by the sanction of the pain; and they make water of tarragon and sage when stopped from one of those places, because the pain has subsided and the wound has opened when it becomes thick.
E si en le loc de la fleubotomia es engendrat gran apostema, quar motas veguadas accideys, e majorment ad aquel que no es stat sangnat sino aquela veguada, o en la apercio de la vena pauca, e lahoras tu coyta, e pausa sobre le loc sponja infuza en aygua e sal, un pauc scalfada, e strenh aquela per una hora, quar es dissolvut.	And if in the place of the flubotomy is created a large pustule, because it happens sometimes that blood comes out of some veins; and more often when it is not a wound but that vein itself, or in the apericio of a small vein, then you bandage it up, and pause over the place sponge bathed in water and salt, a little bit burned, and tighten it for an hour, because it dissolves.
E cove que fassa aquo aprop le yssiment del sanc de aquela vena am compliment de lu o de autra vena.	And when the pain of the wound has passed from that vein completely with water;
E si roman en le loc per alcus dias alcuna negror o viriditat, no notz aquo; e si voles, pausa sobre aquel alcuna causa de aloen e de mirra dissolvut, o alcuna causa de suc de mentastre o de calament o semblant de lu.	And if it remains in that place for some days any black or green color, then do not drink water; and if you want to, pause over that place of aloe and rose dissolved, or any other cause of mint juice or calaminol or similar.
E motas veguadas accideysso apostemas e eminencias deves fleubotomia de la basilica.	And it happens sometimes that pustules and lumps are caused by flubotomy from the base.
E donc pausa la tua ma sobre aquela, e si lahoras tu atrobas mollicia deves la tua compressio sobre aquela, lahoras aquela eminencia es malvada e mala; e adonc guarda te que pauses sobre aquela alcuna causa de aquo que havem dit, quar fort leu fluira de la arteria sanc.	And therefore pause your hand on that place, and if you feel softness then your compression is too strong over that place, then that eminence is bad and evil; and then keep in mind that you do not pause on any cause of water which we have said, because a lot of blood will flow from the sanc' s artery.
E fay emplaustre am aquo en que es stipticitat, per que le loc sia endurat, e aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	And make plaster with water in which it is tightened, so that the place becomes hardened, and then heal that place with another treatment before it is healed.
E cove que extraguas del sanc a tot hom segon la quantitat de la sua vertut e segon la color vencent sobrc le sanc segon que appar.	And when you extract from the wound all the quantity of its virtue and according to the color that prevails over it, as it appears;
Quar si le sanc es negre, lahoras tu le layssa yssir entro que sia rog; e semblantment si tu le vezes gros, lahoras tu le layssa yssir entro que sia subtiliat; e semblantment si es agut, entro que sia ostada la acuitat de lu.	Because if the wound is black then leave it to rise and heal; and if you make it thicker then leave it to heal, and if it is watery then leave it until its sharpness has passed.
E cove ad aquel que es ple e fort e ha necessitat de extraccio de sanc en una veguada, que sia amplificada la fleubotomia de la vena e le fleubotomi sia lat.	And when the place is full and hard and needs to extract the wound in a spot, then the flubotomy of that vein must be enlarged, and the flubotomy must be long.
E en aquel que es freul, sia fayt le contrari de aquel, e cove que extragua aquel en tropas veguadas, e que le trauc sia streyt.	And when it is swollen, then do the opposite of what has been said; and if you extract it in several places, then keep that spot straight.
E le milhor que es administrat en fleubotomia de vena es que sia la seccio transversa, no punctura.	And the best thing to be administered in a flubotomy of a vein is that it is transverse section, not a puncture.
E aquesta manieyra de fleubotomia es salva de flux de sanc e de inscizio de nervi, e es pus lausabla e pus salva que fleubotomia segon latitut e longitut.	And this way of flubotomy saves the wound from flowing and from cutting the nerves, and it is more commendable and more saved than flubotomy according to its length and width.
E a la qual es acostumat sobrevenir sincopi deves la fleubotomia, e cove que tu cures aquel denant la fleubotomia am un petit de pa infus en vi de milgranas o de oximel simple scalfat; e extratz a l u del sanc en tres veguadas o quatre.	And to that which is accustomed to happen fainting because of flubotomy, then before the flubotomy make a small amount of water infused with milk or simple oxymel burned; and extract from it three places or four.
E si es enfregiditat de compleccio, lahoras prengua denant la fleubotomia pa infus en eyssarop de mirra o en eyssarop de mel aromatizat am specias ayssi cum am pebre, canela, gingiebre e semblantz, o en eyssarop aromatizat e mot odorant.	And if it is a cold of the whole body, then make a mixture before flubotomy poured in oil of mirra or in oil of honey flavored with spices such as nutmeg, cinnamon, ginger and similar, or in an aromatic oil and a pungent one; or in an oil that is aromatized and smells.
E si accideys sincopi deves la fleubotomia, e es causa de lu issiment de mot sanc, lahoras cove que prengua en beure aygua de carn e eyssarop mot odorant subtil; e use de aromaticitat am algualea, e sia linit le sieu pietz am aquela.	And if fainting because of flubotomy happens, and it is a cause that comes out from some wound, then make a mixture before the flubotomy poured in meat water and oil with subtle odor; and use aromatic things to make the patient' s hands clean.
E usa de las autras causas que havem ditas en la divisio en le capitol de sincopi per evacuacio.	And use of the other causes which we have said in the division in the chapter of fainting because of evacuation.
E qui vol eventar le sieu bras e dissolver le sieu sanc segonda veguada, cove a lu del qual la fleubotomia es per mota evacuacio, e la vertut de lu es freol, que evacue le sanc petit a petit, so es segon la quantitat de la vertut en les dias continuables.	And who wants to test the strength of his arms and dissolve his pain according to the second place, then do flubotomy because it is an evasive movement, and its virtue is freewill; let him evacuate the wound little by little, so that its quantity depends on the virtue in the continuous days.
Mays qui vol eventar le sieu bras, e gitar lo sieu sanc segonda vetz, e le sieu cors es fort, lahoras fassa aquo aprop vii horas o ix de la primieyra fleubotomia.	But who wants to test the strength of his arms and escape pain according to the third place, then make water near nine hours or eight from the first flubotomy.
Mays qui vol atirar le sanc del cors sieu al contrari de la partida a la qual declina, cove que sia eventat en le segon dia o le tertz.	But who wants to throw the pain of his body into the opposite of the place from which it declines, then do so on the second or third day.
Mays aquel cors en le qual es mot sanc ja scalfat e es acuit e fa accidir febre, cove que sia gitat de lu sanc en una veguada e sia de lu gitada gran cantitat e sia amplificada la apercio entro que accidesca sincopi, pus que tu auras conservadas totas las condicios de fleubotomia; e que pauses la tua ma sobre le pols de lu deves le cors del sanc, per que no endevengua mort en loc de sincopi, quar motas veguadas endeve aquo quan le fleubotomador es ignorant e negligent.	And that body in which there is already a pain and it is sharp and causes fever, then do so on the same place and make a big aperture before it happens fainting, more because you may have preserved all the conditions of flubotomy; and pause your hand on his pulse of the arm where the wound is located, so that it does not end in death in place of fainting, because the doctor is ignorant and careless.
E no cove quan tu voles desliar le bras e evacua le sanc segonda veguada, cum ja sia claus le orrifici de la vena e sia fayt difficil issiment del sanc, que tu premas subre aquel am vehemencia e encurvat sia extendut leugierament, quar aquo es trop mal.	And it does not happen when you want to release the arm and evacuate the pain according to the second place, because it has already closed the orifice of the vein and it is difficult to extract the pain; then press down on that with violence and open it widely, because water is too bad.
Habantz le layssa entro que sia fleubotomat segondament; o remau aquo am la acuitat del fleubotomi que es coagulat del sanc en le orrifici de la vena; o pausa sobre aquel de tyriaca alfarach, o de sagzenea, e comprem aquel am compressio leugiera entro que·l sanc sia fora yssit.	And while you leave it before the second flubotomy is complete; or keep it in water according to the sharpness of the flubotomy which coagulates the wound in the orifice of the vein; or pause over that with a small compression within that the pain leaves;
E si la vena es apostemada, lahoras layssa aquela e no la toques entro que·l apostema sia sedat.	And if the vein is ruptured, then let it be left alone and don't touch it until the bruise has settled.
E si necessitat te provoca a evacuar le sanc segondament, e no es excusacio, lahoras tu sagna aquel sobre aquel loc o en l’autre bras en autra vena.	And if necessity forces you to evacuate the second time, and there is no excuse, then let him urinate on that place or in another limb on another vein.
E la vena apelada “funis del bras” es fleubotomada en loc de la fusca o de la basilica, quan no so atrobadas o so amaguadas, quar es composta de aquelas.	And the vein called "brass strap" is cut in place of the fistula or bazillion, when they are not twisted or hidden, for it is made up of those.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute intrometa la sua ma en aygua cauda entro que·l focil se enrogezesca e que la vena apparia manifestament.	And the quality of the bloodletting is that the patient's hand enters in water until the vein appears clearly.
E aprop sia strengut sobre aquel am liament am strictura migana; e aprop fleubotoma segon le tranvers petit, no latitudinalment ni segon la longitut.	Then let it be strengthened with a tight bandage around the limb half way; and let blood be taken secondarily from the small transverse vein, not laterally or lengthwise.
E sia la apercio ampla e sia la tua fleubotomia am la qual tu fleubotomas aquela sobre la junctura de la ma un petit.	And then is the wide opening and is your bloodletting at which you take blood from the arm at the joint of the hand a little bit.
E si es prohibit le fluxs del sanc, lahoras tu itera la ma en l’aygua cauda e layssa le sanc correr en la aygua entro que consieguas la tua necessitat.	And if the flow of blood is stopped, then let him dip his hand in water until you can get to your need.
Mays si tu eras en les dias d’estiu, lahoras tu yest excusat de la iteracio de la ma en l’aygua cauda, e le mes es pausat le cors del sanc en aygua cauda en temps de yvern.	If you were in the summer days, then you are excused from dipping your hand in water; but the season is paused in the wintertime.
E la fleubotomia de aquesta vena es pus salva que de totas las autras venas, quar dejos lu no ha vena pulsatil, ni nervi.	And the bloodletting from this vein is more valuable than from all the other veins, for there are no pulsating veins or nerves.
E la fleubotomia de la savatella de la ma dreyta es conferent a las malautias del fetge.	And the bloodletting from the wrist of the right hand is sent to the feverish parts of the body.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que tu strenguas la ma am liament o am la tua ma, pus que tu l’as mesa en ayga cauda, entro que la vena sia imflada e sia be demostrada al vezement; e aprop fleubotoma aquela transversan; e si inscidas aquela de tot no nozera aquo en re.	And the quality of the bloodletting is that you strengthen your hand with a bandage or with your own, for it was dipped in water, until the vein swells and is clearly seen; and then let blood be taken transversely; and if you cut that one from top to bottom, no one would see it.
E conserve que no ultimes la tua ma am la fleubotomi, quar dejos lu so les nervis dels ditz denudatz de carn.	And remember not to wrap your hand up after the bloodletting; for there are nerves in the naked skin of the body.
E aprop itera la ma en l’aygua cauda e laysse correr le sanc en aquela, quar si tu no iteras aquela en l’aygua cauda, le sanc sira coagulat en lo orrifici de la vena, e es prohibit de flux.	Then dip your hand in water again and let the blood run into that, for if you do not dip it, the blood will clot at the opening of the vein, and stop the flow.
E cum es extrayt le sanc segon la quantitat de necessitat, lahoras tu pausa sobre la vena oli e sal, per que no sia consolidada coytadament; e semblantment cove que tu fassas en tot ram streyt.	And if the blood is drawn according to the quantity of necessity, then you pause over the vein with salt and oil, that it may not be consolidated too much; and seemingly cover all veins straight.
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de aquela de la ma senestra, es que es conferent a las malautias de la melsa.	If the bloodletting from the wrist of the left hand is more valuable than that from the right hand, it is because it is sent to the feverish parts of the body.
E fay semblantment en la fleubotomia de lu ayssi cum has fayt en l’autra.	Do likewise with the bloodletting from his right hand.
E le juvament de la vena sephena de la fleubotomia es a las malautias que so en la partida dejos del cos, ayssi cum so malautias de la mayre, e a retencio de mestruas, et a las malautias dels ronhos e ulceracios de coyssas e de cambas antiquas, e a lor semblantz de las malautias.	And the quality of the bloodletting from the vein is to feverish parts that are distant from the body, as those of the mother, and to retentions of menstruation, and to feverishness of the cheeks and ulcers of the legs and old breasts, and to their resemblance to fever.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute entrometa lo sieu pe en aygua cauda e fassa sobre aquel fricacio entro que be apparen las venas; e lia sobre la junctura del pe am correia; e le loc de la vena le talo apparent deves le dit pous, e de aquela so ramificatz en la facia del pe motz ramps.	And the quality of the bloodletting is that the patient dip his hand in water until it appears clearly on the wrist; and let him put a bandage over the joint of the hand; and the place of the vein he cut off apparently from the said place, and from that it branches out towards the face of the hand.
E donc fleubotoma le pus ample ram o dejos la camba deves le talo deves la agreguacio de lu, quar es milhor e pus sal.	And then let blood be taken in a wide branch or cut off from the back of the neck, for it is better and more beneficial to the body.
E si fleubotomas aquela en la facia del pe, lahoras tu te guarda dels nervis que so dejos aquela sobre la facia del pe, e pausa la tua fleubotomia am la qual tu fleubotomas per le travers, quays cum si tu la volias inscidir.	And if you take blood from the face of the hand, then let him beware of the nerves that are behind it on the face of the hand; and let the blood be taken transversely, as if you wanted to cut it.
E sia le fleubotomi vosil.	And let this be your bloodletting season.
Mays si es prohibit le issiment del sanc; lahoras tu itera le pe de lu en l’aygua cauda e layssa correr le sanc en aquela entro que sia evacuat.	If the flow of blood is stopped, then let him dip his hand in water until you can evacuate it.
E si le fleubotomador erra en la primieyra veguada, lahoras itera am le fleubotomi en sus un pauc, quar le loc es sal; e no temes de lu malician, mays que te guardes dels nervis ayssi cum havem dit.	And if the bloodletting person makes a mistake in the first place, then let him repeat it a little bit, for the place is salty; and do not fear from it, but beware of the nerves, as we have said before.
E semblantment fay de la sophena del autre pe engualment.	Do likewise with the other arm, inwards.
E de la vena sciatica, le loc ayssi cum havem dit es deves le talo dejos la cavilha de la partida silvestra.	And of the sciatic vein, the place is apparently cut off from the back of the leg.
E le juvament de la fleubotomia de lu es a dolo de anca quan es per sanc caut.	The bloodletting from this vein is more valuable than that of other veins when it is done for fever.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute intre en banh, e festine e strenha la cueyssa de lu del latz de la ancha entro desus le talo desus quatre ditz an una benda longua subtil, quar no appar sino per aquo.	And the quality of the bloodletting is that the patient enter in bath, and goes quickly and strongly along his back from the shoulder blades until it reaches the bottom of the spine within four fingers' space in a long, thin band, for it does not appear otherwise than by water.
E donc quan appar, lahoras tu fleubotoma aquela segon cascun engen que es a tu possible e segon le tranvers, e es milhor; o inscidas aquela per inscizio o secces aquela per seccio, quar le loc de lu es sal.	And then when it appears, then let him take blood from that side first, which is easier to reach; or cut it off from top to bottom, for the place is salty.
E ela es en motz homes mot ameguada; e si atrobas aquela, e no appar al sentiment de tot, lahoras fleubotoma alcun ram de lu, e es aquel que appar en le dos del pe enves le dit auricular e le anular.	It is better to take blood from the side of a man when he is relaxed; and if it appears on one side, do not be concerned with the feeling of the whole body; then let him take blood from any part of his arm, and that which appears on the face of the hand near the thumb is better.
E guarda te dels nervis, e fay correr del sanc la quantitat que voles.	And beware of the nerves, and let the blood run out of the quantity you want.
E aprop deslia la strictura e pausa sobre le loc de la fleubotomia coto e strenh le loc, quar leugierament es sanat.	Then return the vein to its cavity, and place your hand over the area to prevent the blood from flowing too much; for it is better to stop it carefully.
De ventozacio e de las qualitatz de uzar de aquelas.	Of windiness and of the qualities of using those.
Ventozas so de corns, o de eram, o de veyre.	Windiness so from corns, or from earache, or from cold.
E ventozacio es fayta segon doas manieyras: la una de lor es am scarificacio e extracio de sanc, e l’autra es ventozacio ses scarificacio.	Windiness is caused by two things: the first one is bloodletting and extraction of blood; and the other is windiness from scratching.
E aquesta ventozacio que es ses scarificacio es segon doas manieyras, quar o es am foc o ses foc.	And this windiness that is caused by scratching is due to two things: either it is fire and fire; or it is heat and heat.
E a las ventozas que so administradas am scarificacio e extraccio de sanc son xiiii locs del cors, dels quals la un en lo qual so pausadas ventozas es alnocrati, e es la deriera partida del cap; e le mieg loc d’el de doas partz del col ensemp; e ventozas del mento dejos la mandibula pus dejos de la boca; e ventozas de doas spatulas; e ventozas de alohoster, e es sobre la fi de la coeta; e ventozas de dos focils, e so de dos brasses; e ventozas de doas cavilhas; e ventozas de doas cuoyssas.	And the places that are used for windiness by bloodletting and extraction of blood are twelve parts of the body, of which one is at the nape of the neck, and is the last division of the head; and the second part from the jaw; and windiness from the chin, leaving the mouth; and windiness from two spatulas; and windiness from hollows, and it is at the end of the collar; and windiness from two bracers; and windiness from two cheeks.
E ventozacio no extratz le sanc sino de las venas menudas sparssas en la carn, e per aquo no catz la vertut per aquelas, ayssi cum es cazement per fleubotomia; ni no cove que ventozacio sia fayta am foc o ses foc en alcuna malautia fayta per replecio entro que le cors tot sia evacuat.	And windiness does not extract blood except from small veins in the flesh, and it does not stop virtue by those veins; or it stops by fire or hot food; nor does it stop unless all the body is evacuated.
Mays si necessitat provoca a ventozacio per malautia o per continua, aministrem aquela en tota hora al comensament del mes e en la fi de lu, e en le mieg loc de lu e en qualque temps sia.	If necessity forces windiness because of fever or continuous pain, then let it be given in one hour at the beginning of the meal and at the end, and in the middle place; and in the middle part, whenever it is necessary.
La qual causa es quar dels homes es en les quals es sanc multiplicat entro que indigeys de extraccio de lu per ventozacio e atroba en le sieu cap graveza e soda; e de aquels es que atroba replecio e rogor en la sua cara e en le sieu cap, e en le sieu col; e de aquels es que atroba pruziment en la sua cara e en le sieu front e tenebrositat e hebetut en les sieus huels; e de aquels que gieta le loc de la sua ventozacio; e de aquels es que le lor ris es multiplicat; e de aquels es que atroba gustament de sanc en la sua boca, o que la lengua es apostemada e escup sanc; e de aquels es que lor dormir es multiplicat, e de aquels que vetz sanc en lo dormir rogor e antics e plaguas e autras causas a lor semblantz.	And the cause of this is that in men for whom blood multiplies within them before excreting it by windiness, and they feel tired because of it; or it stops by fire or hot food; nor does it stop unless all the body is evacuated.
E donc quan vezes en alcuna causa de aquelas, e propriament si es en le tertz o miga del mes, lahoras comandam ventozacio esser fayta pus que so passadas del dia dos o tres horas.	And then if it happens in some cause like this, and especially if it is at the third or sixth hour of the day, then command that windiness be made.
E juvament de ventozacio de la nuca es que quan aquela confereys a gravitat en le cap e ad aquo que es efondit als huels; mays cove que aquo sia aprop evacuacio de tot le cors.	And with the wind of the neck is that when it gives gravity to the head and falls into the hollows; but also because it should be appropriate evacuation from all the body.
E aquesta ventoza es en le loc de fleubotomia de la cephalica.	This ventouse is in the place of phlebotomy of the cephalic.
E no es legut que use de lu aquel que es de frega complecio, o en le qual es catarr, quar dona ad aquel gran nocument.	And it is not good that you use oil on those who are in a state of fever or have a catarrh, because this causes great harm.
E per aquo no cove que uso de aquela les vielhs, e en les caps dels quals so malautias frejas.	And it is not good that you use oil on those who are old and in the heads of which there are injuries.
Mays ad aquel que sobre aquela es continuant sobre lu es fayta oblivio; e per aquo cove que tu comandes al ventozador que depause la sua ma un petit am la ventosa a las partidas dejos, temen de la generacio de oblivio.	But to that who is continuous over it is made oblivion; and because you command the ventouse that your hand stops a little to the ventouse at the edges of the legs, fearing the generation of oblivion.
Mays ventozacio de alkehel es en loc de fleubotomia de la vena fusca e de la basilica: e per aquo confereys a asma, e a la constriccio de ale e a la scissura del sturment de ale, e a tos, e a replecio.	But the ventouse of alcohol is in the place of phlebotomy of the dark vein and of the basilica: and because it gives to asthma, and to the constriction of air and to the splitting of the instrument of air, and to cough, and to swelling.
E cove que sia enpellida la ventoza alkehel un petit, quar si es pausada dejos, engendra debilitat en le cors e en le stomac.	And if the ventose of alcohol is put a little, because if it is stopped by legs, it generates weakness in the body and in the stomach.
E la ventozacio de alhagdahan confereys a las dolors accident en le cap e a obtalmia, e emigranea, e prefocacio, e a dolors en las razitz de las dentz; e es en loc de fleubotomia de la basiliqua.	And the ventose of almond gives to the accidental pains in the head and to blindness, emigration, pre-focus and pains in the roots of the teeth; and it is in place of phlebotomy of the basilica.
E cove que comandes al ventozador que no prema la sua ma am scarificacio per que no inscida la arteria e accida fluxs de sanc.	And if you command the ventouse that he does not press your hand to the scarification so that it does not pierce the artery and causes a rush of blood.
E ventozacio dejos le mento comfereys a alcola en la boca, e a corrupcio de la gingiva, e a semblantz a lor de las malautias que so en la boca, e stan en loc de fleubotomia de aliheric que so en las doas labias.	And the ventose of legs gives alcohol in the mouth, and corruption of the gums, and resemblance to the lefts of the diseases that are in the mouth, and they stand in place of phlebotomy of another which is in the two lips.
Mays la ventozacio que es fayta sobre las doas spatulas confereys a caphatan, le qual es fayt per replecio de caliditat.	But the ventose that is made on the two spatulas gives to caphutan, which is made by swelling of quality.
E la ventosacio de las doas partidas dedintz dels focils confereys juvament de la fleubotomia de tres venas, so es de la basilica, fusca e cephalica, quar aquela atratz le sanc de totas aquelas venas pus manudas que so en la carn, e aquelas venas menudas de las autras venas pus grossas entro que pervengua la atraccio a las tres venas.	And the ventose of the two legs of the mouth gives youth to the phlebotomy of three veins, if it is from the basilica, the dark and the cephalic, because that one attracts all those veins that are closed by the hand, and those veins that are smaller than those other veins that are closed inside so that it reaches the attraction to these three veins.
E comanda al ventozador que trop no procezesca en scarificacio, quar le loc es denudat de carn, e dejos lu so nervis e arterias.	And you command the ventouse that he does not make a scarification, because the place is naked of flesh and leaves him his nerves and arteries.
E es una ventoza am la qual es ventozat sobre alshosses e confereys a las emorroydas del cul e a las ulceracios pus dejos.	And this is a ventouse that is ventosed on the ass and gives to the hemorrhoids of the buttocks and to the ulcers that are small.
E cove que comandes al ventozador que sia gran ventoza, e que sia de eram, quar le loc indigeys de fort seccio; e fort leu so traucadas ventozas subtils e sia scarificat am scarificacio.	And if you command the ventouse that it is a great ventose, and that it is of ermine, because the place does not give permission to strong separation; and a strong separation of fine ventoses makes scarification for scarification.
Mays ventozas de las cambas minueysso per minuicio manifesta, quar atiran le sanc de tot le cors, e comfereysso a dolors antiquas dels ronhos e de la mayre, e de la vesica; e provocan las mestruas, e comfereysso a bothor e ademil; e stan en loc de fleubotomia de doas sophenas, e alahorcoben, e de doas cavilhas.	But the fine ventoses of the legs give by a clear manifestation, because they attract the blood from all the body, and give to the ancient pains of the neck and of the mother, and of the bladder; and they provoke menstruation, and give to bothor and ademil; and they stand in place of phlebotomy of two fingers, and of alhorcoben, and of two cavils.
Enpero mot debelitan tot le cors e fan accidir sincopi en motz homes.	In the meantime it destroys all the body and causes fainting in young men.
E de las ventozas alahorcoben le juvament es propda al juvament a las ventozas de doas cambas.	And of the ventoses of alhorcoben is appropriate youth to the youth with two ventoses of the legs.
E la qualitat de la posicio de las ventozas es que pauses la ventoza al comensament vueda e sucguas per succio temprada, e no prolongues la posicio de las ventozas, mays pausa aquelas leugierament, e reman aquelas coytadament, e que las humors venguan al loc per adveniment engual.	And the quality of the position of the ventoses is that you stop the ventose at the beginning to see and flow by early, and do not prolong the position of the ventoses, but pause them carefully, and keep them in a hidden way, and let the humors come to the place by coming.
E no cesses iterar aquo e continuar entro que veja le loc ja enrojezir e inflar e que appara la rogor del sanc.	And it does not cease to repeat this several times, and continue inside until he sees the place become red and swollen and the appearance of the blood.
E lahoras tu scarifiqua e itera la succio pauc a pauc, e aprop considera en la dispozicio dels cors.	And you scarify then repeat slowly the flow little by little, and approach carefully to the position of the bodies.
Quar aquel home que es de tendra carn de rars pors, cove que tu le scarifiques una veguada e no pus, per que le loc no sia ulcerat.	Because that man who is of tender flesh of the hands, you scarify once and not again, because the place is not ulcerated.
E comanda al ventozador que amplifique la scarificacio e pronde un pauc, e atempre la succio am facilitat.	And you command the ventouse that he amplify the scarification and make it broad a little, and flow easily.
E si en le sanc es grossitut, lahoras cove que scarifiques doas veguadas, quar en la primieyra veguada es uberta la via de subtiliacio al sanc e a la aquositat de lu.	And if the blood is thick, then you scarify twice, because in the first scarification it opens the way of subtleization to the blood and of its liquidity.
Mays en la segunda a la perscrutacio aquisida de la extraccio del sanc gros.	But in the second to the acquisited scrutiny of the extraction of the thick blood.
E si le sanc es mot feculent, lahoras sia fayta scarificacio la tersa veguada per que consiegua le derier.	And if the blood is feeble, then let there be made a third scarification so that it achieves the last.
E derierament, quan volem extrayre le sanc pauc a pauc o un petit, abasta a nos una scarificacio.	Finally, when we want to extract a little blood or a little, it is enough for us one scarification.
E si volem extraccio de mot sanc, scarificam am mota scarificacio; e si nos conoyssem que·l sanc es gros, lahoras cove que scarifiquem per scarificacio preonda.	And if we want to extract from a blood, then you scarify with a large scarification; and if we know that the blood is thick, then you scarify by a dense scarification.
E le terme de scarificacio en la qual es la profunditat de la codena tant solament.	And the term of scarification in which the depth of the line is only enough.
E si aquel del qual la codena es grossa, dura, fusca, e les sieus pors so streytz, cove que les locs de las ventosas sian untatz lenitius, apertius resolutius; si es en temps d’estiu, ayssi cum es oli de aloen o oli de violat, o oli de amellas dossas, o oli de cemensa de coja; e si es en temps ivern, lahoras oli narci, o oli de liri, o oli de camamilla, o de sanc, e ad aquels semblantz.	And if that man's line is thick, hard, dark and his hands are slender, you use oil of aloe or oil of violet, or oil of lilac or oil of chamomile, or of thyme, and to those who look like it. And if it is winter, then use oil of rose, or oil of almond, or oil of lemon, or oil of sesame; and if it is summer, the windouse should be applied quickly, gently and resolutely;
E si la superfluitat es grossa, freja, lahoras le oli sia amaranti, o oli de balsamita, o oli de aloen, o oli aneti, e a lor semblantz.	And if the superfluity is thick and heavy, then use oil of amaranth, or oil of balm, or oil of aloe, or oil of aniseed, and to those who look like it.
Mays si le ventozador es de amples pors de tendra carn, lahoras cove que sia prohibit de oli, e cove que ad aquest les locs de ventozas de lor aprop la ventozacio sian lavatz am ayguaros o am aygua freja de solatrum, o am aygua de coja, o am aygua de bordolaguas, e semblantz ad aquelas.	But if the ventouse is of large size, then it should be prohibited from oil, and if these places of ventoses of their own are applied quickly with a warm water or with cold water of seltzer, or with water of chamomile, and to those who resemble them.
E aquel del qual le sanc es de mota humiditat, lava las suas ventozas am vi agre, o am aygua de mirt e sumac e semblant ad aquels.	And if that man's blood is of a moist nature, then wash his ventoses with wine or water of mirth or pomegranate and to those who resemble them.
E de aquel del qual las superfluitatz son grossas, lava las suas ventozas am vi antic, o am aygua de sansuc, que es majorana, o de decoccio de anet, o de camamilla, e a lor semblantz.	And if the superfluities are thick, then wash his ventoses with wine of ancient, or water of sansuc (which is marjoram), or aniseed tea, or chamomile tea, and to those who resemble them.
E cove que la ventozacio sia guardada denant de banh; habantz cove que sia aministrada aprop issiment del banh per una hora o per doas, e cove que dorma aprop la ventozacio.	And if the ventose is kept in front of a bath; having it administered early before the bath for an hour or two, and if he sleeps near the ventose.
Quid est quo oportet ut regatur ventosandus aus phlebotomatus ante ventosationem.	What is needed so that it is regulated to be applied before wound treatment.
Cove que consideras al comensament: lahoras si le ventozador o aquel que·s deu fleubotomar es coleric e ventz sobre lu sanc agut e imflamacio, lahoras cove que prengua causas infrigidantz, ayssi cum milgranas acetosas, e endivia an vi agre e laytuguas, e secanabin, e julep, e a lor semblantz.	And consider at the beginning: then if the ventouse or that who is to be phlebotomized is coleric and apply on the head pain and inflammation, then you take causes of cold drinks, such as wine of mirth and lemon, and mint tea, and black currant tea, and julep, and to those who resemble them.
E pausa a lor viandas ayssi cum poletz, e carns de auzels serbiges, e viandas conditas am agras, e a lu semblantz.	And pause their food such as potatoes, and meat of spring lamb, and prepared foods with sweetness, and to them who resemble them.
E de aquel del qual la compleccio es freja, cove que prengua en beure eyssarop almiva, o eyssarop de alsecanabin de semensas, e sumac, e vi mot odorant migier entre viel et noel; e que a lu sia comendat que use de paucitat de beure e de mangar, e pausa las viandas de lu poletz e canabir e pissers e petitz auzels e colombat.	And if that man's complex is strong, then take in drinking honey syrup, or almond syrup of astringent taste, and pomegranate, and a little smell of mint among the food; and it is recommended to him that he use scarcity of drink and eating, and pause his meals such as potatoes, and canaries, and pisons, and petitzals.
E cove que en lo dia de ventozacio e de fleubotomia le beure sia major que la vianda.	And where, on the day of venerection and phlebotomy, the drink is greater than the food.
E cove que sia donat en beure en alcunas horas ad alcus homes tyriaca alpharac, o medicamentz de musc, so es muscada, o alcelita denant la ventozacio o denant fleubotomia o aprop, per so que·ls membres principals sian confortatz e que·l sanc sia subtiliat; e no cove que prenguan aquela scalfatz.	And where, at certain times of the day, to certain men, is given the wine of tarry alkanol, or a medicine of musk, or muscadine, or acacia, before venerection or phlebotomy or close by, so that the main members are comforted and the blood is thinned; and do not take those scalps.
Mays las ventozas que so ses scarificacio sian ventozas que so pausadas sus le fetge, e sobre la melsa e podagra, e sobre le umbelic, en les locs dels jonolhs, e la pixida del ancha, quar aquestz membres no suffertan scarificacio sobre si.	May the venerections that are to be sacrificed be those that are paused on the member itself and on the podagra and on the navel, in the places of the joints, and the incision of the anus, because these members do not suffer sacrifice over themselves.
E no es querit per aquelas sino atraccio de sanc de membre, ayssi cum pausam ventosa sobre mamilha en malautia de flux de sanc del sanc de las nars; e usam de aquela per que sia dissolvuda ventositat freja inviscade del membre, ayssi cum pausam sobre le ventre e l’umbelic; quar aquela rarifique le membre e scalfa lu e ramau la dolor quar resolveys ventositat.	And do not wish it by those but a attraction of the member's blood, so if you pause venerection on the breast in the malady of the flow of blood from the member's wound; and use that because it dissolves a frizzy unsightly member, so if you pause on the navel and the womb, for that attracts the member and scars it and hurts it because it resolves venerection.
E ja es pausada sobre les ronhos quan accideys en lor opilacio o poyra, quar per vertut de atraccio fort leu huobre opilacio e erradica le poyra de son loc.	And it is paused on the cheeks when it happens to their opium or pox, for by virtue of a strong attraction, the opium is greatly alleviated and the pox is eradicated from its place.
E semblantment fa quan es pausada sobre le fetge e la melsa deves ventositat en aquels enclausa.	And apparently it happens when it is paused on the member and the navel, a venerection in those confined.
E aquestas ventozas so administradas vuedas amb succio tant solament; e alcunas veguadas so administradas am foc.	And these venerections are administered with water only; and some venerections are administered with fire.
E alcunas veguadas so administradas plenas de aygua tebeza en las malautias de la melsa.	And some venerections are administered full of hot water in the navel' malady.
E aquo es per que la ventoza sia umplida e sia pus gran, so es aygua cauda sola o aygua en la qual sian cuytas herbas ad aquo convenientz.	And water is so that the venerection is filled and is larger, either is hot water alone or water in which herbs have been boiled to suit.
Forma de ventoza aministrada am foc: sia la amplitud del orrifici de dos ditz, segon que nos la havem formada; e la quantitat del preon sia la maytat de un palm; e sia en lo latz de lu, en le loc que es en le circuit, la maytat de lu, le trauc sia petit segon la quantitat que intre en lu una agulha.	Form of venerection administered with fire: is the breadth of the orifice of two fingers, according to which we have formed it; and the quantity of the liquid be most of a palm; and be in the height of it, in the place that is in the circuit, most of it, the trail be small according to the quantity that enters into it an needle.
Sia fayta de eram rog o citri, de grosses marges, leon, enguals e terses per so que no leda le membre deves la sua posicio sobre lu.	It is made from a small amount of sweet oil or lemon, large margins, lion, owl and third for that it does not lead the member out of its position on it.
E sia al mieg de lu vergua transversa de eram o de ferr, on es pausada candela am lo foc.	And be at mid-leg from a transverse pole of iron or wood, where it is paused lit to the fire.
E ja sia aquesta ventoza gran major de aquela la qual havem recomtat; e la pauca mendre de aquela segon las malautias e la etat de aquel que usa de aquela.	And this venerection is much greater than that which we have just mentioned; and the little less of that according to the malady and the state of the one who uses it.
E las ventosas dels efantz e extenuatz so autres que las ventozas dels joves e de grosses corssas.	And the venerections of the old and exhausted are other than the venerections of the young and strong bodies.
E la qualitat de pausar aquesta ventoza am foc sobre le membre es que extenda la meca am foc de lenha decentment denant una pauca candela de cera, e pausa aquela sobre le mieg de la vergua transversa en le mieg loc de la ventoza, per que le foc sia accendut enviro la partida dejos per que no sia comburit le cors del malaute.	And the quality of pausing this venerection with fire on the member is that it extend the hand to the hand of the pole with a decently lit candle, and pause it on the middle of the opposite side of the member of the venerection, so that the fire be lit around the place where the candle leaves for it not to be extinguished the body of the patient.
E aprop sia pausada sobre le membre del malaute, e le dit sia sobre le trauc que havem dit, entro que quan tenem las ventozas e non indigem que osten le dit e que yesca la vapor sobre aquel trauc, lahoras la ventoza sira tantost dissolvuda.	And then be paused on the member of the patient, and the hand be placed on the place that we have said, until when we have the venerections and do not feel the hand holding them, and the vapor is heated above this hand, then the venerection is dried.
E prop igneys la meca segon la sua manieyra, e itera aquela si indigeyssas de aquela.	And light the fire according to its way, and repeat that if you do not like it.
Mays en ventosa que es aministrada en la malautia de plauressi, am aygua, en la qual no ha vergua transversa ni trauc, e no es aministrada sino que sia umplida de aygua, e es pausada sobre le membre tant solament.	May the venerection that is administered in the malady of the woman, with water, and which does not have a transverse pole or a hand, and is not administered except to be filled with water, and it is paused on the member only.
E aquesta es la forma de lu: E aquesta ventoza quant plus es gran, tant es milhor, per que puya recebre gran quantitat de aygua.	And this is its form: And this venerection, how much it is greater, so much is better, so that it receive a great quantity of water.
Capitol .xcvii.	Chapter .xciii.
Sanguissuguas no so administradas en motz membres sino en les membres en les quals non es possible posicio de ventosas, per la parvitat de aquels, ayssi cum le pot e gingiva e semblantz a lor; o en membre denudat de carn, ayssi cum le dit e·l nas e lors semblantz.	Sanguineous venerections are not administered in the members but in the members where it is impossible to place venerections, because of their poverty, or apparently so; or in a naked member of meat, apparently so.
E la qualitat de usar de aquelas que si has trobadas sanguisugas que so en las ayguas dossas de poyredura mundas.	And the quality of using those that if they have been found to be sanguiniferous, which are in the clean waters of the world.
E aprop sian layssadas le dia e la nueyt en aygua dossa entro que sian famolentas, e que no romangua alcuna causa en le ventre de aquelas; e aprop sia evacuat le cors en le comensament am fleubotomia e am ventozas; e aprop fregua le membre del malaute entro que s’enrojezesca; e aprop sian pausadas sobre lu.	And then are let go on the day and at night in water that is clean before they become hungry, and do not cause any trouble in the belly of those; and then be evacuated the body in the beginning with phlebotomy and venerection; and then are rubbed the member of the patient before it becomes red; and then be paused on it.
E cum son umplidas e caso.	And then are filled, and here ends.
E si es possible succio del loc am ventoza, es mays derier en juvament.	And if it is possible to take the place with venerection, so much more will be gained in a long time.
E sino, lahoras lava le loc am vi agre e aprop am mota aygua; e sia freguat e expremut.	Or, then wash the place with water and knead it up; and pour out water on it; and rub it, and squeeze it.
E si es prolonguat le cors del sanc aprop le cazement de las sanguissuguas, e es aquo resudan, lahoras tu enfon un drap de li en aygua freja, e pausa aquel de sobre entro que sia abdida la resudacio.	And if it is prolonged the member of the wound, so that the blood is not separated, then dip a cloth in water and pause it on the wound; and let it sit until it is dried up.
E si le sanc es multiplicat, lahoras polveriza sobre lu vitriol trissat, o guallas e semblantz a lor de las causas stipticas, entro que·l sanc sia abscidit; o sian pausadas sobre le loc las maytatz de favas excocicadas, e sian layssadas entro que las favas aderescan al loc, e es le sanc abscidit.	And if the wound is repeated, then sprinkle on it vitriol that has been triturated, or grind and make similar to those causes of the stinging ones, so that the wound is dried up; or be let go on the place the last of the cooked beans, and be let go until the beans adhere to the place, and the wound is dried up.
E cove, si es necessaria, iteracio de sanguissuguas, quan es possible mudar aquelas.	And where, if necessary, the repetition of venerections, when it is possible to change those.
E si las sanguissuguas son prohibidas de suspenssio, lahoras sia freguat le loc am sanc recent o fique una agulha en les locs entro que yesca sanc; e aprop sian pausadas, quar aquelas quan sento alcun sanc tantost adarysso.	And if venerections are forbidden by suspension, then rub the place with fresh blood or a needle is placed in the places where it hurts; and then be paused on it because those when they feel any pain, so soon after that.
E quan voles que cajan, polveriza sobre aquelas un pauc de aloen trissat, o sal, o cendre, e cazo tantost.	And when you want to make them fall, sprinkle on those a little amount of aloe that has been triturated, or salt or ash, and soon after.
Ayssi comensa lo prolec de la tersa partida: de restauracio.	Thus begins the process of the third part: of restoration.
Aquest capitol es motas veguadas necessari en la art de medicina; e es restauracio de fractura e de dislocacio accident en les osses.	This chapter is necessary in the art of medicine; and it is a restoration of fracture and an accidental dislocation of bones.
O, filh, sapiatz que jactan se de aquest capitol les fols metges e les vulguars e aquels que degun temps no reguardero les libres dels Antics ni legiro de aquels una letra.	Or, son you aware that this chapter is not pleasant to read, nor do those common physicians understand it, and no one will ever read it again.
E per aquesta causa es fayt que aquesta manieyra dels scients in terra nostra es privat; e yeu no ho e obliat en aquo degun temps be de tot; e no he adhibit aquo que apres, sino per longitut de lectio dels libres dels Antics e studi sobre le entendement de aquels, entro que extrayssi la sciencia de aquels.	And for this reason it is done that this way of the sciences in our land is secret; and I have not forgotten it because of all the books of the Ancients and study on the understanding of those, so that I extracted the science from them.
E aprop adirigui a experiment e studi en la longitut de la mieua vida.	And then I will begin to teach experiments and studies in the length of my life.
E yeu ja he de aquo descrit en aquest capitol tot aquo que conte la mieua sciencia e sobre le qual es passat lo mieu experiment; pus que agui abreujat aquo a vos autres e deliuregui aquo de occupacio de elonguacio; e abreujegui aquo en la fi de abreujacio; et e monstrat aquo en la fi de declaracio; e formegui en aquo motas formas dels sturmentz que so administratz en aquel, cum es fayt per addicio de declaracio, ayssi cum he fayt en dos capitols precedentz.	And I have already written this in this chapter all that my science contains and upon which is passed my greatest experiment; because it has opened to you a new field and freed me from the occupation of elaborating; and I have renewed it at the end of the declaration; and I have formed it from two previous chapters.
Capitol primier.	Chapter first.
Summae et collectiones ex esse fracturae ossium, ex eis quarum praemissio necessaria est, antequam incipiamus rememorationem membrorum fraftorum et diversorum si uniuscuiusque.	A summary of the cause of bone fractures, and from that which is necessary, before we begin to reminisce about broken limbs and diverse stories of each one.
Cove donc que diguam en le prohemi de aquest capitol las summas del sermo; e les capitols al entendament dels quals en le comensament es forsat le artifexs e a stacio sobre la veritat de aquels; so es vos e aquels que so promptz que sapian o aprenguan aquesta art nobla autres de vos.	And where, then, I will tell at the beginning of this chapter the highest points of speech; and which are certainly understood by those who master this noble art; and not by others who simply speak or learn it.
E donc dic que quan accideys a alcu fractura o dislocacio o torcio o cazement, lahoras cove que tu te coytes al comensament am fleubotomia o aleyar aquel, o quascu ensemps, si no prohibeys alcuna causa, ayssi cum debelitat de vertut, o es aquel al qual accideys effant, o viel en decrepitat, o es temps de vehement calor, o de vehement freg.	And therefore I say that when there is a fracture or dislocation or twist or fall, you should cover yourself with bloodletting or drawing it out or any time without prohibition, and the remedy of virtue will come, or whether it happens to you or you are old, or there is hot weather or a cold one.
E aprop sia content en vianda sieua de erbas frejas e de carns de auzels e de crabotz; e prohibem carns grossas e umplir si de viandas e de tota vianda que umple las venas de sanc, entro que siras segurat de apostema caut, e si no temes efusio de materia al membre.	And let it be ready in a bowl of herbs and meat of birds and crabs; and prohibit thick meats and filling with food and all food that fills the veins of blood, until you are certain of an embolism, and if you do not fear an outflow of substance to the limb.
E lahoras retorne le malaute al sieu regiment primier am le qual corr costuma de lu.	Then return the patient to his usual position first with the one that he usually sleeps on.
E donc cum le os trencat comensa esser restaurat, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia pascut de viandas nutritivas de nutriment mot e gros e greu en les quals sia viscositat, ayssi cum so viandas faytas de froment cueyt am aygua, e ris, e caps, e pes, e ventres de vacas, e huous, e peys fresc, e vi gros e semblants ad aquels, e am aquest regiment es fayta coagulacio de fractura pus leugierament e miels.	And therefore when the broken bone begins to be restored, you should feed him with nutritious food that is thick and heavy and has viscosity, so that with food made from wheat cooked in water, and rice, and garlic, and feet, and bellies of cows, and hen, and fresh milk, and large and similar foods, and this diet causes coagulation of the fracture slightly and better.
E sapias que les osses trinquatz quan so en les homes que so en la primiera vilura e en los decrepitz, no es possible que sian continuatz e sian consolidatz segon lur natura per la exsiccacio dels membres de lor.	And know that when the bones are broken in men who are in their early years and in old age, it is not possible for them to continue and be consolidated according to their nature by the drying out of the limbs.
E son consolidatz e continuatz segon lor natura tot temps per la exsiccacio de aquels membres, e so continuatz e consolidatz aquels que so de lor en la fi de la lenitat, ayssi cum les osses dels petitz effantz.	And they are consolidated and continued according to their nature at all times by the drying out of those limbs, and they continue and are consolidated that are theirs in the end of languid heat, so with the bones of small children.
Mays empero natura ajusta e amnecteys sobre le os trencat de tota partida alcuna causa semblant a glut en le qual es grossitut que adhereys e strenh aquel entro que so ensemps conglutinatz e liatz ensemps, entro que venen la fi de fortitut e de fermesa, ayssi cum foc al comensament, entro que denguna causa no prohibeys aquel de las suas obres.	But nature adjusts and heals the broken bone from the beginning of any similar cause to glut that adheres and strengthens it within that it becomes united and bound together, so that it comes to its end of strength and stability, as with fire at the beginning, so that no prohibition causes it to stop from its works.
E per aquesta causa es necessari que pauses las viandas del malaute, viandas en las quals so gravitat e viscozitat e grosseza, ayssi cum havem dit.	And for this reason it is necessary that you pause the patient's food, food in which there is gravity and viscosity and thickness, as I have said.
Mota diversitat de fractura segon diversitat del membre.	A variety of fractures according to the variety of the limb.
E sapias que las specias de fractura son diversas segon la diversitat dels membres, quar fractura del os de la camba es diversa de la fractura del os del cap; e la fractura del os del pietz es divers de la fractura del os del dos; e semblantment totz les autres membres son diverses entre lor.	And know that the types of fractures are different according to the difference of limbs, a fracture of the hip bone is different from a fracture of the head bone; and a fracture of the foot bone is different from a fracture of the thigh bone; and similar to all the other limbs are different from each other.
E yeu venc am rememoracio de tota specia de fractura, expausada en le sieu capitol distincta del autre.	And I give you a summary of all kinds of fractures, described in the separate chapter of another book.
Mota diversitat de fractura en si meteyssa.	A variety of fractures within itself.
E son diversificadas las specias de fractura del os en lor meteyssas; quar es fayta fractura arcuada otra aquo que accidan en lu stellas; e alcunas veguadas es fayta fractura segon la longitut del os: e so las fracturas de lu satagia e astelhas e addicios procedentz e no-procedentz, ayssi cum es fayt en la pena quan es preparada a escriure, e es fractura am plagua e disrupcio en le cap, e es fractura fissura petita.	And the types of fractures of bones within themselves are different; for some it happens in the shape of an arch and others that it happens at the ends of the bone: and those are the fractures of the knee and the feet and the additions, proceeding and not proceeding, as when it is broken by a blow while writing, and a small fracture in the head and disruption.
E a tota specia es engen o turment propri en restauracio de lu segon que vindra rememoracio de lu distincta en les sieus locs.	And to all kinds of fractures is given a certain type of treatment in its restoration, as it comes to be remembered separately in its place.
Mota senhal de fractura del os.	A symbol of a fracture of the bone.
E per aquo es conoguda fractura del os: es tortuositat de lu, e de aquel eminencia e appericio de lu al sentiment, e so de lu quan compremes aquel am la tua ma.	And this is how a broken bone is known: it is a twist and a prominence and an appearance that can be felt with your hand.
E donc quan no es en le loc tortuositat apparent ni so no es feyt deves le tieu tocament quan toques le os am agitacio e le malaute no atroba gran dolor, lahoras no es aqui fractura.	And therefore when it is not in the twisted place that appears or does not appear, and it does not cause great pain when you touch the bone with movement, then there is no fracture.
Habantz es possible que sia tortuositat o petita fissura, adon no cove que tu mauguas aquel am la tua ma e am compressio de tot; habantz pausa sobre lu de las medicinas de las quals ve rememoracio aprop aquel moment le qual conveneys al loc; e aprop sia streyt per strictura subtil.	And while it is possible that it is a twist or a small crack, so that you do not feel it when you touch it with your hand and press all over it; and if you pause for a moment from the medicines of which you have a memory of that moment that you bring to its place; and if it becomes tight by a subtle tightening.
E sapias que·l loc quan es arcuat e no es scindit en dos o otra aquo que no accidan en lu satagie, cum es remauguda tota partida de la sua compar, lahoras cove que comenses de la tua hora a rectificacio de lu habantz que a lu accida apostema caut.	And know that the place is when it is curved and does not split into two or another that happens to its knee, as it is raised from all its sides, then begin the hour of correction of it, because if you happen to it an embolism of blood.
E si a lu accida apostema caut, lahoras layssa aquel per alcus dias entro que cesse le apostema; e aprop engualha aquel segon quascuna manieyra que podes de levitat e de engen.	And if an embolism of blood happens to it, then leave it for a few days until it stops; and if you can hide it in any way that you can imagine using levitation or invention.
E sapias que restauracio de lu e agulacio de lu es pus leugiera que del os en le qual accideysso sathagie.	And know that the restoration of it and the tightening up of it is more difficult than that of the bone in which this happens to the knee.
E aprop strenh aquel segon que vindra la rememoracio de lu.	And leave it as best you can remember it coming.
Mays si en le os so satagias, lahoras es necessaria extencio de aquest membre trencat de doas partz, si es la ma o le pe; o am la tua ma si le membre es petit; o am doas cordas o am una corda e la ma.	But if in the bone there are two satagies, then leave it as broken into two parts, whether it is the hand or the foot; or at the wrist or at the ankle and at the leg.
E sia la tua posicio am la qual pauses le membre loc engual segon la sua figura natural, mentre que las partidas so extandudas del membre trenquat, lahoras te perforsa que fassas retornar aquelas addicios am engen e segon quascuna manieyra que poyras en lor locs.	And be the position of your hand in which you pause the limb extended as natural, while the breaks of the limb are extended, then know that you must return those additions to their places by invention and according to any way that you can imagine putting them in place.
E guarda te segon la tua forssa que no accida sobre le malaute per la tua operacio delor ni lesio; e perforsa te segon le tieu poder que tu appliques la un os am l’autre son companho segon lors milhors formas.	And protect yourself according to your strength so that it does not happen to you through your operation or injury; and by the power of the one bone, apply to the other its shape according to its best forms.
E cove que en aquela hora aprofitablament tu toques am la tua ma aquel, e si vezes aqui alcuna causa diversa, rectifiqua aquel e enguala aquel per la quantitat de la tua vertut.	And if at that hour you take advantage of touching it with your hand, and if there is no other cause, then correct it and hide it according to the amount of your strength.
E exquiva vehement extenssio e compressio, ayssi cum fan mots fols metges que motas veguadas fan accidir apostema caut per la sua operacio, o fan accidir contraccio en le membre ayssi cum havem vist aquo per la operacio de lor motas veguadas.	And with violent extension and compression, as when foolish movements cause the appearance of an embolism of blood to happen through their operation, or cause a contraction in the limb to occur, as we have seen by the sight of it for the operation of their foolish movements.
E aprop annecteys, aprop equacio e decent operacio e strictura de aquel membre, e repaus e tranquilitat; amoneste le malaute sobre aquo e fay le squivar que no maugua aquel en la hora de las suas vigilias e del sieu dormir, e ves la sua revolucio e agitacio, e deves la sua egestio, e deves totz les sieus movementz am tota la sua vertut; e aguarda se que la posicio del membre sia posicio am la qual sia asegurada la dolor, la qual causa es quar quan sent en la disposicio de la posicio del membre delor o lesio; lahoras cove que permutes aquel ad autra disposicio de aquela am la qual non senta dolor; e guarda am aquo que la posicio de lu aquela sia dreyta e engual, per so que al membre non accida tortuositat quan es restaurat.	And leave it connected, and connect it properly and tightly; and rest and quietness; order the patient in this regard and do not allow it to feel pain when you put it in this position, for this is when they are in a position that causes pain to them, and if you change it to another position that does not cause pain, then know that their position is wrong and that this causes pain. And know that when the limb is restored to its original place, then do not allow it to feel pain; and know that if you put it in a certain position, it will not feel pain; and protect it from feeling pain by changing its position.
E la qualitat de la strictura del membre tranquat es aquela que yeu recomti; per que sapias que·ls membres trencatz so diversificatz en lor parvitat e en lor grandeza e en la forma de aquels.	And the quality of the tightening of the limb is that which I recommend; so that you know that broken limbs are different in their smallness and size and in the form of those.
E de aquels que son petits ayssi cum le bras e·l dit e·l focil e semblantz ad aquels, lahoras cove que la envolucio sia de drap mol subtil.	And of those that are small, as the arm and the hand, and similar to those, then know that the wrapping is of a thin cloth.
Mays aquels que so grosses ayssi cum la cuoyssa o la camba, cove que en aquels sia envolucio lada e dura, quar la liadura lada connecteys le membre gran e strenh aquel de tota part am strictura engual, enayssi que en lu no intre macula.	But of those that are large, as the thigh and the hip, then know that in these it is necessary for the wrapping to be tight and firm, so that the bandage does not cut into the limb and tightly hold it in its place, so that it does not leave a mark; and if it covers all parts with a strong binding.
E aprop comensa, aprop la tua evacuacio de equacio, pausar liament convenient ad aquo, sobre le loc de aquela fractura am tres envolucios o quatre segon que·l membre mereys; e strenh la tua ma un petit am le liament.	And begin, and quickly leave, and carefully stop it on the place of that fracture with three wrappings or four according to the limb that you want; and tighten your hand very much with the binding.
E aprop ve am aquel a la partida pus sobirana del loc de la fractura, e strenh mens que no foc la tua strictura am la qual has strengut le loc de la fractura.	And leave it at the beginning of the most powerful place of the fracture, and tighten your hand with the most powerful binding that you have strengthened the place of the fracture.
E aprop elongua te am envolucio del loc de la fractura un pauc, e mollifiqua la strictura petit a petit, entro que prenguas del loc sa una gran partida.	And leave it slightly longer in the wrapping of the place of the fracture, and soften the tightening little by little, until you take it to its full extent.
E aprop pren una autra benda e envolveys aquela autra veguada sobre le loc trenquat am envolucio, e aprop ve am las envolucios a la partida pus dejos de la fractura; e sia la tua operacio en la strictura de la envolucio e en mollificacio de aquela segon que havem dit en la envolucio primieyra desus.	And take another object and wrap that other cloth around the place again, and tie the wrapping above where you left off from the fracture; and your operation in the tightness of the wrapping and in softening that one as we said in the first wrapping.
E aprop pausa entre las volucios de stopa leon o drap am le qual sia engualada la tortuositat de la fractura, si en lu es tortuositat; e sino, no pauses en lu alcuna causa.	And leave between the strips of leather or fabric where it is wrapped the curvature of the fracture, if there is a curvature; and in no way leave for any reason.
E aprop pausa sobre lu autra benda, e aprop enguala sobre aquestas envolucios stelhas decentment faytas tantost, si en le loc no es imflacio o apostema caut, e lahoras pausa sobre lu aquo que sede le apostema aquel e que oste la imflacio; e layssa aquela per alcus jorns; e lahoras tu strenh sobre lu las stelhas.	And leave on top of that other object, and wrap those strips nicely, so much so, if there is no inflammation or abscess in the place, and then pause on that which is seated the abscess there and which causes swelling; and let it rest for a few days; and then you tighten it well.
E sian las stelhas de la maytat de canna lada raza, e be formada saviament; o sian de fust de pi; o de ramps de palma ; e sia le ample de quascuna stelha segon aquesta forma e aquesta figura:	And the strips of canes of any kind, and formed wisely; or of oak-wood; or of palm branches; and be the width of each strip according to this form and figure:
Empero cove que la astelha que es pausada sobre aquela fractura sia pus grossa e pus lada un petit que las autras astelhas, e la longitut de la stela segon qu’es legut al membre en magnitut e parvitat; e aprop strenh sobre las astelhas am autra benda segon la tua primieyra strictura; e aprop lia desus am fiel decentment segon que havem dit de strictura, e es que sia la tua strictura segon le loc de la fractura mes, e quant mes es alonguat de la fractura, es mendre la strictura.	However, consider that the strip that is placed on top of that fracture is thicker and further away from the other strips than those are, and according to the length of the limb in size and thinness; and leave again with a firm grasp according to what we said about tightness; and here is your tightness according to the place of the fracture, and how much it is farther from the fracture, the tighter it should be.
E cove que les fils sian migiers en grossesa e subtilitat, e sian de li mol; e si les fils so grosses, ayssi cum yeu he vist per la operacio de alcus fols pausantz les lors fils de cordas de li tort, e es error gran, quan catz la strictura fora equalitat.	And consider that the threads are thinner in thickness and smaller in size, and are of linen; and if the threads are thick, then also, through the operation of some foolishness while the threads are stopped with string knots there, it is a great mistake when it causes tightness to be equal.
E eyssament fils subtils no so convenientz, quar tu no consaguiras per strictura am aquels aquo que voles, e no cove que entre astela e astela haja mens de un dit.	And also very thin threads are not convenient, because you will not achieve tightness with those which you want, and there is no space between the strip and the strip of a finger.
E si le malaute es ledit per las extremitatz de las stelas aprop la strictura en les locs sas, lahoras pausa dejos aquelas de stopa leon o lana carmenada entro que aquo no li fassa lesio.	And if the patient is tied by the edges of the strips to the tightness in those places, then pause with leather or a woven fabric there, so that it does not cause injury.
Alcunas veguadas fractura es am plagua, e accideys disrupcio en la codena, e yeu vindre am rememoracio en aquela en le capitol segon singularitat.	Some fractures are caused by bad habits, and they occur in the tendon, and I come back to the memory of that one in the capitulum according to its uniqueness.
E sapias que ges tot membre trencat no es streyt am stelhas al primier dia; la qual causa es quar le membre, quan es gran, no cove que pauses sobre lu stelhas sino aprop v dias o vii o mays, segon la tua seguratat de adveniment de apostema caut.	And know that there is no tightness on the first day of a broken limb; which causes because the limb, if it is large, does not cover that it stops on the strips until three days or seven or more, according to your assurance about the arrival of an abscess.
E aquesta es la manieyra dels emplaustres am les quals les Antics restauravan, les quals so pausatz sobre fractura e dislocacio e torcio.	And this is the way of the embalmers with whom the Ancients used to restore them, which were placed on fractures and dislocations and twists.
Manieyra de emplaustra comu abruejat de restaurament de fractura, convenient a motas compleccios e majorment a las femnas e als efantz, quar es de aquo sobre le qual no ventz calor ni freg: e es que prenguas de polvera de moli, e es la medula de la farina que pen deves le movement de la mola en las paretz del moli.	Method of embowelling as a shower of restoration of a fracture, suitable for complicated cases and mostly for women and children, because it is not hot on that which moves the mill; and it is that you take powder of corn meal, and that is the flour's medulla which the movement of the mill causes in the parts of the mill.
E comfeys aquel ayssi cum es, sino que cribelles aquel am album de huou, e pausa la comfeccio de lu no-spessa ni subtil; e aprop usa de aquela.	And so take that also, but instead of that, sift it with the skin of a lamb, and leave the thickening not thin or small; then use that.
Autra manieyra de emplaustre restaurant fractura e dislocacio e torcio: recipe de assafetida, de lapdanum, de acacia, de enula, e migrach, que es razit de milgraner salvage, de totz ana drac. x; de mirra e aloen ana drac. v; alochil ana drac. xx; totz sian trissatz e cribellatz e sian mesclatz am aygua alichil o am album de huou si la compleccio del malaute es scalfada; e aprop usa de aquest emplaustre, quar es de bona composicio e restaura les osses trencatz leugierament, e confereys a motz homes.	Another way to dress fractures and dislocations and twists: take assafetida, lapdanum, acacia, aniseed, and mirra, which is extracted from a million salvages, all of them three times, and mirra and aloes once; all are finely chopped and mixed with water or white of egg if the constitution of the patient is scarred; and then use this ointment, for it is of good composition and gently restores broken bones, and gives men health.
Autra manieyra de emplaustre le qual comfereys a fractura e torcio: recipe migrach e met de altea blanca ana drac. x; de mirra e de aloen ana drac v; de acacia drac. vi; de bol armenic drac. .xx.	Another way to dress fractures and twists: take white oil, one dragon from mirra, and once from aloes; from acacia, a dragon from six; and from the aronian berry, ten dragons.
Totz sian trissatz en mortier am mota contricio, e sian cribellatz, e sian comfitz am aygua o am album de huou e sia administrat.	All of them are sifted in a mortar with a little water or oil, and they are mixed, then sieved; and they are made thick with water or lamb' skin, and given to him.
Manieyra de emplaustre a juncturas e osses separatz de lors locs, e seda dolor accident en aquels e a fissuras e fractaduras: sia presa lana sutza e sia submersa en vi agre e oli cuyt e sia pausat sobre le loc.	Methods of embowelling at joints and separating bones from their places, and which cause pain or splits or fractures: take sheep's wool and dip it in wine and oil, and place it on the place.
Mays en aquest emplastre no es vertut de restauracio, de apostema caut e expelleys dolors propriament.	Not useful for this restoration, for an abscess of bad temper and to expel pain properly.
Autra manieyra de emplastre que restaura os trancat: pren fuelas de figuier sort e fuelas de papaver salvatge; contereys tot e fay emplastre de lor.	Another way to make embowelling that restores broken bones: take leaves of fig tree and leaves of poppy; grind them all together into an embowel.
Manieyra de emplastre abreujat aministrat deves la restauracio de fractura de os e quan tu voles resolucio del romanent de apostema: recipe razitz de altea, de camamilla e flors de violes, de farina de ers, de totz ana partida .i.; sian totz trissatz e sian cofitz am vi, si·l membre no es scalfat.	Method of fresh embowelling to restore bone fracture when you want to solve the bad temper of an abscess: take raisin of almond, of chamomile flowers and violet leaves, of sesame flour, of all parts. i.234; They are all sifted with water or oil if the limb is not scalfed.
Mays si es scalfat, lahoras comfeys aquel am aygua de coliandre humit o am aygua e usa de lu.	If it is scalfed, then take that also in water or lamb' skin and use that.
Autra manieyra de emplastra pus fort en resolucio que aquest primier, quan accideys apostema dur deves la restauracio del membre: recipe de razitz de altea e de semensa de li, e de balaustia, e mellilot, majorana, flors de viol, de camamilla, de totz ana partida i engual; totz sian trissatz e sian cofitz am aygua de sauze o am aygua dousa o am vi, tot aquo segon la qualitat del membre e le repaus de la color de lu.	Another way of embowelling that is more firm in resolution than the first one, when an abscess of hard temper occurs: take raisin of almond and caraway seeds; and also fennel seed, marjoram, violet leaves, chamomile flowers, all parts and give to him. They are all sifted with water or oil according to the quality of the limb and rest for the color of the limb.
Mays Ypocras no diyssec en le sieu libre que sia pausat sobre le membre trenquat deves la restauracio de lu sino cerot fayt de cera e de oli e no autre causa; e recomtec que sia migier entre grossitut e subtilitat.	You do not make incisions in the holy book that is placed on the twisted limb, which restores it except for wax that is placed there and oil; and consider that it be well made between thickness and thinness.
Mays a Gualia es vist que sian pausatz sobre le membre trencat deves la restauracio de lu e las causas en las quals es exsiccacio am petit de caliditat so ayssi cum mirra, enses e semblantz a lor de aquelas causas que havem recomtadas.	You see that they are placed on the twisted limb, which restores it except for small pieces of quality only there as myrrh, endives and herbs similar to those causes that we have recommended.
Manieyra de emplastre que comfereys a lesio e dolor: recipe migat, de cezes, de pels de home inscizes o pena de auzel, e de altea, e sal, partidas enguals; sian trissatz e cribellatz e sian cofitz, e sia fayt emplastre.	Methods of embowelling that you give to injury and pain: take myrrh, caraway seeds, hair of a man or hen, and almond, salt; they are sifted, sieved and mixed together into an embowel. They are all sifted, sieved, and given to him.
Mays la quantitat segon la qual cove que romangua la liadura e aprop sia disliada, es que consideres si no es accidit dolor ni pruziment ni le os es trencat no es maugut de son loc, lahoras tu no deslies de motz jorns.	The quantity according to which it is wrapped around the limb, and then you leave it there; if it does not cause pain or a split, nor has the bone broken; then do not leave it for any reason.
E si accideys al loc dolor vehement o prusiment o imflacio, lahoras tu te coyte o deslie aquel en la hora, e osta le emplastre de lu.	And if there is intense pain or a split or swelling at the place, then you should put the embowel on him in the hour; and here ends the method of embowelling.
E pren drap de li e spongia marina leon humida, e submergeys aquela en aygua tebeza, e am aquela lava le loc entro que cesse aquel pruziment e la dolor sia sedada; e aprop layssa repausar le membre per una hora; e aprop pausa sobre lu lana sutza submersa en vi agre e oli o oli rozat, e lia sobre lu per una nuoyt entro que sias segur de apostema caut, e que repause la imflacio del membre, e sia remauguda la dolor de lu.	And take a piece of linen and marine sponge also; and dip that in water or wine, and wash it over the place until the pain is soothed and the swelling stops; then leave the limb at rest for an hour; and then leave on top of the sheep' wool soaked in wine and oil, or rosewater oil, and lie down; within a new moment you are sure about the abscess of bad temper, and that you stop the swelling of the limb, and its pain is soothed.
E aprop itera aquela strictura subtil e emplastre petit e no·l strenhas per la tua constriccio primieyra, e subtilia am aquel entro que sia sanat.	And then repeat that subtle constriction and paste small and don't tighten them for your first constriction, and gently on the spot that is to be cured.
E si vezes que le apostema e la rogor e la dolor e la imflacio e tots les accidentz ja so remaugutz de tot, e indigeysses de emplastre e de strictura, lahoras tu itera aquel ayssi cum has fayt al comensant engualment.	And if many times the boil and the redness and the pain and the swelling and all the accidents have already been removed with paste and constriction, then you repeat that same thing after having made a starting cut.
E si no accideys al membre alcuna causa de aquelas que havem ditas, lahoras no deslies aquel sino aprop tres dias o quatre o v o .vii.; e alcunas veguadas tot aquo es layssat per xx dias segon que a tu appar per la desliadura del membre, ayssi cum havem dit, entro que la fractura adhereys, e se acosta a la coagulacio de la carn sobre aquel.	And if there does not happen to the member any cause of those that we have said, then don't give up that treatment after three or four days or five or seven; And some are left for twenty days according to what you have said, since the part has been relieved of the constriction, and if there is an adhesion of the fracture, then place blood-clotting powder on it.
E lahoras ajusta en la strictura mays que en la tua strictura primieyra tota, e ayusta en la engrossacio de la vianda del malaute, segon que es precedida la rememoracio de lu.	Then adjust the constriction more than your first constriction, and adjust the thickening of the liquid in the patient's skin according to how it has been relieved.
Mays si tu vezes le loc de la fractura ja desiccar e extenuar mays que no cove, lahoras sapias que·l nutriment es prohibit pervenir ad aquel; e donc embroca aquel am aygua tebeza deves tota veguada que delias aquel; e sia aquo en totz tres dias; e alleuja la strictura un petit, e per aquesta operacio corr al membre le nutriment, e es sanat leugierament.	More if you find the place of the fracture has dried out and become thinner than before, then know that food is not reaching it; and therefore immerse it in hot water every three days, so that it is moistened slightly; and with this operation, treat the member with food, and it will be cured a little.
Mays aquo que fan les fols restauradors de la fractura del membre autra veguada quan no es restaurat al comensament, segon que cove, e es restaurat segon tortuositat, es error segon la operacio de lor, e temor gran, e si fos dreyturier aquo agrandit les Antics en lors libres e agueran am aquo obrat.	More if the joint-friction that is made to restore the fracture of the member is not restored at the beginning, according to what it covers, and is restored according to its tortuosity, then know that it is an error according to the operation, and great fear, and if it were to be dried out, it would enlarge the old ones in their free parts and spread out on the water.
E yeu no he vist ad alcu de lor aquo far, per que es pus razonable que aquo no fassa.	And I have not seen any of them do that, so it is reasonable to think that they don'
Capitol segon: De fractura quan accideys en le cap.	Chapter according: Of fractures when they occur on the head.
Las specias de fracturas son motas, e las figuras de lor son diversas, e las causas son distinctas, quar de fracturas alcuna es fayta per percussio de spaza, e la percussio osta tot le os entro al ciphac, le qual es dejos le os, ayssi cum fay ayssa en le fust, e per aquo aquesta specia es nompnada ascial; o la spaza inscideys alcuna partida del os, e inscideys la carn de lu e no passa la inscizio entro al derier de lu; e aquesta specia de fractura es nompnada levatio absoluta.	The types of fractures are various, and the causes are distinct, since some fractures are caused by impact with a hard object, and the impact stops all the way down to the root of the bone, leaving it intact, as if there had been a cut in one part of the bone, but not in another; and that type of fracture is called a complete levitation.
E la plagua de aquestas doas fracturas o es gran o pauca, e de fractura que es contricio o atricio; e causa de lu es percussio am poyra o cazement sobre peyra, e a lor semblantz.	And the pain of these two types of fractures is great or small, and the cause of them is impact with fire or stone on the head, and their appearance is similar.
E aquesta fractura o es penetrant que ja apropinqua al pannicol le qual es dejos le os; o es en la facia del os, e la plagua de aquestas doas fracturas o es gran o pauca.	And this fracture is either penetrating, so that the skin is already separating from the bone, or it is on the face of the bone, and the pain of these two types of fractures is great or small.
E de fractura es que es ameguada en le os, en la subtilitat del cabel petita, e per aquo es nompnada aquesta specia fractura capillar.	And some fracture is that it is absorbed in the bone, in the subtlety of the hair, and this type of fracture is called a capillary fracture.
E es fractura que es fayta o per cazement o per percussio de peyra e a lu semblantz, que fa intrar alcuna lamina del os a las partidas dedintz, e es fayta en le loc concavitat ayssi cum accideys als payroles de eram quan accideys a lor percussio e es partida de lor intrada a las partidas dedintz.	And it is a fracture that has been caused by impact with stone or impact with fire, and its appearance is similar, so that one layer of the bone enters into another place inside; and it is made in the concave part, as if there had been an entrance into the inside when the impact occurs on the sides.
E majorment es fayt aquo en les cors de osses humitz, ayssi cum so caps de efantz.	And most often it is made on the bones of humans, as if they were heads of youth.
E so a totas aquestas specias fracturas satagias, so son pessas ayssi cum stelhas separadas.	And therefore all these types of fractures are bad, and that is why they are called such.
E yeu vindre am reremoracio de tot aquo en son loc.	I come with the memory of all this in my mind.
E conoyssem totas aquestas specias de fractura per deteccio sobre aquelas e per inquisicio de lor am tentas e ostament de carn corrumpuda que es sobre lor.	And I have learned about all these types of fractures through detection, inquiry, and observation of corrupted flesh that is on them.
E specia capillar es conoguda per aysso que es descubert sobre le os, e es abstergit, e linit sobre lu am tentha, quar la fractura appar negra.	And the capillary specialty has been known through a discovery that is found on the bone, and it is dried out, and appears black.
Mays en la curacio de fractura considera al comensament les accidentz del malaute, e lahoras si tu vezes per los accidentz que signifique per significacio manifesta sobre paor, ayssi cum es vomit de colera, e extencio, e perdement de entendament, e abscizio de votz, e sincopi, e febre acuta, e eyssiment dels huels e rogor de aquels, e semblantz a lor dels accidentz en las majors disposicios, ses dopte no es sanat.	More in the treatment of fractures, at the beginning, consider the patient' accidents, and if you find by means of manifest signs that they refer to pain, then know that vomiting of cholera, ekstasis, loss of reason, confusion, fainting, high fever, and a similar appearance to these are not cured.
E si vezes accidentz no-correntz tu speras salut, lahoras tu comensa la curacio de lu.	And if you do not hope for a good result from those accidents, then begin the treatment of them.
La qual causa es quar si es vengut a tu le plaguat en le comensament cum es plaguat e aquo es en les dias de ivern, lahoras cove que tu studias en le ostament del os denant le dia xiiii segon tota disposicio.	The reason is that if it has come to you in the beginning with pain and it is in winter, then know that you study the structure of the bone before the thirteenth day according to all dispositions.
E si es en les dias d’estiu, lahoras cove que te coytes ostar le os denant le vii dia, habantz que aquo que es dejos le os sia corromput del pannicol, e que accidescan les accidentz que havem recomtatz.	And if it is in the summer days, then know that you study the structure of the bone before the seventh day, having left the skin intact from the bone, and that accidents occur as a consequence.
E si la fractura ja es pervenguda al pannicol cubrent le cervel, e es am partidas menudas e atricio, lahoras cove que inscidas la partida conminuta e atrita, segon que yeu recomtare a tu.	And if the fracture has already reached the skin that covers the neck, and it is broken in several pieces and cut, then know that you study the cut that has been made, as I have instructed you.
E es que tu razas le cap del malaute plaguat, e descuebres sobre le os segon costuma e manieyra a tu possible segon la figura de la plagua, e que sia leugier sobre le malaute.	And it is that you examine the head of the patient to discover any fracture according to custom and method, and that it be slight on the skin.
E si accideys a tu deves la deteccio del os, fluxs de sanc o apostema caut, lahora tu te oppausa a lu am aquo que cove, e es que huemplas le loc de draps infuzes en vi e oli rozat, e fassa repausar la plagua entro que sia sedat le apostema, e sies segur de fluxs del sanc; e aprop comensa en la circuicio del os e en la ablatio de lu.	And if it has happened to you, then you detect the bone, and let blood or pus come out with a caustice, and pause it so that the blood does not come out, and if it is sure of the flow of the blood; and then begin to examine the circumference of the bone and the removal of it.
E aquo sia segon una de dos manieyras de operacio.	And this should be according to one of two methods of operation.
E la una manieyra es que tu inscidas le os am inscisori de streyt tal, e aquesta es la forma de lu: E aprop administra un autre inscissori aquest, un pauc pus lat que aquel; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And the first method is that you cut the bone with a straight chisel, and this is its form: And then you administer another one that is slightly less than that; and this is its form.
E aprop administra mays le inscissori pus lat que·l segon.	And then you administer a wider one again.
E cove que sia deves tu nombre de inscissoris diverses, dels quals alcus so pus latz que alcus autres; e alcus de lor so pus breus que·ls autres e sian en le derier de acuitat de las suas extremitatz, e sian de ferr indi o felod.	And then know the names of various chisels, some of which are wider than others; and some of them are narrower than others, and they are on the sharp end of their edges, and they are made of iron or steel.
E usa de lor am facilitat en percussio sobre le inscissori per so que no concutesca le cap e leda aquel.	And use them according to ease in striking on the chisel so that it does not hurt you, and then strike with it.
E si le os es fort, dur, lahoras cove que perfores en le circuit de lu denant que tu administres los inscissoris am les taravels, les quals so nomnatz taravels no-profundantz.	And if the bone is strong and hard, then know that you pierce in front of it before administering chisels; those are called non-deep knives.
E no so nomnatz ayssi sino quar aquels no pausan le terme de l’os del test ad aquo que es aprop lu, per so quar al taravel es redonda extremitat o marge sobre aquel que es dejos le cap de lu agut semblant a marge o a cercle petit, le qual prohibeys esser submergit e passar la spissitut del os.	And they are not called that way because those do not stop the term of the bone's head in water that is next to it; however, since the taravel has a round extreme or edge on the bone that is left, this resembles a small circle, and it prohibits being submerged and passing through the bone' structure.
E es convenient que tu prenguas de aquestz taravels gran nombre dels quals quascu convenesca a la spicitut de quascun os, entro que sia a tu present en tottz testz del cervel la extremitat del qual sia aguda, la quantitat en longitut e brevitat sia segon la quantitat de spicitut de aquest test.	And it is convenient that you take a great number of these knives, as many as are needed for the bone' structure; except in the case of the head's extreme part, since its quantity in length and brevity depends on the amount of the bone' structure's smoothness.
E aquesta es la forma de tres specias de teravels: La qualitat de perforar en le circuit del os trencat es que pauses le teravel sobre le os e revolvas aquel am les tieus ditz entro que sapias que l’os ja es penetrat; e aprop permuda le terevel ad autre loc, e pausa aquo que es entre tot trauc la quantitat de la grosseza del ray o enviro aquo.	And this is the form of three types of knives: The quality of piercing in front of the broken bone is that you place the knife on the bone and move it with a twisting motion so that it does not stop; then return it to another location, and pause it so that water passes through its width, if possible.
E aprop inscideys am inscissoris aquo que es entre quascun trauc del os, e fay aquel pus subtil que podes sobre aquo en fi de levitat, ayssi cum havem dit, entro que erradiques le os, o am la tua ma, o am alcuna autra causa per alcus sturmentz les quals auras apparelhatz ad aquo, ayssi cum tanalhas e forceps subtils.	And then you insert a chisel between each part of the bone, and make it so thin that you can work on it; as we have said: provided that you remove the bone, or your hand, or another cause with some instruments that you will prepare for water, as tongs and forceps that are thin.
E cove que tu guardes am tota cautela que l’inscissori no toque alcuna causa del ciphac.	And so that the incision does not touch any cause of the patient's chest, keep all your caution.
E donc cum auras circuit le os perforan, e sira separat del ciphac si es continuat am lu, e auras aquel extrayt, cove que razas e enguales aquel en la asperitat de lu de aquo que es en le os am autra sturment semblant a inscissori, mays empero cove que sia pus teon e pus subtil que les autres inscissoris.	And so when you have pierced the bone, if it continues to grow, separate it from the patient's chest as much as possible, and remove it, provided that you cut it with a sharp instrument like an incision, but more carefully than the others, since it is located in the area of the foot where there are other instruments resembling incisions.
E si roman alcuna partida dels osses petitz e satagias, lahoras pren aquela am facilitat am aquo que es deves tu dels sturmentz; e aprop aquo cura la plagua am lichinis e enguentz les quals havem ditz.	And if any part of the small bones is left loose and unstable, then take that easily with a sharp instrument, which you will use for cutting; and then care for the wound with lime and smear on the ointment we have mentioned.
E l’autra manieyra de operacio es leugiera, longinqua de paor, la qual diyssec Gualia e la lauzec per gran lausor; e aquest es le sermo de lu: necessari es a tu en le comensament que comenses descobrir la partida del os del loc en le qual es la fractura pus vehement e pus manifesta, entro que quan auras descubert aquela partida e auras pausat dejos lu la extremitat de aquest inscissori lent e alegre del qual aquesta es la forma:	And another way of operating is to cut through the skin, far from fear, which was used by Guaglia and the knife in long strokes; and this is what he said: it is necessary for you to start revealing the fracture's break, as much as possible, until you have revealed that break and have paused there the tip of a slow and gentle incision, through which this is the form:
E es que la partida lenticular es leon e no inscideys alcuna causa, e la partida aguda es de lu en dos latz avantz en longitut, ayssi cum vezes; que la partida lenticular sia ajustada al ciphac am la facia de lu inscident aguda en le os.	And it is that a rounded break is strong and does not cut into any cause, and an acute break is in two places ahead of each other in length, so that the rounded break is adjusted to the chest with its face facing the acute break in the bone.
E aprop percuteys sobre le inscissori de una partida am un petit malhet entro que inscidas tot le os am facilitat ayssi cum es revolvut, e tu sias segur del pannicol que no accida en lu accident que temas en denguna manieyra, e si le medicant14 era le pus fol de totz les homes e le mays ignorant de lor; certament, e si era dorment.	And so you hit the incision with a small hammer until it is completely broken, and you will be sure that such an accident does not happen to you in any way, and if the medicine was the most effective for all people and the most ignorant of them; certainly, and if it was sleep-inducing.
Lahoras si romania alcuna causa annexa al os del pannicol en alcus locs de os, inscidira aquel de lu am la extremitat del inscissori aquel lenticular, e deliuraria aquel de lu am facilitat, quar es deliurat de lu ses nocument e ses paor.	And if any cause is attached to the patient' s chest bone in several places, cut it with a knife at the end of the incision, and release it easily, because it is released by itself and does not cause pain or fear.
E si fractura del os no penetra entro al pannicol, e aquo que es abscidit o es ostat del os es la facia de lu, e roman en lu asperitat e satagias subtils, lahoras cove que razas aquela asperitat e erradiques aquelas satagias am razoris subtils per les quals tu has preparat le nombre, de diversas quantitatz per que sia a tu possible administrar de aquels en tot loc les pus convenientz de lor e le pus dreyt de aquels segon aquo en que te perduzeys la tua operacio aquel os trencat e la figura de lu.	And if the bone's fracture does not penetrate into the chest, and what is broken or left out of the bone is its surface, and there are thin and sharp points in that area, then cut those points with very sharp points that you have prepared, in various quantities so that you can administer them in all places where they are most convenient for you and most appropriate for applying them according to what you need;
E cove que administres en la tua razio am la qual razes le os al comensament le pus lat de aquels razoris, e aprop usa aprop lu del pus subtil de lu, e no cesses far aquo segon continuitat entro que pervenguas ad aministrar le pus teon e·l pus subtil de totz aquels.	And when you administer the sharpest points with which to cut the bone at the beginning, and then use very sharp ones in succession, and do not stop until you have finished applying them all;
Mays en quascuna de las autras fracturas petitas capillars e fractura subtil, cove que administres cura segon aquo que perduseys ad rectificacio de lu.	But in any of the other small fractures or subtle breaks, administer care according to what you need to correct it.
E es causa que no es ameguada sobre totz les quals han studi en aquela art.	And that is why all those who have studied this art are not familiar with it.
E stec sobre aquo que nos scriut havem mostrat en grans fracturas.	But he has shown us how to operate in great fractures.
E si le pannicol es retangut quan tu erradiques le os, lahoras cove que prenguas drap de li segon la quantitat de la plagua, e submergeys aquel en oli rozat, e pausa aquel sobre le orrifici de la plagua; e aprop pren autre drap doblat o triplicat e submergeys lu en vi e oli rozat e pausa aquel sobre drap prim e fay aquo al pus leugierament que podes sobre aquel, que no graves le ciphac; e aprop administra sobre aquel liament lat, e no strenhas aquel sino per quantitat que tengua la plagua tant solament.	And if the chest is stretched when you cut the bone, then take a cloth according to the amount of wound, and dip it in hot and oily rosin, and pause it over the wound' s orifice; and then take another cloth, folded or tri-fold, and dip it in oil and rosin, and pause it over the first cloth with great care so that the chest is not injured; and then administer a very thin fabric over it, and do not stretch it except by the amount of wound.
E layssa aquel am aquesta cura per un dia o per dos entro que sias segur de apostema caut; e aprop deslia aquel e aprop aministra medicinas am las quals es superflua siccitat, ayssi cum razitz de lin e farina de errs, e polvera de enses e de aristologia, e de semblantz ad aquels.	And leave that wound with this care for a day or two until you are sure that there will be no suppuration; and then wash it off and administer medicines that are superfluous, such as rye flour and bread crumbs, and powder of onions and aromatics, and similar to those.
E es que tu fassas de aquestas medicinas polvera que sia pulverizada sobre la plagua, ayssi cum son secas; e universalment, administra en aquel tota medicina de proprietat de la qual es que abstergesca e no mordique.	And it is that you sprinkle the powder of these medicines over the wound when they are dry; and generally, administer all medicines of their properties which cause constipation and not chewing.
E guarda te segon la tua vertut que la plagua en la tua curacio sia neta; e no sia en lu surdicia de enguent ni autra; ni no layssas agreguar virulencia en lu; quar quan es ajustada sobre le pannicol del cervel, corromp aquel e poyreys aquel, e accideys sobre le malaute aprop aquo malicia maligna.	And keep your word that the wound in your treatment be clean; and is not in a layer of ointment or any other thing; nor do you add virulence to it; because when it is adjusted on the patient' s chest, he corrupts it and destroys it, and it causes malice and evil.
E accideys en le ciphac del cap, cum de lu es mondificat le os e majorment quan es menspresada la cura de lu, e es negror en la superficia de lu; e donc considera lahoras si accideys al malaute les accidentz que havem ditz, sapias que es parnicios ses tot dopte.	And it happens in the patient' s head, and when it is separated from the bone, and more importantly when its treatment is finished, and it is blacker on its surface; and then consider, at that time, whether it happens to the man that we have mentioned, that you know that it is dangerous.
E si no accideys negror sino de la medicina que es pausada desus, e es en vertut de aquela medicina que fassa aquela negror, lahoras cove que tu prenguas de mel una partida e de oli rozat partidas .iii., e am aquels linieys un drap, e aprop pausa aquel sobre le ciphac; e aprop cura aquel am las specias de curacio que conveneys entro que sia sanat.	And if it does not happen to be black due to the medicine that is applied to it, and it is because of the virtue of that medicine that causes that blackness; then take a cloth of honey and some oil of roses. and put a cloth on it, and then pause that over the wound; and then cure it with the medicines we have mentioned to you in order to heal it.
Capitol .iii.	Chapter III.
De restauracio del nas quan es trincat.	Of Restoring a Broken Nose.
Sapias que no es trencat del nas sino doas partidas ensemps pus sobiranas, o una de aquelas alcunas veguadas, per so quar en lu has dos osses, quar la partida dejos es cartillaginosa, e no es trencada e no accideys a lu sino atricio e tortuositat e sinuitat.	You should know that the nose is not broken in two parts separately, and one of those small bones is separated from its cavity, or one of those small bones is fractured, because there are two bones; because the break of the bone is cartilage-like, and it is not broken, but happens to the nose only a little bit of twisting and tortuosity and uneasiness.
Mays si es trencada la una de las doas partidas de lu, lahoras cove que tu intrometas le dit petit en le sieu nas, e que engualhas aquela fractura dedintz am le tieu dit indic, e am le dit pous defora, entro que retorne le nas segon la sua figura natural.	But if one of the two small bones is broken, then insert a very small thing into its nose, and fix that fracture inside with a very small needle, and push it from outside towards the tip of the nose, so that it returns to its natural shape.
E sia fayt aquo per tu am facilitat, e guarda te que no caja per aquela tua operacio sobre le malaute delor.	And do it easily for you, and be careful not to hurt yourself with your operation on the man's face.
E si la fractura es en la pus sobirana partida del nas, e le dit no perve ad aquela, lahoras cove que sia equat am la extremitat del ray en le qual sia petita grossitut.	And if the fracture is in the uppermost part of the nose, and does not reach that bone, then fix it to the tip of the nose with a very small needle.
E si la fractura es en doas partidas, lahoras tu fay le semblant de aquo.	And if the fracture is in two parts, then you make a similar shape for that.
E coyta te am restauracio de lu en le primier dia de la fractura, si es possible; e sino, lahoras aprop le vii o·l x deves le repaus del apostema caut.	And do not delay in repairing it on the first day of the fracture if possible; and otherwise, then wash it with oil to relieve suppuration.
E aprop entromet en la extremitat del nas una meca de drap de li, si la fractura es en una partida, o metz doas calguas, si la fractura es en doas partidas, e sia en la calgua grossitut de tanta quantitat que umpla le trauc del nas.	And then insert a cloth hook into the tip of the nose with great care if the fracture is in one part, or with two hooks if the fracture is in two parts, and fill it with the thickness of as much as the width of the nose fills.
E diysso alcus dels antics restauradors que las calguas sian enfundudas en boder, e sian permudadas en tot dia, mays no es vist a mi; habantz cove que la meca sia enfunduda en album de huou comfit am polvera de moli; e aprop layssa la qualgua entro que l’os sia fermat e sia endurazida la cartillage.	And I have said about the ancient restorative techniques that the hooks are wrapped in cloth, and they are changed every day, but I do not see them; provided that the hook is wrapped in album with oil of roses to harden cartilage. And then leave it alone until the bone has been fixed and hardened.
E alcunas veguadas sia entromes en le nas, en loc de calgua, pena de auca pus que es envolopada de drap de li leon; e sia que ja te la fractura del nas pus vehement e que le malaute no sia prohibit de inspiracio.	And some small bones are caught in the nose, instead of one, because they are wrapped in cloth of lion; and it is that you know that this fracture of the nose is very violent, and that the man' s life is not at risk from breathing.
E aquesta causa no es a tu necessaria; e si voles, fay aquo, e si voles, fay calguas.	And this reason is not necessary for you; and if you want, make one, and if you want, make two.
E si accideys autra veguada apostema caut, emplastra le nas am cerot o am coto enfus en vi agre e oli rozat, o am diaquilon.	And if there is another suppuration, then fill the nose with wax in oil and rosin, or with a cotton swab in linseed oil, or with powder of onions and aromatics, and similar to those.
Mays si no accideys apostema caut, lahoras cove que emplaustres aquel defora am farina de sizami e am polvera de enses cofitz am album de huou; e aprop pausa sobre lu stopa leon, e no lies le nas am alcuna causa.	But if there is not suppuration, then take a cloth of lion and wrap it around the nose, and do not tie it too tightly; and place your hand over the area so that the nose does not move.
Mays si so trencats les osses del nas am fractura petita o so conminuitz, lahoras cove que scindas sobre aquels, e extraguas aquels am insturmentz que conveno ad aquels; e aprop cos la scissura, e cura aquela am aquo que encarna e consolida, e am emplastres ad aquo convenientz.	If the bones of the nose are broken or shattered, then cut them out with a scalpel and remove them with instruments suitable for the job. Then close up the wound, and treat it with oil that soothes and hardens it, as well as with ointments suitable for the wound.
E si accideys plagua dedintz le nas, lahoras cove que cures aquela am calguas e administra canulas de plom entro que sia de tot sanat.	And if there is a plague inside the nose, then cut off that part with calques and introduce lead tubes into it to make it sound; administer ointment for a while until it heals completely.
Capitol .iiii.	Chapter .iiii.
De restauracio de la mandibula quan es trincada.	On the restoration of the jaw when it is dislocated.
Quan la mandibula dejos es rompuda e la fractura de lu no es am plagua, reguarda lahoras si la fractura es deforas tant solament, e no es trencada en dos e es curvada a las partidas dedintz, lahoras la sua cognicio es leugiera.	When the jaw is broken and the fracture is not out of place, nor has it been twisted so much that it is curved at one end; then its recovery will be easy.
E cove donc, si la fractura es en la part dreyta, que tu intrometas le tieu indic senestre en la boca del malaute; e semblantment si la fractura es an la mandibula senestra, lahoras intromet le dit indic de la ma dreyta; e impelleys am aquel la gilbositat de la fractura dedintz am facilitat a las partidas defora, am la tua autra ma de la partida defora del os; am aquel decentment equa aquelam.	And so, if the fracture is on the right side, then insert the little finger of your left hand into the mouth of the patient; and likewise, if the fracture is on the left side, then insert the little finger of your right hand; and push the fracture from the inside with ease towards the outside, with your other hand at the outside end of the bone; and hold it in place firmly.
E si la fractura de la mandibula ja es separada en doas, lahoras cove que administres extensio de doas partz segon rectitut entro que sia possibla la equacio de lu.	And if the jaw fracture has separated into two parts, then cut away two strips according to their length on both sides so that you can restore the alignment of the bone.
E si accideys conmocio de dentz a disrupcio, lahoras strenh aquelas de las quals speras que romandran am fil de aur o de argent o de ceda; e aprop pausa sobre la mandibula trencada cerot, e aprop pausa sobre lu drap duplicat, e pausa sobre le drap gran stelha decentment fayta, o una pessa de sola engual a la longitut de la mandibula; e aprop lia aquela desus segon que a tu es apparelhada la liadura de lu e que conveneys la applicacio, entro que no es destruida.	And if there is a concussion or a dislocation of the teeth, then strengthen those which you hope will hold fast with gold, silver, or ivory; and place wax over the broken jaw, and place a double cloth over it, and put on a large star-shaped cloth neatly folded, or a single weight according to its length; and tie it firmly so that it does not break.
E comanda al malaute que use de repaus e tranquilitat, e pausa la vianda de lu sorbicios leons.	And command the patient to rest and be calm, and provide him with small sips of liquid.
E si extimas que ja es alterada la figura en alcuna manieyra, lahoras tu te coyta e deslia aquel al tertz dia; e aprop rectifica aquo que ja es alterat de lu e emplaustra aquel am polvera de moli, am album de huou, o am farina de cisami, pus que tu auras ostat le cerot de lu, e pausa sobre le emplastra lana leon.	And if you suspect that the shape has been altered in any way, then hide it and wait until the third day; and then adjust what is altered with powder of ash, milk-powder, or flour of chamomile, so that you will have to remove the wax from it, and place it on a woollen cloth.
E adonc cum sta annex e ajustat aquel emplastre sobre lu, e la disposicio del os no es alterada, layssa aquel, que no le deslies entro que sia sanat e strenh la fractura; quar motas veguadas aquesta fractura es streyta en tres sempmanas.	Then, when it is stable and the position of the bone has not changed, leave it alone, unless it is painful and the fracture seems to be healing, for the fracture becomes stiff in three weeks.
E si autra veguada accida apostema caut, lahoras administra aquo que havem dit motas veguadas en la sedacio de lu entro que sia sanat, e sia remaugut aquel apostema.	And if another outbreak of fever occurs, then administer the oil that we have mentioned to soothe it and treat it; also use a poultice.
E si la fractura es am plagua, lahoras considera si es pessa del os separada o satagias, lahoras tu te subtilia que ostes aquelas satagias am aquo que conveneys ad aquo en la remocio de aquelas dels sturmentz.	And if the fracture is infected, then consider whether it is a small fracture or a large one; then administer oil to those that hurt from the movement of their weapons.
E si le orrifici de la plagua es streyt, lahoras tu le amplifique am le fleubotomi segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	And if the hole of the infection is small, then enlarge it with a scalpel according to the quantity of your need.
E aprop quan tu auras ostat aquelas satagias, e de aquelas no sira remaugut re, lahoras tu cos le orrifici de la plagua si es ampla; e sino, pausa sobre aquela un dels emplaustres que conveneysso ad aquo e encarnan aquela, entro que sia sanada.	Then, when you have removed those that hurt, and if the hole is wide, then close it up with a poultice so that it heals; otherwise, place something between them that will prevent movement and allow oil to reach it.
Capitol .v.	Chapter.v.
De restauracio de la furcula quan es trinquada.	On the restoration of the fork (furcula) when it is dislocated.
Motas veguadas es trencada la furcula de la partida denant deves le muscle, e aquela fractura es fayta en una de tres manieyras.	The fork (furcula) is broken in one of the three ways.
Quar o es trencada, o seperada, o es seperada en doas partz otra que no accidan satagias; e es leugier a la restauracio de lu; o es ayssi que accideysso en lu satagias, e es dificil a restauracio de lu; o es ayssi que la fractura es am plagua.	It is broken either in one piece or separated into two pieces, but not both ways, so that it does not cause pain; or else the fracture occurs when it is separated, which makes the recovery difficult, or when it is infected.
E la operacio en aquela, quan la fractura es ses plagua, es que tu fassas esser present dos ministres, per so que la un tengua le adjutori e siegua la furcula trencada, e l’autre extenda le col ves aquela partida.	Then the operation on this is that you prepare two ministers; so that one may hold the fork that has been broken in half, and the other may extend the neck of the patient at the end that is separated.
E aprop enguala la fractura am les tieus ditz entro que sia fayta la forma de lu segon que cove, e no sia en lu eminencia pauca ni concavitat.	Then insert the points of the fork into the teeth, so that it takes the shape of the patient's mouth, and not be in its little prominence or concavity.
E si indigeysses mes de extencio, lahoras cove que pauses dejos le titillic del malaute spera de drap o de lana, e sia la grandesa de lu segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat; e exten e eleva la furcula e coarta la spera am la tua ma entro que enguales la frectura segon que cove.	And if you are too weak to hold the fork, then place a cloth or wool over your hand and hold it firmly; then extend and raise the fork and cut it with your hand above your head so that it cuts according to its length.
E si no podes atirar la extremitat de la furcula a las partidas defora, per so quar es pervenguda al preon, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sua cervitz, e pauses sobre le muscle de lu un coyssi migier en grandeza.	And if you cannot reach the end of the fork to the outside ends, because it reaches too far forward; then place the patient on their back and pause a small cloth over the neck, and hold it down with your hand.
E le ministre prema le muscle de lu a las partidas dejos entro que l’os de la furcula sia elevat que es en le preon en sus, e lahoras tu rectifique la fractura e enguala aquela am les tieus ditz.	Then the minister presses the neck muscles on the side that is separated from the patient, so that the bone of the fork is raised up to the place where it should be; and then adjust the fracture and insert the points with your teeth.
Mays si sentes satagias de la furcula e so maugudas, lahoras cove que fendes sobre aquela e extraguas aquelas satagias am facilitat.	Then, if you feel pain in the fork, then cut it off and remove those that hurt with ease.
E si es retenguda en le os, lahoras tu ingenia inscisio de lu am un dels inscissoris les quals has apparelhatz ad aquo, pus que havias pausat dejos la furcula le sturment que serve le ciphac; e es sturment de fust o de ferr del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And if it is stuck in the bone, then use an invention of yours with one of the cutters that you have already used on water, because you have held it aside from the fork; and this cutter can be made of wood or iron, of which this is the shape:
E es semblant a culier del qual aquesta es la concavitat; e sia la sua latitut segon aquo que has necessitat de lu, segon la grandeza del os o la pauqueza de lu.	And it resembles a scythe whose concave shape matches this one; and its length should match what you have needed from it, according to the size of the bone or the width of it.
Mays la longitut de lu sia segon que es a tu possible a la operacio; que haja doas extremitatz ayssi cum vezes, e la una extremitat sia ample e l’autre streyta.	Then its length should be suitable for the operation; that there are two ends like this, and one end is wide and the other narrow.
E si la disrupcio de la plagua la qual has inscidida quan has extraytas la satagia del os es ampla, e yest segur de apostema caut, lahoras tu ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura.	And if the outbreak of infection which you have cut off from the bone is wide, and be sure to treat it with poultice; then adjust the two lips of the infection with sutures.
E si la disrupcio es pauca, o temes apostema caut, lahoras tu uemple la plagua am draps e pulvils segon la quantitat de la scissura de la plagua.	And if the disruption is small, or you fear an outbreak of infection, then use cloth and powder according to the quantity of the wound's opening.
E si accideys apostema caut, lahoras infon drap en vi agre e oli rozat e vi, e pausa sobre aquel.	And if an outbreak of infection occurs, then dip a cloth in vinegar and olive oil, and place it on it.
Mays la strictura del os quan es ses plagua e ses seccio, es que pauses emplastre fayt de farina de moli am album de huou, e pausa sobre lu stopa leon, e aprop pausa la spera dejos le titillic de lu, si indigeyssas de aquela, e aprop pren humemate, so es torca la qual teno les Sarrazis , que sia mot longua, e sia latitut de lu de un palm o entorn aquel; e aprop pausa pulvils duplicatz sobre la stopa e l’emplastre; e aprop pren una stela de taula subtil de la qual la latitut d’ela sia de tres ditz e en longitut semblantment; e aprop envolopa aquela en drap, e aprop envolopa aquel drap am la stela en lo loc sobre le loc de la fractura; e aprop pausa humemati ayssi cum es revout, e revol aquela sobre le col de lu e dejos le titillic de lu sa e dejos le titillic de lu malaute, e reduzeys aquela sobre tota partida, e quan vezes que la strictura de la fractura am strictura descent, e es aquo que no es occultat sobre tu.	Then the tightness of the bone when it is broken and sectioned off, is that you place a poultice made of flour with milk, and place it on the neck's knot, and turn the patient so that their face looks up; then, when you want to loosen the stricture of the fracture according to its tightness, then take two seeds of fennel, which should be long and wide; and its length should be about three fingers; and place them on the poultice; and then wrap the cloth around it; and then tie the cloth tightly; and then wrap that cloth around the patient's neck and back, and turn them so that their face is towards the ground.
E tot, que no sia mauguda la stelha desobre le os trencat; e per so cove que tu vejas le malaute quascun dia, que quan le liament es mollificat o vezas la stela ja esser remauguda, lahoras tu rectifica aquo e strenh la liadura.	And all this should be done so that the patient's jaw does not tighten; and therefore, when you see the ligature become soft or the stings are loosened, then adjust it and strengthen the ligature.
E aprop pausa le dormir del malaute sobre le col de lu, e pausa dejos le titillic de lu deves le dormir de lu en la nueyt un petit coyssi; per so que am aquel sia elevat le adjutori de lu del latz de aquel, e donc es elevada la la fractura de la furcula a elevacio del muscle; o sia le bras de lu liat al col de aquel.	Then place the patient to sleep on their neck, and pause a little cloth over their throat, so that it does not touch their neck completely; but so that it is raised a little from their neck, and then raise the fork up to the muscle' position; or hold it at the end of the neck.
E no deslies le liament si no accideys en le loc prusiment o apostema, entro a xii dias.	And do not remove the ligature if it does not happen in the place immediately or apoplexy, within twelve days.
E aprop renovelha le emplastre si has vista la facia de lu ad aquo, e ajusta en la strictura e restaura aquel e layssa entro que sia restaurat e sia coagulat la fractura de la furcula.	Then replace the plaster if you see the face of it moistened by water, and adjust it in the constriction and restore that, and leave it until it is restored and the fracture of the femur is coagulated.
E es strenguda e comfortada segon le mes en xxviii dias, e alcunas veguadas en alcus homes es fayt en mens de temps de aquel.	Then strengthen it and comforted according to the measure in twenty-eight days, and some witnessed in some men is done in the period of time from that.
Capitol .vi.	Chapter VI.
De restauracio de fractura de la spalla.	On the Restoration of a Fracture of the Shoulder Blade.
Spatula tart es trencada en le loc lat de lu e no so trencatz de lu sino les marges.	The spatula pie is broken in the place of the shoulder blade and are not broken from it but the edges.
E donc quan es trencat le loc de lu — e es trencat en le mieg loc de lu — e no es conogut sino per tocament, lahoras segon que es la figura de la fractura sforsa te la preparacio de lu e reduzir aquela segon la figura natural en tota manieyra de engen la qual es a tu possible.	And when the place of the shoulder blade is broken— and is broken in the middle of the shoulder blade— and is not known except by touching, then according to that it is the figure of the fracture dislocated I prepare it and reduce that according to the natural figure in all ways by preventing the which is possible.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc polvera de moli am album de huou e stopa leon; e aprop pausa pulvil de drap duplicat; e aprop pausa sobre lu stela lada de taula subtil segon la quantitat de la spatula tota o mays un pauc.	Then place over the place powder of flour white of wool and stops lion; and place a towel doubled; and place on it a thin board according to the quantity of the spatula whole or less a little.
Mays si dejos la stela es concavitat en alcu dels locs de la spatula, lahoras tu enguala aquela concavitat am stopa leon, e aprop pueja la stela segon equalitat.	More if the place is concave in some of the places of the spatula, then you fill that concave with lion's stop; and place the board according to equality.
E aprop strenh desus am humemati longua ab constriccio decent e am fermesa de la stela entro que no sia remauguda del sieu loc.	Then strengthen it above it with a long handle of string tight and secure the board within that is not remounted from its place.
E considera le liament en quascun dia; e totas veguadas que sia mollificat, lia autra veguada e stren le e equa la stela si es remauguda del sieu loc.	And consider the ligature in every day; and all witnessed that is softened, change it and strengthen the board if it is remounted from its place.
E jagua le malaute sobre le sieu latz sa.	And strike the patient on his back slowly.
E la spatula es restaurada en xx dias o en .xxv.	And the spatula is restored in twenty days or in .twenty-five.
E donc quan es complit aquest nombre, lahoras tu dissolveys le liament, e que tu scias ensegurat quar aquela es dels osses dels quals la cominicio no es temuda ni lor dissolucio.	And when this number is completed, then you dissolve the ligature, and that you know assuredly because that is of the bones of which the beginning is not wounded nor its dissolution.
E si procezeys del loc del os pessa e pongeys dejos la codena, lahoras tu scindeys sobre lu, e osta le, e fay segon que havem dit en la fractura de la furcula de sadacio de apostema caut si accideys aqui.	And if you make a hole in the place of the bone heavy and put away from it the chisel, then you split it above it, and stop it, and do according to what we have said in the fracture of the femur of sadacio of apoplexy caut if it happens here.
Capitol .vii.	Chapter VII.
De restauracio de la fractura del pietz.	On the Restoration of a Fracture of the Foot.
Le pietz alcunas veguadas es romput en le mieg loc de lu e aquo tart endeve; mays las extremitatz de lu mot endeve que so ciccadas e comminuidas.	The foot some witnessed is broken in the middle of the foot and is broken therein and ends; but the extremities of it move therein because they are ciccadas and comminuted.
E dels accidentz de lu quan es trencat le mieg de lu es que declina a las partidas dedintz e accideys a lu gran dolor, e dificultat en lo hale, e tos, e fort leu e vomeys sanc; e es declarada en lu cavitat en le os trencat e no es occulta al sentiment.	And of the accidents of it when it is broken in the middle of it declines to the inside and happens to it great pain, and difficulty in the hale, and hoarseness, and fortness, and vomiting; and is declared in it cavity in the broken bone and is not hidden from the feeling.
E la restauracio de lu es que sia resupinat le malaute sobre le sieu dos, e pausa entre las spallas de lu un coyssi; e aprop prem als muscles de lu, e ajusta las costas de lu am las mas de dos costatz, e subtilia te en la operacio de lu e en la equacio segon tota manieyra que es ad aquo possibla e que conveneys ad aquo, entro que retorne la figura del os segon que cove.	And the restoration of it is that it be raised above its two legs, and a cushion placed between its thighs; and press to the muscles of it, and adjust the ribs of it to the sides of two ribs, and slightly in the operation of it and in the equality according to all ways that are possible and convenient to water, within that returns the figure of the bone according to what has covered.
E aprop pausa sobre lu emplastre e estopa e pausa desobre astela de taula subtil de sauze o de caligi e de a lor semblantz en levitat, pus que tu envolopas aquela en drap; e aprop subtilia te en lian aquela sobre le os trencat que no sia maugut; e vay am liadura segon retonditat al dors alcunas veguadas, e strenh aquel am strictura decent; e aprop considera la liadura en tota hora, e quan es mollificada strenh aquela.	Then place over it the plaster and straw, and place a thin board of wood or of caligi and of its likeness in levitation, because you wrap that in cloth; and place with care that is not softened; and strengthen it with a string tightly; and consider the ligature every hour, and when it is softened strengthen that.
E si necessitat provoca a desliament de aquela deves corrossio o pruziment, o dolor, o apostema que accideysso en le loc, lahoras tu coyta e deslia aquela e erradica le emplastre e rectifique aquo que accideys per aquo am manieyra de curacio de lu; e aprop reduzeys le emplastre, si vezes ad aquo la facia; e ajusta a lu strictura entro que sia sanat.	And if necessity causes that of it dissolves or pruziment, or pain, or apoplexy which happens in the place, then you cut off and separate that and remove the plaster and correct that what happens because of water by the way of curacio of it; and return the plaster, if many times to water the face; and adjust its constriction within that is cured.
Capitol .viii.	Chapter VIII.
De restauracio de las costas quan son trincadas.	On the Restoration of the Ribs When They are Broken.
Sapias que fractura de las costas no catz sino en locs grosses que siegon le dos; e de las extremitatz de lor de la partida denant no accideys ad aquelas contricio sino per aquo quar so cartillaginosas.	Know that the fracture of the ribs is made only in the large places which go to two sides; and of the extremities of it from the departure before does not happen to them contraction except by water because they are cartilaginous.
E cognicio de lu no es amaguada al sentiment deves la inquisicio de lu am les ditz.	And the knowledge of it is not hidden from the feeling but is sought after with diligence of it through the help of others.
E la restauracio sia ayssi que enguales la fractura am les ditz segon la manieyra possibla, entro que sia engulhat segon que cove, e aprop emplastre e strenh le os trencat am stela, si indigeys de aquel.	And the restoration be so that it is united with the ribs according to the possibility, within that is swallowed according to what has covered, and place the plaster on the broken bone with a board, if you are afraid of it.
E si la fractura de las costas es declinant a las partidas dedintz, lahoras accideys al malaute dolor vehement e punctura, ayssi cum punctura que accideys ad aquel que ha pleureci, e per aquo quar le os ponh le velament; e accideys a lu difficultat de hanelit, e tos, e vomit de mot sanc; e aquesta es de dificil curacio.	And if the fracture of the ribs declines to the inside, then happens to it great pain and stinging, so that it happens to him who has wept, and by water because the bone is covered; and happens to it difficulty in being washed, and hoarseness, and vomiting from motion; and this is difficult to be cured.
E ja les Antixs so engeniatz en aquela am motz engientz.	Then the Ancients are made more intelligent by that with more effort.
E de lor so que diso: cove que pauses viandas del malaute que engendro imflacio e ventositat, per que le ventre sia imflat e sia extendut, e la fractura sia impellida a las partidas defora.	And of them so that it says: Rest you the patient who engendered inflation and ventilation, so that the belly is inflated and extended, and the fracture is driven to the inside.
Mays nos avoreyssem aquo per so que no sia causa leugiera a generar apostema caut, si no accideys; e si ja accideys, lahoras ja ajuda ad aquo.	More we should draw water by that it is not a cause of legueria to generate apoplexy if it happens; and if it has happened, then it helps to water.
E diyssero alcus de lor que sia pausada desus ventoza e aprop que sucque am fortitut; e es semblant a ratiocinacio, mays empero es temut que la ventoza atire las superfluitatz al loc per la debilitat.	And they say of them that it should be stopped from the ventose and come near to drink with force; and is similar to reasoning, but is feared that the ventose pushes away the excess to the place because of weakness.
E diyssero alcus de lor: cove que·l loc sia cubert am lana que ja es submersa en oli caut, e sian pausatz pulvils entre las costas entro que sia umplida, que sia la liadura engual quan envolopas aquela segon retonditat; e aprop sia curat le malaute am curacio de pleuresi de vianda e de medicina.	And they say of them: Cover that place with wool which has already been submerged in oil if it happens, and let the board be placed between the ribs within that is filled, what has covered being united according to roundness; and be cured the patient with curacio of pleurisy of diet and of medicine.
E si causa vehement constrenh le malaute la qual no sufferta, e le os punh le velament am punctura ledent, temem sobre le malaute, lahoras cove que fendam sobre le loc, descubram de la costa trencada, e aprop pausem desobre aquela instrument que conserve le ciphac, la rememoracio del qual es precedida, e que inscidam le os am facilitat, e extraguam aquel.	And if violent constriction causes the patient pain and does not suffer it, and the bone pokes at the skin with burning, then they are afraid of the patient, then return that it break over the place, uncover the broken rib, and I take from it the instrument which keeps the ciphac, the reminder of which is preceded, and I write the bone according to convenience, and extract it.
E aprop que ajustem las doas labias de la plagua, si es gran, am cozidura, e curem aquela am emplastres entro que sia sanada.	Then place over two lips of the patient, if it is large, with a fire, and I cure that with plaster within that is cured.
E si accideys dedintz apostema, lahoras tu coyta e enfon pulvils en oli rozat e pausa sobre le loc, e que sia curat le malaute am aquo que cove a la apostema dedintz.	And if apoplexy happens inside, then you cut off and throw into rosé oil and place over the place, and be cured the patient with water which covers the apoplexy inside.
E sia ressupinat sobre le latz sobre le qual dorm, entro que sia sanat.	And it should be raised above its legs on which it sleeps, within that is cured.
Capitol .ix.	Chapter IX.
De restauracio de fractura del spondil del dos e del col.	On the Restoration of a Fracture of the Vertebrae of the Back and of the Collarbone.
Alcunas veguadas endeve fractura als osses del col, e tart endeve a lor atricio, e semblantment als spondils del dos.	Some witnessed endvertebrae fracture in the bones of the collarbone, and seemly to those of the vertebrae of the back.
E cum aquo accideys ad alcu e voles saber si sara sanat o no, lahoras considera, quar si vezes las sieuas mas ja mollificadas e stupefaytas e mortas e no pot maure aquelas ni extendre ni strenher aquelas e quan constrenges aquelas am les tieus ditz o punges aquelas am agulha e no sent en aquelas dolor, lahoras sapias que no es sanat, e en las mes de disposicios es mortal.	And if you want to know if it will be cured or not, then consider because, as often the more of them are softened and stupified and dead and cannot extend them nor strengthen them with a string, and when you touch them with a sharp object, do not feel pain in those; then you know that it does not heal, and in their place is deadly.
E si mau aquelas e sent en aquelas constriccio am les ditz e punctura, lahoras sapias que la nucha de l’os es salva e que le malaute guereys am curacio.	And if they feel those and stretch them so that the said pain and stinging are felt, then know that the neck of the bone is saved and that the patient will heal with treatment.
E si ve als spondils del col le semblant ad aquo e voles saber si sira sanat o no, lahoras considera als pes de lu.	And if you see the spine of the neck appearing wet and want to know if it will heal or not, then consider the feet of him/her.
Lahoras si tu vezes que so ja mollificatz, accideys ad aquels aquo que es accidit en las mas, e aprop quan jatz sobre le sieu dos, yeys ventozitat e egestio ses la sua volontat, e alcunas veguadas es resupinat sobre le sieu dos e vol urinar e no pot, lahoras sapias que es mortal, e adonc no trebales en la curacio de lu.	If you find that they are already softened, pay attention to the water that happens in the most (i.e., urine), and when you stand on their two legs, they have wind and defecate at will, some even turn over on their two legs and urinate and cannot, then know that it is mortal, and do not treat them.
Mays si no accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, la causa es milhor e pus leugiera.	But if you don't find any of those causes, the cause is better and lighter.
E la curacio de lu es que te perforses a la sedacio del apostema caut que pauses sobre le spondil atrissat oli rozat sol, o am mugols de huous asatz; pausa sobre aquela aquel alcunas veguadas le dia entro que sia sedat le apostema caut.	And the treatment of him/her is that you pierce into the spine at the back a bit hard, or put a string around his/her leg slightly tight, or apply heat to it; place some warm wool on the area to relax the spine.
E lahoras pausa un dels emplastres confortantz e exsitans, e strenh sobre aquel am liament; e comanda al malaute que use de repaus e de tranquillitat e que no dorme sobre la partida am la qual atroba dolor entro que sia sanat.	And then place a soft, warm plaster on it and tighten it slightly; order the patient to rest and be quiet and not sleep on the part that hurts until it is healed.
E si accideys deves la atricio del os satagias o alcuna causa que ja es seperada de lu, lahoras cove que secces sobre la codena e que ostes aquel os; e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua, am sutura si es gran; e aprop cura aquela am alcu encarnatiu dels enguentz, entro que sia sanat.	If you find a sudden fracture of the bone or some cause that has already separated from it, then cut off what is broken from the bone and fix it; then adjust the two lips of the wound with sutures if it is large; and then treat those with ingrown toenails, so that it heals.
Mays si es trencat le derier del os alhoses, e es la fi de la coeta, lahoras cove que tu entrometas le dit pous de la ma senestra en le cul, e que enguales le os trencat am l’autra ma segon que es possible per equacio segonda; e aprop pausa sobre lu emplastre e astelha, si indigeysses de aquels, e aprop strenh aquel.	But if it is the back of the leg that is broken and it is the end of the fracture, then cut off what is broken from the bone with the left hand at the back, and fix it with the right hand as much as possible; and then place a plaster and a splint on it, and if you feel pain in those, then take some medication for pain; and then tighten it.
E si sentes satagias trencadas en lu, lahoras tu fen sobre aquela, e osta aquel, e cura la plagua am la curacio que es precedida entro que sia sanada.	And if you feel broken toes, then cut off what is broken from him/her and fix it; and then treat the wound with treatment that precedes it until it heals.
Capitol .x.	Chapter 10.
De restauracio de la ancha.	On the Restoration of the Hip.
Les osses de las anchas tart so trencats, e si trencan, lahoras la fractura de lor no es sino communicio en las extremitatz de aquelas e son inscidas en la longitut e declinan a las partidas dedintz; e accideys al malaute dolor en le loc e punctura, e la camba es stupefacta quan es fractura.	The bones of the hip are so broken, and if they are broken, then their fracture is not but a common communication of those extremities that are broken and run along the length and decline to the edges; and the patient feels pain in the place and stinging, and the back is numb when the fracture occurs.
E la restauracio de lu es que tu extendas la tua ma sobre aquel entro que sia sobre la fractura qual es la figura de lu.	And the treatment of him/her is that you extend your hand over him/her so that it is over the fracture, which is the figure of his/her back.
E si fractura es en la extremitat de lu tant solament, lahoras tu enguala aquela segon que a tu es apparelhat per equacio engual entro que sia asemblat a la sua figura natural.	And if the fracture is only in the end of him/her, then you take off that part from him/her step by step until it is put back together with his/her natural figure.
Mays si la fractura es en le lonc o que ja declina a las partidas dejos, lahoras tu fay jaser le malaute sobre le sieu ventre entro que sia preparada a tu la restauracio de aquela fractura.	But if the fracture is long or has already declined to the edges of the hip, then you prepare the patient's belly for your treatment of that fracture.
E donc quan auras engualada aquela, pausa sobre lu emplastre, e aprop pausa sobre aquel astela de fust o de codena, e strenh per strictura sobre la qual no temas punctacio de fractura ni remocio de la stelha.	And then, when you have put it back together, place a plaster on it, and then fix the splint with string or rope that does not hurt or move the fracture.
E enguala la concavitat am aquo que uempla aquela entro que aquela prengua la strictura segon equalitat, e comanda al malaute que dorma sobre le sieu dos o desobre le sieu costat sa.	And fill the cavity with water that covers it all, so that it is equal to it; and order the patient to sleep on his/her two legs or open his/her side.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras tu cessa de extencio de lu e de la sua restauracio entro que sia sedat le apostema caut, e pausa sobre lu aquo que sede aquel segon que es precedit; e aprop retorna a la restauracio de lu, e strenh aquel ayssi cum cove.	But if you find an apoplexy (i.e., fainting), then you stop its extension and its treatment until it is calmer; and then return to the treatment of him/her, and tighten it like this while he/she cuts off what is broken.
E si accideysso en le os satagias o son comminuidas, lahoras tu las tratz.	And if you find a sudden fracture or they are comminuted (i.e., broken into small pieces), then you fix them.
Capitol .xi.	Chapter 11.
De restauracio de la fractura del adjutori.	On the Restoration of the Fracture of the Hip.
Adjutori es aquo que es entre le coyde entro al cap de la spalla.	Adjunct is what joins the rib to the shoulder at the top of the shoulder blade.
E si es trencat, lahoras la restauracio de lu es en una de doas manieyras, de las quals es la una que tu prenguas fust pla de migiera groceza segon aquesta forma:	And if it is broken, then the treatment of him/her is in two ways, which are: the first one is that you take off with a sharp knife a small piece of bone from the rib, according to this shape:
E sian liatz en doas extremitatz dos liamentz, e aprop sia suspendut del loc elevat.	And tie together the two ends of the bones with a string that is high up.
E segua le malaute sobre una sezela; e aprop gieta fora le sieu bras trencat sobre le fust entro que pervengua al titillic de lu en le mieg loc del qual sia annexa la curvitat del fust.	And place the patient on a wooden chair; and then take off the broken arm with a sharp knife from the top of it, where it reaches to the tip of the shoulder, joining it to the wood in that way:
E aprop suspen sobre aquel alcuna causa greu, o·l minestre extenda aquel a las partidas dejos; e aprop le metge eque la fractura am las sieuas mas ensemps, entro que la fractura retorne segon que cove.	And then suspend him/her by some difficult cause or other, or make him/her walk with a stick between his/her legs; and then let the patient sit down and feel for the pain in the hip until it stops; and then treat the fracture together with his/her own will, so that the fracture heals according to how it should.
E l’autra manieyra es que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sieua cervitz e suspen la ma del col de lu am liament; e aprop comanda a dos ministres que la un de lor tengua aquo que es desobre la fractura am las suas mas; e l’autre tengua le pus dejos de lu; e quascu de lor extenda a la sua partida.	The other way is that the patient is lifted up by his/her neck and suspended from the collar of him/her with string; and then order two servants to hold one another's hands, so that one holds water that covers the fracture with his/her hands; and the other serves him/her with food in his/her mouth.
E si voles que la extencio sia pus fort, lahoras tu strenh sobre la fractura am liament e sobre aquela am autre liament, e quascu dels dos ministres extendan a doas suas partidas.	And if you want the extension to be stronger, then you tighten it with string and on top of the fracture and on top of another bone with another string; and each of the two servants stretches his/her hands apart.
E donc si la fractura es propinquada a la extremitat del muscle, lahoras cove que sia pausat la mitat del liament sobre le citillic e l’autre dejos la fractura deves le coyde.	And if the fracture is near the end of the muscle, then cut off what is broken from the rib at mid-length on the wooden chair; and the other servant holds him/her by the shoulder, so that the fracture is held with the help of the chair.
E semblantment si la fractura es propdana al coyde, lahoras cove que sia pausat le liament sobre aquel loc e sobre aquel coyde.	And if the fracture is near the rib, then cut off what is broken from it on the chair; and then treat the whole hip with treatment that precedes it until it heals.
Enguala aquela am facilitat e ses trebal, e aprop quant sira engualada segon que cove e es applicada per bona applicacio, lahoras strenh aquela si no accideys apostema caut.	Take off what is broken easily and do the work, and then tighten it step by step according to how it should be; and when you have put it back together with treatment that precedes it until it heals, then treat him/her if there is no apoplexy  (i.e., fainting).
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras layssa la strictura entro al vii dia, e pausa sobre lu lana sutza enbeguda en vi agre e oli rozat entro que repause le apostema, e lahoras tu stren aquela.	But if you find an apoplexy  (i.e., fainting), then wait seven days and treat it; and then place a warm woollen cloth on the hip, wet with water that is slightly cold, until the apoplexy stops; and then tighten it.
E la manieyra de strenher aquela es que pauses emplastre sobre la fractura, e aprop pausa envolopament de drap nau sobre le emplastre; e aprop ajuste le bras sobre aquel adjutori, e pause la sua ma uberta sobre le sieu muscle.	The way to tighten that hip is to place a plaster on the fracture, and then wrap a cloth over the plaster; and then adjust his/her arms over the adjuntory bone, and place your hand on top of the muscle.
E pausa le drap e strenh sobre le adjutori le bras per so que·l bras sia en loc de stelhas, si no prohibeys de aquo alcuna causa del os trencat.	And then wrap that cloth and tighten it over the adjuntory bone, so that the arm is in its place of bones, if this does not hurt or move the broken bone.
E lahoras usa de stelhas.	And then you use them as they are.
E es que pauses sobre la fractura aquela stela que sia pus lada e pus fort de las autras stelas; e pausa entre quascuna stela la latitut del dit, e sia la longitut de las stelas segon la trencadura am addicio de tres ditz de tota partida.	And that is why you place over the fracture the string that is thicker on one side and thinner on the other; and place between each bone the length of the string according to the fracture, adding three fingers to the length of the hip.
E aprop strenh sobre las stelas am la strictura la qual he dita al comensament del capitol.	And then tighten the strings over the bones with the treatment that precedes it until it is tightened.
E es que la tua strictura sobre le loc de la fractura sia pus streyt.	And your tightening over the place of the fracture should be tighter.
E quant pus es alonguada la fractura sia la strictura menor.	And when the fracture is longer, then make the treatment tighter.
E donc si vezes le situament de las stelas e la strictura ayssi cum havem dit en la hora en la qual restauras le membre al sieu assituament, lahoras tu fay.	And if you find the position of the bones and the treatment tighter as it should be at this time when you restore the member to its situation, then you have done well.
E si temes apostema caut, lahoras tu layssa la strictura e las stelas entro al dia vii ayssi cum havem dit.	And if you fear an apoplexy  (i.e., fainting), then you wait seven days with treatment that precedes it until the apoplexy stops; and you have done well.
E aprop considera le liament en totas partidas per tres dias per so que no accida en le loc pruziment o imflacio; o es prohibida la vianda pervenir al membre per disposicio de superfluitat de strictura; e donc rectifiqua tot aquo segon que havem dit.	And now examine the member in all parts for three days so that it does not happen to the place by accident or inflammation, or is prohibited to arrive food to the member because of the flow of superfluity of constriction; and therefore correct everything according to what we have said.
Mays si tu yest sobre confizanssa que no accida alcuna causa de aquo, lahoras no deslias la liguadura sino aprop tres dias o mays.	And if you are certain that there will be no cause of such a thing, then do not remove the ligature but leave it for three days or more.
E sia la sua dormicio del malaute sobre le sieu dos, e las sieuas mas sian sobre le stomac.	And his sleep on his back and his hands are on his stomach.
E pausa sobre le adjutori cocena plena de lana engualment, e considera en tota hora de la nueyt o del dia que no sia deliada ni dissolta la figura del membre trencat, o que sia le liament mollificat, donc rectifica aquo tot am la tua vertut.	And pause on the assistant cook full of wool, and consider in all hours of the night or day that does not dissolve the figure of the broken member or that the ligature is softened, then correct everything to its virtue.
E pausa la vianda del malaute segon le orde le qual havem denant mes, enayssi que la vianda sia subtil en le comensament entro que es comensat strenher; e lahoras cove que egrossas la vianda de lu.	And pause the food of the patient according to the order that we have mentioned before, so that the food is soft at the beginning and then becomes heavier as it is digested; and then cover that the food of him is fattening.
Quar de constuma del adjutori e de la camba de lu es que sian strengutz en xl dias; e lahoras cove que sian desliatz e sia administrat banh e sia medicat am enguentz los quals rectifican aquel.	Now it is customary of the assistant cook and of the chest of the patient that they are strengthened in ten days; and then cover that they are removed and administered water and are treated with ointments which correct those.
E si la fractura es layha atrita, lahoras tu no deslies de aquela le liament e las stelhas entro a l dias o entro a dos meses.	And if the fracture is stiff, then you do not remove that ligature and the stakes within a day or within two months.
Capitol .xii.	Chapter XII.
De restauracio de fractura del bras.	Of Restoring a Fracture of the Arm.
Bras es compost de dos osses les quals so appelatz dos focils; dels quals la un es petit, e es aquel que siec le dit pous, e l’autre es gran e es aquel le qual es pausat dejos le petit dit, de la partida pus dejus.	The arm is composed of two bones which are called two locks; one is small, and that is the one which is hurt by pushing forward, and the other is large, and that is the one that is placed on the left of the small from the side where it has been hurt.
E fort leu es trencat le focil major solament, o le petit, e fort leu son trincatz ensemps.	And the large lock is broken alone, or the small one, and both are broken together.
E quan es trencat le focil petit desus, lahoras la restauracio de lu es leugiera, e la sanacio de lu es pus leugiera.	And when the small lock is broken above, then the restoration of him is slight, and his healing is quicker.
E quan es trencat le focil de lu dejos la fractura de lu es mala, e la sanacio de lu es dificil.	And when the small lock is broken below, the fracture of him is bad, and his healing is difficult.
E pus mala de aquela es quan son trencatz dos osses essemps.	And worse than that is when both bones are broken together.
Donc si l’os le qual es trencat es le focil petit desus, lahoras es convenient al metge, deves la restauracio de lu, que pauze petita extencio am facilitat entro que aquel sia engualhat.	Then if the bone that is broken is the small lock above, then it is necessary for the doctor, considering the restoration of him, to make a small incision with ease so that he is engualhat.
Mays si le focil gran es aquo que es trincat, lahoras cove que pause extencio pus vehement.	But if the large lock is the one that is broken, then he covers that he makes an incision more vigorously.
E si les dos focils so ensemps trincatz, lahoras cove que tu pauses la extritura mot pus fort.	And if both locks are broken together, then you cover that you make the extraction of them with greater force.
E cove que pauses la figura de la ma deves la restauracio de lu e la extencio de lu estenduda sobre un coyssi, e sia le pols de la ma a las partidas desus, pus aut que totz les autres ditz, e le dit auricular sia pus bas dels autres ditz, e le malaute sia cezent sobre una cezela cayrada.	And cover that you remove the figure of the hand later than the restoration of him and its extension on a cushion, and the pulse of the hand at its ends, more than all the others say, and that the ear of the patient is placed on a cushion rolled up.
E sia un coyssi denant lu en la altetut o endreyt de lu, per so que·l malaute no encorra trebalh.	And a cushion before him in height or behind him, so that the patient does not become uncomfortable.
E aprop le ministre extenda le bras de la partida pus dejos am la sieua ma o am liament, e autre ministre extenda desus semblantment.	Then the minister extends the arm from the side where it has been hurt to the hand of the patient or to the ligature, and another minister extends above it with care.
E aprop le metge engualhe le os entro que redugua aquel segon la milhor figura que pot.	Then the doctor engages to make a hole in the bone as soon as possible according to the best figure that he can.
E si en la factura del os so satagias, lahoras te perforsa raduzir tota pessa en le sieu loc am la tua vertut.	And if, in breaking the bone, it is not sharp, then you pierce with care all the needles in its place according to your virtue.
E si appar en lu satagia separada que punh la codena e no es a tu speransa en la restauracio de lu, lahoras tu fen sobre lu e osta aquela segon la manieyra la qual havem dita desus.	And if it seems to you that the fracture is not separated so as to be able to put a needle in it and does not correspond to your expectation in restoring him, then you go over him and do it according to the way which we have described above.
Mays si la fractura es am plagua, yeu ja he fayt ad aquo capitol singular, e donc pren la curacio de aquel.	But if the fracture is difficult, I have already written a special chapter on it, and therefore take the cure of that.
E si accideys apostema caut al comensament de la tua restauracio, lahoras tu lineys un drap am cerot fayt de oli rozat e cera blanca, e sia migier entre specitut e subtilitat, e strenh drap sobre aquel am strictura subtil entro que le apostema sia cedat; e lahoras remau le cerot e pausa emplastre preparat de polvera de moli am clayre de huou, e aprop pausa stelhas; e sia la stela la qual es pauzada sobre aquela fractura pus lada e pus fort.	And if an apoplexy occurs at the beginning of your restoration, then you tie a cloth to the member with a string made of oil-roze and white wax, and it is moderate between strength and softness, and a tight cloth is tied over that one with a careful strictness within which the apoplexy has ceased; and then you remove the cloth and apply plaster prepared from powder of barley, and tie strings; and let the stings be placed at the sides of the fracture more tightly and more firmly.
E sapias que·l nombre de las stelas del bras so vi en las majors disposicios, o sia la fractura en un focil o en dos focils ensemps.	You know that the number of stakes for the arm is six, or that the fracture is in one lock or in two locks together.
E aprop pausa la tua strictura sobre le loc de la fractura pus fort e pus vehement, e quan mays sira la extrictura a las partidas desus de la fractura o a las partidas pus bassas de lu, pausa la strictura un pauc pus molh segon que es precedida la rememoracio de lu en le comensament del capitol.	Then you place your strictness on the place of the fracture more strongly and more violently, and when it seems that you are remembering him at the beginning of the chapter, you place your strictness on the sides of the fracture more loosely and more softly according to what has preceded.
E les draps que so envolopatz sobre la fractura sian draps mols humitz, e no sian durs ni aspres, e·l fiel am le qual es strenhut sia de li propriament migier entre subtil e gros, ayssi cum havem recomtat.	And the clothes that are wrapped around the fracture should be soft and wet, and not hard or rough, and the string with which it is tied to the member itself should be moderate between strength and softness, so as it has been described above.
E considera le membre e·l liament aprop alcus dias.	And examine the member and the ligature for three days.
E si accideys alcuna causa de la qual rectificacio es necessaria, ayssi cum prusiment le qual accideys al membre, e lahoras cove que tu enbroques le membre am aygua cauda entro que cesse aquel pruziment.	And if there occurs to you any cause for which it is necessary to make a correction, so as to put the member in water tail within which the pain stops.
E leysses le membre no costreyt entro que repause, e aprop torna la strictura.	Then release the member not tightly within which it rests, and then return the strictness.
E si la extrictura ja es mollificada e l’os ja es remaugut e semblantz ad aquels, lahoras rectifiqua tot aquo am la tua vertut.	And if the strictness is already softened and the bone has been set and seems like those that have been healed, then correct everything according to your virtue.
E considera mays si le nutriment es prohibit pervenir al membre per superfluitat de strictura, quar lahoras cove que mollifiques aquel un petit e laysses aquel per alcus dias entro que corra ad aquel le nutriment, e aprop strenh aquel.	And consider if it is necessary to prohibit the food from reaching the member by the flow of superfluity because, as soon as it softens that one a little and leaves it not tightly for some days within which it comes out to the food, then tighten that one.
Mays si al malaute no accideys alcuna causa de aquelas que havem ditas, lahoras no cove que sia desliat entro aprop xx dias o enviro de aquels.	And if there does not occur to you any of the causes which we have mentioned, then do not remove it within about twenty days or so.
E aprop sia suspenduda la ma del malaute per la sua vertut de movement agitatius, e fay aquel dormir sobre le sieu dos.	Then hang up the hand of the patient by his virtue of movement and let him sleep on his back.
E sapias que aquesta fractura es restaurada en xxx dias o en xxxii dias, o fort leu es restaurada en xxviii dias, e tot aquo es segon la disposicio de las compleccios e las disposicios de la vertut.	You know that this fracture is restored in three months or in three and a half months, or that the strong one is restored in twenty-eight days, and all of it is according to the dispositions of the complexions and the dispositions of virtue.
Capitol .xiii.	Chapter XIII.
De restauracio de fractura de la pinche de la ma e dels ditz.	Of Restoring a Fracture of the Hand of the Ma and of the Dits.
Sapias que a la pinche de la ma e als nuzes dels ditz tart endeve fractura, e no accideys a lor sino atricio motas veguadas.	You know that to the pinches of the hand and to the knuckles of the fingers there is no fracture except for the one that appears at the back of them, and that it does not occur to their sides unless they are very much hurt.
E quan accideys a la ma fractura o atrissio, lahoras cove que·l malaute segua cayrat e denant lu lies cezent segon equalitat, e aprop pausa la ma de lu sobre aquela extenduda.	And when it occurs to the fracture of the ma or at the back, then he covers that the patient walks before him with care in equality, and then places the hand on his chest.
E aprop le ministre extenda les osses trencatz e·l metge engualhe aquels entro que sian congongitz am bona congoncio.	Then the minister extends the broken bones and engages the doctor to make a hole in them as soon as possible according to good conjonction.
E lahoras cove que pause emplastre e estopa, si no accideys apostema caut; e aprop pausa stela desus segon la quantitat del loc, e tu ja has envolopada aquela en drap de li.	Then he covers it with plaster and tar, if an apoplexy occurs; then he places stakes above according to the quantity of the place, and you have already wrapped that one in a cloth.
Mays si la trincadura es en las partidas dedintz deves le ventre de la palma, e lahoras fay semblant de spera de drap, e comanda al malaute que strenha aquela am la sua palma trincada; aprop sia strenguda am drap lonc.	And if the piercing is in the inner sides of the hand, then make a bandage of cloth, and order the patient to tighten it with his own hand; then cover that bandage with a long one.
E sia la stelha de cuer am drap en le qual sia levitat, per so que le cuer sia aplicat a la palma; e strenh aquela segon que cove.	Then the stake should be applied to the skin in the cloth in which it is lifted, so that the stake is applied to the hand; and then tighten it according to what has been described above.
Mays si la fractura es a las partidas defora, lahoras cove que pauses desus stela e autre estela de la partida dejos en la palma, per so que la ma sia uberta e dreyta; e aprop pausa la strictura, ayssi cum es revolvuda la ma a la rateta entre les ditz am liamentz.	And if the fracture is in the outer sides of the hand, then he covers that stake above and another stake from the side where it has been hurt on the palm, so that the hand is placed in front of you and to the side; then you place your strictness, as it is rolled up, between the fingers.
E si accideys fractura a alcu dels nozes dels ditz, lahoras si es le dit pous, sia engualat segon que cove e aprop sia strenhut am la palma e si·t voles, pausa a lu astela petita dreyta per so que sia elevada la fractura e no sia mauguda.	And if any of the bones in the fingers are broken, if it is the one that has been bent, and it is straightened again according to its shape and tightly tied with a bandage, then pause the small right hand for so that the fracture is raised and not crushed.
Mays si la fractura es en les autres ditz, ayssi cum en aquel del mieg loc, o en le indic, o en le auricular, o en le anular, lahoras sia engualhat e liat am le dit sa le qual siec aquel; o sian totz liatz segon continuacio, e es milhor; o pausa sobre aquel stela petita, ayssi cum havem dit en le pous.	Or if the fracture is in any of the other fingers, then it should be tied and supported by the finger next to it, or by the middle one, or by the index one, or by the ring one; or all of them according to continuity, and that is better; or pause over that small hand, as we have said about the thumb.
E considera, en la tua restauracio, e aprop aquela, la disposicio de apostema caut e oppose — am la tieua operacio — am aquo que cove quan accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, segon que es iterada la narracio de lu.	And consider, in your restoration, and those, the disposition of poultice cauterization and opposite - to the hand operation - that it is covered when any cause of those occurs, according to which the description of it is repeated from him.
Capitol .xiv.	Chapter 14.
De restauracio de fractura del os de la coyssa.	On the Restoration of aBroken Bone of the Thigh.
Le os de la cueyssa motas veguadas es trencat e es declarat al sentiment segon que es convertit a la partida denant e a la pus sobirana.	The thigh bone that is broken and revealed is split and declared according to what it becomes in front and the superior pus.
E la restauracio de lu se fa enayssi que·l liament es strenhut sobre la fractura e autre liament dejos la fractura, e le malaute sia prostrat sobre le sieu ventre e sobre la cara.	And the restoration of it is done so that the ligament is strengthened over the fracture and another ligament leaves the fracture, and the patient is prostrate on his stomach and on his face.
E aprop le ministre extenda tot le liament a la sua partida segon la qualitat, quan la fractura es en le mieg loc del os.	Then the minister extends all the ligament according to its quality, when the fracture is in the middle of the bone.
Mays si es propdana a la razitz de la cueyssa, lahoras sia le liament propda al denolh a la partida del pentenilh, per so que la extencio caja en sus, e le autre liament dejos la fractura.	Or if it is next to the root of the thigh, then the ligament should be extended downwardly to the middle of the peter, so that the extension falls on him, and the other ligament leaves the fracture.
E semblantment si la trencadura es propdana al denolh, lahoras sia fayt le liament propda al denol, e sia la extencio a las partidas dejos.	And if it is next to the root, then the ligament should be made to look like it is extended downwardly and the extension is made at the ends.
E aprop le metge enguale le os am amduas las sieuas mas entro que reduzesca aquel segon la semblansa natural e l’os es conjungit per bona conjunccio; lahoras cove que pauses emplastre e strictura, si no accideys al membre apostema.	Then the doctor should join the bone with both of its ends together according to its natural shape and the joint is strong; then pause when you have made a poultice and compression, unless there is an accident in the member.
Mays si accideys en lu apostema, lahoras tu layssa aquel per alcus dias entro que l’apostema caut sia cedat, e aprop retorna a la tua curacio.	Or if it happens to be in the poultice, then you should leave it for a few days until the poultice goes away, and return to your treatment.
La strictura de lu sia ayssi fayta: cove que envolopes sobre la fractura una benda dura, e dobla aquela dos o tres veguadas, e remaugua de lu superfluitat; e aprop envolopa la camba entro que pervengua al talo e a la razitz de la cueyssa.	The compression of it should be done so: when a hard bandage is wrapped around the fracture, and it is folded two or three times, and removed from him excessively; and then wrap the legs until they reach the thigh and the root of the thigh.
E intromet lonc fiel entre la cueyssa e la camba prop del denol a las partidas dejos, e venguan las extremitatz del fiel de la partida pus sobirana de las doas partz, e aprop revolveys sobre la camba e la cueyssa aquo que superflueys de la benda.	Then put a long rope between the thigh and the bandage that is next to the root on the ends of it, and make the rope go over the top of the bandage and under the other one; and then roll up the bandage and the thigh so that the excess part of the bandage is removed.
E aprop pausa sobre la cueyssa en le loc de aquela fractura astelhas, e pausa de aquelas una stela sobre le os de la camba.	Then pause on the thigh in the place of that fracture with a small stick, and pause one of those under the bandage.
E aprop uempli las vacuitatz entre la camba e la cuoyssa am draps mols, per so que sia coagulada la extrictura.	Then fill up the emptiness between the bandage and the thigh with soft rags, so that the compression is firm.
E aprop comensa am strictura fort del mieg sobre le loc de la fractura am tres envolucios o quatre, e quant mays tu te alonhas am liament del loc de la fractura, la tua strictura sia menor e pus leugiera e pus molha.	Then start with a strong compression on the middle of the fracture with three folds or four, and how much more you release from the ligament in the place of the fracture, your compression will be less firm and lighter and moister.
E aprop exten a doas extremitatz del fiel a las partidas dejos entro que pervengua a la cavilha del pe, e strenh amdoas las extremitatz de las stelhas del autra part per so que·l liament no sia remaugut del sieu loc.	Then extend the two ends of the rope to the ends of it until they reach the shell of the foot, and tighten them both with the help of the other part so that the ligament does not come out of its place.
E aprop leyssa la strectura sobre aquel, don esta ayssi que no accideys al membre corrosio ni apostema caut ni emflacio e semblantz ad aquels; e si accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, adonc cueta te am desliament de lu, e rectifica aquo que accideys tot aprop, segon que havem dit motas veguadas.	Then leave the compression on it, unless there is a problem with the member or poultice or swelling that resembles those; and if any of those problems occur, then correct it as soon as possible, according to what we have said about the thumb.
Mays si en le os es pessa del os la qual pongua, lahoras cove que tu engualhes aquel segon que a tu es possibla; e sino, fen sobre lu e remau aquel, e cura am aquo del qual es precedida la rememoracio entro que sia sanat.	Or if the bone is thick, then you should join it according to what is possible for you; and if not, then put it under him and tighten it, and heal with water that precedes the healing until it is cured.
E alcunas veguadas es strenhuda aquesta fractura de la coyssa otra aquo que sian ajustadas a lu stelhas, ayssi cum havem dit en le adjutori e·n le bras.	Some of these fractures of the thigh are strengthened by ligaments adjusted to its ends, as we have said about the assistant and the arms.
Mays empero en la restauracio de lu en tal manieyra fayta no accideys al malaute claudicacio; e si es restaurada sola, otra aquo que li sia applicada l’autra camba, lahoras es necessari que claudique aquel del qual es tostemps.	But, nevertheless, in the restoration of it so that there is no lameness in walking; and if it is restored alone, another water that is applied to the other leg, then it is necessary that this one should walk with a limp.
E sapias que la coyssa es strenhuda en xl dias o un pauc mes o un pauc mens, e tot aquo es segon la diversitat de las compleccios e de las autras dispozicios.	And know that the thigh is strengthened in ten days or a little more or a little less, and all this is according to the diversity of the complexes and other dispositions.
Capitol .xv.	Chapter 15.
De restauracio de la fractura de la rodela del denolh.	On the Restoration of a Broken Ankle of the Leg.
Sapias que fractura de la rodela del denol tart endeve, mays accideys a lu motas veguadas atrissio.	Know that the fracture of the ankle of the leg is better understood when it occurs behind him.
Mays si accideys a lu fractura, lahoras no es sino fissura o trauc en las suas partidas, e aquo es am plagua o ses plagua, e sobre aquo tot es estat am le sentiment.	Or if it is broken, then there is only a crack or a break in the ends, and that is what causes pain or swelling, and everything is according to the description.
E la restauracio de lu es enayssi que sia engualat aquo que es romput de las partidas de lu am les ditz entro que sia agreguat e conjongit segon que es possible per equacio e facilitat e fabricacio.	And the restoration of it is done so that it is joined at the ends of the bones according to what is possible by ease and ease of manufacture.
E aprop pausa emplastre e pausa sobre aquel stela redonda, si indigeysses de aquela; e strenh desus am strictura ad aquo convenient.	Then pause a poultice and pause on that stick if you are uncomfortable with it; and tighten them well to the water.
E aprop considera totas las disposicios las quals havem recomtadas en las autras fracturas, ayssi cum es apostema caut e semblant ad aquels enaissi que se oppause a tot accident am aquo que a lu es convenient entro que sia sanat.	Then consider all the dispositions that we have recommended in other fractures, as well as to pause completely over any accident with water that is convenient for him until it is cured.
Capitol .xvi.	Chapter 16.
De restauracio de la fractura de la camba.	On the Restoration of a Broken Leg.
Sapias que en la camba so dos osses dels quals la un es gros, e es le nompnat per nom de la camba; e l’autra es subtil, e es nompnat focil.	Know that in the leg there are two bones, one of which is large and it is called the thigh bone; and the other is small and it is called the shin bone.
E accideys a quascus de las specias de fractura aquo que accideys als dos osses del bras, e per aquo es fayta restauracio de lu ayssi cum restauracio del bras engualment, e la operacio de lu es una.	And any kind of fracture occurs in the bones of the arm, and the restoration of it is done like the restoration of the arm by joining it together, and the operation is one.
E si so trincatz dos osses ensemps, la camba es convertida a totas partidas.	And if two bones are broken together, the leg is broken completely.
E si es trinquat le os pus subtil, la camba es convertida a las partidas Denant.	And if one of the smaller bones is broken, the leg is broken in front.
E si es trincat le os pus gros, atrobas aquel dejos, e es de aquelas causas que no so a tu ameguadas.	And if one of the larger bones is broken, it overtakes that one from below, and that is of those causes that are not familiar to you.
E aprop aministra extencio e equacio e liguacio de las astelas segon aquel engualment.	Then administer extension, equilibrium, and ligature of the ends according to that joining.
Mays empero cove, si la fractura de la camba es laja havent motas satagias, que la extencio sia mendre e pus leugiera, e alleuja am la tua vertut.	But, nevertheless, if the fracture of the leg is thin without any signs of pain, then the extension should be small and lighter, and rejoice in your strength.
E en la camba es alcuna causa de operacio sobre le bras, e es quan tu engualas las stelhas e que comples tota la tieua operacio, lahoras tu prendras pessas de fustz de pi le qual es pausat dejos las cauzas las quals so pausades en solies, e so faytas eyssament de brancas de palma; aligeys de aquelas a las quals es petita groceza, e no sia ges de las manudas, e sia la longuesa de aquelas segon la longuesa de la camba, e del denol entro al pus dejos.	And in the leg there is any cause of operation on the arm, and that is when you join the ends and complete all the work, then you will take the fists of a person whose right hand is smaller than his left one, and do not make cuts on the palms, and align them with those that are smaller in size, and long in length compared to the leg, and put them together from the root within from the top.
E aprop envolopa sobre quascuna drap en doas envolucios segon la longitut de lu, e pausa la una sobre la partida de la camba de la una part e l’autra del autra part, e sian del denol entro al pus bas loc del pe.	Then wrap each in two wraps according to the length of it, and pause one over the ends of the leg from one side and the other from the other side, and place them together from the root within from the top.
E aprop lias las doas stelhas en tres locs de doas extremitatz e al mieg loc, quar am aquesta strectura la camba es prohibida de clinar a la partida dextra e sinistra, e sta per bona stacio.	Then join the two ends in three places of the two ends and at the middle place, because with this compression the leg is forbidden to bend on the side of the right hand or the left, and it is good position.
E ja es aministrat un brasset de fust segon la longuesa de la camba; e sia pausada en lu la camba per so que conserve aquel de movement.	And a blanket has been given to him, according to the length of his back; and the blanket is placed on him so that he does not move.
E majorment cove que tu fassas aquo en fractura, e quan am aquela es plagua propriament.	And mostly you should pour water on the fracture, and when it has been boiled, it is called properly gout.
E aprop considera en quascun jorn la camba e studia am aquel per derier studi, e tu le guardes de apostema e de imflacio o de autres causas semblantz; e cum accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, lahoras opausa te a lu am aquo que cove entro que sia sanat.	And you should consider the back every day and examine it closely, and you should guard against swelling and inflammation or other similar causes; and if any of these causes occur, then stop putting water on him until he is healed.
Capitol .xvii.	Chapter .xvii.
De la fractura del talo e dels osses del pe e dels ditz.	Of the fracture of the talus bone and the bones of the foot and of their treatment.
Al talo no accideys fractura de tot; mays als osses del pe accideys fractura alcunas veguadas; e als ditz del pe pauc accideys fractura, e no accideys a lor sino atricio en las mes de disposicio.	To the talus bone there does not happen a fracture of all; but to the bones of the foot there happens a fracture in some places; and to the feet there does not often happen a fracture, except in the middle parts of their legs.
E si als osses del pe endeve fractura e vezes aquels osses esser elevatz sobre si entre lor, lahoras le malaute pause le sieu pe sobre la terra preparat ayssi cum anant.	And if there is a fracture in the bones of the foot and these bones are raised up from each other, then place the patient's feet on the ground prepared in this way while you continue.
E aprop pausa la un pe sobre aquo que es elevat de aquels osses, e aprop calca aquels, e prem, e engualha aquels entro que torno en los locs.	Then place one foot on top of the other bone that is raised, and then crush and push those bones together until they are back in their places.
E aprop pausa emplastre e stopa desus, e pausa dejos le ventre del pe una petita taula a la qual sian dos caps plas.	Then place plaster and bandage on top of it, and place the patient's stomach on a small table that has two flat surfaces.
E aprop strenh aquela am le pe am strectura descent, pus que tu has envolopada aquela am draps e am autres causes de las quals indigeys.	Then strengthen that foot with stretching and strengthening exercises because you have wrapped it in cloth and from other causes for which it is difficult to speak.
E cum a lu passan tres dias o quatre, lahoras tu deslia le liament, quar tu atrobaras les osses engualatz, o sian trincatz o sian dislocatz, e la operacio en aquels es ayssi co coneysses.	And after three or four days pass, then remove the plaster because you will believe that the bones are healed and straightened out, or if they are broken or dislocated, and the operation on those is to be done with caution.
Mays si alcus ditz son trincatz, lahoras restaura aquels, e enguala aquels ayssi cum yeu e recomtat a tu en la restauracio dels ditz de la ma.	But if any of them are broken, then restore those, and heal those in this way with eye and admonition to yourself in the restoration of the broken parts from the main.
E aprop pausa al dit trincat stela segon la longitut del dit, e sia pus lada de lu un pauc; e aprop dejos le pe aquesta taula la qual e a tu recomtada, e strenh aquela am strictura decent.	Then place the broken bone on a piece of wood according to its length, and place it slightly off-center; and leave the foot on the table that was recommended to you, and strengthen that with stretching exercises.
Mays si aquo que es trincat dels osses so dos o tres o mays, lahoras tu pausa sobre quascun dit astela de la sua quantitat envolopada en drap leon, e strenh la taula en le pus bas del pe, e sia stant sobre la un dels caps de la taula foro le ventre del pe per que la tengua am bona retencio.	But if that broken bone of the bones is two or three or more, then you place it on a piece of wood wrapped in cloth, and strengthen the table at its lower end, and let the foot stand on one of the flat surfaces of the table so that it holds it firmly in place.
E es convenient a tu que no oblides que no consideres totas las causas las quals que e ditas a tu en las autras fracturas dels accidentz que havem dit; e opausa te a tot accident am aquo que cove.	And it is convenient to you that you do not forget that you consider all the causes that have been said to you in all the fractures of the accidents that we have mentioned; and stop putting water on him until he has completely healed.
Capitol .xviii.	Chapter  . xviii.
De fractura del conh de la femna e del os del pentenilh e de la vergua del home.	Of the fracture of the hip bone and the shoulder blade and the man's arm.
Quan le conh de la femna es trincat, lahoras fay aquela ceser en cezela cayrada, e aprop enclina aquela a la partida del dos un petit, e sia tenguda detras.	When the hip bone is broken, then make that woman's cut in the shape of an axe, and tilt it slightly to one side, and hold it back.
E aprop la matrona umpla le conh de coto, e sia fayt en le conh de lu ayssi cum spera; e aprop la femna sia concutida, e eleva le dos de lu petit a petit, quar tot aquo es fora-getat entro que sia denant la partida del conh ayssi cum spera e l’os trincat retorna.	Then the woman should wrap her hand around the hip bone, and hold it in front of her as if she were holding an axe; and the woman is struck, and raise the two bones slightly at a time because all of them are outside until they come to the part where the hip bone meets that shoulder blade with her hand held up.
E aprop pausa pulvils sobre le dos de lu, e quan vol urinar remaugua le coto am facilitat e aprop urine, e reduzeys e retorna aquel segon la manieyra segon la qual mezist aquel al comensament, e aprop retorne al sieu pulvil primier.	Then place powder on the two bones, and when she needs to urinate, he removes it with ease and urinates, and reduces it, and returns it to its first position according to her convenience; and then return that woman' powder to its first position again.
E fassa ayssi per vii dias o enviro aquels, quar aquel es restaurat.	Then let it be for seven days or more because that is healed.
E si voles, pren una vezica de ovela e strenh sobre le trauc de lu una canula de canavera; e entromet tota la vesica en le conh de lu, e aprop ensuffla en la canula am vertut entro que la vesica sia imflada dedintz le conh, quar la fractura retorna.	And if you want, take a little olive oil and hold it over the hip of him with a syringe; and push all the way through the hip bone, and blow into the syringe with force until the bladder is inflated inside the hip bone because the fracture returns.
E aprop sia umplida de coto e estia per alcus dias segon que havem recomtat, entro que sia sanat.	Then let it be filled with oil and let it rest for a few days according to what we have said before, until it is healed.
E quan le os del pentenil de home o de femna es trincat, lahoras aministra en la restauracio e agulacio de lu aquo que havem recomtat en l’os del anca.	And when the arm bone of the man or woman is broken, then administer to it with water that we have mentioned in order to heal and restore it.
E aquo que es dreyt no es occultat en aquestas fracturas proprinquas e que pauc endeveno, majorment ad aquel al qual es alcun studi e us e enten aquest meu libre mot; quar aquela fractura significa a tu en las majors disposicios via dreyturiera en la restauracio e en la strictura de lu, e donc enten be.	And that water that is right does not often happen in these close fractures and rarely in the rest of them, but mostly it is meant to study and use this free will; because that fracture means to you in the main ways of healing and straightening it out, so understand well.
Mays en la vergua del home quan es trincada, pren guarguamela de auca, e met la vergua en aquela; e aprop pausa sobre lu envolucio de drap, e sia envolopada, e aprop sia layssada per tres dias o enviro aquels, e sia sanada.	But if the man's arm is broken, then take an axe and cut it off at its base, and wrap it in cloth; and let it rest for three or more days because it will be healed.
Capitol .xix.	Chapter  . xix.
De restauracio de fractura dels osses quan es am plagua.	Of the Restoration of Fractures of Bones When they are Swollen.
Convenient es ad aquel al qual accideys fractura am plagua, e majorment si le os es gran ayssi cum es le os de la cuoyssa o de l’adjutori, o semblant ad aquel, que tu te cuoytes e fleubotomes aquel tantost si las condicios de fleubotomia a tu o testifican ayssi cum desus havem dit.	It is convenient that you should protect yourself from a fracture with swelling, and mostly if the bone is large like the femur or the shoulder blade, or similar to it, then you protect it and do not let it be moved, and stop putting water on it until the cause of the swelling has been revealed to you; as we have said before.
E si la plagua eflueys sanc, lahoras cove que tu te coytes a la retencio de lu enayssi que tu polverizes sobre lu zegi trissat, si a tu autra causa no es present.	And if the swelling is due to an infection, then stop putting water on it until you have discovered the cause of the swelling; and if there is any other cause, do not put water on it.
E aprop comensa restaurar la fractura en aquel meteys dia, e no prolongues aquo, si no accideys apostema.	Then begin to restore the fracture in that same day, and do not prolong the time of healing; if there is swelling, then stop putting water on it.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras tu layssa la restauracio de lu entro al ix dia, entro que sia cedat le apostema, e no apropinques a lu en le tertz dia e·l iiii de tot, quar tu faras accidir mals accidentz.	But if swelling occurs gradually, then stop putting water on it until the ninth day; and do not approach it within three days of that time because you will cause other accidents to happen.
Mays si le os trencat es eminent sobre la codena descubert, lahoras cove que te perforses reduzir aquel e engualar aquel am las tuas mas am facilitat e am pauca extencio.	But if the broken bone is about to come off, then stop putting water on it until you have healed and secured it with your own hands; do not let it hang for too long a time.
Mays si extencio no es a tu preparada e la equacio de lu am las tieuas mas, lahoras tu reduzeys aquel am las tuas mas am aquest sturment; e es sturment le qual es fayt de ferr, la longitut del qual es de vii ditz o de viii e la latitut del qual es segon la quantitat de la plagua; e per aquo es necessari al metge que prengua de aquels tres o quatre segon la quantitat que indigeys ad aquo en la curacio en tota specia de fractura.	But if the extension is not prepared with the main parts of him, then you reduce that bone with your own hands, and it is a tool made of iron; its length is seven or eight days and its width is according to the amount of swelling; and it is necessary for the doctor to take three or four according to its quantity because he will heal all kinds of fractures in general.
E sia redon, e sia en lu pauca groceza per so que no sia doblat deves la comprecio sobre aquel en la hora de la operacio.	Then let it be done, and let it be done with a little simplicity so that it does not bend or break during the operation on him.
E sia de aguda extremitat al qual sia marge en las sieuas extremitatz; e sia le desus de lu a grossetut tendent, e de la maytat de lu entro a las partidas.	Then let it be done with great precision, and let it be held firmly in place with a strong hold; and most of the time let it be held between the fingers, and a little at a time let it be moved away from the body.
E aquesta es la forma de lu:	This is how to do it:
E es nompnat en grec “labre volentz atelarem”, so es paleta pauca.	It is called in Greek "labra volentiaratelare", which means "to cut off the loose ends".
Per que cove que sia pausada la extremitat de lu acuda elevada sobre la extremitat del os eminent.	So that the end of him is raised above the end of the bone that is about to come off.
E inpelleys aquel en una veguada entro que retorne le os, e sia engualat am alcuna equacio.	Then he places that end in a socket, and it fits into that equation.
E donc esforsa te engualar las extremitatz de la fractura entre lor, e si la extremitat de lu trencada es subtil, e no pren aquela le sturment per bona axcepcio, lahoras cove que tu inscidas la extremitat de aquel os entro que l’insturment haja poder de aquo.	Then he tries to fit the ends of the fracture together, and if the end of the broken bone is thin, and does not take the instrument because it has no power over it, then stop putting water on it.
Mays si no podes reduzir le os de tot am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras enscideys aquel am aquo que coveneys a lu dels inscizoris les quals havem ditz; o serra aquel am una de las serras en qualque manieyra sia a tu possible.	But if you cannot reduce the bone completely with water that we have mentioned, then cut it with one of the scissors that we have said before; or with an axe, in any way that is possible for you to do.
E aprop ratz aquel que roman en le os de asperitat e de scorsas menudas.	And now cut off what remains of the bone that has become sharp and slightly scarred.
E cum le os es reduzit, e aprop la reduccio le malaute atroba dolor vehement ledent, lahoras sapias que le os no es retornat al sieu loc natural; e adonc fay aquo quar tu confereyses al malaute gran juvament.	And when the bone is reduced, and the hernia is removed, there will be a violent painful burning sensation, knowing that the bone has not returned to its natural place; and then make a cut so that you confer great relief to the patient.
Cum es complida la tua restauracio la qual fas al os, e lahoras submergeys drap en vi stiptic negre, e propriament si es en estiu, e no pauses sobre la plagua cerot ni autre causa en la qual sia oli, per so que no fassa en lu accidir poyredura e corropcio.	When your bone restoration is complete and you have applied black tar for the staph infection, and especially if it is during summer, and do not place it over the skin wound or any other cause of injury to it, so that it does not cause the patient to become infected or corrupted.
E aprop aministra stelas en la hora del tieu compliment de la restauracio de l’os, e layssa la plagua descuberta enayssi que inscidas le trauc am forfexs e uses de envolucios segon la quantitat de la plagua.	And now administer the necessary surgical instruments at the appropriate time during the completion of the bone restoration, and leave the skin uncovered as you cut it with a hook and use bandages according to the amount of the wound.
E guarda te am tota cautela que no strenhas la plagua am la fractura, quar motas veguadas an fayt aquo les fols metges, e fero accidir sobre les sieus malautes mort o malautia corrodent o zuthement, so es sania.	And be very careful not to hurt the wound with a broken bone, for the cold humors can cause painful gout in the patient's joints, and they can become corrupted or putrefied, causing death; but it will heal.
E si la tieua strictura leugiera, molli, diversa de la strictura de las autras fracturas.	And if the tight bandage becomes loose, it is different from the tightening of other fractures.
E si la plagua es gran o es plagua mala, e temes sobre aquel alcus accidentz mals les quals havem recomtatz, e atrobas dolor en le loc, lahoras no cove que pauses sobre aquel astelas, mays fay ad aquel envolucio de draps durs en loc de stelas e strenh lu am aquelas.	And if the wound is large or is a bad wound, and you fear about the possible consequences of the injury, and you feel pain in that place, then do not use the surgical instruments, but wrap it up tightly with hard bandages instead of using those instruments there; and let it be.
E cum aprop un dia o dos vezes ja la plagua comensar, que en lu sia engendrat brac, lahoras tu osta desus le drap le qual havias pausat sobre aquel am vi, e aprop aministra calguas, enguentz am les quals de nostra constuma es que mediquem las plaguas, ayssi cum enguentz tetrafarmacon e semblantz ad aquel.	And when the wound begins to heal in a day or two, let it be; then you remove the bandage that you had placed on it with water, and administer cold poultices, which is our custom to treat wounds, also applying tar poultices and calamine there; and let it be.
E conveneys a tu que deslias le liament e considera la plagua en quascun dia mati e vespre entro que sia consolidada e fermada, e cove que·l membre sia preparat en tal manieyra que la poyredura corra de lu a las partidas dejos am facilitat.	And let it be known to you that in the morning and evening you consider the wound until it is solidified and dried up, and that the member is prepared in such a way that the corruption will run from it to the extremities easily.
si a la plagua passan motz dias, e no es consolidada ni es abscindit de lu le brac, lahoras sapias que aqui so satagias de las petitas per que cove enquieras la plagua am tenta.	If the wound takes more than a few days to heal and it is not dried up or separated from the bone, then you know that there will be no good result from it; so keep trying.
E de aquelas satagias aquelas que so separadas remau e extratz, aquelas que de lor no so separadas e pongen le membre e fan accidir dolor, perforsa te a inscidir aquelas segon que a tu aquo es possibla.	And of those wounds that separate and remain in place, and those that do not separate and put the member at risk of causing pain, cut them according to what you think is possible.
E si accideys a la plagua zuchem o eluchen, so es stiomenios, o autra specia de corrupcio e de putrefaccio, lahoras cove que pauses a quada un de aquels am aquo que conveneys a lu de la curacio del qual es precedida narracio en le sieu capitol.	And if the wound becomes sore or swollen, it is a sign of infection and corruption; so be careful not to place any of those on it, as it is mentioned in its chapter.
E de aquo en le qual cove que stia lo mieu sermo e tu fassas present la tua pessa: quan os gros es trincat, emineys sobre le membre ayssi cum le os de la coyssa e del ajutori e semblantz ad aquels dels membres grans, e que no presumas atraccio de lu, ni la extraccio de lu quar motas veguadas accideys per aquo la mort; habantz layssa aquel entro que poyresca, quar fort leu cayra per si aprop xx dias o .xxx.; e lahoras cura la plagua si a tu es vist, e si no layssa aquela.	And from that one in which you can speak your mind and present your request: when it is swollen, administer to the member also with the bone of the thigh and the support and similar things for those of the large members, and do not believe that a person has been healed by the power of God; leaving it alone until it heals, because a strong man falls for himself, and after three or seven days he may fall again; and then heal the wound if it is visible, and if not, leave it.
Capitol .xx.	Chapter 20
De la curacio de nodacio que accideys en le vestigi de alcuna fractura.	Of the treatment of a fracture in its track.
Motas veguadas accideys aquesta nodacio en le vestigi de sanacio de fractura, e majorment que es prop de las juncturas, e es orrasada per lu la figura del membre; e fort leu prohibeys le membre de la sua operacio natural.	This type of treatment is often seen in the recovery of a fracture injury, especially when it is near a joint, and its appearance is unusual due to the member's normal function; and a strong person will deny it movement.
Adonc considera si la nodacio es recent e aministra en aquela medicinas que han stipticat ayssi co es aloen, e enses, e mira, e sercacollo, e acrassia, e semblantz ad aquels; enayssi que prenguas de aquela alcunas o totas, e comfesiys aquelas am vi stiptic, o am album de huou, o am vi agre, e pausa aquela sobre la nodacio en estopa, e constringeys aquelas sobre lu per bona constriccio.	Then consider if the injury is recent and administer those medicinal substances that have been used in it, and wash them; also, take some of its liquid or all of it, and apply those medicines there, also considering the patient' styptic, or water of wheat, or vinegar, and place it over the injury in cloth, and tighten it well.
E leyssa extrictura que no deslies aquela per motz dias; e aprop deslia aquela e itera autra, entro que sia remauguda la nodacio; o strenh sobre aquela lamina de plom descentment, quar plom ha proprietat de remaure tot aquo que es imflat en les membres.	And leave that tightness so that it does not become tight for more than a few days; and now remove it and repeat it, until the injury is healed completely; or place on it a layer of lead, because lead has the property of retaining all that is inflated in the limbs.
Mays si nodacio ja es en peyra convertida e streyta es e nessessitat provoca a ostar aquela coytadament, e lahoras scindeys aquela per la partida pus sobirana de lu, e inscideys la superfluitat e eminent, o ratz aquela am alcus rezoris entro que sia remauguda; e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	More if the injury has already turned into a wound and it is very tight and difficult to treat, and then cut it from the top with a sharp knife, and remove the excess and the prominent part, or cut that one with a small wound in which there is still some life; and then heal that one completely.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter 21
De restauracio de fractura quan es restaurada e aprop aquo roman le membre subtil e freul no segon la sieua natura.	Of the restoration of a fracture when it is restored, and then that member is soft and flexible, not stiff according to its nature.
Quan fractura de os es restaurada, e aprop aquo roman le membre subtil e freul, lahoras aquo no es fayt sino per motas causas: de las quals la una es multitut de solucio del liament e de la liguacio de lu fayta no segon que cove; o per superfluitat de strictura dels liamentz entro que·l nutriment sia prohibit correr al membre; o per multitut de embrocaccio superflua; o per movement superfluent no en la sua hora; o per pauquesa de sanc en le cors del malaute e per debelitat de lu.	When a bone fracture is restored, and then that member is soft and flexible, not stiff according to its nature, then it is because of many reasons: the one is the diversity of solutions for the limb and the liaison of it with others; or because of excess tightness of the limbs through which the nutrient does not reach the member; or because of a lot of useless massaging; or because of excessive movement at the wrong time; or because of a lack of strength in the body and to weaken it.
E curacio de aquo es dar a mengar al malaute e far le cor de lu tendre entro que·l sanc sia multiplicat en lu; e aministra banh; e entromet gaug e leticia sobre lu.	And the treatment of this is to have food that gives strength to the patient and multiply the strength in his body, and administer baths; and put on him a loose gown and comfort.
E aprop pausa pegua sobre le membre, per so que la pegua atire a lu mot nutriment, o continua embrocacio de lu am aygua tebeza, entro que·l nutriment corr e retorne a la sua figura natural.	And now place on him a light gown, that the gown does not take away from it the nutrition, or continue massaging with water, so that the nutrition runs and returns to its natural shape.
Capitol .xxii.	Chapter 22
De curacio dels osses trincatz quan so restauratz tortuozament e prohibeys la operacio de lor de aquo que cove.	Of the treatment of broken bones when they are restored in a twisted way and the operation of their removal is not allowed from them.
Quan accideys al membre ja restaurat aprop la sanacio de lu de tortuositat e eminencia al os trincat e nodacio, e es per aquo fededa de forma del membre, mays empero le membre no es prohibit de la sieua operacio natural, lahora no cove que tu recipias la paraula de aquel que exsistima aquel membre sia de novel trincat.	When the member is already restored in its shape and there are signs of a broken bone and a twist, and that member has become fat from its shape, but that member does not prohibit its natural function; then you will receive the word that this member has been newly broken.
Mays ja so statz motz fols metges e restauradors les quals han fayt aquo en nostra tera; e aquesta operacio es mot vituperable perduzent a gran temor le senhal de la qual es mortal.	More so there are many false metwits and restore the ones that have caused this, which is a very evil thing to do to man; and this operation is full of great danger and fear of the seal, whose destruction is fatal.
Mays si claudicacio e nodacio son recentz, lahoras cove que sian enbrocatz am aygua tebeza en la qual so coytas erbas mollificantz, ayssi cum son fuelas de altea e razitz de lu, e mellilot, e semblantz ad aquels; e sia fayt a lu emplastre am emplastre mollificatio ayssi cum dyallaquilon ben fayt; o que sia preza mucillage de razit de altea e sia contucida am gray de gualina o am oli de cirami, e sia emplastrat am aquel; o que sian prezes figuas grassas e sian trissadas am fems de colom, e semblantz ad aquels de las medicinas que son nompnadas amermans consolidacio.	More if the claudication and the injury are recent, then they are broached in water that is soft, with herbs, also with leaves of aloe and raisin seeds, and with honey, applied to it; or with milk oil, which is made soft by adding a bit of wine; or with a mixture of fig oils, and applied as mentioned above; or with dried fig seeds, also applied as mentioned.
E alcunas vetz es dissolvuda am assidua fricacio leugiera que sia am las mas humidas, e sia administrat movement del membre a tota partida en totas horas.	And sometimes it is dissolved with a gentle friction that is kept wet, and it is administered movement of the member from beginning to end in all hours.
Mays si tortuositat ja es anada denant e es fayta fort e convertida es en peyra e provocada es necessitat a curacio de lu am ferr, lahoras cove que sia le pus desus cecsat e la continuacio del os sia dissolvut, e sia inscidit aquo que superflueys de nodacio de aquel meteys am le os am inscissoris subtils, e sia aministrada facilitat en aquel am sollicitut e studi.	More if the twist has already occurred in advance and it is very strong and has become a wound that must be treated with iron, then it is because it has already been softened, and the continuation of the bone has been dissolved, and it is cut where there is excess of the injury of that member, with a sharp knife, also considering the smallness of the knife, and applying ease in treating it and studying it.
Capitol .xxiii.	Chapter 23
De sermo en dislocacio.	Of speech in a dislocation.
Dislocacio es eyssiment de alcuna de las juncturas del sieu loc, per que es prohibida de movement, e es orrezada la figura del membre, e fa venir sobre le malaute dolors e lesios grans.	Dislocation is that the member has been moved out of its place, so it is prohibited from moving, and the figure of the member changes, causing great pain and major injuries.
Donc quan accideys ad alcu dislocacio, lahoras cove tantost perforsar que sia reduzit, e no tarde aquela reduzir, quar si es tardada, le loc es apostemat e fort leu am aquo es fayta dificil la reduccio de dislocaccio.	And so when there is a dislocation, let them soon pierce to the point that it is reduced, and do not delay that reduction, for if it is delayed, then the dislocation becomes fixed and difficult to reduce.
E per aysso no cove que sia maugut ni stendut en la hora de la apostemacio, quar motas veguadas fa venir spasme e dolors ledentz.	And so do not cover or stretch it at the time of the injection, for if you do, then the muscles will be strained and spasms and pains will occur in them.
Mays quan aquo accideys, lahoras cove que tu te coytes a la flaubotomia del malaute, e aprop sia layssat entro que repause le apostema; e aprop le membre sia embrocat am aygua cauda e oli, e aprop sia reduzit am facilitat.	And if it happens to you, then let them cut the skin of the thigh, and place it so that the injection is not given until it is in place; and the limb is smeared with oil and water, and reduced easily.
E tot membre sia curat am aquo del qual la rememoracio vindra en son loc.	And let all of the limbs be cleaned with the water in which the memory will come to its place.
E yeu ja e ordenatz les capitols de dislocacio segon que es precedit en fractura; de la partida del cos pus sobirana entro a la partida pus dejos.	And you have already ordered that the joints of dislocation be taken care of according to what is followed in fracture; from the top of the body to the bottom.
Capitol .xxiiii.	Chapter.
De curacio de dislocacio de la mandibula dejos.	Of treatment of a dislocation of the jaw.
So dislocadas las doas mandibulas si no tart; e la dislocacio de amdos es fayta segon una de dos manieyras: que o son remaugudas de lurs locs per pauca remocio, e so mollificadas un petit; o so dislocadas per entiera dislocacio e complida, entro que sian mollificadas a la partida de la junctura entro que corro saliva del malaute e que no puesca tenir aquela ni puesca claure la sua boca, e la lengua de lu sia envolopada en sa paraula.	So the two jaws are not treated; and the dislocation of both is done according to one of two ways: that either they are taken out of their places by a small movement, and then they are softened a little; or they are dislocated completely and fully, until they are softened at the joint at the beginning, so that saliva does not come from the patient's mouth and his tongue is not wrapped up in it.
Mays quan la dislocacio de lu es pauca, lahoras en las majors disposicios retorna per si an pauca causa.	And if the dislocation of him is little, then let them return to their usual position by themselves for a little cause.
Mays si la dislocacio es entiera e complida, lahoras cove que sia administrada reduccio de lu leugierament, e no sia tardada de tot.	And if the dislocation is entire and full, then let them be reduced gently, and do not delay at all.
E es que·l ministre tengua le cap del malaute, e entrometa lo metge le dit pous de la una sieua ma en la razit de la dislocacio de la mandibula dedintz la boca de lu, si la dislocacio es de la una part; o que entrometa les sieus dos pouzes ensemps, si la dislocacio es de doas partz, e les autres ditz de las mas de lu sian defora am les quals enguale; e comanda al malaute que cesse las suas mandibulas e absolva aquelas anar de quascuna partida; e le metge engualhe la mandibula e enpellisca la mandibula entro que retorne al sieu loc.	And the minister has the head of the patient, and inserts it between the teeth of one half of the jaw inside the mouth of him, if the dislocation is on one side; or he inserts both sides together, if the dislocation is on two sides, and the others are outside where they belong; and orders the patient to cease his jaws and return them to their places; and inserts the jaw and wraps it up until it returns to its place.
E si dificil es la reducio de lu, e majorment si amdos las mandibulas so essemps dislocadas, lahoras aministra evoporacio am aygua cauda e oli, entro que sia fayta leugiera la reduccio de amdos e no tardes la reduccio de amdos de tot, ayssi quo havem dit.	And if the reduction of him is difficult, and mostly if both jaws are completely dislocated, then administer evaporation with oil and water, until the reduction of both is easy, and do not delay the reduction of both at all, as we have said.
E donc cum retornam e so engualadas, e es clausa la boca del malaute e no es mollificada, lahoras pausa sobre aquelas polvils de drap am cerot, e sia fayt de cera e oli rozat; e aprop sia liat am facilitat am liamens mols.	And then when they return and are wrapped up again, and the mouth of the patient is closed and is not softened, then place them on a cloth for protection, and let wax be made from oil and rosin; and let it be stretched easily with a soft hand.
E sia le dormir del malaute sobre le sieu dos, e·l cap de lu sia stant entre dos aurelhes, per so que no maugue aquel a la partida dreyta ni a la sinistra; e no li fassas per forsa masteguar alcuna causa; habans la sieua vianda sia forbicio leon, entro que quan las dolors sian remaugudas e las mandibulas so nozadas, lahoras maugue aquo que vol.	And let the patient sleep on his back, and let the head of him be between two pillows, so that he does not wake up to the right or left; and do not force him to eat for any reason; have a hard pillow under him, so that when the pains are returned and the jaws are locked, then let him wake up who wants.
E aquo sia aministrat am facilita, e no trebalhe sobre la apercio de la boca deves la comestio e beure e ocitatio, entro que la mandibula sia nozada e sanada.	And let it be administered easily, and do not work on the opening of the mouth before eating, drinking, or speaking; so that the jaw is locked and healed.
E si es dificil la reduccio de duas mandibulas quan so dislocadas en alcuna hora e no so convertidas als lors locs, lahoras motas veguadas accideysso febres e soda assidua, e fort leu es alerguat le ventre del malaute, e fort leu e vomeys colera pura.	And if the reduction of two jaws is difficult when they are dislocated at any time and are not returned to their places, then let sudden fever and frequent vomiting occur, and let strong pain arise in the abdomen of the patient, and strong diarrhea.
E quan tu vezes aquo, lahoras sapias que es perdicio; e motas veguadas mor aquel al qual accideys aquo en x dias.	And when you see this, then know that it is a loss; and let sudden death come to the one who experiences this in five days.
Capitol .xxv.	Chapter.
De reduccio de la dislocacio de la furcula e de la extremitat del muscle.	Of reduction of a dislocation of the clavicle and the end of the muscle.
Furcula no es dislocada del latz dedintz per la sua continuacio am le pietz; e alcunas veguadas es dislocada a la partida defora, e aquo es declarat al sentiment.	The furcola is not dislocated from behind by its continuity with the leg; and some are dislocated at the end outside, and this is announced to the feeling.
E la restauracio de lu es que·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu dos e extenda les sieus brasses.	And the restoration of him is that the patient lies on his back and stretches his arms.
E aprop coarta le loc am la tua palma am fort coartacio, quar ela retornara.	Then cut the place with your thumb firmly, for it will return.
E aprop pausa sobre aquela emplastre e pulvils e strenh aquela.	And then place on that ointment and cloth, and strengthen it.
Mays la extremitat de aquel que siec le coyde e·s continuat am aquel, no es dislocada en alcun dia; lahoras cove que sia reduzida e engualhada segon que havem dit e segon que es a tu aparelhat.	Then the end of him that seizes is not dislocated in any day; then let it be reduced and wrapped up according to what we have said, and according to your apparatus.
E aprop pausa sobre aquela emplastre, e pulvils, e extrictura, e comanda al malaute adherir a trenquilitat e a repaus entro que sia sanat.	And then place on that ointment, and cloth, and tighten it, and order the patient to stay quiet and at rest until he is healed.
E am aquesta meteyssa curacio es reduzida la extremita del muscle quan es separada del sieu loc.	And in this cure, the end of the muscle is reduced when it is separated from its place.
Capitol .xxvi.	Chapter.
De la reduccio de la dislocacio del muscle.	Of reduction of a dislocation of the muscle.
Sapias que·l muscle no es dislocat sino segon tres manieras, de las quals es la una que sia dislocat a la partida del titillic a la partida dejos.	Know that the muscle is not dislocated unless it is according to three ways, of which one is dislocated at the end of the rib at the beginning; and the other two are dislocated at both ends.
E la segonda es que sia dislocat a la partida desus del muscle, e aquo es fayt tart; e no es dislocat a las partidas detras per la spalla; e no es dislocat a las partidas denant per les nervis.	And the second is that it is dislocated at the end of its rib, and this is not difficult; and it is not dislocated behind by the shoulder; and it is not dislocated before by nerves.
E majorment es dislocat e defora eyssit a las partidas dejos deves le titillic, e majorment en aquels dels quals las carns son paucas, leugierament es dislocat; mays en aquels en les quals so motas carns, es eyssit fora am dificultat.	And most of the time it is dislocated and goes out from behind at the beginning of the rib, and most of the time it is dislocated slightly; but in those where the flesh is thick, it is dislocated easily; but in those where the flesh is little, it goes out with difficulty.
E fort leu accideys ad alcus homes percussio o cazement, e le muscle de lu es apostemat de apostema caut, e es cujat per aquo que ja sia dislocat.	Then sudden pain occurs in some men by a blow or accident, and the muscle of him is torn from its place; and it is recognized by the pain that has already been dislocated.
Adonc cove que tu sproes aquo entro que estias sobre-sertetut de lu, e lahoras procesiscas en la curacio de lu.	And then let them not be too worried about him, for you are already relieved from worry; and proceed to the cure of him.
E es conoguda la dislocacio de lu quan es a las partidas dejos deves le titillic; per so que distingescas entre le muscle dislocat e·l muscle sa, quar tu atrobas entre aquels diversitat manifesta; e atrobas en le cap del muscle concavitat e dejos le titillic deves le tocament del cap del muscle ayssi quo un huou, e al malaute no pot redusir la sua ma a la sieua aurelha, ni maure aquela per totz movementz.	And it is clear that the dislocation of him is at the beginning of the rib; but so that you can distinguish between the dislocated muscle and the other, for you see a great difference between them; and you feel a depression in the top of the muscle, and to the patient's ear, he cannot reduce his jaw to its place by all his movements.
Si es dislocat deves le pietz o ensus, e tu lahoras atrobas manifest tocament, e no es amaguat.	If it is dislocated, then let them feel a firm touch, and do not be afraid.
E de aquesta dislocacio es fayta leugiera reduccio quan es fresca e le malaute es enfant.	And of this dislocation, a slight reduction is made when it is fresh, and the patient is child.
E la reduccio de lu es que·l ministre eleva la ma de lu a las partidas desus; e aprop pause les tieus pouses dejos le titillic de lu, e eleva la junctura am fortaleza en sus al sieu loc, e·l ministre eleva la ma de lu, e extenda aquela en sus; e aprop pausa aquela dejos quar ela retorna leugierament.	And the reduction of him is that the minister raises his hand to the top of it; and then places the ties on both sides of his rib at its end, and tightens it with force in its place; and the minister raises the patient' hand, and extends it forward; and then places the ties on both sides as they return slightly; for they return easily.
Mays si per aquo que havem dit no retorna, e so del comensament que accidic la dislocacio, motz dias, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia banhat en aygua cauda e sia aministrada enbrocacio que mollifique e liniesca ayssi cum si so coytz razitz de altea, e fenugrec, e melillot en aygua, e sia administrada.	And if, by the way that I have said, it does not return, then let it be from the beginning where dislocation occurs; and let them be bathed in oil and water, and let them be given a massage with hot stones; and let oil be applied to the whole body as if they were being stripped of their clothes; and let fenugrec and mielot be added to the water, and administered.
E aprop le malaute sia ressupinat sobre le sieu dos e sia pausat dejos le titillic de lu espera de lana que sia engual entre levitat e strictura, e aprop le metge pause le sieu talo sobre la spera, e eleva le cap del muscle am vertut, e atire la ma del malaute per que no sia mauguda a las partidas dejos, e autre ministre tengua le cap del malaute, que no sia maugut a las partidas dejos, quar aquela tantost retorna al sieu loc.	And then the patient is placed on his back and his legs are raised slightly with cloth; and the doctor tightens it with force, and waits for him to relax; and he places his leg on the spine, and lifts the top of the muscle with his hand, and throws the patient' head so that it does not touch the ground, and another minister holds the patient' head, so that it does not touch the ground either; because this one returns to its place quickly.
E si voles, reduzeys aquel segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu fassas esser prezent un home le qual sia pus lonc que·l malaute, e estia de la part de aquel latz, e entrometa le sieu muscle dejos le titillic del malaute e eleve le titillic de lu a las partidas desus entro que·l malaute sia suspendut en ayre, e autre ministre tire la ma del malaute de las partidas dejos del sieu ventre.	And if you wish, reduce this second in such a way: and it is that you being present a man who was longer than the patient, and stood on this side of the latter, and entrenches his muscle between the titillic of the patient and raises the titallic of him to the split within that the patient be suspended in air, and another minister pulls the patient's hand from the splits of his belly.
Mays si le malaute es leugier, lahoras cove que am lu que autre causa sia suspenduda, per so que grave aquel, quar la dislocacio retorna tantost.	If the patient is loose, then know that another cause is suspended, so that this one, for so much as the dislocation returns soon.
E es reduzit eysament segon autra manieyra: e es que sia ficat en terra un fust lonc le cap del qual sia redon de figura, ayssi cum pilo de mortier, que no sia gros ni subtil, e aprop sia pausat dejos le malaute; pus que so pausatz sobre·l cap del fust draps leons, e·l malaute sia stant segon la longitut del fust, e aprop sia extenduda la ma de lu a las partidas dejos del autra part; e sia extendut le cos de lu del autre part am fortaleza, quar la junctura retorna al sieu loc am velocitat.	And it is reduced with care according to another way: and it is that he be laid on the ground a pole long enough whose top be round of form, thus with a mortar's head, that not be thick nor thin, and be placed from behind the patient; for they are placed on the top of the pole lions' skins, and the patient stands according to its length, and his hand is extended from behind him at the split; and his legs are extended from the other side with strength, because the joint returns to its place quickly.
E si es dificil reduccio de lu per totas las causas que havem ditas, lahoras usa de aquesta cura: e es que tu prenguas un fust la quantitat del qual sia en le lonc de dos brasses, e latitut de aquel sia de quatre ditz, e la grossetut de lu sia aleujat en le preon del tittilic segon aquesta forma:	And if the reduction of him is difficult for all the causes that we have said, then use this cure: and it is that you take a pole whose quantity be in its length of two brases, and its width of four dizes, and its thickness be separated in the preon of the titillic according to this form:
E aprop sobre le cap redon sian liatz drap leons per so que·l fust no ledesca le malaute.	And they are placed on the top round skin is tied on the pole so that it does not slip the patient.
E aprop sia pausat dejos le titillic del malaute, e sia extenduda la ma o le bras sobre·l fust entro a las partidas dejos, e sia liat le fust sobre le adjutori e le bras e la extremitat de la ma.	And they are placed from behind the titilic of the patient, and his hand or his leg is extended on the pole within the splits, and it is tied the pole on the helpers and the arm and the end of the hand.
Aprop sia pausat le bras sobre un scalo de scala segon la latitut, e la ma sia extenduda a las partidas dejos, e l’autre cos sia suspendut de l’autre part, quar la junctura intra tantost.	Then they are placed the arm on a step according to its width, and his hand is extended from behind him at the splits, and the other side is suspended from the other side, because the joint returns soon.
E cum le intrament de lu es complit segon quascuna maniera que es a tu possibla, e lahoras cove que tu pauses dejos le titillic spera de lana de engual quantitat; e aprop pauza emplastre perparat de polvera de moli am enses e album de huou sobre tot le muscle, ayssi quo es revolvut desus, e aprop strenh dejos le titillic am strictura decent; e le liament sia revolvut sobre le emplastre, e la ma de lu sia annectida al col de lu, e sia leyssat, e no sia mauguda la ma de lu per vii dias.	And with the instrument of him is completed according to each way that it is possible to you, and then know that you leave from behind the titilic a length of wool; and they are placed a paste prepared of mortar' dust and white of egg on all the muscle, thus being turned down it, and then tighten from behind the titilic with a force; and the joint is turned over the paste, and his hand is joined to its neck, and it is tied, and not be loosened his hand for seven days.
E cove que sia pausada la vianda del malaute pauca, entro que·l membre sia confortat, quar es pus leugier a la sanacio de lu.	And then that the patient's food is little placed, within that the member is comforted, because it has been longer to its cure.
E aprop la vianda sia donada major aprop vii o v e sia exercitat un movement; e donc si es fermat e no es mollificat, lahoras ja es sanat.	And then the food is given more often than seven days or it is exercised a movement; and if it stops and does not be softened, then it already is healed.
Mays si la junctura es dislocada motas veguadas per humiditat que accideys a lu o per autra causa, lahoras cove que en aquela sia administrat cauteri am tres traucs, segon que denant es dit en le capitol de cauteri.	If the joint is dislocated there are seen by moisture that happens to him or for another cause, then know that in this one is administered cauterization with three cuts according to what was said before in the chapter of cauterization.
E si tot aysso es fayt e aprop vii dias es desliat le liament e la junctura no es fermada, e le emplastre e la strictura son reduzitz sobre lu alcunas veguadas, e no es fermada e catz e no pot elevar aquel bras a las partidas desus, lahoras sapias que·ls nervis de lu, les quals so al cap del muscle, ja so inscizes o extendutz o mollificatz, e sapia que la junctura nul temps no sira ficada en loc sieu.	And if all this is not done and seven days are passed it is separated the joint and the cauterization and the stricture are reduced on him some times, and it does not be fixed and the skin and not can raise that arm at the splits, then know that its nerves, which are to the top of the muscle, already have been cut or extended or softened; and you know that the joint will never remain in its place.
De la dislocacio de aquela qu’es fayta deves le pietz e la mamilha o las partidas detras, la reduccio es fayta am impulcio e extencio am las mas, entro que retorne.	From the dislocation of that which is done deves the foot and the nipple or the splits behind, the reduction is made with an impulsion and an extension to the more, within that it returns.
E sia administrada en aquela l’autra strictura, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	And be administered in that one another stricture, and cure that one within that it is healed.
E si accideys aprop la sanacio gravitat en le membre e tarditat en le movement de lu, lahoras le malaute uze de banh motas veguadas entro que aquela gravitat sia alleujada e que retorne a la natura de lu primiera.	And if it happens near the healing gravity in the member and delay in the movement of him, then the patient uses bath water that is separated by the gravity and returns to its natural form first.
Capitol .xxvii.	Chapter.xxvii.
De curacio de dislocacio del coyde.	Of cure of dislocation of the hip.
Sapias que la junctura del coyde es dislocada am difficultat e semblantment retorna am difficultat; e aquela es dislocada a totas partidas, e majorment a la partida denant a la partida detras, e la dislocacio de lu no es amaguada a tu quar es cazent dejos le vezement o dejos le tocament segon qualque figura sia dislocat, e quan ajustes le coyde disloguat am le sa, aquo es a tu declarat manifestament, quar la junctura es concavada e no pot doblar le bras, ni tocar am aquel le sieu muscle.	You know that the hip' joint is dislocated with difficulty and seems to return with difficulty; and it is dislocated at all splits, especially in the front split to the back, and the dislocation of him is not covered by your skin or by your touch according to some shape is dislocated, and when you adjust the hip dislocated with the hand with which you hit, then it is declared manifestly, because the joint is bent and cannot bend the arm, nor can touch on its muscle.
E cove que·t coytes, e reduzescas la dislocacio tantost denant que vengua a lu apostema caut, quar si ve a lu apostema caut, dificil es la reduccio de lu, e fort leu no es sanat de tot; e majorment quan es a las partidas detras, quar pus mala es de totas las autras specias de dislocacio, e de major dolor, e motas veguadas deyssen am aquela la mort.	And then your heels, and reduce the dislocation as soon as possible before that it comes to him a puss of cauterization, because if it sees to him a puss of cauterization, the reduction is difficult for him, and fort painful does not heal completely; and especially when it is in the back splits, because it is worse of all the other dislocations, and of greater pain, and causes some times to die.
E la restauracio de lu, quan es aquela que es possibla reduzir, es que la ma de lu sia extenduda am doas mas, e le bras de lu sia expandut, e las mas del metge sian sobre le coyde e dejos lu, e el empellisca la junctura am les pouzes de las suas mas ensemps, o am la razit de la sua palma entro que torne en son loc.	And the recovery of him, when it is that one possible to reduce it, is that his hand be extended with two hands, and its arms are expanded, and the sides of the body are over the hip and away from him, and he pushes the joint with his knuckles together or with the heel of his palm as soon as it returns to its place.
Mays si la dislocacio es a las partidas denant, lahoras retorna ayssi que dobla la ma am la sua ma, entro que percuta le coyde am la razit de la sua palma.	If the dislocation is in the front splits, then return this way that it doubles his hand with his own hand, within that it hits on the hip with the heel of his palm.
E si la dislocacio no obezeys a la reduccio, lahoras aministra vehement extencio e mot fort.	And if the dislocation does not obey to the reduction, then administer violent extension and do it hard.
E es que dos ministres extendan le bras, e tenguan aquel eyssament dos ministres per so que no sia remaugut deves la extencio.	It is that two ministers extend the arms, and have him a puss of two ministers for so that it does not be turned again after extension.
E aprop sia revolvut le bras deves tota part, pus que es envolopat drap doblat lonc sobre la ma de lu, o liament.	And then they are turned the arms before all its parts, because they are wrapped skin that is folded long on his hand, or joint.
E quant le metge toca la junctura am la sua ma, unte aquela am alcun oli per so que aquo sia aquelas causas las quals ajudan en lubricitat de la junctura am facilitat; e aprop empellesca la junctura am empulcio vehement entro que retorne.	And when the body touches the joint with his hand, anoint that one with some oil for so that it is those causes which help in lubrification of the joint with ease; and then push the joint with a violent impulsion as soon as it returns to its place.
E aprop la reduccio de lu cove que sia pausat sobre aquela empastre en le qual sia stipticitat e excequacio am album de huou, e sia extrenhut am strictura descent, e·l bras sia suspendut del col, e sia layssat per alcus dias.	And then the reduction of him is placed over that paste in which there is rigor and execution with white of egg, and it is extended with a force downward, and his hand is joined to its neck, and it is left for some days.
E aprop sia desliat; e donc si la junctura es formada en le sieu loc, lahoras tu deslia le liament de lu e layssa aquela.	And then it is separated; and if the joint is formed in its place, then your hand separates the joint from him and leaves that one.
E si vezas la junctura no be strenher, lahoras tu itera le emplastre e·l liament, e layssa aquela per alcus dias entro que sia extrenhuda; e aprop deslia aquela.	And if you see the joint is not stronger, then your hand iterates the paste and the joint, and leaves that one for some days within that it is extended; and then separate that one.
Mays si accideys a lu gravitat aprop la reduccio de la junctura, e la disposicio de lu es en movement, lahoras aministra humectacio en banh e fricacio subtil, e comprecio, entro que sia aleujat; o pausa sobre la junctura aleliati, so es coyssa de moto grassa; e aprop sia liada, e layssa aquela sobre le os le dia e la nueyt.	If it happens near the reduction of the joint gravity, and the disposition of him is in movement, then administer bath with humidity and a subtle friction, and compression within that it is separated; or pause on the joint with a weight, so it is left from movement; and then tie it, and leave that one for a day and a night.
E aprop osta aquela, e met aquel en banh; e quan suza, lahoras tu fregua la junctura am fricacio temprada, e aprop itera sobre aquela aleliati, so es ronhonal de moto, una veguada, e la segonda, e la .iii.a.,	And then tie that one, and put that one in bath; and when it is warm, then your hand rubs the joint with a strong friction, and then iterates on that one with a weight, so it is heard a noise of movement, once, and the second, and the third;
corrupcio ja es pervenguda sobre le denolam intrament de banh, entro que sia linit.	Corruption has already come about on the denouement of the bath, unless it is liminary.
E si voles, pausa sobre aquela fenda de vaca humida e scalfada am boder e stren sobre aquel; e fay aquo alcunas veguadas, quar aquela es humida e reduzeys a la sua disposicio.	And if you wish, pause on that cow' split with wet and sharp friction against him; and you make some times to it, because that one is wet and reduces its disposition.
Capitol .xxviii.	Chapter .xxviii.
De curacio de dislocacio de malassen, so es de la junctura que es entre·l bras e la ma.	On the Treatment of Dislocation of the Shoulder, if it is at the joint where the arm meets the body.
Malassen de la ma alcunas vetz es deslocada, e la reduccio de la dislocacio de lu es leugiera, e·l contrari es de las autras juncturas, mays empero cove que sia velocitat en la reduccio de lu en la hora en la qual es deslocada, denant que le loc sia apostemat o que accida en lu apostema caut.	If the shoulder is dislocated, and the reduction (re-position) is slow, and conversely for the other joints; nevertheless it is necessary to hurry in reducing it at the moment when it has been displaced, before a lump forms or an ulcer appears from the impact.
E la reduccio de la dislocacio de lu es que tu pauses la junctura de la ma del malaute sobre una taula e le ministre extenda la ma de aquel, e le metge pause la sua ma o o la sua palma sobre la iminencia de la junctura, e empellisca aquela entro que retorne al sieu loc.	And for reducing the dislocated shoulder; you should place the shoulder of the patient onto a table, and have a minister extend the patient's arm, and the doctor places their hand or palm on the joint, and pushes gently to bring it back into place.
Mays empero cove que sia considerat si la palma ja es ostada al ventre de la ma, lahoras le malaute pause le dos de la sua ma sobre una taula deves la extencio e la reduccio; e si la dislocacio es precedent deves le dos de la ma, lahoras sia la posicio de la ma de aquel intrinicequement sobre la taula, per so que la ma del metge caja sobre aquela iminencia de la junctura.	However, if the palm is already held by the patient towards their stomach, then have the patient extend their arm onto a table for extension and reduction; but if the dislocation is previous, then hold the patient's hand firmly upon the table, so that the doctor's hand rests on the joint in question.
E donc si retorna tantost, bon es; e sino, lahoras strenh aquela am empastre cedant le apostema e layssa aquel; e no iteres aquo, quar sino, no soferta ni no podes sobre la reduccio de lu pus que passan a lu dias.	And if it returns soon, then it is good; but if not, then strengthen that one with plasters while there is an ulcer; and do not repeat this, for unless the reduction is quick, it will not work and it will not be possible to reduce it except by waiting a few days.
Mays empero la junctura roman segon la sua tortuositat; e no notz al malaute alcuna causa, sino que la ma es mollificada e no pot strenher alcuna causa; lahoras sapias que les nervis son trincatz o trissatz, e lahoras no es engen en lu sino que sia strenhuda am cauteri prop le cazament de lu e fort leu aquo confereys alcuna causa.	However, the Roman joint is second only in its tortuousness; and there is no cause for the patient to feel weak, but rather their muscles are relaxed and do not hold themselves; then you should know that the nerves are torn or stretched, and it is not possible to treat them except by a strong cauterization near the joint and firm pressure thereon; then apply some cause.
Donc cum malassem es retornada, lahoras pausa sobre lu empastre le qual havem recomtat, e sia layssat e strenhut per v dias; e aprop sia desliat e sia layssat e la ma de lu sia excercitada.	Then, if the malady returns after having been remedied with plasters, then allow it to rest and strengthen for a few days; and then remove them and exercise the hand.
Mays si le movement de lu es ostat e accideys en lu alcuna gravitat, lahoras leniys aquela am aygua cauda e am fricacio alcunas veguadas, entro que sia alleujat.	But if the movement is excessive and causes pain, then have that one rest with their hand in water and apply friction to some areas, so that it feels better.
Capitol .xxix.	Chapter 29.
De la curacio de dislocacio dels ditz.	On the Treatment of Dislocation of the Fingers.
Alcunas veguadas so dislocatz les ditz a tota partida.	Some joints are dislocated at their very beginnings.
E quan es dislocat alcun dit de aquels al dos de la palma o al ventre de lu, lahoras sten le dit e impelleys la dislocacio de lu am les tieus pouses, entro que retorne.	And when any finger of these is dislocated at the joint with the palm or at the base of the finger, then bend the finger and push it back into place, so that it does not return to its original position.
E aprop sostenta le cap del dit, e suspen aquel deves la part a la qual es dislocat, e layssa aquel per dos dias.	Then support the end of the finger, and suspend it from the part where it is dislocated, and leave it for two days.
E aprop suspen aquel e exten aquel entro que dreyt sia engualhat en aquel sieu dia.	Then hang that one up and extend that joint so that it may be reabsorbed by the body in a day or two.
E quan sira noyt, lia aquel segon aquela narracio, e no cesses desliar aquel en le dia e exercitar am movement, e lia aquel en la noyt; e fay aquo per alcus dias entro que sia streyt.	And when the pain subsides, then follow the previous instructions, and do not stop exercising the movement, and keep it extended at night; and make sure to be patient.
E fay semblant am aquo, si es dislocat al ventre de la ma, e lia aquel ad aquela partida e fay am aquo la tieua primiera operacio, entro que sia sanat.	And if it is dislocated at the base of the finger, then bend that one back, and follow the same instructions as before; and if it does not improve, then apply a different treatment, so that it heals.
E semblantment fay am aquo quan es dislocat a las autres partidas.	And in the same way, if it is dislocated at any other joint.
Capitol .xxx.	Chapter 30.
De la curacio de dislocacio dels spondils del dos.	On the Treatment of Dislocation of the Vertebrae in the Back.
Quan accideys ad alcun dels spondils del dos o del col dislocacio complida, e so remaugutz motz spondils de lors locs, lahoras en aquela no es curacio, quar la mort se coyta al malaute.	And when a dislocation of the vertebrae in the back or neck occurs completely, and one or more vertebrae are dislocated from their position, then there is no cure for this patient; death comes quickly.
E senhal de aquo es que la egestio del malaute es fora-eyssida ses voluntat, e no pot retenir aquela; e motas veguadas so mollificatz alcus membres de lu o doas cambas de lu o dos brasses de lu, o un de aquels; o es remaugut un spondil de son loc, quar motas veguadas es remaugut e motas veguadas es fayta la remocio de aquels a quatre partidas.	This is to say that the patient's vomit can be forced out of their will, and they cannot hold it in; or several members of the body become weak, or two limbs or two arms are dislocated from their joints, for some limbs or two arms are dislocated from their joints. For some limbs are dislocated from their joints and fall to the ground, and some limbs become withered.
Donc aquela ja es remauguda a las partidas detras e es nompnada gelbozitat.	Then that one has already fallen in four parts behind; this is called a "gelbow".
Mays la curacio de lu es que lahoras consideras si la gelbozitat accidey de puerissia, quar lahoras en aquela no es curacio ni de aquela no es sanacio de tot.	However, the cure for this is that you should consider whether it has happened because of a disease of the body; because in this case there will be no cure or healing for it completely.
Mays en aquela que ve per cazement o per percussio o per semblant ad aquels, ja diyssero les Antics las manieras de curacio am sermo prolixs, del qual lo mays retorna am profieyt; mays yeu ja e abreujat de aquel del qual lo pauc escusa del trop de lu, per la mieua propinquitat a la entencio mieua exposicio, am la qual he aquo expausat et format ex instrument divers de aquel am le qual mostrero aquo e espausero aquel.	However, in those that happen by accident or impact or seem to be affected by them; the ancient books speak at length about their cures, some of which do return after a long time has passed, and others are new creations made from an instrument that is not usually used; one that I have found useful and that I will share with you.
E dic que en gelbosita que accideys de la partida denant en le pietz, no es engen ni sanacio de aquela; e semblantment en aquela que es fayta a dos latz.	And it is said that if the dislocation occurs from the front of the foot, there will be no cure or healing for that one; and in a similar way, if it happens to two feet.
E de aquelas no es curada sino aquela que accideys en le dos propriament am aquo que yeu recomti.	And those cannot be cured except by water; that is what I have recommended.
E es que·l malaute sia extendut sobre la sua cara sobre pug engual prop de paret, e sia extendut dejos lu esturment molh per so que no sia lidit le pietz de lu.	And the patient be placed on their face, extended over a table with their feet hanging over the edge, and a wet instrument held near their toes.
E aprop un fust dreyt sia pausat, ficat en la terra en la extremitat del pug entorn le cap de lu, e autra fust en aviro les pes de lu en l’autra extremitat del pueg.	Then a long stick be placed on the ground at the end of the foot near the heel of the patient's hand, and another one held up by their toes in the other end of the table.
E·l ministre tengua le fust, e no sia fermat en fossa; e autre ministre tengua l’autre segon aquela forma.	The minister should hold the stick, and not be placed in a pit; and another minister should hold the other one in this way.
E aprop envolopa sobre le cap del malaute e dejos les titillic liamen leon ferm; e exten la extremitat del liamel al fust le qual es deves le cap de lu, e lia aquel en lu; e aprop strenh l’autre liament sobre las ancas de lu les denols de lu, e deves las cambas de lu; e aprop ajusta totz les liamentz e lia aquels en l’autre fust le qual es deves les pes de lu.	Then wrap the cap of the patient around your neck and let the little fingers touch the ground in front of you, and extend that end of the limb with the stick; and then strengthen the other limb by holding its extremities together and keeping them apart, and then adjust all the limbs, and place those on the other stick that is meant for the feet.
E aprop le ministre cascu extenda le liament a la partida del fust, e no sian remaugutz les dos fustz e les liamentz dels sieus locs en les quals son ficatz, mays empero no so fermatz ayssi cum havem dit.	Then the minister should drop the limb onto the end of the stick, and not let them hang in mid-air; however, they should not be held like this permanently.
E le metge pause las suas palmas sobre le spondil am fortaleza entro que retorne, o que pause sobre aquela una taula, e aprop que ajuste sobre la taula les sieus pes entro que retorne.	And the doctor should place their palms onto the spine with force, so that it returns to its original position, or they should place it on a table, and then adjust their legs onto the table as well.
Mays si no retorna per aquesta forma, lahoras pren una taula de la qual la latitut o la longitut sia en aviro de tres brassas, e cava en la paret de la qual havem dit que es prop le malaute un loc en le qual intre la extremitat de la taula.	However, if it does not return by this method, then you should find a table whose height or length is at an angle to three bras; and dig into the wall where I have said that it is convenient for the patient to stand with their feet on either side of the table.
E aprop pausa la maytat de la taula sobre le spondilh, e·l metge pause les sieus pes sobre l’autre extremitat, e estrenha be entro que le spondil sia coartat e que retorne al sieu loc.	Then the minister should place the end of the table onto the spine, and the doctor should place their legs onto the other end of the table, and then adjust it so that the spine is straightened, and then release it back into its original position.
E si tu voles, obre am torn le qual es revolvut am la ma; e es que tu fiques en terra deves le cap del malaute en le derier del pug dos fustz, la longitut dels quals sia d’un bras, e deves le cap de lu en le derier del pug eyssament dos fustz; e sia la longitut que es entre quascun fust un palm, e ja es fayt en quascun fust trauc en le qual corr torn, e quascun sia mot fermat en terra per so que no sia maugut.	And if you wish, then open the door by which one enters; and it is that the cap of the patient be placed at the back of two poles, whose length is a palm, and the cap of the patient in the back of two poles; and it is that the length between each pole be a palm, and so it is done in each pole above the ground, so that one can run back into the room, and someone stop them from running out by holding them on the ground.
E sia mes un fust redon en le qual es le torn, e sia revolvut en les dos traucs dels dos fustz.	And there should be a long stick that is turned around at both ends of the two poles; and it is that this long stick be held between the two poles, so that one end is at the door where people enter, and the other end be turned around to the back of the two poles, so that it touches the ground.
E en la extremitat de lu es un trauc en le qual es format le fust, la longueza del qual es un palm am aquo que es revolvut; e en les dos autres fustz es semblant de aquel.	And at the end of it is a pole that forms the stick, whose length is a palm, and in the other two poles is similar to this one.
E aprop strenh les liamentz que has streyt en le pietz del malaute en le trau le qual es deves le cap de lu, e les liamentz que has streyts en las coyssas de lu en le torn le qual es deves les pes de lu.	And tighten the ligaments that you have stretched in the foot of the patient in the bed where his head is, and the ligaments that you have stretched in his thighs in the turn where his feet are.
E aprop deves quascun torn e stia un ministre que torssa le torn am la sua ma, e le metge engualhe le spondil segon que havem dit.	And place a servant in each turn and the doctor rubs the spine according to what we have said.
E aquesta es la forma del torn:	This is the way the turn is done:
E aprop pus que le spondil es retornat, e le loc es engualhat, lahoras cove que pauses empastre exciccatiu am album de huou, e aprop estopa; e aprop pause sobre le empastre astela de taula de la qual la latitut sia de tres ditz o enviro aquels, e la longitut de lu sia quantitat que prengua le loc de la gelbositat, e sobre la partida del spondil sa.	And then that the spine is returned and the place is closed, it is necessary to apply a dry and stiff plaster of white calamine on the back, and then cover it; and place over the plaster an ovoid or circular board whose length is three hands or more than those, and whose width is the amount that takes up the space of the swelling, and on the top of the spine.
E aprop sia liat am liament le qual havem dit, e uze le malaute de nutriment subtil entro que sia sanat.	And then tie with a ligature the member that we have said, and use the patient's nutrition for it to heal.
E si roman alcuna iminencia en le loc en la fi de la sanacio, lahoras cove que sian aministradas medicinas que moilifico e liniscan am aministracio de la taula per lonc temps, la qual havem recomtada; e ja es aministrada en aquel loc lamina de plom.	And if there is any imminence in the place at the end of the cure, then when the medicine that softens and smoothes has been administered to the patient for a long time, which we have recommended; and it is given in that place a plate of lead.
E alcunas veguadas accideys imminencia en le derier dels spondils del dos, e es cujat per aquela dislocacio; e es aquel os le qual ja imineys per que no cove que sia fayta prosompcio a lu am aquesta medicina, quar fort leu fara a tu accidir mort.	And in some cases there is imminent danger in the last of the spine of the two, and it is caused by that dislocation; and it is that bone which you have already mentioned because it does not require that medicine to be given to it, for it would make the patient die.
Capitol .xxxi.	Chapter 31.
De curacio de anca dislocada.	Of Cure of a Hip Joint Dislocation
Sapias que la junctura del ancha e la junctura del muscle no endeve sino dislocacio tant solament, e no accideys ad aquelas aquo que accideys a las autras juncturas de petita remocio e concavitat.	Know that the hip joint and the muscle joint do not cause anything except dislocation when they move slightly and have a cavity, and those who happen to them are not like those who happen to other joints of small movement and curvature.
E la junctura de la ancha es dislocada segon quatre manieyras, quar es dislocada a las partidas dedintz, o a las partidas defora, o a las partidas denant, o a las partidas detras.	And the hip joint is dislocated according to four ways, because it is dislocated in the inner parts, or in the outer parts, or in the front parts, or in the back parts.
E majorment es dislocada a las partidas dedintz, e pauc a las partidas denant o a las partidas detras.	And mostly it is dislocated in the inner parts, and rarely in the front or back parts.
E senhal de la dislocacio de lu a las partidas de dintz es quar, quan tu ajustas la camba del malaute sana am la malaute, es pus longua e·l denolh es pus heminent que de la sana, e·l malaute no pot doblar le sieu pe deves le lenguonar, e es le loc que siec le lengonar apostemat de apostema caut, per so que·l cap de la coyssa ja es pervengut aqui.	And the sign of the dislocation of it in the inner parts is that when you adjust the patient's back with a curve, it becomes longer and the nape is closer to the spine, and the patient cannot bend his neck as it is stuck at the top of the thigh.
E·l senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio es a las partidas defora, es que les accidentz de lu so contraris ad aquest accident.	And the sign of that person who has dislocated his hip is in the outer parts, that is, if he has an accident, his opposite will be like this accident.
E senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio a las partidas denant es quar expan la camba sieua segon compliment, mays empero no dobla aquela ses dolor que es en le denol, e si se perforsa ad anar e no pot sobre aquo a las partidas denant; e la urina de lu es retenguda e l’engonar de lu es apostemat, e deves la ambulacio de lu sobre le talo.	And the sign of that person who has dislocated his hip to the front is that he expands his back according to the complement, but moreover he does not bend that pain which is in the nape, and if he walks he cannot reach the front parts; and his urine is repressed and his skin becomes swollen, and his walk is on tiptoe.
E senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio a las partidas detras es que no expande le denol, ni no puesca doblar aquel denant que doble le engonar, e la camba de lu es pus breva que l’autra, e l’engonar es mollificat, e·l cap de la coyssa es deves aquel loc.	And the sign of that person who has dislocated his hip to the back is that he does not expand his nape, nor can he bend that neck which bends his back more than its opposite, and his back is shorter than the other, and his skin becomes soft, and the top of the thigh is the place.
Mays reduccio de las specias de aquesta dislocacio es que tu consideras, lahoras, si la dislocacio es vetusta et antiqua, que ja es anticada am le havent aquela aprop tu aministras reduccio de lu e roman segon la sua disposicio, lahoras no es en aquela curacio de tot; e adonc no cove que en aquela sia fayta prosompcio.	But the reduction of these spices of this dislocation is that you consider, then, if the dislocation is old and ancient, that it has already been cured with that medicine which you have recommended to administer to it and arranged according to its position; then it is not a cure of all. And then it does not require that medicine to be given to it, for it would make the patient die.
Mays en aquel del qual la dislocacio es recent, e es una de las quatre specias de dislocacio, lahoras te coyta ad aquo que volvas la junctura e extendas aquela a las partidas dedintz e a las partidas defora, e mau aquela a la dextra e sinistra, quar fort leu retorna e no indigeys de autra cura.	But in that person whose dislocation is recent and is one of the four species of dislocation, you should bind him so that you restore the joint to its inner parts and outer parts, and place him on his right and left sides, because it returns with great force and does not require another cure.
Mays, si no retorna en aquesta manieyra, lahoras cove que tu prepares ministre fort e extendas la camba de lu de la partida pus dejos, o am las suas mas, o am liament lo qual es liat sobre la camba desus le denol; e autre ministre extenda la ma de aquel desus enayssi que meta las suas mas dejos les titillics de lu; e aprop strenha am liament leon sobre la razit de la coyssa, e tengua autre ministre ters le extremitat del liament.	But if it does not return in this way, then you should prepare a strong servant and extend the patient' back from the front part, or between his legs, or with a ligament that is tied above his spine; and another servant extends the patient' hand from behind, so that it touches its opposite leg at the tips of its toes; and place another servant below the spine, so that it does not touch its opposite leg. And then tighten the ligament on top of the spine, and hold the server's hand with a strong grip.
E sia extencio de lu o de la partida dedintz a l’angonar a la partida de la furcula, o de la partida detras a la partida del dos.	And it is extended from him or from the inner part to the swelled part, or from the back part to the hip joint.
E sia la extencio de totz aquels en una veguada entro que·l malaute sia elevat am le sieu cos de terra e que romangua pendent.	And it is all of those in one way that the patient is lifted by his head to the ground and his feet are hanging.
E aquesta specia de extencio es specia cominal a totas quatre.	This species of extension is specific to all four.
E donc si la dislocacio retorna am aquo que havem dit, sira bo; e sino, lahoras es necessari a tota specia aquo que dire de la propria curacio.	And so if the dislocation returns to the medicine that we have said, it is good; otherwise, then all species of medicine that describe the cure of themselves are necessary.
En la reduccio de lu propria, quan es dislocada, e la dislocacio es a las partidas dedintz, cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre le sieu latz sa; e aprop pausa les liamentz sobre la razit de la coyssa en aquel loc le qual entre le cap de la coyssa e·l loc que es dejos le langonar; e aprop exten le liament en sus de la part del angonar a la pus auta partida de la furcula.	In the reduction of itself when it is dislocated, and the dislocation is in the inner parts, then the patient is raised on his back; and place the ligaments on the top of the spine in that place where the top of the thigh is and where it is swollen; and extend the ligament behind the hip joint to the front part of the thigh.
E aprop autre ministre fort prengua les brasses de lu, e amerme le loc gros de la coyssa malaute e extenda a las partidas deforo per extencio vehement, quar aquela retorna en le sieu loc.	And another strong server takes hold of the patient' arms, and extends his back part by violent extension, because that returns to its own place.
E aquesta specia es de pus leugiera curacio am la qual aquest membre es reduzit que las autres specias.	And this cure is the lightest specific cure with which this member is reduced from the other species.
Mays si es excusat sobre tu e no obezeys al entrament am aquesta specia de curacio de tot, lahoras cove que sian liatz les dos pes del malaute ensemps am liament fort, leugier, sobre amdos les talos e amdos les denols.	But if it does not agree with you and does not obey this cure of all species, then bind the two legs together with a strong ligament on both sides of the hips and on both backsides.
E sia la longitut de quascun de son par la quantitat de quatre ditz, e sia la camba malaute extenduda mays que l’autre per quantitat de dos ditz.	And be the length of each one of them as much as four fingers, and be the patient' back extended more than the other by two fingers.
E aprop le malaute sia suspendut sobre le cap del fust, e que sia en la mayso; e sia la longitut de lu de la terra la quantitat de dos brasses.	And then the patient be suspended on his head, and be high up; and be the length of him from the ground as much as two arms.
E aprop comanda a un jove fort que minuesca le cap de la coyssa, e sia suspendut am le malaute autre jove, e l’autre jove minuent la coysa am fortaleza empellesca, quar la junctura retorna al sieu loc am velocitat.	And then order a strong youth to lower the top of the thigh, and another to raise it high on the patient; and the other youth lowers the thigh with an iron girdle because the joint returns to its place with great speed.
Mays en la reducio propria, quan es dislocacio a la partida defora, cove que·l malaute jaga sobre pug segon que havem recomtat en le havent gelbozitat; e sia strenhut le liament sobre la camba malauta propriament e sobre le pietz de lu.	But in the self-reduction when it is dislocated to the front parts, then the patient remains on one leg according to what we have said; and be bound tightly on top of the spine itself and on its feet.
E aprop dos fustz sian pausatz, la un als pes de lu, e l’autre al cap; e aprop sian pausatz fustz ajustatz al mieg del pueg ficat sobre·l qual draps humitz sian envolopatz, per so que·l malaute no sia dampnajat per que·l fust sia entre las coyssas de lu, per que deves la extencio a las partidas dejos no sia atirat.	And two youths are placed, one on each side of the patient, and another on top; and place strong fust between the thighs of the patient, so that it is not dampened by it; and place it in such a way that the extension to the front parts is not pulled out.
E aprop quascun ministre extenda a la sua part, e·l metge am la sua ma enguala la reduccio segon l’art.	And each servant extends to its part, and the doctor covers it with his hand according to the art.
Donc, si obezeys a revercio, sira bo grandament; e sino, pausa sobre aquela diligentment e ayssi quo havem dit en gelbozitat per aquela engualment.	And so, if you obey in reverse, it is good greatly; and otherwise, then place it carefully and then administer as we have said for binding.
Mays cove que·l malaute jagua sobre les sieus latz sa quetament.	But the patient remains on his side and quietly.
E quan la dislocacio es a las partidas denant, lahoras cove que la camba sia extenduda leugierament, e es segon aquesta meteyssa narracio sobre pueg; e le metge pause la palma de la sua ma dreyta sobre·l langonar malaute, e aprop coarte aquel am l’autra ma, e am aquela coartacio pausa aquel extendut a las partidas dejos a la partida del denol.	And when the dislocation is in the front parts, then the back is extended slightly; and it follows this account of the story about the puget; and the doctor places his right hand on the patient' spine, and then turns that hand to the left, and another to the right, and so turns those two hands, and places a strong girdle around the patient' neck; and thus it is bound tightly.
E si la dislocacio es a las partidas detras, lahoras no cove que·l malaute sia extendut a las partidas dejos, e es elevat sobre la terra; habantz cove que sia pausat sobre causa dura, ayssi cum cove le eyssament si l’ancha de lu es dislocada a las partidas defora, segon aquo que havem dit del jasement de lu sobre dos anchas; e es sobre la sua cara e les liamentz sian extendutz, segon que havem dit, no ha guayre.	And if the dislocation is at the front of the legs, then do not cover that the patient is extended to the front legs, and is raised above the ground; let be that it is placed on a hard surface, so that the examination if the broad of him is dislocated at the sides outside, according as that we have said about the Jasement of him over two broads; and it is over his face and the ligaments are extended, according to what we have said, there is no danger.
E cove que sia aministrada compressio am taula sobre le loc al qual yeys la junctura.	Then let be administered a compression with table on the place which you have the junction.
Donc cum la reducio es complida segon que cove — e·l senhal de la reduccio de lu no es amaguat a tu, e es que tu extendas del malaute doas cambas, e quan tu vezes aquelas enguals e le malaute extrenh la sieua camba e expandeys aquela ses excusacio, lahoras sapias que·l membre segon que cove es retornat — e lahoras tu ajusta doas coyssas e pausa empastre e extrenh am benda ayssi que la ancha no sia mauguda en alcuna de las partidas; e adheresca le malaute a repaus per tres dias o per quatre.	And when the reduction is completed according to that you— and the signal of the reduction of him it is not covered up to you, and it is that you extend two broads of the patient, and when you see those enguals and the patient extrenh its broad and expands that one of his excuses, then you will know that the member according to that you is returned— and then you adjusts two cushions and pauses a pad and extrenh a cloth so that the broad is not mauguda in any of the sides; and attaches the patient to rest for three days or four.
E aprop deslia le liament e l’empastre, e compara la una camba am l’autra.	Then return the ligament and the pad, and compare one broad with another.
Lahoras, si vezas aquelas enguals en vustament, lahoras sapias que la dislocacio ja es fermada, e adonc layssa le malaute anar.	And if you see those enguals in your hand, then know that the dislocation already is closed, and let leave the patient to go away.
E si vezas alcuna causa de mollificacio, lahoras tu retorna e emplastra aquel, e extrenh aquel segon la tua primiera strectura, e layssa aquel en tres dias.	And if you see any cause of mollification, then you returns and pad that one, and extrenh it that according to your first stretching, and leaves that in three days.
E aprop deslia aquel, e fay aquel tardar en ambulacio sobre quascu per alcus dias, entro que sia confortat.	Then return that one, and let that one wait to walk on every side of some days, until it is comforted.
Capitol .xxxii.	Chapter.
De curacio de dislocacio del denolh.	On the treatment of a dislocation of the foot.
Le denolh es dislocat segon tres manieyras, quar es dislocat a las partidas defora, e a las partidas dedintz, e a las partidas dejos mays a las partidas detras; e a las partidas denant no es dislocat.	The foot is dislocated according to three ways, because it is dislocated at the sides outside, and inside, and at the front legs more than at the back ones; and is not dislocated in front.
E le senhal de dislocacio de lu es que comandes al malaute que aplique la sua camba am la coyssa; lahoras sapias que·l denol es dislocat.	And the signal of a dislocation of him is that you command to the patient that it applies its broad to the cushion; then know that the foot is dislocated.
E la restauracio de totas las manieyras de lu es que fassas cezer le malaute dreyt, enayssi que ja extenda la sieua camba, si pot sobre aquo; adherir le tieu dos a la cara de lu, e pausa le pe de lu entre les tieus pes; e aprop fay adherir le denol de lu am las tuas palmas, e rete aquelas entre les tieus ditz sobre le denolh de lu am fortaleza, e autre ministre extenda le sieu pe entro que·l denol retorne a son loc.	And the restoration of all ways of him is that you pass over right the patient, then extends its broad, if it can on this one; attach the two to the face of him, and pause the foot of him between the two feet; and if it is necessary that you pass over those between the two feet over the foot of him with strength, and other minister extend his foot until the foot returns to its place.
E senhal de reddicio de lu es que la sua camba adharesca am la coyssa am levitat no-laboroza.	And the signal of a cure of him is that its broad attaches to the cushion with a levitating non-laborious.
E aprop emplastra aquel e fay adhirir la camba am la coyssa, e aprop lia aquelas emsemps am una benda per tres dias o per quatre, e aprop deslia aquelas.	Then return that one and pad that one, and if it is necessary attach the broad to the cushion, and if it is necessary pass over those by means of a cloth for three days or four, and then return them.
E no uze le malaute de ambulacio per alcus dias, entro que sia sanat e cofortat.	And does not use the patient to walk on every side of some days, until it is healed and comforted.
Mays si la reduccio de lu a tu es excusada, lahoras aministra fort extencio am liamentz dels quals en la curacio de la hancha precedit narracio.	More if the reduction of him to you is excused, then administer a strong compression with the ligaments in the cure of the foot preceded a narrative.
Capitol .xxxiii.	Chapter.
De la curacio de la dislocacio del talo.	On the treatment of a dislocation of the ankle.
Le talo alcunas veguadas es remaugut per petita remocio, e alcunas veguadas es dislocat segon compliment, e la dislocacio de lu es fayta o a las partidas dedintz o a las partidas deforo.	The foot sometimes gets up by small removal, and sometimes is dislocated according to complement, and the dislocation of it is made at the sides inside or outside.
E le senhal de la dislocacio de lu es que vezes le talo imflat procedent a la partida a la qual es dislocat.	And the signal of a dislocation of it is that you see the foot inflating according to the side where it is dislocated.
Mays la curacio de la remocio de lu es de leugiera reddicio, e es que sia extendut am facilitat am las mas e sia engualhat entro que retorne.	More if the cure of a removal of it is of easy recovery, and it is that it is extended with ease to the side and enguals until it returns.
Mays en la curacio de lu quan es dislocat segon compliment, cove que fasses cezer le malaute dreyt, e tengua aquel un ministre fort e valent de la partida detras del dos de aquel en le mieg loc de lu.	More if the cure of it is made according to complement, do not make right the patient, and has another minister strong and valiant of the side behind the two of it in its place.
E aprop te tu am la tieua ma dreyta le pe de la pus sobirana part, e am la tua ma sinistra de la part pus dejos del pe en le loc de la cavilha.	Then return to you on the right foot of the superior part, and on the left one of the inferior part in the place of the nail.
E aprop atira le pe a tu am la tua ma dreyta, e aprop am la sinistra per dos veguadas, e aprop exten am la sinistra; e empelleys le pietz del pe am la dreyta deves la camba ses trebalh.	Then return the foot to you on the right side, and then on the left for two times, and if it is necessary extend it on the left side; and pad with the right hand opposite to the broad that is working.
E fay aquo doas veguadas segon que havem comtat.	Then make two times according as we have counted.
E aprop empelleys le pietz del pe a la camba la tersa veguada, e tu es a la cavilha.	Then return the foot to the broad on the third time, and you are in the nail.
Donc si retorna en una veguada o en dos segon aquesta manieyra, e si vezes le pe engualhat, es bo; e sino, lahoras sobre lu itera la operacio, quar aquel retorna.	Then return on one time or two according to this way, and if you see the foot engaging, is good; and if not, then perform again the operation, because that one returns.
Mays si a tu es prohibida la reduccio de lu am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras fay jaser le malaute sobre le sieu dos sobre terra, e estrenh un paysel mot en terra fermat, e que caja entre las coyssas de lu, e tu ja has envolopat sobre lu drap per so que no ledesca le malaute.	More if to you it is prohibited to reduce the foot according to water that we have recommended, then make the patient lie on its two sides on the ground, and extend a cloth mot in the ground, and let it fall between the cushions of him, and you have wrapped over him with a drap so that he does not come out the patient.
E aprop le ministre de lu tengua las suas coyssas, e aprop autre ministre extenda le pe am las suas mas o am liament que lie sobre le col del pe; e aprop extenda aquel quascun ministre contre extencio del sieu par, e le payssel sia extant entre las coyssas del malaute retinent aquel, per so que·l cos de lu no sia atirat a las partidas dejos deves la sua extencio.	Then the minister of him holds its cushions, and another minister extends the foot to his side or to the ligament that it lies on the back of the foot; then extend that one any minister against extension of the broad of him, and the payssel is extended between the cushions of the patient, keeping that one so that its toe is not drawn out at the sides outside its extension.
E aprop le metge enguala la dislocacio am las sieuas mas, e autre ministre tengua la coyssa sana a las partidas dejos, quar la dislocacio retorna am la facilitat.	Then the doctor enguals the dislocation with his hand, and another minister holds the cushion of him on the sides, because the dislocation returns with ease.
E donc cum retorna la dislocacio e es declarada a tu la sanetat de la reduccio de lu, lahoras pausa emplastre e extrenh aquela am liamentz fortment, e ligua le pe am liament a la camba.	And if it returns the dislocation and is declared to you the cure of the reduction of him, then pause pad that one with a strong compression, and attach the foot to the broad.
E cove que temes o te guardes dels nervis les quals so detras sobre le talo, per que le liament sobre aquel no sia vehement e leda aquel fortment.	And if you are afraid or watch out of the nerves which they are behind on the foot, because the ligament over that one is not violent and that one strongly.
E aprop layssa aquel per dos dias o per tres; e si le liament es mollificat, extrenh aquel.	Then leave that one for two days or three; and if the ligament is mollified, extelh that one.
E aprop deslia aquel en le ters dia o en le quart, e prohibeys le malaute de anament per xl dias.	Then return that one in the third day or in the fourth, and prohibit the patient to walk on for ten days.
Mays si es forsat de anar denant aquel spazi, no es fayta segurtat que la dislocacio no sia sobre lu dissolvuda e corrumpuda, e aprop aquo que no recipia curacio.	More if it is forced to go on a space that one, does not need that the dislocation is over him dissolved and corrupted, then return what it is cured.
E si accideys a lu apostema caut, lahoras cove que tu aministre en la cedacio de lu aquo en lo qual precedic la nostra narracio, en autre loc de curacio e de embrocacio, entro que sia remauguda.	And if it happens to him an apoplexy of caution, then know that you administer in the cure of him here where we preceded our narrative, in another place of cure and of preparation, until it is re-raised.
Capitol .xxxiiii.	Chapter.
De curacio de dislocacio dels ditz dels pes.	On the treatment of a dislocation of the toes.
Cove que aquel qu’es dislocat sia engualhat am pauca extencio ses trebal; e aquo que no es dificil, abantz es leugier.	And that which is dislocated is engaged by little removal is difficult, and this one before it is easy.
Mays si la dislocacio es en alcus nozes del dos del pe, lahoras cove que fassas cezer le malaute le sieu pe sobre loc engual de la terra o sobre taula, e sia estant ayssi cum si anava.	More if the dislocation is in two of the feet, then know that you pass over right the patient his foot on a place on the ground or on a table, and is being there like this one goes away.
E aprop tu sta de pes, e pausa le tieu pe sobre aquo que imineys de las juncturas, e aprop calca aquel am le tieu pe am vertut entro que retorne, e que vejas aquel ja engualhat e no aparesca en le loc eminencia.	Then return the feet to you, and pause the two feet on this one that it inflates from the joints, and if they are not engaged, then return them.
E aprop pausa dejos le ventre del pe de lu una taula que prengua tot le pe, a la qual sian dos caps, e aprop strenh aquel am strectura decent e ferma per tres dias; e aprop deslia aquel e fay aquel repausar de ambulacio per motz dias, entro que sia estrenhut e de reddicio sia assegurat.	Then pause the stomach of the foot on a table that it holds all the foot, to which are two tops, and then tighten that one with a strong and firm compression for three days; and then return that one and make that one rest to walk on every side of some days, until it is engaged and if the recovery is assured.
Capitol .xxxv.	Chapter .xxix.
De las specias de dislocacio que sian faytas am plagua o am fractura o am quascuna ensemps.	About the different types of fractures that may occur due to pain or injury.
Quan accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, e tu te perforssas en la curacio de aquela e en la restauracio de lu, motas veguadas succezeys la mort.	When any such cause occurs, and you attempt the cure of that and the restoration thereof, be mindful that death may result.
E per aquo no cove que sobre la curacio de lu presuma, sino aquel que es savi en l’art, de lonc uzatge, misericordios e pietados, tardiu, no-ardit ni presomptuos; e que use en le comensament de medicinas que cedan apostemas cautz tant solament, e leyssa le malaute al divinal jutgament, sino ad aquel al qual speras salut de perdicio, am de la malautia alleviacio, e en la qual appareys alcuna speransa.	And do not presume to undertake the cure of it, but he who is skilled in the art, long-suffering, merciful and compassionate, tardy, not impatient, and who uses remedies that yield only somewhat, and leaves the patient to divine judgment, but addresses himself to the patient with hope for salvation from destruction, with relief for the illness, and where there seems to be some hope.
E adonc esforsa te tantost far de lu la reduccio en le comensament de la causa, denant que endevengua apostema caut.	And then endeavor as much as possible to restore it at the very beginning of the cause, before it develops into a plague.
E adonc si le membre retorna segon que volem, lahoras aministra regiment le qual ceda apostema caut e cura la plagua am aquo que conveneys a lu dels enguentz desiccatius.	And then if the member returns as it should, then administer the remedy that yields only somewhat and cures the plague associated with it, using the enguenttes desiccatius.
E si dislocacio es am fractura e accideys en le os satagias separadas, lahoras tu perforsa le stement de lor, e fay en aquo so que havem dit en las malautias simplas de aquo que es precedit en les locz de aquels.	And if the fracture is caused by a dislocation and the bones separate, then you should attempt to set them back into place, and perform the procedure of simple malady on those that precede in location to those that occur in the body.
E guarda e esquiva segon la tua vertut aquel del intrament en las vias de temor segon que a tu es precedida la mia predicacio; quar aquo es milhor a tu deves le tieu Creator, e mays permanent a la tua gloria, e mays saludos al tieu cos verays aquels en le tieu temps.	And guard and avoid according to your virtue that instrument in the ways of terror according to which I precede you in predication; for you should desire your own Creator, and persist more firmly in your glory, and offer up more prayers to your true God at all times.
Ayssi fineysso las paraulas de Albucasim perfieytament de las quals Dieus ne sia benezeyt.	Thus ends the words of Al-BuCaSim clearly explaining what God wills.
Amen.	Amen.
