Ayssi comensan las paraulas de Albucasim .	Thus begin the words of Albucasim.
O, filhs, pus yeu he a vos complit aquest libre, le qual es le derier de la sciencia de medicina, per le compliment de lu so consequit la fi en lu, e per las exposicios de lu, e per las declaracios de lu, es a mi vist que yeu complesca aquel a vos am aquest tractat, le qual es partida de la operacio am ma, so es cyrurgia.	O children, since I have completed this book for you, which is the last of the science of medicine, by means of which its conclusion has been reached through me and through whose expositions and through whose descriptions to me it has become clear that you will achieve the object of this treatise, which is a part of the operation with the hand, namely surgery.
Quar la operacio am ma es prostrada en nostre regio e en nostre temps de tot privada, entro que fort leu peric la sciencia de lu, e le vistigi de lu es ostat; e no romasero de lu sino alcunas petitas descripcios en les libres dels Antics, les quals mudero las mas e endevenc ad aquels error e heyssitacio entro que son clausas las entencios de lu e es elonguada la forsa de lu e l’art.	For the operation with the hand is almost unknown in our region and in our time, having been completely deprived of its science and its art has decayed; and nothing remains of it except some small descriptions in the books of the Ancients, which they have altered and have led to error and confusion, so that the understanding of it is obscured and its power diminished.
E es vist a mi que yeu vivifique aquela am ordenacio de aquest tractat en aquela segon la via de exposicio e de declaracio e de abreviacio; e per que vengua am las formas dels ferramentz de cautheri e dels autres instrumentz de la obra cum sia per addicio de la declaracio, e per preparacio de lu, la qual causa es necessaria.	And it has been revealed to me that I shall revive it by arranging this treatise in the following manner: according to the way of exposition and description and abbreviation; and so that we may come to an understanding of the forms of the tools of cautery and other instruments of the art as they are through addition of description, and also through preparation, which is necessary.
Mays la causa per la qual no es atrobat bo artifex am la sieua ma en aquest nostre temps, es quar la art de medicina es longua, e que cove le sieu actor denant aquo esser excercitat en la sciencia de anotomia la qual recontec Gualia entro que sapia les juvament dels membres e las formas de aquels, e la conjunctio e la separacio de lor; e haia la conoyssensa dels osses, dels nervis e dels lacertz, e·l nombre de aquels, e la egrecio de lor; e de las venas pulsatils e de las quietas, e dels locs del eyssiment de lor.	The reason why a good artist is not found in our time who can use his hand is because the art of medicine is long, and it requires its practitioner to be exercised in the science of anatomy, which was known to Galen, who understood the members of animals and their forms, and the connection and separation of them; and had knowledge of the bones, nerves, and veins, and the number of these, and the course of them.
E per aquo ditz Ypocras que am u nom es mot, mays en l’obra petit, e majorment en la art de la ma.	And because of this, Hippocrates says that his name is great, although he was small in stature, and especially in the art of the hand.
Mays nos ja avem dit de aquel en l’introit de aquest libre; quar qui no es scient aquo que li avem dit de anotomia, no es evacuat que no caia en error per la qual siran mortz les homes, ayssi cum yeu he vist trops de aquels, quar alscus son formatz en esta sciencia e gettan se de aquela ses sciencia e ses experiment.	But we have already said this in the introduction to this book; for whoever is not educated in what we have said about anatomy will certainly fall into error and cause men to die, as I have seen many such people do, for some of them are trained in this science but forget it and do not follow its precepts.
Quar yeu vi un metge folh e enperit aver incidit un apostema escrophilos en le colh de una femna, e incidic alcunas arterias del colh per que fluic gran sanc entro que la femna cazec morta entre las mas de lu.	For I saw a foolish and inexperienced doctor cut an abscess of scrofula on the neck of a woman, and he cut some arteries in the neck so that much blood flowed out and the woman died in his arms.
E vi un autre metge que pres que el traguera una peyra d’un home le qual avia procesit en sa etat, e la peyra era gran, e venguet a lu e trayssec aquela peyra am un tros de la vesiqua, per que aquel home al tertz dia es mort.	And I saw another doctor who was called to a man who had a stone in his bladder, and the stone was large, and he came to him and extracted that stone with a piece of the bladder, so that the man died on the third day.
E yeu ja apelat fuy a estrayre aquela, e vi que per la grandesa de la peyra e per la disposicio del malaute conogui subre lu que morira.	And I called upon him to extract it, and I saw that because of the size of the stone and the disposition of the patient over him that he would die.
E vi un autre metge le qual prenia stipendic de un duc de nostra terra per cyrurgia, e endeven a un crastrat negre le qual era deves lu fractura en la coyssa de lu; e perparec le metge am la sua ignorancia, estrayssec la fractura, sobre la plagua, am pulvinas e astelas am forta strectura, e no layssec a la plagua espiracio.	And I saw another doctor who was paid by a duke of our land to perform surgery, and he set a broken bone in the thigh of a black man; and through his ignorance, the doctor extracted the broken bone above the plague with powdery substances and bound it with strong binding, and did not leave any opening for exhalation.
E aprop le desliet segons los sieus desiriers, e aprop le relieg, e aprop le leyssec per alcus jorns e comandec que nos deslies le liament; e estec ayssi entro que la coyssa e·l pe foro apostematz, e pervenguet a perdicio.	And then he died according to his desire, and then he was buried, and then he was allowed to lie for several days, and command was given that he be disentombed; and they found the thigh and leg swollen with an abscess, and it came to perdition.
E yeu fuy apelat a lu, e aparelhegui a desliar le liament, e conseguida es tranquilitat e enayssi amermet de sas dolors.	And I was called to him, and I made arrangements to disentomb him, and tranquillity was achieved and he was cured of his pains.
Mays empero ja corrupcio era confermada en le membre, per que no pogui refrenar aquela, e no cessec perambular la corrupcio en le membre entro que·l malaute peric.	But indeed the corruption was confirmed in the member, so that I could not restrain it and the corruption did not cease to spread in the member until the man died.
E vi un autre metge le qual perforec un apostema cancros, e fo ulcerat aprop alscus dias, entro que foc magnificada la malicia de lu am lo senhor de lu.	And I saw another doctor who opened a cancerous abscess and it became ulcerated after several days, so that the malice of the ulcer increased through the lord of the house.
La qual causa es quar le cranc caut es pur de humor melencolic, lahoras no cove que pervengua a lu am ferr de tot, sino que sia an membre le qual suffertes que de tot fos hostat.	The reason for this is that the black cautery is pure of melancholic humour, so it does not allow anything to come to it except from a member which suffers from it.
E per aquo, filhs, necessari es a vos que la operacio am ma sia devisada en dos devesios: so es en operacio a lu qual es associada salut, e en obra am la qual es perilh en las majors disposicios.	And because of this, children, it is necessary for you that the operation with the hand be divided into two parts: one in which the operation is associated with health, and another in which there is danger in the greatest dispositions.
E yeu ja he exsitat aquo en tot loc de aquest libre en le qual venc opperacio en la qual es error e temor; per que necessari es a vos que guardetz aquo e layssetz aquel, per que les folhs no atrobo via a parlar e a vos desonestar.	And I have already mentioned this in every place in this book where there is error and fear, so that it is necessary for you to be careful about this and leave it alone, so that the foolish may not stumble upon it and dishonour you.
E donc prenetz las vostras armas am sollicitut e am proteccio de Dieu , e les vostres malautes am falicitat e am fermetat.	And now take up your weapons with diligence and with the protection of God, and your patients with gentleness and firmness.
E usatz de la milhor via per la gracia de Dieu perdusent a salut e a lausabla successio, e laysatz las malautias terriblas de difficil sanacio, e ostatz las vostras armas de aquo que vos fa temer, per so que ysitatio en vostra fe e en le vostre nom no vos evasisca: quar mays es remanent a la vostra gloria, e pus aut en le mon e en derier a las vostras sanctitatz.	And use the best way through the grace of God to bring about health and glorious success, and vanquish terrible diseases of difficult cure, and put away your fears of that which causes you terror, so that apprehension in your faith and in your name does not overcome you: for thus shall there remain to your glory, and more beyond the world and into eternity to your sanctities.
Gualia ja diyssec en alcunas sieuas monicios:	Galen already said in some of his writings:
“No mediquetz malautia mala, per so que mals metges no siatz nompnatz”.	does not heal diseases badly, for bad doctors are not named.”
E yeu ja he devesit aquest libre segontz tres capitols.	And I have divided this book into three chapters.
Comensa la divisio del libre, e primier de la primieyra partida.	The division of the book begins, and first of the first part.
Le primier capitol ordenat del cap entro·s pes, en las formas dels instrumentz e en les ferrementz dels cauteris, e de aquo que necessari es en la opperacio.	The first chapter ordered from the head, on the forms of the instruments and on the tools of cauteries, and about what is necessary in the operation.
La divisio de la segonda partida.	The division of the second part.
Le segon capitol, de siccio e perforacio, e de ventosas, e de plaguas, e de extractio de sagetas e de semblantz ad aquelas, tot capitolat e ordenat de las formas dels instrumentz.	The second chapter, on cautery and piercing, and about cupping, and about plagues, and about extraction of thorns and similar things, all chaptered and ordered according to the forms of the instruments.
Divisio de la tersa partida.	The division of the third part.
Le tertz capitol, de restauracio e de dislocacio, e de curacio de torcio e de semblantz ad aquels; capitol ordenat del cap entro·s pes, e de las formas dels instrumentz.	The fifth chapter, on restoration and dislocation, and on cure of dislocation and of similar things; a chapter ordered from the head, on the forms of the instruments.
De cauteri am foc e am medicina aguda e rememoracio de la opperacio.	Of cauterization we have fire and sharp medicine and the memory of surgery.
Am aquel comensa le tractat de tot le libre.	Here begins the treatise on all the book.
Cove que yeu digua la qualitat dels juvamentz de aquel cauteri e dels noccumentz de lu, e en qual compleccio sia prohibit cauteri.	First I will say about the qualities of the materials for cauterization and the damage it can do, and in what conditions cauterization is prohibited.
Donc dic que·l sermo de la qualitat del juvament de cauteri e del noccument de lu es sermo lonc e prolixs, e subtil per sciensa, e secret amaguat; e ja de lu a parlat gran multitut de savis, e de lu se son desacordatz, et a mi abasta un petit dels sermons de lor, temen perlonguacio.	Therefore I say that the discussion of the qualities of the materials for cauterization and the damage it can do is a long and prolix subject, subtle in its science and secret in its nature; many wise people have spoken about it at length and disagreed on it, and I will be content with a little of their words, fearing to be too verbose.
E donc dic que cauteri comfereys a tota compleccio universalment la qual es am materia o ses materia, exceptat dos compleccios, las quals son compleccios caudas ses materia .	And therefore I say that cauterization generally affects all parts of the body universally, whether they are made of matter or not, except for two parts which are parts without matter.
En la compleccio cauda e secca am materia se desecordero; quar alcus dyssero que cauteri es juvatiu ad aquela, e les autres dyssero le contrari de aquel, que cauteri no es convenient en malautia la qual es per qualiditat e per siccitat, quar natura del foc es qualiditat e siccitat, e enconvenient es que malautia cauda e secca am aquo que es caut e sec sia sanada.	In the dry and cold body made of matter there is disagreement; some say that cauterization benefits it, while others disagree and say that cauterization is not convenient for a malady which is due to quality and dryness, because fire has the qualities of heat and dryness, and cauterizing such a malady makes it worse.
E diysec aquel que ditz le contrari de aquel, que per cauteri es fayt juvament en tota malautia cauda e secca que ve en les cors dels homes, quar quan tu comparas le cors de home e las humiditatz de lu a la compleccio del foc, atrobas le cors de home freg.	And he disagrees with him who says the contrary, that cauterization benefits all cold and dry maladies in the bodies of men; for when you compare the body of man and its moisture to the nature of fire, you will find the body of man to be wetter.
E yeu dic per le sermo de aquel, que esperiment aquo ja a mi alscunas vetz a descubert.	And I say this according to experience, which I have observed many times myself.
Mays empero no cove que vengua sobre aquo aquel que ja es exproat e excersitat en le capitol de cauteri per derier exercici, e a conogut la diversitat de la compleccio dels homes e la disposicio de las malautias en lor meteyssas, e las causas de aquelas, e·ls accidentz de lor, e l’espasi del temps de aquelas.	But nevertheless it is not enough just to say this, but one must also have experience in the subject of cauterization through long practice, and know the diversity of men's natures and the dispositions of their maladies, as well as their causes and the influences of time upon them.
Mays en las autras compleccios, no es sobre vos temor, e majorment en las malautias fregas e humidas, quar ja totz les metges se son acordatz sobre aquels, e no so desecordatz en le juvament am cauteri en aquelas.	But in the other diseases there should be no fear, and especially in moist and hot maladies, for all doctors have agreed on these, and they do not disagree on the benefit of cauterization in them.
E sapiatz, filhs, que del secret de curacio per cauteri am foc e de la bontat de lu, so sobre cauteri am medicina comburent, es quar le foc es simple, la accio del qual no perven sino al membre le qual es cauterizat e no notz al autre membre am lu ajustat sino am petit nocument.	And know, sons, that the secret of healing by cauterization with fire, and its goodness, is this: cauterization with a burning medicine is better than cauterization with hot fire, because fire is simple, and its action does not reach any other member except the one which is cauterized, and it does not affect another member which is next to it unless by a little damage.
Mays la accio de medicina comburent perven ad aquel en les membres le qual de lu alunhat, e fort leu fa venir en le membre malautia de dificil sanacio e fort leu ausit.	But the action of a burning medicine reaches into other members near it and makes a difficult disease come about in them and brings about great harm.
Mays le foc, per la sua sublimitat e de la sua substancia bontat, no fa aquo sino que superfluisca E ja es a nos conogut per experiment e per longitut de servitut de studi am l’art sobre le veritat de las causas; e per aquo yeu so excusat de la longitut del sermo E si no fos que no es legut al mieu libre en aquest pausero a vos secret amaguat am le foc, e la qualitat de la operacio de lu en les cors e de la sieua expulcio per la qual expellis las malautias, am sermo philosophic demostratiu, le qual siria acuit en las vostras pessas.	But fire, by its subtlety and the goodness of its substance, does not do this unless it is allowed to be excessive. And it is known to us through experience and long study of this art that the truth of the causes is demonstrated philosophically, which would be acute in your minds if it were not for the length of my words.
E sapiatz, filhs, que els se desacordan del temps en le qual es convenient far cauteri e pausan le milhor temps de primaveyra.	And know, sons, that they disagree on the time in which cauterization should be done, and they pause, deeming the best time to be in spring.
E yeu dic que cauteri es convenient en tot temps, per so que le nocument per le temps accident es submergit en le juvament de aquo que am le cauteri es atirat, e majorment si le cauteri es per dolors o de dolors necessaries, fortz e fistinas, las quals no suffertan tarditat per so que es temut de aquelas que vengua malicia, que es major que petit nocument entrant per lo temps.	And I say that cauterization is convenient in all times, for the accidental damage caused by time is submerged in the benefit of what is brought about by cauterization, and especially if the cauterization is for pain or necessary wounds, severe and festering, which do not tolerate delay for fear of greater harm coming from them.
E aysso no catz en vostras pessas, o, filhs, aquo no estiman sino le poble vulguar e les fols metges, so es que ad aquela malautia que es sanada per cauteri no es redicio tot temps, e pausan aquel consequen.	And let not your minds doubt this, O sons, for that is not believed except by the common people and foolish doctors; it is a consequence of that malady which is healed by cauterization that it does not return with every passing time.
E la causa no es ges ayssi quo els cuydan per aquo, quar cauteri no es sino en loc de medicina la qual altera la compleccio e esicca las humiditatz las quals son causa per que veno las dolors.	And the cause is not as they think it is; for cauterization is only in the place of medicine which alters the nature and dries up the moisture which causes pain.
Mays empero cauteri superflueys sobre la medicina per volicitat de la sua valitut e vertut de la sua operacio e grandesa del sieu senhor.	But cauterization has an excess of virtue over medicine by virtue of the excellence and goodness of its action, and the greatness of him who does it.
E es possible que la sua malautia retorne en alcuna hora del temps, segon la compleccio del malaute e la locacio de la sua malautia, e la vertut de lu, e aquo que es preparat en le cors de lu de la agreguacio de las superfluitatz en lu, e aquo que es pervengut a lu en la sua acquisicio en viandas e semblantz de aquelas causas; sino que la malautia en la qual sia aministrat cauteri sia malautia subtil en membre de paucas superfluitatz e humiditatz, ayssi cum cauteri de dent per dolor e semblantz ad aquel, possible es que en lu no retorne aquela dolor, mays aquo se fa en petitz.	And it is possible that the malady may return at some time, according to the nature of the patient and the location of the malady, and the virtue of cauterization, and what is prepared in his body from the accumulation of excesses in him, and what comes upon him through food and similar causes; but if the malady in which cauterization was performed is a subtle malady in a part with few excesses and moisture, like toothache or its like, it is possible that the pain will not return in that part, although this may happen in other parts.
E mays sermo vulgar es que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina, e es sermo dreyturier, no ad aquo que els entendo en lu, quar els crezo que no es curacio que aprofieyta am medicina ni am autra causa aprop cauteri.	And it is a vulgar saying that cauterization is the last resort of medicine; and it is a direct saying, not in the sense that they understand it, for they believe that there is no cure which benefits through medicine or any other cause except cauterization.
E la causa es en contrari de aquo; e la entencio que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina no es sino quan administram las manieyras de curacio en alcunas malautias, e aquelas medicinas no conferieysso, e aprop en la fi de la causa aministra hom cauteri, e aprofieyta ad aquela.	And the cause is contrary to that; and the intention of cauterization being the last resort of medicine is only when we have administered other methods of curing in some maladies, and those medicines did not confer it, but at the end of the cure we administer cauterization, and it benefits that.
E lahoras de aqui cat16 que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina, no segon la entencio la qual entendo les vulgars e trops dels fols metges.	And so from here on, let cauterization not be the last resort of medicine according to the understanding of the vulgar and foolish doctors.
E diyssero les antics que cauteri am aur es milhor que cauteri am ferr, e no diyssero aquo sino per la equalitat del aur e sublimitat de la sua sustancia.	And they said that cauterization with gold is better than cauterization with iron, and they did not say this except for the equality of gold and subtlety of its substance.
E diyssero que le loc de cauteri no fa brac, cum aquo no sia absolutament vertat, quar yeu ja he aquo proat e he atrobat que aquel no fa aquo sino en alcus cors ses les autres, e cauteri am aquel es bo e milhor que am ferr ayssi quo els diyssero; mays empero quan tu fas cauteri am foc am de aur, no es a tu declarat, quar es egnit segon la quantitat que tu vols per la rugor de l’aur, e quar prepara a recebre freg; e si ajustas sobre lu ignicio se fon l’aur per le foc, e caso en le foc alcunas laminas per que le artifex catz per la occupacio de aquel.	And they said that the location of cauterization does not matter, except when it is absolutely true; for I have already proved and shown that this is not true, for it only matters in some bodies and not others, and cauterization with gold is better than with iron, as they say; but nevertheless when you do cauterization with fire with gold, it is not clear to you, for it is heated according to the amount you desire by the heat of the gold, and when you put fire upon it some plates are made so that the artisan can control the heat.
E per aquo es fayt cauteri am ferr deves nos pus leugerament e pus propdanament a rectitut de operacio.	And for this reason cauterization with iron should be done more gently and more closely according to the correctness of its action.
E yeu ja he ordenat aquest capitol en le cauteri segon capitols, et he ordenat aquels del cap entro les pes, per so que aleugo le demandant aquo que vol de lu.	And I have already ordered this chapter on cauterization according to chapters, and I have ordered those of the foot within the feet, so that if anyone asks about it, we will know what to say about it.
De cauteri de dolor de cap per frigiditat e humiditat.	Of cauterization for headache from coldness and moisture.
Le capitol primier.	The first chapter.
Aquesta cauterizacio confereys a la humiditat e frigiditat sobre le servel accident de la qual so doas causas, so es causa de soda e multitut de flux raumatic, apelat corissa, del cap a las partidas dels huelhs e de las aurelhas fluent, e multitut de dormir, e de dolor de dentz e del guolayro, e universalment de tota malautia que ve per fregiditat, ayssi cum paraliticament, sodo e apoplexio, e semblantz en aquelas malautias.	This cauterization confers moisture and coldness on the serval accident of which there are two causes; it is a cause of soda and multitude of fluxes, called rhinitis, of the head to the parts of the ears and of the eyes, and of sleep, and of toothache, and of the gullet, and universally of all maladies that come from coldness, like paralysis, stroke, and their likes in those diseases.
La forma de aquesta cauterizacio es aquesta, que primieyrament comandes al malaute que sia evacuat am medicina lacsativa le cap mondificant, per tres o per quatre nueytz, segon que exhigeys la vertut del malaute e la edat de lu e la sua costuma.	The form of this cauterization is that first you should command the patient to be evacuated by laxative medicine for a cleansing of the head, for three or four days, according to the strength of the patient and his age and habit.
E aprop comanda li que raza le sieu cap am razor, e aprop fay aquel sezer entre las tuas mas sobre una banca cayrada e que pause las suas mas sobre le pietz sieu.	And then command that he have his head shaved with a razor, and let him lie between your knees on a heated bed, and let him rest his hands upon his feet.
E aprop pausa la razit de la tua palma aprop le pous sobre la razit del nas entre les huels sieus.	And then place the sole of your palm near the top of their nose between your fingertips.
Mays empero, cum le tieu dit del mieg loc es pervengut, signa aquel loc am tenta, e aprop igneys le cauteri olivar del qual aquesta es la forma:	But when you reach the middle part of that location, mark it with a tent and then ignite an olive-oil cautery, which has this form:
E aprop pausa aquel sobre le loc senhat am tenta, a manieyra que descent, am la qual la tieua ma sia constrengida petit a petit, e tu revolveys aquel.	And then place that on the marked location, in such a way that it descents, with your hand being gradually constricted, and you keep revolving it.
E aprop leva la tua ma leugerament e reguarda le loc, e si veses ja del os esser descubert alcuna quantitat del cap, ayssi cum la quantitat de gra de errs, lahoras eleva la tua ma, e si no torno la tua ma am aquel ferr, am autre de aquel, si es enfrigidat, entro que sia vist del os aquo que yeu he dit a tu.	And then lift your hand gently and look at the location, and if you see any amount of bone being uncovered, as much as a grain of err, then lift your hand, and if not return your hand with that iron, with another one, if it is cold, within so that it can be seen by the bone that I have told you about.
E aprop pren un petit de sal e disolveys aquel sobre le loc e leyssa aquel per tres jorns.	And then take a little bit of salt and dissolve it on the location and let it for three days.
E aprop pausa sobre lu coto enbegut en boder e leyssa aquel sobre lu entro que sia destrusida la scara del foc.	And then place over it a bandage soaked in vinegar and leave that over it until the fire's scar is destroyed.
E aprop cura le loc am anguent tetrafarmacon entro que sia sanat.	And then treat the location with tetrapharmacon ointment until it is healed.
E ja diyssero que quant la plagua roman uberta, tant mielhs geta le brac, per que es milhor e mays juvatiu.	And they say that as much as the wound opens up, so much the better, because it is more healthy and healing.
E diyssero alcus de lor que sia cauterizada la codena entro al os, e sia tengut le cauteri entro que sia adhurida alcuna partida de la specitut del os.	And they said that among them that the tendon should be cauterized within the bone, and the cautery should be held so that some part of the thickness of the bone is burnt.
E aprop sia ras aquo que es adhust del os, e aprop sia curat.	And then it should be cut that which is attached to the bone, and then it should be treated.
E diyssero autres que am lo cauteri pervengua al derier, entro que enprema en le os forta enprecio entro que le os caga, e aquesta es la forma de alphecati petit:	And others said that the cautery should reach the end, so that it burns strongly into the bone until the bone melts, and this is the form of the small alpecat in size:
E estiman de aquel loc expiran la vapors del cap.	And they estimate from that location to breathe out the vapor of the head.
E sia tenguda la plagua uberta per lonc temps, e aprop sia curada entro que sia consolidada.	And let the wound be open for a long time, and then treat it so that it is consolidated.
Mays a mi no so vistas aquestas doas specias de cauteri de tot, sino en alcus homes segon via de temor; e layssa aquel, deves mi, milhor es am salut, quan es; quar le cap es develitat per solucio de continuitat de lu ayssi cum havem testificat en les autres membres, e majorment quan le cap del malaute es de freul natura.	But I have not seen these two types of cautery at all, except in some men according to a way of fear; and let that be, it is better for health when it is, because the head is deprived of feeling due to solution of continuity in it, and especially when the patient's head is of a fragile nature.
E la specia de cauteri primieyra es mays salva e milhor deves mi; e de aquela husi e am aquela obra am salut.	And the first type of cautery is more safe and better for me; and using that, and with that action, it is healthier.
Capitol segon.	Chapter according to.
Del cauteri del cap.	Of cauterization of the head.
Quan en tot le cap accideys dolor cronica e longua e aquo es en le malaute prolonguat, e usa de gerras e de cochias e de capipurges e de emplaustres e de guatz e de cadels e de gualinas e de semblantz, e majorment si ja es cauterizat am un cautere le qual recontam e no aprofieyta a lu deguna de aquelas causas, lahoras considera quar si le cap del malaute es de fort creacio en la sua natura; e no es freul et atroba mot gran freg, lahoras aquel cauterisa am autra cauteri dejos aquel un pauc.	When in every case chronic and long-lasting pain occurs in the head, and it is prolonged in the patient, and he uses scarification and cupping, and caput purges, and poultices, and fomentations, and cataplasms, and similar things, and especially if he has been cauterized with a cautery which does not help him for any of those causes, then consider that if the patient' head is of strong constitution by nature; and it is not fragile, and finds great pain from frequent heat, then cauterize it with another cautery after that one a little.
E aprop cauterisa aquel sobre le corn del sieu cap am cauteri entro que la codena es partida.	And then cauterize that on the crown of his head with a cautery so that the tendon is cut.
Incisa la codena e sia descuberta del os la quantitat la qual havem recontat e cauteriza aquel am un cauteri en la partida deriera del cap en le loc le qual es apelat vas, — e es aquel loc en le qual es pausada ventosa.	The tendon is cut and the amount that we have estimated is uncovered, and cauterize it with a cautery in the back part of the head in the location which is called the vein — and it is that location in which the cupping-glass is applied.
Et alleuja la tua ma en aysso, e no descobras le os, quar le malaute per aquo atroba mot gran dolor diversa de la dolor de totz les autres cauteris del cap.	And loosen your hand in that way and do not uncover the bone because with that the patient feels much greater pain than from any other cauterizations of the head.
E yeu diyre aquest cauteri en son loc, quar cove que·l cauteri am le qual so cauterisatz les corns del cap e le occiput es pus subtil cauteri que aquel am le qual es cauterisat le mieg loc del cap; e aquesta es la forma de lu.	And I will show you this cautery in its place, for the cautery with which they cauterize the horns of the head and the occiput is a more subtle cautery than that with which the middle part of the head is cauterized; and this is its form:
Capitol ters.	Chapter third.
De cauterisacio de emigranea no-antiqua.	Of cauterization of recent not-ancient wound.
Quan endeve en la partida del cap dolor sodo, o es stenduda dolor entro al uelh, sia evacuat am medicinas le cap mondificantz, e sia aministrada l’autra curacio, la qual yeu he dita en las devesios de las malautias; e tot no aprofieyta, lahoras cauterisacio en lu es en dos manieyras: o cauterisacio am medicina acuta comburent, o am ferr.	When suddenly in the front part of the head there is a dull pain, or pain extends into the eye, let the head be evacuated with cleansing medicines, and let the other treatment which I have described in the previous chapters be administered; and if this does not help, cauterization of that location can be performed in two ways: either by cauterization with an acute medicine burning, or by iron.
Mays cauteri am medicina comburent es que tu prenguas una dolsa de alh, e escorgas aquela e abcindas las extremitatz de lu de amdos les caps.	But the cauterization with an acute medicine burning is that you take a piece of wool, and you scorch it and apply the ends of it to both sides of the head.
E aprop incideys le loc de la dolor en la templa am una lanceta lada entro que sia en lu feyt loc dejos la codena, entro que sia occultada.	And then cut the location of the pain in the temple with a pointed lance so that it penetrates below the tendon and is hidden.
E aprop strenh sobre lu am stopada per descent constreccio, e layssa aquel per le spazi de tres horas; e aprop deslia le e tratz le alh, e laysa la plagua per dos o per tres jorn, e aprop pausa sobre lu coto submergit en boder entro que le loc fassa brac.	And then press on it with a bandage so that there is strong constriction, and leave it in place for the space of three hours; and then loosen the bandage and treat it with an ointment that I will describe later, and leave the wound uncovered for two or three days, and then place a bandage over it which has been soaked in vinegar so that the location feels heat.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And then treat that with an ointment so that it is healed.
E si tu voys, fe aquo am alcunas medicinas comburentz las quals yeu he scriutas en le douse tractat de medicinas comburentz.	And if you wish, do this with some burning medicines which I have written about in the second treatise of burning medicines.
Mays la cauterisacio am ferr segon aquesta manieyra: igneys per cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma:	But the cauterization with iron according to this way: ignite a cautery, of which this is the form:
e es apelat claus clavilhs, quar le cap de lu es ayssi cum forma de clavel en le qual es alcuna curvitat, e·n le mieg loc de lu es eminensia petita.	and it is called close-nailed, for the head of it is thus with a shape of a nail in which there is some curvature and in the middle part of it there is a small protuberance.
E aprop pausa sobre loc de la dolor, e rete la tua ma — per que no sia adhurida la arceria la qual es dejos — e revol le ferr petit a petit am velocitat.	And then place it on the location of the pain and rotate your hand — so that the arteriol which is underneath is not burned — and revolve the iron little by little with speed.
E si la quantitat de lu que es adhurida per la specitut de la codena ayssi quo la maytat de lu, e elava la tua ma per so que la arteria no sia adhurida la qual es dejos, per so que no vengua flux de sanc.	And if the amount of it that is burnt by the thickness of the tendon as much as the width of the finger, and raise your hand so that the artery underneath is not burnt which is underneath, so that there is no flow of blood.
E aprop enbibeys coto en aygua de sal e pausa aquel sobre le loc, e layssa aquel per tres dias; e aprop pausa coto mulhat am boder, e aprop cura am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And then wet the area with salt water and place that on the location, and leave it for three days; and then place a bandage moistened in vinegar, and then treat it with an ointment so that it is healed.
E si voys, cauterisa am la extremitat del cutellari segon cauteri, e guarda te de incisio de arteria en aquesta emigranea propriament no-antiqua.	And if you wish, cauterize with the end of the scalpel according to cauterization, and beware of cutting of artery in this recent not-ancient wound.
Capitol quart.	Chapter fourth.
De cauterizacio d’emigranea antiqua.	Of cauterization of ancient wound.
Quan tu curas emigranea am aquo que havem dit de la curacio precedent, e aquo que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias, e no aprofieyta la curacio, e vezes per la malautia que no abasta a lu aquo que havem dit del primier cauteri am medicina o del cauteri am foc, lahoras cove que tu igniscas le cauteri cutellar entro que sia albificat, pus que significas sobre le loc de la dolor am linha de longuesa de la qual sia la maytat del dit, o quays aquel; e depausa la tua ma per una veguada e strenh aquela entro incidiscas la arceria e pervengua entro al os.	When you are treating a wound with what we have said about the treatment beforehand, and what we have said in the divisions of the diseases, and the treatment does not help, and you see that the disease does not suffice to it which we have said about the first cauterization with medicine or with fire, then whenever you ignite the cautery scalpel so that it becomes white, mark over the location of the pain with a line of length of which is the width of the finger, or however much; and loosening your hand by a little way and rotating it you penetrate the artery underneath and go inside the bone.
Empero necessari es a tu que guardes de la continuacio de la mandibula, la qual es mauguda deves la masticacio, e que le lacert no sia adhurit e le nervi le qual mau aquela, e que no s’endevengua espasme.	However it is necessary for you to beware of the continuity of the jaw which is bitten due to chewing and that the nerve underneath is not burned and that there is no spasm.
E si es sobre la custodia e cautela de flux de sanc de l’arteria que es abciza, quar en la abcizio de lu es temor, e majorment ad aquel le qual ignora aquo que fa e no es studios e esproat; e layssa la operacio en lu al comensament.	And if it is on the care and guarding of the flow of blood from the artery that is cut, for in the cutting of it there is danger, and especially to him who ignores what he does and is unskilled; and let the operation be performed at the beginning.
E yeu vindre am rememoracio del regiment de flux de sanc accident de la arceria segon la sieua manieyra, en le sieu loc de aquest libre.	And you will come to remember the regimen of the accidental flow of blood from the artery according to your own way, in your own place for this free.
E si veses de aquesta malautia que no abaste aquest cauteri e veses le cors del malaute tollerable, cauteriza aquel en le mieg loc del cap ayssi cum havem recontat, e cura la plagua entro que sia sanada.	And if you see that this illness does not respond to this cautery and you see the patient's body tolerating it, cauterize him in the middle of his head as we have described before, and cure the wound until it is healed.
E si voys, aministra le cauteri le qual havem dit en le capitol de streccio de arceria am cauteri havent dos cotels, e es milhor cauterizacio aquesta e mays conferent.	And if you administer the cautery that we have described in the chapter on the stretching of the artery with a two-pointed cautery, this is a better cauterization and it confers more power.
Capitol .v.	Chapter 5.
De cauterisacio de las dolors de aurelhas.	On the cauterization of ear pains.
Quan en la aurelha ve dolor per freg e es curat am causas lacsativas e am l’autra curacio la qual he dita en la divisio, e no es remauguda la dolor, lahoras igneys le cauteri, e es aquest le qual ha nom puncta, del qual aquesta es la forma:	When there is pain in the ear from inflammation and it is treated with caustic substances and with the other cure that has been mentioned in the division, and if the pain persists, then ignite the cautery, and this is the one called 'punta', of which this is its form:
E aprop puncta aprop la ignicio, e sia menat al enviro de tota la aurelha ayssi cum roda es revolguda, o en le circuit de quascuna essemps si la dolor es en quascuna.	And the pointed part is first ignited and then passed over all of the ear as it rotates, or around any part that hurts.
Alonga te am le cauteri de la razit de la aurelha pauc a pauc pus que aias senhat le loc am tenta.	Pass the cautery from the root of the ear slowly and little by little so that you feel it heating up the place with touch.
E si le cauteri de detz puntz en tota aurelha, e quays aquela, e aprop cura les locz entro que sian sanatz.	And if the cautery is made in both ears and it helps, then cure the places inside until they are healed.
Capitol .vi.	Chapter 6.
De cauterizacio de turtura.	On the cauterization of torture.
Turtura la qual es curada e am cauterizacio no es sino de las specias las quals veno per flecma, segon que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias.	Torture which is cured with cauterization and is not just from the humors that come through phlegm, as we have said in the divisions of illnesses.
Esquiva cauterizacio de la specia que endeve per siccacio o per spasme del nervi.	Avoid cauterizing the humor which comes from dryness or from nerve spasm.
Quan tu curas aquela specia de turtura am jerras e capipurgi e guarguarismes, e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas le malaute am tres cauteris: la i deves la razit de la aurelha, e·l segon un petit dejos le sieu templar, e le ters deves la conjunccio de doas labias.	When you cure that type of torture with hot irons and bloodletting and poultices, and your cure does not work, then cover the patient's body with three cauteries: one at the root of the ear, the second a little below his temple, and the third at the junction of the two lips.
E pausa lo tieu cauteri per le contrari de la partida malauta, quar mollificacio no ve sino en la partida que apar sana.	And place your cautery on the opposite side of the affected area, for softening does not come except to the part that is healed.
E la forma de cauterisacio es que cauterizas aquel am le cauteri en le dreyt de la extremitat de la aurelha pus sobirana un petit sobre le corn del cap, e en le templar autre, la longuesa del qual sia segon la longitut del dit pous, e depausa la tua ma am cauteri entro que sia comburida la quantitat de la maytat de la specitut de la codena.	And the form of cauterization is that you cauterize it with the cautery on the right side of the outer part of the ear, a little above the horn of the head, and another at the temple, the length of which should be according to the length of the finger's nail. And place your hand over the cautery until the quantity of the half of the tip of the codine is burnt away.
E aquesta es la forma del cauteri, e es specia del cutellari, la forma del qual es denant mesa.	And this is the form of the cautery, and it is a type of scalpel whose shape is like a table.
Mays empero pus subtil es que aquel un pauc ayssi co vesas; e cove que cotel en lu de superflua groceza un pauc.	But it is better to make it a little finer, and cover its superficial roughness a little.
E aprop cura le loc am aquo que es denant procezit entro que sia sanat.	And then cure the place with that which is before processed until it is healed.
Capitol .vii.	Chapter 7.
De cauterizacio de apoplextia antiqua.	On the cauterization of ancient apoplexy.
Quan apoplextia es antiquada e curas aquela am aquo que havem dit e no confereys la tua medicacio e le malaute no ha febre, lahoras cauteriza aquel am quatre cauteris: sobre totz les corn del sieu cap; e am cauteri e le mieg loc del cap, ayssi cum havem dit; e am cauteri en le coguot.	When apoplexy is ancient and you cure it with that which we have said and your medicine does not work and the patient does not have a fever, then cauterize him with four cauteries: over all the horns of his head; and with cautery in the middle of his head, as we have said before; and with cautery in the neck.
E la manieyra del cauteri es fayta segon que es desus dit.	And the manner of the cauterization is done according to what is above said.
E ja es cauterizat sobre la boca del estomac; e es mays derier; e aprop sia curat am aquo que procezeys.	And he has already been cauterized over the mouth of the stomach; and it is better later; and then let him be cured with that which processes.
Capitol .viii.	Chapter 8.
De cauterizacio de obblivio fayta per flacma.	On the cauterization of oblivion caused by phlegm.
Cove que sian donatz al malaute en le comensament jerras grans e pilulas le servel mondificantz.	Give the patient in the beginning large hot irons and purging pills as a serving servant.
E aprop ras le cap tot del malaute e pausa sus le coguot de lu emplaustre de cetre descrit en le tractat dels emplastres.	And then scrape all of the patient' head and place on his neck an ointment of cedar described in the treatise on ointments.
E pausa aquel alcunas veguadas, quar aquel es manieyra de cauteri.	And give that some times, for that is the manner of cauterization.
E fay aquo segon aquel meteys orde le qual ja he dit.	And do that according to the order which I have said before.
E donc si per aqueles sanat bo es; e sino, lahoras fay a lu tres cauteris en la deriera partida de sieu cap, les quals sian deysendentz de la partida pus sobirana del cap entro a la partida pus dejos del col.	And if he is healed by those, then it is good; and if not, then do to him three cauteries in the back part of his head, which descend from the highest part of his head down to the lowest part of the neck.
E pausa entre quascun cauteri la grossetut del dit, e aprop cura lo cauteri am aquo que es procedit.	And place between each cautery the thickness of a fingernail, and then cure the cautery with that which it processes.
Mays si tu vos addicio e le malaute es aquo tollerant, lahoras fay a lu cauteri en le mieg loc; e si voys major addicio, lahora cauteriza aquel sobre les dos corns.	But if you see an increase and the patient can tolerate it, then do to him cautery in the middle of his head; and if you see a greater increase, then cauterize him over both horns.
Aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat; e sia le cauteri olivar segon la forma denant donat.	And then cure that until it is healed; and let the cautery be olive-colored according to its given shape.
Capitol .ix.	Chapter 9.
De cauterisacio de parazili e de mollificacio de tot le cors.	On the cauterization of parasites and the softening of the whole body.
Cove que tu procesiscas en mondificacio del cap am jerras e am aquo que havem dit; e aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap, e am cauteri sobre totz les corns del cap, e am cauteri sobre la deriera partida de lu, e am tres cauteris sobre les spondils del col.	Give the patient a purging of the head with hot irons and with that which we have said; and then scrape his head, and then cauterize him with cautery in the middle of his head, and with cautery on all the horns of his head, and with cautery on the back part of his neck, and with three cauteries on the vertebrae of his neck.
E si es necessari en la malautia de mollificacio del cors de trops aquel e les malautes tollerantz e la malautia es fort, lahoras cauteriza aquel am quatre cauteris sobre les spondils del dos, e dererament am cauteri entro que sia comborit de la codena mot de lu, e aleva la tieua ma.	And if it is necessary in the softening of the body's parasites and they tolerate it, and the illness is strong, then cauterize him with four cauteries on the vertebrae of his back, and finally with cautery until he feels the burning of the tip of the cautery, and lift up your hand.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat, e aquest sia cauteri olivar.	And then cure that until it is healed; and let this be the cautery olive-colored.
Capitol .x.	Chapter 10.
De cauterisacio de epilemcia.	On the cauterization of epilepsy.
No es cauterizat le epilemtic sino aquella epilemcia es per flecma.	The epileptic should not be cauterized except that epilepsy is through phlegm.
E donc cove que mondifiques le cervel de lu al comensament de lu am yeras e am l’autra curacio la qual havem dicta en la divisio quan le malaute es gran e es tollerant la exceperacio de las medicinas.	And therefore, when you cleanse the brain of him at the beginning with herbs and with the other cure which we have described in the division when the patient is large and can tolerate the exception of medicines.
E si es enfant le qual no sufferte las medicinas, lahoras aministra guarguarissmes e mastiguatoris le servel mondifican, denant aquo per motz dias, am bonifficacio de las viandas.	And if he is an infant who does not suffer medicines, then administer healing poultices and masticators made by the servant cleansing, before that for several days with the benefit of foods.
E aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop cauteriza aquel am un cauteri en le mieg loc del cap segon la manieyra precedent, e am autre cauteri en le occiput de lu, e sobre quascun corn del cap sieu cauterisa.	And then scrape the head of him; and then cauterize him with one cautery in the middle of his head according to the previous manner, and with another cautery on the back part of his head, and over each horn of his head he should be cauterized.
E si le malaute es fort e es tollerant, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteris les quals he ditz, en havent paraliticament e mollificacio del cors sobre les spondils del col e les spondils del dos.	And if the patient is strong and can tolerate it, then cauterize him with cauteries which I have said, in having paralysis and softening of the body on the vertebrae of the neck and the back.
E sia cauteri olivar segon qu’es precedit.	And let the cautery be olive-colored according to what is before said.
Mays si le malaute es enfant, lahoras pausa cauteri subtil segon aquesta manieyra.	But if he is an infant, then place the cautery thinly according to this manner.
Capitol .xi.	Chapter 11.
De cauterizacio de melencolia.	On the cauterization of melancholy.
Quan las causas de melencolia so humiditatz corrompudas e flacma gros, lahoras cauteriza aquel am les cauteris les quals havem ditz en le havent paralisi.	When the causes of melancholy are corrupted humidities and gross phlegm, then cauterize him with cauteries which I have said in having paralysis.
E si la causa de melencolia es superfluitat declinant a melencolia, e le cors del malaute es humit, lahoras da ha beure aquo que mundifica le cervel de lu segon aquo que ha precedut en la divisio.	And if the cause of melancholy is excess phlegm declining into melancholy, and the body of the patient is cold, then give him something that cleanses his brain according to what has been said before in the division.
E aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop fay tortora decentment fayta de li sobre le cercle, e aprop depausa aquela en le mieg loc del cap.	And then scrape the head of him; and then make a decently made bandage of linen and place that on his head, and then place your hand over it.
E le malaute sia sesent cayrat, e sia tengut de tota partida.	And let the patient be seated and have his body held upright.
E aprop pausa liniment; et es pus digne de boder antic de ovelhas.	And then give him a poultice; and it is worthy of being rubbed by an old sheep.
E escalfa aquel sobre le foc per calefaccio temprada per mesura, le qual le dit sufferta quan es mes en lu.	And warm that over the fire by a gradual heating to a measured temperature, which the patient can bear when it is applied to him.
E aprop vuo’ aquel en le mieg loc del cap de lu en le cercle, e leysa lu entro que sia enfregidat.	And apply that in the middle of the head, in the circle, and let it be rubbed in until it is absorbed.
E fay aquo am le malaute en tota semmana una veguada, am le autre regiment de lu bo entro que sia sanat; o si vols, cauteriza aquel fazen petitz puntz segon lo mays de lu, sino que tenguas la ma am un cauteri ayssi ordenat: aquesta es specia de cauteri la qual humecta le cervel am equalitat.	And do this to the patient once a week, with the other treatment continuing until he is healed; or if you wish, cauterize that by making small punctures according to the nature of the malady, but have your hand ready with a cautery iron like this: this is a special kind of cautery which moistens the brain with equality.
E aprop pausa aquel coto enbegut en boder o en grays de gualina.	Then apply that plaster, soaked in wine or in grease from suet.
Capitol .xii.	Chapter 12.
De cauterisacio de aygua descendent en le huel.	Of cauterization with water descending into the eye.
Quan a tu es declarat le comensament de aygua en le huel per les senhals les quals yeu he ditz en la divisio, lahoras comensa e dona en beure al malaute aquo que mondifique le cap de lu, e guarda aquel de totas humiditatz.	When you have discovered the beginning of water in the eye from the signs which I have mentioned in the division, then begin and give the patient something to drink which will cleanse his head, and guard against all moisture.
E fay aquel suzar en banh en degu per alcus jorns.	And let him sweat in a bath for several days.
E aprop comanda a lu que raza le sieu cap, e cauteriza aquel am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap; e aprop cauteriza aquel am dos cauteris sobre dos templas si es le comensament de ysement de aygua en dos huels, o de la un latz si es comensamen de l’aygua en un huel.	Then order him to wash his head and cauterize that in the middle of the head; and cauterize that with two cauteries over the temples if it is the beginning of water in both eyes, or on one side if it is just one eye.
Incideys am cauteri totas las venas e arcerias las quals so dejos la codena; e sian les cauteris en aquela lonh en la latitut de las templas.	Puncture with a cautery all the veins and small vessels which are beneath the eyebrow; and let the cauteries be in that length at the width of the temples.
E guarda te de fluxs de sanc quan es cauterizat; e si veses de lu fluxs de sanc, osta le am alcuna medicina, la qual es a tu possible.	And beware of bleeding when it is cauterized; and if you see any bleeding from him, stop it with some medicine which is available to you.
E yeu vindre am savieza la qual es en extraccio de arcerias e am abscizio de aquelas e cautela de fluxs de sanc.	And he will come with wisdom which is in extraction of the small vessels and with incision of those and caution against bleeding.
E alcunas vetz es cauterizat en le cervitz dejos dos osses am dos cauteris dererament produzitz.	And sometimes it is cauterized under two bones with two recently produced cauteries.
Capitol .xiii.	Chapter 13.
De cauterizacio de lacrimas antiquas.	Of cauterization of ancient tears.
Quan lacrimas dels huels so antiquas assuduament e per las venas e arterias las quals so en le loc manifest del cap defora e es verificat que aquo es superfluitatz frejas flecmatiquas, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteri le qual havem recontat en le capitol de comensament de aygua cazent en les huels, e am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap e am dos cauteris en la cervitz dejos dos templas, e am dos cauteris en la cervitz dejos dos osses.	When tears from the eyes are ancient habitually and through the veins and arteries which are in the manifest location of the head outside and it is verified that this is superfluous moistness, then cauterize that with a cautery which we have recounted in the chapter of the beginning of water coming into the eyes, and with a cautery in the middle of the head and with two cauteries over the temples, and with two cauteries under two bones.
E si indigeyses de addicio, lahoras cauteriza aquel en tot latz de la coa del huel sobre la extremitat del sobrecilh am petit cauteri.	And if there is an indication of addition, then cauterize that in every part of the lid of the eye over the extremity of the eyebrow with a small cautery.
Capitol .xiiii.	Chapter 14.
De cauterizacio de fetor de nas.	Of cauterization of nose fetor.
Quan tu medicas aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no aprofieyta la tua medicacio, lahoras tu aparelha e dona en beure al malaute las cochias per tres noytz; e aprop ras le cap de lu, e cauteriza le am cauteri migier am cauteri olivar.	When you treat him with what we have said in the division and your treatment does not benefit him, then prepare and give the patient enemas for three nights; then shave his head and cauterize that with a cautery made of olive oil.
E aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri clavelh am dos cauteris sobre les dos sobrecilhs dejos les cabels un petit.	Then cauterize that with a cautery made of cloves with two cauteries over the two eyebrows below the hair, a little one.
E guarda te de la arceria que no incindas aquela.	And beware of the small vessel so that you do not scorch it.
E del cauteri clavilh aquesta es la forma.	And here is the form of the cautery made with cloves:
Capitol .xv.	Chapter 15.
De cauteri de mollificacio de palpebras dels huels.	Of cauterization for softening of eyelids of the eyes.
Quan la palpebra del huel es mollificada per malautia o per humiditat, lahoras cauteriza aquela palpebre1 am un cauteri am aquest cauteri lunar; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	When the eyelid of the eye is softened by illness or by moisture, then cauterize that eyelid with a cautery with this lunar cautery; and here is its form:
E si vos, cauteriza aquel sobre les dos sobrecils un petit am dos cauteris en tota partida, e sian elonguatz de las timporas.	And if you wish, cauterize that over the two eyebrows a little one with two cauteries all along it, and let them be elongated from the temples.
E sia la longitut de quascun cauteri segon la quantitat del sobrecil.	And let the length of each cautery be according to the quantity of the eyebrow.
E no premas trop la tua ma am le cauteri, mays segon la quantitat que la tersa partida de la palpebre sia adhurida.	And do not press too much with your hand holding the cautery, but according to how much the third part of the eyelid is adhered.
Capitol .xvi.	Chapter 16.
De cauteri de la palpebre del huel quan les pels so convertitz a las partidas dedintz e punho le huel.	Of cauterization of the eyelid when the hairs are turned to the inside and close the eye.
Quan les pels del huel son convertitz a las partidas dedintz ayssi que pungo le huel, cauteri en aquels es segon dos manieyras, quar cauteri o es am fer o es am medicina comburent.	When the hairs of the eye are turned to the inside so that they close the eye, then there is cauterization according to two manners, either cauterization with fire or cauterization with a medicine which burns.
Si am cauteri de lu am foc, comanda al malaute denant aquo que leyse les sieus pels ayssi cum aquels les quals les mundan, entro que sian prolonguatz e engualhatz; e si punho aquel deves le lor naysement, lahoras tu strenh les huels de lu am una benda per so que no sia maugut entro que·ls pels sian nascutz.	If cauterization is with fire, order the patient to look down at that which he sees his hairs, so that they are prolonged and curled; and if it closes it, then you tighten the eye with a bandage so that it does not weep while the hairs grow.
Donc cum siran nascutz e engualhatz, lahoras pausa le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop senha sobre la palpebre dels huels de lu am tenta, am senhal le qual sia segon la figura de fulha de merta, e sia le comensament del senhal prop dels pels.	Then when they are born and curled, then place the head of the patient into the water, and properly mark over the eyelid of the eyes with a tent, with a mark which is according to the shape of a dead leaf, and let that be the beginning of the mark close to the hairs.
E aprop pausa coto enbegut en album de huou o en mucillatge de ptilli sobre le huel.	Then apply a poultice soaked in white vinegar or in poultice of poppies on the eye.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu.	Then ignite the cautery, of which here is its form:
E aprop cauteriza sobre la figura la qual as senhada, petit a petit, em motas veguadas, entro que sia comburida la superficia de la codena la qual es ayssi cum fuelha de mirta, tota aparent propriament.	Then cauterize over the figure which you have marked, little by little, in many turns, until all the surface of the vein is burnt which is as if it were a leaf of myrrh, all apparently apparent.
E senhal de sanetat de la tieua obra es que tu vegus la palpebre de l’huel ja esser contrayta e·ls pels de lu esser elevatz deves la punctura del huel.	And the sign of health of your work is that you see the eyelid of the eye already contracted and the hairs of it elevated from the puncture of the eye.
E donc eleva la tua ma e laysa aquel per tres jorns, e aprop pausa sobre lu coto am boder entro que sia eredicada la scara.	And then raise your hand and lay him for three days, then apply a poultice with suet on it until the scar is healed.
E aprop cura aquela am enguent entro que sia sanat.	Then treat that with ointment until it is healed.
Mays si retorna per les pels alcuna causa aprop lor naysement e la palpebra es mollificada, lahoras fay autra vetz le cauteri sobre aquel tot ayssi cum avias fayt primieyrament.	But if it returns for some cause and the eyelid is softened, then do another cautery over that all again as you have done at first.
Mays si les pels so en la palpebra dejos, lahoras cauterisa aquela entro que sia elevada al sieu loc natural e sia engualhat e que les pels no punhan le huelh.	But if the hairs are under the eyelid, then cauterize that so that it is elevated to its natural location and is curled and the hairs do not close the eye.
Mays le cauteri am medicina comburent aquest es que comandes al malaute que leyse les pels entro que sian prolonguatz e engualhatz, e aprop sia fayta de carta de drap la forma de fuelha de mirtra.	But the cautery with medicine which burns is that you order the patient to look at the hairs so that they are prolonged and curled, and then let there be made of linen cloth the shape of a leaf of myrrh.
E aprop pren de sabo conogut e de caus viva ana unc. .i., o quays aquo, e aprop mescle3 aquelas causas be, e fay aquo am festinacio per so que no sia enfregidat; e aprop expandeys de aquo sobre la carta la qual es fayta ayssi cum forma de fulha de mirtra, e pausa aquel sobre la un huel od amdos; e pausa dejos le huel coto enbegut en album de huou, e el cap del malaute sia en le tieu se.	Then take of soap congealed and of quicklime half an ounce. And: Take that and mix it, and stir those ingredients together, and make that into an ointment so that it is not cold; then spread that over the linen which is made as said with the shape of a leaf of myrrh, and apply that on one eye or both; then place underneath the eye a poultice soaked in white vinegar, and let the head of the patient be turned to the side.
E pausa le dit sobre le medicina e prem aquela un petit e no la mauguas entro que lo malaute senta la mordicacio de la medicina, quar mordicacio es en lu ayssi cum de foc.	And place that on the medicine and press it a little, but do not weep while the patient feels the biting of the medicine, for the biting is in him as with fire.
E donc cum percevera aquo que el atrobo mordicacio, lahoras leyssa la medicina e mau aquela am le tieu dit; donc cum cessa la mordicacio, lahoras remau la medicina he lava le huel am aygua; e lahoras considera si vezes la palpebra ja es levada ayssi cum es lavada deves la costriccio am foc o am incisio, quar lahoras esta be; e si no torna sobre aquela de la medicina sobre le loc en le qual no ha empremut la medicina e no se denigra entro que sia engualhada la tua operacio e sia contrayt le huel.	And therefore when you perceive that the biting has ceased, then remove the medicine and wash it with water; then consider if there is any change in the eyelid which was washed after it was bitten, or whether the cautery was on the location where the medicine did not take effect and did not darken, for then let this be, and tighten the eye.
E aprop pausa sobre lu coto am boder entro que sia eradicada la codena de la adhustio, e aprop cura aquel am enguent deafinicon o am autre entro que sia sanat.	Then apply a poultice with suet on it until the vein of the compression is eradicated, and treat that with ointment of dafinikon or another so that it is healed.
E es necessari a tu, deves la tua operacio que guardes am pervigil diligencia que en le huel no caia re de la medicina, e si la palpebre aprop alscus dias es mollificada e alcuna causa dels pels punh en le huel, lahoras itera la tua medicina sobre aquel loc le qual de la palpebre es mollificat, e propriamen ayssi quo as fayt al comensament, e aprop enaviro lu entro que sia sanat.	And it is necessary for you, during your operation, to be vigilant and ensure that nothing from the medicine falls into the eye. And if the eyelid becomes soft in a few days due to a pustule, then reapply your medicine to that spot where the eyelid became soft, and do so as you did at first, and gradually draw it inward until it is healed.
E aquesta es la forma de fuelha de mirtra.	And this is the formula for myrrh.
E sapias que les huels dels homes son diversificatz segon la magnitut e la parvitat, e donc segon aquo es fayta la tua contraccio.	And know that men's eyes are different in size and shape, so you must adjust your incision accordingly.
E no sira amaguada la via de rectetut ad aquel al qual es studi en aquesta art.	And do not hide the path of rectitude from one who is taught in this craft.
Capitol .xvii.	Chapter XVII.
De cauterizacio de fistula que es en le lacrimal de l’huel.	Of cautery for a fistula that is in the tear duct of the eye.
Quan tu curas fistula am aquo que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas aquela segon aquesta manieyra: comanda al malaute que pause le cap sieu en le tieu se, e tengua le cap de lu alcun ministre entre las tieuas mas en tal manieyra que no sia maugut ni agitat am le sieu cap.	When you are treating a fistula and have followed what we have said in the sections on diseases and do not trust your treatment, then you must cauterize it as follows: instruct the patient to hold his head steady, and have someone else hold his head in such a way that he does not move or shake his head.
E aprop pausa coto enfus en album de huou o en mucellage de ptilli sobre le huel de lu.	Then place cotton wool soaked in honey or in the pulp of poppies over the eye.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma:	And then ignite the cautery, of which this is the formula:
le qual sia conquau, ayssi cum es forma de cana o de pena de voltor, de la una extremitat am la qual es fayta lo cauteri.	Which should be hollow, like a reed or a quill pen, from one end of which the cautery is made.
E si voys, sia penetrant entro a la autra extremitat.	And if you wish, it can be drawn out from the other end.
E si vols sia sort ayssi cum tenta.	And if you want, it can exit in the same way as it entered.
Mays empero aquel que es concau es milhor a la tieua obra.	However, the hollow one is better suited for your purpose.
E aprop prem la fistula si es uberta, e tra de lu sania et exsicca aquela.	And then press the fistula if it is open and draw out from it pus and exudate to dry it up.
E si no es uberta, lahoras obre aquela e extratz la poyredura de lu.	And if it is not open, then open it and extract the pus.
E aprop pausa sobre lu le cauteri le qual sia be ignit, e te am aquel la tieua ma un petit deves le cauteri del huel a la partida del nas, per so que no erre la tua ma o le malaute sia enquietat, e lahoras pausa le cauteri en le grays del huel e corrompas aquel.	And then place the cautery, which should be well ignited, over the eye, holding your hand a little away from the cautery so that it does not move or the patient is not disturbed, and then place the cautery at the corner of the eye and scorch it there.
E donc si al comensament del tieu cauteri perve entro al os, bo es; e sino, lahoras itera le cauteri una veguada o dos, si mestiers era; e layssa aquel ayssi per tres jorns, e aprop pausa sobre aquel coto am boder e enviro lu am enguent exsiccatiu entro que sia sanat.	And so if at the beginning of your cautery you feel warmth enter into the bone, that is good; and if not, then repeat the cautery once or twice more as needed; and leave it there for three days, and then place cotton wool over it and gradually draw it inward until it is healed.
Mays si eran passatz xi dias e no es sanat, lahoras pausa sobre lu medicina aguda corrosiva entro que l’os sia descubert e sia ras segon que conveneys en le sieu capitol.	But if eleven days have passed and it has not healed, then place a corrosive medicine over the open wound so that the bone is exposed and scrape away at it according to what is described in that chapter.
E es autra manieyra de cauteri de fistula la qual alscus primiers diysero: enten al loc de la fistula e fen aquela e aprop pausa en aquela fissura camaen subtil del qual es la forma de lu: E fon en aquela la quantitat de i unc de plom fundut; e te la tua ma am camaem am bona retencio, e no sia maugut le malaute per so que le plom fundut no pervengua al huel de aquel; e cove que pausas sobre le huel del malaute coto enfus en album de huou o en aygua, quar plom adhureys le loc de la fistula e sana aquela per sanacio meravilhora.	And there is another method of cauterizing a fistula which some people say: enter into the fistula and pierce it, then place in that wound molten lead; and hold your hand steady so that the patient does not move and the molten lead does not enter the eye of the patient; and see to it that you pause over the eye of the patient cotton wool soaked in honey or water, for the lead will attach itself to the fistula and heal it with a marvelously effective cure.
E si la fistula es sanada am aquo que havem dit del cauteri e de la curacio, bo es; e sino, lahoras es necessari aministrar trauc del nas e reduzir la fistula al cors del nas segon que vindra en son loc propri.	And if the fistula is healed with what we have said about cauterization and treatment, that is good; and if not, then it is necessary to insert a trocar into the nostril and draw out the fistula to the nose according to its proper location.
Capitol .xviii.	Chapter XVIII.
De cauterizacio de la fendedura des potz.	Of cauterizing the slit of the nose.
Motas veguadas accideysso fissuras en las labias, e majorment en las labias dels enfantz.	Many times slits occur in the lips and especially in children's lips.
Donc cum tu curas aquelas fissuras am aquo que nos havem dit en las divisios e no aprofieyta la tua cura, lahoras igneys le cauteri petit cutellar segon aquesta forma que s’ensiec:	So when you are treating those slits according to what we have said in the sections and your treatment does not work, then ignite a small cautery knife as follows:
E sia la conquavitat de lu segon la subtilitat de cotella.	And let its shape be according to the thinness of a small blade.
Aprop pausa aquel init cuytadament en aquelas fissuras entro que·l cauteri pervengua al preon de las fissuras.	Then place it carefully into those slits so that the cautery reaches the bottom of the slits.
E aprop cura aquel am cerotz entro que sia sanat.	And then heal that with ointment until it is healed.
Capitol .xix.	Chapter XIX.
De cauterizacio de fistula en la boca.	Of cauterizing a fistula in the mouth.
Quan en la razit de uvula o en le paladar o en las razitz de las dentz endeve apostema e aprop fa brac, e aprop es rompuda, e aprop es antiquada, e corr brac e es fayta fistula, e aprop tu curas aquela e no aprofieyta a curacio, lahoras cove que tu igniscas cauteri segon la quantitat que sia receubuda en la fistula, e aprop met aquel ignit en le trauc de la fistola, e te la tua ma entro que pervengua le ferr ignit al preon de lu, e al derier de lu fazen aysso una veguada o dos; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que nos havem dit de la curacio entro que sia sanat.	When in the root of the uvula or on the palate or in the roots of the teeth there is an abscess and then swelling, and then it bursts and then becomes old, and the swelling goes away and a fistula is made, and if you are treating that and your treatment does not work, then see to it that you ignite cauteries according to how much has been received in the fistula, and then place that ignited over the opening of the fistula, and hold your hand so that the iron ignited reaches the bottom of it, and do this once or twice; and then heal that with what we have said about treatment until it is healed.
E donc si la sania es abscindita e es sanat, bo es; e sino, lahoras es necessari de descubrir le loc e hostar le os corrumput segon que vindra en son capitol.	And so if the pus has been drained and it is healed, that is good; and if not, then it is necessary to expose the location and scrape away rotten bone according to what comes in its chapter.
Capitol .xx.	Chapter XX.
De cauterisacio de las dentz e de mollificacio de las angivas.	Of cauterizing teeth and of softening ulcers.
Quan las angivas son mollificadas per humiditat e las dentz son maugudas, e curas aquelas am medicinas e no confereys, lahoras pausa le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop igneys le cauteri la forma del qual vindra aprop aysso, enayssi que tu pauses la quanula sobre la dent e entromet en aquela le cauteri ignit festinantment, e te la tieua ma un petit entro que·l malaute cente la calor del foc a la razit de la dent esser pervenguda.	When ulcers are softened by moisture and the teeth are shaken, and you treat those with medicines and your treatment does not work, then have the patient hold his head still, and ignite the cautery whose shape will come next, in such a way that you place the cotton wool over the tooth and insert into it the ignited cautery firmly, and hold your hand a little away so that the patient feels the heat of the fire on the root of the tooth from which the cautery is coming.
E aprop leva la tua ma, e aprop itera le cauteri alcunas veguadas segon que vols.	And then lift up your hand and repeat the cautery several times as you wish.
E aprop le malaute huompla la sua boca de aygua de sal e tengua aquela per una hora, e pueys stupa aquela, quar la dent mauguda es fermada e la gengiva mollificada es strenguda e la humiditat corrompuda es exsiccada.	And then the patient should rinse his mouth with salt water and hold it for an hour, and then spit it out, for the shaken tooth is firmed up and the softened gum strengthened and the corrupted moisture dried up.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter XXI.
De cauterisacio de dolor de dent.	Of cauterizing toothache.
Quan dolor de dent es per fregiditat, o en lu es freg o verm, o no comfereys la curacio am medicina, lahoras cauteri en aquela es segon dos manieyras: o cauteri am boder de vacas, o cauteri am foc.	When toothache is from coldness, or in it is swollen or decayed, or your treatment with medicine does not work, then cauterize that in two ways: either cauterize it with cow' hide or fire.
Cauteri am boder es que tu prenguas boder de vacas e bulhas aquel en culhe de ferr , e aprop pren coto e envolopa le sobre la extremitat de la tenta, e aprop enmergeys aquel am boder bulhit, e pausa aquel sobre la dent dolorosa festinantment entro que sia enfregidat.	Cauterizing with cowhide is that you take cowhide and soak it in cow' s dung, and then take a piece of it and wrap it around the end of the thread, and then immerse that in hot dung and place it over the painful tooth firmly until it is numbed.
E aprop itera aquela alcunas veguadas entro que la vertut del foc pervengua a la razit de la dentz.	And then repeat that several times until the power of the fire reaches the root of the teeth.
E si voys, submergeys lana o coto en le boder desus dit, e pausa aquel sobre la dent dolent, e pausa sobre aquel ferr ignit entro que·l ferr pervengua al preon de la conquavitat de la dent.	And if you wish, soak wool or thread in the dung, and place that over the painful tooth, and place the ignited iron over it so that the iron reaches the bottom of its cavity.
Mays empero la cauterizacio am foc es que tu atendas a la quannula de eram o de ferr, e sia en le cor de lu alcuna grocesa e la acuitat del foc no pervengua a la boca del malaute.	But cauterizing with fire is that you take a piece of iron or of steel and let it be in the heart of the fire until some thickness is formed there and the heat does not reach the patient' s mouth.
E aprop igneys le cauteri la forma del qual vindra, e pausa aquel sobre la dent e te la tua ma entro que·l cauteri sia enfregidat; e fay aquo alcunas veguadas quar la dolor sira remauguda o en aquel dia o en l’autre dia.	And then ignite the cautery whose shape will come, and place it over the tooth and hold your hand so that the cautery is numbed; and do this several times because the pain will be numbed for a while or on that day or on another day.
E cove que per empressio de aquel cauteri que·l malaute umpla la sieua boca de bon boder e tengua aquel per una hora e aprop scupa le; e aquesta es la forma del cauteri.	And see to it that because of the cautery the patient fills his mouth with good breath and holds it for an hour, then spit it out; and this is the way of cauterization.
E cauteriza am qual que tu voys extremittat segon que a tu es possible.	And cauterize with heat to the limit of what you are able.
E aquesta es la forma de la cannula:	This is the shape of the cannula:
Capitol .xxii.	Chapter 22:
De cauterizacio de extrophulos.	Of cauterization of hernia.
Quan extrophulos so de flecma e de humors fregas e no so hobedientz a digistio per medicinas e tu voys la digistio de aquelas leugerament, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri conquau la forma del qual es aquesta seguen, havent dos extremitatz hubertas per que yesca le fum deves le cauteri per l’autra extremitat, e pausa aquel ignit sobre aquel apostema una veguada, e autre si indigeyses de aquel, entro que pervengua al preon del apostema.	When hernia is caused by phlegm and cold humors that are not easily healed through digestion of medicines, and you see the digestion of these slowly, then you should light the cautery according to its shape, having two ends open so that smoke comes out from one end and enters into the hernia at the other end.
E si l’apostema es pauca, lahoras pausa le cauteri segon la quantitat del apostema, e aprop leyssa le per tres jorns e pausa sobre lu coto enfus en boder entro que sia remaugut aquo que·l foc ha comburit.	And if the hernia is small, then apply the cautery according to the size of the hernia, and then let it be for three days and place a cotton pad soaked in vinegar over it until what the fire has burnt is healed.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent e tentas e draps entro que sia sanat.	Then treat this with ointment and bandages and swabs until it is healed.
E la forma de la cannula o deu cauteri a tal es comveyter.	And the shape of the cannula or cautery should be such as follows:
Capitol .xxiii.	Chapter 23:
De cauterizacio de rauquiera de votz e de constriccio de ale.	Of cauterization of throat and constriction of voice.
Quan las humiditatz veno sobre le quanal del pulmo, e majorment quan aquo es am fregiditat de compleccio, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia evacuat al comensament am medicinas laxativas, e aprop cauteriza aquel deves la razit del golayro en le loc depremegut.	When humidity comes upon the larynx of the lung, and especially when it is caused by coldness of complexion, then it is necessary that the patient be evacuated at the beginning with laxative medicines, and then cauterize that according to the root of the glottis in the depressed place.
E guarda te que no pervenguas am le cauteri al golayro ni no comburas de la codena de lu sino un pauc.	And beware that you do not bring the cautery to the glottis nor burn it from its corde, but only a little.
E cauteriza aquel am autra cauteri deves la junctura del col en le derier espondil de lu.	And cauterize that with another cautery according to the junction of the throat at the last vertebra of it.
E·l cauteri de lu sia clavilh sego la maniera precedent.	And let the cautery for this be a nail, following the previous manner.
E aprop cura aquel am aquo que es precedit entro que sia sanat.	Then treat that with what has been said before until it is healed.
Capitol .xxiiii.	Chapter 24:
De cauterizacio de malautia del pulmo e de tos.	Of cauterization of illness in the lung and of cough.
Quan tos e malautia de pulmo so de humiditatz fregas e le malaute no ha febre ni tisic e es malautia antiqua, lahoras cauterisa aquel am dos cauteris sobre la furcula en les locz depremegutz leontz e buoytz; e am autra cauteri en le mieg loc del pietz entre dos mamillos; e sia le cauteri clavilh segon la forma precedent.	When cough and illness in the lung are caused by cold humors that infiltrate, and the patient does not have fever nor tuberculosis, and it is an old illness, then cauterize that with two cauteries over the furcula at the depressed places of the chest; and with another cautery in the middle place of the foot between the two nipples; and let the cautery be a nail according to the previous form.
E si vols, sia la tua cauterizacio punctan am le cauteri que es apelat puncta, la forma del qual precedeys en la ponctacio de dolor de aurelhas.	And if you wish, let your cauterization be punctured with the cautery that is called puncture, the form of which is described in the puncturing of earache.
E sian puntz entro cays ad aquels; e aprop cura aquel am aquo meteys que es precedit entro que sia sanat.	And let there be punctures within them; and then treat that with what has been said before until it is healed.
E ya sia le cauteri haventz tres ramps quar cauterizacio es am aquel: am una veguada podes far tres cauteris segon aquesta forma:	And when the cautery has three points, for cauterization there can be up to three cauteries according to this form:
Capitol .xxv.	Chapter 25:
De cauterizacio de titillic que es le cap del ajutori.	Of cauterization of tic douloureux.
Quan le cap del ajutori es dislocat per causa de humiditatz lubricas e no es fermat en la hora del sieu retornament deves la sua dislocacio entro que sia a lu aquo costuma de retornar, e aprop per un petit movement es deslocat ayssi que s’endeve, ayssi cum nos havem testificat, lahoras cove que primieyrament redusiscas la dislocacio, e aprop le malaute sia reversat sobre le sieu dos o sobre le latz sa; e aprop eleva la codena la qual es en la partida dedintz del citillic a las partidas desus am les ditz de la tua ma sinistra, si la junctura es dislocada a las partidas dedintz.	When the joint of the jaw is dislocated due to lubricious humors and does not close at its return time, and especially when it is dislocated on one side or the other as we have testified, then first reduce the dislocation, and then let the patient's jaw be returned to its place either on the neck or on the cheek; and then lift the cord which is in the front part of the tic douloureux to the parts above with the fingers of your left hand, if the joint is dislocated at the front parts.
E aprop igneys le cauteri havent dos caps; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And then light the cautery having two ends; and this is its form:
E aprop cauteriza la codena entro que penetre aquela entro al autre latz; e vindra la figura de cauterizacio lahoras de iv caps cauteris.	And then cauterize the cord so that it penetrates to one side and then to the other; and there will be four cauteries.
e so aquel subtils segon la quantitat de tenta; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And this is done according to the amount of tenting; and this is its form:
E alcunas veguadas es ajustat segon aquest comte i per que son les cauteris .viii.	And some times it is adjusted according to this count, for there are eight cauteries:
E aprop pausa sobre le cauteri porys cuytz am sal, e aprop fay adherir le malaute a trenquilitat, e lo membre no sia maugut per alcun temps entro que sia confortat.	And then place on the cautery powdered salt, and let the patient be quiet so that the joint is not moved for some time until it is comfortable.
E si la dislocacio es a las partidas desus e tart es fayt aquo, lahoras cauteriza sobre le muscle am cauteri clavilh o am motz cauteris puntan, quar la junctura es confermada e la humiditat es romauguda e le malaute es sanat.	And if the dislocation is at the front parts and it is done so, then cauterize on the muscle with a nail-like cautery or with pointed cauteries puncturing, for the joint is confirmed and the humidity is drained and the patient is healed.
Capitol .xxvi.	Chapter 26:
De cauterizacio del stomac.	Of cauterization of stomach.
Quan veno en l’estomac freg e motas humiditatz entro que aquel extrazo de la sua compleccio e so multiplicatz raumases a lu, e si tu continuas las manieyras de curacio e no confereyso, lahoras cove que le malaute sia sobre le sieu dos ressupinat, e extenda las suas mas e las suas coysas, e aprop cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris: an un cauteri dejos le pietz per la quantitat d’un dit am cauteri clavilh, e am dos cauteris dejos del dos costatz del cauteri, entro que vengua la figura de cauteri triangulada; e elonga entre els que no sian ajustatz que faran poyredura.	When there is coldness and many humors come up from the stomach's complexion and multiply in it, and if you continue the methods of healing and do not confirm, then let the patient be on his back, and extend his arms and legs, and cauterize that with three cauteries: one cautery below the foot according to the amount of a finger with a nail-like cautery, and two cauteries below the armpits so that the figure of the cautery is triangular; and lengthen those which are not adjusted so they will make a noise.
E si la profunditat del cauteri la quantitat de les dos terses de la grocesa de la codena.	And if the depth of the cautery is two thirds of the thickness of the cord:
E sia la figura del cauteri segon aquesta forma ses addicio, E si vols, cauteriza am gran cauteri en le mieg loc del estomac segon aquesta forma; et aquest sia un cauteri segon la forma de cercle segon aquesta forma:	Let the figure of the cautery be according to this addition. And if you wish, cauterize with a large cautery in the middle place of the stomach according to this form; and let that be a cautery according to the shape of a circle according to this form:
E sia cauterizat l’estomac punctan ad aquel que de aquest cauteri es spaventat: e es que tu senhes sobre l’estomac punt segon la quantitat que voles am tenta, e aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri en les puntz; e aprop cura aquel am la curacio qu’es precedita entro que sia sanat.	And let the stomach be punctured where that which is frightened by this cautery: and feel on the stomach puncturing according to the amount you want with tenting, and then cauterize that with cauteries at the punctures; and then treat that with what has been said before until it is healed.
Capitol .xxvii.	Chapter 27:
De cauterizacio del fietge fret.	Of cauterization of the fretted finger.
Quan endeve en le fietge dolor per fregiditat o per humiditat o per grossa ventositat entro que de la sieua normal compleccio sia getat per egressio superflua, e es curat le malaute am aquo que havem dit e no comfereys, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sua cervitz, e senhes am tenta tres cauteris segon aquesta forma et aquesta quantitat meteyssa sobre le fietge dejos dels ipocondres, la hon perve le decubit de home.	When there is pain in the finger due to coldness or humidity or due to thick ventosity so that it has been struck from its normal complexion by an excess of egress, and is treated with what we have said and does not confirm, then let the patient be on his back, and feel three cauteries according to this form and amount over the finger below the hypochondria, where the decubitus of a man lies.
E sia l’espazi le qual es entre quascun cauteri segon la grossetut del dit, e sia le cauteri segon la longitut del cors dreyta.	And let the space between each cautery be according to the thickness of the finger, and let the cautery be according to the length of the body straight.
E no compremas la tua am le cauteri mot.	And do not press it with your hand.
E si la quantitat de aquo que es adhurit la quantitat de la maytat de la specitut de la codena, e no y sia pus ajustat; e si le malaute stant sobre les pes de lu; e si no es estant, lahoras sia jassent, le qual ja ha extendudas las suas coysas, e eleve les sieus brasses.	And if the amount of that which is burned the amount of the thickness of the cord, and it is not very hot; and if the patient is standing on his feet, then let him be seated, for he has already extended his legs, and lift up his arms.
E es aquesta la forma del cauteri:	And this is the form of the cautery:
E a tu es possible que cauterizes aquestz cauteris am cauteri cutellar, quan es am tu subtilitat e prudencia en l’art.	And it is possible for you to cauterize these cauteries with a chisel cautery when you have subtlety and prudence in the art.
E guarda te que trop no procesiscas en la cauterizacio, e sia adhurida la specitut de tota la codena per que sia adhurit tot le cors e pervengua entro als budels, quar la codena aqui es subtil; e sapias aquo.	And beware that you do not overdo it in cauterization, and let the thickness of all the cord be burned so that it is burned throughout the body and come into the intestines, for the cord here is subtle; and know this.
Capitol .xxviii.	Chapter 28:
De perforacio de apostema del fietge am cauteri.	Of puncturing of abscess on the finger with a cautery.
Quan endeve excitura o apostema en le fietge e voles saber si aquel apostema es en le carn del fietge o en la tunica de lu, lahoras si es en la carn del fietge, le malaute atrobo gravitat e dolor ses acuitat.	When there is an abscess or ulcer on the finger and you want to know whether that abscess is in the flesh of the finger or in its lining, then if it is in the flesh of the finger, the patient will be depressed and the pain will be acute.
E si es en la tunica del fietge, am la dolor es acuitat gran e vezes que ja afatiguatz les metges la cura de lu.	And if it is in the lining of the finger, there will be great pain and it seems that the medicines have worn out its cure for him.
Donc cove que·l malaute sia enversat sobre la sieua cervit; e aprop senha le loc de l’apostema am tenta; e aprop igneys le cauteri le quel es asemblat a rag, la forma del qual a precedit en l’autra pagina.	When the patient is turned over onto his/her chest, mark the location of the abscess with a tenting needle. Then heat the cautery that is shaped like a rag, the form of which has been described on the previous page.
E cauteriza am aquel i cauteri entro que tota la codena sia comborida, entro que pervengua al ciphac, entro qu’en yesca sania.	And cauterize with that cautery until all the pus has been burned away and healthy tissue appears.
E aprop cura aquel per curacio dels autres apostemas entro que sia sanat.	Then treat it with other remedies for the treatment of abscesses until it is healed.
E no cove que de aquesta forma de cauteri use sino aquel del qual le estudi en l’art de medicina es prolonguat, e en las mas del qual motas malautias an conogut; mays aquest am esperiment alcunas veguadas sia ardit sobre aquesta operacio, mays empero leyssa aquela deves nos, e es miels.	And do not use this form of cautery unless your studies in medicine have been prolonged, and you are aware of many diseases; but sometimes it is tried out on this operation, but nevertheless it is better to refrain from doing so.
Capitol .xxix.	Chapter 29.
De cauterizacio de plauresi.	On the cauterization of ulcers.
Diyssero les antics cauteri de las razitz de aristologia a plauresi frega segon aquesta manieyra esser fazedor, e es aquest que tu prenguas de las razitz de aristologia longa secca una razit pun longua que es trobada, e sia de la grossetut del dit.	The ancients used to cauterize ulcers by rubbing them with the roots of aristology, according to this manner, and it is this that you should take from the roots of a long, dry aristology, and it should be as thick as your finger.
E aprop submergeys aquela en oli e eysen aquela al foc, e aprop cauteriza per un cauteri en aquel loc le qual es entre la continuacio de la furcula am le col; e am dos cauteris petitz dejos guidazi, un pauc declinans a la partida que es dejus la barba, e am dos cauteris en aquo que es declinant entre la quinta costa e la cizena, declinant un pauc a las partidas detras; e am autre cauteri en le mieg loc del pietz; et am autre sobre l’estomac, et am tres cauteris de las partidas detras; et am un cauteri en aquel loc le qual es entre las dos spallas, e am dos cauteris dels dos latz del pietz, dejos le cauteri le qual es entre doas spallas.	And then submerge it in oil and heat it in the fire, and cauterize with a cautery in that place which is between the continuance of the furcula and the collarbone; and with two small cauteries guide them, one slightly declining towards the part below the beard, and with two cauteries declining between the fifth rib and the armpit, declining a little to the parts behind; and with another cautery in the middle place of the foot; and with another on the stomach, and with three cauteries on the parts behind; and with one cautery in that place which is between the two shoulders, and with two cauteries on the sides of the foot, below the cautery which is between the two shoulders.
E no cove que compremas la tua ma am le cauteri, ans sia en le manifest de la codena en obra.	And do not press your hand with the cautery, but rather in the manifestation of the pus in its appearance.
E ja diyssero alscus antics que so alscus dels homes les quals uson de cauteri de ferr semblant a ray e igneysso aquel, e meto aquel en aquel loc le qual es entre las costas, entro que pervenguam am aquel ad aquel apostema e sia foragetada sania, ayssi cum havem dit en l’apostema del fietge.	And the ancients also said that some of the men used to use cauteries made of iron that were similar to a ray, and they would heat this and put it in that place which is between the ribs, until they reached the apostema and healthy tissue appeared, as we have said in the apostema of the liver.
Mays en aquesta perforacio am cauteri no es ses temor, quar hu mor tantost ho accideys en le loc fistula a la qual no es sanacio.	But in this piercing with a cautery, there is no fear, for it will not happen immediately in the place of a fistula to which there is no healing.
Capitol .xxx.	Chapter 30.
De la cauterizacio de la melsa.	On the cauterization of the melas.
Quan tu curas la malautia de la melsa am aquo que havem dit de la curacio en la divisio e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cauteri en lu es segon tres manieras, las quals totas son dreyturieras, de las quals la una es que fassas tres cauteris o quatre linhan segon la longitut de la melsa segon la figura dels cauteris del fietge, la figura dels quals ha precedit.	When you are treating the disease of the melas with what we have said about treatment in the division, and you do not confer your treatment, then a cautery in it is according to three ways, all of which are right-angled, one of which is that you make three or four lines according to the length of the melsa, according to the figure of the cauteries of the liver, the figure of which has preceded.
E sia entre quascun cauteri la grossetut d’un dit o un pauc mes, e la manieyra del cauteri sia la manieyra la qual havem dita en le cauteri del fietge engualment.	And let there be between each cautery the thickness of a finger or a little more, and the manner of the cautery is the same manner that we have described in the cautery of the liver equally.
E no compremas la tua ma am le cauteri; e le malaute sia eves sobre lo sieu dos.	And do not press your hand with the cautery, and let the patient be on his back.
E es autra manieyra de cauterizar, so es que tu igniscas le cauteri haventz dos vertimentz, la qual causa havem dita en le capitol de dislocacio del muscle, e elava la codena la qual es en le endreyt de la melsa la hon perve le jazer del malaute sinistre.	And another way of cauterizing is that you ignite the cautery having two garments, the cause of which we have said in the chapter on dislocation of the muscle, and raise the pus which is in the end of the melas where the jaw of the patient on the left side lies.
E sia la tua elevacio am la qual elevas la codena segon la longuesa del cors, per que sian faytz cauteris segon la latitut del cos.	And let your elevation by which you raise the pus be according to the length of the body, so that cauteries are made according to the width of the body.
E aprop entromet les dos vernimentz, ignitz mot, en aquel entro que am aquels penetres la codena de la autra part.	Then put in two garments, ignite them, in that place into which you penetrate the pus from the other side.
E aprop extrayt le cauteri; e donc son faytz quatre cauteris.	And then take out the cautery; and so four cauteries are made.
E si voys, cauteriza am cauteri havent tres vernimentz.	And if you wish, cauterize with a cautery having three garments.
E aprop tu cura le cauteri pus que aia laysat de getar brac per trops jorns, quar mays es comferent que las autras causas precedentz en la curacio.	And then you cure the cautery when it has lain for several days, for more than other causes that precede in the treatment.
Capitol .xxxi.	Chapter 31.
De cauterizacio de ydropici.	On the cauterization of hydropsy.
Cauteri no catz en ydropici sino en alcinte3 propriament.	A cautery does not cauterize in hydropsy, but rather in the armpit properly.
Quan tu curas le ydropic am las manieyras de curacio las quals havem ditas en la divisio e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que aquel cauterizes am quatre cauteris en le cercuit del embelic e am un cauteri sobre l’estomac, e am autre cauteri sobre le fietge, e am autre cauteri sobre la melsa, e am dos cauteris entre les spondils del dos, e un cauteri en lo dreyt del pietz, e am autre cauteri sobre l’estomac.	When you are treating hydropsy with the ways of treatment that we have said in the division and you do not confer your treatment, then let him cauterize with four cauteries in the circuit of the armpit, and with one cautery on the stomach, and with another cautery on the liver, and with another cautery on the melas, and with two cauteries between the shoulders of the back, and a cautery on the right side of the foot, and with another cautery on the stomach.
E la quantitat de la profunditat del cauteri sia propdana a la spicitut de la codena.	And let the quantity of the depth of the cautery be proportional to the thickness of the pus.
E aprop layssa le cauteri ubert per so que gete brac per lonc temps.	And then take out the cautery so that it lies for a long time.
E no evacuas le malaute de curacio aprop le cauteri am aquo que cove per que sian agreguadas a lu doas entencios, e sira festinada a lu am ajutori sanacio.	And do not evacuate the patient from treatment by cautery with that which causes two tendencies to him, and let him lie with it helping towards healing.
La forma del cauteri am lo qual es cauterizat lo ventre sia clavilh segon que la forma de aquel es desus precedent, e es aquel am le qual es cauterizat le dos sia olivar segon qu’es precedent a la sua forma.	The form of the cautery with which the belly is cauterized is a key according to what its form is above, and it is that with which the back is cauterized is an olive according to what precedes its form.
Capitol .xxxii.	Chapter 32.
De cauterizacio de pes e de las coyssas.	On the cauterization of feet and of thighs.
Quan les pes so apostematz en ydropitz e so repletz de aygua sitrina, cove que cauterisas les pes sobre le dos del pe in nocrati aquo que es entre le auricular e le anular, e eleva la tua ma am le cauteri e no torses aquel; e aprop eleva la tua ma, e no retornes aquela de tot, quar l’aygua satrina rezuda.	When the feet are apostemized in hydrops and are filled with yellow water, let him cauterize the feet on the sole of the foot in the nerve which is between the auricular and the annular, and raise your hand with the cautery and do not turn that; then raise your hand and do not return it at all, for the yellow water will flow out.
Es le cauteri segon aquesta forma: E aprop fay sobre las doas coyssas dos cauteris, e en quascuna coysa sia feyt cauteri am la extremitat del cauteri cutellar.	It is the cautery according to this form: And then make two cauteries over both thighs, and in each thigh let a cautery be made with the end of the cauterizing instrument.
E sia le cauteri segon la longitut de la coyssa: i dejos le denolh e l’autre jos le mieg loc de la coyssa; e sobre quascuna coyssa dos cauteris.	And let the cautery be according to the length of the thigh, that is, below the knee and the other above the middle part of the thigh; and over each thigh two cauteries.
E layssa la plagua uberta ses curacio per lonc temps per so que alcuna aygua resuda de lu.	And let the plaster lie open without a cure for a long time, so that some water flows from it.
E aprop cura le am aquelas causas las quals havem ditas.	Then treat him with those causes which we have said.
Capitol .xxxiii.	Chapter 33.
De cauterizacio de cos de ventre.	On the cauterization of the body of the belly.
Quan cos de ventre es per freg e per humiditat entro que debelice las vertutz, so es la vertut digestiva e retentiva, las quals so en l’estomac e en les budels, e es curat aquo am las manieyras de curacio e no confereys, e vezes le malaute suffertan cauteri de vertut exhiberant, lahoras cauteriza aquel am gran cauteri sobre le sieu stomac segon que a precedit en la cauterizacio del estomac, am le cauteri del cercle e am quatre cauteris en le cercuit del embelic subtils, am cauteri clavilh subtil; e am cauteri sobre le alcatin sobre alozis gran, o am dos cauteris.	When the body of the belly is affected by rubbing and humidity so that the digestive and retentive faculties are impaired, which are in the stomach and the intestines, and it is treated with remedies for treatment and does not confer, and sometimes the patient suffers from cauteries of an exudating vertue, then cauterize him with a large cautery over his stomach according to what has preceded in the cauterization of the stomach, with the cautery of the circle and with four cauteries in the circuit of the armpit subtly, with a cautery key subtilely, and with a cautery over the alcatenia on alozis greatly, or with two cauteries.
E si vezes las humiditatz exhuberants e le malaute aquo tollerant, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre le pentenilh e sobre les budels, e fort leu ajustant dos cauteris sobre l’estomac e prop dels inguonas, quar es curacio perficent de juvament de la qual no erras.	And if the humidities are exudating and the patient tolerates it, then cauterize him over the pentenilch and over the intestines, and tightly fasten two cauteries over the stomach and near the groins, for it is a perfect cure of the rising of which there is no error.
Capitol .xxxiv.	Chapter 34.
De cauterizacio de emorroydas antiquas.	On the cauterization of ancient hemorrhoids.
Quan so en la natura derier emorroydas antiquas o una de humors grossas fregas o de humiditatz corrompudas, e son curadas am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no confereys la tieua curacio, lahoras cauterisa am tres cauteris sobre le pus dejos spondilh del dos petit e petit triangular, e am cauteri desus le ombelic cays per dos ditz.	When in nature there are ancient hemorrhoids, or one of thick humors rubbed, or of corrupted humidities, and they are healed with what we have said in the division and do not confer your treatment, then cauterize with three cauteries over the pus below the small spine of the back triangularly, and with a cautery above the umbilicus by two ditz.
E si doptas que l’estomac de lu sia enfregidat e la vianda de lu no sia degerida, e la cara de lu vezes apostemada, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre l’estomac am gran cauteri segon que es precedit; e am un cauteri sobre fietge, e am autre cauteri sobre la melsa de lu am cauteri clavilh, e leyssa le cauteri per alcun temps ubert, e aprop cura lu entro que sia sanat.	And if you see that the patient's stomach is swollen and their food is not digested, and their face is puffed up, then cauterize the area over the stomach with a large cautery as it has been described; and with one cautery over the anus, and with another cautery over the navel using a nail cautery. Leave the cauteries in place for some time, then dress the patient's wound until he is healed.
Capitol .xxxv.	Chapter 35.
De cauterizacio de atheyl aprop la abscizio de lor.	On cauterization near the armpit and on the incision of them.
Quan tu abscindes atheyl, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri que es asemblat a ray.	When you cut an armpit, then you will light the cautery that is similar to a ray.
Aprop entremet aquel ignit en aquel atheyl abscis, e ultima la tieua ma entro que pervengua le cauteri al orifici de la vena de la qual ve la sanc.	Then insert this burning cautery into the armpit incision, and hold your hand over it until the cautery reaches the opening of the vein from which the blood flows.
E fay aquo una vetz o doas, quar si achieyl son trops, lahoras cauteriza quascun de lor segon que havem recontat, e aprop cura aquels am aquo que confereys a lor dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And do this once or twice, for if they are too many, then cauterize each of them according to what we have recounted, and dress those with something that suits their wounds until he is healed.
E si cauterizas am gran cauteri sobre alquatin, es mays derier en juvament.	And if you cauterize with a large cautery on someone, then it is better to do so in the evening.
Capitol .xxxvi.	Chapter 36.
De cauterizacio de fistolas que son faytas en la natura derie en las partidas de lu.	On the cauterization of fistulas that are made in nature in the parts of the body.
Quan la natura no obeziys a la obra la qual havem recomtada en son loc, e·l pacient es espaventat per aquo, sia sanat am cauteri.	When nature does not obey the method that we have recounted in its place, and the patient is distressed by it, then he should be healed with a cautery.
Donc quan ad alcun ve fistola en la natura derier, e es antiquada, corro sania de lu e humiditatz corrompudas, e donc aquo que es pus digne que cove es que proes aquela am tenta subtil, e aprop conoys la quantitat de la profunditat de lu am la devant dita tenta.	Therefore, when someone sees a fistula in nature that is old and discharges corrupt humidity, then the most appropriate thing to do is to probe it with a subtle needle, and then know the quantity of its depth with the needle as described before.
Aprop igneys le cauteri que es semblant a ray.	Then light the cautery that is similar to a ray.
E aprop met aquel cauteri ignit en aquesta fistula, e segon la quantitat en la qual intrec la tenta.	And then insert this heated cautery into the fistula, and according to the quantity in which the needle entered it.
E itera sobre aquela le cauteri entro que sian comburitz aquels cors corrumputz tost una veguada o dos o tres, segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	And repeat with the cautery on that area until those corrupt bodies are burnt once or twice or three times, according to the quantity of your need.
E guarda te de combustio de nervi e de vena; o si fistula va al cors de la vesica o al cors del budel, lahoras guarda te de totz aquels locz; e no fassas aquo sino quan la fistula es en loc carnos e cogitas que no es penetrant.	And beware of cauterizing nerves and veins; or if the fistula goes towards the bladder or the intestines, then beware of all those areas; and do not do this unless the fistula is in a fleshy area and you are certain that it does not penetrate them.
E aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat.	And then dress the wound until it is healed.
E si le loc es sigillat, e so abscindidas de lu las materias, e roman ayssi per lonc temps, lahoras sapias que ja es curat entierament.	And if the area is sealed and matters are discharged from it for a long time, then know that it has been completely healed.
E si las materias no so de lu ostadas, lahoras sapias que es penetrant o en le preon de lu os corromput, o cays aquo de aquelas causas de las quals vindra rememoracio en son loc.	And if the matters are not discharged from it, then know that they are penetrating into the flesh or into its bones and have become corrupted there; or something of those causes from which a recurrence will come to that area.
Capitol .xxxvii.	Chapter 37.
De cauterizacio dels ronhos.	On the cauterization of warts.
Quan en les ronhos endeve dolor per freg o per grossa ventozitat, e per aysso le coyt del malaute es amermat, lahoras cove que cauterizes aquel sobre les ronhos am cauteri sobre quascun ronho am cauteri clavilh del qual precesic la rememoracio.	When warts on the body hurt because of rubbing or because of a large windiness, and so the skin of the patient is hurt, then know that you should cauterize each wart with a cautery made from a nail, of which the remembrance comes.
E fort leu cauterizam am le segon un petit dejos, per que vindran tres cauteris liniatz, e donc siran mays deriers en juvament.	And very gently cauterize them with the second one small after it, so that three cauteries come, and then they will be more effective in the evening.
Capitol .xxxviii.	Chapter 38.
De cauterizacio de la vesica.	On the cauterization of the bladder.
Quan accideys en la vesica debelitat e mollificacio per freg e per humiditatz ayssi que·l malaute la urina no retengua, lahoras cauteriza aquel en la partida pus dejos sobre la vesiqua, la hon comensan les pels del pentenilh, e cauteriza am un cauteri en la partida dreyta, e am autre en la senestra de lu.	When there is a weakness and softening in the bladder because of rubbing and humidity so that the patient does not retain urine, then cauterize that area just below the vesica where the hairs of the penis begin, and cauterize with one cautery on the right side of it, and another on the left side.
E sia la longitut de quascun cauteri segon la cantitat dels not del pous; e cauteriza aquel am cauteri en la partida pus bassa del dos, o am dos cauteris si es necessitat.	And let the length of each cautery be according to the number of knots of the thread; and cauterize that area with a cautery just below the highest part of the bladder, or with two cauteries if it is necessary.
E sia cauteri clavilh segon que es procesit.	And let there be a nail cautery according to how it has been described.
Capitol .xxxix.	Chapter 39.
De cauterizacio de la mayra.	On the cauterization of the sciatic nerve.
Quan veno en la mayra freg e humiditatz, e per aysso es prohibida enpreignacio, e son corrompudas las mestruas de lu, e es tardada la provocacio de lor, e accideys dolor deves le haveniment de lor, lahoras cove que·l loc sia cauterizat am tres cauteris en le circuit del ombelic, ayssi cum havem dit en le cauteri de la vesica; e am cauteri sobre le loc pus dejos del dos, o am dos cauteris, e sia le cauteri clavilh.	When there is rubbing and humidity in the sciatic nerve, and so it is prohibited from being impregnated, and its menstruation are corrupted and delayed in provoking them, and pain comes because of their having happened, then know that that area should be cauterized with three cauteries around the navel as we have said in the cauterization of the vesica; and with a cautery on the lowest part of the buttocks, or with two cauteries, and let there be a nail cautery.
Capitol .xl.	Chapter 40.
De cauterizacio de la dislocacio de l’anqua.	On the cauterization of the dislocation of the ankle.
Quan humiditatz moucozas so efundudas a la partida de la anqua, e so faytas causas del yssiment del sieu loc, e senhal de lu es que la coyssa es prolonguada sobre l’autre quan so comparadas entre lor.	When moist humors are infused in the area of the ankle, and these are the causes of the dislocation of its joint, and the sign of it is that the leg is prolonged beyond the other when they are compared to each other.
E le loc de la dislocacio es atrobat en lu quays boyt.	And the area of the dislocation is blocked in that place where it hurts.
Adonc cove que cauterizas le malaute sobre la partida de la anqua de lu am cauteri a sercle semblant, pus que tu auras senhat am tenta en le cercuit de la partida ayssi cum es revolguda, e per so que la partida caia el mieg loc del cercle.	Then know that you should cauterize the patient on the area of the ankle with a circular cautery similar to a ring, after you have probed it with a needle in the circuit of that area as it is turned, and because the area falls from the middle part of the circle.
E sia le cauteri del qual precedit la forma en la cauterizacio del estomac.	And let there be a cautery of which we have spoken before in the cauterization of the stomach.
E si aquest cauteri no es a tu present, lahoras cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris am cauteri olivar gran.	And if that cautery is not present to you, then cauterize it with three cauteries with a large olive-shaped cautery.
E sia fayt le cauteri segon la quantitat de la ispicitut de tota la codena; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And let the cautery be made according to the quantity of the thickness of all the tendons; and then dress that area until it is healed.
Capitol .xli.	Chapter 41.
De cauterizacio de la vena sciatica.	On the cauterization of the sciatic vein.
Quan dolor ve en la partida de anqua, e so causa de lu freg et humiditatz, le malaute es curat am aquo que havem dit e no confereys, e aquo es antiquat, lahoras cove que tu lacses le malaute de humors grosses am pillulas fetidas o am pillulas artificials o semblantz; e aprop cauteriza aquel.	When there is pain in the area of the ankle and this is caused by rubbing and humidity, the patient is not cured by what we have said before, and that is old, then know that you should loose the patient from gross humors with stinking pills or artificial pills or similar; and then cauterize that area.
E la manieyra del cauteri en aquela es segon dos manieyras: o cauteri am medicinas comburentz, o cauteri am foc.	And the manner of the cautery in that area is according to two manners: or cautery with burning medicines, or cautery with fire.
Sira segon dos manieyras scientas, de las quals es la una que cauterizes aquel sobre la partida de l’ancha de lu am tres cauteris triangulatz segon aquesta forma; e fay am aquels bona profunditat.	And they come according to two sciences, and one is that you cauterize that area on the ankle with three cauteries in the shape of triangles, and make them at good depths there.
E sia le spazi le qual es entre cascun cauteri la quantitat de la grossitut del dit e si le cauteri olivar o gran.	And let the space between each cautery be the quantity of the thickness of the finger, and if the olive-shaped or large cautery.
Mays alcunas veguadas sia le cauteri sobre le mieg loc sobre le cap de l’anquan per que son quatre cauteris.	Sometimes let there be the cautery over the middle part over the head of the ankle so that they are four cauteries.
E si vols, cauteriza am le cercle del qual es precesida la forma en la cauterizacio de la dislocacio de l’anqua, la i que sia cercle continent e comburey la ispicitut de tota la codena.	And if you want, cauterize with the circle of which is preceded the shape in the cauterization of the dislocation of the ankle, so that it is a containing circle and burns the thickness of all the tendons.
E aquesta es la manieyra de cauteri in ciatiqua quan dolor es adherent al anqua e no es estenduda entro a la coyssa.	And this is the manner of cauterization in sciatica when pain is adherent to the ankle and is not extended into the leg.
Mays si es estenduda entro a la coyssa, lahoras cauteriza aquel am dos cauteris sobre la coyssa sobre le loc al qual envireys le malaute que es la dolor; e am un cauteri sobre la cavilha per quatre ditz un pauc deves la part cilvestra.	But if it is extended into the leg, then cauterize that area with two cauteries over the hip on the side to which the pain extends; and with one cautery over the ankle for four knots a little from the bony part.
E si le cauteri cutellar, e sia la profunditat del cauteri segon la quantitat de la ispicitut de la codena.	And if the cautery is cut, then let there be the depth of the cautery according to the quantity of the thickness of the tendon.
E si le malaute envireys que la dolor es estenduda entro al loc prop les ditz des pes, lahoras cauteriza aquel aqui on envireys am cauteri per tres puntz o quatre o mays si indigeys de aquel.	And if the pain extends into that area and it is prolonged into the parts of the fingers, then cauterize that area where they extend with a cautery for three points or four, or more if they need it.
E si le malaute envireys dolor esser dejos le donolh ves la coyssa, lahoras cauteriza aquel aqui am un cauteri cutellar.	And if the patient feels pain in his thigh, then cauterize that area with a knife-like cautery.
E guarda te en tota cauterizacio que no ultimes am le cauteri en tant que comburas nervi o gran arceria, e que per aquo a tu es sobre le malaute mal noccument o contraccio.	And be careful in all cautery procedures not to use the cautery so much that you burn a nerve or large artery and thus harm the patient or cause contraction.
E yeu ja e vist un e autre de aquels les quals cauterizero sobre la cavilha e ultimero en la cauterizacio, e la cama foc inflada entro que la tumor aconseguit lo pe, e foc perforat e corromput tot le pe.	And I have seen one and another of those who cauterize on the ankle and finish in their cautery, and the bed fire inflames between the tumor achieved the foot, and perforated and corrupted all the foot.
E aprop accidic fort solucio de ventre, e aprop aquo la mort.	And soon after received strong medicine for the belly, and here came death.
E si la dolor es en dos partidas ensemps cauteriza quascuna segon aquesta manieyra.	And if the pain is in two parts then cauterize both according to this way.
E diysero les savis alcus en la cauterizacio de anqua cauteri del qual aquesta es la manieyra: fay semblant a cercle de ferr del qual le cercuit sia la maytat de un palm; e sia deves le sieu orrifici segon la grossesa de un os de datil o mens un pauc.	And they said the wise some in cauterization of a vein from which cautery this is the way: make a circle of iron whose circumference is half of a palm; and its opening according to the thickness of a finger joint or less.
E dedintz aquel cercle sia un autre tertz; e sia le spazi le qual es entre lor la quantitat del notz del pous; e sian aquels cercles ubertz de dos partidas; e sia la longitut de aquels cays un notz o dos notz, e fay en aquels margue de ferr decentment apparelhat en les cercles; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And within that circle there is another third; and the space which is between them is the quantity of the nail of the toe; and let these circles be opened from two sides; and may the length of those nails be an inch or two, and make in those edges of iron decently bent in the circles; and this is its form:
Aprop sia ignit en le foc entro que s’enrogesisca e gete scintillas, e aprop sia pausat sobre la partida del anqua, le malaute colcat sobre le latz sa.	Then let it be ignited in the fire until it turns red and shoots sparks, and then let it be placed on the part of the vein, with the patient lying on his side.
E donc cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris redontz en una veguada.	And thus cauterize that with three round cauteries in one session.
E aprop layssa aquel per tres jorns; aprop emplastre aquel am boder e layssa la plagua uberta per trops dias; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And let it rest for three days; then dress the wound with wool and let the scab remain uncovered for several days; then heal that by anointing until it is cured.
Diys Albucasis : o, filhs, de aquesta specia de cauteri pauc havem usat per la terror del reguardament de lu, e per aquo que paucs havem trobatz les quals reguardan sobre lu.	Albucasis said: O sons, of this kind of cautery we have used few because of the fear of it, and because we have found few who guard against it.
Mays dels bos cauteris a lu qui les sufferta, et atroba am aquel le loc de lu.	Better for him who bears the cauteries to find the place himself.
Mays cauteri am medicinas adhurentz es que tu fassas dos cercles haventz armula perforada en la qual deyssen le guaffo de la porta de ferr; sia la longuitut de la paretz en la nauteza de lor sian dos nozes o quays aquels.	Better cautery with medicines burning is that you make two circles having a needle-hole in the center of which the needle of the door of iron is pierced; may the length of the parts in their natural state be two inches or suchlike.
E si le spazi le qual es entre quascu la quantitat de la grossitut del dit; e sian ubertz dejos e desus, e sian que contenguan se entre lor segon aquesta forma:	And if the space between them is the quantity of the thickness of a finger; and let them be opened below and above, and let them contain themselves among themselves according to this form:
E aprop pausa sobre la partida de la anqua le malaut jasent sobre le latz sa, e comprem la tua ma sobre la partida de la anqua; e aprop pren de aygua cauda e fon la entre dos cercles, e la qualiditat de aquela sia am le foc petit a petit, e te aquela per la quantitat de una hora, e sufferta le malaute la mordicacio e la adhustio de lu — quar aquel atrobo mordicacio ayssi cum de foc — entro que cesse la mordicacio.	Then place on the part of the vein the patient lying on his side, and press your hand over the part of the vein; then take a hollow needle and pierce between the two circles, and let its quality be small at first with fire little by little, and hold it for the quantity of an hour, and let the patient bear the piercing and the squeezing of it — for that I found piercing like that with fire — until the piercing ceases.
E aprop eleva la tua ma am le instrument et abstergeys l’aygua cauda de tota la anqua am aygua dousa.	Then raise your hand with the instrument and wipe away the hot water from all the vein with warm water.
E aprop leyssa aquel per tres jorns e pausa sobre aquel boder entro que sia la negror de la adhustio remauguda, e leyssa aquo per alcus jorns, e correra de lu poyredura; aquest es derier en juvament.	Then let it rest for three days and dress that with wool until the blackness of the squeezing is healed, and let it be left for several days, and pus will flow from it; this is last in healing.
E aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	Then heal that by anointing until it is cured.
E si la dolor es extenduda entro la coyssa o la camba, fay a lu estatua en lu que contengua aygua segon que es feyt en la anqua engualment.	And if the pain is extended into the thigh or the leg, make for it a statue in which there is water according to what is done with the vein in guassage.
E aquesta es la manieyra de aygua cauda, e yeu ja he scrit aquela en le tractat de la rectificacio de medicinas.	And this is the way of hot water, and I have already written that in the treatise on the rectification of medicines.
Recipe de alcali e de caus no extinta de amdos ana partida una, e trissa les e pausa en una ola nova de la qual la partida dejos sia perforada per un petit trauc, segon la quantitat que intre en lu ray.	Take of chalk and of not-extinguished ash of both ends one part each, and crush them and place in a new jar of which the bottom is pierced with a small hole, according to the quantity that goes into it.
E pausa dejos le fons de la ola autra ola enveyriada, e gete sobre aquel alcali e caus viva de aygua doussa la qual cobra aquels per un dit, e pus que tu compremes aquels am la tieua ma per bona compressio, e leyssa la hola que deyssenda de lu aygua aguda en la partida dejos a la ola enveyriada.	And place beneath the bottom of the other jar another jar filled with water, and pour over that chalk and ash with warm water the which covers those by a finger, and as you compress those with your hand for good compression, and let the water that falls from it drop into the jar below.
E aprop ajusta tota aquela aygua, e geta la sobre autra caus viva e autre alcali renovelatz, quar aquela lahoras sira de mot forta acuitat, la qual es aministrada en motas operacios de medicina e en cauterizacio dels autres membres, quar operacio fa de foc.	Then draw all that water and pour it over other ash and chalk renewed, because that water then becomes of strong quickness acute, which is administered in many operations of medicine and in cauterization of the other members, for that operation makes fire.
E so de las medicinas alcunas am las quals es cauterizat ancha, ayssi cum tezizic e mel anacrat e caus am sabo enayssi que sian mesclatz.	And some medicines with which there is wide cautery, as with tezizic and honey and ash with soap so that they are mixed.
E Gualia recontet de un home dels antics la operacio e la curacio am la qual es curada dolor de anqua e de vena sciatica, e magnifiquet mot be esser de aquel, e diys que no hac necessitat de autra curacio, e quar es sanat per una veguada ayssi cum recomtec, quar fort leu aquel intrec en banh e eysic ja sa d’aquel.	And Gualia recounted from an old man the operation and the cure by which it is cured pain of vein and sciatic nerve, and he magnified much that, and said that no other cure was needed, and that it was healed in one go with bath and sweat so that he was cured of that.
Et es que sia pres de certarragi vert, e si no es atrobat vert, sia presa figua recent; e mot sia trissada am un pauc de grays e sia pausat sus la anqua en la qual es la dolor, o en la coyssa, o en la camba, e sia liat.	And let it be taken from a certain plant, and if not taken green then taken dried; and let the thing be crushed with a little of grain and placed on the vein in which there is pain, or in the thigh, or in the leg, and let it be bound.
E sia layssat per la cantitat de tres horas o per la quantitat que·l malaute centa cedacio de la adhustio.	And let it be left for the quantity of three hours or for the quantity that the patient bears the squeezing.
E aprop met aquel en banh e donc quan le cors de lu sia enrozat, entromet aquel en le sol, quar la dolor cessa e es sanat.	Then put that in a bath and thus when his body is heated, put that in the sun, for the pain ceases and it is healed.
E sapias que no cove que alcu use de cauteri am aquestas medicinas sino aprop la evacuacio del cors.	And know that it is not proper that anyone should use cautery with these medicines except after the evacuation of the body.
Mays ja Escorides diysec que quan am fenda de cabra la vena stretica es cauterizada, aprofieyra a lu mo be; e sia le cauteri am lu segon aquesta manieyra: sia presa lana e sia enbeguda en oli antic, e sia pausat entre le pous del pe e entre le fossil.	But Ja Escorides said that when with goat’s milk the vein is stretched, let it be cauterized, apply to it oil then, and let the cautery be done to it according to this way: take wool and soak it in old oil, and place it between the toes of the foot and between the sole.
E aprop pren fenda de cabra secca e emflasma aquela am foc entro que sia fayta carbo; e aprop pausa lu sobre la lana e leysa la entro que sia estengida.	Then take dry goat’s milk and inflame it with fire until it becomes charcoal; then place that over the wool and let it be left until it is cold.
E aprop itera aquo, e no cessas far aquo entro que·l scintiment de la mordicacio pervengua entro al anqua e repausa la dolor.	Then do that again and don’t cease doing that until the piercing comes into the vein and rest the pain.
Et aquesta manieyra de cauteri es apelat cauteri de vaquas.	And this way of cautery is called cautery of cows.
Capitol .xlii.	Chapter 52.
De cauterizacio de dolor de dos.	Of cautery for pain of two.
Alcunas veguadas dolor es en le dos per tropas causas, cum per cazement o per percucio o per superflua evacuacio, e per causas ad aquelas semblantz, per infusio de materia frega e humida.	Some times pain is in the back from various causes, such as by compression or piercing or by excessive evacuation, and for those similar causes, by infusion of material rubbed and moistened.
E cauteri no catz sino en aquesta sola specia la qual es fayta per efusio de materia frega.	And cautery is not used except in this sole species which is made from infusion of material rubbed.
Donc cove, aprop evacuacio del malaute am pillulas fitidas e am semblant a lor, que sian faytas sobre·l dos en le qual es la dolor tres linhas segon la latitut de lu, pus que senhas am tentha en quascuna linha v cauteris o mays, segon la quantitat que ve de la tolleransa del malaute e de la vertut de lu.	Therefore know, then evacuation of the patient is with pills formed and similar to them, that are formed over the back in which there is pain three lines according to the length of it, for you have experience by feel in each line or cautery, or else, according to the quantity that he bears the toleration of him and the virtue of him.
E sia fayta cauterizacio am cauteri de punt.	And let cautery be done with point cautery.
E si vols, cauteriza am tres cauteris o am quatre am cauteri clavilh medial segon aquesta forma:	And if you want, cauterize it with three cauteries or with four cauteries according to this form:
Capitol .xliii.	Chapter 53.
De cauterizacio al comensament de gilbositat.	Of cautery at the beginning of goutiness.
Motas veguadas endeve aquesta malautia als petitz enfantz; e senhal del comensament de lu en les enfantz es que accideys sobre lor estrectura en le ale eves la elevacio e·l movement.	Many times this sickness happens to small children; and sign of the beginning in them is that they get rigor mortis over them in their limbs with the rise and movement.
E atrobas en le derier espondil del dos e dels notz de lu que ja comensa a sobremontar sobre les autres spondils.	And there are compressions in the last vertebrae of the back and of the toes that he already begins to rise over the others vertebrae.
E donc quan tu vezes aquo e voles prohibir, lahoras cauterisa aquel am cauteri que sia cercle segon aquesta forma:	And when you see this and wish to prevent it, then cauterize it with a pointed cautery in the shape of a circle as follows:
que prengua le cauteri sobre tota partida del spondilh engualment.	take the cautery around all parts of the spine evenly
E si vols, cauteriza en le circuit del spondilh am le cauteri de punt dos linhas o tres.	and if you want, cauterize in a circle around the spine with the pointed cautery two lines or three.
E sian les puntz propdas entre lor.	And let the points be close to each other.
E aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat am aquo que havem dit.	Then return the area where it is healing with what we have said.
Mays guarda que cauteri no sia administrat en gelbositat que sia fayta per spasme de nervi.	But be careful that a cautery is not administered in yellowing which is caused by a spasm of nerves.
Capitol .xliv.	Chapter 44
De cauterizacio de podagra e de dolor de juncturas.	Of cauterization for gout and joint pain.
Quan dolor de juncturas son faytas per humors fregas les quals so enfundutz a quascun membre del cors, lahoras quan veno dolors en los pes, de costuma dels metges es que aquo apelen podragua propriament.	When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
E donc cum es curada podagra de causa frega am manieyra de cura e no so remaugudas las dolors, lahoras las remau cauteri.	And when gout from a cause of friction is cured with a cure and the pains are not reduced, then it is to be cauterized.
E es que tu cauterizas aquel aprop evacuacio en le circuit de la junctura del pe am motz cauteris.	And it is that you cauterize the evacuation in the circle of the joint of the foot with motte cauteries.
E sia cauteri olivar del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And let there be an olive-shaped cautery, of which this is its form:
E si es necessitat que puntz sia fayt sobre la fassia del pe, lahoras fay am cauteri de punt.	And if it is necessary to make points on the surface of the foot, then do so with a pointed cautery.
E si las dolors pujan entro als denolhs o a las autras juncturas, e aquo motas vetz s’endeve, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre quascun donolh am tres cauteris o quatre de tota partida am aquest cauteri olivar.	And if the pains move into the joints or other joints, and this thing becomes evident, then cauterize that over each joint with three cauteries or four of all parts with this olive-shaped cautery.
E si motz cauteris que aquestz cauteris sian a tu necessaris, lahoras cauteriza aquel e no premas trop la tua ma am le cauteri abans, sia tant solament enviro la specitut de la codena.	And if you need the pointed cauteries, then cauterize that and do not press too hard with your hand on the cautery beforehand; let it only surround the tip of the needle.
E si las dolors pugan entro al donolh e·l dos, lahoras aministra le cauteri le qual havem dit en le sieu capitol.	And if the pains move into the joint at both ends, then administer the cautery which we have described in its chapter.
E si las dolors so en las mas tant solament, e es apelada suagra, lahoras puncta en le circuit dels focils ayssi cum se revolvo, puncta en aquels dos linhas.	And if the pains are only in the hands and it is called sciatica, then point at the circle of the joints as they twist, point at those two lines.
E si reman de las dolors en les ditz, lahoras puncta en le cercuit dels focils sobre quascun notz e sobre la pinche de la ma.	And if there are pains in the fingers, then point at the circle of the joints over each knuckle and over the palm.
E si las dolors pugan aprop alscus jorns als coydes o als muscles, lahoras cauteriza les quascus de tota part dels ajutoris.	And if the pains move towards the elbow or the muscles, then cauterize all parts of each joint.
E no evacuas le malaute de bon regiment e de recepcio de medicinas, quar si es fayt bon regiment e flacma es evacuada am aquest cauteri sira sanat, Dieus ajudan.	And do not evacuate the patient from good treatment and the reception of medicines; for if good treatment is done and phlegm is evacuated with this cautery, it will heal, God helping.
Capitol .xlv.	Chapter 45
De cauterizacio de rompeduras.	Of cauterization for ruptures.
Quan endeve rompedura en les angonars e diysendo les budels denant l’atela al genetiu, e aquo es comensan de aprop, lahoras cove que tu mandas al malaute layssar la sua comestio en le sieu dia e que use de causas leniens per so que la fenda deyssenda del sieu ventre.	When you see a rupture in the angles and the intestines protruding through the lining towards the vagina, and it begins as such, then command that the patient stops eating for the day and that he uses laxatives so that the tear goes down from his belly.
E aprop segua le malaute entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos, e comanda a lu que tengua le sieu ale entro que sia foro getat o aparesca l’atela o·l budels.	Then follow the patient between your hands on his back, and command him to have his bowels released so that either there is a hole broken through or the lining or intestines come out.
E aprop retorna aquel am les tieus ditz e senha am tenta la ruptura sobre le os del pentenilh am senhal la extremitat del qual sia semblant a la maytat de cercle a las subiranas partidas del cors.	Then return to it by your fingers and point at the rupture on the bone of the hip with your finger, pointing to the extremity of which is like the top part of a circle at the upper parts of the body.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	Then ignite the cautery, of which this is its form:
entro que sia mot rog e gete cintilhas.	until it becomes red and bleeding.
E aprop reduzeys le budel o l’atela a la sua conquavitat, e aprop pause la sua ma sobre le loc per so que le budel no yesqua.	Then return the intestine or hernia to its cavity, and place your hand over the area to prevent the intestine from coming out.
E tu ja has ubert entre las coyssas del malaute e dejos lu as pausat un coyssi, et autre servent sia sus las cambas de lu, e autre sus le pietz de lu, le qual tengua las suas mas.	You have already opened the space between the patient's thighs, placed a cushion under them, another servant on their legs, and another on their chest, holding their hands.
E aprop pausa le cauteri sobre aquel senhal am la tua ma am cauteri stan dreyt, e te aquel entro que am lu consieguas le os del pentenilh entro al mieg del duiduni; e itera am aquel autra veguada si a tu aquel no has conseguit en la primieyra veguada entro al os.	Then hold the cautery over that with your hand with the cautery straight, and apply it to where you sense the bone of the hip within the cavity of the buttock; and repeat with another application if you have not achieved it in the first application to the bone.
E observa saviament del ysiment del budel en la hora de la tua cauterizacio, que no comburas aquel budel per so que sobre le malaute no vengua in mort o autre gran malicia.	And wisely observe the movement of the intestine at the time of your cauterization, that you do not burn it so that over the patient does not come death or another great harm.
E sapias que quan tu am le cauteri no atenhas le os, no confereys la tua operacio.	And know that when you with the cautery do not touch the bone, your operation will not succeed.
E cove que·l cauteri dels enfants sia subtil segon le gran e la mesura de lor.	And see to it that the cautery of children is subtle according to their size and age.
E aprop cura le loc del cauteri per tres dias am boder entro que sia remauguda la scara del foc.	Then heal the site of the cautery for three days with a plaster on it while the scar of the fire is still raw.
E aprop cura aquel am les autres enguentz entro que sia sanat.	Then heal that with other ointments until it is healed.
E le malaute sia jasent sobre le sieu dos per xl dias entro que sia sigillat le loc e la plagua.	And let the patient rest on his back for 40 days while the wound and the plaster are sealed.
E cove que pauses le nutriment de lu segon la longitut del temps de la curacio de lu le qual le linesca le ventre de lu, e que le budel no yesca fora deves le esforsament de guerir.	And see to it that his food is reduced according to the length of time of his healing so that the tear of his belly does not come out again through effort in healing.
E aprop quan se vol levar aprop xl dias, lahoras aministra liament decentment fayt, e tengua aquel per autres xl jorns.	And when he wants to get up after 40 days, then administer a gently made cast, and have him wear that for another 40 days.
E sia mermat de trebalh e de replecio de vianda e de beure, e de votz vehementz, quar quan usa de aquest regiment de sanacio entiera sira sanat.	And let there be rest from work and replenishment of food and drink and of violent movements, for when he uses this complete treatment of healing, it will heal entirely.
E yeu diyre la curacio de las rupturas en las autras partidas del ventre, e so al comensament, e vols que no treguan, lahoras cauterisa la ruptura d’aquel am cauteri redon segon la quantitat de lu, e sia aquo que es exhurit de la codena ayssi cum la tersa partida de lu; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit, e no es ajustat.	And I will tell of the healing of ruptures in other parts of the belly, and so at the beginning, and you want that it does not rupture again, then cauterize that rupture with a red hot cautery according to its size; and heal that with what we have said, and do not press on it.
E ja diyssero alcus primiers que ruptura sia cauterizada am cauteri triangular segon aquesta forma, pus que es senhada am tenta:	And I will tell of the first ones that ruptures are to be cauterized with a triangular cautery according to this form, and see them as you point:
e es pausada linha que eys per la latitut en le latz pus sobira de la ruptura, e autra linha al desus; e depausa la tua ma am un cauteri clavilh, mays le primier cauteri es pus leugier e milhor.	and there is placed a line that goes along the length in the side over the rupture, and another line above it; and hold your hand with an iron cautery, but the first cautery is better and easier.
Capitol .xlvi.	Chapter 46
De cauterizacio de torcio.	Of cauterization for torque.
Quan endeve en alscus membres per cazement o per percussio dolor e persevera aquela dolor per lonc temps e no comfereys al u curacio am medicinas, lahoras cove que cauterizes am cauteri de punt.	When you see in any member a pain from a blow or from pressure and that pain persists for a long time and does not yield to any treatment with medicines, then see to it that there is cauterized with a pointed cautery.
E sia le cauteri de tot membre segon la magnitut e la parvitat de lu, e vertut e develitat de lu, e locacio de torcio e dolor de lu.	And let the cautery of every member be according to its size and smallness, and its nature and weakness, and location of torque and pain in it.
Donc si·s sanat per le primier cauteri, bo es; e sino, lahoras itera sobre lu le cauteri; quar de costuma de aquelas dolors es que sian punctatz de membre ad aquel membre le qual apropinque al u, per que cove que consieguas aquels am cauteri entro que·l malaute sia sanat.	So if it is healed by the first cautery, well; and if not, then do the cautery again on it; for from custom of those pains are that they are punctured in a member near to which member it hurts, so that you see the patient healed.
Capitol .xlvii.	Chapter 47
De cauterizacio de lepra.	Of cauterization for leprosy.
Les lebros alcunas veguadas am cauteri per mot gran juvament, e magerment si la specia de lepra que es fayta per putrefaccio de flacma e de melencolia.	The lepers some times with cautery for great advantage, and healing if the nature of leprosy is made from putrefaction of phlegm and of melencolia.
E donc cum tu vols cauterizar aquel, considera si la lepra es comussan e as aquela curada am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no deysen, ni esta, e temes sobre le malaute que la corrupcio comprehenda tot le cors de lu e tota la compleccio de lu, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre le cap am v cauteris: am un en le mieg loc del cap, e am le segon pus dejos de lu, eves le front a la fi dels cabels; e amdos sobre dos corns; e am un detras, sobre la nuca o servitz.	And when you want to cauterize that, consider if the leprosy is dry and healed by what we have said in the division and not burning or hurting, nor this, and fear over the patient so that the corruption includes all his body and all its complecion, then cauterize that on the head with 5 cauteries: one in the middle of the head, and one below it, eves the forehead to the ends of the hair; and both over the ears, and one behind, over the nape or back of the neck.
E ultima la tua ma am le cauteri un pauc entro que emprema en le os una petita empressio, e de lu sian deslocadas las scorsas, per so que la expiracio de grossas vapors sia alleujada de lu; e cauteriza sobre la melsa segon que es precesit.	And finally, with the cautery, make a slight impression on the bone, and from it the skin will be displaced, so that the exhalation of thick vapors is eased; and cauterize over the ulcer as has been described.
E si la lepra es ja expanduda sobre le malaute e apar manifestament, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas aquel am aquels cauteris les quals havem ditz en le cap; e am cauteri sobre la extremitat del nas, e am dos cauteris sobre las doas maysselas, e am dos cauteris sobre dos spondils del col, e am vi cauteris sobre les spondils del dos, e am un gran sobre les spondils prop de la coeta, e un sobre la cotea , e am dos sobre las anquas, e am un sobre quascuna anqua, e am dos sobre les donols e un sobre quascun donolh, e am dos sobre les coydes, e am dos sobre les muscles, e am dos las teneretutz del sieu pietz; e cauteriza aquel sobre totas las juncturas dels ditz de las mas e dels pes, e sobre quascun talon dels sieus pes, e sobre les foscils de las suas mas.	And if the leprosy has already spread over the body and appears manifestly, then you should cauterize it with those cauteries which we mentioned earlier in reference to the head; and you should cauterize at the tip of the nose, and with two cauteries on each side of the neck, and with two cauteries on the vertebrae of the back, and with six cauteries on the vertebrae of the waist, and one large cautery on the vertebrae near the tailbone, and one on the tailbone itself, and two cauteries on the hips, and one on each hip joint, and two cauteries on the knees and one on each knee cap, and two cauteries on the elbows, and two cauteries on the tendons of his feet; and you should cauterize all the joints of the fingers and toes, and on the insteps of his feet, and on the soles.
E guarda te dels nervis les quals so sobre le talo que no comburas aquels.	And be careful not to burn the nerves that are above the ankle joint.
E alcunas veguadas es cauterizat am un cauteri sobre le os del pentenilh e am autre sobre la boca del stomac, e autre sobre le fietge.	And sometimes it is cauterized with one cautery on the bone of the elbow joint and another on the mouth of the stomach, and another on the liver.
E sapias que quant mays ajustas cauteris, tant es mays juvatiu e mays conferent; e sapias que le malaute no ha en le cauteri dolor, ayssi cum han les sas, per so quar le cors de lu ja es stupefayt.	And if you find that the ulcer is already open and the bone exposed, then you don't need to perform cauterization; but you should apply a good poultice over it so that the bone can heal.
E cove que les cauteris sian grans o paucs segon les membres e las juncturas segon que es precedit de las specias dels ferramentz.	And you should make the cauteries large or small according to the members and joints, as it is preceded by the description of the tools.
E aprop cura le cauteri am farina de errs coyta am mel e am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	And then have the patient well-warmed and standing, with his arms supported; and you should apply the poultice over the ulcer and joint of the bone, and bandage it tightly, and make a good dressing so that the ulcer can heal.
Capitol .xlviii.	Chapter 48:
De cauterizacio de stupor.	On Stupor Cauterization:
Quan alcun membre es stabozit o adormit e es curat am medicinas, olis e emplastres, e no es sanat, lahoras tu cauteriza aquel membre stabozit am cauteris segon que merita la grandesa del membre o la parvitat de lu.	When any member is paralyzed or asleep and is not healed by medicines, oils, and plasters, then you should cauterize that paralyzed member with cauteries according to the size of the member or its smallness.
E sia lo tieu cauteri intrant la ispicitut de la codena un pauc.	And if the member is small and you don't want to perform a large cauterization due to the great danger, then you should cauterize it in another way through each joint of the member.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia sanat.	Then take care of it with an ointment until it heals.
E alscunas veguadas es cauterizada alcuna stupor le qual endeve a las mas e als pes, e als spondils del dos e ves le eysiment dels nervis les quals mavon aquel membre, e es remauguda la stupor.	And if the member is large, then you should cauterize it through each joint of the member.
Mays no prusuma sobre aquo sino aquel que es savi en la anotomia dels membre e de la egressio dels nervis tot le cors moventz.	And if the stupor is on the foot and it is exposed, then you should make an application of buffalo pouch over the heel and ankle, and bandage it tightly.
Capitol .xlix.	Chapter 49:
De cauterizacio de albaras que es morfea.	On Cauterization of Diseases of the Foot and Ankle through Each Joint of the Foot:
Quan albaras es antiqua e no comfereys a lu alcu dels enguentz de medicina, lahoras tu cauteriza sobre aquela am cauteri preon un pauc segon la quantitat de la specitut de la codena entro que sia remauguda la blancor e la color de lu, e la color de lu sia mudada.	And if you want to perform cauterization on the foot, then make a dressing of ground barley mixed with honey over the heel and ankle, and bandage it tightly. If the foot is exposed, apply buffalo pouch over the heel and ankle, and bandage it. If there are ulcers present, then you should cauterize the foot.
E aprop cura aquel am farina de errs e de lentilhas am oli rozat e am folhas de arnagrosa, e am sanc de colomba o am sanc de yronda, da cascuna sia una partida e totas sian mescladas, e aprop sia linit un drap e sus le loc sia pausat entro que sia sanat.	And if the foot is exposed and you want to cauterize it, then make an application of buffalo pouch over the heel and ankle, and bandage it tightly.
Capitol .l.	Chapter 50:
De cauterizacio de cranc.	On Cauterization of Any Ulcers that are Exposed Throughout the Body:
Quan canser es comensan e vols aquel ostar, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteri de cercle en le circuit de lu ayssi cum es revolgut.	And if there are ulcers exposed on any member of the body, then you should cauterize it at the foot and ankle and heel. If the bone is exposed, make an application of buffalo pouch over the heel and ankle, and bandage it tightly. If cancer is starting and you want to stop it, then cauterize it with a circular cautery needle as it rotates.
E diysero les savis que sia cauterizat am lo derier cauteri en le mieg loc; mays a mi no es vist aquo, quar temi que sia ulcerat, e yeu ja e vist aquo alcunas veguadas.	And if the cancer is exposed on the foot and it is exposed, then make an application of buffalo pouch over the heel and ankle, and bandage it tightly.
E es pus dreyturier que sia cauterizat en le circuit de lu am cercle ayssi cum avem dit, o am motz cauteris.	And it is much better that it be cauterized in the depth of it with a circular cautery as we have said, or with many cauteries.
Capitol .li.	Chapter XI.
De cauterizacio de adubilati.	[Title] Of cauterization for gout.
Quan alcun adubilati es tardat en maturacio, e aysso es per la superfluitat fazen aquela, o per etat del malaute, quar es vielh en decrepitat, de pauc sanc, o per le temps, e tu vols festinar en la maturacio de adubilati; lahoras cauteriza en le circuit de lu am motz cauteris petitz punctan; e aprop leyssa aquela quar ela fastinara en maturacio.	When gout is delayed in ripening and this is due to excess humors, or the condition of the patient, either because he is old and feeble, or of poor blood, or due to the season, and you want to hasten the ripening of gout, then cauterize around him with small cauteries; and by doing so it will speed up ripening.
Mays si tu vols la perforacio de lu am cauteri, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu: e depausa aquel en le mieg loc de adubilati entro que penetre la codena.	But if you want to pierce him with the cautery, then ignite the cautery of which this is its form: and apply it in the middle place of gout until it penetrates the skin.
E si le cauteri en aquel loc que es pus dejos, per so que le cors del brac sia alleujat; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if you cauterize him in that place which is lower down, so that the body of the arm be eased; and then heal it up until it is well.
Capitol .lii.	Chapter XII.
De cauterizacio de corrodent.	[Title] Of cauterization for ulcers.
Corrodent es corrupcio ambulant en le membre, la qual corrodeys aquel ayssi cum a foc comedent lenha secca.	An ulcer is a rotting that travels throughout the body, which corrodes like fire eating dry wood.
Donc si vezes aquel corrodent en loc le qual sufferte cauteri am foc, lahoras tu igneys cauteris clavils motz paucs, e grans segon que es convenent en aquel loc en le qual es corrodent.	And if you see the ulcer in a place that can bear fire cautery, then ignite some small nail cauteries, and large ones according to what is appropriate for the location of the ulcer.
E aprop cauteriza aquel de tota partida entro que erradiques tota la corrosio e no romangua alcuna causa de lu.	And then cauterize it entirely all around so that you eradicate all the corrosion and remove any cause of it.
E aprop leyssa aquel per tres dias, e pausa sobre les locs cauterizats solpre trissat am oli mesclat entro que las scaras sian totas eradicadas e tota la corrupcio.	And then let it be for three days, and place warm poultices on the cauterized spots so that the scars are all eradicated and all the corruption.
E aprop cura aquel am enguentz carn engendrantz.	And then heal it with a flesh-producing ointment.
Mays si aprop tres dias vezes que la carn nasca sana en la qual no es corrupcio, bo es; mays sino, lahoras itera le cauteri sobre aquo que es romas en les locs corrumputz.	But if after three days the flesh does not grow healthy where there is no corruption, that is good; but if not, then repeat the cautery on what is rotten in the corrupt places.
E corrodent es medicat alcunas vetz am medicina aguda, quar aquela es meza en loc de cauteri.	And ulcers are sometimes treated with a sharp medicine because it is a middle way between cautery.
Mays empero cauteri am foc es de pus leugier juvament.	But nevertheless fire cautery is much milder.
E yeu ja e dit la curacio de lu am medicina aguda en la divisio, e donc pren aquela quan de lu auras endegencia.	And I have already spoken of the cure of it with sharp medicine in the division, and therefore take that when you will have an inclination for it.
Capitol .liii.	Chapter XIII.
De cauterizacio de claus e dels autres semblants.	[Title] Of cauterization of warts and similar growths.
Motas veguadas endeve a las partidas dejos del pe malautia que s’apela clau, e es causa grossa, fentrada, la qual ladeys le pe; e cauteri en aquels es segon dos manieyras, so es cauteri am foc e cauteri am aygua cauda.	Warts often come from the parts below the armpit of a sick person which is called a wart, and it is a large cause, deep-rooted, that eats into the body; and cauterization for these are according to two ways, either by fire cautery or water cautery.
Mays cauteri am foc es que igniscas le cauteri concau semblant a pena de voltor, le qual sia feyt de ferr segon la quantitat la qual contengua le clau de tota partida, e sia de subtils marguas.	But fire cautery is that you ignite the cautery made hollow like a feather of an owl, which shall be made of iron according to the amount that it contains the wart all around, and it shall have thin edges.
E aprop pausa aquel ignit sobre le clau, e aprop revolveys la tua ma am le cauteri en le circuit del clau entro que·l cauteri pervengua a la profunditat del clau.	And then apply that ignited cautery onto the wart, and then revolve your hand with the cautery around the wart so that the cautery reaches the depth of the wart.
E leyssa aquel per tres dias entro que comense getar brac.	Let it be for three days until the arm begins to heal.
E aprop emplastre aquel am malvas salvatges trissadas am sal, e leyssa le emplastre sobre aquel per una nuoyt, quar aquel sira eradicat de las suas razitz.	And then poultice that with mallows pounded with salt, and apply the poultice over it for one night because it will eradicate it from its roots.
E aprop cura le loc am enguent de carn generatiu entro que sia sanat.	And then heal the spot with flesh-producing ointment until it is well.
E si so no-convertitz, e motas veguadas accideysso en la superficia del cors, majorment en las mas e les pes, lahoras cove que tu aministres en aquels cauteri am aygua, e es que prenguas una quannula de eram o de ferr o de pena de voltor, e pausa aquela sobre le clau; e aprop geta en la quanula de aygua cauda pauca cantitat, e rete la tua ma, e tu revolveys aquela am compressio de la tua ma de tot, e sia enpremut le marge de la canula en la razit del clau, e atrobara la aygua cauda via al preon de la razit del cau; e espera le malaute un pauc la mordicacio de l’aygua cauda per una hora, e aprop remau aquela, quar le clau am las suas razitz sira erredicat.	And if it does not convert, and often happens in the surface of the body, mostly on the hands and feet, then see that you administer cauterization with water on those; and take a quill of reed or of iron or of owl feather, and apply that onto the wart; and then pour into the quill little quantity of water-cautery, and grip it with your hand, and revolve that with pressure all around with your hand so that the edge of the quill goes into the root of the wart, and wait for the patient to bite on the quill for an hour, and then remove it, because the wart and its roots will be eradicated.
E ayssi fe am aquels la i aprop l’autre entro que venguas sobre totz les quals de lor so en le cors.	And do the same with the others all over their bodies.
E aprop cura aquels pus que las razitz dels claus so erradicadas am aquo dels enguentz les quals la carn ve engenran.	And then heal those after the roots of the warts are eradicated with that ointment which engenders flesh.
Capitol .liiii.	Chapter XIV.
De cauterizacio de tremor.	[Title] Of cauterization for tremors.
Quan endeve ad alcu tremor per freg en le nervi o per febre de causa frega, o per autra causa semblant, lahoras cove que tu cauterises aquel am quatre cauteris o am v sobre les spondils del dos, entre quascun spondilh am un cauteri; e am cauteri en le pietz de lu, e sobre l‘estomac de lu, am cauteri olivar.	When you see tremor due to friction on a nerve or due to fever from some cause of friction, or due to another similar cause, then see that you cauterize that with four cauteries or five over the vertebrae of the back, between each vertebra one cautery; and cauterize him in the feet, and over his stomach, cauterize with olive oil.
E la tremor de lu se repausa e festina la sanetat de la malautia frega.	And the tremor of him will rest and the sickness of the friction will speed up.
Capitol .lv.	Chapter XV.
De cauterizacio de albati accidentz al cors.	[Title] Of cauterization for accidental wounds to the body.
Quan en le cors so espellitz albati, e so pustulas fendas las quals so feytas de materias grossas corruptas; donc cove al comensament cum apareyso, que sia cauterizat sobre tot cap de la fistola am cauteri subtil am fustz de mirt, la extremitat del qual es estenduda am foc; o am razitz de erestologia longua; o am cauteri lentecular.	When in the body there are blisters and pustules that are caused by thick corrupt materials; therefore see at the beginning when it appears, that it is cauterized over all the head of the blister with a subtle cautery made from myrtle wood whose end is ignited; or with long razor cuts; or with a lenteular cautery.
E alscunas veguadas es cauteri ademamil al comensament de la sua expulcio segon aquesta manieyra; e no so cregudas, e es disrumpuda la superfluitat fazens aquels, et sana de aquels.	And sometimes it is cauterized with wormwood at the beginning of its expulsion in this way; and when they are not broken, and the superficial part is disrupted by doing these, and it is healed from them.
Mays empero cove que aquo sia fayt aprop evacuacio am fleubotomia.	But nevertheless see that it is done then evacuation with phlebotomy.
Capitol lvi.	Chapter XVI.
De cauterizacio de fluex de sanc accident per incisio de arceria.	[Title] Of cauterization for accidental blood flow due to incision of a vein.
Tropas veguadas endeve fluex de arceria que es inciza deves la plagua la qual endeve deforo, o deves la incizio de apostemas o cauteri del membre, e alor semblantz, e es dificil remaura aquel.	Sometimes there is blood flow from a vein that is cut due to a wound by the plague which due to an incision of abscesses or cauterization of the limb, and similar things, and it is difficult to heal that.
Donc cum accideys ad alcu aquo, lahoras tu·t coyta am la tua ma a l’orrifici de la arceria, e pausa sobre aquel le tieu dit endic estrenh aquel motas veguadas entro que sia ostat le fluex del sanc dejos le tieu dit, e que non yesqua.	Therefore when it happens to anyone, then you shall hold it with your hand at the opening of the vein, and apply over that your index finger, which is made narrow by the incision of the wound, and often over it so that the blood flow stops and does not flow.
E aprop pausa en le foc les cauteris olivars paucs e grantz, per nombre motz, e exsuffla sobre aquels entro que sian mot ignitz.	And then apply the olive-oil cauteries little and large, by numbers of them, and blow on them so that they are extinguished.
E aprop pren de aquels un petit o un gran segon le loc e la plagua en la qual es rompuda la arteria, sobre aquela vena festinantment pus que auras remaugut le tieu dit, e te le cauteri entro que sia abcindit e restreyt aquel sanc.	And then take one little or large according to the place and plague in which the artery is broken, over that vein hasten with pus so that you have stopped your finger, and cauterize it so that it is bound up and restrained that blood.
E si le sanc es expellit de l’orrifici de la arteria quan tu remaues le tieu dit e extringeys le cauteri, lahoras pren la un autre cauteri coytadament dels cauteris les quals en le foc son preparatz, e donc no cesses fer aquo un aprop autre entro que le sanc sia restrengit.	And if the blood is expelled from the opening of the artery when you remove your finger and constrict the cautery, then take another cautery that is cut into the cauteries that are in the fire, and therefore do not cease doing this until the blood is restrained.
E guarda te que no comburas le nervi que aqui es, e que vengua sobre le malaute autra malicia.	And see to it that you do not burn the nerve that is here, and that there comes upon the patient another evil malady.
E sapias que quan de l’arteria flueys sanc, lahoras no es possible en aquels restrenge la sanc, e majorment quan l’arteria es gran, si no am una de quatre manieyras: o am cauteri ayssi quo dit havem, o am extraccio quan no es extrayta, quar quan es extrayta las extremitatz de lu miels son comburidas e es restreyt le sanc, o que sia liat am fiel o am liament per fort strectura, o que sian pausadas sobre lu medicinas de las quals la vertut es restringir la sanc; e sian strengudas am pulvinar am costriccio decent.	And know that when blood flows from the artery, then it is not possible to restrain the blood in those, and especially when the artery is large, unless one of four ways: or cauterize so as aforesaid, or by extraction when it is not extracted, because when it is extracted, its extremities are burnt and the blood is restrained, or that it is bound up with a ligature or that it is ligatured strongly, or that medicines of which their virtue is to restrain blood; and are ligatured with poultice by strong compression, or that they are paused over it with poultices of which the virtue is to restrain the blood.
Mays aquel que aministra restriccio decent de lu am liament e am strictura am draps o per posicio de causas comburentz e de semblantz, no comfereys sino tart.	But that one who administers restraint properly with ligature and compression with bandages or by position of causes burning and of similar things, it does not confer unless a wound.
Mays si aquo endeve ad alcu e no sia le metge present ni medicina, lahoras obre am pausament del dit indic sobre le orrifici de aquela vena ayssi cum havem dit, e entenda a la gran costreccio de lu entro que le sanc sia ostat de la sobirana partida de la plagua, e sobre la arceria le dit no sia remaugut; e de sobre la arceria sia aspergit am aygua frega de mot gran fregiditat entro que·l sanc sia congilat e engrossat; e mays cossire en que ha de cauteri o de medicina necessitat.	But if this is directed to someone and the doctor is not present or there is no medicine, then open with a pause of the aforementioned finger on the opening of that vein as we have said, and understand [the patient's] great distress within as the blood is hindered from the upper part of the plague, and on the artery let it not be pricked; and above the artery, let it be sprinkled with water rubbed with something very cold until the blood congeals and thickens; and if there is a need for cautery or medicine.
Comensa la segonda partida.	The second part begins.
De incisio e perforacio e ventozas e de fleubotomia e de plaguas e de lor semblants.	Of incision and piercing, of bleeding and phlebotomy, of plagues and their likenesses.
Aquestas son paraulas de Albucazis.	These are the words of Albucasis.
Ja havem dit en le primier capitol tota malautia en la qual cauteri am foc es convenient e am medicina comburent, e las occasios e las causas de lu, e les instrumentz en aquels necessaris am las formas dels cauteris; e he ordenatz les capitols de la subiranetat del cap entro als pes.	We have already said in the first chapter about all illnesses where cautery with fire is convenient and burning medicine, and their occasions and causes, and the instruments in which they are necessary, and I have arranged the chapters from the top of the head to the feet.
E yeu procesire en aquest capitol per aquela meteysa guisa, per que sia alliujat lo querent aquo, lahoras sobre aquo que aura demandat.	And I will proceed in this chapter in that same way, so that it may be lightened for the one who reads it and then about which he has demanded.
E denant que yeu comense aquo, cove, fils, que aprenguatz que en aquest capitol es per terror aquo que es en le capitol primier de cauterizacio.	And before I begin this, believe, reader, that what is in this chapter is for fear of what is in the first chapter about cauterization.
E per aquo que cove que sia en lu gran cautela, quar en la operacio la qual es en aquest capitol motas veguadas catz evacuacio la qual es am sanc am le qual esta la vida deves la aspersio de la vena o incisio sobre l’apostema o apercio de exsitura o puracio de la plagua o extraccio de sageta o incizio de peyra e a lor semblantz.	And because he who is performing the operation in this chapter many times makes evacuation through bleeding, which is with blood, through which life is due to the sprinkling of the vein or incision over the pustule or opening of the wound or purification of the plague or extraction of the arrow or incision of the stone and their likenesses.
E de totz aquels so acompanhatz temor e tremor e en le mas de lor catz la mort.	And all of these are accompanied by fear and trembling, and in the majority of them death.
E yeu amonesti vos que sobre vos no caia aquo en le qual es esitacio, quar alcunas veguadas cazo deves vos manieyras de homes am manieyras motas de malautias.	And I warn you that this does not happen to you in which there is a situation, because several times it happens that men are managed by many illnesses.
E de lor es alcu que s’irays am la sua malautia e es leugiera deves lu la mort, e aysso per la vehemensia de aquo que troba de sa malautia, e per longuesa de la malautia de lu, e am la malautia es paor la qual significa mort.	And of these there is one that becomes worse due to his illness and death is lighter for him because of the vehemence with which he suffers from his illness, and because of the longevity of his illness, and because of the illness he has fear that signifies death.
E de aquels es le qual dona a tu son aver e ditta, tu esperant am aquel sanetat, e la sieua malautia es perniciosa.	And of those is the one who gives you his word and promise, you waiting for his health, and whose illness is destructive.
E donc no cove que tu consentas en aquel que ve a vos del qual es aquesta manieyra; e la vostra cautela sia major que covesitat e la vostra rapacitat; e no presumatz alcuna causa sobre aquo sino aprop sciencia certa la qual virifica aquo deves vos, e al qual perve successio lausabla.	And so do not consent to whoever comes to you whose case is like this, and your caution should be greater than greed and your rapaciousness; and do not assume any cause for this unless it is certain knowledge that verifies it for you, and to whom a praiseworthy outcome occurs.
E usatz en la curacio de totz vostres malautes de pronosticacio e indicacio de lu al qual es salut convertida, quar en aquel es a vos ajutori sobre adquisicio de fama e de memoria, de lausor e de gloria.	And use in the cure of all your illnesses of prognosis and indication for him to whom health is converted, because in that is your helper for acquiring fame and memory, praise and glory.
O, filhs, Dieus en vos spire le sieu entendement e no oste a vos direccio e proteccio, quar aquo es en la sua ma.	O sons, may God inspire you with his understanding and not deprive you of direction and protection, for that is in his hand.
E yeu e ordenat aquest capitol distingent per capitols segon que precedit en le capitol de cauteris, de la cura del cap entro als pes, per que sia a vos alleujat aquo que demandatz de aquo e del qual havetz necessitat.	And I have arranged this chapter distinguishing it by chapters according to what precedes in the chapter about cauterizations, of the cure from the head to the feet, so that it may be lightened for you who demands it and of which you have need.
Capitol primier.	First chapter.
De la curacio de aygua la qual es contenguda en le cap dels enfantz.	Of the cure of water which is contained in the head of children.
Sapias que aquesta malautia motas veguadas endeve als enfantz deves le enfantament e quan la noyrissa estrenh le cap del enfant ses livitat.	Know that this illness many times happens to children because of childbirth and when the nurse tightens the child's head with a bandage.
E alcunas veguadas endeve per causa amaguada la qual no es saubuda.	And sometimes it happens because of a hidden cause which is not cleaned.
Mays yeu no vi aquesta malautia sino en les enfantz; e a totz aquels les quals yeu vi se coytec la mort, e per ayssi es a mi vist layssada obra en aquels.	But I have not seen this illness except in children; and all of those whom I have seen it befell died, and because of that it is to me a wonder at them.
E yeu e vist que un enfant le cap del qual era d’aygua omplit, e·l cap de lu era totjorn ayssi magnificat entro que ceser no podia sobre si meteys per la grandesa del sieu cap, e mays que la humiditat fe aucmentada entro que foc mort.	And I have seen a child whose head was filled with water, and the child's head was always magnified so that breast-feeding could not be done on him because of the size of his head, and more so that the moisture increased continuously until death.
E aquesta humiditat o es agreguada entre la codena e l’os, o es agreguada dejos le os sobre le ciphac.	And this humidity is either aggregated between the skin and bone, or is aggregated below the bone over the skull.
Quar la operacio en aquel si la humiditat es entre la codena e l’os e le apostema es pauc, lahoras cove que tu fendas en le mieg loc del cap am una fissura en la latitut, e sia la longitut de la fissura cays dos notz entro que corra la humiditat, e aquesta es la forma del spatum:	Because the operation in this if the humidity is between the skin and bone and the pustule is minor, then you must split in the middle of the head with one slit in width, and let the length of the slit be two fingers wide so that the humidity flows out, and this is the shape of the spatula:
E donc si la humiditat es mays augmentada e l’apostema es major, lahoras son aqui dos fissuras segon aquesta manieyra:	And if the humidity is more increased and the pustule is larger, then here are two slits in this way:
E si la humiditat es dejos le os, senhal de lu es que tu vezes la comissuras del cap ubertas de tota partida e l’aygua es spremuda quan tu compremes aquela am la tieua ma a las partidas dedintz e no es aquo a tu amaguat.	And if the humidity is below the bone, a sign of it is that you will see the comissures of the head swollen in all parts and the water is pressed out when you compress it with your hand on the parts between your fingers and it is not hidden from you.
Cove que tu fendas en le mieg loc del cap am tres fissuras segon aquesta manieyra:	You must split in the middle of the head with three slits in this way:
e aprop la inscizio extratz ne tota la humiditat; e aprop strenh las fissuras am draps e plumassols; e aprop enbroca aquo de sobre am vi e oli entro al quint dia, e aprop deslia le liament e cura la plagua am tentas e enguentz, e strenh le cap am equalitat; e mange le malaute am vianda secca de pauca humiditat entro que·l membre sia confortat e sanat.	And then remove all the humidity and tightly bandage the slits with cloths and plasters; and then anoint it with wine and oil on the fifth day, and loosen the bandages and cure the wound with poultices and ointments, and strengthen the head evenly; and feed the patient dry food of little moisture so that the member is comforted and healed.
E es autra manieyra de incisio, que consideras hon apar la magnitut del apostema e la colleccio de l’aygua, quar alcunas veguadas es mays en le occipicii, o en la partida denant, o en la destra, o en la sinistra; e donc aten am la incizio on appar le apostema e la replecio de l’aygua, e fen aquo segon que a tu es miels possible.	And there is another way of cutting which considers where the pustule appears and the collection of water, because sometimes it is more in the occipital bone, or in the front part, or on the right or left side; and so pay attention to the cut where the pustule appears and the collecting of the water, and do that as you think is most possible.
Et observa que no inscindas la arteria e endevengua flueys de sanc e mora le malaute per aquel flux de sanc am evacuacio de humiditat.	And observe that you do not cut the artery and bring forth a flow of blood and cause the death of the patient through that flow of blood with the evacuation of humidity.
Capitol .ii.	Chapter .ii.
De inscisio de las arterias las quals so aprop las aurelhas, apeladas hilasseysse.	Of cutting of the arteries which are under the ears, called auriculas.
Capitol segon.	Second chapter.
Quan endeveno ad alcu catars o raumas als huelhs o al pietz, e es antiquat aquo, e no confereys en aquo la curacio de las medicinas, lahoras la deriera curacio en aquest es incizio de aquelas dos arterias.	When it happens to someone catarrh or phlegm in the ears or feet, and it is old, and there is not success in the cure of the medicines, then the last cure in this is cutting of those two arteries.
E donc cove quan tu vols inscidir aquelas que le malaute raza lo sieu cap, e aprop fregua le loc am drap aspre per so que aparan las arcerias, e aprop sia strengut le col del malaute am alcu drap; e aprop considera on polsa la vena; e les locs de quascuna sobre les locs les quals so aprop las aurelhas depremutz, e tant se occultan sino en alcus homes.	And so when you want to cut those which the patient's head spreads over, and then rub the site with an abrasive cloth so that the arteries appear, and then tightly bandage the neck of the patient with some cloth; and then consider where to pulsate the vein; and the sites of both over the sites where the auricles are depressed, and they are hidden in some men.
E aprop senha sobre la arceria am tenta, e aprop inscideys quascuna am le spatum de quascuna partida agut am inscizio pervenient entro al os, e sia aquo per la latitut del cap.	And then touch the artery with a tent, and then cut each one with a spatula of each part coming into contact with the bone, and let that be through the width of the head.
E si vols, entromet le spatum dejos la arteria e trenqua aquala a las inciden a las partidas desus.	And if you want, insert the spatula below the artery and pierce that to the parts above it.
E sia la longitut de la inscizio cays dos ditz ajustatz, quar quan alcuna vena es inscizida le sanc es eyssit am egressio pulsatil, le qual saut deforo per saut frequent.	And let the length of the cut be two fingers wide, because when an artery is cut, the blood flows out with pulsating thrusts, which jumps back and forth frequently.
Mays si la arceria no apareys al cintiment, lahoras cove que tu mesures de la aurelha la quantitat del spazi de tres ditz, e aprop senha am tenta, e fen entro al os.	But if the artery does not show the pulse, then you must measure from the auricle the quantity of the space of three fingers, and then touch with a tent, and pierce into the bone.
E aquo que cove getar del sanc es quantitat de vi unc., e fort leu ne geta de lu mays o mens, e tot aquo es segon la quantitat la qual appareys de la vertut del malaute e de la replecio de la arceria de lu.	And what should be bled is quantity of wine ounce, and let the strong one give him of it more or less, and all that is according to the quantity which appears of the virtue of the patient and the collecting of the artery in him.
E aprop considera la plagua, e donc si reman sobre le os alcuna causa del ciphac, lahoras inscindys aquo per so que no endevengua apostema caut.	And then consider the plague, and if there is any cause for cipha on the bone, then cut it so that it does not become a cauterized ulcer.
E aprop strenh la plagua am plumassols e am liamentz de drap de li, e aprop cura aquela am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	Then strengthen the plague with plasters and linen bandages, and then heal it with an ointment within so that it may be cured.
Capitol .iii.	Chapter 3
De extraccio de las arcerias las quals so en las templas.	Of the extraction of veins which are in the temples.
Quan ad alcu accideys emigranea antiqua o catertz agutz, per humiditatz agrimonials e per qualiditat en les lacertz des templas, o sodo antiqua vehement e semblantz ad aquels, e es medicat am las manieyras de curacio de medicina e aquo no comfereys, lahoras nos hem sproatz en aquestas malautias extraccio de las arcerias en les templas, o cauterizacio de aquelas ayssi cum havem mostrat.	When someone experiences ancient or catarrh-like emigrations, due to moist and hot humors in the temples, or violent ancient sicknesses resembling these, and medicine and its treatments do not help, then we must resort to these maladies of extraction of veins in the temples, or cauterization of those as we have shown.
E la manieyra de la operacio e extracio de aquelas es que·l malaute raza les pels les quals son en les templas; e entenda a la arceria apparent en le templar quar ela es a tu mostrada per le sieu pols, e·s occultada sino en paucs homes per vehemencia de freg.	And the manner of operation and extraction of these is to cause the patient to raise his arms so that the veins in the temples appear; and understand the apparent vein in the temple where it is shown by the pulse, and is hidden except in a few men due to the vehemence of friction.
E si a tu es occultada, lahoras le col del malaute sia strengut am alcun drap; e aprop fregua le loc am un drap aspre o evapora le loc am aygua cauda entro que aparesca a tu la arceria manifestament.	And if it is hidden, then the patient's neck should be tightened with some cloth; and then rub the area with a rough cloth or evaporate the area with warm water until the vein appears obviously.
E lahoras tu pren le spatum del qual aquesta es la forma:	And then you take the spatulum, of which this is the shape:
E aprop tu scorja la codena am aquel am facilitat entro que pervenguas a la arceria; e aprop geta en lu onti e extratz aquela a las partidas sobiranas entro que extraguas aquela de la codena e descobras aquela de las tunicas las quals so dejos aquela, de tota partida.	And then you scorch the vein with that with ease until you reach the vein; and then throw on it vinegar and extract it to the upper parts in order to pull it out of the vein and uncover it from the tunics which are beneath it, from every part.
Mays si la arteria es subtil, lahoras envolveys aquela am la extremitat del oncii, e aprop inscindeys de aquela una partida segon la quantitat per la qual sian alonguadas las extremitatz de lu e sian contraytas, e no endevindra flux de sanc, quar si no so inscididas no pujara le sanc de tot.	But if the vein is subtle, then you wrap it with the end of the needle, and then cut a part according to the quantity by which its ends are lengthened and contracted, and there will not be a flow of blood; for if they are not cut, the blood will not flow at all.
E aprop evacua del sanc de vi unc. entro a tres.	And then empty out some blood. of three times [unc].
E si la arceria es gran, lahoras cove que tu lies aquela en dos locs am fiel dopble fort de ceda o am cordas a lonc, e no coyte a lu putrefaccio denant la consolidacio de la plagua e endevengua flux de sanc.	And if the vein is large, then you must tie it in two places with strong double-folded wool or cords, and do not let putrefaction come before the consolidation of the plague and there be a flow of blood.
E aprop incideys la superfluitat la qual es entre dos liamentz; e fay aquo en aquela hora o aprop autra ora.	And then cut the superfluity which is between two bandages; and do that at that time or another time.
E si vols, cauteriza aquela am cauteri entro al os am cauteri cutellar entro que sian incididas las extramitatz de lu, e stara en loc de aquela meteyssa obra.	And if you want, cauterize it with a cautery into the bone with a knife-like cautery until its ends are cut, and it will be in place of that work.
E es milhor obra sino que·l malaute aia febre o es de escalfada compleccio; quar cauteri es de aquelas causas que ajudan a las humiditatz finidoras, e donc es milhor en juvament.	And it is better for the patient not to have fever or a heated complexion; for cauterization aids in eliminating those causes of humors, and therefore is better during youth.
E cove aprop la extraccio de las arcerias que huomplas le loc de coto antic, e sian pausatz sobre lu polvils decentement fayt, e aprop sia curat am medicinas seccas fazen naysser la carn e am calguas entro que sia sanat.	And therefore it is better to extract the veins that inflame the ancient wound, and have powdery poultices decently made laid upon it, and let it be cured with dry medicines that make the flesh grow and with cauteries so that it may be healed.
E si mentre obres autra veguada endeventa flux de sanc de la arceria, lahora tu te coyta a restrenger aquel sanc, o am cauteri, o que omplas le loc de coto, e strenh la tua ma entro que sia restreyt le sanc.	And if while you operate another vein begins to flow from the vein, then you must restrain that blood, or with cautery, or by compressing the wound, and strengthen your hand so that the blood is restrained.
E si deguna causa de aquelas no es a tu present, lahoras pausa le tieu dit sobre le loc entro que·l sanc sia congilat, e enbroca le loc am aygua de vehement fregiditat entro que la acuitat repausa, e sia strengut segon que cove.	And if none of those causes are present to you, then place your finger on the spot so that the blood may congeal, and moisten the spot with water of violent heat so that the acuteness ceases, and it is tied according as it should be.
E aquo que es pus leugier en extraccio de arceria es que tu cauterizes la vena am aquest cauteri haventz dos cotels, pus que tu has senhat les dos locs am tenta, e depausa quascus, mot ignitz, entro que pervenguan al os e inscindan la vena en dos locs, per so que sia elonguat aquo que es entre las extremitatz de lu, quar no son consolidadas de tot am aquest cauteri.	And what is easier in the extraction of veins is that you cauterize the vein with this cautery having two points, after you have pricked the two spots with a tent, and depose each, lighting fire, so that it comes to the bone and cuts the vein in two places, so that it is lengthened which is between its ends, for it is not consolidated at all with this cauterization.
E aquesta es la forma del cauteri:	And this is the shape of the cautery:
E sia la acuitat dels dos cotels esemps.	And let the acuteness of its two points be equal.
Mays empero si so mendres acuitat que dos cotels es milhor, quar si so agudas cum dos cotels propera a quascuna freg, e no enscideysso la carn am velocitat.	But if it is milder than the two points, that is better, for if they are acute with both pricks, it approaches each other with swiftness and does not cut into the flesh.
Donc cum en aquels es alcuna grossitut, es tenguda la calor del foc en aquels e la carn es abscindida leugierament.	Therefore when there is any thickness in them, the heat of the fire is held in them and the flesh is cut loosely.
E aquesta obra es milhor en tota obra e pus leugiera.	And this work is better in all works and easier.
E sia le spazi le qual es entre dos cotels la quantitat de la grossesa del dit.	And let the space between the two points be the quantity of the thickness of the finger.
Capitol quart.	Chapter 4:
De la cura de cors de lagremas agudas e aciduas dels huels.	Of the cure of acute and acidic wounds of the throat.
Quan so lagremas aciduas, e es le cors de aquelas venas las quals so sobre le test del cap deforo, e no comfereys en aquo alcuna causa de la curacio de medicina, e vezes la cara del malaute ja enrogesir e sent en le sieu front deambulacio ayssi cum si era deambulacio de formiguas, e·ls huels de aquel so extenuatz, humitz enayssi que ja les pels de lor son conodutz, e las parpelas so scalfadas per la acuitat de las lacrimas, les antics agro mesties en la curacio de aquelas de aquesta operacio, e nompnero aquela curacio am spassa.	When they are acidic wounds, and the veins of those are above the test of the head deforo, and medicine does not help in that any cause of its cure, and the face of the patient is already red and feels walking around as if it were the walking of ants, and his ears are exhausted, humid as if his skin is known, and his eyelids are scalded by the acuteness of tears, the ancients applied this cure with a sponge.
E es que tu comandas al malaute rayre les pels les quals son en le sieu front, e aprop inscideys en le front tres fissuras engualment distans segon la longitut del front.	And it is that you command the patient to shave the hair which is on his forehead, and then cut into the forehead three evenly distant gashes according to the length of the forehead.
E si’ la longitut de la fissura cays dos ditz: la una fissura sia engualment distant a la longitut del nas en le mieg loc del front, e la segonda segon la longitut un petit del movement dels lacertz les quals so en le lacrimal, e la tersa del autre part.	And if the length of the gash is two fingers: the first gash should be evenly distant to the length of the nose in the middle location of the forehead, and the second according to the length of a small movement of the veins which are in the tear ducts, and the third from the other side.
E guarda te de la incizio de las arcerias las quals so en dos latz, e elongua la tua ma de la continuacio de amdos las mandibulas.	And be wary of the cutting of the veins which are on both sides, and lengthen your hand from the continuation of both jaws.
E si’ l’espazi de quascuna inscizio la quantitat de tres ditz ajustatz.	And if the space of each incision is the quantity of three fingers placed side by side.
E si’ a tu una pessa d’espongua apparelhada o draps seccatz motz am les quals exsiccas le sanc.	And if you have a sponge with apparatus or dry bandages which absorb the blood.
E aprop entremet le spatum de dos agudas extremitatz, del qual aquesta es la forma de la inscisio de lu:	And then insert the spatula between its two acute ends, of which this is the shape of its incision:
que es de la partida des templas entro a la segonda inscizio.	that is from the part of the temples to the second incision.
Exxcorja am aquel tota la codena la qual es entre dos incizios am le ciphac le qual es sobre le os, e aprop fay aquo de la inscizio migera entro a la segonda inscisio.	Excise with that all the vein which is between two incisions with the skull which is upon the bone, and then do that from the middle incision to the second incision.
E aprop stratz ne aquest spatum e entromet en la primieyra inscizio autra vetz un autre instrument le qual es apelat cutellar, agut de una part e del autre no agut.	And then pull with that, and insert into the first incision another instrument which is called a knife, sharp on one side and blunt on the other.
E pausa le latz de aquel agut deves la carn annexa deves la codena, e le latz de lu leon dintz le os, e empelley aquel entro que pervengua a la fissura migera, e abscindeys am aquel totz les vaysels que descendo del cap als huels.	And place the sides of that sharp against the flesh annexed to the vein, and the sides of it against the tooth against the bone, and push that so that it comes to the middle incision, and cut with that all the vessels which descend from the head to the throat.
Mays que sia continuada la inscizio ad aquo appar de la codena, e aprop fay aquo en la fissura migana entro al autra fissura.	But if the incision is continued to that appearance of the vein, and then do that from the middle incision to the second incision.
E pus que corr del sanc quantitat engual, exprem les locs de las pessas del sanc congilat.	And after the blood flows equally, squeeze the spots of the congealed blood.
E aprop pausa en quascuna fissura calgua de coto vielh, e pausa sobre aquels polvils enbegutz en vi e oli e vi agre, e vegas que no endevengua apostema caut.	And then place in each incision cold water of wound, and place upon those poultices made with vinegar and oil and wine, and bandages so that there be no cauterized ulcer.
E en le tertz dia deslia le liament e aministra gran enfusio de aygua cauda o tebeza, e aprop cura aquo am enguent bazilicon am oli rozat e autres entro que las plaguas sian sanadas.	And on the third day loosen the bandages and administer great effusion of warm water or thick tea, and then cure that with basilicum ointment with rose oil and others so that the scabs are healed.
Capitol .v.	Chapter 5:
De la cura de lagramas per catartz e als huels descendentz de las partidas dedintz del cap.	Of the cure of wounds by cauteries and the throat descending from the parts within the head.
Quan ad alcu veno catartz agutz e continuantz, e vezes les huels del malaute extenuatz petitz, e ja le reguardament de lor es debelitat, e las palpebras ulceradas e de lor cazo les pels, e en le preon del cap es dolor aguda ledent e extrenutacio consequent, lahoras sapias per aquestz accidentz que las materias e catartz no veno sino de motas venas de las partidas dedintz procedent.	When to someone come purgatives and continuous vomiting, and you see the patient's eyes exhausted little, and their guard is weakened, and the eyelids ulcerated, and from them hair falls out, and in the brain there is a sharp pain and consequent vertigo, then know by these accidents that the matter and purgatives come not but from many veins proceeding from within.
E la milhor curacio en aquels es aquesta: que comandes al malaute que raza lo sieu front, e aprop inscideys en aquel una fissura al mieg loc del front, un petit per la latitut (e comensa am la fissura del templar senestre entro al dextre templar; e sia inscisio entro al os; e eslongua la tua ma dels lacertz del templas lesquals son maugutz deves la mastigacio), entro que sia le os descubert.	And the best cure for these is this: that you command the patient to raise his eyebrow, and then insert into that a slit at the middle of the forehead, a little in width (and begin the slit from the left temple, entering into the right temple; and it should be inserted into the bone; and lengthen your hand from under the temples, which are bitten down because of chewing), as long as the bone is uncovered.
Exsicca tot le sanc am espongua o am drap secc e aprop repleys entre las doas labias de la fissura am coto vielh o am draps de li.	Dry all the blood with sponge or dry cloth and then fill up between the two lips of the slit with cotton wool or with rags.
E aprop estrenh desus am polvils enbegutz en vi e oli per so que no endevengua apostema caut.	And then tighten it up above with powdered lint, soaked in wine and oil, so that no pus-filled boil results.
E quan deslias aquo e veses que l’apostema ja es diminuit, lahoras cove que fregua le os entro que comensa en lu nayser carn, e aprop cura aquel am regiment exsiccatiu le qual fassa neysser la carn, ayssi cum si tu prenes de farina de froment dos partidas e de colofania quatre partidas e mescla o, e de lor sia fayt emplastre e sia aministrat en aquestas plaguas a de la carn nativitat.	And when you loosen it and see that the boil has diminished, then cover that area where the bone begins to grow flesh, and treat it with an astringent ointment which causes the flesh not to grow, just as if you take two parts of wheat flour and four parts of rosin and mix them together, and from this mixture make a plaster and apply it to these wounds at the point of the new flesh.
Capitol .vi.	Chapter 6:
De la cura de aquo que catz en las aurelhas.	Of the cure for that which bites in the ears.
Tota causa que catz en las aurelhas es una de quatre specias, quar o es peyra mineral o causa semblant a peyra, ayssi cum ferr e veyre, o es de planta ayssi cum ceze o fava, o es causa fluxtibla ayssi cum aygua e vi agre e a lor semblantz, o alcuna bestia.	All causes that bite in the ears are of four kinds; one is a mineral stone or something similar to a stone, like iron and glass, or it is from plants, such as beans or peas, or it is a fluid cause, like water and sour wine, or their likes, or some animal.
E donc quan peyra catz en l’aurelha o autra causa semblant de aquelas causas que no ajustan ne creysso en l’aurelha, e pausa la aurelha al solelh, e si vezes la peyra, lahoras distilla en aquela alcuna causa de oli violat o sizami, e aprop aministra la extraccio de lu, e fay le stornudar am condizi, e oppila las nars deve le aveniment de stornutacio.	And so when a stone bites in the ear or any other cause similar to those causes which do not enter nor grow in the ear, and you see the stone, then distill into that some cause of oil of violets or sesames, and then administer its extract, and cause sneezing with snuff, and cover the nostrils due to the action of sneezing.
E aprop pausa en le circuit de la aurelha alscunas pessas de drap o lana, e dextendas la aurelha a las partidas desus, quar motas veguadas es foro-getada am aquestas causas.	And then place around the ear some balls of cloth or wool, and extend the ear to the sides above it, for many times it is forced out by these causes.
E si no n’es getada, lahoras aministra extraccio de lu am le instrument apelat gesti epicicarios subtil del qual aquesta es la forma:	And if it is not forced out, then administer its extract with the instrument called a subtle hooked tweezers of which this is the form:
E si es foro-getada am gesti, bo es; e sino, lahoras aministra la extraccio de lu am onci subtil de pauca duplicacio.	And if it is forced out with tweezers, that is good; and if not, then administer its extract with a fine needle of few folds.
E donc si no es foro-getada per aquo, lahoras fay una canula de aram e entromet la extremitat de la canula en le trauc de la aurelha e claus a l’enviro de la canula am cera e am oli mollificada per so que no sia ubert sino la canula.	And therefore if it is not forced out by this, then make a tube of bronze and insert the end of the tube into the hole of the ear, and close around the tube with wax and softened oil, so that only the tube be open.
E aprop extratz am le tieu vent am fort atraccio, quar tropas veguadas cum aquo que havem recontat.	And then extract it with your breath with strong吸引力, for many times it goes in company with what we have related.
Mays si no es foro-getada en aquesta manieyra, lahoras pren de halka alumbat o de vecz aparelhat am le qual son preses les ausels una patita quantitat, e pausa aquel en la extremitat de ray, e aprop envolopa sobre aquel coto decentment pausat.	But if it is not forced out in this manner, then take a little bit of alum or of the medicine prepared with which birds are caught, and place that at the end of the ear, and then wrap around that decently placed plug.
E aprop entromet aquel en le trauc de la aurelha am facilitat, e aprop excicca la aurelha de la humiditat.	And then insert that into the hole of the ear with ease, and then dry out the ear from its moisture.
E donc si no es foro-getada am totas las causas las quals havem recontadas, lahoras tu coyta a talhar aquela denant que endevengua apostema caut o espasme.	And therefore if it is not forced out by all the causes which we have related, then you cut that in front so that it does not become a pus-filled boil or a spasm.
E la manieyra de talhar aquela es que tu al comensament sancnes le malaute de la vena sephasica e extratz del sanc segon la mannieyra de la vertut de lu, e aprop fay aquel cezer entre las tuas mas e converteys l’aurelha a las partidas desus, e fen am petita fissura en la razit de la aurelha deves lo greys de lu en le loc be premegut de lu.	And the manner of cutting it is that you at first cause bleeding in the patient from the vein of the head and extract the blood according to the nature of it, and then cause him to sneeze between your hands and turn his ear to the sides above it, and finish with a small slit at the root of the ear due to the place being pressed by you.
E sia la fissura de figura lunar entro que pervengua a la peyra, e, la peyra atrobada, osta aquela si podes am instrumentz apropriatz; e aprop cos la fissura en aquela hora am velocitat, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	And the slit be of a moon-like figure so that it may come to the stone, and if the stone is found, pull it out with appropriate instruments; and then close up the slit in that moment with swiftness, and cure it when healed.
E si la causa cazent en la aurelha es un dels gras que creysso e so inflatz, lahoras aministra la curacio e la extraccio de lu; mays si no obezeys a tu ad eyssiment, lahoras tu pren spatum teune subtil segon aquesta forma:	And if the cause that bites in the ear is one of the fats that grows and becomes inflated, then administer its cure and extract it; but if it does not obey your instruction, then you take fine spatular tweezers according to this form:
e aministra am aquel la abscizio de aquel gra lo qual es cazut en l’aurelha.	and with that administer the incision of that fat which is bitten in the ear.
E no fassas aquo quan cogitas que aquel ja es humectat per la vapor del aurelha, e pausa aquel en motas pessas, e prop extratz ne aquelas am les oncis o am gesti subtil, o ab inscizio ayssi co dit havem, quar es alleujada la extraccio de lu.	And do not do this when you think that it is already moistened by the vapor of the ear, and place it in many balls, and then extract those with tweezers or with a subtle hook, or with an incision as we have said before, for its extraction is facilitated.
Mays en l’aygua la qual es intrada en l’aurelha cove que·l malaute use de sternutacio am condizi al comensament, e omple la sieua aurelha am alcu coto vielh, e jagua sobre aquela aurelha en la qual es l’aygua, e si per aquo es foro-getada, bo es; e sino, lahoras pren tropas peyras teunas e leons segon la longitut del dit, e calfa aquelas en le foc un pauc, e le pacient entrometa una de aquelas en le trauc de la sua aurelha e saute sobre la un pe sieu de aquela partida e percussia am una autra peyra sobre la peyra la qual es dintz la aurelha.	But if water is entered into the ear so that the patient sneezes at the beginning, and fills his own ear with some old cotton wool, and spits on that ear in which there is the water, and if by this it is forced out, that is good; and if not, then take some fine pebbles and heat them in fire for a while, and let the patient insert one of those into the hole of his ear and press over it with his finger from that side, and press another pebble on the pebble which is in the ear.
Donc no cesse aquo am peyra entro que tota l’aygua sia foro-getada.	Therefore do not cease this with pebbles until all the water is forced out.
E ja l’aygua sira foro-getada enayssi que tu prenguas de papier o de gonc .i., e met la una extremetat de lu en l’aurelha e estendas l’autre extremitat am foc entro que sia comburit le may de lu.	And when the water is completely forced out, as if you took some paper or wax .j., and put one end of it into the ear and extend the other end with fire until its middle is burnt.
E prop met i autre gonc e fay aquo tantas veguadas entro que tota l’aygua sia foro-getada, e stratz aquel am canula ayssi co desus es dit de la peyra extrasadora.	And then put in another wax and do this as many times until all the water is forced out, and treat it with a tube as we have said before of the stone extractor.
Mays en la extraccio de bestia intrant en aquela aurelha, si es a petit cos, ayssi piussa e a lu semblant, cura aquel ayssi cum havem dit en la divisio; mays si es de gran cos la qual causa apar al sen del vezement, lahoras aministra la extraccio de lu am gesti e oncis, e la causa de lu es pus leugiera de totas las autras causas que cazo en l’aurelha.	But in the extraction of an animal intruding into that ear, if it is a small one, like a fly or to it similar, cure it as we have said in the division; but if it is of a great size causing pain throughout the head, then administer its extraction with tweezers and fine needles, and its cause is a long-distance from all other causes which bite in the ear.
Mays en la extraccio de verm engendrat en la aurelha, quan tu curas aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e en le tractat de distillacios e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu reguardes la aurelha al solelh.	But in the extraction of a worm engendered in the ear, when you cure it with what we have said in the division and in the tract on distillation, and do not bring your cure to completion, then cover that ear to the sun.
E donc si apar aqui alcuna causa dels verms, lahoras extratz aquel am gesti o am onci subtils, mays si no apar deguna causa, lahoras pren una canula dejos streyta e desus ampla de la qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And therefore if you see there any cause of the worms, then extract it with fine tweezers or needles; but if you see no cause, then take a tube below narrow and above wide, of which this is the form:
E entromet la extremitat subtil en la aurelha segon la quantitat la qual suffertar puesca le malaute; e aprop sucgeys am aquela per succio fort, e fay aquo motas veguadas, entro que totz les verms sian foro-gitatz.	And insert its slender end into the ear according to the amount which the patient can endure; and then suck it with a strong suction and do this many times, until all the worms are forced out.
Mays si no obezeysso a tu al ayssiment, lahoras tu opila e claus en le circuit de la canula am cera ayssi cum havem dit; lahoras aministre distillacios las quals han ja esproadas les antics en la curacio dels verms, e atrobaras aquo en le tractat de distillacios.	But if it does not obey your instruction, then cover and close up around the tube with wax as we have said; then administer distillation which the ancients have tried in the cure of worms, and discover it in the tract on distillation.
E sia la tua efusio am la qual efundas les olis medicinas en la aurelha am aquest strument del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And let your effusion be such that you pour the medical oils in the ear with this instrument of which this is its shape.
E fay aquela de argent o de eram, dejos streyt, en le qual sia un petit trauc, e am pla desus.	And make one of silver or gold, very narrow, in which there is a small hole, and flat on top.
E donc sia cum empellent a que es en la conquavitat de la canula de continent aqui on sira necessari.	And thus it should be so that it fits into the cavity of the canal from where it will be necessary to remove it.
E si vols, pren le ray e envolveys en la extremitat de lu decentment coto, e aprop gieta oli en la concavitat del auziment, o suc de alcuna herba, o aquo que vols de aquestas medicinas en la canula — e aquela es en la aurelha —, e aprop entromet le ray am coto desus e exprem am la tua ma aquel am compressio temprada de lu entro que l’oli sia expellit en la concavitat del auziment e le malaute senta le oli dedintz.	And if you want, take the rod and wrap the end of it decently with cotton, and then pour oil into the cavity of the ear, or juice of any herb, or anything else of these medicines in the canal — and that is in the ear —, and then insert the rod with the cotton on top and squeeze with your hand that which is pressed by it within so that the oil is expelled into the cavity of the ear and the patient feels the oil inside.
E aquo que sia enfundut en la aurelha sia ja scalfat am foc un petit.	And that which is poured into the ear should already be warmed by fire a little.
E guarda te que la causa la qual distillaras en l’aurelha no sia trop frega, quar las medicinas de aurelha no suffertan aquo.	And beware that the cause for which you will distill in the ear is not too hot, because medicines of the ear do not bear that.
Capitol .vii.	Chapter 7.
De curacio de opilacio de aurelhas.	Of treatment of swelling of the ears.
Alcunas veguadas alcus enfantz yeysso dels ventres de lors mayres no-perforatz, e aquo ja accideys en alcus homes, opilacio en le meat de la aurelha per plagua o per carn nada en aquela; e aquesta opilacio alcunas veguadas es fayta en le preon del trau de la aurelha la qual no consiec le vezement, e alcunas veguadas es en las partidas defora.	Some children are born from the bellies of their mothers not having broken through, and that happens to some men; swelling in the middle of the ear due to plague or due to a lump in there; and this swelling sometimes occurs in the membrane of the eardrum which does not achieve hearing, and sometimes it occurs in the outer parts.
E aquela que accideys en le preon de lu, la qual no comprehen le vezement, es en las majors disposicios de dificil sanacio.	And that which happens in the membrane of it, which does not achieve hearing, is in the most difficult dispositions for healing.
E en aquela en qual consegueys le vezement, cove que tu pauses la aurelha del malaute al solelh e reguarda en aquela.	And in that in which you achieve hearing, beware that you hold the ear of the patient towards the sun and look at it.
E donc si vezes oppulacio apparent, obre aquela am espatum subtil del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And thus if you see an apparent swelling, open that with subtle sponge of which this is the shape of it:
Si’ la extremitat de lu en la qual sia petita la latitut, del qual la una partida sia aguda e l’autra no; e le spatum sia de dos latz leon per so que no fassa lizio al aurelha.	If the end of it in which there is a small width, of which one part is acute and the other is not; and let the sponge be of two edges by itself so that it does not harm the ear.
E donc si la opilacio es per carn nascuda en la aurelha o en le meat de lu, lahoras te aquela am oncis subtils e incidiys aquela vehement facilitat entro que sia ostada tota la carn.	And if the swelling is due to a lump born in the ear or in the middle of it, then open that with thin needles and pierce that fiercely until all the flesh is removed.
E si opilacio es en le preon de la aurelha, lahoras pren ray subtil leon e escalfa aquel am foc un pauc, e aprop met aquel en le meat de l’aurelha.	And if the swelling is in the membrane of the ear, then take a thin rod and heat it a little with fire, and then insert that into the middle of the ear.
E donc si as scentit oppulacio am aquo que le malaute atroba am facilitat, per gravetat de ausir, esforsa la oppressio de lu am facilitat; e guarda te que no plagues les nervis del aurelha.	And thus if you feel swelling with that which the patient feels with ease due to difficulty of hearing, relieve the oppression of it with ease; and beware that you do not plague the nerves of the ear.
E aprop pausa en l’aurelha drap de li segon la quantitat del ample del trauc lo qual tu as envolvutz en l’enguent egipciac; e fay aquo per alcus jorns entro que sias segur de la consolidacio de la plagua; o que prenguas qualgua e enfon aquela en ayguaros e pulveriza sobre lu segi trissat e usa de lu; e si vezes la aurelha ja esser apostemada, lahoras cove que tu estraguas la qualgua e permutes aquela am autra qualgua la qual tu envoloparas en cerot que sia fayt am oli rozat, entro que sia le apostema caut cedat; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And then pause in the ear cloth according to the amount of the width of the hole which you have wrapped in Egyptian ointment; and do that for some days until you are sure of the healing of the plague; or take some of it and soak that in water and sprinkle over it powdered red lead, and use of it; and if you see the ear already pustulated, then beware that you pull out whatever there is and replace that with something else which you wrap in cerot made from oil of roses, so that the pustule may be cauterized; and treat that until it is healed.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc, lahoras submergeys esponga o drap en aygua frega e pausa sobre la aurelha, e usa del autra curacio la qual restrengeys le flux del sanc, la qual es dita en le tractat de distillacio.	But if bleeding occurs, then soak sponge or cloth in warm water and place over the ear; and use the other treatment which constricts the flow of blood, which is written in the treatise on distillation.
Capitol .viii.	Chapter 8.
De cura de athezil le qual endeveno a las palpebras.	Of cure for ataxia which affects the eyelids.
Athezil les quals endeveno a las paupebras dels huels alcuna veguada so humitz, alscunas veguadas son secs.	Athezil which affects the eyelids of people some time they are humid, some time they are dry.
Donc cove que tu tenguas aquels am tenhalhas o am onci, e inscindas aquels am espatum de las suas razitz, e aprop pausa sobre les locs segi trissat.	And thus beware that you have those with tans or with ointment, and pierce them with thin needles of their roots; and then place over the places powdered red lead.
Mays si dolor am flux de sanc veno, lahoras tu cauteriza aquels am cauteri lanticular subtil.	But if pain comes with flow of blood, then cauterize those with a small pointed cautery.
E la milhor cauterizacio es aprop las inscizios e tropas veguadas retornam quan reman alcuna causa de sas razitz; e quan so cauterizadas am foc, aquelas razitz son comburidas e no retornan.	And the best cauterization is then the incisions and bumps return when some cause of them remains in their roots; and when they are cauterized by fire, those roots are burned and do not return.
Capitol .ix.	Chapter 9.
Cura de grandeyssa que veno a las palpebras dels huels.	Cure for granulation which comes to the eyelids of people.
Motas veguadas endeve en las palpebras dels huels alcuna causa la qual es asemblada a grandissa en sa fortalicia e duricia, e per so grandissia es apelada.	Many times it happens in the eyelids of people some cause which is likened to granulation in its strength and hardness; and thus granulation is called.
E es agreguacio de humiditat grossa en la palpebra dejos e desus.	And it is accumulation of dense moisture in the eyelid above and below.
Donc la opperacio en lor es que consideras lahoras si la grandissia es procedent en lu en aquo que apar de la palpebra e es mauguda a tota partida; e la causa de lu es leugiera.	And the operation in them is that you consider then if the granulation is proceeding in it in that which appears on the edge of the eyelid and is bitten at every part; and the cause of it is blepharitis.
Donc fen sobre aquela am fissura per la latitut, e aprop escorga aquela de tota partida am facilitat entro que evasesca, e aprop suspen aquela am onci e abscindeys aquela.	And thus pierce over that with a slit in width, and then scrape that at every part with ease so that it may drain, and then suspend that with needle and pierce that.
Mays si a tu no es apparelhada la incizio de lu si no pus que penetras la palpebra am inscizio pauc a pauc, lahoras aquo no notz en deguna causa.	But if you are not equipped for the piercing of it if there is not pus that penetrates the eyelid with piercing little by little, then that does not help in any cause.
E si la figura es gran, lahoras tu l’ajusta am sutura; e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	And if the wound is large, then you adjust it with suture; and treat that until it is healed.
E si es pauca, a tu no sobrevindra mal per aquela quar l’anguent de lu restaura aquela e encarna.	And if it is small, you will not be harmed by that because the oil of it restores that and incorporates.
E si la grandissia es declinant a las partidas dedintz de la palpebra deves la superficia dedintz, lahoras evesa la palpebra e suspen la grandissia am onci, otra que tu indigescas de incizio, e prem aquela de tota part, e si la palpebra per inscizio es alonguada, aquo no notz en deguna causa.	And if the granulation is declining at the edges of the eyelid from within the surface therein, then open the eyelid and suspend the granulation with needle, another that you pierce for incision, and press that at every part; and if the eyelid by piercing is elongated, that does not matter in any cause.
E aprop la incizio, lava le huel am aygua salada; e cura le loc am aquo que encarna entro que sia sanat.	And then the incision, wash the eye with salty water; and treat the place with what incorporates until it is healed.
Capitol .x.	Chapter 10.
De la cura axcirnah en la palpebra desus del huel.	Of cure of axcirna in the eyelid above the eye.
Axcirnath es grays le qual es engendrat en las tunicas de la palpebra desus, e majorment endeve als enfantz, agrava les huels de aquels et accideyso a lor catartz le mayti; e no podon reguardar la claror del solelh per aquo quar lagremas se coytan ad aquels.	Axcirna is a disease which is engendered in the membranes of the eyelid above, and mostly happens to children, harms their eyes and causes to them catarrh; and they cannot regard the brightness of the sun because tears are closed to them.
E per so tu vezes aquels jaser sobre les lors caras tot temps, e sobre les lors caras dormen; e so a las palpebras de lor dejos les sobrecils humidas, las quals ja ha cuberta imflacio, e iminencia de accernac apparent es en l’uelh; e que quant tu premes le loc am les tieus ditz, tu centes accernac entro aquels.	And thus you see them always over their faces, and they sleep over their faces; and over their eyes below the eyebrows are moist, which have already covered inflammation, and appearance of swelling is in the eye; and when you press the place with your fingers, you feel the swelling therein.
E alcuna manieyra de opperacio es en aquel que le malaute pausa le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop pausa drap de li e de lu fay calgua, e fay de lu cercle segon la quantitat la qual contena arthernach de tota partida, e aprop pausa aquel sobre aquela e prem am les tieus ditz de tota per que sia agreguat arcernac en le mieg del cercle, e aprop fen en le mieg de aquela humiditat am spatum inscident am fissura per la latitut, e la fissura no sia major que la fissura que es fayta en flaubotomia.	And some way of operation is in that which the patient holds his head to you, and then pause cloth over it and make of it cold, and do a circle according to the amount which contains arthernach at every part, and then pause that over it and press with your fingers so that there is accumulated swelling therein; and then open in the middle of that moisture with sponge piercing with slit in width, and let the slit not be greater than the slit which is done in flaubotomia.
Mays en le preon cove que tu fendas la codena tota entro que pervenguas ad arcernach, quar en las mays desposicios proceseys arcernach per fissura segon la forma de grayseza blanca.	But in the membrane beware that you split the whole so that you reach to axcirna, because in the most disposed processes axcirna is reached by slit according to the shape of white gray matter.
Donc extratz aquela am draps los quals tu as envolopatz entre les tieus ditz a las partidas deforo e revolv entre la ma dextra e sinistre entro que sia dispargut.	And then pull out that with forceps which you have wrapped between your fingers at the edges abroad and revolve between the right and left hand so that it is loosened.
E guarda te que no ajustes en la fissura per so que am le spatum no pervenguas al huel e ladescas aquel.	And beware that you do not press in the slit so that with the sponge you do not reach to the eye and loosen that.
Mays si no apar a tu arternach en le comensament de la fissura, mays que tu ajustes en la fissura un petit am fecilitat entro que procesisca arternach; e aprop extratz aquela ayssi quo havem dit; e aprop submargeys draps de li en aygua e vi agre e pausa les sobre le loc e estrenh aquels am polvils.	But if you do not see the pulse at the beginning of the fissure, but you place a small one in the fissure to facilitate the pulse; and then extract that as we have said; and then moisten some cloths with hot water and wine and lay them over the area, and sprinkle those with powders.
E so alcus que trissan sal e pausan aquel en la conquavitat de la fissura per so que aquo que es remas de aquela humiditat.	And then others who grind salt and place it in the cavity of the fissure so that what is left behind from that moisture.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And then treat that until it is healed.
Mays si accideys en le loc apostema caut, lahoras cura aquel am emplastres cedatils entro que sia sanat.	But if an ulcer occurs at the site of the fissure, then treat that with gentle ointments until it is healed.
Capitol .xi.	Chapter 11.
De manieyras de tactimi del huel.	Of ways to touch the pulse.
Quan en las palpebras dels huels so natz pels ajustatz dejos les pels naturals e so antiquatz, lahoras aquels noso al huel e fan endevenir manieras de malautias ayssi cum lacrimas assiduas e mollificacio de palpebras e tela entro que aquo sia causa de destruccio del huel que s’apela tactinir del huel, e cura se en quatre manieyras: o per cauteri am foc; o am medicina acuta segon que denant es dit en le capitol de cauteri; o es fayt atactini per inscizio e sutura; o per cannas segon que yeu diyre.	When on the eyelids of the eyes, humors are produced by the natural adjustment and become old, then those affect our vision and cause diseases such as constant tears and softness of the eyelids and membrane, which is called destruction of the eye, and it can be treated in four ways: either by cauterization with fire; or with an acute medicine as mentioned earlier in the chapter on cauterization; or tactinir of the eye is caused by incision and suturing; or with cannae, as I will say.
E donc cove que tu pauses le cap del malaute en le tieu se; aprop converteys la palpebra del uelh am la tua ma sinistra, e si es convertida, bo es; e sino, entromet agulha en aquela en la qual sia fiel de la partida pus dejos de la palpebra, e fay penetrar la agulha am fiel desus, e aquo sia — prop del marge de la palpebra en le qual naysso les pels — prop dels pels, e tira le fiel a las partidas desus am la palpebra, e converteys aquela am le ray.	And so, whoever you are, place the head of the patient towards you; then lift the eyelid of the eye with your left hand, and if it is lifted, that's good; but if not, insert a needle into where there is pus just below the eyelid, and let the needle penetrate up above, near the margin of the eyelid, among the hairs, and draw out the pus towards the upper eyelid, and then lift that with your finger.
E aprop fen en la partida dedintz de la palpebra dejos les pels ajustatz am spatum inscidentz del lacrimal major entro al lacrimal mendre; e aprop extratz le fiel e pausa dejos la palpebra polvilhs petitz de coto o de drap, e aprop senha sobre la palpebra am tenta, e sia ayssi cum figura de fuelha de mirt.	And then probe inside the eyelid, below the hairs that are adjusted by the spatum, at the point where the larger tear duct joins the smaller one; and then extract the pus, and place small balls of lint or cloth beneath the eyelid, and then press on the eyelid with a tent, leaving a mark in the shape of a leaf of myrtle.
Mays empero cove que sia la figura segon la quantitat de helevacio de la palpebra, quar aquo ja es diversificat en les homes, quar de aquels es le quals indigeys que sia inscidit de la palpebra gran quantitat segon la quantitat per la qual la palpebra es mollificada.	But indeed, whoever it is, the mark should be made according to the amount of swelling of the eyelid, for this varies among people, and from those who need that a great quantity be removed from the eyelid, according to the amount by which the eyelid is softened.
E aprop fen am le spatum sobre las doas linhas las quals has senhadas, e comensa del lacrimal major entro al lacrimal menor.	And then probe with the spatum along the two lines that you have marked, and begin from the larger tear duct into the smaller one.
E si’ la tua fissura prop dels pels naturals ayssi cum es la grossetut del rey.	And if your fissure is near the natural hairs, as in the thickness of a king.
E aprop met le onci en un dels dos angles de la codena, e aprop excoria aquela tota, e aprop ajusta am la scitura las doas labias am gula o fiel de lana subtil, e abstergeys le sanc, e fay adherir aquo que superflueys dels fiels sobre dos sobrecils am alcunas causas enviscans, si voles far aquo, e sino, non cures.	And then place the needle in one of the two angles of the corner, and then scrape away all of that, and then adjust with the incision the two lips with gum or fine wool, and stop the bleeding, and allow what is superfluous of the humors on both eyelids to flow away with some causes, if you want to do so, but if not, don't.
E aprop leyssa la sutura dels fiels entro a tres dias o quatre, e aprop cura aquo.	And then let the incision of the humors heal within three or four days, and then treat that.
E si vols, layssa la plagua ses sutura, e cura aquela am aquo que exsicca e constrenh, quar la palpebra es alevada deves la sigillacio de la plagua e la agreguacio de lu; mays sutura es milor E donc aysso diysso les antics de taxanir.	And if you want, remove the plaster after suturing, and treat that with something that dries and constricts, for the eyelid is lifted because of the sealing of the plaster and the accumulation on it; but suturing is better. And so, thus do they say about those who taxanir.
Mays empero en lu sia sollicitut sobre le malaute, e es de bona operacio, e no es en lu temor.	But indeed, there should be no solicitude over the patient, and it is a good operation, and there is no fear in it.
E es autra manieyra en taxmir, e es que senhes sobre la palpebra figura ayssi cum fuelha de mirt, e aprop eleva la palpebra am tres uncis segreguatz e congreguatz segon aquesta forma:	And there is another way in taxmir, and it is that you mark on the eyelid a figure like a leaf of myrtle, and then lift the eyelid with three nails separated and gathered together according to this form.
Mays si no es possible aquo, tener les uncis, e aquo no es engualhat, lahoras pren una agula en la qual haia fil e met aquela en le mieg de la figura, e entromet le autre fiel prop le lacrimal major, e·l fiel segon prop le lacrimal mendre, e ajusta entre les tieus ditz les fiels am equalitat, e aprop am aquels eleva la tua ma am elevacio engual, eleva tota la codena sobre la qual es senhat ayssi cum havem recomtat.	But if that is not possible, and the nails are not available, and it is not swollen, then take a needle with thread in it and place that in the middle of the figure, and insert the other end near the larger tear duct, and the end according to the smaller one, and adjust between your fingers the humors with equality, and then with those raise your hand with equal elevation, raise all the corner over which you have marked thus as we have recommended.
E aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And then adjust the two lips of the plaster with suturing, and treat that until it is healed.
Mays si accideys apostema deves la tua inscizio o la tua fissura, seda aquel apostema am cerot e a lu semblantz, e am enguentz.	But if an ulcer occurs because of your incision or your fissure, treat that ulcer with cerate and to it similar, and with ointment.
E alcunas veguadas endeve a la palpebra que·ls sieus pels sian convertitz, adonc cove que tu uses en aquela de aquo que havem dit de inscizio; mays sutura en quascus es mays artificial.	And sometimes, when the hairs of the eyelid are turned inwards, then whoever you are, use in that what we have said about incision; but suturing in either is more artificial.
Ataxinir am cannas es segon aquesta forma:	Taxanir with cannae is done thus:
e es que tu convertas la palpebra e scindas la figura qu’es dedintz segon que he recontat; e aprop per art fay doas cannas o doas astelas subtils de las quals longitut sia segon la longitut de la palpebra e la latitut de lor sia mendra de la latitut del spatum.	And it is that you lift the eyelid and split the figure which is within, according to what has been recounted; and then with skill make two cannae or two astelae of which their length is according to the length of the eyelid, and their breadth is less than the breadth of the spatum.
E tu ja has inscidit en las extremitatz de quascunas partidas, la on tenes les fils.	And you have already made incisions in the extremities of some parts, where you hold the threads.
Aprop agregua quascuna am subtilitat subre aquo que superflueys de la palpebra del huel, e constres las cannas de quascunas partidas am fort strictura, e layssa aquela per alcus jorns, quar la codena per la strictura morira e sira denegada e se poyrira entro que per si meteyssa cayra.	Then collect each one with subtlety over what is superfluous of the eyelid of the eye, and tighten the cannae in some parts with strong constriction, and let that be for several days, for the corner will die and become black and rot off as it is pressed down by itself.
Mays si es tardat, lahoras trenca la am las toroyras, e aprop cura la plagua entro que sia sanat.	But if it is delayed, then break that with the tongs, and then treat the plaster until it is healed.
Donc cum es solidada, la palpebra es elevada e les pels no pungo.	And so when that is solidified, the eyelid is lifted up and the hairs don't sting.
E aquesta es la forma de doas cannas las quals faras segon aquesta forma:	And this is the form of two cannae which you will make thus:
e haia la quantitat de la longitut e de la latitut ni mays ni mens.	and the amount of length and breadth, neither more nor less.
Capitol .xii.	Chapter 12.
De elevacio de pels pungentz en le huel am agula quan le pel es dur.	Of lifting hairs that sting in the eye with a needle when the hair is hard.
Quan son pels no-naturals, durs e aspres e pungentz les huels, lahoras la operacio en lu es que tu prenguas agula subtil e pauses en aquela fiel de ceda subtil e leon, e aprop que tu ajustes las extremitatz de lu e nozes quascu en manieyra mot subtil.	When the hairs are not natural, hard and rough, and sting the eyes, then the operation in them is that you take a fine needle and place it in the hair of cedrum and lion's wool, and then adjust the extremities of it with great subtlety and carefulness.
E sia la longitut dels fiels de quantitat de una palma.	And let the length of the hairs be the quantity of a palm.
E aprop tu compon2 autre fiel subtil dejos lu en breu, e nuza las extremitatz de aquel si tu·t vols.	And then you place another fine hair beneath it briefly, and tie the ends of that if you want to.
E aprop pause le malaute le sieu cap en le tieu se, e sia prop del solelh per que la tua obra sia declarada, quar es operacio subtil e menuda.	And then let the patient hold his head towards you, and be near the sun so that your work is seen clearly, for it is a subtle and minute operation.
E aprop intromet la agulha en la razit del pel ajustat la qual ha necessitat de engen, e fay aquela penetrar en la palpebra festinantment entro que extraguas aquela desus le pel natural.	And then insert the needle at the root of the hair which needs skill, and let that penetrate the eyelid quickly while you extract it above with the natural hair.
E aprop tire le pel entro desus e intromet aquel en alixati, e sian les pels un o dos o tres e no mays.	And then pull on the hair beneath while inserting that into the eye, and let the hairs be one or two or three and not more.
E aprop tira la tua ma am aquel entro que·l pel sia fora-gitat am alixolati en la palpebra am le pel natural.	And then pull your hand on that so that the hair is drawn out, while the hair is drawn into the eye with the natural hair.
Mays si es atirat alixalati e non es gitat le pel, atiraras alixati a las partidas dejos am le fiel le qual tu has compost am aquela, entro qu’en sia gitat alixalati del trau sobira.	But if it is drawn into the eye and not drawn out, draw alixati to the sides with the thread which you have composed on that, so that in being drawn out alixalati of the tract above.
E vegas aquela am la visio del huel, quar lahoras tu gitaras alixati e lo fiel, e grotan quascu e clautz le huel, e laysse le claus per dos dias o tres, entro que·l pel adheresca al sieu loc e nasque sobre aquel bona carn.	And then you wet that with the vision of the eye, for then you will draw out alixati and the thread, and rub each other and close the eye for two or three days, so that the hair sticks to its place and grows on that well.
E si es mays breu le pel, lahoras tu ajusta un pel lonc dels pels naturals, e es elevat am aquel, o que·l leysses entro que sia alonguat aprop alcu spazi, e lehoras tu eleva aquel.	And if the hair is shorter, then you adjust one long hair of the natural hairs, and let that be lifted by it, or let the needle be inserted so that it lies along while you lift that.
Capitol .xiii.	Chapter XIII.
De la cura de ehacratir la qual ve en la palpebra desus.	Of the treatment of a hunchback which appears above the eyelid.
Quan ve en le huel ehacratir, e es contraccio de la palpebra quan es contrayta en sus, o a dextra o a sinistra partida, per mala consolidacio de plagua o de seccio o de cauteri, e es apelada leporina, e aquesta ahercrati o es natural o accidental, e es fayta per consolidacio de plagua o de seccios o de cauteri, o per semblantz a lor malcuratz.	When there is a hunchback in the eyelid and it is a contraction of the eyelid, whether on the right or left side, caused by poor healing of an ulcer or wound, or from cauterization, and this hunchback may be natural or accidental, caused by poor healing of an ulcer or wound, or cauterization, or something similar that was badly treated.
May la manieyra de la operacio en lu es que tu fendas aquela consolidacio e que separes las labias de lu, e pauses en lu en aquo que es entre aquelas una meca de drap de li, e ligues aquelas entro que sian sanadas.	The manner of the operation is that you should split that fusion and separate the eyelids, and place in between them a piece of linen, and bind them together until they heal.
E no cove que tu uses de curacio de lu de las causas las quals exsiccan, constrenho; quar si tu fas aquo retorna alixacratir pus mal que nulh temps no foc habantz.	And it is important that you do not use any treatments that dry out the eyelids, as constriction; for if you do this, the hunchback will return worse than before.
Usa en aquela de causas que mollifico ayssi cum es fenugrec, e embroca am la aygua en la qual son coytz altea e semensa de li, o enguent dyaquilon, le qual sia liquefayt am alcu dels olis, e submergeys en aquel la meca, e cura am aquel.	Use for this cause which softens like fenugreek, and soak in the water in which are soaked fennel seeds and aniseed, or guaiac wood, which should be liquefied with one of the oils, and immerse in that the piece of linen, and treat it with that.
E lo tesaur de la tua curacio es que tu perforsses am tot engen que no sia consolidat segon la forma que foc al comensament.	And the treasure of your treatment is that you perforate it with anything that is not consolidated according to the shape it had at the beginning.
E aquesta operacio la qual havem dita, no es sino alcuna rectificacio de ehalixacrati que no retorna la forma del loc segon que foc denant.	And this operation which we have described is nothing but a correction of the hunchback that does not return the shape of the place according to what it was before.
Capitol .xiiii.	Chapter XIV.
De la cura de ehacrati le qual es fayt en la palpebra dejos.	Of the treatment of a hunchback which is done below the eyelid.
Aquesta alxacrati la qual es fayta en la palpebra dejos, la qual es nompnada vertadierament alxacrati; e es de lu alcuna natural, autra accidental.	This hunchback which is done below the eyelid, which is properly called a hunchback; and it may be natural or accidental.
Mays accidental es fayta per plagua o per scissura o per cauteri o per autres semblantz.	But accidental is caused by ulcer or wound or cauterization or other similar things.
E la via de la operacio de lu es que tu prenguas una agula en la qual haga fil doble, e fiques aquela en la carn, e que la fassas passar del lacrimal de senestre entro al lacrimal dextre, entro que·l fil pervengua en las doas extremitatz de la carn.	And the way to operate on it is to take a needle with a double thread, and pierce the flesh, and make it pass from the left tear duct into the right one, so that the thread comes out at both ends of the flesh.
E aprop exten la carn a las partidas desus am la agula e cus aquela am la agula, e inscideys am spatum ample.	Then stretch the flesh upwards with the needle and sew it with the needle, and insert it widely.
E donc si retorne la figura de la palpebre segon que cove, bo es; e sino, pren le ray e pausa aquel en la figura fenduda, e am aquel converteys la palpebra, e fen las doas fissuras en le latz de la palpebra dejos.	And if it returns the shape of the eyelid as it should be, that is good; and if not, take the thread and place it in the split figure, and with that convert the eyelid, and split the two wounds on both sides of the lower eyelid.
E sian las extremitatz de las doas fissuras de dos angles de la inscizio, la qual has fayta entro que concurren, e sia de lor fayt angle entro que quan se congreguan sia fayta figura de lor.	And the ends of the two wounds are two angles of the incision, which you have made so that they meet, and an angle is made between them when they come together; a figure is made between them.
E aquesta figura es letra greca: la landa.	And this figure is the Greek letter: lambda.
E aprop osta la carn aquela per la quantitat que es le latz de lu agut dejos de lu, aquo que siec la palpebra.	Then push that flesh upwards by the amount that it was cut below, so that it covers the eyelid.
E aprop ajusta las partz seperadas e cos aquelas am le fil de lana; e aprop cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit de las medicinas mollificativas e de las calguas entro que sia sanat.	And then join the separated parts and sew them with the woolen thread; and then treat them with what we have said about the softening medicines and the poultices until it is healed.
E si alxacrati endeve per fissura o sutura o cauteri, lahoras cove que tu fendas am fissura plana sobre les pels de la palpebra segon que es precedit.	And if the hunchback is caused by an ulcer or wound or cauterization, then it is necessary that you split with a flat incision on the skin of the eyelid as has been described before.
E aprop separa am la calgua entre doas labias segon que havem dit.	And then separate with the poultice between two eyelids as we have said before.
En la suma del sermo de la cura de alxacrati quan es desus o dejos, que corra en lu operacio, segon que es preparat de la forma de alxacrati, e aquela es en forma de motas diversitatz.	In the sum of the words of the treatment of hunchback when it is above or below, the operation runs according to the preparation of the shape of hunchback, and that is in the form of different shapes.
E le artifexs savi totz temps prepara engen en quascuna manieyra la qual es possibla a lu entro que fassa retornar la figura a la forma natural, o prop de aquela, e aquel malaute segon que a lu conveneys de la operacio e dels strumentz en las majors disposicios.	And the wise artisans always prepare everything in every way that is possible for them so that they can return the figure to its natural shape, or close to it, and the patient according to what suits him from the operation and the instruments in the best dispositions.
Capitol .xv.	Chapter XV.
De la adherencia de la palpebra am la conjunctiva o am la cornea.	Of the adhesion of the eyelid to the conjunctiva or to the cornea.
Quan accideys aquesta consolidacio a motz homes enayssi que sia solidada la palpebra pus desus am le album del huel, e sia prohibida de la facilitat del movement e de las suas obras naturals, donc cove que tu entrometas la extramitat del ray dejos la palpebra, e eleva en sus aquela, o exten aquela am le unci.	When this consolidation happens to many people so that the eyelid is more solid above the white of the eye, and it is prohibited from the facility of movement and its natural actions, then you must insert the end of the thread below the eyelid and lift it upwards, or extend it with the finger.
E aprop tu inscideys la adherencia am spatum subtil, le qual no sia am acuitat de las inscisios, habantz obtus un petit per so que·l malaute no sia inquietat deves la operacio, e remau le spatum que no ledesca le huel am la sua acuitat.	And then you insert the adhesion with a subtle poultice, which is not sharp at the ends of the incisions, so that the patient is not bothered after the operation, and remove the poultice so that it does not irritate the eye with its acuteness.
E sia la tua inscizio quays excorjan aquela adherencia am facilitat entro que sia retornada la palpebra segon la sua forma natural e que sia sanada tota la adherencia.	And your incision should open that adhesion with ease so that the eyelid returns to its natural shape and all the adhesion is healed.
E aprop tu met en le huel aygua salada am la qual tu laves; o distilla en lu de zunia dissolvut en l’aygua.	And then put in the eye salted water with which you wash it, or distill in it vinegar dissolved in water.
E aprop separa entre la palpebra e l’huel am calgua de li, e pausa sobre le huel lana infuza en album de huou, e aprop le tertz jorn usa de causas consolidativas entro que sia sanat.	And then separate between the eyelid and the eye with poultice of linseed, and place over the eye wool infused in white of egg, and then the third day use causes of consolidation until it is healed.
Capitol .xvi.	Chapter XVI.
De inscizio de ungla e de eminencia de carn dels lacrimals.	Of incision of nail and of prominence of flesh of the tear ducts.
Sapias que ungla es segon dos manieyras, quar o es nervosa, e es semblant a ciphac dur subtil; o es no-nervosa, semblant a humiditat blanca congilada, la qual quan ferr la toca, o es forsat aquela prendre am onci, es abscindida e le onci no es ficat en lu.	Know that nail is according to two ways, because it is nervous, and is like a hard, thin ciphe; or it is non-nervous, like white humidity hardened, which when the iron touches it, or it is forced, it takes on an impression, is separated and the iron is not put in it.
E amdos las specias no comensan sino del lacrimal major entro que va petit a petit que cobre la vista e prohibeys le lum e·l movement de huel.	And both kinds do not begin except from the major tear duct as it goes little by little that covers the sight and prohibits light and the movement of the eye.
Mays la manieyra del obrar en la inscizio de lu es que·l malaute pause le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop obre les huels de lu, e eleva la palpebra am la tua ma, e aprop colligeys la ungla am onci de pauca duplicacio e exten aquela a las partidas desus.	But the way to operate in this incision is that the patient tilts his head back, and then open his eyes, and lift the eyelid with your hand, and then gather the nail with the tip of a little finger doubled and extend it upwards.
E aprop pren una agula e entromet en aquela un pel de cavalh o de buou o de vaqua, o de semblantz, o de fiel fort, o duplica la extremitat de la agulha petit a petit e fica aquela en le mieg de la ungla, e penetra aquela am la agulha, e lia am fiel la ungla; e exten aquela a las partidas desus, e excorja am le pel le latz de la ungla lo qual siec la pupilla.	And then take a needle and insert it into that a hair of horse or ox or cow or similar, or a strong vein, or double the tip of the needle little by little and put it in the web of the nail, and pierce it with the needle, and lift the nail; and extend it upwards, and separate at the ends the angle which covers the pupil.
E ayssi tu sieguas aquela am le pel entro al derier de lu.	And thus you follow that path through his back.
E aprop tu inscideys le romanent en la razitz del lacrimal am spatum subtil o am petitas forfexs, e leysa la carn del lacrimal natural per so que per inscizio de aquela no endevengua fluxs de lagremas continuabla.	And then you insert the rest of the stilet into the root of the tear duct with a slender instrument or small forceps, and cut through the meat of the tear duct so that through its incision it does not experience continuous flow of tears.
E alscunas vetz la ungla am le sol onci estenduda o am fiel, ayssi co havem dit, e aprop sia excurjat am spatum leon del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And sometimes the nail is driven into the sole with the finger stretched out or with the palm, as we have said; and then it is driven in with the lion stilet, of which this is its shape:
E guarda te que am le spatum no toques la tunica cornea e que avengua en lu ruptura, e que la pupilla sia perforada.	And be careful that with the stilet you do not touch the horny tunica and that there is no rupture in it, and that the pupil is perforated.
Aprop la inscizio geta en le huel un pauc de sal trissa o di cief fayt de siniar, e leyssa aquel entro al autre dia; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove entro que sia sanat.	Then on the incision pour a little powdered salt or vinegar made of wine, and let it remain there until the next day; then dress that with water so that it may heal.
E si la ungla no es nervoza e no podes metre la agulha, ni es ficada en aquela le onci, lahoras motas veguadas aquesta specia de ungla es curada am medicinas, e es sanada ayssi cum yeu e recomtat en la divisio.	And if the nail is not nervy and you cannot insert the awl into it, or it is not pierced by that which is stretched out, then this kind of nail is healed with remedies, and is healed in the same way as an eye is healed and restored to its division.
E si tu vols inscindir aquela, lahoras tu obre le huel del malaute e pren spatum subtil leon de freul acuitat segon aquesta forma:	And if you want to split it, then open the mouth of the patient and take slender stilet lion of tempered bronze sharpened according to this shape:
am subtilitat.	with subtlety.
E si vezes que aquela es rarificada e es confugida e empren en aquela razit, lahoras distilla de la tua ora en le huel de cief fayt de siniar o am cief rog o am sal trissat, e opila le huel entro a l’autre dia.	And if you see that it is rare and closed up and it sticks in that root, then distill from your mouth into the mouth made of wine vinegar or with vinegar made of wine, and let it remain there until the next day.
E aprop itera sobre aquela la operacio entro que sia remaugut tot aquo que es de lu, sino que·l contrari apostema caut sia en le huel, quar lahoras tu leyssa aquela, e cura al comensament la apostema entro que sia sanat.	Then repeat the operation on it until all that is of it is removed; but if you see an ulceration cautery in the mouth, then you cut that, and cure the ulcer at the beginning so that it may heal.
E aprop itera la tua operacio sobre aquela am razo entro que sia sanat.	And then repeat your operation on it with reason until it is healed.
La emenencia de la carn lacrimal, si notz en le huel per gran nocument, sia suspendut am onci; e inscideys aquela de aquela una partida, e no ultimes la inscizio per so que no inscidesqua fluxs de lagremas.	The membrane of the tear duct, if it is noticed in the mouth with great injury, should be suspended by stretching out; and insert that one part from that, and do not complete the incision so that you do not cause tears to flow.
E aprop distilla en le lacrimal cief rog e fayt de siniar entro que sia sanat.	And then distill into the tear duct vinegar made of wine and wine until it is healed.
Capitol .xvii.	Chapter .xvii.
De inscizio de alguazardenic e de aquo que es nascut de carn ajustada en le huel.	Of incision of the eye and of what is born from flesh pressed upon in the mouth.
Alcunas veguadas en les huels de alcus es nascuda carn roga, e es sobre-pausada entro que cobre la pupilla, o apropinqua o estrenh sobre las palpebras e fort leu comprem las palpebras a las partidas deforo e es assemblada a roza de balaustra.	Sometimes in the eyes of some men there is born red flesh, and it lies above that it covers the pupil, or near or stretched over the eyelids, and it strongly presses the eyelids to the edges outside and is assembled like ballaster wall.
Mays la operacio en lu es que·l malaute pausa le sieu cap en le tieu se; e aprop obre les huels de aquel e colligeys tota aquela carn am oncis convenientz ad aquo, e te aquo am una forcep o am cesti; e aprop inscindiys la carn el comensament entro que tot sia finit am le encisori, e guarda te del huel que no ledescas aquel deves la tua operacio.	The operation on him is that the patient should bend his head towards you; and then open the eyes of him and gather up all that flesh with convenient tweezers or forceps; then insert the flesh at the beginning so that all is finished by the incision, and be careful of the eye that you do not tear it away from your operation.
E sia la tua inscizio am la qual inscides aquelas o am espatum le qual nos havem recomtat en la inscizio de la ungla, o am petitas forfexs am las quals es colligit ascebel segon que vindra la forma de lu aprop aquest capitol.	And your incision is with which you insert that or with stilet which we have recommended in the incision of the nail, or with small forceps with which ashbell comes according to its shape, properly to this chapter.
Donc cum es complida la tua inscizio e es remauguda tota aquela carn, lahoras omple le huel de sal trissa, o destilla en lu polvera roga e semblantz a lu de las medicinas corrossivas, e pausa sobre le huel deforo coto am album de huou entro que sia asegurat de apostema caut.	Then when your incision is completed and all that flesh has been removed, then fill the eye with powdered salt, or distill into it red powder and similar to it of the corrosive remedies, and place over the eye outside a cloth with egg white until it is secured from ulceration cautery.
E si roman alcuna causa de alguardenici e es senhoragat sanc caut, e temes apostema caut, lahoras leyssa le huel e cura aquela apostema am aquo que ceda aquela apostema, e aprop itera sobre aquel am operacio entro que sia sanat, e semblantment fay en la carn ajustada la qual accideys en le huel de aquesta especia.	And if any cause of the eye and is caused blood cautery, and you fear ulceration cautery, then cut the eye and cure that ulcer with what causes that ulcer, and then repeat on it the operation until it is healed, and similarly do on the flesh pressed upon which happens in this kind of eye.
Mays empero tu cove que alienes tota curacio del huel freul per via natural o per via accidental, obran am ferr, e no metas la tua ma en alcuna de aquestas operacios entro que veges que aquel membre sia suffertant aquela operacio.	However you should not perform any cure of the eye by natural or accidental way, working with iron, and do not put your hand in any of these operations until you see that this member suffers that operation.
Capitol .xviii.	Chapter .xviii.
De colleccio de sabel en le huel.	Of collection of ashbell in the eye.
Sabel so venas rogas las quals son testudas sobre le huel e prohibeysso al vesement la sua operacio, e develican le huel am longitut de dias.	Ashbell are red veins which are tested over the eye and they prohibit the working of its operation, and they make the eye long for days.
Donc necessari es al comensament que tu consideres si le huel en le qual es sabel es fort e en lu no es autra malautia que sabel, lahoras tu colligeys aquel sabel.	Therefore it is necessary at the beginning that you consider if the eye in which ashbell is strong and there is not other disease but ashbell, then you gather up that ashbell.
E es que tu comandes al malaute que pause le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop suspen aquelas venas am un onci o am dos segon la tua prudencia; e sia aquel onci de subtil duplicacio segon aquesta forma:	And it is that you command the patient to bend his head towards you, and then suspend those veins with one finger or two according to your prudence; and that finger be of slender doubling according to this shape:
o so dos oncis gradantment en un cos segon aquesta forma:	or two fingers gradation in one body according to this shape:
E aprop sian colligidas aquelas venas am forses subtils, am subtilitat, e abstergeys le sanc hora aprop hora, entro que vegas aquelas venas esser remaugudas del huel e sian revolgudas.	And then those veins are gathered up with slender forceps, with subtlety, and you blot the blood now and then, until you see those veins sucked back into the eye and are drawn back.
E guarda te que tu no ledes le huel am las extremitatz del spatum; e si’ la tua operacio en le miegjorn denant le solelh, e sias mot ferm en la tua operacio que no inscidas sino aquelas venas.	And be careful that you do not tear the eye with the ends of the stilet; and if your operation is in the evening in front of the sun, then you remain firm in your operation that you do not insert except those veins.
E quan tu auras complitz, lahoras tu distilla en le huel cief vert o rog per que am sa acuitat corrodesca aquo que es remaugut del sabel.	And when you have completed it, then you distill into the eye vinegar made of wine or red wine because with its acuteness it corrodes what is sucked back from ashbell.
Mays si aquo no es a tu possible colligeys tot en aquela hora, e lahoras tu emplastra tot am aquo que cede la dolor de lu, e leyssa lu per alcus dias entro que sia sedada la dolor de lu e que sia asegurat de apostema caut.	But if it is not possible for you to gather up all in that hour, then you apply plaster on all so that it yields the pain of him, and let him for some days until the pain of him is calmed down and he is secured from ulceration cautery.
E aprop itera sobre lu segon que la mateyssa manieyra entro que sia sanat.	Then repeat on him according to how the previous manner until it is healed.
E aquesta es la forma de las forfexs:	And this is the form of the forceps:
Capitol .xix.	Chapter .xix.
De reduccio de arizati al nas.	Of reduction of hernia to the nose.
Quan tu curas arisati am cauteri o am medicina aguda comburent segon que es precedida la narracio de lu e no es sanat, lahoras no es engen en lu sino que fendas sobre le apostema deves la maturitat de lu, e que extraguas tota la humiditat la qual es en lu e·l poyre entro que sia descubert le os.	When you cure hernia with cautery or with sharp medicine as it is preceded the narration of it and it is not healed, then do not burn in it but split over the ulcer after the maturity of it, and draw out all the moisture which is in it and the pus until the bone is uncovered.
E donc cum es descubert le os e vezes en lu corrupcio o negror, lahoras tu ratz lu am un sturment del qual aquesta es la forma:	And then when the bone is uncovered and you see in it corruption or blackness, then scrape it with an instrument of which this is the form:
E es nompnat de aspre cap, e sia feyt de fer indi, e sia le cap redon ayssi cum asir le qual sia fayt punctat per punctacio de lima o aliskalfati per punctacio subtil (ayssi cum es en la forma seguent).	And it is named from rough head, and it is made of iron, and its head is rounded thus with a file or rasped by filing subtle piercing (thus as in the following form).
E pausa aquel sobre le loc corrumput del os, e aprop revolveys aquel entre les tieus ditz, e prem la tua ma petit a petit entro que sapias que aquela corropcio es rasa.	And place that over the corroded place of the bone, and then revolve it between your fingers, and press your hand little by little until you know that corrosion is scraped.
E aquo sia fayt alcunas veguadas, e aprop restaura le loc am causas exsiccativas e stipticas.	And let it be done several times, then restore the place with astringent and styptic causes.
Donc si·l loc es consolidat e es en lu nascuda bona carn e es abscindit le cors de la sania e roman per xl dias, e no es renovat e no es apostemat e no accideys en lu accident, lahoras tu sapias que es sanat.	Then if the place is consolidated and there is born good flesh in it and there is removed the body of the ulcer and it remains for over a month, and it is not renewed and there does not happen an accident and does not occur in it an ulceration, then you know that it is healed.
E sino, lahoras no es en lu engen sino reduzir la fissura a la forma del nas, e segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu descuebras de segon os am ferr o am medicina acuta, e cum sira descubert le os, lahoras tu pren tribo segon aquesta forma:	And if not, then do not be in it except to reduce the fissure to the form of the nose, and according to this manner: and it is that you uncover according to bone with iron or with sharp medicine, and when the bone is uncovered, then take gangrene according to this form:
Sia la extramitat de lu ferr triangulada, e·l fust de lu sia prim extenuat entro a la extremitat ayssi cum vezes assi.	Let its end be triangular with iron, and its shaft be bent at the end thus with a file as it turns so.
E aprop pausa aquel sobre le os, e sia aquel prop del lacrimal; e alongua la tua ma un pauc del huel, e aprop revol la tua ma am le tribo entro que penetre tot le os, e aquel sente le malaute per asso que atroba vent yssir per so quan te la sua ma.	And then place that over the bone, and let it be near the tear; and lengthen your hand a little from the hole, and then rotate your hand with the salve inside, allowing it to penetrate all the bones, and the patient will feel the warmth as the wind exits through the opening when you cover it with your hand.
Donc lahoras restaura le loc am medicinas stipticas exsiccantz ayssi cum t’e eyssenhat.	And then restore the area with astringent medicines that dry up just as much as it has been wet.
Donc cum nays la carn e·l loc es endurazit, lahoras la materia la qual effundia a las partidas deforo retorna al nas, donc aquo es pus leugier sobre le malaute.	And then when the meat and the place have been toughened, the matter that was effused in the parts abroad returns to the nose; therefore it is easier for gout to affect the patient.
Capitol .xx.	Chapter 20.
De reduccio de la eminencia del huel.	On the reduction of the swelling on the leg.
Quan le huel emineys am la sua totalitat e no accideys en le vezement nocument ni diminuacio, lahoras cove que laxas le malaute, e aprop que·l segues, e aprop que pausas ventozas en le cervitz ses scarificacio e succa per bona succaccio; e aprop pausa sobre le huel liniment le qual sia fayt de acatra e aloe e enses e sarcocolla, e aprop strenh le emplaustre sobre le huel am motz polvils.	When the leg swells throughout its entirety and there is no harm or decrease in the swelling, then you should let loose the patient, and then follow up by placing wind-letting poultices on the nape of his neck after having made a light scarification and sucked out through good suckling; and then place over the swelling a liniment which is made of pitch, aloe, onions, and mastic, and then tightly bind the bandage over the swelling with powdered herbs.
E la manieyra dels polvils es que prenguas draps de li leons motz, e quascun drap sia duplicat en quatre plecs; e fay de aquels motz.	And the way of the powders is that you take cotton cloths with many folds, and each cloth is folded in four pieces; and you make those into powder.
E aprop pausa aquels la un sobre le autre segon la quantitat de la qual ha le huel necessitat.	And then place those one over the other according to the quantity of which the leg has need.
E aprop strenh sobre aquels am drap dur am fort strictura; e itera las ventosas am succio ses scarificacio; e aprop osta las ventosas e leyssa le huel streyt le dia e la nueyt.	And then tightly bind over that with a hard cloth with strong compression; and repeat the poultices with suckling without scarification; and then take off the poultices and let the leg be tight during the day and the night.
Mays si entretant le liguament es mollificat, lahoras cove que sia mot streyt.	But if in the meantime the ligament softens, then you should loosen it a little.
E aprop osta le liament aprop le dia e la nueyt ayssi cum havem dit.	And then stop using the poultices during the day and night just as we have said.
E si vezes le huel ja esser redusit, bo es, e sino, lahoras itera le emplastre am les polvils e la strictura e las ventosas entro que sia sanat.	And if you see that the leg has been reduced, then it is good; and if not, then repeat the poultice with the powders and compression and the wind-letting poultices until it is healed.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter 21.
De la inscizio de la eminencia de la tunica uvea.	On the start of the swelling of the tunica vaemosa.
Quan endeve disrupcio en la tunica uvea, e aprop es eminent e procezeys fora las palpebras ayssi cum un gra de rasim, e es orrazada la forma de home per aquo, e vols aquo inscidir, lahoras la operacio en lu es ayssi cum havem recomtat, que tu entrometas la agula en la razitz de la uvea de la partida dejos en la partida desus, e aprop met la agula autra en la qual sia fil doble de la part del lacrimal, e fay aquela penetrar e leyssa la primieyra agula segon la sua disposicio; e aprop inscideys le loc del fiel doble e leva am aquel la partida de la uvea en le circuit de la agula, e strenh aquela mot.	When there is a rupture in the tunica vaemosa, and it is prominent and protrudes out of the eyelids like a grain of pepper, and it is shaped like a man by that, and you want to insert it, then the operation on him is just as we have recommended: you should insert the needle at the root of the veina in the part below in the part above, and then put another needle in which there is a double thread at the lacrimal part, and let that penetrate and let the first needle follow its disposition; and then insert the spot of the double vein and lift with that the part of the tunica vaemosa in the circuit of the needle, and tightly bind that place.
E aprop extratz la agula e pausa sobre le huel lana infusa en album de huou e leyssa entro que cayha le fil am la uva.	And then take out the needle and place over the swelling wool infused in egg white and let it sit so that the thread falls down with the tunica vaemosa.
E aprop cura le huel am aquo que conforte aquel entro que la plagua sia sanada.	And then cure the leg with that which comforts it until the wound is healed.
E alcunas veguadas aduna de tota partida am cercle de drap entro le huel ajuste eminencia gran, e aprop sia perforat am le spatum subtil que vengua al preon del huel, e corra la humiditat albuginea, e descen le huel e intra tantost.	And sometimes gather from all parts with a circle of cloth over the leg at the site of the great swelling, and let it be pierced by the subtle spatulum that comes to the front of the leg, and let the white moisture run down, and the leg descend and enter as soon as possible.
E aprop strenh entro que sia sanat.	And then tightly bind until it is healed.
Capitol .xxii.	Chapter 22.
De curacio de alconati.	On the cure of a hernia.
Aquesta malautia que es apelada alconati no es sino sania la qual es ajustada en le huel semblant a aygua dessendent e no es aquela.	This disease which is called a hernia is nothing but a ulcer which is settled in the leg resembling water descending and it is not that.
Mays la manieyra del obrar en ela es que fasses le malaute sezer sobre la sela aparelada e dreyta, e aprop pren le cap sieu en las tuas mas de doas partz e mau aquel entro que veias la sania pervenir a las partidas dejos, e aprop sia siccada e no descenda, e sia ostat le lum, e·l malaute veia las causas ayssi cum vezia.	But the way to act on it is that you make the patient sit up straight on a prepared and level chair, and then take hold of his head with both hands and hold him so that you see the ulcer coming from the parts below, and then let it be dried up and not descend, and be stopped up, and the patient sees the causes just as he saw them.
E si no descendra en jos, sapias que es aygua.	And if it does not descend, you should know that it is water.
Mays si no es preparat le descendement a la sania am aquo que havem dit, lahoras fay le malaute sezer entre las tuas mas e aprop pren spatum subtil e fen am aquel sobre le pannicol cernent un petit deves la continuacio de la conjunctiva am la tunica cornea en la corona (entro al loc vuet), entro que sia fora-getada la sania.	But if the descent of the ulcer is not prepared with what we have said, then make the patient sit up between your hands and then take a subtle spatula and apply it on him over the membrane stretching a little from the continuance of the conjunctiva with the tunica cornea in the crown (at the sight of the eye), until the ulcer is pushed out.
Donc cum es fora-getada, lahoras tu distilla en le huel aygua cauda en la qual has mesclat mel o aygua en la qual ja has bulit fenugrec e mel.	And then when it is pushed out, you then distil water tailing into the leg in which you have mixed honey or water in which you have boiled fenugreek and honey.
E aprop sia curat am las autras causas entro que sia sanat.	And then let it be cured with the other causes until it is healed.
Capitol .xxii.	Chapter 23.
De la curacio de la aygua descendent del huel.	On the cure of a descending ulcer.
Ja havem dit las specias de la aygua en la divisio e qual conveneys a perforar am sermo declarant, lahoras aquel segon la sanetat.	We have already said about the species of water in division and what it is convenient to pierce with an iron needle according to the disposition, then that according to its health.
Lahoras cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute entre las tuas mas sobre un cayrat e lia le sieu huel sa, lu mot stringent.	Then you should make the patient sit up between your hands over a chair and bind his leg tight.
E aprop pausa prop de la palpebra del sieu huel la tua ma senestra, si le huel en le qual es l’aygua es le huel senestra; o am la tua ma dreyta, si le huel es le dextre.	And then place your left hand near the eyelid of his leg, if the leg with the ulcer is the left one; or with your right hand if it is the right leg.
E aprop am la tua ma dextra pren almagda, si le huel es senestre; o am la tua ma senestra, si le huel es de dreyt.	And then take alum with your right hand if the leg is left; or with your left hand if it is right.
E aprop pausa la extremitat de almagda prop de la corona per la grossesa del ray en le album del huel de part del mendre lacrimal, e aprop enpelleys almagda am vertut e revol la tua ma am aquel.	And then place the end of the alum near the crown for the thickness of the vein in the white of the eye from the part of the tear gland, and let the alum be greased with butter and rotate your hand with it.
E aprop penetre en le album del huel e sentas que almagda ja es pervenguda a causa vueda.	And then penetrate into the white of the eye and feel that the alum has already come to a visible cause.
E cove que sia la masura del cami de almagda al preon la mesura del spazi le qual es de la pupilla entro a la fi de la negror, e es la corona del huel; quar tu veyras am aquel pupilla am la visio de l’huel per la clartat de la tunica cornea.	And let it be the distance of the path of alum to the front the measure of the space which is from the pupil to the end of the darkness, and it is the crown of the leg; because you will see the pupil with the vision of the leg through the clarity of the tunica cornea.
E aprop pausa almagda entro al loc en le qual es l’aygua, e aprop tu la atira en jos una veguada aprop autra, e donc si la aygua descen tantost, lahoras vetz le malaute aquo sobre le qual huebre la sua vista tantost, e almagda en le sieu huel.	And then place the alum in the place where there is the ulcer, and then you pull it down another way, and then if the ulcer descends as soon as possible, then you see the patient over that on which he breaks his sight immediately, and let the alum be in his leg.
E aprop repausa se un pauc; donc si la aygua es descenduda, lahoras tu depausa aquela autre veguada abantz que almagda ne sia getada.	And then rest a little; therefore if the ulcer is descended, then you take off that other way before alum is put in.
E donc quan es sicada e no descen, lahoras tu extrat almagda am facilitat, e revol am aquel la tua ma pauc a pauc, e aprop dissolveys en l’aygua un petit de sal clara de gemma e am aquela lava le huel dedintz; e aprop pausa fora le huel coto o stopa o lana infusa en oli rozat e album de huou e ligua am aquo le huel sa.	And then when it is dried up and does not descend, then you take out the alum with ease, and rotate your hand a little with it, and then dissolve in the ulcer a little of clear salt of gemma and wash the leg inside; and then place outside the leg cotton or stoppa or wool infused in rose oil and egg white and tongue with that the leg.
Mays nos e aquels que so de nostre temps pause sobre aquel comi trissat am album de huou.	But those who are of our time place over that cooked meat with egg white.
E si no obezeys a tu almagda al intrament de l’huel per la sua duricia — quar es alcu dels homes del qual le huel es dur mot —, lahoras cove que prenguas le spatum le qual es nompnat alberid del qual aquesta es la forma:	And if it does not obey you the alum to the treatment of the leg because of its hardness— for it is hard bone — then you should take the spatula which is called albertid, of which this is the form:
E donc perfora am aquel aquela conjunctura, e no ultimes la tua ma en le trauc, e no es si no que fassas via ad almagda loc subtil.	And then pierce it with that those conjunctions, and do not finish your hand in the thrust, and it is not unless you make way to alum subtle place.
E aprop entromet almagda segon que havem dit.	And then put in alum as we have said.
E deves le compliment de la tua obra, sia preparat al malaute dormitori descentment fayt en le qual dorma sobre le sieu dos en mayson tenebrosa, e sia prohibit de totz movementz .	And when you have finished your work, let the patient be prepared sleeping descent made in which he sleeps on his back in dark house, and be prohibited from all movements.
E pausa en la natura de lu aquo per que sia linida la sua natura, e no maugua le sieu cap a la partida dreyta ni senestra de tot.	And place it in such a way that its nature is inclined, and do not turn his head to the right or left at all.
E sia le liament segon la sua disposicio entro al tertz dia.	And let the ligament recover according to its disposition on the third day.
E aprop deslia aquel en aquela maysso tenebrosa e exproha la freol vista, e fay li vezer alcunas causas, e aprop retorna le liament entro al dia .vii.	And then loosen that terrible bond and show him the true cause, and make him see some causes, and then return the ligament to its original state on the seventh day.
E no cove que fassas aquo en la hora de las curacios o tantost aprop la infusio.	And do not do this during the time of healing or immediately after the infusion.
Habantz cove que tu alienes aquo per so quar la aygua puega leugierament per gran e vehement de reguardament.	Have them move that way so that the water can flow easily and violently from the affected area.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras cove que deslias le huel denant le vii dia, e rectifica aquel am aquo que ceda apostema.	But if pus develops, then loosen the bandage on the seventh day and treat the wound with something that will promote the flow of pus.
Lahoras tu absol la vista de lu e pausa sobre la cara de lu oral per le qual sia regit le vezement de lu dejos lu per alcus dias, lu existent en la mayszo tenebrosa.	Then reveal to him the cause and place on his face a medicine that will regulate his breathing, keeping him in the dark for several days.
E aprop sia gitat de aquela mayzo gradantment e conversa8 en las suas causas.	And then let him be carried away by that gradual process and discuss with him the causes of his condition.
E sapias que in alchatea no es excusat le discipol de visio alcunas veguadas, e lahoras tu sias ardit sobre la operacio.	And know that it is not permissible for the disciple to see anything during the operation, and then you must be courageous about performing the operation.
E ja es pervengut a nos de alcu de aquels les quals so al Artach , e alcu disse que fayt foc en al Ayrac magdaam perforat am le qual es succada la aygua.	And it has come to our attention that some people who are in the Artach suffer from fire in their eyes, and some say that a fire is lit in the eye socket, causing water to flow out.
Mays empero yeu non e vist degu en la nostra terra le qual haia perfeyt aquo, ni e aquo legit en alcu dels libres dels antics; e es possible que aquo sia novel.	However, we have not seen this in our land, nor is it mentioned in any of the ancient books; and it is possible that this is something new.
E aquestas so las formas de las specias de magdaan per que sia sobre aquelas aquel le qual ignora aquelas:	And these are the forms of the species of eye problems, so that one can recognize them who does not know them:
E sian faytas de eram o de ferr propriament, e sian las extramitatz de lor am aquesta subtilitat triangulada, la extremitat aguda ayssi cum aquela es la forma.	And they are made of copper or iron wire, and the ends of them should be shaped into a triangular point, the acute angle like that of the shape of a triangle.
Capitol .xxiv.	Chapter .XXIV.
De la curacio de carn nada en le nas.	On the treatment of growths in the nose.
Quan en le nas so nascudas carns diversas ajustadas de las quals es alcuna causa la qual es assemblada a scorpio de motz pes, o a polip peys; e aquesta malautia es apelada polipus quar es a semblansa de aquel peys representat.	When in the nose there are various growths which have developed for some cause related to a scorpion sting or to a stone weighing down on it, and this ailment is called polypus because of its resemblance to that pebble as represented.
E de lu es carn cancrosa, lapadea, de fusca color; e de lu es que es carn leon no de color fusca.	And from it there issues a foul-smelling pus, and from it there is a blackened, rotten meat, and from it there is a lion's meat not of a dark color.
Donc en aquela que es en aquestas carns leon no fraudulenta ni cancroza, cove que fassas le malaute sezer entre las tuas mas e posat al solelh, e huebre las nars de lu, e picoys le tieu onci en aquelas carns.	Therefore, if it is not a fraudulent or rotten lion's meat, let the patient hold his nose and breathe into the nostril, and prick with your finger in that growth.
E aprop extrat aquela a las partidas deforo, e aprop inscindeys aquo que has comprehendut de aquelas am spatum agut subtil de la una partida entro que sapias que tota la carn ja es ostada; que si roman de lu deguna causa de la qual la abscisio es possibla, lahoras tu ratz aquo am la un dels estrumentz subtils am facilitat entro que de lu romangua denguna causa.	And then extract it from the nostrils, and then burn what you have understood with a sharp, fine instrument in one nostril until you know that all the meat has been removed; for if something remains of it due to some cause so that abscission is possible, then you must treat it with one of the fine instruments with ease so that nothing of it remains.
Mays si senhoreja am sanc o accida apostema caut, lahoras tu pausa a lu aquo que cove; o es dels apostemas malignes, lahoras tu coyta e cauteriza aquel entro que sia abscindit sanc e sian ostadas las cavas totas.	But if it bleeds or pus develops, then you must pause there until it stops; or if they are malignant pustules, then you must cut and cauterize that area so that the bleeding stops and all the holes have been stopped.
E aprop sia getatz en le nas aprop la inscizio vi agre e aygua o vi.	And then let the nostril be treated with vinegar and water or wine.
Mays si le nas es ubert e de lu procezeys humiditat entro al palat, lahoras sapias que ja es sanat.	But if the nose is open and from it proceeds moisture into the palate, then you know that it has healed.
Mays si la humiditat no penetra segon que cove, lahoras tu sapias que dedintz lu es carn nada en los pus sobiras osses de las nars als quals non es pervengut abscizio.	But if the moisture does not penetrate according to how it should, then you know that within him there is a growth in the nostril which has not yet been removed by abscission.
Donc lahoras cove que entromitas fiel de li al qual sia alcuna grosseza, e nuza en lu motz nuzes, e pausa entre quascun nutz la quantitat del dit o mens, e engene le malaute e entromet una extremitat del fiel en le nars am lo ray o am autra causa la qual es a lu possibla.	Therefore let the patient put a piece of wool in his mouth which has some thickness, and let him move it around, and place between each tooth the amount of the tip or less, and hold the patient's nose and insert one end of the wool in the nostril with the thumb or other finger so that it is possible to do so.
E pus que aquo aura fayt, que atire le sieu odorament entro que pervengua a las canals de las nars, e sia eyssit sobre le sieu golayro, quar tropas veguadas le semblant ad aquesta accio fan les enfantz a las scolas, e es leugiera causa ad aquel que ho vol far.	And when this has been done, let him breathe out his odorant into the canals of the nostrils, and spit onto his palm, for those who have experience in this action do the like to children at school, and it is a gentle cause to the one who wants to do it.
E aprop pausa las dos extramitatz del fiel, una extremitat que iesca sobre le nas et l’autra que romangua en le nas, e aprop aministra serratura de carn am les nuzes que so en le fiel, e fay aquo entro que sapias que las carn ja so am les nuzes del fiel.	And then place both ends of the wool, one end that goes out over the nose and the other that goes in the nose, and then administer a cauterization to the meat with the fingers that are on the wool, and do this until you know that the meat is cauterized from the fingers.
E aprop extratz le fiel, e pausa en le nas aprop la abstraccio del sanc una calgua , e fay aquo per tres dias o mays entro que l’enguent corrodo tot aquo que es romas de las carns.	And then pull out the wool and place in the nose the abscission of the blood a poultice, and do this for three days or more until everything that remains from the growth has been eaten away.
E aprop en la fi de la causa, pausa en le nas una canula de plom per alscus jorns entro que sia sanat.	And then at the end of the healing, place in the nose a lead pipe for several days until it is healed.
Mays si endigeys de curacio que exsique, usa de aquela.	But if there is an excess of pus, use that which was mentioned earlier.
E aquesta es la forma del instrument a capipurge fazedor am le qual son distillatz olis e medicinas en le nars:	And this is the form of the instrument used for purging the nose, with which oils and medicines are distilled into the nostrils:
E fay aquo de argent o de eram, la qual sia semblant a una petita lampesa uberta, ayssi cum petita conqua, e le meat semblantment.	And let it be made of silver or copper, and let it be shaped like a small open vessel, just like a small cup, and let the meat be similar.
E si vols, fay una canula clausa ayssi cum cana, e la cancula del estrument a capipurge fazedor e sia plana, descuberta; a la qual sia manubre en lo derier de lu, am le qual tenguas aquela quan escaufas en lu oli o aquo que tu vols dels sucs e de las causas suctiblas.	And if you want, make a closed tube like a reed, and the end of the instrument used for purging the nose should be flat, uncovered; to which is handled in him, with which you hold it in him, oiled or with water that you want from the juices and from the suckers.
E aquestz capipurgi es precios: recipe de enforbi de castor, de balayra blanc, de giengiebre, e piletre de safra, de pebre lonc, de escafragia, de epetum de spic ana unc. vi cumfizeys am suc de bleda e de caul, e sian faytas pillulas, e sia destemprada una pillula am aygua tebeza, e sia gitat en las nars del malaute jasent envers.	And these are the materials for making the capsicum: take a quarter of a drachm each of castoreum, white ambergris, ginger, long pepper, saffron, and spikenard, of each half a drachm, of black pepper one drachm, of myrrh a quarter of a drachm. And let it be made with vinegar and water, and let the pills be made, and let a pill be tempered with tepid water, and let it be applied to the nostrils of the patient who is sitting up.
Capitol .xxv.	Chapter .XXV.
De theyls natz en las extramitatz del nas.	On the growths in the ends of the nose.
Motas veguadas es nat theyl en las extramitatz del nas, e es magnificat e omentat en alscus dias entro en que mot es leg le reguardament de lu.	Sometimes there is a growth in the ends of the nose, and it becomes swollen and grows over several days until the patient feels pain from it.
E per aquo cove que tu inscidas aquel en le comensament de la apparissio de lu, e erediques tot aquel.	And for this you must insert that into the beginning of his appearance, and remove all of that.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc o cauteri o medicina comburent la qual estia en loc de lu.	And then place on the spot a cauterization or burning medicine which is in the location of him.
Mays si es tardada la sua inscizio entro que sia magnificat, lahoras considera si es lapificat, dur, de fusca color e de pauc sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel am ferr quar es apostema crancos; quar motas veguadas ad aquel que inscideys aquesta apostema endeve per lu granda malicia sobre aquel le qual aquel havia.	But if its abscission is delayed so that it becomes swollen, then consider whether it has become suppurated, hard, of a dark color and with little feeling, then do not touch it with iron because this is a suppurating pustule; for many times when you insert this pustule it becomes inflamed for him.
E si le apostema es de leon tocament e no es de fosca color, e vezes que inscizio es possibla en tot aquel, lahoras evacua le malaute e inscideys aquel senes temor, e cura le loc am aquo que exsique e costrenh entro que sia sanat.	And if the pustule is of a lion' s meat and not of a dark color, and sometimes its abscission is possible in all of it, then evacuate the patient and insert that without fear, and treat the area with what emerges and press it in so that it heals.
Capitol .xxvi.	Chapter .XXVI.
De sutura del nas e de las labias e de la aurelha quan la continuitat es dissolvuda per plagua o per semblantz.	On the sewing of the nose and of the lips and of the auricle when there is a disunity which has been dissolved by pus or by similar things.
Sapias que quan accideys solucio de continuitat en una de aquestas cartillages, pauc confereys en aquela operacio sino en alcus homes.	Know that when the solution of disunity happens in one of these cartilages, it rarely occurs in some people.
Donc cove, quan endeve ad alcu alcuna causa de aquelas, que consideres si es plagua fresca am le sieu sanc, e lahoras tu ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	Therefore, when for some cause of these, you consider whether it is a fresh wound with the patient' s blood, and then bring together the two lips of the wound with a sewing, and then treat that until it is healed.
E si las labias de solucio de continuitat so ja separadas, e quascuna es fayta sana, lahoras cove que tu excorjes quascuna partida de la sua codena apparent entro que n’iesca sanc.	And if the lips of the disunity are already separated and each one is healed, then let you cut off each open part of its apparent tendon so that blood flows out.
E aprop ajusta las doas labias am sutura e strenh aquelas, e sobre aquelas pulveriza sanc de drago e enses trissat, e pausa sobre la polvera una pessa de emplaustra diafinicon, o de alcu autre dels emplastres consolidatius, e leyssa aquel liat per dos jorns o per tres, e aprop deslia aquel e permuta aquel emplaustre e leyssa aquel entro que·ls fiels per si sian abscinditz, e aprop cura am enguent entro que sia sanat.	Then sew together the two lips and tighten them, and sprinkle dragon's blood and ground incense on top, and place a piece of diafinicon plaster or one of the other consolidation plasters over the powder, and let it lie for two or three days, and then remove it and replace the plaster, and let it lie until the sores are healed.
Mays la manieyra de la sutura es que tu agregues la solucio de continuitat o am agulhas ayssi cum havem recomtat en la sutura del ventre, o agregua la solucio de continuitat am fiel ayssi cum a tu e fayt saber.	But the manner of sewing is to add the solution of continuity or needles as we have related in the sewing of the abdomen, or add the solution of continuity with bile as you please and make it known.
Capitol .xxvii.	Chapter 27.
De extraccio de aquela causas que veno en las doas labias en las partidas dedintz.	Of the extraction of those causes which come between the two lips in the parts within.
Motas veguadas endeve a motz homes en las partidas dedintz de las suas labias alcus apostemas durs semblantz a gras de errs, e alscunas de lors son mendres e alcunas son majors.	Many times many men have in the parts within their lips certain hard pustules resembling ear wax; some of them are small and some large.
Donc cove que tu convertas las labias e fendas quascuna de aquelas duricias de tota part, e aprop la abscizio umpliscas le loc de sagi trissat entro que·l sanc sia restrengut, e aprop sia lavat am vi agre e sia curat le loc am aquo que es stipticitat, entro que sia sanat.	Therefore, if you turn over the lips and split each of those hard pustules all around, and then make an incision to let out the pus, filling up the place with ground incense so that the blood is constricted, and then wash it with vinegar and cure the place with something astringent until it is healed.
Capitol .xxviii.	Chapter 28.
De inscizio de la carn ajustada en las gengivas.	Of cutting of the flesh pressed against the gums.
Granre de veguadas nays sobre la gengiva carn ajustada la qual les antics apelero albulus, adonc cove que tu suspendas aquela am onci o que tenguas aquela am las forfecs e inscidas aquela deves la sua razit, e leyssas la sania correr o le sanc.	Very often there is on the gum pressed flesh which the ancients called albus; therefore if you suspend it with your finger or something else and cut it at its root, and let the pus or blood run out.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc sagi trissat o autra polveras stipticas o excicativas.	Then place on the place ground incense or other astringent or cauterizing powders.
E si aquela carn retorna, lahoras inscideys aquela segundariament, e cauterisa aquela, quar aprop le cauteri no retornara.	And if that flesh returns, then cut it again secondly, and cauterize it, for the cautery will not return.
Capitol .xxix.	Chapter 29.
De razo de dentz am ferr.	Of drawing teeth with an iron.
Quan en la superficia de las dentz de las partidas dedintz e de las de foro e entre las gingivas so ajustadas escorsas aspras, legas, e alcunas veguadas son de nigradas e son faytas citrinas o vertz entro que a la gingiva ve per aquo corrupcio e son faytas las dentz legas.	When on the surface of the teeth in the parts within and around the gums there are rough, hard, black or green spots which come from corruption of the gum, and the teeth are made loose:
E donc cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute entre las tuas mas e pausar le cap de lu en le tieu se, e ratz las dents en las quals apareysso aquelas escorsas e causas semblantz arena entro que de lor no romangua deguna causa, e aquo fay de la negror e de la citrinitat e de las autras entro que sian mondificadas.	Therefore, if you make the patient open his mouth and press down on the head with your thumb, and cut off the teeth in which those spots appear, and cut away the causes as though they were sand so that no cause remains behind, and this will be done with the blackness and the greeness and the others so that they are cleansed.
Donc si es ostat aquo que es en aquelas del comensament de la razio, bo es; e sino, lahoras tu itera la razio sobre aquelas al autra dia e al segon e al tertz entro que vengua al derier stament en aquo que tu vols.	Therefore, if what is in the beginning of the cause is removed, it is good; and if not, then you shall repeat the cautery on those spots another day, or the second or third day until it comes to the last state as you wish.
E sapias que las dentz han necessitat de motz rezoris de diversas formas e de motas figuras segon que es preparat a la tua operacio.	And know that teeth have need of many remedies of diverse forms and many figures according to how they are prepared for your operation.
E per so quar le razori am le qual la dent es raza de la partida dedintz es autre del razori am le qual es ras entre las dentz segon autras formas, e aquestas formas de razoris sian deves tu preparadas las quals veyras tantost:	And therefore the razor with which teeth are cut in the parts within is another than the razor with which they are cut between the teeth according to other forms; and you ought to prepare these razors whose forms you will see at once:
Capitol .xxx.	Chapter 30.
D’eradicacio de dentz.	Of uprooting of teeth.
Cove que tu cures la dent de la sua dolor am tot engen e tardes en tota eradicacio de lu, quar no es denguna causa que suplisqua la veguada de lu quan es eradicada, quar es sustancia sublima entro que es excusacio en la eradicacio de lu.	If you cure the tooth of its pain by all means and delay in any uprooting of it, for there is no cause which is beneath it when it is uprooted, for it is a sublime substance which is an obstacle to the uprooting.
Mays cove quan le malaute es forsat aquela dent eradicar, que fermament deves tu sia certificat quala es la dent dolent, quar motas veguadas la dolor descep le malaute e cuga que sia en dent sana, e tu eradicas aquela e aprop la dolor no cessa entro que la dent malauta e dolent sia eradicada, quar nos ja havem vist aquo per operacio dels barbies.	But if the patient is forced to uproot the tooth, you must be certain which is the painful tooth, for often pain deceives the patient and it seems to be in a healthy tooth when it is really in a sick one; therefore you shall cut that one and then the pain will not cease until the sick and painful tooth is uprooted, for we have seen this by operation of the barber-surgeons.
Donc cum deves tu es sertificat qual es la dent dolent, e que o sabes be, lahoras cove que tu scarifiques en le circuit de la dent am spatum en le qual sia alcuna vertut, entro que sia dissolvut de la dent de la gingiva de tota partida, e aprop mau aquel am les tieus ditz, o am forfexs subtils al comensament petit a petit entro que aquela concucesquas.	Therefore if you are certain which is the painful tooth and you know it well, then if you scarify in a circle around the tooth with a spathe in which there is some strength, so that it is dissolved from the gum all round, and then draw it out with tweezers or with subtle pincers little by little until it is uprooted.
E aprop alogua en lu fortz tenalhas grans per bona loquacio o estuptura fort, e pausa le cap del malaute entre les tieus denolhs que be le tengues que no·s maugua, e aprop tratz la dent segon rectitut en manieyra que no trenques aquela, ni al malaute major dolor no dones.	And then you shall pull it hard with great strength for good speech or stupidity, and place the head of the patient between your thighs so that his mouth may not close so that you do not break the tooth, nor give the patient greater pain.
E donc si no es foro-getat, lahoras pren un de aquels instrumentz, e met aquel dejos lu de tota part am facilitat e esforsa la remocio de lu ayssi que es feyt al comensament.	And if it is not loose, then take one of those instruments and place it beneath in every part with ease and exert force on its removal as is done at the beginning.
Mays si la dent es trauquada o corrosa, lahoras cove que tu comples de drap aquel trauc e estrenguas aquel am la extremitat de ray subtil per so que no sia trinquada en la hora de la tua constriccio sobre aquela am tenalas.	But if the tooth is split or worn away then if you plug that crack with a piece of cloth and tighten it at its extreme with a fine thread, so that it is not split in the hour of your constriction on it as you hold it.
E cove que tu obres exquesitament am scarificacio en le circuit de tota part de la gingiva e guarda mot la tua fortaleza que no trenques aquela e romangua partida de lu, e retorne sobre le malaute per la malicia que sia majo que la primieyra dolor de lu.	And you shall open sufficiently with scarification in the circle of all parts of the gum and guard your strength so that it is not split, and return upon the patient for the wickedness which he may do so that his first pain is lessened.
E guarda te que no fassas aquo que fan alscus ignorantz barbiers en lor fistinacio e audacia sobre la eradicacio de lor, ses que no aministran aquo que nos havem recomtat; quar motas veguadas fan venir sobre les homes malautias grans las quals son pus dificils que sian trinquadas, e las razitz de lor remaugudas totas, o alcunas de aquelas, o que extrayguas aquela am alcus osses de la mandigula ayssi cum motas veguadas havem testificat.	And beware that you do not do what certain ignorant barbers do in their hastiness and audacity upon uprooting them, without administering what we have recommended; for often they bring great diseases on men which are difficult to be bound, and the roots of them being removed all or some of them, or that you draw out that tooth with a bone of the jaw just as we have often witnessed.
E aprop la eradicacio de lu sia lavada la boca am vi caut o vi agre am sal.	And then the uprooting of it is to be washed in the mouth with hot wine or vinegar with salt.
E si endeve fluxs de sanc per aysso, ayssi cum motas veguadas endeve, lahoras trissa alcuna quantitat de zegi e aspergeys sobre la plagua, e si no confereys aquel zegi, cauteriza.	And if blood flows out of it, then grind some quantity of vitriol and sprinkle upon the wound; and if that vitriol does not work, cauterize.
La forma de las forceps e tenalas subtils am las quals es mauguda la dent al comensament sia de longua extramitat, de breu manubre e gros, per so que no sian doblatz quan am aquels deves obrar.	The form of the pincers and tweezers with which the tooth is to be drawn out at the beginning must be of long length, short handle and broad, so that they are not bent when you work with them.
E sian ayssi cum vezes de gros manubre entro que quan estrenhas am aquelas no sian dobladas, sian breus extramitatz.	And let their handles be as thick as to be strong and not bent when you draw out with those; they must be short lengths.
E sian faytas de ferr de India descentment faytas de dreytas extramitatz, e en las extramitatz de aquelas sian dentz de las quals las unas intron en las autras e estrenhan per constriccio descent fort, e alscunas veguadas las extramitatz de aquelas sian la forma del bec d’un auzel le qual ha nom ciconia, so es guanta, e son de fort constriccio.	And they are to be made of Indian steel descended from right angles; and the ends of those are to have teeth of which some fit into others and draw tight with strong constriction; and sometimes the ends of those are to have the form of a hawk's beak, so that it is hooked, and they are strong constrictors.
Capitol .xxxi.	Chapter 31.
De erradicacio de dentz e d‘estraccio dels osses de las mandibulas trincadas.	Of uprooting of teeth and extraction of the bones of the jaws that are split.
Quan deves la eradicacio de dent le qual es trinquat roman alcuna causa, lahoras cove que tu pauses sobre le loc coto am boder per un jorn o per dos entro que·l loc sia mollificat; e aprop entromet algesti o tenalhas las extramitatz de las quals so asembladas al bec de un auzel apelat ciconia o guanta, la forma de las forceps:	When you must uproot a tooth which is split for some cause, then let you place upon the spot a poultice with a bandage for one or two days until the place is softened; and then insert an instrument or pincers the ends of which are fitted together like a hawk's beak, the form of the forceps:
Las extramitatz de lor sian faytas dedintz ayssi cum lima o alfagi.	The ends of them to be made with files or chisels.
E si no obediys a tu a eyssiment am aquestas forceps o tenalas, lahoras cove que tu caves sobre la razit e descrobas tota la carn e entrometas le instrument le qual ha nom atali, so es palanca petita del qual la forma es aquesta:	And if it does not obey you with these forceps or pincers, then let you dig into the root and cut away all the flesh and insert the instrument which is called the lever, a little bar of which the form is thus:
E sia de breu extremitat grossa un petit, e no sia enbegut per so que no sia trinquat.	And it is to be of short length broad, not bent so that it is not split.
Donc si per aquo la razit es foro-getada, bo es; e sino, ajuda te am aquestz autres instrument dels quals aquestas son las formas: la forma del primier instrument es de triangulada extramitat en la qual sia alcuna grossesa:	Thus if by this the cause is forgotten, it is good; and if not, help yourself with these other instruments of which these are the forms: the form of the first instrument is a triangular extremity in which there should be some thickness:
La forma del segon instrument es que sia de triangulada e de pus subtil extremitat.	The form of the second instrument is that it be of triangular and very thin extremity.
E ja so ajudatz am aquest instrument havent dos ramps del qual aquesta es la forma aprop la seguent:	And you are helped by this instrument having two ramps, of which this is the form, following appropriately:
e am autres instrumentz les quals precidero en rasura de dentz; quar juvament es fayt am aquest instrument le qual es asemblat a onci gran, e aquesta es la forma:	and by other instruments which are used in cutting teeth; for it is done with this instrument which is similar to a large needle, and this is the form:
de la triangulada extremitat torta o curta, la qual sia alcuna grossesa, e no sia enbegut per so que no sia trinquat.	of the triangular bent or short extremity, which should have some thickness, and not be bent so that it is not broken.
E otra sapias que·ls instrumentz de las dentz motz so e semblantment les autres instruments.	And another wisdom that the instruments of the moving teeth are and similarly the other instruments.
Mays le artifexs savi e subtil en l’art, atroba per si mateys segon aquo que a lu significa la operacio e las malautias diversas; quar son de las malautias a las quals les antics no diysero ni pausero propri instrument, per las formas de diversas specias.	But the wise and subtle artisan in the art finds by himself matters according to what the operation and various illnesses mean to him; for there are illnesses of which the ancients did not speak nor set proper instruments, due to the forms of diverse species.
Mays si es trinquat l’os de la mandibula o dels autres osses de la boca, o si poyreys, lahoras sia pes curat sobre aquel en son loc am aquo que es a lu convenient dels instrumentz e de las forceps las quals havem dit en la extraccio de las razitz de las dentz, e ajuda te am gesti del qual aquesta es la forma:	But if the jawbone or other bones of the mouth are broken, or if you pierce, then cure it on that in its place with what is convenient to him of the instruments and forceps which we have spoken about in the extraction of the roots of teeth, and help yourself by gesture of which this is the form:
E sia en lu alcuna grosseza petit a petit, e sia instringida o tenguda am la boca per que no evasesca o fuga entro que l’os de tot sia foro-getat; e aprop restaura le loc am medicinas convenientz ad aquo.	And there should be some thickness in it little by little, and it should be bound or held by the mouth so that it does not escape or enter until the bone of all is forgotten; and then restore the place with convenient medicines to that end.
Mays si en l’os es petita poyredura, lahoras ratz aquel de aquela poyredura e de la sua negror, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	But if in the bone there is a small piercing, then cut that of that piercing and of its blackness, and cure it so that it is healed.
Capitol .xxxii.	Chapter .xxxii.
De la cura de las dentz eminentz sobre las autras.	Of the cure of teeth prominent above others.
Quan las dentz so eminentz no segon lor cors natural per aquelas la forma es laga, e majorment quan endeve a las femnas, e majorment a las piuselas venerablas; donc cove que tu consideras: si dent es nada aprop autra dent, e no es possibla sarradura ni linament de lu, lahoras radica aquela; mays que no sia annexa am autra dent, lahoras tu inscideys aquela am aquest instrument del qual aquesta es la forma; e es semblant a morr de porc, e sia feyt de ferr de India de extramitat mot aguda.	When teeth are prominent not according to their natural form by those the shape is lagged, and most especially when they affect women, and most especially venerables; therefore you should consider: if tooth is next another tooth, and there is no possibility of separation or lining of it, then cut that; but if it is annexed to another tooth, then you insert that with this instrument of which this is the form; and it is similar to pig's snout, and should be made of Indian iron of acute extremity.
E sia la tua inscizio am la qual inscideyses aquela en trops dias per la duricia de la dent, e que no sia comauguda autra de las dentz.	And your incision by which you insert that into it in several days due to the hardness of the tooth, and that it not be infected with another of the teeth.
E si es dent eminent expausat a limadura, lahoras lima aquel am lima de ferr de India del qual aquesta es la forma:	And if the prominent tooth is exposed to polishing, then polish that with an Indian iron file of which this is the form:
E sia tot de ferr de India e·l margua eysament; e sia de motz menutz puntz ayssi cum lima am la qual son faytas agulhas, am la qual la dent sia limada pauc a pauc en motz dias am fecilitat, per so que no sia autra dent comauguda e caga.	And let all of it be of Indian iron and the margin sharp; and let it be of very small points like needles with which the tooth is polished little by little in several days with ease, so that no other tooth is infected and falls away.
E aprop lineys aquela en la fi, e ratz aquela am alscus razoris.	And then line it at the end, and cut that with a sharp razor.
E si es dent del qual una partida es trinquada e lideys la lengua, lahoras cove que tu limescas aquel entro que l’aspretat de aquela fraccio sia ostada e engualhada, e sia aplenada per so que la lengua no ledesca ni la paraula no corrumpa.	And if the tooth of which one part is broken and hurts the tongue, then you should polish it so that the sharpness of that fracture is worn down and dulled, and be flattened so that the tongue is not hurt nor speech impaired.
Capitol .xxxiii.	Chapter .xxxiii.
De restauracio de dentz maugudas am fiel de aur o de argent.	Of restoration of infected teeth with gold or silver.
Quan accideys a las dentz devant concussio e remossio per percussio o per cazament, e le malaute no pot strenher sobre aquo que manga, e tu has curat aquel am medicinas stipticas, e no ha valgut la tua curacio, lahoras per so que no cagan es engen en aquelas que sian strengudas am fiel de aur e no de argent, quar argent se fa vert e aprop se poyreys aprop alscus dias, mays aur nul temps no es mudat.	When there happens to teeth before concussion and removal due to impact or falling, and the patient cannot strain on what he chews, and you have cured that with astringent medicines, and your cure has not helped, then so that they do not rot, it is necessary to strengthen them with gold and not silver, for silver turns green and then rots after a few days, but gold never changes color.
E sia le fiel en tal subtilitat e grocesa segon la quantitat que puesca entrar entre las dentz; e la forma de la reccio es que prenguas le fiel e pren lo doble de lu entre doas dentz sanas, e aprop que cresques am doas tortuositatz del fiel entre doas maugudas, o si’ una o motas, entro que pervengua la tela a la dent sana del autra partida.	And let the gold be of such thinness and thickness according to the quantity that it can enter between teeth; and the form of the filling is that you take the gold and take twice as much of it between two healthy teeth, and then so that it grows with two tortuosity of the gold between two infected ones, or if one or many, so that the tissue comes to the healthy tooth of the other party.
E aprop itera le teyssiment entro a la partida de la qual comenciest, e strenh la tua ma am facilitat e savieza entro que no sia mauguda.	And then repeat the filling so that it comes to the party from which you begin, and strengthen your work with ease and wisdom so that it is not infected.
E sia la tua striccio am la qual strenhas le fiel deves las razitz de las dentz que no evasesca.	And let your filling by which you strengthen the gold not escape from the roots of teeth.
E aprop inscindeys las extramitatz del fiel superfluens am las forceps o tosoyras, e agregua aquelas en quascun loc am gesti, e converteys aquelas e las occulta entre la dent sana e la dent mauguda, per so que no fassa lesio a la lengua.	And then insert the excess extremities of the gold with forceps or tweezers, and add those in each place with gesture, and convert and conceal those between the healthy tooth and the infected one, so that it does not cause injury to the tongue.
E aprop leyssa aquela ayssi streyta cum roman.	And then polish it thus tightly with Roman sand.
Mays si es desliada o rumpuda, strenh aquela o aquelas am autra fiel en tal manieyra en tot son temps.	But if it is loose or cracked, strengthen that or them with another gold in such a way at all times.
E aquesta es la forma de las dentz e la figura de la rectacio de doas dentz sanas e de doas maugudas, ayssi cum vezes aquestas liadas:	And this is the form of teeth and the figure of the filling of two healthy ones and two infected ones, thus with their veins:
E quan se fa que retorno una dent o doas aprop le cazement de quascuna en lors locs, e sian recrescutz ayssi cum havem recomtat, e que remauguan.	And when it is made so that one tooth or two return to their places and are grown again as we have recommended, and become infected again.
E no fa aquo sino bo artifexs e savi.	And it does not happen unless it is a wise artisan.
E alcunas veguadas es aptat alcuna causa dels osses de vaca, e es fayt de lor ayssi cum forma de dent, e es pausada en loc en le qual defayl la dent, e es strengit ayssi cum havem dit, e reman e serveys am aquel per lonc temps.	And sometimes a cause of the bones of cows is appropriate, and it is made in the form of a tooth, and is placed in the place in which the tooth fails, and is strengthened as we have said, and remains and serves with that for a long time.
Capitol .xxxiv.	Chapter .xxxiv.
De inscizio del liament le qual ve en la lengua e prohibeys loquela.	Of incision of the ligament which comes on the tongue and forbids speech.
Aquest liguament le qual ve dejos la lengua alcunas veguadas o es natural am le qual hom nays, o accidental e accideys per plagua la qual ja es consolidada.	This ligament which comes under the tongue sometimes naturally or accidentally happens due to a wound which is already consolidated.
E la operacio en lu es que huobres la boca del malaute, le sieu cap existent en le tieu se; e eleva la sieua lengua, e aprop inscideys aquel liament nervos segon la latitut entro que sia solvuda la lengua de la sua recencio.	And the operation on it is that you open the mouth of the patient, your head being in your lap; and elevate his tongue, and then insert that ligament of nerves according to its width so that the tongue is loosened from its binding.
Mays si en aquela es alcuna duricia o denodacio, e aquo es stat per consolidacio de plagua, lahoras tu gieta unci e scindeys aquel per la latitut entro que aias inscindit le liament e sia dissolvuda la nodacio.	But if there is any hardness or knotting in it, and that is standing due to consolidation of wound, then you wet the tip of the needle and cut that according to its width so that you have cut the ligament and the knot is dissolved.
E guarda te que no sia fayta fissura en le preon de la carn e que scindas aqui arceria e vengua flux de sanc.	And take care that there is not a fissure made in the membrane of the flesh, and that you split only the tendon and blood flows out.
E aprop sia lavat le vestigi de la inscisio am ayguaros o am vi agre o am aygua frega; e aprop pausa dejos la lengua licini; so es meca la qual tengua le malaute dejos la lengua en quascuna nuoyt per so que no sia consolidat autra veguada.	And then let it be washed the trace of the incision with aqua regia or with vinegar or with wine, and then pause under the tongue for a moment; thus is the one which holds the patient's tongue down in each night so that it is not consolidated again.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc, pausa sobre le loc vetriol trissat; mays si le sanc ventz, lahoras cauteriza le loc am cauteri lantiginos le qual conveneys ad aquo.	But if blood flows out, pause over the place vitriol broken into pieces; but if the blood vents, then cauterize the place with a lantigo cautery which is appropriate for that end.
E aprop aquel cura am las autras causas entro que sia sanat.	And then cure it with other causes so that it is healed.
Capitol .xxxv.	Chapter .xxxv.
De extraccio de ranula dejos la lengua.	Of extraction of ranula under the tongue.
Alcunas veguadas accideys dejos la lengua apostema asemblant a nomla petita prohibent la lengua de la sua operacio natural; e fort leu es magnificada entro que huempla la boca.	Sometimes an aposteme happens under the tongue resembling a small nail prohibiting the tongue from its natural operation; and it is swollen so that it fills the mouth.
E la operacio en lu es que huebras la boca del malaute sesent devant le solel e considera le apostema.	And the operation on it is that you open the mouth of the patient facing the sun and consider the aposteme.
E si tu le vezes de fusca color o de negra, dur, al qual le malaute no atroba sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel quar es cranc.	And if you see it of a dusky or black color, hard, to which the patient does not respond with feeling, then do not touch that for it is rotten.
E si es declinat a blancor, en le qual es humiditat, lahoras tu met le onci en lu, e inscideys aquel am spatum subtil, e inscindeys le de tota partida; e si sanc te ventz en la hora de la tua operacio, lahoras tu pausa desus zegi trissat, so es vetriol, entro que sia restreyt le sanc.	And if it is inclined towards whiteness, in which there is moisture, then you should apply the ointment to it, and insert that with a slender spatula, and insert the whole of it; and if blood comes out at the time of your operation, then you should stop it with a bandage made of pitch, until the blood is constricted.
E aprop retorna a la obra tua entro que lo haias trayt am compliment de lu, entro que sia lavat am vi agre e sal; e cura aquel am l’autra curacio ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	Then return to your work while it is still fresh, until it has been washed with agreeable wine and salt; and cure that with the other cure until it is healed.
Capitol .xxxvi.	Chapter 36.
De extraccio de apostema de doas aurelhas e de aquel que es nada en le golayro e de las autras apostemas.	Of the extraction of an abscess from the ears, and that which occurs in the throat, and of other abscesses.
Quan endeveno en le golayro godat, so son glandulas las quals son asembladas algodat, las quals accideysso deforas e son nompnadas doas aurelhas, las quals quan tu las curas am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no es sanat, lahoras tu considera si le apostema es dur, de fusca color, de pauc sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel am ferr.	When an abscess occurs in the throat, there are glands which are attached and are similar to cotton, which burst outwards and are named tonsils; if you cure these with what we have said in the division and it is not healed, then you should consider whether the abscess is hard, of a dark color, and has little feeling, then do not touch that with iron.
E si es de roga color e la razic es grossa, lahoras no toques aquela am ferr per le flux del sanc; abantz layssa aquel entro sia madurat, e lahoras o tu trauqueras aquel, o sira romput per si.	And if it is of a red color and the root is thick, then do not touch that with iron because of the flow of blood; before you leave that, let it become ripe, and then either you will cut that out, or it will break open on its own.
E si es de blanqua color, radon, e la razit de lu es subtil, lahoras aquel es que cove esser inscidit.	And if it is of a white color, soft, and its root is slender, then that is what should be pierced.
E la operacio en lu es que consideras, denant la tua operacio, si ja ha repausat le apostema de lu caut am repaus complit o si es deminuit am alcuna deminucio; e lahoras fay sezer le malaute denant le soleyl, e·l cap de lu sia en le tieu se, e huebre la boca de lu, e le servidor prenent entre las suas mas prema la lengua de lu dejos am instrument mot noble del qual aquesta es la forma:	And the operation on it is that you should consider before your operation if the abscess has already rested by itself with complete rest or if it has decreased by any decrease; and then make the patient lie down facing away from the sun, with his head in your lap, and open his mouth, and the servant holding his hands take a noble instrument between their fingers to press his tongue down, so that:
E sia fayt de argent o de aram, e sia subtil cum cotel.	And the servant taking his tongue and pulling it forward through that channel if it is necessary to pull out the abscess; and it should be made of silver or brass, and be slender like a needle.
Donc cum tu premes am aquel la lengua e es mostrat a tu la apostema, e catz sobre aquel le tieu vezement, lahoras pren onci e fica aquel en l’amenla, e tira aquel a las partidas defora tant quant podes.	Then when you press with that instrument and the abscess is shown to you, and place your finger over that, then take ointment and put that in the aperture, and pull that outwards as far as you can.
Otra aquo que tiras alcuna causa de las tunicas, e aprop incideys aquela am instrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	Another one which pulls some cause from the membranes; and then pierce that with an instrument of which this is the shape:
e es asemblat a forceps, empero las extramitatz de lu son corvadas, ayssi que l’orrifici de quascuna de aquelas es en le endreyt del autra, mot agudas, le qual sia de ferr indi enbegut.	And it should be made with slender iron; and it is like tweezers, except that the ends of it are curved so that the aperture of each one is towards the other, very sharp, and it should be iron which has been tempered.
Mays si aquest instrument no es a tu present, lahoras inscideys aquel am spatum del qual aquesta es la forma de lu: E sia agut de la una part, no agut del autra part.	But if this instrument is not available to you, then pierce that with a spatula of which this is the shape of it: and it should be sharp on one side, not sharp on the other side.
E pus que has inscidit una mella, inscideys l’autra segon aquesta meteyssa manieyra de inscizio, e aprop la inscizio le malaute guarguarise de aygua frega	And once you have pierced one aperture, pierce the other according to this manner of piercing; and then wipe the patient's throat with water.
Mays si endeve flux de sanc, guarguarise aygua de decoccio de scorsa de milgrana o de fuelha de mirtra e semblantz ad aquel de las causas stiptiquas entro que·l flux del sanc sia restreyt, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	But if blood flows out, then cure it with water of decoction of bark of pomegranate or of bay leaf and the like for causes which constrict the flow of blood until the flow of blood is constricted, and then cure that until it is healed.
E alcunas veguadas naysso en le guolayro autras apostemas otra aquelas doas aurelhas, e inscideys aquelas segon que yeu e dit en la inscizio de doas mellas engualment.	And sometimes in the throat there are other abscesses besides those tonsils, and pierce those according to what is said in the piercing of two apertures simultaneously.
E yeu ja fu medicat una femna de apostema le qual era nat en le golayro de lu, le qual apostema tendia a color fusca, de pauc sentiment, le qual ja havia claus le golayro de lu, e la femna respirava am meat streyt, e ja havia prohibit a lu comestio e beure de aygua, e ja era pervenguda a la mort si mays agues stat per un dia o per dos.	And I had treated a woman of an abscess which occurred in her throat; that abscess was inclined towards a dark color, had little feeling, and it had closed her throat; and the woman breathed with difficulty, had prohibited herself from eating and drinking water, and she would have reached death if I had not acted.
E l’apostema ja tant havia pugat que havia mezes dos ramps entro que eyssiro per dos traucs.	And the abscess had pushed so much that it had made two holes through which pus drained out.
Donc yeu me cuytegui fisturalment e fiquegui en un de lor onci, e tiregui aquel, e atirada es de lu gran porcio, e aprop yeu incidigui aquela de on comprendegui del autre trau, e aprop yeu obrigui la boca de lu, e compremegui la sua lengua, e aprop yeu fiquegui le onci en aquela apostema.	So I cut the abscess open and placed one of their ointments in it, and pulled that out, and a great portion came out of him; then I pierced the other aperture from where I understood there was another abscess, and then I closed his mouth, pressed his tongue, and then I put the ointment in that abscess.
E aprop yeu abscizi gran partida de lu, e no corria de lu sino un pauc de sanc.	And then I cut a large portion of it out, and there was only a little blood flowing from him.
Donc absolut es le guolayro de aquela femna, e comensec tantost beure aygua, e aprop presec vianda, donc yeu no cessegui inscidir de aquela apostema motas vetz per lonc temps, e succesia apostema en loc de aquel, le qual inscizia entro que es prolonguat aquel.	So her throat was completely cleared and she began to drink water immediately and also eat food; then I did not cease piercing that abscess many times over a long time, and there would be another abscess in the same place, which I would pierce so that it was prolonged.
Donc yeu engen agui e cauterizegui le guolayro de lu, donc astec de addicio; e aprop yeu perambulegui e no saubi que fec Dieus de aquela aprop mi.	So I used iron and cauterized her throat; then after a few days I walked around and did not know what God did to me from that; therefore, I will continue.
Capitol .xxxvii.	Chapter 37.
De inscizio de huvela quan es apostemada.	Of piercing the membrane when it is abscessed.
Quan catarr deysen a la huvula, e es apostemada e es longa, lahoras ela es nompnada perpendicular; e si es en la partida dejos grossa e redonda, e lahoras ela es apelada buba.	When there is pus in the membrane and it is abscessed and long, then it is called perpendicular; and if it is thick and round at the bottom, then it is called a boil.
Mays quan es curada am aquo que havem dit en la divisio, e no comfereys la tua curacio, e eyssament ja vezes que apostema caut ja es ostat de lu e es subtil, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquela que es agreguadas redonda; e si es ad aquela longitut, e es sanguina, de fusca color o de negre, e no es a lu centiment, lahoras cove que tu temtes la inscizio de lu, quar en aquela es temor sobre le malaute.	But if it is cured with what we said in the division and does not comply with your cure, and you see that the abscess is cauterized and is thin; and if it is at that length and blood flows from it, of a dark color or black, and there is no feeling in it, then beware of piercing it, for there is fear over the patient.
E quan tu vezes aquela segon la manieyra que yeu he dita de la sua blancor e longuesa, que tu fassas sezer le malaute e premas la lengua de lu am instrument del qual procesic la sua forma e aprop fica le onci en la nuva, e tira aquela en jos e inscideys aquela am un de dos instrumentz les quals e ditz en la inscizio de dos mellas.	And when you see that according to the manner that I have said of its whiteness and length, then make the patient lie down and press his tongue with an instrument of which you process its shape; and then put the ointment in the new one, pull it down, and pierce that with one of two instruments of which I spoke about the piercing of two apertures.
E cove que no inscidas aquela sino aquo que es ajustat sobre le terme natural ses addicio, quar si tu inscides de lu mays, lediyras le sieu parlar.	And beware of piercing that unless it is adjusted to the natural term with addition; for if you pierce it more, you will harm his speech.
E aprop la inscizio, usa de aquo le qual havem recomtat en la inscizio de dos mellas, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	And then, after the piercing use what we recommended in the piercing of two apertures and cure that until it is healed.
Mays si era le malaute espaventat per la inscizio de lu, cove que use de engen en la cauterizacio de lu ses temor, e la manieyra del cauteri en lu no es sino am aygua aguda, e es que tu pauses le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop prem la lengua de lu am le instrument le qual havem dit, e aprop pren de l’aygua la qual havem dita en le capitol de cauterizacio, e comfeys am aquela caus viva, e pausa aquela no spessa ni subtil, e de aquela omple la concavitat de l’estrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	But if the patient is frightened by the piercing of it, then use the iron in cauterizing him without fear, and the manner of the cautery in him is not except with sharp water; and it is that you place the patient's head in your lap, and then press his tongue with the instrument which we said, and then take the water which we said in the chapter on cauterization, and comply with it while it is alive, and stop that neither thick nor slender, and fill the concavity of the instrument of which this is the shape:
Sia la extramitat de lu conquavitat en la qual sia pausada la medicina ayssi cum la conquavitat de culher de ray, e pausa le strument am la medicina sobre la vula, e·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu latz per so que corro saliva o musellage de la boca de aquel per la intrinscequa medicina, per so que no deyssenda de aquela deguna causa sobre le golayro de lu e que ledesca aquel.	And take a slender spatula and scrape the new one from which you removed the membrane; and if it is soft or bleeding, and the patient quiets down, then stop his speech.
E aprop te la tua ma am la medicina, e exprem aquela sobre la uvula per l’espazi de miega hora entro que vegas aquela esser denegrada e sedada per la mordicacio de la medicina.	And then hold your hand over the medicine, and express that onto the uvula for a space of about half an hour until you see that it is blackened and numbed by the biting of the medicine.
E si vols, prengues coto e envolopes aquel sobre la extremitat del ray, e submergeys le coto en la medicina, e entrometas le ray am le coto en una canula de sobre entro que·l coto adheresca en aquela canula, e fay aquo tantas vetz entro que consiegues aquo que vols de la cauterizacio de la uva, e aprop leyssa aquela quar ela se seccara e cayra aprop tres dias o quatre.	And if you wish, take lint and wrap that around the end of the iron, and submerge the iron in the medicine, and insert the iron with the lint into a tube so that the lint adheres to that tube; and do this as many times until you achieve what you want from cauterizing the boil, then close that which has been cauterized for three or four days.
E si indigeysses que iteras la medicina, itera aquela, e aprop la cauterizacio abstergeys en le circuit de la uva am coto enbegut en boder, e mondifica am aquel aquo que es en le circuit de lu de la medicina, e sia lavat am aygua frega, e sia curat deforo am embrocacio, e dedintz am guarguarismes entro que sia sanat.	And if you wish to iterate the medicine, do so, and then sterilize the wound with a hot poker dipped in wine, and cleanse it with the water that was used to dip the poker into the wine, and wash it with soap, and treat it from the outside with embrocation, and on the inside with healing salves until it is healed.
E aquesta especia de curacio es pus salva que inscizio e pus long de temor.	And this type of treatment is safer than surgery and less frightening.
Alcunas veguadas es curada la uvuola am aquo que es pus subtil que cauteri e inscizio, quar es curat am subfumigacio en aquesta manieyra: recipe calament, ysop, origua, ruda, scicados arabic, camamilla, broyda e semblant ad aquels de las erbas, e ajusta totas aquelas causas, o alcunas de lor, en una ola, e sian submergidas am vi agre, e bulhan; e la ola sia be lutada am lut decentment, e sia en le mieg loc de la ola un trauc, sobre le qual sia pausat un instrument conquau de aram segon aquesta manieyra; sia fayt de argent o de aram.	Sometimes the ulcer is healed with something more subtle than cauterization or incision: take calamus, hyssop, oregano, rue, scissum arabic, camomile, and similar herbs to these, and prepare all those ingredients, or some of them, in a bowl, and let them be steeped in sweet wine; then let the bowl be boiled gently, and let there be a hole in the middle of the bowl, on which is placed a suitable hollow instrument made of silver or bronze.
E sia entromesa la extremitat en la boca del malaute entro que la vapor poge a la uvula sobre la quanula, entro que la uvula sia mot ofuscada.	And the end of this instrument is inserted into the mouth of the patient so that the steam reaches the ulcer on the tongue, while the tongue is very fogged up.
E aprop itera sobre aquela motas veguadas entro qu’es secca, e guarda te que no fassas aquesta curacio al comesament de l’aveniment de apostemas, quar trop ajustaria en le apostema, e no cove que tu fassas aquo, sino deves la declaracio de apostema de lu caut.	And then repeat this several times until it is dried up, and beware of performing this treatment during the decline of an ulcer, for it would be too harsh on the ulcer, but you should perform this after the ulcer has been cauterized.
Mays si no es a tu present aquest instrument, lahoras pren una cana e compon en la extramitat de lu un clos de huou, per so que la boca del malaute sia comborida, quar le closc del huou prohibeys la vapor comburir la boca.	But if you do not have this instrument at hand, then take a reed and attach a ball of wool to its end, so that the mouth of the patient is protected, for the wool prevents the steam from burning the mouth.
E aquesta curacio es bona am salut.	And this treatment is beneficial for health.
Capitol .xxxviii.	Chapter 38.
De extraccio d’espinas e de aquo que adhereys en le golayro e de las autras causas.	On the extraction of thorns and other objects stuck in the throat and other causes.
Motas veguadas adhereys en le guolayro o spina de peys o alcuna autra causa.	Many times something gets stuck in the throat, or a thorn from the foot, or some other cause.
Adonc cove que tu extraguas aquo que de aquels es apparent, sobre le qual catz la vista, pus que tu premes la lengua am instrument denant solelh, per so que a tu sia declarat aquo que es en la guola.	Therefore, you must pull out what is visible to you by looking at it while pressing the tongue with an instrument in front of your eyes, so that you can see what is in the throat.
E aquo que no apar e es a tu occultat en le guolayro, cove que tu fassas vomir le malaute denant que la vianda sia degerida en l’estomac, quar fort leu la causa annexsa le golayro sira foro-getada per vomit; o que deglusia le malaute una pessa de nap o de razit de laytuga o un boci de pa sec; o prengua una pessa de sponga marina sequa leon, e lia aquela fortment am fiel, e aprop le malaute transglussia aquela, quar cum perve al loc en le qual so spinas e es extrahuda, lahoras so foro-getatz.	And if there is something hidden in the throat that you cannot see, then make the patient vomit before the food has digested in the stomach, for very often the cause of a blockage in the throat is that the object is forced down by the food; or let the patient eat a piece of bread or a raw lettuce leaf, or a mouthful of dry bread; or take a piece of dried sponge, and apply it firmly to the wound, and then the patient swallows it, for when it reaches the place where there are thorns, it will pull them out.
E mays pren una anguila e be am fiel liada, e sia dedintz mesa e soptament sia extrayta; o pren un porr e soptament le metas e soptament l’en tratz.	And take an eel and dip it in vinegar, and let it stay inside the mouth and be chewed and swallowed; or take a piece of rope and chew on it and spit it out again.
Mays si no so foro-getatz am aquelas causas las quals havem ditas, lahoras husa de un instrument de plom segon aquesta forma:	But if they are not pulled out with those methods we have mentioned, then use an instrument of lead in the following shape:
E sia pus gros que ray un petit, e en la extramitat de lu sia conquavitat la qual tu entrometas en la sua guola am facilitat.	And let it be thicker than a small straw, and on its end have a hollow that you can easily insert into the patient's throat.
E el aga le sieu cap elevat en sus, e guarda te que·l tocament del sieu os de la gola, per so que endevengua a lu cos e am aquela que enpellesca le os o la spina, o que aquel le metge am la sua ma.	And let the patient tilt his head back, and be careful not to touch his bones in the throat, but with that instrument gently probe for the thorn or the object, or have the doctor hold his hand over it.
Mays empero que·l malaute aquel entrometa es miels, per la sua sciencia del loc de la causa annexa e enpellisca en jos, e tira la sua ma am le instrument en sus, tot aquo segon la quantitat la qual es a lu preparada entro que sia foro-getada.	But let the patient himself insert it, for he knows best where the object is stuck, and with his hand gently probe from above, and pull the object out with the instrument downward, as much as the object will allow without causing any harm.
Capitol .xxxix.	Chapter 39.
De extraccio de sancguisugua annexsa al golayro.	On the extraction of blood clots stuck in the throat.
Quan es medicada sanguisugua am aquo que havem dit en la divisio de la curacio am medicinas e no comfereys, considera lahoras en le guolayro del malaute al solelh, pus que tu aias compremuda la lengua de lu am instrument le qual a tu havem recomtat.	When the ulcer has been treated with what we have said in the division of treatment with remedies, then consider the patient' s throat, for you must have probed his tongue with an instrument as we have recommended.
Donc si tu vezes la sancguisugua, extratz aquela am onci petit o am gesti subtils decentment.	Therefore, if you see a blood clot, pull it out with a small hook or a fine needle gently and decently.
E si no es a tu possible estrayre am aquel, lahoras pren una canula concava e entromet aquela en lo guolayro del malaute, e aprop pausa en la concavitat de la canula un ferr ignit, e fay aquo tantas vetz (entro que la sancguisugua sia morta e se osta del guolayro) e abstengua se le malaute tot lo jorn de aygua.	And if you cannot pull it out with that instrument, then take a hollow tube and insert it into the patient's throat, and then place a hot iron in the hollow of the tube, and do this as many times (as long as the blood clot is killed and comes out) and refrain from drinking water all day.
E aprop prengua una veyria plena de aygua frega, e obra la boca de lu en aquela, e lava la boca am aquela; e no trasglucia de aquela alcuna causa e maugua l’aygua una hora aprop autra am la sua ma, quar la sancguisugua tantost cum sent l’aygua catz.	And then take a pitcher full of warm water, and pour it into his mouth, and wash the throat with it; do not drink any other liquid or medicine for an hour or so with your hand, for as soon as the blood clot comes in contact with the water, it will come out.
Mays si no es foro-getada am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras subfumigua le malaute am cimetz o am assafetida per le instrument le qual havem recomtat en la sufumiguacio de uvula.	But if it is not pulled out with what we have mentioned, then smoke the patient' s throat with camphor or asafoetida through the instrument that we have mentioned for smoking the ulcer.
Fay aquo, so en quar cayra.	Do this in whatever way you can.
E es un’autra manieyra de operacio en sufumiguacio de aquela, es que tu prenguas una ola en la qual sian carbos ignitz e la ola sia cuberta am una cobertora en le mieg de la qual sia un trauc, e sia compausat en aquel trauc la extremitat del instrument; e aprop dega desus la subfumigacio; e pause le malaute la sua boca en la extremitat de la canula, e claugua la sua boca per que la subfumiguacio no sia foro-getada entro que sapias que la subfumigacio es pervenguda a la sancguisugua, quar la sancguisugua tantost cayra.	And there is another way to smoke it: take a bowl in which there are burning coals and the bowl is covered with a cloth, and on that cloth there is a hole, and put the end of the instrument into that hole; and then smoke the patient' s throat with that, and let the patient hold his mouth over the end of the tube so that the smoke does not escape, until you know that the smoke has reached the blood clot, for as soon as the blood clot is reached, it will come out.
E si no catz, lahoras tu itera la subfumiguacio motas vetz, e abstengua le malaute de beure, e mange causas saladas e alhs, e no begua aygua, e ayssi necessari es que am aquest regiment sia fora-getada.	And if it does not come out, then repeat the smoking several times, and refrain from drinking, and eat salty foods and almonds, and drink no water, and with this regimen it will surely be expelled.
E aquesta es la forma del instrument am le qual es trayta sancguisugua del guolayro quan es vista; e es semblant a forceps ayssi cum vezes, sino quar es en lu alcuna curvitat:	And this is the shape of the instrument with which blood clots are pulled out when they are seen; and it is similar to forceps, except that it has some curvature:
le qual sia mesa al guolayro, e la extremitat de lu es semblant a bec de ciconia, que es guanta, en la qual es aspretat de lima, per so quar, quan comprem alcuna causa, aquela no leyssa.	which is inserted into the throat, and its end is similar to a stork's beak, which is smooth, and on it there is a groove, so that when something is pressed against it, it will not slip.
Capitol .xl.	Chapter 40.
En le qual es la suma del sermo en apercio de apostemas e en seccio de lor.	Here ends the first part of the treatment of ulcers and their division.
Les apostemas so motas specias, de motas manieyras, segon que ve rememoracio de lor, de quascuna en aquest libre.	Ulcers are many things, of various kinds, according to what is remembered about them, in this book.
E so diversas en perforacio e seccio de lor per doas manieyras, de las quals la una es per la specia de apostemas en si meteys; e per aquo que comprem de las humiditatz.	And they are varied in their formation and division by two ways, of which one is by the nature of ulcers themselves; and by that which comes from humours.
E la segonda manieyra es prop les locs en les quals accideys del cos, quar le apostema accident en le cap es autra de la apostema accident en le cul; e le apostema en le loc carnos accident es autra del apostema accident en junctura; e a quascun de lor es son juguament per operacio.	And the second way is according to the parts of the body where they occur, for an ulcer on the head is different from one on the back; and an ulcer on a fleshy part is different from one on a joint; and each of them requires treatment by incision.
E mays de apostemas so alcunas las quals cove que no sian perforadas sino aprop maturacio de la sania en aquels o compliment de lor.	And there are also ulcers which are not punctured but rather mature in their pus, or are fulfilled with matter.
So autras apostemas les quals cove que sian traucatz quan son cruzes, e no son maturatz segon lor compliment, ayssi cum apostemas que son propdas a las juncturas, quar apostema quan ve prop junctura, lo esser de lu es prolonguat entro que·s poyreys aquo que es en le circuit de lu, e fort leu son corromputz les liamentz o les nervis de aquela junctura, per que es fayta causa de contraccio de aquel membre; o es apostema prop de membre principal, e si tu tardas la perforacio de lu entro sia madurat nosira al membre principal; o es prop le cul, donc perfora aque no-madurat; e no cove que·l perforas cru, de no-complida degestio, sino aquel que es prop del cul, per so que no poyresca le preon de lu e sia elonguat a las partidas dedintz del cul, e sia fayta fistula, o que sia fayt en le terme de lu que no sia sanat.	And other ulcers are punctured when they are cruciform, and not mature according to their nature; or are near joints, for when an ulcer occurs near a joint, the part around it is prolonged because its muscles or nerves are affected, causing contraction of that member; or it is near a main member, and if you delay in puncturing it until it is mature, it will affect the main member; or it is near the anus, so do not puncture it unless it is mature; or it is made near the end of the body so that the flesh around it becomes prolonged, and a fistula is formed, or it occurs on the edge of the body if it is not healed.
Mays cove que tu sapias la hora de la perforacio de la apostema, e aysso es quan es maturat.	May I inform you of the time of the piercing of the pustule, for that is when it matures.
E sapias que es madurat quan es la cedacio de la dolor e la cessacio de la febre, e aprop la diminucio de la rogor e de la pulsacio, e la acuitat del cap del apostema, e les autres senhals.	You will know that it has matured when there is a decrease in pain and fever, and also when there is a reduction in redness and pulse, and when the head of the pustule becomes sharp and the other signs appear.
E quar cove que sapias la perforacio cazer en le loc pus dejos del apostema e de pus venient de curacio de la eminencia.	You will know that piercing has occurred in the lowest part of the pustule, and also from the pus coming out of the healing process of the eminence.
E perforacio tostemps sia per le lonc de la carn o del cors, si las apostemas son en las partidas de las mas o dels pes, e en loc dels lacertz, de las cordas dels nervis, de las arcerias; e, al derier, en totz locs enguals en les quals no es reflecio; quar en aquels que so reflectitz, usa de perforacio segon aquel membre.	And piercing should always be done through the length of the skin or body, if the pustules are on the parts of the hands or feet, and in the places of the veins, nerves, and arteries; and in short, in all places equally, where there is no reflection; because in those where there is a reflection, piercing should be done according to that member.
Mays quan le apostema es en loc carnos, lahoras miels es que leysses la perforacio de lu entro que sia confermada la digestio de lu segon compliment, ayssi quo havem dit; quar si tu perforas aquel denant aquo, es prolonguat le cors del poyre de lu e de mota sordicia, e fort leu las labias de lu so enduradas e la profunditat de lu.	But if the pustule is on a fleshy part, it is better to let the piercing be made inside so that digestion of it be confirmed according to what we have said; for if you pierce it before then, the body of it will be prolonged and there will be much filthiness and strengthening of its lips and depth.
Mays alcus apostemas so perforatz segon la latitut de la carn o del cos deves la necessitat, o segon aquo del qual lo membre indigeys.	But some pustules are pierced according to the breadth of the skin or body, because of necessity, or according to that member from which it is indigestible.
E cove que administres petita perforacio , e·n les apostemas grans gran perforacio e ampla o motas seccios segon la diversitat de la grandesa dels apostemas.	And you shall administer a small piercing for the great pustules; and a broad and ample or many piercings according to the diversity of the size of the pustules.
E autras so dels apostemas en les quals cove que la codena sia conquavada e sia encidida, quan es fayta ayssi quo pan e fayta es en terme que ja stigua, ayssi cum aquel que accideys en trops de dubelec e de bubos.	And others are from pustules in which the cord is hollowed out and cut, when it is made thus as bread; and so it happens in tumors of scrofula and scrofulous bumps.
E de aquels so que so insciditz am seccio havent tres angles; e de aquels es en le qual es inscidit ayssi cum figura de fuelha de mirtra, ayssi cum las apostemas dels angonars.	And some are cut with a section having three angles; and others are cut thus in the shape of a leaf of myrtle, thus as the pustules of the angles.
E de lor so en les quals es administrada seccio redonda e seccio lunar, e semblantz ad aquels.	And some are administered round section and moon-shaped section, and resembling those.
Mays aquel al qual no es cap ayssi cum son apostemas leons superficials, cove que tu perforas aquel am perforacio superficial, o plana tant solament.	But to that which is not as its pustules are superficial lions, you shall pierce it with superficial piercing or plane only.
E cove quant le apostema es gros e ya ha colligit mota sania, que perfores aquel e no te coytes que extraguas tot le poyre en aquela hora; habantz extratz de aquel una partida, e aprop opila le apostema entro al autre dia, e aprop extratz una partida major, e aprop fa aquo motas veguadas segon graduacio entro que sia foro-getat.	And when the pustule is thick and has collected much pus, pierce it and do not be afraid to extract all the pus in that hour; having extracted some part of it, then plug up the pustule again for another day, and then extract a greater part, and do this many times according to its graduation until it is healed.
E majorment si·l malaute es de freol vertut, o femna prens, o enfant petit, o viel en decrepitut, quar l’esperit animal motas vetz es resolvut am la egressio de la sania, e fort leu mor le malaute, e tu operte les.	And especially if the patient is of phlegmatic nature or a woman with child, or small infant, or old man in decrepitude; for the animal spirit many times is dissolved by the exit of pus, and soon dies after, so you should open them up.
Don guarda aquest capitol am gran cautela, e aprop la tua perforacio en la qual perforas aquestz apostemas, cove que abstergescas las plagues e consideras donc si la plagua del apostema es pauca, o es una seccio plana, lahoras tu aministra las qualguas de li o de coto antic; e si le apostema es gran, e las fissuras de la perforacio son motas, lahoras cove que tu pauses meca en quascun trauc entro que pervenguan ensemps.	Therefore keep this chapter with great caution, and when you pierce these pustules, wash the wounds and consider if the wound of the pustule is small, or a flat section, then you shall administer the remedies of oil or old wine; but if the pustule is large and the fissures of piercing are many, then you shall put a plug in each slit so that they may come together again.
E si en le apostema es abscindit una partida de la codena o has concavada aquela en le circuit, lahoras cove que tu la complescas de coto viel o de fil fayt de drap de li, ayssi cum quan has traytz pans o razizos, ses humiditat; e strenh aquel entro al tertz dia; e aprop proceseys aquel e cura le am aquo que cove dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And if in the pustule a part of the cord is abscinded or hollowed out around it, then you shall complete it with old oil or thread made from linen cloth, thus as when you have treated pains or roots, without moisture; and strengthen it on the third day; and process it and heal it by that which you know to be best.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc en la hora de la operacio tua, lahoras tu aministra aygua frega e vi agre en les quals mules un drap de li, e pausa aquel sobre le loc del fluxs del sanc motas veguadas.	But if there is bleeding in the hour of your operation, then you shall administer warm water and vinegar in which you have steeped a linen cloth, and apply it to the site of bleeding many times.
Mays si persevera le fluxs del sanc, lahoras cove que tu aministres regiment e curacio e polveras las quals he recomtadas en motz locs de aquest nostre libre e de divisio.	But if the bleeding persists, then you shall administer remedies and cures, and powders which I have recommended in many places of this our book and of division.
Mays si es en temps de hivern, e·l loc de la apostema es loc de motz nervis, lahoras cove que tu enfundas pulvils en vi e oli caut, e pauses aquels sobre les locs.	But if it is in wintertime and the location of the pustule is near many nerves, then you shall soak cotton in wine and oil, and apply these to the locations.
E si es en estiu, e les locs son carnoses, lahoras cove que tu pauses pulvils enbeguts am aygua e oli o am vi e oli, e tot aquo sia freg entro que sia le ters dia, ayssi cum havem dit, e lahoras cove que tu deslies le apostema e abstergescas aquel e aministres en la curacio de lu aquo que a lu conveneys entro que sia sanat.	And if it is in summer and the locations are fleshy, then you shall apply cotton soaked in water and oil or wine and oil; and do all this until the third day, as we have said, and then open up the pustule, cleanse it and administer what suits it to heal.
E aysso es aquo que es necessari de la cognicio de la curacio de apostemas universalment, mays segon la via de distinccio ja he dit de tot apostema en qual manieyra es via de la cura de lu per capitols singularment.	And this is what is necessary to know about the cure of pustules universally, but according to the way of distinction, I have said above in each chapter how the cure is for each pustule particularly.
Capitol .xli.	Chapter 41:
De seccio de apostemas les quals veno en la codena del cap.	Of section of pustules which come in the cord of the head.
En la codena del cap petitz apostemas, e so de specias de nodes les quals conteno tunicas que so a lor factz ; e las specias de lor so motas.	In the cords of the head there are small pustules which contain tunics that are made of many parts, and their species are numerous.
E de lor son pingas, e de aquelas so que conteno humiditat semblant a lima.	And from these come pimples, and some contain moisture like lime.
E de aquelas so las quals conteno humiditat semblant a pols, et asemblantz a lor; e de aquelas so que son lapideas, durs.	And some contain moisture resembling powder, and some resemble them; and some are scaly and hard.
E en la seccio de totz, e en la extraccio de aquels no es temor, cum deves la exteccio de aquels no fa contrariat arceria.	And in the section of all these, and in the extraction of them there is no fear, as long as the extraction of them does not disturb the artery.
E la operacio en seccio de aquels es que tu esproes aquels am instrument la forma del qual ve aprop aysso, le qual es apelat entromes, entro que sapias que contengua.	And the operation in the section of these is that you express them with an instrument the form of which you will see below, the one which is called entromes, so that you know what it contains.
Quar si aquo que conte es humiditat, lahoras scindeys aquel am seccio segon la longitut per seccio superficial segon aquesta forma:	For if what it contains is moisture, then cut it with section according to its length by superficial section in this form:
E comensa en la seccio de la linha de .B. entro a la linha de .G. Donc cum la humiditat es evacuada, lahoras tu excoria aquela pel que conte aquela humiditat, e no leysses de aquela alcuna causa de tot, quar tropas veguadas retorna, si roman de aquela alcuna causa.	And begin the section from line B to G. Therefore when the moisture is evacuated, then you shall scrape it by which it contains that moisture, and do not leave any cause of it, for many times it returns if there is any cause.
E aprop submergeys coto en enguent egipciach, si es present, e sino, en aygua e sal; e umpleys am aquel la plagua e layssa aquel entro ad autra dia, quar am aquo corrodeys tot so que es romas de aquela pellicula.	And then immerse the wound in Egyptian ointment, if it is available, and if not, in water and salt; and fill with this the wound and leave it until the next day, for by this you will corrode all that which is left of that film.
E aprop itera sobre aquel coto am enguent egipciach segondament e tersament si indigeyses de lu, entro que·t comfides que no y haia romas alcuna causa de aquela pellicula; lahoras cura la plagua am enguent entro que sia sanada.	And then apply the ointment to it again a second and third time if it is not healed, so that you are confident there is no cause of that film left; then heal the wound with ointment so that it may be healed.
E si apostema conte nodi gras, lahoras tu inscideys aquel segon aquesta forma:	And if the pustule contains a nodular lump, then cut it according to this form:
am seccio havent forma de crotz, e geta oncis entre doas labias de la seccio e scorsa aquel de tota partida, e esforsa la tua vertut en extraccio de la tunica la qual conte aquel.	By section having the form of a cross, and cut on both sides of the section and bore it from end to end, and exert your strength in extracting the tunic which contains it.
Mays si a tu arceria fa contrarieta, lahoras fay aquo que yeu t’e recontat primieyrament.	But if your artery causes contradiction, then do what I have told you before.
E semblantment fay en le apostema lapificat de seccio e de curacio segon que a tu havem dit; e seccio sobre apostema lapificat es pus leugiera, quar es de pauc sanc e de pauca humiditat.	And similarly do in the pustule which is whitewashed with section and cure as we have said before; and cut over pustule which is whitewashed so that it may be pustular, for it contains little blood and little moisture.
E alcunas vetz so alcus de aquestz apostemas les quals so en le cap en alcus homes am los quals de tot no es humiditat; la qual causa es quar yeu inscindigui sobre un apostema en le cap de una femna vielha e atrobegui le apostema ayssi cum peyra sorda, aspra, blanqua, la qual no podia esser trinquada, e si a alcu fos am aquela percussit, plaguera aquel.	And some of these pustules are in the head in some men who do not contain moisture; and its cause is that they have struck over a pustule on the head of an old woman and plugged up the pustule thus with soft pebble, rough, white, which could not be pierced, and if they strike it, they would hurt it.
Mays en les autres apostemas accidentz en le cap otra aquest no es aquest capitol, ayssi cum les apostemas que veno als caps dels enfantz e deves las razitz de las aurelhas, mays la seccio de aquestz totz sia seccio superficial.	But in other pustules that come accidentally on the head which are not in this chapter, as well as those that come on the heads of infants and have the roots of warts, their section should be superficial.
E pausa la perforacio de aquels de la partida pus bassa de lor per so que sia alleujat le cos de la sania a las partidas pus bassas.	And make the incision in those from the lower part of their body so that the body is relieved of the disease in the lower parts.
E aprop cura aquelas am aquo que conveneys ad aquel de curacio.	Then treat those with what is appropriate for that type of treatment.
Capitol .xlii.	Chapter 42.
De seccio de scrophulas las quals accideyso en le col.	Of the section of scrofula which happens in the neck.
Motas veguadas endeveno aquestas apostemas en le colh e en las aysselhas e en les angonars; e alcunas veguadas accideyso en las autras partidas del cos.	These pustules sometimes appear on the neck, armpits and angles; and sometimes they appear in other parts of the body.
E so aquelas que accideysso en le colh, e so motas que so engendradas entre lor, e tota scrofula de aquelas es dintz la sua tunica propria, e ayssi cum en les nodis e apostema del cap, ayssi cum havem recomtat.	And those that happen in the neck, and many that are engendered among them, and all scrofula of these is within its own tunic, and also with nodes and pustules on the head, as we have related.
E las specias de aquestas scrophulas son motas, quar de aquelas so alcunas lapideas, e de aquelas so que conteno humiditatz, e de aquelas so malignas las quals no obeseysso a curacio.	And the species of these scrofula are many, some of which are stony, and some contain humidity, and some are malignant and do not obey treatment.
Donc en aquela la qual tu vezes de bona disposicio en le Tocament, de la qual la color de aquo que es manifest es propda a la color de la codena, e es mauguda a tota partida, e no es annexsa am le nervi del colh, ni am las venas, ni am la arceria, e no es preonda, cove que tu inscidiscas aquela am siccio superficial de la partida desus a la partida dejos del cos de la linha de .G. entro la linha de .B., e scorja aquela de tota partida, e exten dos labias de la codena am onci, o am motz oncis si has necessitat de aquels, ayssi cum havem dit en las apostemas del cap, e extratz aquela petit a petit.	Therefore, in that which you see of good disposition in the Touchment, of which the color of which is apparent is close to the color of the codena, and is enlarged to all parts, and is not annexed by the nerves of the neck, nor by the veins, nor by the artery, and is not deep, where you investigate that with a superficial cut of the part above to the part below the body of the line of G. between the line of B., and peel that from all parts, and extend two lips of the codena with tweezers, or with many tweezers if you have the need of those, as we have said in the pustules on the head, and extract that little by little.
E es mays cautela que no sia inscidida la vena o nervi.	And it is a greater precaution that the vein or nerve not be cut.
E sia le spatum no mot agut, que no ajuste a tu la tua ma am inscizio, o que enquiete le malaute, e que inscidas aquo que no es necessari inscidir; quar si inscideysses vena o arceria e prohibeys tu de la tua operacio, lahoras pausa en la plagua vetriol trissat o autras polveras las quals ostan fluxs de sanc, e estrenh la plagua, e layssa aquel entro que·s repausa la acuitat de la apostema e sia mollificada la plagua e comense esser poyrida.	And let the spatula not move sharply, so that it does not hit your hand with a cut, or disturb the patient, and that you incise what is not necessary to be incised; for if you cut a vein or artery and forbid yourself from your operation, then put on the wound vitriol ground small or other powders which stop the flow of blood, and close the wound, and let that remain within which causes the keenness of the pustule and let the wound be soft and begin to turn red.
Quan le sanc es abscindit.	When the blood is abstained.
Donc retorna a la tua operacio entro que l’aias complida.	Therefore return to your operation until it is completed.
E aprop inquireys am le tieu dit indic si es romas alcuna causa de las autras petitas scrophulas, donc inscideys aquelas e munda aquelas.	And then inquire with your finger into the other small scrofula, therefore incise those and cleanse those.
E si es en la razit de la scrophula gran vena, cove lahoras que no inscidas aquela scrophula de la sua razitz.	And if it is in the root of a large scrofula vein, where then you should not incise that scrofula at its root.
Abantz cove que lies aquela am fiel doblat fort e que leysses aquela entro que caia per si ses nocument.	Before that you twist that with strong thread and let it drop by itself without harm.
E aprop omple la plagua de coto vielh le qual tu has ja submirgit en enguent egipciac, e aprop cura aquel.	Then fill the wound with old cotton which you have already saturated in Egyptian ointment, and then cure that.
E si inscides aquela scrophula tota, lahoras cove que tu ajustes las doas labias de la plagua e cuzas2 tantost pus que no y ha romasa deguna superfluitat.	And if you incise the whole scrofula, then you should pinch the two lips of the wound and suck out the pus so that none remains above.
Mays si tu vezes que haia romasa superfluitat per la grandeza de la scrofula, cove que tu entendas a inscidir la razit de aquela, e astrayra aquela e aministra sutura e aquo que es dit.	But if you see that pus remains because of the greatness of the scrofula, where then you should understand to incise its root and drain it and administer suture and what is said.
E aquela de las scrophulas que conteno humiditatz, perfora aquela am perforacio superficial aqui la on appar a tu le loc de maturacio de lu, e pausa perforacio de aquo que siec le pus bas del cos, ayssi cum havem dit.	And of the scrofula which contains humidity, perforate that with a superficial incision where it appears to you to be the location of its maturity, and make an incision of what is below the pus of the body, as we have said.
E aprop aministra perforacio, calguas am enguent e semblantz ad aquels, per so que corroda aquo que es romas de la corropcio.	And then administer an incision, calx with ointment and bandages to those, in order that it corroses what remains of the corrosion.
E aprop quan tu vezes la plagua ja esser mundada, lahoras tu cura aquela am enguent de carn generatiu entro que sia sanada.	And then when you see the wound already cleansed, then you cure that with generative ointment of flesh until it is healed.
Capitol .xliii.	Chapter 43.
De seccio del pilhot del apostema accident dintz le guolayro.	Of the section of the pimple of the pustule accidentally in the gullet.
Diyssero les antics aquesta seccio en le epilhot, e no vist alcu hom en nostra terra que aquela aia fayta.	The ancients taught this section in the epiglottis, and we did not see anyone in our land who has done that.
E aquesta es la inscriptura del sermo de aquels.	And this is the inscription of the word of those.
Mays en les homes haventz esquinencia, cove que sia esquivada la extraccio del epilhot, cum per aquo no sia fayt juvament per so quar totas las venas e las majors del malaute so aqui.	But in men having a scrotum, where the extraction of the epiglottis is avoided, as it is not done for them for that all the veins and the larger of the patient are here.
Mays en aquels que han apostemas cautz en la boca o guolayro o dos aurelhas, quan la malautia no es en la cana, cove husar de la seccio de epilhot a fugir la perdicio la qual es fayta per perfocacio.	But in those who have pustules cauterized in the mouth or gullet or both ears, when the illness is not in the throat, where they should use the section of epiglottis to avoid loss which is done by perforation.
Donc cove quan volem aquo, que inscidam le epilhot dejos tres cercles dels cercles del epilhot, o quatre am petita seccio per la latitut en aquel que es entre dos cercles per quantitat, que la seccio sia en ciphac, no en la cartillage, e aquest loc es convenent a seccio, quar es privat de carn e les vayselhs de sanc de lu son luhen.	Therefore when we want that, let us incise the epiglottis below three circles of the circles of the epiglottis, or four with small section for the width in that which is between two circles for quantity, that the section be in the diaphragm, not in the cartilage, and this location is convenient to section, because it is deprived of flesh and its vessels of blood are light.
E si le metge es pauruc, cove lahoras que extenda la codena del golayro am onci, e aprop fenda la codena entro que pervengua a la canal, mays evite les vaysels de sanc si vetz de aquelas alcuna causa.	And if the physician is fearful, where then let him extend the membrane of the gullet with tweezers, and then split the membrane so that he reaches the cavity, but avoid the blood vessels if you see from those any cause.
E aprop inscida li ciplach segon que havem recomtat; e es significat sobre la seccio de la canal per le flacma le qual es de aquela eyssit am aquo que es de lu disromput e per la abscizio de la votz.	And then incise the septum according to what we have written; and it is significant about the section of the cavity by the phlegm which comes from that which is of him broken and through the incision of the voice.
E layssa la plagua uberta per alcun temps.	And let the wound remain open for some time.
Donc cum la hora es remauguda en la qual perforacio es temuda, agregua doas labias de la codena de la plagua, e cus aquela sola ses la cartillage.	Therefore when the hour is diminished in which the incision is feared, unite two lips of the membrane of the wound, and cut that only to the cartilage.
E aprop administra medicinas que fan naysser la carn entro que sia sanat.	And then administer medicines that cause the flesh within to be healed.
E diyssec Albucasis que la summa del sermo le qual havem recomtat, exposicio no es sino que veias que alcus de aquetz apostemas ja han opilat lo guolayro del malaute, e le malaute es vengut entro a mort, e le ale de lu es entresecat, e alcus van a inscidir le epiglos per so que respire le malaute sobre le loc de la plagua per alcuna respiracio, e sia salvat de mort.	And Al-Bucasis said that the summary of the word which we have written, its exposition is not but that some of those pustules have cauterized the gullet of the patient, and the patient has come to death, and his throat was swollen, and some went to incise the epiglottis so that the patient breathes the air on the location of the wound through any respiration, and he is saved from death.
E per aquo comandero layssar la plagua uberta entro que sia consumida la malicia de la malautia; e es la malicia de lu per tres dias; e donc lahoras comandero cosi la plagua, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	And for that they commanded to leave the wound open until the malice of the illness is consumed; and the malice of it is for three days; and then therefore they commanded to close the wound, and cure that until it is healed.
E aquo que yeu he vist per mi meteys, es que una sirventa pres un cotel e mesec le en le sieu golayro e inscidic am aquel una partida de la cana del pulmo, e yeu fu apelat a la curacio de lu, e atrobegui la mugen ayssi cum es mugit del moridos, e descubrigui la plagua e atrobegui le sanc le qual era yssit de la plagua petit.	And what I have seen by my physicians is that a servant pressed a cloth and moistened it in the gullet of the patient and cauterized one part of the canal of the lung, and he was called to its cure, and it stopped the mucus as it is stopped from the dead, and he uncovered the wound and stopped the blood which was flowing from the wound.
Donc yeu fo confessat que aquela no havia inscidit vena ni guidegi, e le vent yssia de la plagua, e curegui aquela entro que foc sanada.	Therefore he confessed that that had not incised a vein nor artery, and the wind was coming from the wound, and it healed that until the fire was healed.
E no accidic a la sirventa si no rauquiera en la votz, e aprop alcus dias retornec ad miloracio de las suas dispozicios.	And he did not listen to the servant unless she screamed in her voice, and then after some days he returned to the milking of his dispositions.
E ara dic yeu que en la seccio del epilhot no ha temor.	And now he says that in the section of the epiglottis there is no fear.
Capitol .xliv.	Chapter 44.
De seccio sobre apostema le qual accideys en le golayro defora, e es apelat hernia del golayro.	Of the section on pustule which happens in the gullet outward, and it is called hernia of the gullet.
Aquest apostema nompnat hernia del golayro es apostema gran segon la color del cors, e es mot en las femnas.	This pustule named hernia of the gullet is a large pustule according to the color of the body, and it is found in women.
E es segon dos manieyras, quar o es natural o accidental.	And it is according to two manners, for it is either natural or accidental.
E en le natural no es engen de curar.	And in the natural there is not remedy.
E l’accidental es segon dos manieyras del qual la un es semblant a nodes grasses, e l’autra manieyra es semblant apostema le qual es fayt per nodacio de arteria, e en aquel es temor.	And the accidental is according to two manners of which one is like nodes green, and the other manner is like pustule which is done by constriction of artery, and in that is fear.
E no cove que·s fassa presumpcio a lu cum ferr sino en aquel que es petit.	And don't make the patient wear armor except in those who are small.
E tu proha aquel e investigua aquel am le dit, e si atrobas lu semblant a nodi gras, e no es suspendut am alcuna de las venas, lahoras tu inscideys aquel ayssi cum les nodes, e extratz aquel am aquo que conte lu de la pel e bursiclam; e sino, lahoras es perscrutat tot le sieu esser, e aprop cura le loc am aquo que cove de curacio entro que sia sanat.	And you examine that and inspect it as he said, and if you find it looking like a knotted vein, not suspended from any of the veins, then cut into it along with the knots, and pull out what is inside it from the skin and bursa; and if not, then probe his whole body, and apply medicine to the area so that it may heal.
Capitol .xlv.	Chapter .45.
De seccio de las specias de nodes.	Of the cutting of the various types of knots.
Dels nodes so motas specias e yeu ja he dit totas las specias de lor en la divisio.	There are many types of knots, and I have already discussed all their types in the division.
E cove que yeu recomte assi la diferencia entre node e exitura cum fassa dubitacio.	And one should know the difference between a knot and an exit as there is doubt.
Donc yeu dic que am exitura es caliditat e febre e dolors vehementz entro que es sedada la ebullicio de la superfluitat; e es complida putrefaccio que lahora cessa la febre, la dolor e la calor.	Therefore, I say that with an exit there is heat and violent fever and pain until the ebullition of the superfluity is subdued; and there is completed putrefaction when the fever, pain, and heat cease.
Mays am node no es caliditat ni febre ni dolor, e conte aquel ciphac leon le qual es al u sac propri.	But with a knot, there is no heat or fever or pain; it contains that lion's tooth which has its own bag.
E es segon la color del cors, e le comensament de lu es cum un ceze e es fayt ayssi cum vace, sia major o minor, e son segon dos specias, quar o so grassas e conteno humiditat, e las colors de la humiditat son motas, segon que yeu diyssi en la divisio.	And it is according to the color of the body, and its beginning is like a cyst and it is made like a bag, either major or minor, and they are according to two species, for one is fatty and contains humidity, and the colors of humidity are many, according to what I discussed in the division.
Donc cove, quan pervenas a la curacio de node, que exprohes aquel e inquiras aquel al comensament am sturment le qual es apelat intromes, segon que vindra la sua forma en le capitol le qual es aprop aquest.	Therefore, when you come to the cure of a knot, probe it and open it at its beginning with an instrument called an intromis, according to what its form will be in the chapter which is next.
E es manieyra de inquisicio de apostemas e de totz nodes, e es que tu prenguas aquest sturment e entromet aquel en le loc pus humit le qual atrobas en le apostema, e tu revolveras les tieus ditz am aquel petit a petit entro que sapias que·l sturment ja ha penetrat la codena.	And it is the method of probing abscesses and all knots, and it is that you take this instrument and insert it into the most moist place that you find in the abscess, and you twist your fingers with it little by little until you know that the instrument has penetrated the membrane.
E aprop ultima la tua ma segon la mesura de la grandeza del apostema, e aprop extratz le entromes e considera aquo que es yssit en le vestigi de lu.	Then place your hand over it according to the measurement of the size of the abscess, and pull out the instrument and consider what has come out in its trail.
E si es fora-getada la humiditat corrent, de qualque color sia, lahoras tu le inscideys am seccio superficial segon que he dit en les autres apostemas.	And if the humidity is flowing out, of whatever color it may be, then probe it with a superficial cut according to what I have said about other abscesses.
E si del vestigi de l’intromes no hieys humiditat, lahoras sapias que es gras.	And if you do not get humidity from the trail of the instrument, then know that it is fatty.
E secca sobre lu am seccio havent forma de crotz segon aquesta forma:	And cut over it in a form of a cross according to this form:
ayssi cum t’e ensenhat, e suspen aquel am oncis, e excorja la codena de tota part am facilitat, e guarda la pel o sac, si podes, sobre aquel e extraguas aquela sania am le node.	Thus you have taught it, and suspend that by the nails, and cut the membrane from all parts with ease, and keep the skin or bag, if you can, over that and pull out that pus along with the knot.
Mays si es romput en la operacio, no es possible extrayre aquela sana, e motas veguadas endeve aquo, e lahoras tu la extratz a pessas entro que de lu no romangua denguna causa.	But if it is broken in the operation and it is not possible to pull out that pus, then you should cut it into pieces so that from it nothing may rupture again for any cause.
Quar si de lu roman denguna causa, pauc o trop, le node retorne segon le mays.	For if from it anything ruptures, whether a little or a lot, the knot will return according to the most.
E si tu vezes que de lu roman alcuna part petita, lahoras comple la plagua de alcunas polveras corrosivas agudas e strenh la plagua, e pausa sobre aquela que sede apostema caut, e cura aquel del autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	And if you see that from it any small part ruptures, then complete the wound with some corrosive powdered acids and strengthen the wound, and place over it what caused the abscess, and cure that by another cure until it is healed.
E si es node gran, lahoras tu cus las doas labias de lu e cura aquel am aquo que encarna.	And if the knot is large, then you cut its two lips and cure that with what incarnates.
Mays si vena pulsatil es a lu contraria, o no-pulsatil, lahoras tu coyta e huemple le loc de zegi trissat que es vetriol e leyssa aquel streyt per dos dias o per tres entro que·s poyresca la plagua e que repause la ebullicio del sanc; e aprop retorna a inscindir aquo que es romas del node.	But if pulsating blood comes to it contrary or non-pulsating, then you cut and fill the place of the vein that is veridical and let it rest for two or three days until the swelling of the blood subsides; then return to cutting what has ruptures in the knot.
Capitol .xlvi.	Chapter .46.
De las formas del sturmentz necessaris en seccio e perforacio.	Of the forms of the instruments necessary for probing and piercing.
De aquels so las formas dels intromesas, e so de tres specias, que de aquels es alcu gran, e de lor es migier, e de lor es petit.	Those are the forms of the intromises, and they are of three species; one is large, and one is middle-sized, and one is small.
La forma de intromes gran es aquesta:	The form of the large intromis is this:
La forma de intromes migier es aquesta:	The form of the middle-sized intromis is this:
La forma de intromes petit es aquesta:	The form of the small intromis is this:
Sian faytz de ferr, de alfulud, de extremitatz cayradas decentment, per so que festino le intrament en les apostemas.	They are made of iron, of full-hole, and of tapered ends, so that the instrument fits into the abscesses.
E aquestas so las formas dels experientz, e son nompnatz albered, e un de aquels es apelat berid.	And these are the forms of the experimenters, and they are called albaris, and one of them is called veridis.
E so de tres especias, quar de lor es gran, migier e pauc.	And they are of three species; one is large, middle-sized and small.
La forma de experient gran, forma de lu:	The form of the large experimenter's form is:
La forma de experient migier, forma de lu:	The form of the middle-sized experimenter's form is:
La forma de experient pauc, forma de lu:	The form of the small experimenter's form is:
Conveneysso que sian per aquels apostemas e exituras e fistulas e bubos per so que entre aquelas so dels osses e de autras causas.	They are convenient for abscesses and exits and fistulas and boils, so that they fit between those [bones] and from other causes.
E so faytz redontz, grosses, leons, ayssi cum grans agulhas am las quals son cosidas las selhas, e son faytas de eram citri, o de eram o de ferr, o de argent, E las milhors so quan so faytas de eram citri.	And they are made round, large, and pointed, with which needles are sewn, and they are made of ramon citrin, or of ramon, or of iron, or of silver; and the best are when they are made of ramon citrin.
E son faytz les experient de plum negre, les quals se acordan que per aquels sian ubertas las fistulas en la conquavitat de las quals so reflexios, que sian reflectidas am la sua levitat am aquelas refleccios.	And they are made the experimenters of black feathers, which are considered that through them the fistulas are opened in the cavities in which they are reflected by their levitation with those reflections.
E so de tres specias, quar alcus de lor so loncs, e dels autres migiers, e dels autres breus, segon la quantitat del ample de la fistula e de la strictura de lu.	And they are of three species; some of them are long, and some middle-sized, and others short, according to the quantity of the opening of the fistula and its stricture.
Forma del experient gran de plom:	The form of the large experimenter made of lead is:
Forma del experient migier de plom:	The form of the middle-sized experimenter made of lead is:
Forma del experient petit de plom:	The form of the small experimenter made of lead is:
Las formas dels oncis so de motas specias, quar de aquels so alcus simples, als quals es una curvitat solament, e so de tres specias: grans, paucs e migiers.	The forms of the nails are of many species; some of them are simple, having only one curve, and they are of three species: large, small, and middle-sized.
E de lor so uncis orps, e so de tres specias.	And their bodies are hooked, and they are of three species.
E de aquels so uncis haventz doas curvaturas, e so de tres specias.	And some of them have two curves, and they are of three species.
E de lor so haventz tres curvaturas, e so de tres specias.	And some of them have three curves, and they are of three species.
E totz aquetz so necessaris en lor loc.	And all of those are necessary in their place.
Forma de unci simple gran, forma de lu:	The form of the large simple nail is:
Forma de unci simple migier:	The form of the middle-sized simple nail is:
Forma de unci simple pauc, forma de lu:	The form of the small simple nail is:
Forma de unci orp gran:	The form of the large nail with a body is:
Forma de unci orp migier, forma de lu:	The form of the middle-sized nail with a body is:
Forma de unci orp pauc, forma de lu:	The form of the small nail with a body is:
Forma de unci gran havent dos curvaturas:	The form of the large nail with two curves is:
Forma de unci migier havent dos curvatas:	The form of the middle-sized nail with two curves is:
Forma de unci pauc havent dos curvaturas:	The form of the small nail with two curves is:
Forma de unci gran havent tres curvaturas:	The form of the large nail with three curves is:
Forma de unci migier havent tres curvaturas:	The form of the middle-sized nail with three curves is:
Forma de unci pauc havent tres curvaturas:	The form of the small nail with three curves is:
E aquestas so las formas dels scalpels am les quals son seccatz e scorjatz les nodes e le apostemas, e so de tres specias, quar de aquels es gran, migier, e pauc.	And these are the forms of the scalpels with which they cut and pierce the knots and abscesses; and they are of three species; one is large, middle-sized, and small.
Forma de scapel gran:	The form of the large scalpel is:
Forma del scapel migier:	The form of the middle-sized scalpel is:
Forma de scapel pauc:	The form of the small scalpel is:
Las extramitatz de aquels am les quals es fayta seccio so agudas e las autres extramitatz so no-agudas, e no so pausadas en tal manieyra, sino per que sia fayt juvament en la excorjacio dels nodes la temor de inscizio de vena o de nervi, e per aquels sia sanat le malaute e atrobe tranquilitat un petit per la adustio la qual atroba deves la excoriacio del apostema.	The ends of those with which is made the cut are pointed and the other ends are not, and they are not placed in such a way that it is done gently in the cutting of the knots the fear of piercing of vein or nerve; and by them the patient is healed and given rest a little by the scaring of the abscess.
E aquestas son las formas de almagidas, e so de tres specias: gran, migier e pauc, ayssi cum veyras.	And these are the forms of bandages, which are of three kinds: large, medium and small, as you will see.
La forma de magda gran:	The form of a large bandage:
Forma de magda migier:	Form of medium bandage:
Forma de magda pauc:	Form of small bandage:
Sian faytas de eram e so semblantz de ray am le qual e fayt alcofol.	They are made of wool and are similar to a round shield.
E es en la extramitat lada punctada am spatum occultada e en aquela corr a las partidas dedintz e defora, quan tu vols, ayssi cum veses.	And it is punctured on the outer edge, concealed with a spatula, and the inner part, inside and out, as you wish, as you see.
Las formas de spatimis, les quals so amaguatz entre los ditz deves la perforacio dels apostemas e no les percebo les malautes, e so de tres specias: gran, migier e pauc.	The forms of spatulas, which are hidden between the fingers through the piercing of the pustules and are not perceived by the patients. And they are of three kinds: large, medium and small.
E aquestas so las formas de aquels:	And these are their forms:
Las formas de ventozas am las quals es abscindit le flux del sanc, e so de tres specias; gran, migiera e pauca; las formas de lu:	The forms of vents through which the flow of blood is stopped, and they are of three kinds: large, medium and small. Their forms are as follows:
Sian faytas de eram citri, redondas am alcuna longitut , e sian subtils.	They are made of citrus tree bark, round with some length, and are thin.
E cove que sian aquestas specias de ventosas deves tu grans, migieras e paucas, per so que per aquelas abscindas flux de sanc am velocitat en necessitat, e lahoras quan a tu primieyrament no es medicina.	And these kinds of vents stop the flow of blood with great speed when there is a need and they are not used for the first time as medicine.
Enpero no uses de aquelas ad abscidir sanc en tot loc del cors, e non uses sino en locs carnoses, ayssi cum en les lacertis de las cambas e de las coyssas, e en les lacertz dels brasses, e de las mamillas e del ventre e dels engonars, e semblantz a lor dels lacertz carnoses humitz.	However, do not use these to stop the flow of blood in all parts of the body, but only in fleshy places, such as on the insides of the arms and thighs, and on the flesh of the chest, breasts, belly, armpits, and similar fleshy parts with moist skin.
E alcunas veguadas son faytz de aquels strumentz autres petitz semblantz scorsas de fisacs segon aquesta forma; per les quals lo sanc es abscindit quan es fayt per fleubotomia, o deves inscizio de vena o de arceria.	And sometimes these instruments are made smaller, similar in shape to scrotal sacs, through which blood is stopped when a phlebotomy or an incision of a vein or artery is performed.
E alcunas veguadas son faytas redondas segon aquesta forma:	And sometimes they are made round like this:
Capitol .xlvii.	Chapter 47.
De la cura de las mamillas dels homes las quals so asembladas de femnas.	On the treatment of men's breasts, which are similar to women's.
Alcunas veguadas so infladas las mamillas de alcus homes deves le compliment del dormir cum comensan esser pellutz, e aprop so infladas las mamillas, e so asembladas las mamillas de las femnas, e romano apostemosas, lejas.	Sometimes men's breasts are swollen due to a sleeping habit when they start to become hairy, and then the breasts become swollen, resembling women's breasts, and become painful to the touch.
E ad aquel que avoreys aquo, cove que inscidisca aquelas am seccio lunar segon aquesta forma, de la linha de .B. entro a la linha de .G., e aprop excorja la groceza tota, e aprop uempla la plagua de medicament encarnatiu, e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am cosidura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And for this, when you cut into them with a lunar incision according to this form, from the line .B. to the line .G., and then remove all the thickness, fill the wound with embodied medicine, and then sew the two lips of the wound together and heal what is left.
Mays si la mamilla declina a las partidas dejos e es mollificada per la sua magnitut ayssi cum endeve a las femnas, lahoras sia fendut en dos latz sieus pus sobiras, am dos seccios semblantz a figura lunar, de las quals quascuna sia contenguda en l’autra deves la fi de quascuna, entro que sia que la linha major contengua la menor segon aquesta forma de la linha de .B. e la linha de .G. E aprop excorja la codena la qual es entre dos labias de la plagua, e osta la pingueza, e aministra aquo que havem dit de la sutura e de las polveras aquo que es necessari en la curacio entro que sia sanat.	But if the breast sags towards the sides and is softened by its weight like women'e breasts, then it should be cut into two parts at its middle with two incisions resembling a lunar figure, so that each part contains the other because of their connection, as the longer line contains the shorter one according to this form, from line .B. to line .G. And then remove the cord which is between the two lips of the wound, and scrape away the pimple-like growths, and administer what we have said about the suturing and powders that are necessary in the healing process until it is healed.
E si tu non conpleysses la inscizio de aquo que cove inscidir per la inquietut del malaute, e per flux de sanc, lahoras cove que huemplas la plagua de coto submergit en enguent corrosiu e layssa aquel entro que aquo corroda que es romas de la grayssa, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if you do not complete the incision of what needs to be cut because of the patient's restlessness and blood flow, then fill the wound with cotton soaked in corrosive ointment and leave it there until it corrodes the roughness, and then heal what is left.
Capitol .xlviii.	Chapter 48.
De perforacio de apostemas que veno dejos le titillic.	On piercing pustules that come from below and cause itching.
Aquetz apostemas que veno dejos le titillic so de las specias de scrophulas, durs, las quals conte una pel que es sac.	Those pustules that come from below and cause itching are of the kinds of scrofula, hard, and contain a sac-like substance.
E de aquelas so alcunas que conteno humiditatz; e aquelas que conteno humiditatz cove que sian inscididas am seccio lunar segon aquesta figura: de la linha de .G. a la linha de .B. E cum es tot evacuat aquo que es en le apostema de la sania, lahoras tu le comple de coto viel e leysa le entro al autra dia.	And some contain moisture; and those that contain moisture should be punctured with a lunar incision like this: from line .G. to line .B. And when all the pus is evacuated from the pustule, fill it with wool and leave it for another day.
E aprop le coto sia ostat e sia curat am enguent convenient ad aquo, entro que sia sanat.	And then the wound should be cleaned and healed with a suitable ointment until it is healed.
E si le apostema de las specias dels nodes es, e de las scrophulas, lahoras tu scindeys sobre aquel ayssi cum havem dit en la seccio sobre las scrophulas engualment.	And if the pustules of the kinds of nodules and scrofula, then you should split them as we have said in the section on scrofula above.
May si la plagua es extenduda en aysso que yesca poyredura, lahoras administra en lu cauteri segon que en aquo havem denant dit.	But if the wound extends so that it causes pus discharge, then administer a cautery as we have said before in this section.
Capitol .xlix.	Chapter 49.
De seccio de apostemas que accideysso per arceria o per vena.	On incisions of pustules that occur through an artery or vein.
Quan arceria es rompuda, e la codena es consolidada la qual es sobre aquela, lahoras motas veguadas accideys apostema E les senhals per les quals es conoguda que imflamacio e apostema sian per la arteria o per vena: quar quan apostema es per arceria es lonc agreguat en le preon del cors; e que quan inpelleysses le apostema am les tieus ditz, sentes en lu quays sia stridor.	When an artery is broken and the vein that is on top of it is hardened, then many times pustules occur because inflammation and pustules are caused by an artery or vein: when a pustule occurs through an artery, it is long-lasting in the depth of the body; and when you push on the pustule with your fingers, you feel a wheezing.
E aquel que es per vena es redon al manifest del cors.	And what occurs through a vein is spread out throughout the superficial parts of the body.
E seccio sobre aquest apostema es error, e majorment en aquel que es dejos las aysselhas, e en les angonars, e en le col, e en motz locs del cors; e es mot gran, donc cove que la sua curacio am ferr sia esquivada, e aquel que es en las extramitatz, o al cap, cove que sia evitat.	And an incision on this pustule is dangerous, especially in what is below the armpits, and in the groin, and in the neck, and in many parts of the body; and it is large, therefore its treatment with a cautery should be avoided, and what is on the extremities, or the head, should be avoided.
Mays sobre aquel que es de lor per imflacio de l’orrifici de la arceria, scindeys en la codena seccio en le lonc; e aprop huebre la seccio am uncis e aprop la arceria, e deliura de las tunicas entro que sia descuberta.	But for what occurs through inflammation of the opening of an artery, split it in its vein with a long incision; and then open the incision with pincers and then the artery and loosen the membranes that have been uncovered.
E aprop met sobre aquel agulha e fay aquela penetrar entro al autre latz, e estrenh la arceria am fiel doble en dos locs, — la qual causa yeu a tu eyssenhegui en extraccio de doas arcerias les quals so en les templars.	And then place an awl on that and make it penetrate to the other side, and narrow the artery with a double-edged knife in two places, which causes a shuddering when you pull on both arteries which are in the arms.
E aprop punh le loc le qual es entre dos liamentz am spatum entro que yesca le sanc tot que es en lu, e sia dissolvut le apostema.	And then plug up the place that is between two membranes with a spatula so that the blood in it is all discharged, and the pustule is dissolved.
E aprop administra curacio en la qual es engendrat poyre entro que caian les liamentz; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz convenientz ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	And then administer a cure in which pus is generated inside when the membranes fall, and then heal that with suitable ointments until it is healed.
E si es apostema per seccio de vena, lahoras cove que tu tenguas am la tua ma aquo que es a tu possible del apostema am la codena, e aprop intromet la agulha dejos le loc le qual tu has tengut dejos la tua ma, e fay aquela penetrar; e sia en aquela fil doble entro que tu extraguas aquel del autre latz, e aprop ligua le apostema am bo liament segon que yeu he dit a tu en le liament de uva4 de doas partz am doas extremitatz del fil.	And if it is a pustule due to an incision of a vein, then you must hold with your hand what is possible of the pustule by its vein, and then insert an awl below where you have held with your hand, and make it penetrate; and narrow it with a double-edged knife so that you pull out from the other side, and then ligature the pustule with a thin thread according to what you feel when pulling on two parts with two extremities of the thread.
Mays si temes que extraguam le fil, lahoras entromet le fiel am aquela agula dejos tot le apostema deves la inscizio de la agulha primieyra, e strenh les tieus fiels en quatre locs.	But if you fear that the thread is pulled out, then insert the awl below all of the pustule due to the incision of the awl first, and narrow your fingers in four places.
Aprop secca le apostema en le mieg loc de lu entro que quan es yssit aquo que es en lu, lahoras tu inscideys la superfluitat de la codena, e layssa aquo que de lu es liat.	Then dry the pustule in its middle part where it comes out so that when it is dried up, you split open the excess of the vein, and leave what is left.
E aprop pausa sobre lu pulvil le qual has submergit en vi e oli, e aprop administra la curacio la qual es fayta am calguas e enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And then place over it a powder which you have soaked in wine and oil, and then administer the cure which is made with poultices and ointments until it is healed.
Capitol l del apostema le qual accideys per torcio de nervis.	Chapter 50 on pustules that occur due to torque of nerves.
Ayssi cum accideys apostema en arceria e en vena, e semblantment accideys apostema en les nervis quan accideys en lor percussio o accideys per trebal superfluable, e per semblantz.	Like pustules occur in arteries and veins, and similarly pustules occur in nerves when they occur due to a blow or occur due to excessive twisting.
E es fayt le mays de lu en les locs dels adjutoris o del talo, o en tot loc en le qual so maugudas las juncturas.	And it occurs most often in the places of the helpers, or in the heel, or any place where the joints are crushed.
E es apostema greu, e es asemblat a la color del autre cors, e es en las majors de lu disposicios ses de lor e quan es streyt am vehementia, sent en lu le malaute semblant stupor.	And it is a serious pustule, and is similar in color to the rest of the body, and has six dispositions in it, and when it is pressed hard, the patient feels a stupor.
E no es apostema agreguat en le preon del cors, e per so es dejos la codena, e el es maugut a tota partida e no va a las partidas denant ni detras.	And it is not pustule-like in the abdomen, and because of that, it is below the diaphragm, and he is unable to move his arms or legs.
Donc aquo de aquels que es en las juncturas no cove que sia envasit am ferr, quar fort leu endevenguera contracio.	Therefore, for those who have pain in their joints, there is no need for the application of lead, because shortly it would cause contraction.
Mays aquel que es en le cap o en le front fen la codena am spatum.	However, for those with pain in their head or forehead, open the diaphragm with a spatula.
Mays si es apostema pauc, lahoras te aquel am les forfecs e abscindeys aquel de razitz.	But if there are only a few pustules, then take out that one with tweezers from its root.
E si es gran, lahoras tu le suspen am unci, e excorja aquel, e aprop osta aquel; e ajusta la plagua am sutura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if it is large, then open it with a blade, and remove the pus from inside, and then close that wound with stitches, and treat the wound so that it heals properly.
Capitol .li.	Chapter 7.
De seccio de apostema le qual accideys de cheil que accideys al ventre.	Of the section of pustules which happens to the jaw, which happens in the stomach.
Endeveno ad alcus homes motas veguadas en les ventres de aquels e en las autras partidas del cors de aquels theils les quals son apelatz funguals per similitut de aquels am funges, dels quals la razitz es subtil e·l cap de aquel es gros; e ja las labias de aquels so conversas, e es de aquels que es petit, e es de aquels que es mot magnificat.	Some men have pustules in their stomachs and other parts of the body which are called funguals due to their similarity to fungi. The root of these pustules is thin but their head is thick; some of these men have chapped lips, some are small while others become very large.
E yeu ja e vist un, e en le ventre de lu eran dos theils les quals eran mays a funges semblantz, e no era diferencia entre aquels blancs, de menuda razitz.	And I have seen one such person whose stomach had two pustules that looked like fungi; there was no difference in them except for their size, some were small and thin-rooted while others were larger.
E ja las labias de aquels eran enversadas e se fendian, e humiditat corria de aquel tot temps.	And the lips of these people would crack and bleed, and moisture would flow from them all the time.
Donc yeu inscidegui aquels e atrobegui en la un en pes quays xviii unc. e l’autre quays vi unc.	Therefore I opened those pustules and found one inside that weighed 18 ounces. The other one weighed six ounces.
E la operacio en la inscizio de lor es que consideres lahoras si·l malaute es humit, e la color de atheil es blanca, humit, de subtil razitz; lahoras tu le inscideys am spatum lat, e sian en la presencia tua cauteris en le foc, quar motas veguadas deves la seccio de lu es expellit mot sanc; e si te ventz le sanc, cauteriza aquel.	The operation at the beginning of these pustules is that one should consider if the patient is humid or dry, and the color of the pus is white, humid with thin roots; then open it with a wide blade and burn the pus with fire, because often the cutting of this pustule expels much blood; and if you see blood, cauterize it.
E si vezes le malaute pauruc e temeros, guarda te de inscizio am ferr; mays lahoras pren fiel de plom recent fayt, e strenh am aquel atheil, la manieyra del qual es aquela que havem dita; e leyssa aquel per dos dias.	And if you see the patient is fearful and timid, refrain from opening it with a blade; instead, take fresh lead ore and rub it on the pustule, in the way we previously described; then leave it for two days.
E aprop ajusta en la strictura del fil de plom; donc, no cesses strenher le plom granre devetz en theil, entro que sia abscindit e cayha per se ses trebalh.	Then tie it tightly with the lead wire; therefore, do not stop tightening the large lead wire around it until it is completely cut off and falls out on its own.
Mays si theil es de grossa razitz, lahoras en la inscizio de lu es alcuna causa de temor e de paor, e majorment en aquel que es en le ventre.	However, if the pustule has a thick root, then opening it causes fear and terror, especially when it is located in the stomach.
Mays possibla es que tu inscindas la maytat de lu , e aprop cauteriza aquel per que no retorne.	But you can cut it partially, and then cauterize it so that it does not return.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanada la plagua.	Then treat the wound so that it heals properly.
E guarda te que tu no presumas inscidir theil le qual es de fusca color, de pauc sentiment, de leg reguardament, quar aquel es absi cancros.	And beware of opening a pustule that is dark in color and feels insensitive to touch, because it is often cancerous.
E yeu vindre am rememoracio de cranc aprop aysso.	And I have seen this happen many times.
Capitol .lii.	Chapter 8.
De curacio de eminencia del umbilic.	Of the treatment of hernia of the navel.
Eminencia del umbilic es fayta per motas causas; o per fissuras del ciphac le qual es sobre le ventre, e yeys de lu la tela o budel segon que endeve en las autras rupturas; o per sanc le qual flueys de vena o de arceria segon que es denant dit, o per ventositat coarctada en lu.	Hernia of the navel is caused by many things: either by fissures on the diaphragm which is located above the stomach, or by the tissue or intestine slipping through these openings; or by blood flowing from a vein or artery that is located in front, or by a constricted ventricle.
Mays si es per fissura del ciphac e per yssiment de la tela, lahoras la color del apostema es semblant a la color del cors; e es leon ses dolor, e aprop appar de divers situament.	But if it is caused by a fissure in the diaphragm and a tear in the tissue, then the pustule has a similar color to the rest of the body; it also has less pain, and appears in different places.
E si es per egressio del budel, lahoras le situament de aquel am lu de aquo que havem recontat, de mays vehement diversitat, e cum tu premes aquel am les tieus ditz es occultat, e aprop retorna; e fort leu es am lu so, e es magnificat mot deves le introt de banh e vehement trebalh.	And if it is caused by a slipping of the intestine, then its position will be as we previously described, with more intense variations, and when you press it with your fingers it hides, and then returns; and soon it becomes very large due to taking baths and strenuous activity.
Mays si per humiditat, lahoras es leon e no es occultat quan premes am la tua ma, ni es constrengut, ni es cregut.	But if it is caused by humidity, then it is soft and does not hide when you press it with your hand, nor is it constricted or burned.
E si es per sanc, lahoras am aquestz senhals apareys le apostema a negror declinant.	And if it is caused by blood, then it has dark-inclined pustules with these signs.
Mays si es per carn nada, lahoras es apostema greu, gros e dur, e es ficat segon una quantitat.	But if it is caused by a tumor, then it is a serious and large pustule, hard and firm, and it grows according to its quantity.
Mays si es per ventositat, lahoras le tocament de lu es leon.	But if it is caused by a ventricle, then touching it causes pain.
E la operacio en lu es que consideras lahoras si la eminencia de l’umbilic es per sanc de arceria, o de vena, o per ventositat; lahoras cove que sias prohibit de la curacio de lu, quar en aquela es temor e paor ayssi cum t’e ensenhat en le capitol en le qual he dit les apostemas per arceria e per vena.	And the operation on it is that one should consider if the hernia of the navel is caused by blood from an artery or vein, or by a ventricle; then one must refrain from treating it because there is fear and terror in that, as we instructed in the chapter where we talked about pustules caused by arteries and veins.
E si la eminencia del umbilic es per le budel o per la tela, lahoras cove que comandes al malaute que tengua le ale sieu, e sia stant extendut; e aprop senha am tenta en le circuit de tot le umbilic, e aprop comanda a lu que stia envers entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos, e aprop circunda am spatum lat en le circuit del umbilic sobre le loc le qual has senhat am la tenta; e aprop exten la maytat del apostema a las partidas desus am unci gran; e aprop lia en le circuit am fiel fort o am ceda e la manieyra del liar decent.	And if the hernia of the navel is caused by the intestine or tissue, then command the patient to lie on his back, and be standing upright; then touch with your fingers around the entire navel, and then command him to press his chest against your hands while you are pressing the area above the navel with a wide blade; then extend the pustule to the sides with strong pressure or with tweezers in a decent manner.
E aprop huebre le mieg del apostema extendut sobre le liament e intromet le dit tieu en aquel indic e quereys le budel; e si tu l’as atrobat ni guardat per le liament, lahoras tu extratz alxorati e impelleys le budel a las partidas dedintz del ventre.	Then open the mouth of the extended pustule above the navel and insert your finger into it; and if you have pushed it back and held it there, then pull out the intestine towards the inside of the stomach.
E si has atrobada la tela, lahoras pren aquel am unci; e inscideys las superfluitatz de lu.	And if you have pushed back the tissue, then take that with tweezers; and cut off its excess.
Mays si es contraria a tu arceria o vena, lahoras circunda aquel mot, e aprop retorna a la tua operacio; e pren dos agulhas e met en aquelas dos fiels fortz e entromet dos agulhas en le circuit le qual has feyt entorn le apostema en manieyra de crotz, las quals fassas penetrar; e aprop strenh le apostema en quatre partidas sobre las agulhas.	But if it is pressing against an artery or vein, then surround it greatly and return to your operation; take two needles and insert them in the circle you made around the pustule in the form of a cross, with the needles penetrating through; then tighten the pustule into four parts on top of the needles.
E si tu vols, osta las agulhas e leyssa le loc entro que poyresca la carn extenduda e caia per si; o inscideys aquel quan es subtiliat e se poyreys, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And if you want, remove the needles and let the flesh that has been extended and dropped on its own; or open it when it becomes thinner and is about to drop, then treat it with what is suitable for its healing.
E si la eminencia del ombilic es de carn nada en lu o per humiditat, lahoras cove que tu conquaves le apostema ayssi cum havem dit e estraguas le sanc o la humiditat, la qual atrobas en lu, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove e que consolide le loc.	And if the hernia of the navel is caused by a tumor or humidity, then you must open the pustule as we previously described and dry out the blood or humidity which you find in it; then treat it with what is suitable and consolidate the wound.
Capitol .liii.	Chapter 9.
De curacio de cranc.	Of the treatment of cancer.
Ja havem dit, en la divisio, de specia de cranc e en qual manieyra es via a la curacio de lu am medicinas, e que es squivador en lu la curacio am ferr per so que no sia ulcerat; e havem dit cranc engendrat en la mayra e cautela de la curacio de lu.	We have already said in the division of cancer and how it is treated with medicine, and that it is dangerous to treat it with iron without first being ulcerated; we have also talked about cancers generated in the mother and the caution in treating them.
E diyssero les antics que alcunas veguadas cranc es en loc on es possibla la eradicacio de lu, ayssi cum de cran le qual es en las mamillas o en la coyssa e a lor semblantz dels membres allocat a estrayre tot aquel, e majorment quan es comensant petit.	And the ancients said that sometimes cancer appears in places where it is possible to eradicate it, like cancers located in the breasts or in the groin and their branches are similar to those of the limbs; therefore, one should extract all of it, especially when it starts small.
Mays quan es antiquat e es gra, no cove que te propries a lu, quar yeu non pogui sanar de aquel alcu ni no he vist autre, ni que sia pervengut ad aquo.	But when it is old and large, one must not approach it, because I have never seen anyone healed from that illness nor become better.
E la operacio en lu es quan es allocat ayssi cum havem dit, es que tu precedescas e laysses le malaute e purgues de colera negra alcunas veguadas, e aprop sagna aquel, si es atrobada replecio manifesta.	And the operation on it is, when it is located as we previously described, to make him rest and give him black hellebore several times; then bleed that person, if there is evident congestion.
E aprop prepara le malaute am preparacio en le qual sia locat am operacio, e aprop prohiceys en le trauc uncis les quals cove ad aquel; e aprop concava de tota part am la codena sego bona perexcrutacio entro que no romangua alcuna causa de las razitz de lu.	And then prepare the patient with a preparation in which he will be operated on, and you shall cut off the nails of the fingers and toes that belong to him; and then from all sides with a good incision, do a thorough examination so that no cause remains in the roots of him.
E layssa correr le sanc, e no abscidas aquel leugierament, e exprem les locs, e abstergeys le sanc gros tot am la tua ma o am instrument am le qual es a tu possible dels instruments.	And let the blood flow, and do not cut off the wound quickly, and squeeze out the places, and wipe away the blood with your hand or with an instrument with which it is possible for you to do so from the instruments.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat de sanc gros inscizio de vena o de arceria, lahoras cauterisa aquela entro que·l flux del sanc sia cessat, e aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	But if it troubles you with the flow of blood from a vein or an artery, then cauterize that area so that the flow of blood is stopped; and then cure that wound with another treatment until it is healed.
Capitol .liv.	Chapter 44:
De curacio de ydropici.	Of the treatment for dropsy.
Nos ja havem recomtat, en la divisio, de las specias de ydropici de l’aygua, e les senhals de quascuna especia, de la curacio de lu am medicinas.	We have already recounted, in the division, of the species of dropsy from water, and the signs of each species, of its cure with medicines.
E aquela la qual es curada am ferr no es sino la specia de althitas sola, e no es aproximat am ferr a la specia de timpanistres ni a la especia de yposarcha, quar aquo es mortal.	And that which is cured by iron is nothing other than the species of [dropsy] from bile alone; and it is not approached with iron to the species of tympany nor to the species of hyposaracha, for these are deadly.
E quan tu ja has medicat aquesta especia de ydropici timpanistre am medicinas e no comfereys la tua medicacio, lahoras considera, quar si al malaute ja es conseguida debelitat, o es am aquel autra malautia otra ydropici, ayssi cum si es en lu tos o cos de ventre e semblant ad aquels, lahoras guarda te que no le mediques am ferr, quar temor es sobre aquo.	And when you have treated this species of tympany with medicines and your treatment does not help him, then consider: for if the patient is already weakened, or is suffering from another malady, or another dropsy, like this if there is a cough or sickness in his abdomen and similar to these, then beware that you do not treat them with iron, for fear of this.
Mays si tu vezes le malaute de vertut exuberant, e am lu no es autra malautia sino ydropici tant solament, e no enfant ni vielh, lahoras la manieyra de la operacio de lu es que tu eleves le malaute entre las tuas mas, e le ministre aprop lu exprema le ventre de lu am la sua ma, enpellen la aygua a la partida dejos del pentenilh, e aprop pren spatum spinos segon aquesta forma:	But if you see the patient swollen with fluid, and there is no other malady in him except for dropsy alone, and he is not a child or an old man, then the manner of operating on him is that you elevate the patient between your hands, and you squeeze his abdomen with your hand, filling up the water from below the navel, and you take the spathe of thorns according to this shape:
sia de dos partz agudas lonc, de aguda extremitat ayssi cum spatum; mays empero sia en lu alcuna brevitat petit a petit, per so que en la operacio am aquel no passes entro al budel, e que ledas aquel.	Let it be of two acute parts long, with an acute end like a spathe; but let there be in it some small brevity little by little, so that during the operation you do not pass into the intestine, and take out that.
E aprop considera si la generacio de ydropici es de part dels budels, quar lahoras cove que tu am la seccio te alonhes del ombelic per la quantitat de tres ditz a las partidas dejos, en le dreyt de lu sobre le pentenilh.	And then consider if the generation of the dropsy is from the parts of the intestines, for then you should with the section lengthen him from the navel down by the amount of three digits at the lower ends, in his right side over the navel.
Mays si la generacio de hydropici es per malautia del fietge, lahoras la tua seccio sia sinistra del ombilic per tres ditz.	But if the generation of dropsy is from an illness of the liver, then your section should be left of the navel by three digits.
E si la generacio de lu es per la melsa, lahoras la tua seccio sia en le las dreyt.	And if its generation is from phlegm, then your section should be on the right.
E no cove que la tua seccio sia sobre le costat sobre le qual vol jaser le malaute per que no corron las superfluitatz ad aquel loc freul.	And do not let your section be over the side where he wants to lie so that the superfluities do not flow to that place.
E aprop perfora am le instrument tota la codena, e aprop entromet en aquela seccio, e eleva la tua ma am le spatum entre la codena e·l siphac, e tu excorja aquel; e si’ la quantitat de una ungla o enviro.	And then pierce with the instrument throughout the whole cavity, and insert into that section, and elevate your hand with the spathe between the cavity and the sphincter, and you drain him out; and if it is the quantity of a fingernail or as much.
E aprop perforo le ciphac entro que pervengua le spatum al loc vuoyt, e es loc de l’aygua.	And then pierce the sphincter until the spathe reaches the desired location, and it is where the water is.
E aprop extratz aquel e entromet un instrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	And then take out that and insert an instrument of which this is the shape:
e es semblant a canula de argent subtil; es fayt de argent o de eram o de lato leon, al qual en la partida pus bassa de lu es un petit trauc, e en les costatz de lu so tres traucs: dos de una partida e un del autra partida; e fayta es la extremitat de lu insciza segon la manieyra de pluma, ayssi cum vezes:	and is like a cannula of silver subtle; it is made of silver or brass or lion-skin, to which at its lower end there is a small cut, and on its sides are three cuts: two from one side and one from the other side; and its end is split according to the manner of a feather, just like:
E en la extramitat de lu pus sobirana es armilla, quar quan le instrument perve al aygua, lahoras aquela tantost deysen sobre le instrument, donc evacua de l’aygua en la ora miega quantitat, quar si tu evacuas de aquela mes que no cove en la hora, fort leu mor le malaute per resolucio del sieu spirit animal, o accideys a lu cincopi que es appropinquada la mort.	And at the upper end of it there is a ring, for when the instrument reaches the water, then that immediately falls upon the instrument, thus evacuating the water in a small amount at a time; for if you evacuate more than that which does not return in the hour, then the patient will die quickly from resolution of his animal spirit, or he will suffer a fivefold death that is near to death.
Mays evacua de aquela segon la quantitat de la vertut de lu e segon que significan a tu las disposicios del malaute de la vertut del pols de lu e de la bontat de lu.	But evacuate from that according to the quantity of his strength and according to what are shown to you the dispositions of the patient's strength by his pulse and his goodness.
E aprop extrats le instrument, e rete l’aygua la qual causa es quar tantost es retenguda per la codena la qual rete le trauc que es sobre le ciphac del qual e recomtat a tu que perfores aquel segon aquela manieyra.	And then take out the instrument and let the water remain, for its cause is that it is retained by the cavity which closes over the sphincter of which you are told to pierce according to this manner.
E aprop itera le instrument al autra dia si vezes le malaute tollerant aquo, e extratz de la aygua petita quantitat, e fay aquo per alcus jorns sobre temor, e guarda te de error entro que no romangua de l’aygua sino pauc.	And then return the instrument on another day if he can endure that, and take out a little of the water, and do this for several days with caution, and beware of errors so that not too much remains in the water but only a few drops.
Mays si tu temes sobre le malaute, e leyssas de l’aygua gran quantitat, lahoras cura aquel am sepultura en arena cauda, e mota suzor en banh, e al solelh espere per lonc temps; e cura aquel am medicinas dessicativas entro que sia sanat.	But if you fear for the patient and let out of the water a great quantity, then cure him with dry medicine in a bath until he is healed.
E cauteriza sobre le stomac, e la melsa e·l fitge aprop la extraccio de l’aygua, segon que yeu he recontat en aquo que es precedit.	And cauterize over the stomach, and the phlegm and the liver, for the extraction of the water according to what I have recounted in that which precedes.
Capitol .lv.	Chapter 45:
De la curacio dels enfants les quals so natz les locs de la urina no-perforatz.	Of the cure of children whose places for urination are not pierced.
Alcunas veguadas alcun dels enfantz es eyssi del ventre de la sua mayre e·l cap de la sua mixtio no es perforat (o es trauc streyt o no es en son loc).	Sometimes a child is born from the belly of his mother and the head of his mixture is not pierced (or it is cut tightly or it is in its place).
Donc cove coytar am perforacio de lu tantost que es nascut am spatum mot subtil segon aquesta forma:	Then it should be touched with piercing of him immediately that he is born with spathe moved subtle according to this shape:
E aprop pausa en le trauc un clavil subtil de plom e ligua aquel, e te per tres jorns o per .iiii.tre.	And then stop in the cut a needle of lead and bind it, and let him be for three days or for four days.
E quant vol urinar sia remaugut e hurine; e aprop retorne aquel.	And when he wants to urinate let him be restrained and urinate; and then return that.
E si tu no pauses le plom, ja es possible que la urina la qual va sobre le loc, no leysa aquest claure.	And if you do not stop the lead, then it is possible that the urine which goes over the place does not harm this closure.
Mays aquel del qual le trauc es streyt sia medicat am clavil de Plom, ayssi cum havem dit, per trops dias entro que sia amplificat.	But he of whom the cut is tight should be treated with a needle of lead as we have said for several days until it is enlarged.
Mays aquels en les quals es le trauc no en son loc, so leditz, la qual causa es quar de aquels, aquel que es nat e·l trau es deves la fi del cap de la vergua per que no pot urinar a las partidas dedintz, entro que eleva la vergua am la sua ma a las partidas desus; e no es a lu generacio, per so quar le sperma no pot pervenir a la mayre segon rectitut, e es malautia mot laga.	But those in whom the cut is not in its place are led, for the cause is that of these, he who is born and the cut is from the end of the penis due to which it cannot urinate at the parts within, thus elevating the penis with his hand at the parts above; and it is not generation, therefore the sperm cannot arrive at the mother according to rectitude, and it is a sickly thing.
E la manieyra de la operacio en lu es que·l malaute sia envessat sobre le sieu dos, e aprop exten le cap de la vergua de lu am la tua ma sinistra am vehement extraccio, e inscideys le cap del cap de la vergua del loc del perpucii am spatum agut, ayssi cum es inscizio de pluma, o que tu ne razas alcuna partida, per so que·l mieg de lu vengua semblant al cap de la vergua e que le trauc caia en le mieg loc segon que cove.	And the manner of operation on him is that the patient be bent over his back, and then extend the penis with your left hand with violent extraction, and insert the head of the penis of the place of the foreskin with a spathe acute, like an incision of feather, or you scrape any part, so that the meat of him comes similar to the head of the penis and that the cut falls in the meat place according to where it should.
E guarda te que en la tua operacio de flux de sanc, quar motas vetz accideys aquo; e pausa te a lu am aquo que abscindeys le sanc, e cura la plagua entro que si’ sanada.	And beware that in your operation you flow blood, for many times it happens to him; and stop him with it that you draw out the blood, and cure the wound until if it is healed.
Capitol .lvi.	Chapter 46:
De albater le qual accideys en le prepucii en le cap de la vergua e de corropcio e negror e adherencia del prepucii del cap de la vergua.	Of whitlow which happens in the foreskin on the head of the penis and of hardness and blackness and adhesion of the foreskin of the head of the penis.
Motas veguadas accideys aquest albater en la vergua e es eminencia de carn laga.	Sometimes it happens to this whitlow in the penis and there is eminence of meat gone bad.
E de aquela una es maligna e autra es no-maligna.	And of one it is malignant and the other is not malignant.
No-maligna, cove que suspendas am unci subtil e abscindas aquela entro que aquela mondes tota; e aprop pausa sobre aquela coto submirgit en enguent egipciac; e aprop aquel, cura le am enguent diafinicon entro que sia sanat.	Non-malignant, suspend it with a needle and draw out that until the whole is drained; and then stop on that cot which is immersed in Egyptian ointment; and then cure that with ointment of dayfinicon until he is healed.
E si albater es maligna, de lega color, lahoras cove que tu aministres cauteri aprop la inscizio de lu e la razio de lu.	If the ulcer is malignant, of a dark color, then you should administer cautery near its edges and roots.
Mays si albater es en le prepuci del cap de la vergua no-circumcis, e la una partida de albater es dedintz le prepucii e l’autra partida es defora, lahoras cove que tu ostes albater le qual es dedintz al comensament entro que es consolidat; e lahora tu cura aquel deforo, quar quan tu curas aquel ensemps le prepuci, no es asegurat que no sia trinquat.	But if the ulcer is on the foreskin of the penis, and one part of the ulcer is within the foreskin and the other part is outside, then you should remove the ulcer which is inside at its beginning where it is attached; and then you should cure that which is outside, for when you cure that complex the foreskin will not be secured from being torn.
E ja eysamen accideys en les genetius e en le prepuci negror e corruccio, adonc cove que tu conquavas tot aquo que ja es denigrat e que ja se vol corrompre o que ja es corrumput; e aprop lineys sobre aquel aprop aquo am mel, le qual es contusit am farina de scorsa de milgrana e de errs trissatz e crivellatz.	And indeed we have seen this happen to the testicles and foreskin with blackness and corruption, so then you should cauterize all that which has turned black or is beginning to corrupt; and then spread over it ointment made from ground pomegranate peel mixed with ground and sieved bran.
E aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sana.	And then cure it with the other cure until it is healed.
Mays si endeve flux de sanc, lahoras aministra cauteri lunar segon aquesta forma:	But if there is bleeding, then administer lunar cautery in this way:
quar cauteri juvatiu es a dos disposicios ensemps, so es a flux de sanc e a la plagua quan es corrumpuda.	for cautery helps in two ways, namely for bleeding and for the plague when it is corrupted.
E si le cap de la vergua es corrodut e es destruit tot en la hora, lahoras cove que tu intrometas en lo meat del prepucii una canula de plom per so que le malaute urina per aquela.	And if the head of the penis is eaten away and destroyed completely, then you should insert into the opening of the foreskin a lead tube so that the patient urinates through it.
En la adherencia del prepucii am le cap de la vergua (et aquesta adherencia no accideys sino en aquel del qual le prepucii es sa, e sobre lu no es exhigida circumcizio; e quan accideys adherencia per plagua o per apostema) cove que excorjas am spatum obtus entro que sia dissolvut le liament e sia deliurat le cap de la vergua de tota partida.	In the adhesion of the foreskin to the head of the penis (and this adhesion does not happen except in that whose foreskin is loose, and on whom circumcision is not performed; and when adhesion happens due to plague or suppuration), then you should cut with a blunt spatula until the ligament is dissolved and the head of the penis is separated from all sides.
E si es dificil desirnir aquelas exquisidament, lahoras cove que tu excorjes am spatum alcuna causa del cap de la vergua e del prepucii, e aysso es quar le prepucii, quan es subtil, fort leu es perforat per la sua subtilitat leugierament.	And if it is difficult to separate them carefully, then you should cut with a spatula between the head of the penis and the foreskin, and this is why the foreskin, when it is thin, can be easily pierced due to its thinness.
E aprop separa entre·l prepucii e·l cap de la vergua am dra7 de li subtil, le qual ja es mulhat en l’aygua frega per que no adherescan autra veguada.	Then separate the foreskin and the head of the penis with a thin thread which has been moistened in water so that they do not adhere again.
E aprop sia curat am vi stiptic entro que sia consolidat.	And then it should be cured with a styptic until it is healed.
Capitol .lvii.	Chapter .LVII.
De mundificacio dels enfants e de la curacio de aquo que accideys ad aquels de circumcisio.	Of the purification of children and of the cure for those who are circumcised.
Circumcisio no es solucio de continuitat ayssi cum las autras plaguas: mays empero cum sia de la nostra operacio e de nostra voluntat, e lus de aquela sia propriament en les enfants, es necessari que asignem en aquela milhor operacio e via pus leugiera perdusent a salut.	Circumcision is not a cure for continence like other plagues; but rather since it comes from our action and will, and its cause is specifically in children, it is necessary that we assign to it better action and a shorter way so they lose less health.
Donc dic que les antics no diyssero circumcisio en alcu dels lors libres, quar no n’usan en las suas leys, e no es sino quar havem aquisit per speriment, la qual causa es que yeu he atrobat la major partida dels artifexs e dels barbies usar circumcisir e mundificacio am novacula e am torores; e usan de liament am fiel e de inscizio am la ungla.	So I say that the ancients did not prescribe circumcision for any of their men, because they did not use it in their laws, and it is only because we have acquired it through experience, and the cause is that we have found the majority of artisans and barbers using circumcision and purification with a knife and with torches; and they use ointment made from pitch and incision with the nail.
E yeu ja he prohadas totas aquestas manieras e no atrobegui milhor mondificacio am forfexs, am liament am fiel que en mondificacio cum la ungla, quar motas vetz efugeys la codena pus desus, quar la codena del prepucii a dos tunicas, e roman la tonica pus dejos, e fort leu es forsat ad autra inscizio e dolor sicura.	And I have already prohibited all these methods and not found better purification with tweezers, or ointment made from pitch which is used in purification with the nail, for many times the foreskin has escaped underneath, for the foreskin has two tunics, and the inner one is pushed down underneath, and it is easily forced towards other incisions and certain pain.
E am mundificacio le qual es fayta per alphecati, e es digital, del qual usan les sabatiers, no es segurada la inscizio de la extremitat del membre viril, quar fort leu intra en le trau de lu.	And purification which is done by the butcher, and is made with a knife, of which the butchers use, does not secure the incision of the tip of the virile member, for it easily goes inside its channel.
Mays en la operacio am ungla, fort leu obazeys ferr e corromp la tua operacio.	But in the operation with the nail, iron and corruption often obstructs your operation.
E la codena del enfant es breu per natura, e motas veguadas nays en tal manieyra que no ha necessitat de mondificacio, e yeu he vist aquel.	And the foreskin of a child is short by nature, and in many cases it does not need purification, and I have seen this.
Mays de la mondificacio que·s fa am forfexs e liamentz am fiel, la bontat, experiment descrobic a mi, quar las forfexs so de proporcional inscizio, per aquo quar la acuitat que es desus es ayssi cum la acuitat que es dejos; e donc cum tu premes la tua ma so proporcionadas dos acuitatz, e inscideysso segon una comperacio en un temps; e es fayta compressio del fiel am figura contenent la codena de la vergua de tota partida, am le qual no catz error de tot.	But as for the purification which is done with tweezers and ointment made from pitch, its goodness I discovered through experience, for the tweezers have proportional incisions, so that the acuteness which is above is equal to the acuteness which is below; and therefore when you press your hand they are equally compressed, and the ointment is made into a figure containing the foreskin of the penis from all sides, with which no error can occur.
E la manieyra de la operacio primeyra es que tu fassas estar le enfant majorment si es de aquels que entendo un petit, que no fassas sino que tu lies le fiel en la sua vergua tant solament, e que leysses aquel entro al autra dia.	And the way of the first operation is that you let the child be mostly upright if he is one of those who understand a little, and do not do anything but apply the ointment to his penis for just one day.
E aprop fay aquel alegrar en tota aquela manieyra que es a tu possibla de aquo que recep la sua intelligencia.	Then let him be cheerful in all ways that it is possible for you to receive his intelligence.
E aprop fa aquel estar entre las tuas mas estatuir preparadament, e no sia ges cezent; e occulta las forfexs en la tua ma o dejos le tieu pe, que l’enfant no veia aquelas ni degun autre dels instruments.	Then let him be between your hands, established comfortably, and not crying; and conceal the tweezers in your hand or underneath your foot, so that the child does not see those nor any of the other instruments.
E aprop entremet la tua ma a la vergua de lu e suffla en la codena, e tira aquela entro que sia eyssit le cap de la vergua, e aprop mondifica aquel de aquo que es agregat en ela de sordicia.	Then put your hand to his penis and breathe into the foreskin, and draw it out so that the head of the penis is exposed, and then purify it of that which is accumulated in there from filth.
E aprop lia le loc signat am fiel dobla, e aprop ligua pus bas de aquel un petit le segon liament, e aprop te am le dit pous e endic tieu le loc del liament dejos am bona retencio, e inscideys entre dos liaments.	Then apply the ointment to the marked spot, and then lick a little of the second ointment, and then press with your finger and pierce the spot underneath with good retention, and insert between two ointments.
E aprop eleva la codena sus leugierament e estratz le cap de la vergua; e aprop leyssa le sanc corre petit e petit, quar es milhor ; e pausa polvera desus e sobre la polvera pausa drap en le qual es spandut mugol de huou coyt en ayguaros concosit am oli rozat recent bo; e layssa aquel sobre aquel entro al autra dia; e cura aquel am curacio entro que sia sanat.	Then elevate the foreskin slightly and spread the head of the penis; then let the blood flow a little bit by bit, for that is better; and put powder over it, and on top of the powder put a cloth in which is spread mulberry juice mixed with rose oil recently boiled and cooled; and let this be over it until the next day; and cure it with the cure until it is healed.
La forma de las forfexs a mondificacio, aquesta es la forma:	The form of the tweezers for purification, this is their form:
Sian las unas extramitatz no-talhantz e las autras sian talhant, que non sia yssit le ram del clau, e sia la longitut de las doas acuitatz ayssi cum la longitut de dos manubres engualment.	Let the outer tips be blunt and the inner ones sharp, so that the nail of the claw is not cut, and let the length of both tips be equal to the length of two handles equally.
Mays la error en mundificacio es quar fort leu efugeys la codena intrinseca tota, o partida de lu deves la inscizio.	But the error in purification is that often all the intrinsic foreskin goes out, or a part of it because of the incision.
Donc cove que tu extendas aquela de la tua hora am la tua ungla denant la apostemacio del loc e que inscidas aquela segon equalitat.	Then you should spread that which is in your hand with your nail before the pustule of the spot and insert it according to equality.
E si no la podes tenir am la tua ungla, lahoras extratz aquela am unci e inscideys aquela.	And if you cannot hold it with your nail, then extract that with tweezers and insert it.
Mays si son passatz tres dias, e roman aquo que es imflat dejos la vergua apostemat, lahoras tu leyssa aquo entro que sia cedat le apostema caut, e excorja aquel am fecilitat, e inscidex aquel segon que a tu es preparat.	But if it has passed three days and the pustule on the penis is reduced, then you should insert that which is flat underneath the penis, and you should cut that which is raised by the pustule with ease, and insert it according to how it is prepared for you.
E guarda te del cap de la vergua, quar no nosera a lu aquo.	And beware of the head of the penis, for it will not hurt him.
E donc cura aquel am aquo que la plagua consolida de las polveras las quals havem recomtadas en le tractat de las polveras.	And then cure it with that which the plague consolidates from the powders of which we have spoken in the treatise on powders.
E si es inscidit de la codena sobre mesura, e obezeys a las partidas desus, aquo no notz a lu.	And if it is inserted into the foreskin to measure, and it obstinates the parts above, that does not hurt him.
E mays cura aquel am aquo que havem dit entro que sia sanat.	But then cure it with what we have said until it is healed.
Capitol .lviii.	Chapter .LVIII.
De curacio de urina retenguda en la vesiqua.	Of the cure for retained urine in the bladder.
Retencio de urina en la vesica es fayta per oppulacio fayta per peyra o per sanc congilat, o per poyre o per carnada, e semblantz ad aquels de aquo que havem dit de las manieyras de curacio en la divisio.	Retention of urine in the bladder is caused by obstruction made by a stone or by congealed blood, or by phlegm or by catarrh, and it is similar to those of whom we have spoken about the methods of cure in the division.
E si no es dissolvuda la urina, e veses retencio de lu esser per peyra le qual ja es en le col de la vesica, lahoras cove que le malaute sia encorbat sobre les sieus denolhs.	And if the urine is not dissolved and retention of it is caused by a stone which already is in the neck of the bladder, then let the patient be bent forward over his knees.
E aprop conponeys les pes de aquel sobre le sieu dos e extendas le sieu ventre de la partida pus desus del sieu dos, e le malaute estrengua le sieu ale tant quant es a lu possible.	Then you put the patient's feet on their back and stretched out their stomach from above their back, and the servant should hold onto the patient as tightly as possible.
Donc lahoras le col de la vesica es costreyt ha espulsio de la peyra a las partidas detras, per que la urina es absolta.	So then when the neck of the bladder is constricted and there is expulsion of the stone from behind, so that the urine can be passed freely.
E si no es dissolvuda am aquo que havem dit he vehement es fayta la causa sobre le malaute, lahoras cove que aministres extraccio de lu am instrument le qual es apelat siringua, del qual aquesta es la forma: Sia de argent e sia subtil leon conquau, ayssi cum canula de pena de ausel am subtilitat de ray lonc en similitut d’un palm e mig, al qual sia cana subtil en le cap de lu.	And if the cause is not dissolved as we have said it is vehemently caused in the patient, then one must administer extraction with an instrument called a syringe, and this is its form: It should be made of silver and the needle should be hollow like a quill pen with a long, narrow hole in it, resembling a palm and a half in length, to which there should be a narrow tube attached at its tip.
E la manieyra del eyssiment de la urina per aquel es que prenguas le fiel doblat e lies en la extramitat de lu lana o coto per bona liadura; e entrometas las extramitatz del fiel en la partida dejos de la ciringua, e inscideys am las forfexs si superflueys alcuna causa de la lana, mays intromet la en la canula am vehemencia E aprop enongeys la ciringua am boder e am album de huou.	And the way to withdraw urine through it is to take the folded cloth and wet it in the end of the syringe with wool or cotton for a good seal, and insert the ends of the cloth into the end of the syringe below, and cut away any excess cause of the wool with scissors; then push it into the tube with force and fill the syringe with white wine.
E fay cezer le malaute sobre la selha, e embroca la vesiqua de lu e la vergua am olis umitz, e oli de oliva e ayguaros.	And make the patient lie on his back, and pierce his bladder and penis with an olive oil-soaked reed, and a mixture of olive oil and water.
E aprop entromet la ciringua am facilitat entro que pervengua a la razit de la vergua; e aprop dobla la vergua desus a la partida del embelic; e aprop empelleys la ciringua dintz aquela; e aprop empelleys aquela entro que pervengua a la vesica, e aquela centa le malaute esser pervenguda a la causa vuoda, e no es fayt asso segon aquest orde, sino le meat en le qual va a tortuositat.	Then insert the syringe with ease until it reaches the root of the penis; and then bend the penis upward at its tip; and then press the syringe in there, until it reaches the bladder, and you will know that it has reached the empty cause, and if not according to this order, then the urethra is bent.
E aprop exten le fiel am la lana petit a petit, quar la urina siec la lana.	Then slowly extend the cloth with the wool little by little, because urine will soak the wool.
Aprop extratz aquela e fay per curacio urina, e usa ciringua, no cesses fer aquo e usa ciringua entro que sia evacuada la vesica e le malaute atrobe alleviacio.	Then extract it with care and make the patient pass urine, and use the syringe; do not cease doing this until the bladder is emptied and the patient is given relief.
Capitol .lix.	Chapter .lix.
De qualitat de clisterizacio de la vezica am clampcedra e am semblantz instrumentz les quals sian acordants ad aquo.	Of the quality of clysterization of the bladder with camphor and similar instruments which are appropriate for this.
Quan accideys en la vesica ulceracio o apostema, o sanc congilat en aquela, o es coartat poyredura, e vols en aquela destillar ayguas e medicinas, lahoras sia fayt am instrument le qual es apelat clampcedra, e aquesta es la forma de lu:	When ulcers or pus occur in the bladder, or blood has congealed there, and you want to distill waters and medicines into it, then this should be done with an instrument called a clampcedra; and this is its form: It should be made of silver and have a hollow needle at its tip, resembling a quill pen, about two and a half inches long, with a tube attached to it for distilling liquids.
sino que en la extramitat de lu es sorda, so es clausa.	Unless that in the end of it is closed off.
Et en aquela so tres traucs: dos de la una partida , ayssi quo vezes.	And there should be three holes in it: two on one side, spaced apart like a pen.
En le comensament es loc concau, en le qual es aquo que es enpellit, e sia segon quantitat que oppile aquel, ses addicio, entro que quan alcuna causa es ab aquel tirada de las humiditatz, sia atirada, e quan es expellida, am aquo sia atirada, e quan es expellit lonc, segon que fa clampcedra am la qual es phicat naphta en las batalhas de mar.	At its beginning is a hollow space in which the liquid is placed; and it should be according to the quantity that is pushed through it without addition, so that when any cause is pulled through it, it is pulled back with the liquid, and when it is expelled, it is expelled with the liquid, and when it is expelled far, according to how the clampcedra is made with naphtha in the battles of the sea.
Donc cum tu vols prohicir humiditatz en la vesica, entromet la extremitat de clapcedra en la humiditat, e atira am aquel aquo que es empellit a las partidas desus, quar la humiditat es atirada en la conquavitat de clapcedra.	So when you want to pour liquids into the bladder, insert the end of the clapcedra into the liquid, and push through it the liquid that is pushed up from below, because the liquid will be pulled into the hollow of the clapcedra.
E aprop entromet la extramitat de clapcedra en la vergua segon que havem recomtat en la ciringua; e aprop empelleys la humiditat am aquo que empelleys, quar aquela humiditat perve a la vesica tantost, e le malaute cent aquela.	Then insert the end of the clapcedra into the penis as we have recommended with the syringe; and press in the liquid with the liquid that you are pressing, because that liquid will immediately reach the bladder, and the patient will feel it.
Forma del cristeri subtil am le qual la vesica es cristerizada, e es aquela la forma:	Form of a subtle clyster by which the bladder is clystered; and this is its form:
E sia fayta de argent o de lato, de la qual le cap pus aut sia semblant a petita pluma, e dejos lu cana dedintz liament.	And it should be made of silver or brass, the tip more pointed and resembling a small feather, and below that a tube is attached inside it.
E aprop pren vesica de moto, e pausa en aquela la humiditat que vols cristirizar en la vesica, e aprop lia aquela entre dos am fort liguatura am fiel doble, e escalfa aquela humiditat sobre le foc.	And take the bladder from the patient, and put into it the liquid that you want to clysterize in the bladder, and then bind that between two with a strong ligature using a folded cloth, and heat that liquid over the fire.
E aprop entromet la extremitat del cristeri en la vergua.	Then insert the end of the clyster into the penis.
E aprop estrenh la tua ma sobre la vesica am la humiditat am strectura descent entro que·l malaute centa que aquela humiditat ja es pervenguda a la vesica.	And then squeeze your hand over the bladder with the liquid with pressure descending, so that the patient feels that the liquid has reached the bladder.
Mays si a tu no es present vesica, lahoras tu pren una pessa de parguames e fay de aquel cercle; e perfora aquel de tota la sua retonditat; e aprop entromet fiel fort en aquels traucs, ayssi quo so revolgut; e aprop agregua le cercle ayssi quo es agreguat alsofatur, pus que tu pausas en aquel aquo que tu vols de las humiditatz, e olis e ayguas.	But if the bladder is not available to you, then take a piece of parchment and make a circle out of it; and pierce that all around its circumference; and then insert a strong cloth into those holes, so that it can be turned inside out; and then add the circle just as the ligature is added, by putting in that whatever liquids, oils, and waters you want.
E aprop tu lia aquel en le instrument e fay am aquel ayssi cum has fayt am la vesica, e exprescio am la tua ma entro que la humiditat pervengua a la vesica.	Then you bind that in the instrument and do to it just as you did to the bladder, and express with your hand so that the liquid reaches the bladder.
Capitol .lx.	Chapter .lx.
De extraccio de peyra.	Of extraction of stone.
Nos ja havem dit en la divisio las specias de peyra e curacio de lu am medicinas, e la diferencia entre peyra engendrada en los ronhos e peyra engendrada en la vesica, e les senhals de aquela.	We have already said in the division of the kinds of stone and its cure with medicines, and the difference between stone generated in the kidneys and stone generated in the bladder, and their signs.
E havem dit la peyra en la qual catz operacio am ma, e seccio.	And we have said about the stone for which there is an operation with the hand, and cutting.
E la peyra engendrada en la vesica propriament es aquela que es ficada en la vesica.	And the stone generated in the bladder properly speaking is that which is lodged in the bladder.
E yeu so narrant aquel am exposicio manifesta e abreviacio.	And I will now narrate it with a manifest exposition and abbreviation.
Donc dic que peyra engendrada en la vesica majorment ve als enfantz; e dels senhals de lu es que la urina que es eyssida de la vesica es semblant a aygua en la sua subtilitat, e apar en aquela arena; e le malaute fregua la sua vergua, e motas veguadas pen, e aprop es dressada; e am aquo yeys foro le cul en motz de aquels.	So I say that stone generated in the bladder mostly affects children; and its signs are that the urine which emerges from the bladder is like water in its thinness, and there is sand in it; and the patient rubs his penis, and moves it back and forth many times, and then is constipated.
E es laugiera la sanacio dels enfants de aquela entro que han conseguitz xiiii ans; e es dificil curacio en les viels.	And this disease is the cure of children from it when they have reached 14 years; and it is difficult to cure in the old.
Mays en les joves es migiera per aquo quar es entre aquels.	But in the young it is mild due to what is in them.
E de aquel del qual la peyra es major e la curacio es pus leugiera; E si es pauca, es contraria ad aquela.	And if the stone is large and its cure is more difficult; and if it is small, then it is contrary to that.
Donc cum pervenem a la curacio de aquela, cove al comensament de aquela que mondifiquem le malaute am cristeri le qual extragua tota la fenda la qual es en les sieus budels; quar aquela fenda alcunas veguadas prohibeys la envencio de la peyra deves la inquisicio de lu.	So when we come to the cure of it, then first cleanse the patient with a clyster which extracts all the humor that is in his body; because that humor sometimes prohibits the expulsion of the stone due to its obstruction.
E aprop sia pres le malaute am les sieus pes e sia contosit e maugut enjos per so que la peyra descenda al preon de la vesica, o que saute de loc aut alcunas veguadas.	Then take the patient by his feet and make him bend over and press his buttocks so that the stone descends to the bottom of the bladder, or jump up and down sometimes.
E aprop fay aquel cezer entre las tuas mas preparat, e las mas de lu sian dejos las coysas de lu, per so que la vesica tota sia fayta declinant a las partidas dejos.	Then make the patient lie on his back with his arms under him, so that the bladder is completely turned downward.
E aprop perquier aquela e tota aquela deforo.	And then expel all of that.
Donc si sentes la peyra en l’espazi, lahoras tu te coyta tantost am seccio sobre lu.	So if you feel the stone in the space, then you cut him immediately over it.
E si no catz de tot dejos le tieu tocament, lahoras cove que tu untes am oli le tieu dit indic de la ma sinistra, si malaute es enfant, o le dit miga si es jove complit, e entrometas aquel en le sieu cul.	And if it does not emerge from below with your touch, then cover the tip of your finger with oil and insert it into his anus.
E perquier de la peyra entro que stia dejos le tieu dit.	Then expel the stone so that it falls below your finger.
E converteys aquela petit a petit entro al col de la vesica.	And slowly draw the stone into the neck of the bladder.
E aprop prem sobre aquel am lo tieu dit, e expelleys aquel a las partidas defora ves le loc del qual vos la seccio.	Then press on it with your finger and expel that to the outside through the opening which you cut.
E comanda al ministra que prema la vesica am la sua ma; e comanda a un autra ministra que am la sua ma dextra extenda les genetius a las partidas desus, e am la sua autra ma remaugua la codena la qual es dejos les genetius, en partida del loc en le qual se fa la seccio.	And order the assistant to hold the bladder with his hand; and order another assistant to extend the genitals upwards with his right hand, and to hold the umbilical cord which is below the genitals, at the location where the incision is made.
E aprop entromet espatum be inscident del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	Then insert a sponge, of which this is the shape:
e scindeys en lu aquo que es entre·l cul e·ls genetius, no en le mieg loc, abantz al latz de la coyssa sinistra; e sia la seccio sobre aquela peyra e·l tieu dit sia en le cul, e sia fayta seccio transversa, per que la seccio defora sia ampla e dedintz streyta segon la quantitat que egrecio de la peyra sia a lu possibla, e no major, quar fort leu comprem le tieu dit le qual es en le cul la peyra deves la seccio, e es foro-getada ses defacultat.	and cut between the anus and genitals, not in the middle place, towards the left thigh; and let the incision be on the stone and the testicle be in the anus, and let the incision be transverse, so that the outside incision is wide and the inside narrow according to the amount that can be removed from the stone, and no more, for soon the testicle in the anus will be crushed due to the pressure of the stone, and it will go out without difficulty.
E sapias que de la peyra es alcuna a la qual so angle e margers, per que le eyssiment de lu es fayt deficil per aquo.	And know that there is some stone which has angles and edges, so that the removal of it is made difficult because of this.
E de aquela aquo es leon semblant a glan, e es redonda, e es fayt de lu leugier eyssiment.	And there is one resembling a lion's tooth, and it is round, and it is easy to remove.
Donc si es aquela al qual so angles e marger, ajusta en la fissura.	So if it is the one with angles and edges, place it in the crack.
E si no es ayssi foro-getada, lahoras cove que tu engenes sobre aquel, o que strenguas sobre aquel am gesti decentment, la extremitat del qual sia ayssi cum lima am le qual strenguas sobre la peyra, e no evasesca de lu; o que entrometas dejos lu instrument subtil de curvada extremitat.	And if it is not possible to get it out, then you must either push on it with your finger, or squeeze it decently with a tool, the end of which should be like a file with which you can squeeze the stone; or insert under it a curved tool with a blunt tip.
Mays si tu no podes sobre aquel, lahoras tu amplifica le trauc un petit, e si tu veus flux de sanc, abscindeys en strenh aquel am vitriol trissat.	And if it is round, then you must push it down with your finger. But if you cannot get it out, then enlarge the hole a little, and if you see blood flowing, cut away at that with powdered vitriol.
Mays si la peyra es mays de una, lahoras al comensament tu impelleys la ma a la boca de la vesica, e aprop inscideys sobre lu; e aprop impelleys un petit aprop aquo; e semblantment fay si son motas mays de doas.	But if there are more than one stone, then at the beginning you must push your finger to the mouth of the bladder, and insert a small instrument into it; and similarly proceed if there are more than two stones.
E si es peyra mot gran, lahoras ignorancia es que tu inscidas aquel am gran seccio, quar accideys al malaute una de doas causas: o que mora o que endevengua a lu destillacio de urina continuabla, per aquo quar le loc no es de tot consolidat.	And if the stone is very large, then it is foolishness to cut it with a large incision, for there are two things that can happen to the patient: he can die or suffer continuous urination due to the fact that the place is not entirely healed.
Mays aministra expulcio de lu entro que sia fora-getada, o engenia en la fractura de lu am las forfexs entro que extragua aquela en pessas.	But the minister should draw it out if it has been pushed out, or he can insert tongs into the fracture and extract it in pieces.
Donc cum tu auras cumplit la tua opperacio, lahoras omple la plagua de enses de aloe e de sanc de drago, e strenh aquel.	So when you have completed your operation, then fill the wound with cotton soaked in aloe and dragon's blood, and close it up.
E pausa sobre aquel drap enfus en oli e vi, o en oli rozat e aygua frega, per so que apostema caut sia cedat.	And place over it a cloth dipped in oil and wine, or in rosin and water to stop the wound from festering.
E aprop resupina le malaute sobre le sieu col, e no deslias le liament entro al tertz dia.	Then return the patient to his bed, and do not loosen the bandages for three days.
E cum aquel auras desliat, embroca le loc am aygua e mot oli, e aprop cura aquel am enguent diafinicon e am enguent diabazilicon entro que sia sanat.	And when you have loosened it, wash the wound with water and a little oil, and then treat it with ointment of diaphoretic and diuretic drugs until it is healed.
Mays si en la plagua accideys apostema caut, adhust e corrosiu, e de aquel semblantz ayssi cum si le sanc es en la vesica congelat, e per lu es la hurina prohibida (e aquo es conogut per la egressio del sanc am urina), a donc entromet lo tieu dit en la plagua e extratz aquel sanc, quar si roman provoca la vesica a corropcio de la vesica e de lu putrefaccio.	But if the wound becomes swollen and festering, and it looks like the blood has congealed in the bladder due to which urination is prohibited (and this is known through the output of blood with urine), then insert your finger into the wound and extract that blood; for if it remains, it will cause putrefaction of the bladder.
E aprop lava la plagua am vi agre, aygua e sal, e am opposicio a tota specia, am aquo que conveneys a lu de la curacio entro que sia sanat.	Then wash the wound with wine, water and salt, and apply ointment of all kinds, according to what is appropriate for its healing until it is healed.
E cove en las horas de tota la curacio que tu lies amdos las coyssas e ajustes las medicinas las quals so pausadas sobre le loc.	And you should take care throughout the healing process that you keep both thighs closed and adjust the medicines which are placed on the wound.
E si la peyra es petita e es en le meat de la vergua, e es ficat en lu, e eyssement de urina es prohibit, lahoras cura aquel am aquo que yeu recomti denant que pervenguas a seccio, quar tropas veguadas per aquesta curacio yest acusat de seccio; e ja yeu e esproat aquo, e es que tu prenguas un perforador de ferr alfelut, del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And if the stone is small and in the middle of the penis, and it has been pushed in, and urination is prohibited, then treat it with what I have written before about incisions, for troops experienced in this treatment have approved of that cure; and I have tried it, and you should take a hole-punch made of iron felt, of which this is the shape:
de triangulada extramitat, agut, ficat en fust.	of triangular shape, pointed, placed in a staff.
E aprop pren fiel, e lia am aquel la vergua dejos la peyra per so que no retorne a la vesica.	Then take some thread, and tie the penis with it below the stone so that it does not return to the bladder.
E aprop entromet le ferr en la vergua, perforant am fecilitat entro que·l perforador vengua ad aquela peyra.	Then insert the iron into the penis, punching through easily until the punch comes to the stone.
E revolveys le perforador am la tua ma en aquela peyra petit a petit, e tu perforsa la perforacio de lu entro que fassas aquel del autra part penetrar; quar la urina tantost es absolta.	And turn the punch with your hand towards the stone little by little, and pierce the hole from the other side until you penetrate it; for then the urine will be passed at once.
E aprop prem la tua ma sobre aquo que es romas de la peyra de la partida deforo de la vergua, quar aquela es trinquada, e es foro-getada am la urina, e le malaute es sanat.	Then press your hand over the part of the stone which is broken off from the end of the penis, for that is split, and it is blocked by urine, and the patient is healed.
Mays si aquesta curacio no es a tu aparelhada per alcuna causa la qual prohibeys de aquela, lahoras lia un fiel dejos la peyra, e autra fiel desus la peyra.	But if this cure is not prepared for some reason which prohibits it, then tie a thread below the stone, and another thread above the stone.
E aprop encideys sobre la peyra en aquela vergua entre doas liaduras.	Then press on the stone in the penis between the two threads.
E aprop extratz aquela.	Then extract it.
E aprop deslia le liament e mondifica le sanc congilat, le qual es fayt en la plagua.	Then loosen the thread and clean the congealed blood which is made in the wound.
E no es necessari liament de fiel dejos la peyra, sino per que no retorne a la vesica, e l’autre liament desus sino, quar quan es desliat le fiel aprop la egrecio de la peyra, la codena retorna a son loc e cobra la plagua.	And the thread below the stone is not necessary except that it does not return to the bladder; and the other thread above except that when you loosen the thread, the stone comes out, and then the wound recovers.
E per aquo es a tu necessari quan lias le fiel desus, que tu eleves la codena a las partidas desus, o que retorne deves le tieu compliment, e cobra la plagua ayssi co havem dit.	And therefore when you tie the thread above, you should lift the testicles upwards, or let it return to its place, and then the wound will heal as we have said.
Capitol .lxi.	Chapter .lxi.
De extraccio de peyra de las femnas.	On the extraction of stone from women.
Peyra en las femnas pauc es engendrada.	A stone in women is rarely engendered.
Mays si ve peyra ad alcuna de aquelas, lahoras dificil es la curacio de lu, e es prohibida per tropas manieyras.	But if you see a stone in one of them, then the cure of it is difficult, and is prohibited by many methods.
La una de lor es quar la femna fort leu es verges.	The first one is when the woman is very young.
E la segonda es quar tu no trobas femna be scient que descroba si meteyssa al metge quan es casta, o es de las femnas haventz maritz.	And the second is when you do not find a woman who knows how to discover if she has been with a man, or is one of those women who have had a child.
La tersa es quar tu no hatrobas femna be sabent aquesta art, majorment la operacio am ma.	The third is when you do not find a woman who knows this craft, especially the operation with the hand.
E la quarta es que·l loc de la seccio sobre peyra en las femnas es longinc del loc de la peyra, per que indigeys de seccio preonda, e en aquela es temor.	And the fourth is that the location of the incision on a stone in women is different from the location of the stone, because the wound is very deep, and there is fear in it.
Mays si necessitat provoca a tu ad aquo, lahoras cove que tu prenguas una femna metga be scient, e pauc es atrobada.	But if necessity requires you to do so, then you must take a woman who knows this, and she is rarely found.
Mays si tu es privat de aquela, lahoras cerca metga quast e subtil, o presenta una femna matrona be esenhada en le feyt de las femnas, o femna que en aquesta art ennueys partida del art.	But if you lack that one, then seek a midwife who is skilled and subtle, or present a woman who is experienced in the nature of women, or a woman who has had children.
Donc fay aquela present, e comanda a lu que fassa tot aquo que tu li mandaras, de la enquisicio sobre la peyra al comensament; la qual causa es que reguarde si la femna es verges, lahoras cove que meta lo sieu dit en le cul de lu e quiera la peyra.	So she should do all that you command her to do about the stone from the beginning; and the cause is that she should examine whether the woman is a virgin, then insert her finger in the anus of it and touch the stone.
Donc si atroba aquela, coarte aquela dejos le sieu dit, e lahoras comanda a lu que inscida sobre aquela.	So if she finds it, cut off that part below his finger, and then command her to insert herself on it.
Mays si no es verge, lahoras comanda a la matrona que entrometa lo sieu dit en le conh de la malauta e enquiera sobre la peyra, pus que pausa la sua ma sinistra sobre la vesica, e comprem aquela am bona comprecio.	But if she is not a virgin, then command the midwife to insert her finger into the vagina of the patient and touch the stone, for then she should place her left hand over the bladder, and hold it with a good grip.
Donc si atroba aquela, lahoras cove que gradantment maugua aquela de l’orrifici de la vesica a las partidas dejos am somman de la sua vertut entro que pervengua am aquel a la razit de la coyssa.	So if she finds it, then gradually press that part of the opening of the bladder towards the openings below with the strength of her virtue within so that it comes to the root of the thigh.
E aprop inscida sobre aquela apposicio de la maytat del conh deves la razit de la coyssa de qualque part sia a lu parada e cent la peyra en aquela partida, e·l dit de lu no sia remaugut de la peyra coartan dejos lu.	Then the surgeon should make an incision on the side of the patient's leg where it hurts and remove the stone from that spot; the patient's leg should not be tied up so as to prevent the stone from falling out.
E la seccio sia pauca al comensament; e aprop entrometa lo ray sobre aquela seccio, e si sent la peyra, lahoras ajuste en seccio segon la quantitat la qual sap que la peyra sira getada de aquela.	The incision should be small at first; then the surgeon should insert his finger into the wound and if he feels the stone, he should cut around it according to its size so that it can be removed easily.
E sapias que las specias de peyra son motas: quar de aquelas es pauca e gran, e leon e aspra, e longua e redonda, e havent ramps.	And know that there are many kinds of stones: some are small and large, smooth and rough, long and round, and have bumps on them.
Donc tu sapias quantas specias so de lu per aquo que tu signifiques sobre aquo que vols.	And so you should know how many kinds there are according to what you feel when you examine it.
E si tu veus flux de sanc, ajusta en le loc vetriol trissat e te aquela per una hora entro que sia abscindit le sanc, e aprop retorna a la tua operacio entro que la peyra sia fora-getada.	And if you see blood flow, apply crushed vitriol to the wound for an hour until the bleeding stops; then return to your operation and remove the stone.
E fay que prepares am tu dels instrumentz les quals e ditz en la extraccio de peyra en les homes, per so que sias ajudat per aquels en la tua operacio.	And prepare some of the tools which are used in removing stones from men, so that you may be helped by them in your operation.
E si tu veus flux de sanc, e sabes que la expulcio del sanc es de la arceria que es insciza, lahoras tu pausa polvera sobre le loc e estrenh aquel am pulvils e strictura descent, e no iteras aquo; e layssa la peyra e no extraguas aquela, quar fort leu morira la malauta.	And if you see blood flow and know that the bleeding is from an artery which has been cut, then you should put powder on the wound and tighten it with a bandage; leave the stone in place and do not try to remove it, for the patient will soon die.
E aprop cura la plagua.	Then heal the wound.
Donc cum es cedada la acuitat del sanc aprop alcus jorns, e·l loc se poyreys, lahoras tu retorna a la tua operacio entro que la peyra sia fora-getada.	And when the severity of the bleeding has subsided and the wound is closed up, return to your operation and remove the stone.
Capitol lxii.	Chapter 62:
De seccio sobre ernia acoza.	Of incision on a hernia.
Hernia ayguoza no es sino agregacio de humiditat en le ciphac blanc lo qual es dejos la codena dels genetius contenent le huou, e es nompnat ciphac.	A hernia is nothing but an accumulation of moisture in the white membrane which covers the intestines and lies under the diaphragm; it is called membrane.
E alcunas veguadas es en le propri pannicol le qual a lu preparec natura en la partida del huou, entro que sia cuyat que ja es autre huou; e es la codena del genetiu entre le ciphac blanc le qual havem dit, e no es aquo sino tart.	And sometimes it occurs in the surrounding membrane which nature has prepared for that purpose at the beginning of the intestines; there is another intestine beyond it and it is the diaphragm of the white membrane we have mentioned before, and this is just a membrane.
E la generacio de aquest hernia es per debelitat la qual accideys als genetius, per que ad aquels es efundunda aquesta materia, e alcunas vetz accideys per percuscio fayta sobre les genetius.	And the cause of this hernia is weakness which occurs in the intestines and because matter is poured into them; sometimes it occurs as a result of blows inflicted on the intestines.
E aquesta humiditat es havent motas colors, quar la color de lu o es declinant a citrina o a sanguinent, o rog, o es negra feculenta, o es ayguosa blanqua, e es aquo que es mays.	And this moisture has many colors; sometimes it inclines towards yellow or blood-red, or red, or is black and putrid, or is water-white, and that is what matters most.
E les senhals per les quals es saubut on es aquesta agreguacio de aygua so aquestz: quar si es en le ciphac blanc le qual havem dit, lahoras le apostema es redon declinant un pauc a longitut ayssi cum figura de huou, e appar le genetiu, quar la humiditat conte aquel de tota part.	And the signs by which one knows where this accumulation of water occurs are these: for if it is in the white membrane we have mentioned before, then the hernia will be round and declining slightly in length like a figure of an intestine, and it will appear on the intestines because the moisture collects all around them.
E si la humiditat es en le propri pannicol, lahoras le apostema es redon am partida del huou e per aysso hom estima que es autre huou.	And if the moisture is in the surrounding membrane, then the hernia will be round at the beginning of the intestines and one thinks it is another intestine because of that.
E si la humiditat es entre la codena dels genetius e·l ciphac blanc, lahoras catz dejos le centiment.	And if the moisture is between the diaphragm of the intestines and the white membrane, then cut from underneath; and if it is between the diaphragm of the intestines and the surrounding membrane, then cut from above.
E cum tu vols la cognicio de la color de la humiditat, lahoras tu esproa la color de la humiditat en le apostema am entromes cayrat del qual la forma es precedida; e segon aquo que es eyssit en le vestigi del entromes, jutga de aquo que es dedintz lu.	And if you want to know the color of the moisture, then examine it in the hernia by probing with a needle whose tip has been dipped in vinegar; and according to what comes out on the tip of the needle, judge what is inside.
Donc quan nos vinem a la curacio de lu am ferr, lahoras cove que comandem al malaute que sia fleubotomat si aquo es a tu possibla, e vezes le cos de lu ple.	Therefore when we come to cure it with iron, then let us command the patient to be phlebotomized if this is possible for you, and make him lie on his back.
E aprop sia resupinat sobre le sieu dos sobre alcuna causa un pauc auta, e pausa dejos lu motz draps.	And let him lie on his back for some reason or other a little longer, and place under him several folded sheets.
E aprop setz tu sobre la part sinistra de lu, e comanda al ministra que segua a la dextra de lu, le qual extenda la sua vergua a hun de dos latz a la codena dels genetius e a la partida del mirac del ventre.	And let yourself sit on the left side of him and command the assistant to stand on his right side, stretching his arm out across the diaphragm of the intestines to the beginning of the navel.
E aprop pren spatum lat e scindeys la codena dels genetius del mieg loc per la longitut entro prop le pentenilh.	And let yourself grab the arm and split the diaphragm of the intestines at the middle point along its length towards the armpit.
E sia fayta la seccio segon rectetut engualment distant de la linha que deveseys la pel dels genetius, entro que pervengua al ciphac blanc comprehendent.	And let the incision be made according to a straight line equally distant from the line which separates the peritoneum of the intestines, so that it comes to the white membrane containing them.
E excorja aquel, e observa, e guarda te per aysso que tu no inscidas aquel; e la tua excoriacio am la qual aquel excorjas per partida jassia que sia suspenduda am le huou mays e subtilment escruta am la excoriacio segon la quantitat a tu possibla.	Examine it and observe, and beware so that you do not cut the membrane; and your incision should be according to the part which is suspended by the intestines and examine the incision according to its quantity as much as possible to you.
E aprop perfora le ciphac ple de aygua am perforacio ampla, e extratz tota l’aygua.	And let yourself pierce the membrane full of water with a wide incision and extract all the water.
E aprop separa entre doas labias de la seccio am uncis, e exten le ciphac a las partidas desus; e no toques la codena les genetius comprehendent, e inscideys le ciphac en aquela manieyra que es a tu possible.	And let yourself separate between the two lips of the incision with forceps and extend the membrane towards its upper parts; do not touch the diaphragm of the intestines which contains them, and cut the membrane in such a way that it is possible for you.
E inscideys aquel am la sua totalitat o en pessas, e majorment le sieu latz subtil, quar si tu no perscrutas exquisidament la inscizio de lu, no es fayta segurtat que la aygua no retorne.	And let yourself examine it either entirely or in parts, and especially its sides most carefully; for if you do not probe the incision of it thoroughly, there is no assurance that the water will not return.
Mays si le huou procezeys de aquela defora de la sua codena en la ora de la tua operacio, lahoras quan tu auras complida la seccio del ciphac, retorna dedintz aquel, e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la codena dels genetius am sutura, e aprop cura aquel ayssi cum las autras plagua, entro que sia sanat.	But if the intestines process out of that opening from their diaphragm in the hour of your operation, then when you have completed the incision of the membrane, return it inside and let yourself close the two lips of the diaphragm of the intestines with a suture, and heal that just like the other wounds, so that it is cured.
E si atrobas le huou corromput per autra malautia, lahoras cove que tu lies les vayssels les quals so sore le suspensori, e extrat le huou, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit.	And if you find the intestines putrid due to another disease, then let yourself lift the vessels which are over the suspensory ligament and extract the intestines; then heal that just as we have said before.
Mays si l’aygua es agreguada en doas partidas esemps, lahoras sapias que doas son las ernias; donc inscideys aquela partida segon que has feyt en l’autra engualment; e si es a tu vist que sia una opera, lahoras tu la fay.	But if the hernia is divided into two parts, then you know that there are two hernias; therefore you incise that part according to how you did the other, similarly; and if it appears to be one operation to you, then you do it.
E aprop tu abstergiys le sanc, e entramet en las seccios lana submersa en oli o en oli rozat; e pausa deforo autra lana la qual tu as submersa en vi e oli, e expandeys aquela sobre dos genetius e·l mirac del ventre; e pausa desobre draps doblatz e pulvils, e lia aquels desobre am liament le qual es segon aquesta forma:	Then you clean the blood and enter into the incisions wool soaked in oil or rose oil; and place outside another wool which you have soaked in wine and oil, and spread that over two pieces of cloth and the navel of the belly; and place on top folded cloths and powders, and apply those on top with a bandage which is according to this shape:
e aprop sian preses dos draps e sian humplitz de lana carmenada segon aquesta semblansa; e sian faytas las extremitatz am les quals es premut de coto o de lana humida, e sian agreguatz am strectura en le braguier de las braguas, e la una de las extremitatz prengua del cul entro al dos, e la segonda prengua a la partida del pantenilh, e dos extramitatz sobre dos coyssas dejos e dos extramitatz autras sobre dos angonars, e tota extrictura sia ajustada en le braguier de las braguas.	and let two pieces of cloth be pressed and made into a pad with wool according to this shape; and the extremities with which it is tied tightly from the waist or from wet wool, and let them be attached with tightness in the belt of the underpants, and one extremity takes hold of the buttocks inside, and the second takes hold of the opening of the pantaloons, and two extremities on the thighs below, and the other two extremities over the armpits, and all tightness is adjusted in the belt of the underpants.
E alcunas veguadas aquesta hernia es medicada artificialment am cauteri en loc de seccio am ferr; e es que tu prenguas cauteri cutellar subtil e que inscidas am aquel la codena dels ginitius, e es ignit segon que havem recomtat entro que sia descubert le ciphac blanc contenent la aygua, e lahoras tu pren cauteri segon aquesta forma:	And sometimes this hernia is treated artificially with cauterization in the place of incision with iron; and you take a fine knife-cautery and incise with it the vein of the thighs, and it is ignited according to what we have recounted until the white capsule containing the hernia is uncovered, and then you apply cauterization according to this shape:
e es asemblat a letra greca.	and is similar to the Greek letter alpha.
E aprop perfora am aquel ciphac, e es ignit entro que tota la humiditat sia fora-gitada.	Then pierce with that ciphac, and it is ignited until all moisture is driven out.
E aprop exten le ciphac am uncis, e excorja am uncis, e excorja am cauteri subtil ignit; e inscideys aquel segon que es a tu possible entro que eradiques tot lu; e guarda te del huou que·l foc no·l toque.	Then extend the ciphac with tongs and cut with tongs, and cut with fine cautery ignited; and incise that according to what is possible for you until you eradicate all of it; and beware that the fire does not touch you.
E sapias que aquesta operacio es pus salva e pus longinqua de flux de sanc, e milhor que operacio am seccio.	And know that this operation is more safe and more distant from bleeding, and better than operation with incision.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat apostema caut en la hora de seccio o en hora de cauteri, o flux de sanc, lahoras cove que tu cures qual contrarietat fa a tu per aquo, am curacio la qual conveneys a lu segon que es dit.	But if you encounter an ulcerated wound in the hour of incision or in the hour of cauterization, or bleeding, then know that you heal whatever difficulty occurs to you by that, with healing which you know for it according to what is said.
Mays si le malaute es pauruc, e no spera la segonda operacio per la sua horribilitat, lahoras administra perforacio segon que yeu recomti aquo; e es quan es certificat deves tu, per aquo que havem dit de las significacios, que aquela hernia es ayguosa.	But if the patient is fearful, and does not expect the second operation due to its horribleness, then you perform piercing according to what I have recounted; and it is when it is certified that you must, through the significance which we have said, know that this hernia is aqueous.
Lahoras cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute sobre alcuna cezelha elevada, aprop perfora le apostema en la partida pus bassa de lu am spatum lat, e pausa la perforacio segon la longitut del cos.	Then know that you should raise the patient on a high pillow, and then pierce the wound in the lowest part of him with a wide-spaced chisel, and make the piercing according to the length of the body.
E sia la apercio ampla entro que corro tota l‘aygua.	And the opening is ample so that all the hernia may run out.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc coto e lia aquel e layssa aquel, per so que corro le romanent de l’aygua.	Then place on the site cotton and apply that and leave that, so that the remainder of the hernia runs out.
E aprop cura aquel entro que la plagua sia sanada.	And then heal that until the wound is healed.
Mays si contrarietat es a la egrecio de l’aygua en aquela hora tu perforas aquela: e aquo no es fayt sino per aquo quar le pannicol blanc en le orrifici de la plagua fa contrarietat e prohibeys le eyssiment de l’aygua, lahoras cove que tu metas en la plagua pena o instrument am la qual es extrayta l’aygua dels ydropitz, la forma del qual es precedida; o ajusta en la opprecio de la plagua un petit.	But if difficulty occurs in the flowing out of the hernia at that time when you pierce it: and this does not occur unless the white membrane in the orifice of the wound causes difficulty and prohibits the flowing out of the hernia, then know that you put into the wound a pencil or instrument by which the hernia is extracted from the hydrops, the shape of which is preceded; or attach to the compression of the wound a small.
E sapias que l’aygua retorna, e es agueguada aprop vi meses o enaviro aquels; e cum es agreguada, lahoras sia perforat segon aquela meteyssa manieyra, quar le malaute ayssi passara les sieus dias.	And know that the hernia returns, and is stopped for about a year or so; and when it has returned, then let it be pierced according to that same manner, for the patient will pass his days thus.
Capitol .lxiii.	Chapter .lxiii.
De seccio sobre hernia carnosa e la curacio de lu.	Of incision upon a fleshy hernia and its healing.
Sapias que en la seccio sobre aquesta hernia es temor perdusent a pernicia en las majors disposicios; per que a mi es vista la dimissio de lu e esser salvat per aquela milhor.	Know that in the incision upon this hernia there is fear of death in the greatest dispositions; for I have seen its dismissal and being saved by that better.
E yeu so rememorant la operacio en aquela e las specias dels apostemas.	And I am remembering the operation on it and the spices of the wounds.
Donc, dic que l‘apostemas natz en les cos dels quals les genetius so conponutz e es fayt aquo per motas causas: o per superfluitat aguda agra, la qual es efundida als genetius, o per percuscio.	Therefore I say that the wounds are born in the parts of the body whose vessels are composed and it is made so for many causes; or by acute acute superfluity which is poured into the vessels, or by concussion.
E es la color de la apostema segon la color del cos, e no es atrobat en lu dolor, e es apostema greu.	And the color of the wound according to the color of the body, and there is not pain in it, and it is a grave wound.
E fort leu es apostema lapificada, del qual la color es fosca, e no es centiment a lu.	And quickly it is an apostema suppurated, whose color is dusky, and there is not sensation in it.
E alcunas veguadas es fayt per nodacio de las arcerias, e per imflacio de aquelas ayssi quo ja es perceubut la rememoracio de lu, o per imflacio de venas.	And sometimes it is made by nodulation of the arteries, and by inflammation of those thus, so that already the memory of it has been perceived, or by inflammation of veins.
Mays aquo que es per imflacio de arcerias es conogut per la dispercio de la apostema quan compremas aquela am les tieus ditz; e no cove que aquel toques.	But that which is by inflammation of arteries is known by the dispersing of the wound when you compress it with your fingers; and it does not know that it touches.
Mays aquel que es fayt per imflacio de vena no es dispergut de lu alcuna causa deves la compressio am les ditz.	But that which is made by inflammation of a vein is not dispersed from it for any cause due to compression with the fingers.
E ja es possible que sobre aquesta specia sia fayta seccio e sobre les autres carns; e es que tu inscida la codena dels genetius, e aprop esten le huou a las partidas desus, e extratz aquel del ciphac blanc, e deliura le suspensori dels vaysels, e ligua les, e inscideys le suspensori pus que tu deliuras aquel de tota partida de las partidas del huou.	And it is possible that upon this species incision and upon the other meats; and you incise the vein of the thighs, and then stretch the fire towards the parts above, and extract that from the white capsule, and ligate those, and incise the suspensory more so that you deliver that from all parts of the fire.
Donc si l’huou ja es am aquelas carnadas consolida, lahoras cove que tu extraguas le huou e inscidas aquel.	Therefore if the fire is already to those meats consolidated, then know that you extract the fire and incise that.
E si es adherencia entro alcuna causa del ciphac, o entre aquo que es entre les bayssels, lahoras cove que tu deliures tota aquela adherencia e inscidas aquela per inscizio redonda.	And if there is adhesion for any cause of the capsule, or between that which is between the vessels, then know that you deliver all that adhesion and incise that by round incision.
Mays si es nativitat de carn en le loc de la adherencia la qual es detras, lahoras cove que tu inscidas tot aquo que es de lu, e extraguas le huou ayssi cum havem dit.	But if there is flesh generation in the place of the adhesion which is behind, then know that you incise all that is of it, and extract the fire thus as we have said.
Donc cum es complida la tua operacio, lahoras omple la plagua de lana imfuza en oli rozat e vi; e aprop cura aquela am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	Therefore when your operation is completed, then fill the wound with wool soaking in rose oil and wine; and then heal that with the other healing until it is healed.
Capitol .lxiv.	Chapter .lxiv.
De la curacio de hernia que es de vitz.	Of the healing of a hernia which is of veins.
Vit es apostema envolut per alcuna envolucio semblant a broto am mollificacio dels testiculs, e es fayt dificil movement exercitiu e deambulacio sobre le malaute.	Vein is wound wrapped with any wrapper similar to growth on the testes, and it is made difficult movement exercise and walking upon the patient.
E en la curacio de aquesta malautia es per temor per aquo del qual es precedida rememoracio.	And in the healing of this illness there is fear for that from which its memory precedes.
Empero cove que diguam opperacio en aquela segon que fero les primiers.	However, know that we give direction in it according to how they make the first.
E dic que cove que fassas sezer le malaute sobre una cezelha elevada; e aprop enpelleys le suspensori dels testiculs a las partidas dejos; e aprop te la codena dels genetius am les tieus ditz am les baysels que so probdas a la vergua; e tengua aquels autre ministre que tu, e extenda aquels am extencio vehement.	And I say that you raise the patient on a high pillow; and then pierce the suspensory of the testes to the parts below; and then stretch the fire to the parts above; and touch those with your fingers at the vessels which have been tried in the bowstring; and hold those with extension vehement.
E aprop inscideys am spatum lat agut per seccio traversa en le dreyt dels vaysels entro que sian les vayssels descubertz.	And then incise with a wide-spaced knife through the vein of the vessels so that they are uncovered.
E aprop excorja de tota partida ayssi quo a tu havem dit en extraccio de arceria las quals so en las templas.	And then cut from all parts as we have said in extraction of the arteries which are in the temples.
E aprop fica en aquelas un’agulha en la qual sia fiel doble, e lia aquel en le primier del locs en les quals accideys vit, e lia aquel autra veguada en le derier de lor.	And then insert into those a needle in which is a double point, and apply that in the first of the places in which veins occur, and apply another healed one turned upwards in the last of them.
E aprop inscideys aquels en le mieg loc per seccio dreyta segon la longuesa del cos, e extratz aquo que es agreguat de las humiditatz fetulentas e corruptas.	And then incise those in the middle place by oblique incision according to the length of the body, and extract that which is aggregated from the putrid and corrupt humors.
E aprop cura la plagua am curacio de las autras plaguas en las quals vols sania esser engendrada per so que caian les vaysels les quals noyreysso un de dos genetius, quar no es mal per aquo.	And then heal the wound with healing of other wounds in which you desire the generation of the venom to be engendered by falling of the vessels which burn one of two testes, for that is not evil for that.
Mays si accideys vit a totz les bayssels, lahoras cove que·ls testicols sian extragutz o que les testicols per aquo se cequo am les vayssels, per que sia privat de tot nutriment per la inscizio dels vayssels, e que sian estaborits, o que cequo per so que no sia juvament am aquels.	But if the veins become completely blocked, then one must extract the testicles or cut off the vessels through which they are nourished, in order to deprive them of all nourishment through the obstruction of the vessels, and that they may wither away, or be removed so that they do not cause harm.
Capitol .lxv.	Here is the text you provided, formatted for easier reading:
De la cura de hernia entestinal.	Here is a line-by-line translation of the text:
Le adveniment de aquesta hernia es per seccio que endeve en le ciphac extendut sobre le ventre de part dels angunars del mirac del ventre, per que deysendo les budels de aquela ruptura ad alcu dels budels.	The occurrence of this hernia is due to an incision that extends from the top of the abdomen down towards the groin, causing a rupture and protrusion of the intestines through that opening.
E aquesta ruptura es o del ciphac o de excencio de lu, e accideysso aquestas doas specias per motas causas: o percussio, o per sautz, o per clamor, o per elevacio de alcuna causa greu, o per semblantz.	And this rupture can occur in either direction: upwards or downwards, and it happens for various reasons: due to a blow, a fall, screaming, or the lifting of something heavy, or similar activities.
E·l senhal de aquo, quan es per extencio del ciphac, es que accideys pauc a pauc en lonc temps, e no accideys soptament, e es apostema engual entro ves le preon per so quar le ciphac comprem le budel.	The sign of this condition, when it is due to an extension of the abdomen, is that it occurs gradually over a long period, and not suddenly, and there is swelling in the groin area as the abdomen presses against the intestine.
E le senhal de lu es quan es per seccio del ciphac, quar al comensament fa accidir dolor vehement sobtament; e es apostema divers aparent dejos la codena propdana aparent, e aquo es per eyssiment del budel, e·l cos de lu a las partidas deforo del ciphac.	And the sign of the condition when it is due to an incision in the abdomen is that at the beginning, there is violent pain; and there is diverse swelling apparent below the pubic bone, and this is due to the protrusion of the intestine, and the body is drawn forward at the waist.
E alcunas veguadas es fora-getat am le budel la tela, e es apelada aquesta hernia entestinal zirbal.	And sometimes the intestine's lining is pushed out with the tissue, and this hernia is called a 'strangling intestinal hernia'.
E alcunas veguadas es fayta am ventositat, e alcunas veguadas corr en le budel fenda, e aqui es retenguda, e es am aquo gran pernitia3 del malaute, e alcunas veguadas fa endevenir dolor malvada e majorment quan es premut.	And sometimes it occurs due to inflammation, and sometimes there is a tear in the intestine, and here it is trapped, and it causes great harm to the patient, and sometimes it brings about violent pain, especially when pressure is applied.
E en la curacio de las especias de aquesta malautia am ferr es temor, per que cove que sia esquivat le cazament en aquela.	And in the treatment of this condition, there is fear of error, for one must avoid causing harm in that area.
E la manieyra de la operacio de aquela es que comandes al malaute que redugua le budel am la sua ma a las partidas dedintz de la sua conquavitat si obezeys al sieu retornament, e aprop sia envessat sobre le sieu col entre las tuas mas, e eleva las cambas de lu.	And the manner of operating on this condition is to command the patient to draw in his belly with his hand towards his navel if he obeys his instructions, and then have him lean forward at the waist, resting his weight on his arms and elevating his legs.
E aprop sten la codena la qual siec la codena dels testicols a las partidas desus, e inscideys la codena dels testicols tota per le lonc; e aprop fiqua en doas labias de la seccio uncis segon que indigeysses a hubrir la seccio am aquels.	And then tighten the groin which binds the groin of the testicles towards the top, and insert the testicles entirely into the incision; and then pull apart two lips of the incision with hooks according to what you require in order to open the incision with them.
E si’ la seccio segon la quantitat que a tu sia possible que de aquela le huou sia foro-getat.	And if the incision, according to how much is possible for you, that from that place the lining be pushed out.
E aprop excorja aquela ciphaqueth les quals so dejos la codena dels testicols, entro que sia descubert le ciphac blanc dur de quascuna partida.	And then scrape away at the abdomen beneath the groin of the testicles, until the white, tough abdomen is revealed on both sides.
Lahoras tu entromet le tieu dit en aquo que siec le testicol, en aquo que es entre ciphac blanc, le qual es dejos la codena del huou, e entre le ciphac segon, e absolve am aquel’adherencia que es en la partida detras del huou.	Then you insert your finger into that which holds the testicle, in what is between the white abdomen and the scrotum, and free it from that adhesion which is in the rear part of the scrotum.
E aprop mau am la ma la codena dels testicols a las partidas deforo, e am aysso exten le ciphac blanc en sus am la ma sinestra, e eleva le huou am le ciphac a la partida de la seccio; e comanda al ministre que extenda le huou ensus e tu dissolveys la adherencia que es detras am solucio complida.	And then hold the groin of the testicles towards the front with your right hand, and extend the white abdomen upwards with your left hand, and lift the scrotum up to the top of the incision; and command an assistant to extend the scrotum upwards, while you dissolve the adhesion behind it with a sharp instrument.
E cerqua am les tieus ditz que lay no sia alcuna causa del budel envelopat en le ciphac blanc dur.	And feel with your fingers that there is no cause for the intestine to be wrapped up in the tough, white abdomen.
Mays si tu atrobas de lu alcuna causa, lahoras tu enpelleys aquel al ventre dejos.	But if you find any cause there, then you must return it to its proper place within the abdomen.
E aprop tu pren una agulha en la qual sia fiel gros fayt de x fiels, e entromet aquel deves le derier del ciphac, le qual es jos la codena dels testicols, la qual siec seccio; e aprop inscideys las extremitatz las quals emineysso del fiel entro que sian quatre fiels, e aprop compausa alcus de lor sobre alcuna figura en manieyra de crotz; e lia am aquel le ciphac del qual havem dit que es dejos la codena dels testicols am fort liament de dos partz.	And then take a needle with a large eye, and insert it through the rear of the abdomen beneath the groin of the testicles, where there is an incision; and then insert the ends which protrude from the needle so that they make four eyes, and tie some of them into a cross shape; and tie the other two around a figure in the form of a cross; and bind the abdomen from which we have said that the groin of the testicles emerges with strong ligatures at two points.
E aprop envolveys las extremitatz dels fiels e lia aquelas am liament vehement entro que alcu dels vayssels que noyrrisso aquels no puscan trametre alcuna causa per so que de aqui no accida apostema caut.	And then wrap the ends of the threads and tie them with a strong ligature so that none of the vessels which nourish those can pass through, so that no harm can occur there from now on.
E pausa autra veguada liament segon foro le primier liament, lonh de lu mens tres ditz; e aprop aquestz dos liaments layssa del ciphac le qual es dejos la codena dels testicols la quantitat de la grandeza del dit, e inscideys tot le romanent segon redondeza, e osta de lu le huou.	And place another ligature according to the length of a finger beyond the first ligature, and these two ligatures will be separated from the abdomen by the amount of space equal to the width of a finger; and insert all of the remaining intestines according to their roundness, and hold back the scrotum.
E aprop inscideys en la partida dejos de la codena dels testicols per seccio de la qual corra sanc e sania ayssi cum havem recomtat en aquo que havem dit.	And then insert into the bottom of the groin of the testicles through the incision from which blood and pus flow, as we have described in what we have said before.
E aprop aministra lana submersa en oli, e pausa en la plagua; e aministra le liament le qual havem recomtat (e alcunas veguadas le ciphac blanc es cauterizat, le qual havem dit aprop la inscizio de lu temen de flux de sanc, quar motas veguadas accideys aquels) e leyssa le liament entro que per si caia.	And then apply wool soaked in oil, and place a dressing over it; and administer the ligature which we have recommended (and sometimes the white abdomen is cauterized at the incision, as we have said before, when there is fear of a flow of blood, because sometimes these occur) and tie the ligature so that it holds itself.
Mays si le cazement de lu es tardat, lahoras de aygua cauda sia embrocat, e pausa sobre aquel entro que caia segon que havem dit.	But if its healing is delayed, then let it be bathed in warm water, and place a dressing over it according to what we have said before.
E aprop cura la plagua am l’autra curacio de las plaguas entro que sia sanat.	And then cure the wound with the other treatment for wounds until it is healed.
Capitol .lxvi.	Here is the text formatted for easier reading:
De hernia ventosa.	Of a hernial swelling.
En aquesta hernia no e vist alcu que sia estat ardit sus la curacio de lu am ferr.	In this hernia, there is no one who has been healed by its treatment with fire.
E les primiers diyssero que es fayta ayssi cum havem recomtat en la hernia que es am vi; la qual es que tu lies les vayssels aprop la seccio sobre aquela am fecilitat de lu; e aprop secca en le mieg loc en enviro le apostema am aquo que obro aquel, entro que caian les vayssels.	And the first one is that it is made as we have recommended in the hernia which is with wine; and that is that you tie the vessels over that incision with ease, and then dry up the swelling in the center around that place by which those vessels are protruded.
E cura la plagua segon que havem dit entro que sia sanada.	And cure the wound as we have said until it is healed.
Capitol .lxvii.	Here is the text formatted for easier reading:
De la disropcio que es fayta en les anguonars.	Of the rupture that occurs in the groins.
Alcunas veguadas endeve ruptura en les angonars ayssi cum havem dit, e emineys le loc.	Sometimes there is a rupture in the groins as we have said before, and it protrudes out from that place.
E no deyssen als genetius alcuna causa dels budels al genetius; e si deyssen, aquo es pauc; e retorna s’en en totas horas.	And there should be no cause for the intestines to protrude into the groin; and if they do, it is rare; and return inside at all times.
Mays si es prolonguat le temps am aquo, es ajustada fissura en le ciphac entro que deysenda le budel en le ciphac; e accideys aquo per la extencio del ciphac le qual es en le angonars ayssi cum havem dit, la qual causa es quar le ciphac es estendut, e aprop es mollificat e·l loc es apostemat e emineys.	But if time passes and this occurs, then there is a fissure in the abdomen through which the intestine protrudes into the abdomen; and this happens due to the extension of the abdomen, which is in the groin as we have said before, and that cause is because the abdomen is extended, and then it softens and protrudes out.
E la cura de lu es am cauteri ayssi quo es precedida la narracio de lu.	And its cure is by cauterization as it has been preceded by the description of it.
E alcunas veguadas es curada am ferr segon aquesta manieyra: e es que·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu dos entre las tuas mas, e aprop secca le loc de la ruptura dels apostemas emineys am seccio per la latitut segon la quantitat de tres ditz.	And sometimes it is cured by fire in this way: and the patient lies on his back between his arms, and then dries up the place of the rupture of the swellings protruded through the incision to the width of three fingers.
E aprop strenh le ciphac blanc que es jos la codena entro que sia descubert.	Then tightly bind the white cord that is under the scrotum so that it is uncovered.
E aprop pren le ray e pausa aquel sobre le loc eminent del ciphac, e prem aquel al preon del ventre.	And take the rod and place it over the prominent part of the scrotum, and press it against the abdomen.
E aprop cus le dos locs eminentz sobre la extremitat del ray del ciphac, e ajusta am la sutura un de aquels am l’autre.	Then cut two notches into the end of the rod in the scrotum, and sew one to the other.
E aprop extratz la extremitat del ray, e no inscidas del ciphac de tot, ni no extenda le huou, ni autra causa ayssi cum yeu te fi saber en la curacio de hernia entestinal.	Then cut off the end of the rod, but do not cut into the scrotum at all, nor extend the incision, or any other cause that you may know in the cure of intestinal hernia.
E aprop cura aquela am la curacio de las plaguas, e cum inscideyses les fiels, mundifica aquela e restaura la plagua entro que sia consolidada; quar le ciphac es contrayt e no es ajustada la eminencia de ruptura.	And cure that with the cure of wounds, and when you incision the bowels, cleanse it and restore the wound so that it is consolidated; for the scrotum is contracted and the prominence of the rupture is not attached.
E cauteri es milhor en aquest loc, quar es pus propda a salut.	And cautery is better in this place, because it is closer to health.
Capitol .lxviii.	Chapter 68:
De mollificacio de la codena dels testiculs.	Of the softening of the scrotum of the testes.
Motas veguadas la codena dels testiculs en alcus homes es mollificada per aysso quar las carns que so entre aquela son mollificadas, e es fedat le reguardament de lu.	Many times the scrotum of the testes is softened in some men because the flesh that is between them is softened, and the guarding of it is relaxed.
Adonc necessari es ad aquel que es preguat en la curacio de lu que fassa jazer le malaute segon le sieu dos, e enscida tota la codena la qual es mollificada sobre la codena natural; e aprop que ajuste doas labias am la sutura.	Therefore it is necessary for the one who performs the cure of him that he makes the patient lie on his back, and open all the scrotum which is softened onto the natural scrotum; and then sew together the two lips.
E si vols, cus en le comensament la superfluitat de la codena mollificada am tres cozeduras o quatre e am ferma sutura.	And if you want, cut off in the beginning the excess of the softened scrotum with three or four cuts and with a tight stitch.
E aprop inscideys entre las suturas; e aprop cura per curacio de las autras plaguas entro que sia sanat e caian les fiels.	And then cut inside between the stitches; and cure by the cure of the other wounds until it is healed and the bowels have fallen back in.
Capitol .lxix.	Chapter 69:
De castracio.	Of castration.
Sapias que castratio en nostre ley es excomengada, mays per causa es legut a mi que·m remembre de lu en aquest libre; e no es necessaria la rememoracio de lu sino per doas manieyras, de las quals es la una per so que aquo sia en la sciensa del metge quan es enterroguat de aquela, que sapia la curacio de lu al qual accideys; e l’autra manieyra es que nos motas vetz havem necessitat de castracio de autras bestias per les juvamentz nostres per aquelas, ayssi cum de motos, e de bocs, e de porcs, e de semblantz a las bestias.	Know that castration in our law is excommunicated, but it has been written to me that I remember it in this book; and the remembrance of it is not necessary except for two reasons, one of which is so that he knows the cure of it if he is questioned about it, so that he knows how to cure it when it happens; and the other reason is that we many times have a need to castrate other beasts for our own uses, such as horses, oxen, pigs, and similar beasts.
E donc dic que castracio es fayta en dos manieyras: o per atrissio, o per fissura a seccio.	And so I say that castration is done in two ways: either by constriction or by incision to sectioning.
Mays en aquela que es fayta per atrissio, la via de la opera es que nos fassam cezer la bestia en aygua cauda entro que·ls genetius de lu sian mollificatz e sian linhitz e que pendan.	But in the one that is done by constriction, the method of the operation is to make the beast lie on its back so that the testes are softened and hang down.
E aprop pren aquels am la tua ma entro que sian resols e no apparescan dejos le tocament.	And then take them with your hand so that they are dissolved and do not appear below the touch.
Mays en castracio fayta per fissura e seccio, cove que tu tenguas la bestia e premas la codena dels testicols de lu am la ma senestra.	But in castration done by incision and sectioning, take hold of the beast and squeeze the scrotum of its testes with your left hand.
E aprop lia le suspensori, e inscideys sobre quascun huou am una seccio entro que dos huous proceseysso.	And then cut the suspensory ligament, and make an incision on each side so that two processive holes are made.
E aprop inscideys aquels pus que auras quascu excorjat.	And then cut those more than you have excised.
E no leysses sobre aquels del ciphac alcuna causa, sino le ciphac subtil le qual es sobre les vazes.	And do not put any cause on the scrotum, except for the sottile scrotum which is over the veins.
E aquesta manieyra de castracio es milhor la qual es fayta per atrissio, quar atrissio fort leu layssa alcuna causa dels testicols per que la bestia desira coyt.	And this way of castration is better which is done by constriction, because constriction leaves no cause on the testes so that the beast desires intercourse.
E aprop cura la plagua entro que sia sanada.	And then cure the wound until it is healed.
Capitol .lxx.	Chapter 70:
De la cura de hermafrodozia.	Of the cure of hermaphrodites.
Hermafrodozia en les homes es segon dos manieyras: la una es quar o appar en aquo que siec l’espazi en la codena de testiculs, en aquel que es entre dos testiculs figura quar cunh de femna en la qual so pels.	Hermaphrodites in men are according to two types: one is where there appears a space between the testes, at the place which is between the two testes, and it figures like a woman’s vulva; in the other, there appear both testicles on one side.
E alcunas veguadas de aquel corr urina le qual es en la codena dels testiculs.	And sometimes from that they emit urine which is in the scrotum of the testes.
Mays en las femnas es una specia: e es que·l conh de la femna sobre le pentenilh es ayssi cum dos testiculs de home un pauc de tot yminiheys a la partida deforo ayssi cum le perpucii de home e dos testicols.	But in women there is one species: and it is that the clitoris of a woman is like two testes of a man, a little bit at the entrance of the vagina, like the foreskin of a man and two testes.
E la curacio es de tres specias: de dos dels homes e de una specia de las femnas.	And the cure is of three species: two of men and one species of women.
E es que cove que tu inscidas aquelas carns ajustadas entro que efuga la emprecio de aquela, e aprop que cures aquelas am curacio de las autras plaguas.	And it is so that you cut those tightened flesh so that the impression of that goes away, and then cure them with the cure of the other wounds.
E en la segonda specia dels homes de la qual yeys urina la qual es en la codena dels testiculs, no es curacio ni opperacio en lu.	And in the second species of men from which they emit urine which is in the scrotum of the testes, there is no cure nor operation for it.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter 71:
De lentinge e de carn eminent per causas de las femnas.	Of hernia and prominent flesh due to women's causes.
Lentige fort leu es ajustada sobre causas naturals entro que es etressat e es fayt leg le reguardament; e alcunas veguadas es magnificada en alcunas femnas en tant entro que es spandit ayssi cum en les homes e perve entro al coito.	Hernia is strongly tightened onto natural causes so that it is stressed and is made tight the guarding; and sometimes it is enlarged in some women as much as in men, and it protrudes into intercourse.
Adonc cove que tu tenguas la superfluitat de lentinge am la tua ma o am unci e inscidas.	Therefore take the excess of hernia with your hand or with a needle, and cut.
E no ultimes en inscizio, majorment en le preon de la razit, per so que no endevengua flux de sanc.	And do not cut through in the incision, mostly in the vein of the razor, so that it does not cause a flow of blood.
E aprop cura aquela am curacio de las plaguas entro que sia sanada.	And then cure it with the cure of the wounds until it is healed.
Mays carn nascuda es carn que nays en le horrifici de la mayre entro que umple aquel, e fort leu es eyssit a las partidas deforo segon semblansa de coa (e per aquo alscus primiers appelero aquo “malautia caudada”); donc cove que nos inscidam ayssi cum inscidem lentinge, e curem aquela entro que sia sanada.	But born flesh is flesh which grows in the womb of the mother so that it fills it, and strongly protrudes at the openings of the vagina according to the appearance of a tail (and therefore some first called it "tail hernia"); therefore if we cut it as we do with hernia, and cure it until it is healed.
Capitol .lxxii.	Chapter 72:
De curacio de alratica.	Of the cure of alratica.
Alratica es que le conh de la femna no sia perforat, o sia le trauc petit.	Alratica is when the clitoris of a woman is not perforated, or it has a small wound.
E es o natural o accidental.	And it is either natural or accidental.
Accidental es per malautia la qual ha precedit, e aquela es fayta o per carn nada ajustada o per ciphac subtil o espes.	Accidental is due to ill health which has preceded it, and that is done or by tightly tied flesh or by sottile scrotum or thick.
E es fayt o en le preon de la mayre, o en les costatz de lu, o en le pus sobira de lu, o en le pus bas de lu, e prohibeys de cuoyt e de enprenguacio e de enfantament, e fort leu prohibeys las mestruas.	And it is done either in the womb of the mother, or in its ribs, or in the upper part of it, or in the lower part of it, and it strongly prohibits intercourse and pregnancy, and very much it prohibits menstruation.
E la cognicio de aquela es fayta per reguardament de la metrona, si la oppilacio es apparent, propdana; mays si no es apparent, lahoras tu cerqua aquela am les tieus ditz o am le ray.	And its knowledge is done by guarding of the midwife, if the swelling is apparent, then you pierce it with needles or with a razor.
Mays si oppilacio es per ciphac subtil, e es propda a las doas labias, lahoras tu coyta e disromp aquela.	But if the swelling is by sottile scrotum and it is attached to both lips, then you sew and cut it.
E es que pauses sobre las doas labias pulvils, e aprop pausa les tieus ditz indicz de amdoas las mas encemps.	And it is so that you pause over the two lips for a while, and then you pause your fingers of both hands in turn on both sides.
E la femna sia sobre le sieu dos, las sieuas coyssas extendudas, e aprop exten las doas labias am forsa entro que aquel ciphac subtil sia romput e la oppilacio sia uberta.	And the woman be on her back, with her breasts extended, and then open both lips with force so that the sottile scrotum is broken and the swelling is opened.
E aprop pren lana e enbeu le4 en oli e pausa aquela sobre·l loc, e jagua am home le dia per so que·l loc inscis no sia consolidat.	And then take wool and dip it in oil and place it over the area, and wash it with hot water every day so that the area is not consolidated.
Mays si le ciphac es gros e espes, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquel am spatum lat o am fuelha de mirta.	But if the scrotum is thick and dense, then take it with spatum late or with a needle of myrrh.
Mays si la oppilacio es per carnada, lahoras suspen aquela am unci, e inscideys aquela.	But if the swelling is by flesh, then suspend it with a needle, and cut it.
E sian am tu las medicinas que fan cessar flux de sanc ses mordicacio, ayssi cum ahacatia, e sanc de drago, e enses, ajustat am album de huou.	And they are the medicines that make the flow of blood cease after biting, like ahacia, and dragon’s blood, and astringents, bound with egg white of an egg.
E aprop aministra una canulha de plom ampla per so que la plagua no sia consolidada leugierament.	And then administer a broad lead band so that the wound is not loosely consolidated.
E tengua aquela per alcus jorns e aministra calgua de li sec.	And he should keep that position for several days and be administered dry heat.
E aprop sia curada am l’autra curacio de consolidacio entro que sia sanada.	Then the wound should be treated with a consolidative dressing until it is healed.
E alcunas vetz accideys en la mayre nativitat de autres carns, e lahoras cove que inscidas segon aquesta manieyra.	And sometimes there are accidents in the mother's body, and then they should be treated in this way.
Mays si aysso es per apostema crancos, a l’apostema crancos le qual es en la mayre no sia fayta contrarietat am ferr en deguna manieyra.	But if it is due to scrofulous tuberculosis, there should be no contraindications to the use of iron in any way.
Capitol .lxxiii.	Chapter 73.
De la cura de emorroydas e de tayl e de botor roja que accideysso en le conh de las femnas.	On the treatment of hemorrhoids, and of tail and red bumps which occur in women's genitals.
Emorroydas so apprecio dels orificis de motas venas entro que de aquelas corro mot sanc continuadament; e cum so antiquadas emorroydas e son fayts theyls.	Hemorrhoids are an obstruction of the openings of many veins, and when they are old hemorrhoids and become constricted.
E ja yeu he dit en la divisio las specias de aquelas e les senhals de aquelas, e diyre ayssi aquelas que recebo curacio e aquelas que no recebo curacio.	And I have already said in the division of them their species and their signs, and will say thus those that receive treatment and those that do not receive treatment.
Donc dic que emorroydas e theyls quan so en le preon de la mayre e no apparo al sentiment, lahoras en aquelas no sia fayta curacio am ferr.	So I say that hemorrhoids and theyls when they are in the anus of the mother and do not appear to the senses, then in those there should be no treatment with iron.
Mays aquelas las quals so en le orrifici de la mayre sobre las quals catz sentiment, so aquelas que so curadas.	But those which are in the anus above which there is sensation, they are those that are treated.
E cove que tu metas la femna en mayso frega e aprop exten atheyl am les forfexs, o am drap aspre, e inscideys aquelas am las razitz.	And you should put the woman in warm water and then stretch it with tweezers or with rough cloth, and insert those with the roots.
E aprop pulveriza sobre aquelas deves le fluxs del sanc de una de las polveras insciscivas ses mordicacio, ayssi cum acassia e semblant ad aquels.	Then you should sprinkle on them one of the powdery stop-bleeding herbs without biting, thus with cassia and its likes.
E aprop enpellesca les sieus pes per una hora, e aprop pausa aquela en aygua freja.	Then you should put her feet in warm water for an hour, and then pour that warm water on the affected area.
E si persevera le fluxs del sanc, lahoras fay aquela sezer en decoccio de sumat e de scorsas de milgranas e de gualas e de semblantz.	And if it persists bleeding, then you should make her a bath with an infusion of sumac and of pomegranate peels and of gourds and their likes.
E aprop pren farina de ordi e comfiys aquela am miel e vi agre e fay emplastre am aquo sobre le dos de lu.	Then take barley flour and cook it with honey and sour wine, and make a poultice of it over his back.
E si le sanc es abscindit, bo es; e sino, fay adherir am dos ventozas, e a las mamilhas ses escarificatio.	And if the blood is dark, that is good; and if not, you should attach two leeches, and to the breasts, no scarification.
E aprop pren lana e submergeys aquela am suc de coliandre o am suc de arnagloza o am suc de guarravier am vi pentit e fay adherir al loc; e aprop cura le loc am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	Then take wool and soak it in juice of black bugloss or in juice of hollyhock or in juice of wormwood with red wine, and attach it to the affected area; then treat the wound with ointment until it is healed.
Mays athyl rog le qual es de aspre reguardament, cove que tu inscidas aquo que a tu appar de aquel segon que he dit en theyl engualment.	But that hard lump which is of rough texture, you should insert into it that which appeared to you according to what I said in the section on tumors.
E cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And treat that until it is healed.
Capitol .lxxiv.	Chapter 74.
De perforacio de eyssedura accident en la mayre.	On piercing a wound-hole accident in the anus.
Motas specias de apostemas accideysso en la mayre, ayssi cum cranc e apostema lapident e ulceracios e adhubelat e erpetromens e fistulas emorroyas e raguarrias e thyl e autres apostemas.	Many species of tumors occur in the anus, thus with scrofulous tuberculosis and tumor-ulcer and ulceration and induration and herpetic and fistulous hemorrhoids and raggedness and others.
E yeu ja he dit aquestas malautias e las specias de aquelas e les senhals de aquelas, e las curacios de lor en la divisio.	And I have already said those illnesses and their species and their signs, and their treatments in the division.
E cove que yeu digua en aquest tractat de apostema caut le qual ve en la mayre quan es dels apostemas que collegeysso sania, e si vols saber en qual manieyra se fa la opperacio de lu am ferr.	And I will tell in this treatise of scrofulous tuberculosis which appears in the anus when it is of those tumors that cause suppuration, and if you want to know how its cautery with iron is performed.
Adonc cove que tu consideres si la dolor de la apostema en le sieu comensament es aguda am percussio e flecma e febre, e vezes aquel enrogezir e si catz sobre aquel le sentiment, lahoras no·t coytes am perforacio de lu, e cura aquel am aquo que ajuda sobre la maturacio entro que cesse la acuitat dels accidentz.	Then you should consider if the pain of the tumor at its beginning is acute with percussion and phlegm and fever, and when it becomes swollen and if there is sensation over it, then do not pierce it, and treat that with something that helps on maturation until the acuteness of the accident ceases.
E lahoras cove que tu fassas cezer la femna sobre una cezelha que aia doas cezelhas; e recline sobre le sieu dos e ajusta les sieus pes a la partida pus dejos del ventre, e las sieus coyssas sian expandudas, e pausa les sieus brasses dejos les sieus denols, e lia quascus am liament ad aquo convenient.	Then you should make the woman lie on an elbow that has two elbows; and recline on her back and bring her feet up to just below the navel, and let her thighs be spread apart, and place her arms beneath her head, and lean each one with a pillow in a convenient way.
E aprop la matrona segua del latz dreyt e aministre le instrument am le qual es ubert le orrifici de la mayre, la forma del qual vindra en aquelas causas que·s faran aprop.	Then the midwife should follow to the right side and administer the instrument with which the opening of the anus is opened, the shape of which will depend on those causes that will be appropriate.
E cove quan vols ministrar aquest instrument que tu fiques am lo ray le preon de la mayre de la femna, e aquo que del instrument es intrat en la mayre no sia mays que·l preon de la mayre e leda le malaute.	And when you want to administer that instrument, you should insert it in the anus of the woman, and what goes into the anus of the instrument is not more than the opening of the anus, and lead the patient.
Mays si l’estrument es major que·l preon de la mayre, lahoras cove que tu pauses pulvils sobre la textura del preon de la mayre per sso que sia prohibit l’intrament de tot instrument en le preon de la mayre.	But if the instrument is larger than the opening of the anus, then you should pause powders on the texture of the opening of the anus so that it be prohibited for all instruments to enter into the opening of the anus.
E cove que tu pauses le vertitge que corr en le strument del latz pus desus e que le ministre tengua le strument e revolva le vertitge entro que sia ubert le orrifici de la mayre.	And you should hold the wire that goes around the instrument from the side above, and who administers it should turn the wire so that it is opened the opening of the anus.
E cum appar la excitura, e es tocada am la ma e es leon e molh, lahoras cove que tu secces aquela deves le cap de lu am spatum lat.	And when the ulcer appears and it is touched with the hand and is dry, then you should cut that off by means of a broad knife.
E cum la sania es evacuada, lahoras cove que tu pauses en la plagua una meca submersa en oli rozat o oli vert en le qual sia alcuna stiptisitat; e pausa la calca7 en la seccio en le preon de la mayre.	And when the suppuration is evacuated, then you should pause in the wound a sponge soaked in rose oil or oil with some styptic quality, and place the sponge in the opening of the anus.
E pause deforo la mayre e sobre le pentenilh lana munda submersa en aygua en la qual sian bulidas malvas.	And you should pause a sponge over the perineum and over the anus clean wool soaked in water in which are soaked mallows.
E aprop sia curada aprop dos dias am enguent le qual conveneys ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	Then it will be treated for two days with ointment appropriate to what it needs until it is healed.
E alcunas veguadas es lavada la mayre e la plagua enayssi que es cristerisat am aygua e mel, e aprop am aygua en la qual es bulhida razit de liri o de aristologia longua, e aprop retorna al enguent.	And some times the anus and the wound are washed with water and honey so that it is purified with water in which is soaked bark of linden or of long-leafed artichoke, and then return to the ointment.
E si la plagua es dedintz en la mayre ameguada, lahoras cove que tu sias prohibit de la curacio de lu am ferr, habantz cura aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio.	And if the wound is deep in the anus, then you should be prohibited from its treatment with iron, having treated that with what we have said in the division.
Capitol .lxxv.	Chapter 75.
A ensenhar las matronas en qual manieyre les enbrios bius sian medicatz quan yeysso segon figura no-natural.	To teach midwives in what manner the male babies should be treated when they appear according to an unnatural figure.
Necessaria causa es que la matrona conogua en le comensament la figura del enfantament natural per senhals de lu, e es que quan tu vezas la femna expremar a las partidas dejos e desira odorar le ayre, e sobre aquo es enleujada per aquo que sobre ela es del part, e festina le eyssiment del enbrio, lahoras sapias que aquest part es segon figura natural, e es l’eyssiment de lu sobre le sieu cap, e la segondina am aquel o suspensa o pendent del ombelic.	It is necessary that the midwife examine in the beginning the figure of childbirth according to its signs, and when you see the woman distend below and desire to smell the air, and about it is raised from what is on her is the part, and hasten the exit of the baby, then know that this part is according to a natural figure, and the exit of it over her head, and the second one with it or suspended or hanging from the umbilical.
Donc cum tu vezes aquels senhals, lahoras cove que·l ventre de lu sia compremut per so que l’embrio deysenda leugerament quar quan deyssen sobre le sieu cap, deysen a lu la segondina, e es mondada de aquelas superfluitatz am bona mondificacio.	So when you see those signs, then the belly of it is compressed so that the baby descends gently when he descends over her head, and the second one with it or suspended or hanging from the umbilical, and is cleansed of those superfluities by good cleansing.
Mays aquel que es otra aquest part es no-natural e no-lausable, quar quan le enbrio es eyssit sobre sos pes e·l cos de lu es eyssit devant le cap de lu e·ls pes de lu, e la ma de lu una, o al pe de lu .i., o es eyssit le cap de lu e la ma de lu, o al ventre de lu, e fort leu es convertit sobre le sieu col, e semblant de las figuras de lu no-lausablas.	But that which is the other part non-natural and not-lawful when the baby is exited over his feet and the body of him is exited before his head and his mother's hand or his father's foot, and he is cleansed of those superfluities by good cleansing. Or he is exited his head and his mother' hand or the belly of him, or he is converted strong over her shoulder, and like the figures of him non-lawful.
Don necessaria causa es a la matrona que sia savia e subtil en totas aquelas causas, e que·s guarde de error e de decepcio.	It is necessary for the midwife to be wise and subtle in all those causes, and to guard against error and deception.
E yeu so mostrant tota figura de aquelas, e qual engen es en aquelas per so que sia significat per aquo e sia stat sobre aquo.	And I will show all the figures of them, and what way they are in those for that it is signified by that and lies upon that.
Quan le feyt es eyssit sobre le sieu cap per egrecio natural, e aquel es vehement sobre la femna e es fayt a lu part dificil, e vezes la vertut de lu ja debelitada, lahoras fay aquela sezer , o que las femnas tenguan lu, e evapora le conh de lu am fenugrec coyt e am olis humitz.	When the baby is exited over her head by natural vigor and that is violent on the woman and he has made for him a difficult part, and his strength is already debilitated, then you should make it sweat, or that women hold him and evaporate the moisture of him with fenugreek oil and with hot oils.
E aprop entrometa la metrona entre les sieus ditz espatum petit e fenda am aquel la segondina, o secce aquela am la sua ungla entro que corro aquo que es en ela de humiditat.	Then gently insert the midwife's finger between the lips of the vagina, and with the second finger open it or suck up any moisture with her nail.
E preme le ventre de la femna entro que deyssenda le fet.	And press on the woman's abdomen to help the baby descend.
Mays si no deyssen, lahoras cove que la femna sia cristirizada de mucellage de ptilli e mucellage de fenugrec am cizami.	But if they do not descend, then the woman must be anointed with liniment of poppy and liniment of fenugreek using a sponge.
E aprop comanda a lu, aprop le cristeri, que sia compremuda e fay aquela stornudar am condisi; e te la boca de lu e·l nas de lu per huna hora, quar le fet sira foro-getat tantost.	Then command the man to hold back his breath and have the midwife press on his chest and make him snort with it; and keep his mouth and nose closed for an hour, because the child will soon be forced out.
E si las doas mas del fet so foro-getadas al comensament, lahoras cove que tu redusiscas aquelas am fecilitat petit a petit.	And if the two hands of the child are forced out at the beginning, then you should gently pull them back little by little.
Mays si no obezeys al intrament, lahoras pausa la femna sobre una cezelha e leva les pes de lu sus, e aprop concuceys la cezelha sobre la terra; e la femna sia tenguda que no caia deves la concussio.	But if the patient does not obey the remedy, then place her on a bed and lift her feet up, and gradually tilt the bed towards the ground; and the woman must be held so that she doesn't fall from the tilting.
E si las mas no son dedintz tornadas e morr le fet, lahoras inscideys aquelas e extratz le romament del fet o lia le cors a la ma de lu am drap e extratz aquel am equalitat, quar aquel sira foro-getat.	And if the hands are not turned inside out and the child is dying, then push those in and pull out the baby's arm or tie the body to your hand with a cloth and pull that one out evenly, because it will be forced out.
De eyssiment del embrio sobre les sieus pes.	From the embryo' s feet.
Quan le fet yeys sobre les sieus pes, lahoras cove que tu impelliscas aquels en sus, e aprop convertas le fet petit, e aprop que engualhes aquel, e aprop que prenguas un pe de lu e extendas aquels petit a petit.	When the child lies on its feet, then you should gently push those up, and gradually turn the child, and have it suck its fingers, and take one of its feet and stretch those little by little.
Mays cum son eyssit entro a las coyssas, lahoras tu comanda a lu que se exprema, e fay aquela extornudar am condizi, quar sira foro-getat si Deus lo vol.	But when it has come out between the thighs, then command the man to bear down and make him push it out with effort, because if God wills it will be forced out.
E si no es foro-getat am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras tu retorna le fet petit a petit entro que pauses aquel segon figura natural, quar aquel sira lahoras foro-getat am leugier eyssiment.	And if it has not been forced out with what we have described, then gently return the child little by little and place that second shape naturally over it, because it will be forced out with easier delivery.
E si es prohibit am tot aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras pren de musellage de altea e de goma dissolvuda, e percuteys tot en le mortier per bona percussio, e aprop linieys am aquo le conh de la femna, el pus bas del ventre de lu.	And if it is blocked by all that we have described, then take liniment of alder and dissolved gum, and pound both thoroughly in the mortar, and line with that the birth canal at the lowest part of the woman's abdomen.
E aprop fay aquela cezer en aygua tebeza, entro que consegua les ypocondias.	Then make her sneeze in warm water while she achieves the hypothermic state.
E cum vezes que las partidas dejos de lu so lenificadas, lahoras fay a lu subfumiguacio de mirta e sub-pausa aquela a lu.	And when you see that his limbs are loosened, then have him breathe in the smoke of myrtle and place that below him.
E quan te la sub-fumiguacio per una hora, lahoras tu la fay sezer sobre una cezelha, e aprop fay aquela stornudar e extrenh la boca de lu, e levas de aquela, e prem la partida pus bassa del ventre de lu am leugiera compressio, quar le fet sira tantost foro-getat.	And when she has breathed the smoke for an hour, then have her lie on a bed, and make her snort and open her mouth, and lift that up, and press the lowest part of her abdomen gently, because the child will soon be forced out.
Eyssiment del fet sobre les sieus denols e las suas mas.	Delivery of the child onto its knees and hands.
Quan le fet eyssira segon aquesta forma, lahoras tu engenies en entrometen las suas mas petit a petit; e aprop la femna stia evessada sobre le sieu col, e les pes de lu pengo en jos, e aquelas sia jasent sobre le lieyt, e complegua las suas mas.	When the child comes out in this shape, then you gently insert its hands little by little; and have the woman lean back over her knees, and her feet down, and let those rest on the bed, and complete his hands.
E aprop prem sobre le ventre de lu petit a petit, e aprop extratz aquo que es dejos les pes de lu de las aurelhas entro que sia preparada en la partida pus dejos.	Then press gently on its abdomen little by little, and pull what is under his feet from the ears as it prepares in the lowest part.
E si le fet no es fora-getat, lahoras pren les pes de lu e mau aquels am movement vehement, e aprop prem aquo que es sobre les ypocondres petit a petit entro que le fet puege a las partidas desus.	And if the child has not been forced out, then take its feet and move them violently, and press what is over the hypothermic state little by little as the child can go to the parts above.
E aprop entrometa las suas mas e engualhe le fet petit a petit, e comanda a la femna que se exprema entro que le fet sia foro-getat.	Then insert its hands and suck the child gently little by little, and command the woman to bear down as the child is forced out.
Eyssiment del fet latutidinalment pendent una de las suas mas.	Delivery of the child hanging sideways with one of its hands.
Sia engeniat en reduccio de la ma de lu, mays si no podes aquela reduzir, lahoras eleva la femna e fe aquela anar.	Let it be gently pulled back by the hand, but if you cannot pull it back, then raise the woman and make her walk around.
E si anar no pot, lahoras fay la jazer sobre le lieyt, e concuteys las coyssas de lu am concussio vehement, e aprop aministra liamentz les quals yeu e recomtatz de mucillages.	And if she cannot walk, then have her lie on the bed, and shake her thighs with violent concussion, and administer oils which are made of mucilages.
E si es vengut le enfantament, lahoras fay aquela sezer sobre cezelha, e aprop studia sobre la reduccio de la ma, e enguala le fet segon figura natural, e fay stornudar la femna e comanda a lu que comprema a si entro que sia foro-getat.	And if the childbirth comes on, then have her lie on a bed, and study the hand, and suck the child according to its natural shape, and make the woman sneeze and command the man to bear down as it is forced out.
Eyssiment del fet sobre·l col expandudas las suas mas e la fassia de lu es al dos de la sua mayre.	Delivery of the child with its arms and legs expanded and the abdomen out in front of its mother.
Cove que la matrona tengua la ma del fet e aprop revolva aquel petit a petit, e eque aquel am facilitat.	Have the midwife take the child's hand and gently turn it over little by little, and have that be easy for it.
E cum es e quant so es engualhat, e lahoras pausa sobre le conh de lu aquo que havem recomtat de oli e de mucellages.	And when it is and how it is sucked, then place over its mouth what we have recommended of oil and mucilages.
E aprop comandas a lu que·s maugua petit a petit, e quan auras feyt aquo, lahoras fay aquela cezer sobre una cezelha e comanda li que sia inclinada sobre le latz dreyt, e aprop comanda a lu que sia compremuda; e fay aquela stornudar am condizi.	Then command the man to suck little by little, and when you have done that, then have her lie on a bed and command him to be bent over to the right side, and command him to be pressed; and make her sneeze with effort.
Exitus foetus praeparati super latus.	Exit of the child prepared above its side.
Quan deyssen a horrifici de la mayre segon aquesta manieyra, considera, e lahoras tu inscideys la segondina am la tua ungla entro que sia evacuada de la humiditat.	When it occurs to the mother according to this way, consider and then you insert the second one with your nail so that it is evacuated of moisture.
E si le fet es suspendut sobre la cara e·l col de lu, lahoras tu inscideys aquela del embelic, per so que no sia retengut e mora.	And if the child is suspended over his face and neck, then you insert that of the umbilical cord, so that it is not retained and delayed.
E aprop empelleys le fet a las partidas dedintz entro que pauses aquel segon que cove, e manda a la femna que comprema a si alcunas veguadas, e el sira fora-getat am eyssiment leugier, si Dieus o vol.	Then press the child to the inner parts as you hold it according to what is appropriate, and command the woman to bear down several times, and it will be forced out with easy delivery if God wills it.
Exitus geminorum aut foetuum multorum.	Exit of twins or multiple births.
Sapias que gemels motas veguadas so natz, e alcunas vetz naysso tres o quatre , mays aquo es estranh e tart s’endeve; mays v so causas foro natura, e no vivo.	Know that twins occur many times, and some times one or four are born, but that is strange and rare, and they do not live.
E conte aquelas, ja sia que sian montiplicatz, una segondina, e son seperatz per ciphac, distingen aquels enter le liguament en l’ombilic de cascun de aquels E alcunas veguadas so foro-getatz ayssi cum es un fet per eyssiment natural leugier, e so eysitz alcunas veguadas per eyssiment no-lausabla ayssi cum havem recomtat.	And count those, although they are multiplied, a second one, and they are separated by a membrane, distinguish those within the ligament in the umbilical of each of them and some times are forced out so as is one child with easy delivery, and sometimes exit not-labourable so as we have recommended.
E si son dificils alcus de lor deves le enfantament e perveno ad aquo que havem dit de las figuras no-naturals, lahoras tu cura aquels ayssi cum havem recontat.	And if they are difficult some of them by their needing childbirth and come to what we have said of the non-natural figures, then you cure those as we have recorded.
E si’ la matrona subtil e fassa aquo que fa am facilitat e subtilitat, e am tarditat, e sia ingeniat segon tota figura segon que es a lu preparat de l’engen amenant a salut.	And if the midwife does what she does with ease and subtlety, and delay, and it is prepared according to the child' s health, then let her be guided according to all its shape as it is prepared by the nurse bringing health.
Rememoratio eius quod formatur in matrice ex embrionibus et Abortiuntur.	Remember that which forms in the womb from embryos and abortions.
Alcunas veguadas son formatz en la mayre un, e dos, e tres, e quatre, e v, e vi, e vii, e mays x, e ja es deves mi verificat que una femna abortem ne getet vi, e una autra x totz formatz, la qual causa fo fayta per mensuracio dels glorios savis.	Sometimes they are formed in the womb as one, two, three, four, five, six and seven, and it is necessary for me to verify that a woman who aborts has six [fingers], and another has ten, which was caused by measurement of the glorious wise.
E tot aysso cove que sia en la sciencia de la matrona quar fort leu ad aquela parve semblant de aquo, e donc opause se ad aquo am so que cove.	And all this know that it is in the science of the midwife who is strong in her opinion about what appears like that, and therefore stop at that as she is used to it.
Capitol .lxxvi.	Chapter .lxxvi.
De extraccio del fet quan es mort.	Of extraction of the child when he is dead.
Quan tu curas le fet mort am aquo que havem dit en la divisio de la medicacio e no es defora eyssit, e tu yest forsat usar de opperacio am ma, lahoras cove que consideras si la femna es de sana vertut e no es am alcu dels accidentz per les quals sobre ela es temuda perdicio.	When you cure the dead child with what we have said in the division of medicine and it is not put out, and you are forced to use incision with your hand, then consider if the woman is of sound nature and does not suffer from any accidents by which she is in danger.
Lahoras cove que la femna sia envessada sobre le lieyt sobre le sieu dos, e sia le cap de lu enclinat enjos e las coyssas de lu sian elevadas.	Then let the woman be laid on her back over his chest, and let his head be inclined downward and his thighs raised up.
E·l ministre tengua aquela de doas partz o sia liada en le lieyt per so que·l cos de lu no se extenda deves la extraccio del fet.	The servant should have one hand on either side of or bound to the patient's body so that it does not extend beyond the extraction of the foot.
E aprop tu humecta la boca de la mayre de lu am olis humitz e am mucellage de altea e de fenugrec e de semensa de li.	Then you should moisten the mother's mouth with moistened oils and mucilage of alder, fenugreek, and fennel seeds.
E aprop unte la matrona la sua ma am aquels olis e mucellages, e aprop entrometa la sua ma am fecilitat en la mayre, e aprop cerque am la ma loc en le qual fique les uncis en le fet.	Then the midwife should grease their hand with those oils and mucilage, then insert their hand gently into the mother's vagina, and locate with their hand the place where the nails are in the foot.
E locs convenient en aquo: adonc tu considera si le fet es preparat que deysenda sobre le sieu cap, e lahoras tu fique les uncis en les huels de lu, o en le col, o en la boca, o en le palat, o dejos la barba, o en la furcula de lu, o en les locs propdas de las costas, o dejos les ypocondres.	And you should check the appropriate location for this: then consider if the foot is prepared to descend onto their head, and then place the toenails in their heels, or neck, or mouth, or palate, or under their beard, or under their armpit, or near their ribs, or under their hip.
Mays si le deysendiment es sobre les pes de lu, lahoras en le pentenilh, o en le mieg de las costas.	But if the descent is onto their feet, then in the instep, or middle of their back.
E cove que tengua le unci am la ma dreyta, e pausa la curvitat de lu en aquel loc le qual es entre les ditz de la ma senestra, e entrometa la ma am facilitat e fique le unci en alcu de aquels locs les quals havem ditz, entro que pervengua a la causa boyda.	And hold the toenail with their right hand, and place the curve of the nail in the space between their left hand's fingers, insert their hand gently and place the toenail in one of those locations we mentioned that addresses the obstruction.
E aprop pause e fique en la apposicio de lu un autre unci, o le tertz si es necessitat, per so que sia atraccio engual, e no sia extencio segon la sua rectetut tant solament.	Then place and hold in the opposition of their foot another toenail, or a third if necessary, so that there is mutual attraction and not extension according to its straightness only.
Ans sia maugut a tota partida, per so que l’eyssiment de lu sia alleujat ayssi cum es fayt en dent deves la eradicacio de lu.	Let the tooth be loosened from every side so that its extraction is eased just as it is done with a tooth.
E cove en lu aquo que es entre lor que la extencio sia mollificada; e si alcuna partida de lu es retenguda, lahoras cove que la matrona unte alcus sieus ditz am oli e entrometa aquels espertament e revolva am aquels aquo que es retengut.	And if something in between them is held back, then the midwife should grease their fingers with oil and insert them skillfully and turn what is held back.
Donc si la partida del fet es fora-getada, lahoras les uncis sian permudatz entra loc le qual sia pus aut; e fay aysso entro que tot le fet sia fora-getat.	So if the part of the foot is displaced, then the toenails are moved between the locations that are highest; and do this as the entire foot is displaced outward.
Mays si la ma es eyssida denant l’autra, e no es possible reduzir aquela per la coartacio de lu, lahoras cove que drap sia envolopat sobre aquela; e aprop extratz aquela entro que tota sia fora-getada, e inscideys aquela o en la junctura de la ma o en le coyde.	But if the hand is displaced in front of the other, and it's not possible to bring it back by contracting the foot, then wrap a cloth around that; then extract it as the entire hand is displaced outward, and insert it into the joint of the hand or the elbow.
E ayssi cove que fassas en l’autra ma e en les dos pes.	And do the same to the other hand and both feet.
Mays si le cap del fet es gran, o accideys a lu coartacio en le eyssiment, o es en le cap de lu aygua ajustada, lahoras cove que entrometa entre les ditz espatum spinos e fenda le cap e extragua la aygua, o que discroba aquel am un instrument le qual es nompnat “alundat”, la forma del qual vindra am las formas dels autres instruments en le capitol le qual es aprop aquest.	But if the head of the foot is large, or there's constriction in its extraction, or there' s water collected in its head, then insert between their fingers sharp spatula and split the head and extract the water, or discover it with an instrument called "alundat" the form of which will come with the forms of other instruments in the chapter that is next.
E semblantment fassa si·l fet es de gran cap per natura: e lahoras cove que inscida aquel am algematu, o que prengua aquel am alunda ayssi cum havem dit; e aprop extra les osses am les forceps.	And do similarly if the foot is naturally large-headed: then insert that with a forceps, or take it with an alundat just as we have said; and then extract the bones with forceps.
E si le cap es eyssit e es coartat deves la furcula, lahoras sia fendut entro que la humiditat la qual es en le pietz sia efunduda.	And if the head is displaced and constricted by the armpit, then it should be split so that the moisture in the feet is discharged.
Mays si no es complicat, ni obezeys a eyssiment, lahoras tu inscideys le cap tantost segon que a tu sira possible.	But if it's not complicated or obstructed, then insert the head as soon as possible according to how convenient for you it is.
E si le dejos del ventre es apostemat o es en lu ydropici, lahoras cove que tu perfores aquel entro que corro la humiditat que es en lu.	And if there's swelling or dripping in the armpit, then pierce that so that the moisture in it runs out.
Mays si le fet es sobre les sieus pes, lahoras la atraccio de lu es leugiera e la direccio de lu a la boca de la mayre es leugiera.	But if the foot is on their feet, then its attraction is weakened and the direction of it to the mother's vagina is weakened.
Mays si es coartat deves le ventre e·l pietz, lahoras cove que tu extraguas aquel am drap le qual auras envolopat sobre la tua ma, e que fendes le ventre e·l pietz entro que corra aquo que es en aquels.	But if it' s constricted by the armpit and feet, then extract that with a cloth which you will have wrapped around your hand, and split the armpit and feet so that what is in them runs out.
Mays si les autres membres so ostatz e torna le cap, lahoras la metrona entrometa la ma senestra; mays si la boca de la mayre es huberta, lahoras intrometa la ma en le preon de layre, e cerque am aquela le cap, e atira aquel am les ditz entro a la boca de la mayre, e aprop entrometa en lu un unci, o dos uncis, e atire lu am aquels.	But if the other limbs are pulled back and the head turns, then the midwife inserts their left hand; but if the mother' s mouth is open, then insert the hand into the airway of the larynx, and surround with that hand the head, and pull that toward the mouth of the mother, and then insert in it a toenail, or two toenails, and pull it with those.
E si la boca de la mayre es coartada per apostema caut le qual accideys a l’u, lahoras cove que no sia trebelhat sobre lu; abantz cove lahoras aministrar efusio de causas humidas grassas.	And if the mother's mouth is constricted by an ulcer that comes to the u, then it should not be pressed upon; instead let there be administration of emission of moist, fatty causes.
E aministre emplastres; e segua le pacient en ayguas que mollifican e humectan.	And administer plasters; and follow the patient in waters that soften and moisten.
E si le fet es sobre le sieu costat, lahoras si possible es, sia agulat: e sia aministrat aquo que havem dit en le fet viu.	And if the foot is on their side, then if possible, it should be straightened; and what we have said for a living foot should be administered.
E si aquo no es possible, lahoras sia inscidit en pessas, e sia extrayt.	And if that' s not possible, then let it be split into pieces, and extracted.
E cove que non layssas alcuna causa dedintz de la segondina.	And let there be no cause left inside the secondina.
E cum tu auras complida tota la tua opperacio, lahoras aministra aquo que havem dit de la curacio en les apostemas cautz les quals accideysso de la mayre.	And when you have finished all your operations, then administer what we have said about the treatment of ulcers that come to the mother.
E si accideys flux de sanc, lahoras deyssendas en ayguas stipticas e aministra l’autra curacio.	And if there' s bleeding, then let it be stopped in astringent waters and administer the other treatment.
E yeu ja e vist una femna en le ventre de la qual era fet mort, e aprop sobre aquel foc autra veguada emprenhada, e aprop foc mort es le fet autre.	And I have also seen a woman in whose womb there was a dead fetus, and on that fire another pregnant woman, and the dead fetus is the other one.
Accidit al u aprop lonc temps apostema en le sieu embelic; e inflat es entro que foc ubert, e comensec a getar brac.	An ulcer occurred in his elbow for a long time; and it became swollen as the fire opened, and he began to vomit blood.
E yeu fu appelhat a la cura de lu, e medicat a lu per lonc temps, e la plagua no es consolidada.	And I was called to his treatment, and I treated him for a long time, and the ulcer wasn' t healed.
Adonc yeu pausegui sobre lu de alscunas causas emplastra de forta atraccio, e eyssic de lu un os, e aprop passero alcus jorns, e eyssic un autre os; e yeu fu trop meravilhat, cum en le ventre no sia os.	Then I applied to him some plaster causes of strong attraction, and one bone was extracted from him, and then after a few days, another bone was extracted; and I was very astonished, as there were no bones in his belly.
E adonc yeu cogitegui que eran dels osses del fet mort.	And so I thought that they were the bones of the dead fetus.
Donc yeu enguisigui la plagua, e extrayssi de lu motz osses , la femna existent en las sieuas milhos disposicios, e ja visquec en tal manieyra per lonc temps, correc de lu un petit de brac.	Then I removed the ulcer, and extracted from him some bones, the woman whose condition was as said before, and she already lived that way for a long time, and there was a little discharge of blood from her.
E yeu no afermegui asso esser stranh, sino quar en aquo es sciensa e ajutori ad aquo que le metge artifec am la ma per curacio aministra.	And I did not consider that to be strange, but rather what is known and helps with what the doctor artifices with his hands for treatment.
De las formas dels instrumentz que so necessaris a extrayre le fet.	Of the forms of instruments that are necessary to extract the fetus.
Forma de vertitge am la qual es uberta la mayre:	Form of speculum with which the mother' s vagina is opened:
Aquesta es la forma de strenhedor en le qual so engualhatz les libres, al qual engualhament sian dos virtitges en doas extremitatz de dos futz.	This is the form of a narrow tube in which the lips are inserted, and to that insertion there are two benefits on both ends of two tubes.
May empero aquesta virtitge cove que sia pus subtil de strictori, e sia fayt o de eba o de fust de boys.	However this benefit should be more subtle in tightness, and it is made of ebony or boxwood.
E sia la latitut de quascun fust quays dos ditz e le marge de quascu amdos quays un dit, e la longitut de quascu es un palm e mig; e en le mieg loc de dos fustz so dos ajustaments de aquel meteys fustz les quals ja son fermatz, dels quals la longitut es la maytat de un palm e un pauc mes, e la latitut de quascu es quay dos ditz, o un pauc mes.	And the thickness of each tube is two fingers and the edge of either side are one finger, and the length of each is a palm and a half; and in the middle part of two tubes there are two adjusters of those wood which are already closed, the length of which is a palm and little more, and the thickness of each is two fingers, or little more.
E aquestz dos additamentz sian entromeses en la boca de la mayre per que sia uberta am aquels quan tu revolves las doas prescriptas virtigges.	And these two additions are inserted into the mother' s mouth so that it is opened by them when you turn both specified benefits.
Forma autra semblant de aquela pus subtil e pus leugiera:	Other similar form that is more subtle and narrower:
Sia fayta de fustz de eba o de boys segon la semblansa de forceps.	It is made of ebony or boxwood according to the resemblance of forceps.
Mays empero en la extremitat de lu so dos additament ayssi cum vezes, e la longitut de aquels additament es quays un palm, e la latitut de quascu es dos ditz.	However at the end of it there are two additions like this as well, and the length of those additions is about a palm, and the thickness of each is two fingers.
E cum tu vols am aquels ubrir la mayre, lahoras tu fay cezer la femna sobre le lieyt les pes pendentz, ubert aquo que es entre las coyssas de lu.	And when you want to open the womb, then you must cause the woman to lie on her back with her feet dangling, opening what is between her thighs.
E aprop obre la tua ma am le instrument ayssi cum fas am forfexs engualment segon la quantitat que vols de la aprecio de la boca de la mayre entro que la metrona fassa so que vols.	Then open your hand with the instrument like you do with forceps, according to the amount that you want from the opening of the womb, while the midwife does what she wants.
La forma de vertitge la qual diysero les antics:	The form of the placenta which the ancients mentioned:
Forma de impellent am le qual es empellit le fet:	Form of the fetus which is pushed out:
Forma de amisidat2 am le qual es conterit le cap gran	Form of the head which has been crushed:
E es asemblat a forceps al qual so dentz en la extremitat, ayssi cum vezes, e alcunas veguadas es fayt lonc ayssi cum forceps segon aquesta forma, ayssi cum vezes, al qual so dentz ayssi cum dentz de ressegua am le qual es inscidit e conterit.	And it is similar to forceps whose teeth are at the end, and sometimes it is made long like forceps according to this form, and sometimes it has teeth like a pair of scissors with which it is cut and crushed.
Forma de amesidat pauc:	Form of the head that is crushed little:
Forma de unci havent una spina:	Form of a thorn which has an edge:
Forma de unci havent doas spinas:	Form of a thorn which has two edges:
Forma de forceps a la qual so dentz de cerra am le qual le cap del fet sia conterit:	Form of forceps whose teeth close to crush the head of the fetus:
Forma de spatum havent dos extremitatz am le qual le cap es abscindit:	Form of a spatula which has two ends, with which the head is cut off:
Forma de dos espatums latz:	Form of two wide spatulas:
Totz aquels instrumentz so excersitatz, e quan mes so multiplicadas las specias de aquel e so preparadas deves le artifexs, quant es pus leugier a la sua opperacio e pus aut deves les homes per la sua quantitat.	All of these instruments are exercised and when they are more numerous and prepared according to the artist, the more difficult it is for him to operate and the more people he needs for his quantity.
E no obres de aquels instrumentz ja sia qua sia deves tu aparalhat, quar la necessitat de aquels no es excusabla.	And you should not neglect any of these instruments because their necessity is inexcusable.
De extraccio de la segondina.	On the extraction of the afterbirth:
Quan la segondina es retenguda deves le enfantament, lahoras cove que tu comandes a la malautae que retengua le sieu ale, e aprop fay aquela stornudar am condizi, e strenh la tua ma sobre la boca de lu e sobre las nars de lu, e si per aysso es defora eyssit, bo es.	When the afterbirth is retained after childbirth, then you must order the patient to retain her breath, and then cause her to sneeze with a towel, and press your hand over her mouth and nose, and if it comes out as a result, that is good.
E sino, lahoras tu pren una ola e perfora en la cuberta un trauc e pausa en aquela erbas ubrent la boca de la mayre, ayssi cum calament e ruda e anet e camamilla e scicados arabic e cassia lignea e santaurea.	And if not, then you take a bowl and pierce a hole in its cover, and place herbs in it that open the mouth of the mother, such as: calaminth, rattleweed, aniseed, camomile, Arabic scilla, cassia wood, and saintwood.
Totas aquestas erbas o alcunas de lor sian submersas en aygua en la ola, e pausa aquela sobre le foc.	All of these herbs or some of them should be soaked in water inside the bowl, and you should place it over fire.
E aprop pausa una canula de canaviera en la boca de la mayre, e tengua aquela entro que la evapor vengua a la concavitat de la mayre.	Then place a straw in the mother's mouth, and keep it there until the evaporation comes into the cavity of the mother.
E aprop fay aquela stornudar ayssi cum havem dit, e la segondina sira fora-getada am velocitat.	And then make her sneeze as we have said, and the second time let it be expelled with force.
Mays si roman aprop aquesta curacio e no es eyssida, lahoras tu comanda a la matrona que submerge la sua ma sinistra en oli sizami o en micellage de altea, e aprop entrometa aquela en le conh e queresca am aquela la segondina, e cum aquela auras trobada, lahoras pren la e exten aquela pauc a pauc Mays si es annexsa en le preon de la mayre, lahoras entrometa la sua ma segon que havem recomtat, e quan aura trobat la segondina, extragua aquela petit a petit segon rectetut per so que la mayre no caja deves la atraccio vehement.	But if this treatment is not effective, then order the midwife to submerge her left hand in olive oil or in mullein tea, and then insert it into the vagina and grab the second one with it, and once you have found it, pull it out little by little according to the correct technique so that the mother does not suffer excessive pain. However, if it is attached to the mother's womb, then insert your hand as we have instructed, and when you find the second one, extract it gradually according to the correct technique so that the mother does not experience intense pain.
Abantz cove que sia permudada als costatz dreyt e sinestre am facilitat.	Afterwards, make sure she is turned onto her right and left sides with ease.
E aprop sia ajustat en la quantitat de atraccio, quar ela obedira e evasira de adhirencia.	Then adjust the amount of pull, as she will obey and be released from adhesion.
E si la boca de la mayre es coartada, nos ja havem recomtat la curacio am sturnutacio e am medicacio de la ola am erbas.	And if the mother's mouth is blocked, we have already recommended the cure with sneezing and with medication of the bowl with herbs.
Mays si no es fora-getada am totas las causas las quals havem recomtadas, lahoras guarda te que no fetigues sobre aquela en iteracio de abstracio, mays empero cove que aquo que es eyssit de lu a la boca de la mayre lies a la coyssa de la femna, e aprop cristeriza aquela am enguent e tetrafarmacon; quar aquel fara poyrir aquela aprop alcus dias e sira dissolvuda e sira fora-getada.	But if it is not expelled with all the causes that we have recommended, then be careful not to exhaust yourself by pulling too hard, but instead make sure that what comes out of her mouth goes into the woman'coyssa, and then anoint it with ointment and tetramedion; for this will cause it to rot, become dissolved, and then expelled.
Mays quan se poyreys, es de lu elevada mala audor al cap, e al estomac, e aquo ledeys la malauta; e adonc cove que sian aministradas sub-fumiguacios e convenientz ad aquo.	But when it putrifies, a bad odor rises to the head and stomach, and this hurts the patient; therefore, make sure that smoke is administered in a convenient way.
Mays alcus dels Antics ja so esproatz sub-fumigacio de nazitort e de figuas seccas.	But some of the Ancients have also tried smoke from nux vomica and dried figs.
Forma de instrument am le qual la femna es sub-fumiguada deves la retentio de mestruas e de la segondina:	Form of instrument by which the woman is smoked for the retention of menstruation and the second one:
Sia fayta de veyre o de eram.	It should be made from glass or earthenware.
E sia pausada la extremitat subtil en le conh e la extremitat ampla sobre le foc, e la sub-fumiguacio sia pausada sobre las brazas del foc.	And the narrow end should be inserted into the vagina and the wide end placed over the fire, and the smoke should be directed onto the embers of the fire.
E tengua aquela entro que sia consumida aquela sub-fumiguacio e itera·n autra.	And keep it there until the smoke is consumed, and then repeat this process.
De curacio del cul del enfant no-perforat.	Of the cure of the infant's anus that is not perforated.
Motz enfantz naysso e les culs de lu no so perforatz, les quals ya ciphac subtil e opilat.	Some newborn infants and their anuses are not perforated; therefore, they are gently and carefully opened.
Adonc cove a la matrona que perfore am le sieu dit aquel ciphac; e sino, perfora aquel am spatum agut, e guarda se que no toque le lacert.	Therefore, order the midwife to open it with her finger; and if not, open it with a pointed spatula, and be careful not to touch the foreskin.
E aprop pause sobre aquel lana enfusa en vi e oli; e aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia senat.	Then place wool soaked in wine and oil over it; and then treat that with ointment until it is healed.
Mays si temes que sia opilat, lahoras pausa en le trauc una canula per motz dias, e osta la quan le enfant voldra degerir.	But if you are afraid that it is blocked, then insert a straw into the hole for several days, and remove it when the infant wants to defecate.
E ja accideys oppilacio del cul per consolidacio de plagua o de apostema; adonc cove que aquela consolidacio sia inscidida, e aprop sia curada am aquo que avem dit de la curacio e del plom.	And sometimes the anus is blocked by a clot or abscess; therefore, when that clot is broken, treat it as we have said about the cure and the plug.
De curacio de las fistulas que endeveno dejos.	Of the cure of fistulas that emit pus from underneath.
Las fistulas que endeveno en la partida dejos pus bassa so nodacio e grossetut las quals endeveno prop del cul defora o en l’espazi de la una partida.	Fistulas that emit pus near the anus or in the space between the buttocks have a soft and thick discharge, which comes out close to the anus.
E es una fistula o motas.	And it is either one fistula or several.
E cum aquela nodacio es antiquada e corr de la humiditat aygosa blanca o poyridura subtil, e alcunas veguadas so de aquestas fistulas alcunas penetrantz.	And when that discharge becomes old and mixes with the watery pus, it turns white or putrid, and sometimes these fistulas penetrate in several places.
E aquelas penetrantz so conogudas per aquo que es eyssit de aquelas per la egressio e per ventosetat; e alcunas vetz use le malaute de egressio, e fort leu es eyssit de aquelas verm.	And those that penetrate are known by what comes out of them through the exit and through windiness; and sometimes they use the patient' mouth for egress, and often they expel a lot of pus from there.
E so de aquelas fistulas alcunas veguadas en l’espazi penetrantz entro a la vesica, e entro al meat de la vergua; e so de aquelas penetrantz entro la junctura de la coyssa e entro al notz de la coeta.	And sometimes those fistulas penetrate into the bladder and into the depth of the vagina; and sometimes they penetrate into the joint of the thigh and into the notch of the vagina.
E aquo en que es conoguda fistula penetrant entro al cul e no-penetrant, es que tu metas le tieu dit endic en le cul, e entrometas tenta subtil de eram o de ferr en la fistula quan no y es turtuositat.	And in order to know if a fistula has penetrated into the anus or not, insert your finger into the anus and insert a thin rod of horn or iron into the fistula when it is tense.
Mays si en aquela es turtuositat, lahoras entromet en aquela tenta subtil de plom o de pels de caval entro que tu sentas la tenta o le pel en le tieu dit.	But if it is tense, then insert a thin rod of lead or horse hair into the fistula so that you feel the rod or the hair in your finger.
E si no sentas aquela de tot ni no procezeys del trauc alcuna causa de egestio ni verm ni ventositat, ayssi cum havem dit, lahoras sapias que es no-penetrant, e lahoras coyta te a la curacio.	And if you do not feel it at all or if there is no cause for ejection or windiness or pus coming out of the hole, then know that it is not penetrated, and then proceed to the cure.
E quan la fistula es penetrant entro a la vesica o entro al meat de la vergua, lahoras la significacio de lu es eyssiment de urina de aquela e prohibicio de lu ad aysso que·l loc am medicina sia consolidat.	And when the fistula has penetrated into the bladder or into the depth of the vagina, then its meaning is the ejection of urine from there and the prohibition of it to be healed by medicine.
Mays si es penetrant entro la junctura de la coyssa o entro al os e envencio de dolor en le circuit, lahoras senhal de lu es que la tenta perve entro aqui si en lu no es turtuositat entro al os, e envencio de dolor en le circuit de la partida; e que de lu yeys poyredura tostemps; e que no val en aquela medicacio, ni es consolidada am enguent.	But if it has penetrated into the joint of the thigh or into the bone and causes pain in the circle around it, then its sign is that the rod goes in there if it does not feel tense in the bone, and the pain in the circle around the part; and pus comes out of there at times; and it does not help with medicine, nor is it healed with ointment.
E en totas aquelas fistulas penetrant no es curacio de tot, e la curacio de aquelas es trebalh e vanetat dels folyls metges sobre·l qual so fermatz.	And in all those penetrated fistulas there is no cure at all, and the cure of them is labor and vanity of the efforts of doctors who talk about it.
Mays en aquela que no es penetrant e no antiqua, sanacio am ferr es sperada segon que yeu a tu recomtare, e aquo que ja yeu e proat.	But in that which is not penetrated and does not become old, healing with iron is expected according to what you have recommended, and that which has already been seen and tried.
E es que le malaute jagua entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos e eleva las cambas de lu entro sus, las coyssas sian enclinadas al ventre de lu, e aprop entromet tenta de plom, o de eram si es en la fistula turtuositat, entro que sapias le loc on perve la tenta.	And it is that the patient lies on his back on top of his knees and raises his legs over them, with his thighs tilted towards his stomach, and then insert a rod of iron or horn into the fistula until you find the place where the rod goes in.
E si aquela sent le malaute entorn le cuol, lahora cove que tu entrometas le tieu dit endic en le cuol.	And if it feels pain around its neck, then insert your finger into its neck.
E si sentas en le tieu dit la tenta ja per si meteyssa descuberta penetrar, otra aquo que sentas entre le tieu dit e aquela siphac o carn, lahoras sapias certanament que aquela es penetrant; e adonc no trebalhes en aquela, quar no es en aquela sanacio, ayssi cum havem dit.	And if it feels the rod already pushing itself into the hole discovered, or flesh and bone, then know certainly that it is penetrated; therefore, do not labor in that, for there is no cure in that, as we have said.
Mays empero diyssero alcus que es sana en alcus homes tart.	But some people say that it is healed in some men.
E de la medicacio per la qual es sperat juvament en lu es que tu ignes cauteri subtil segon le ample de la fistula, ayssi cum es precedit, e intrometas aquel ignit en la fistula entro que pervengua entorn le cuol; e aprop itera aquel doas o tres vetz entro que sapias que ja son adhustas totas aquelas carns ajustadas fistuladas que so semblantz a cana de pluma de ausel.	And of the medicine by which it is hoped for youth in it is that you burn cautery subtleties according to the width of the fistula, as it has been preceded, and insert that burning into the fistula until it comes out around its neck; then repeat this twice or thrice until you know that they are already dried up all those flesh clamped fistulas which seem like a feather of goose.
E aprop cura aquela am calguas envolopadas en boder entro que en yescan totas aquelas carns que so adhustas, e aprop cura aquela am medicinas la carn engendrantz e consolidantz, e si es sanada, bo es; e sino, lahoras no es sana en degun temps per autra curacio.	Then treat that with poultices wrapped in wool until all those flesh are dried up, and then cure that with medicines that generate and consolidate flesh, and if it is healed, well; and if not, then it will not be healed in any time by another cure.
E si la tenta intra, e no penetra entro·l tieu dit le qual es en le cul, e entre aquel e la tenta que es velament spes de carn o de ciphac, e vezes la fistula en aquo que siec la superficia de la codena, lahoras secca la codena del comensament de la fistula, e tu ve seccan am la tenta, e sia en la fistula entro que la seccio pervengua al loc en le qual perve la extremitat de la tenta, e per la tenta es liberat e catz.	And if it goes in but does not penetrate into your finger which is in the anus, and between that and the rod which is obviously flesh or bone, and the fistula comes out where it touches the surface of the codon, then dry up the codon from the beginning of the fistula, and you will dry up the flesh by the rod, and it will be freed through the rod, and it will be healed.
E aprop mundifiqua aquelas carns fistuladas las quals so asembladas a canula de pena de ausel e no romangua de aquelas alcuna causa.	And then cleanse the flesh that has developed ulcers, which resemble the quill of a feather and do not come from any other cause.
Mays si flux de sanc vezes que vengua entre tu e la tua opperacio quan ensideysses aquelas carns, lahoras le milh que sia e del pus leugier instrument es cauterizar am foc o am medicina acuta, quar cauteri am foc ajusta bonas doas habitutz: so es adhustio de aquelas carns ajustadas, e abscizio del sanc exseccacio de las humiditatz.	But if blood flows from these meats when you touch them with your hand, then the meat must be cauterized with fire or with a sharp instrument. For a cautery with fire draws out moisture and dries up the humors.
E aprop cura aquela am calguas envolopadas en boder o en caus trissat entro que·l loc geta brac, e aprop lahoras cura la plagua am enguentz carn dura engendran e consolidan.	Then treat it with cool bandages wrapped around the affected area, and then treat the wound with a hard, dry ointment that produces scars and solidifies.
E so medicinas en las quals so stipticitat e exseccio; quan lahoras es restaurada ja es sanada e no temes iteracio.	These medicines have the power to stop bleeding and dry out humors. When they are applied, the wound is healed and there is no fear of recurrence.
Mays si la fistula ja perve entro al preon del cul e es elonguada de lu superficia del cos, lahoras entromet le tieu dit en le cul e inquireys am aquel.	But if the ulcer has already reached the rectum and is elongated from the body's surface, then insert your finger into the anus and examine it.
E donc si centes la tenta e entre tu e ela es velament de ciphac o de carn, e es propda a la penetracio, lahora no es operacio en lu sino segon via di fiducia e de speransa.	And if you feel a membrane or flesh with it, and it is close to the opening, then there is no need for an operation on it, but rather a second examination with confidence and hope.
La qual causa es aministrar en lu una de tres manieyras: o que cauterize aquela ayssi cum havem dit; o que secces aquela entro que consieguas la conquavitat de lu per que sia a tu possible entrometre las qualcas e la curacio propdana; e no procesiscas mot am seccio per so que no inscidas le lacert contenent le cuol, e que accidisque sobre le malaute eyssiment de la egistio ses voluntat; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit quar fort leu sira sanat; o que elongues aquel velament e mondes aquel pus que seccas aquel entro prop le cul, ayssi cum havem dit, o am tenta o am autre instrument de aguda extremitat, e aprop mondifique aquelas carns fistuladas las quals so en la seccio entro la on podes am percrustacio; e aprop esforsa te a far la restauracio de tota la plagua am seccio, e si le orrifici pus desus no es consolidat, e romangua la fistula uberta en la partida del cul, e sira pus leugier per le malaute.	There are three ways to treat this: either cauterize it as we have said; or dry up the ulcer and return it to its cavity so that you can insert your fingers and apply treatment; or do not cut at all so that you do not pierce the membrane containing the rectum, and make the patient suffer against his will because of the insertion. Then treat it with what we have already said, for it will heal quickly. Or elongate the membrane and drain the pus from the ulcer, as we have said, either with your fingers or another sharp instrument; then cleanse the flesh that has developed ulcers which resemble the quill of a feather and do not come from any other cause. Then strive to restore the entire wound by cutting, and if the opening above is not consolidated and the fistula opens at the anus, then drain the pus more quickly through the patient's body.
E alscunas veguadas la fistula es finida segon aquesta manieyra: es quan tu entrometas la tenta en la fistula, e es en le latz del cul entorn la superficia del cos am la codena e en le marge del cul, lahoras pren tenta de perforada extremitat, que es ayssi cum agulha de preparantz les coers segon aquesta forma:	And sometimes the fistula is ended in this way: when you insert your finger into the fistula and it is on the side of the anus around the body's surface and at the edge of the anus, then take a piercing instrument with a pointed end, which is prepared like a needle for sewing up wounds in this way:
e entromet en aquela fiel envolopat de v fiels o entorn aquels; e aprop entromet tenta am fiel en la fistula entro que consiegua la conquavitat de lu.	and insert it into the fistula until you reach its cavity.
Mays si es penetrant en le marge del cul prop dedintz, lahoras tu extratz le fiel de aquel trauc ayssi que tu intrometas le tieu dit en le cul; e extraguas la extremitat del fiel e ajustes las duas extremitatz essemps, e estrenh cascuna, e leyssa aquo per un dia o per dos, e quan mays inscideys le fiel en la carn, estrenh be aquel entro que aquelas carns sian inscididas las quals so entre doas extremitatz del fiel e que cajan.	But if it pierces the edge of the anus near the inside, then pull out the instrument from that wound so that you can insert your finger into the anus; then pull out the end of the instrument and bring together its two ends, and tie them, and leave it in place for one or two days. And when you feel the instrument piercing the flesh, tighten it between the two ends of the instrument and draw it out.
E aprop cura la plagua entro que sia consolidada e sanada.	Then treat the wound so that it is consolidated and healed.
Mays si le orrifici de la fistula no es penetrant, lahoras fay aquel penetrar, en qualque manieyre sia a tu preparat, sino que sia mot en le preon, quar no es a tu que fassas aquo per que no inscidas le lacert; e aprop fay am aquela entro que sia sanada.	But if the opening of the fistula does not penetrate, then make it penetrate in whatever way you are prepared, unless it goes into the rectum, for it is not up to you to pierce the membrane. Then treat it so that it heals.
La forma de spatum spinos am lo qual es fenduda la fistula: la curvitat del qual es mot aguda e l’autra partida es no-aguda, per so que no inscidas aquo que no es necessari, ayssi cum vezes.	The shape of the split-spoon with which the fistula is split: its curved end is very sharp and the other end is not sharp, so that it does not pierce what it should not, as it should be.
De sutura de emorroydas en las quals corra sanc en la inscizio de aquelas.	Of the sewing of hemorrhoids in which blood flows in the opening of them.
Emorroydas so segon dos manieyras, quar o so entre le cul semblantz aysi que es de carbos, o quays aquelas sian cum a gras de rasim.	Hemorrhoids come in two ways: either they are between the anus like charcoal, or they are like fat with hair.
E de aquelas so petitas e grans, e que le sanc corr de aquelas tostemps e es una, e so motas, e so fora·l cul, e en las extremitatz de lu.	And some are small and large, and the blood flows from them at any time, and they are one, and some are cut, and outside and on the edges of the anus.
Mays empero aquelas que so foro le cul so segon las mes de pauca humiditat, de las quals corr aygua citrina o un petit de sanc am cos continuabla, e so segon la color del cos.	But those that are outside the anus are according to the months of little moisture, from which flows a watery fluid or a little blood with a continuous body, and they are according to the color of the body.
E la curacio de aquela que es dedintz le cuol es que comandes al malaute que se assela e que se exprema entro que le cuol yesca e las emoroydas apparescan a tu.	And the treatment of that which is inside the rectum is to command the patient to sit and to be compressed so that the rectum dries and the hemorrhoids appear to you.
Adonc tu te coyte e suspen am uncis o que tenguas aquelas am la tua ungla, e aprop incideys aquelas deves las suas razitz.	Then you cut and suspend with tweezers or what you have those with your fingernail, and then pierce them down to their roots.
Mays si les uncis no so tengutz en aquelas per la humiditat de lor e mollificacio de aquelas, lahoras pren aquelas am drap aspre o am coto o am flassada de lana, e extratz aquelas am les tieus ditz, e aprop inscideys aquelas e polveriza sobre lor alcunas polveras caudas aprop la inscizio, per que sian ad aquelas en loc de cauteri; o cauteriza aquelas segon que es precedit en le capitol de cauterizar.	But if the tweezers are not held in them because of their moisture and softness, then take them with rough cloth or twine or a piece of wool, and pull them out with your fingers, and then pierce them and powder some powdered caustics over them at the opening so that they are as cauterized; or cauterize them according to what is preceded in the chapter on cauterizing.
E aprop cura aquelas am l’autra curacio entro que sian sanadas.	Then treat them with the other treatment so that they heal.
E si le cul no obezeys a egressio, lahoras cristerisa le malaute am cristeri en le qual sia mordicacio petita, e sia lavat am aquel aquo que es en le cuol e que obezesca a egressio leugierament quan le malaute s’esprem.	And if the anus does not obey defecation, then anoint the patient with an ointment in which there is a small amount of biting, and let it be washed with that water which is in the rectum and let the patient defecate quickly when he is compressed.
Mays si las emorroydas so defora le cul, lahoras la causa de lor es leugiera, e es que tu prenguas aquelas am la tua ungla, o que prenguas aquelas am unci, e inscidas aquelas, e aprop cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit entro que sian sanadas.	But if the hemorrhoids come out of the anus, then the cause of them is looseness, and it is that you take them with your fingernail or take them with tweezers and pierce them, and then treat them with what we have said so that they heal.
E aquel que avoreys inscizio, cove que aministres sutura de lor segon aquesta manieyra: pren fiel envolopat e entromet aquel en agulha e aprop extratz las emorroydas a las partidas dessus, e fay aquel penetrar am la agulha en la razit del autra part, e envolveys las doas extramitatz del fiel en la partida pus dejos de la agulha, e so latitudinalment; e estrenh la emorroyda am strectura fort, e aprop noza le fiel e extratz la agulha.	And if you see an opening, know that you should administer suturing of them in this way: take a piercing instrument and insert it into the needle and then pull out the hemorrhoids at their ends, and make the piercing instrument penetrate with its other end into the root of the opposite side, and wrap the two ends of the instrument around the part below the needle horizontally; and tighten the hemorrhoid with a strong grip, and then remove the instrument.
E fay aquo a totas, e layssa de aquelas una e no la cozes, per so que la superfluitat del sanc corra de aquela.	Do this to all of them, and let one flow and not the others, so that the superfluous blood flows from it.
E aprop pausa sobre le cul drap enfus en oli rozat o en cerot; e pausa aquel sobre·l cuol e comanda al malaute que·s repause.	Then place a cloth soaked in rose oil or in cerate over the anus and let him sit.
E aprop layssa aquela entro que caja; e quan es casuda, cura aquelas am enguentz o am autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	And then let it be discharged so that it flows out; and when it is discharged, treat the hemorrhoids with ointment or another treatment so that they heal.
De curacio de fistulas.	Of the treatment of fistulas.
Motas veguadas accideys per exseccacio de fenda o per costriccio de natura.	They often occur because of dryness of a fissure or because of contraction of nature.
E cum so antiquadas e no val en aquela medicina, lahoras cove que tu razas aquelas am la puncta de spatum o am la tua ungla entro que sian faytas humidas e sia hostada de aquelas la escorsa pus desus, la qual prohibeys aquelas de consolidacio; e aprop cura aquelas entro que sian consolidadas.	And if they are old and not helped by that medicine, then know that you should pierce them with the point of a split-spoon or with your fingernail so that they become moist and let the escorce above it be healed, which prohibits them from consolidating; then treat them so that they consolidate.
Lahoras tu osta aquelas am razio pus vehement que la primieyra entro que mot sancno e sian excoriadas; e aprop cura aquelas entro que sian sanadas.	Then you pierce them with a very violent piercing more than the first so that blood flows and they are excoriated; then treat them so that they heal.
De curacio de almesamir, so es clau.	Of the treatment of hemorrhoids, it is a key.
Sapias que alamermar, so es clau, e no es si no notz redon segon la color del cors semblant a cap de claviel, e es fayt en tot le cors e majorment en las partidas dejos les pes e als ditz, e endeve per aquels dolor deves le anament.	Know that hemorrhoids, so is key, and it is not if it does not throb according to the color of the body resembling a head of a nail, and it is done throughout the body and especially in the lower parts around the feet and at the edges, and because of this there is pain.
E adonc cove que sia inscidit aquo que es en le circuit del clau, e sia tengut am les forfexs o am unci, e sia eradicat de la sua razit; e aprop cura aquel.	Then know that what is in the circuit of the claw is pierced, and is held with tweezers or with tweezers, and is pulled out from its root; then treat it.
E si vols, cauteriza le segont que es precedit en le sieu capitol.	And if you wish, cauterize the second [part] as preceded in its chapter.
Mays de veruca es eminencia petita aspre fistulada redonda sobre la superficia del cos, e motas veguadas veno en las mas dels enfantz.	Warts are small, rough, fistulated, and round protuberances on the surface of the body, and they often appear on children's hands.
E curacio de lu es que estendas e inscidas aquela, o que estrenhas aquela am fiel o am pel entro que caja.	And its cure is to stretch it out and insert that, or to pierce it with a needle until blood comes out.
E si vols, cauteriza aquo, segon que havem dit, am foc o am medicina acuta.	And if you want, cauterize it, as we have said, with fire or with a sharp medicine.
E ja so eradicadas enversas e no-enversas am le instrument le qual yeu diyre.	And thus, both straight and crooked warts are eradicated using the instrument I will describe to you.
Mays formica es eminencia petita feutrada o fistulada grossa sobre la superficia del cos anant mot en le preon, e quan le freg atroba aquela es centit en lu semblant de mordificacio de formigua, e es fayta entorn le cos.	However, an ant is a small, hairy, or fistulated protuberance on the surface of the body that moves around the penis; when rubbed, it feels like a bite from an ant, and it occurs throughout the body.
E curacio de lu es que prenguas una canula de pena de auca o de pena de voltor, e sia fort, e pausa aquela sobre la formigua entro que la contengua le cercle de la canula de las partidas de lu; e aprop revolveys la tua ma am la canula entro que inscidas aquo que es en le circuit de la formigua, e pauses aquela en le preon de la carn, e que eradiques la formigua de la sua razit.	And its cure is to take a peacock feather or a vulture feather, which should be strong, and place it on the ant so that it contains the circle of the feather; then, with your hand, turn the feather so that you pierce what is inside the ant's circle, and place it on the flesh of the penis, and eradicate the ant from its root.
E si vols, fay aquo am canula de eram o de ferr segon aquesta forma:	And if you wish, do this with an ermine or steel needle in the following way:
Sia la partida desus de la canulha trahent a subtilitat, sorda (so es no-perforada), envolopada per so que sobre le dit la aprencio de lu sia ablaviada e la revolucio de aquela.	Let the tip of the needle be very thin and blunt (so it does not pierce) and wrapped so that, when placed on the wart, its appearance is smooth and the rotation of the needle is effortless.
E si vols cauteriza la formiga segon que es denant dit en la cauterizacio de atheyl en le capitol de cauteri.	And if you wish, cauterize the ant as mentioned earlier in the chapter on cauterization.
De forma dels instrumentz que so aministratz a dar cristeri.	The instruments used to administer cauterization are described below.
Alcunas veguadas es fayt cristeri de argent o de lato o de eram fondut o malleat; e alcunas veguadas es fayt de aquels instrumentz petit e gran segon aquels als quals so aministratz, quar aquel que es aministrat en la curacio dels petitz enfants sia petit; e de aquel dels quals los culs son freuls o doloyrozes, les cristeris de aquels sian petitz.	Sometimes cauterization is done with silver or brass or molten ermine or mallable metal; and sometimes it is done with small or large instruments according to those who are administered, for that which is administered in the cure of small children should be small; and that which is administered to those whose anuses are sore or painful, their cauteries should be small.
La forma de cristeri gran e pauc:	The form of a large and rare cautery:
Le cap de la canula de lu desus en le qual es liada la borsa sia ampla segon aquesta manieyra; e sia a lu distinacio la on la borsa es liada ayssi cum vezes.	The head of the needle, at the top where the pouch is tied, should be wide in this manner; and the distinction where the pouch is tied should be there as well.
E la extremitat de lu pus dejus, la qual es entromesa en le cul, sia sorda (so es no-uberta) mot leon, atrasent a subtilita; e en la un del latz de lu sian dos traucs, e en l’autre costat un trauc, e sia la amplesa del trauc segon la groseza dels rays e pus gros un petit.	And the lower end of it, which is inserted into the anus, should be blunt  (so it is not open) like a lion's tooth, honed to a fine point; and on one side of it there should be two holes, and on the other side one hole, and the width of the hole according to the thickness of the rays and more gross for a small one.
E sia la borsa en la qual sian pausadas las medicinas de vesica de bestia o de pel de ovelha, e la razit de lu sia un palm.	And the pouch in which are placed the medicines of an animal's bladder or sheepskin should be one palm long.
E sia perforada per motz traucs ayssi cum es revolvuda; e si l’espazi le qual es entre les traucs la grossetut del dit.	And it should be perforated with many holes so that, when it is revolved, the thickness of the object is between the holes.
E aprop entromet en aquels traucs fiel fort de fiel cru le qual sia de detz fiels, o enviro aquels; e ajusta am aquel la borsa; e quan es pausada en lu la borsa, sia streyt en le cap del cristeri entre dos distingentz am fort costriccio, e aprop cristeriza am aquel quascun trauc: Mays la qualitat de cristerizar am aquel es que tu omples la borsa de la medicina, que sia escalfada segon la quantitat de la tolleransa del malaute; e guarda te que no sia trop cauda ni trop freja.	Then insert into those holes strong, raw bile from ten cows, or surround those holes; and adjust with that the pouch; and when the pouch is placed on it, tightly grip the head of the cautery between your fingers, and then cauterize with that each hole: However, the quality of cauterizing with that is that you fill the pouch with medicine, which should be heated according to the quantity of the patient's tolerance; and beware that it is not too hot nor too cold.
E aprop le malaute sia resupinat sobre le sieu dos, e eleva las suas cambas en sus e pausa dejos lu un cuer sobre le qual ja so les homes o un lansol; e aprop unta la extramitat del cauteri am oli o am album de huou o am mucellage de fenugrec o de semblantz; e aprop entromet aquel en le cul am facilitat, e aprop le ministre prengua la borsa e exprema aquel am doas mas e essemps am vehemencia entro que sia evacuat en le budelh tot aquo que es en le cristeri; e aprop extra le cristeri e le malaute leva las suas cambas a la paret.	Then the patient should lie on his back, and raise his legs up and place under them a board or a pillow; then anoint the end of the cautery with oil or egg white or mucilage of fenugreek or similar plants; then insert it into the anus with ease, and let the minister take hold of the pouch and squeeze it with both hands and press with strength until everything that is in the cautery is evacuated; then pull out the cautery and let the patient raise his legs to the wall.
E si la medicina forsa aquel a eyssiment, tengua le tant quant poyra; e si dorm am aquel per tota una nueyt, es mays derier en juvament.	And if the medicine forces that out, let him hold it as long as he can; and if he sleeps with it for an entire night, it is better for healing.
Mays si tu cristerizas aquel en las malautias de solucio de ventre e l’eyssiment de lu le coyta, lahoras tu itera le cauteri entro que sia sanat.	However, if you cauterize that in diseases of a swollen belly and its discharge, then repeat the cautery until it is healed.
E si en le cul so emorroydas o apostemas ledens, lahoras sia le cristeri mot subtil e leon, dels cristeris am les quals les enfantz so criterisatz.	And if in the anus there are hemorrhoids or painful bumps, then the cautery should be very fine and sharp, of those cauteries with which children are cauterized.
De curacio de las plaguas.	Of the cure of wounds:
Yeu ja e dit en la divisio de la curacio de las plaguas aquo que convenia al libre, e yeu dic assi la curacio de aquelas am ma e am medicinas segon le conpliment.	You have already said in the division of the cure of wounds what suited the free man, and I have also described the cure of those with hand and medicines according to their complement.
Donc dic que las plaguas son diversificadas segon aquo en que son faytas las plaguas e segon le loc sobre le qual cazo las plaquas.	Therefore, I say that wounds are diversified according to what they are made of and according to the location where they occurred.
E las causas per que motas vetz son faytas las plaguas so ayssi cum getament de peyra, o inscisio d’espaza o de cotel, o percussio am lansa, o am fustz, o am sageta, o semblantz ad aquels de motas causas.	And the causes for which many wounds are made are thus with a stone, or cutting with a knife, or piercing with a lance, or beating with a stick, or with an arrow, or similar objects from those causes.
Mays las plaguas que so en les locz del cos so ayssi cum plagua la qual catz sobre le cap, o·l col, o·l pietz, o·l ventre, o·l fitge, e semblantz ad aquels dels membres.	However, the wounds that are in parts of the body are thus with a wound on the head, or neck, or foot, or belly, or thigh, and similar to those of the limbs.
E yeu so recomtant la curacio de alcunas plaguas per que pauses aquela ratiocinacio e regla sobre las autras plaguas.	And I will recommend the cure for some wounds so that you may pause that reasoning and rule over other wounds.
E yeu comensare de las plaguas del cap simplas, quar la rememoracio de las compostas vindra al comensament del tertz capitol.	And I will begin with simple wounds of the head, for the memory of the compounded wounds will come to the beginning of the third chapter.
Donc dic que quan accideys en le cap plagua simpla e no es fractura, lahoras considera: si es per getament de peyra o de semblant, e ja ha trinquada la codena tant solament e es gran plagla e temes sobre aquel malaute havinement de apostema caut, lahoras tu te coyta e fleubotoma la cephalica tantost, e no tardas aquo; e extrats ad aquel del sanc segon la quantitat de la vertut de lu si no mes alcuna causa prohibent de fleubotomia, majorment si·l sanc que es eyssit de la plagua es pauc.	Therefore, I say that when it happens in the head a simple wound and there is no fracture, then consider: if it is with a stone or similar object, and the tendon has only been stretched and is a large wound and you fear an abscess forming over it, then you cut and flebotomi the cephalic one as soon as possible, and do not delay that; and draw out from that wound blood according to the quantity of its strength if there is no prohibiting cause of flebotomy, especially if the blood that flows from the wound is little.
E sia la flaubotomia del contrari de la partida plaguada; e guardase le malaute de replecio e de vi e de viandas grossas.	And let the flebotomy be on the opposite side of the wounded part; and let the patient abstain from repletion and from wine and heavy food.
Mays si de la minuicio prohibeys alcuna causa, lahoras sia aminorat de la vianda e no apropinque a carn ni a vi.	However, if any prohibiting cause, then let him be diminished in food and not approach meat or wine.
E pausa sobre la plagua, si a lu accideys apostema caut, coto enfus en oli rozat solet o en vi en le qual es stipticat.	And place over the wound, if an abscess forms over it, cut it in oil roasted alone or in wine in which it is steeped.
Mays si est segur de apostema caut, lahoras pausa sobre la plagua, si es recent am le sieu sanc e le ayre no ha mudat aquela la polvera la qual yeu recomtare aprop petit.	However, if he is certain of an abscess, then place over the wound, if it is recent and his blood and air have not changed that powder which I recommended earlier; then stop for a while.
E si le ayre ja ha mudada aquela, lahoras pausa sobre alscus enguentz entro que sia sanada.	And if the air has already changed that, then place over it alcus gummi until it is healed.
Mays si la plagua es gran o es per inscizio d’espaza e de semblantz, e no so ajustadas las labias de lu per puvils, lahoras ajusta aquelas am sutura segon que yeu recomtare de la sutura de lor.	However, if the wound is large or it is by cutting with a knife and similar objects, and its lips are not pulled together by threads, then pull them together with sutures according to how I recommend of their sutures.
Mays si la plagua ja es discuberta del os e pen, e no es retencio de lu sino un petit suspensori, lahoras inscideys aquela e aprop cura la plagua am medicinas e restaura la carn aprop en loc de codena, e comanda al malaute que sia pescut de viandas en las quals es groceza: caps e formen coyt e semblantz a lor, entro que sia compost.	However, if the wound is already uncovered from the bone and there is no retention of it except for a small suspensory, then insert that and then cure the wound with medicines and restore the flesh by cutting into the tendon, and command the patient to abstain from heavy foods in which there is thickness: heads and formen cots and similar to them, until it is healed.
E si atrobas en la codena putrefaccio e no adhereys al os, lahoras tu inscideys tot aquo poyrit e geta aquo, e aprop cura aquo.	And if you find in the tendon putrefaction and it does not adhere to the bone, then insert everything that is rotted and cut it out, and then cure that.
Mays si en aquestas plaguas es arteria o vena de la qual fluxs de sanc pot evenir, e no es abscindida per medicinas, lahoras tu inquier sobre la arteria, e si atrobas aquela no-inscidida, lahoras tu inscideys aquela am spatum, o lia aquela; e si necessitat te provoca que aquo que havem dit no comfereys, lahoras tu cauteriza entro que·l sanc sia abscidit.	But if in these plagues there is an artery or vein from which blood can flow and it is not cut off by medicine, then you inquire about the artery, and if you find that it is not cut off, then you cut it with a spatula, or ligature it; and if necessity compels you to do so, then you cauterize it until the blood is stopped.
E si aquestas plaguas son simplas e petitas, lahoras la causa de lor es leugiere; enayssi que tu polverizas sobre aquelas aquesta polvera, quar consolidada aquela denant que l’ayre mude aquelas.	And if these plagues are simple and small, then their cause is slight, so you powder them with this powder, which hardens them before the air changes them.
E la manieyra de la polvera es aquesta: recipe oli de enses partida una, de sanc de drago partida doas, de caus no-extincta partidas tres; sia tot mot trissat e crivellat, e de lu sia la plagua omplida, e sia constrengida per bona constriccio entro que be sobre aquela aderesca, e sia coagulada am le sanc.	And the manner of the powder is this: take oil of nuts, broken one part, blood of dragon, broken two parts; cause not extinguished, broken three parts; let all be well ground and strained, and with it fill the plague, and keep it bound with a good binding until it adheres well, and coagulate it with the blood.
E aprop strengeys aquela desus am pulvils e leyssa aquela, e no la deslias mentre esta ayssi que no es apostemada, quar no es eredicada de lu la medicina entro que sia sanada.	Then bind it above with powder and lye, and do not loosen it while it is thus that the medicine is not expelled from it as long as it has not healed.
E alcuna vetz fa aquo sola cautz, quan no es a tu en present enses e sanc de drago.	And sometimes it does this alone, when you do not have nuts or dragon's blood available.
E ja fa aquesta meteyssa operacio en las grans plaguas quan conveneys que sia pausada sobre aquelas e sian streytas, e so plaguas recentz am le lor sanc, las quals le ayre no ha alteradas.	And you do this operation on great plagues when it seems right to put it on and keep them tight; and on recent plagues with their blood that the air has not altered.
E si le ayre las ha alteradas, e majorment quan es en temps d’estiu, lahoras no es entencio a la posicio de aquesta polvera, mays adonc cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit, enayssi que tu pauses sobre aquelas alcus enguents degistius, o que pauses sobre aquelas pols de la farina del ordi am aygua e mel entro que getan poyredura; e aprop cura aquelas am l’autra curacio entro que sian sanadas.	And if the air has altered them, and especially in the summer, then it is not necessary to use this powder, but cure them instead as we said, by placing on them some thickened ointments or pastes made from wheat flour with water and honey, which cause blistering; and cure them with the other treatment until they are healed.
Mays si accideys am la plagua fractura en os, e es petita, lahoras tu extratz aquo am gesti.	But if a fracture in bone has happened to the plague, and it is small, then you remove that with tweezers.
E yeu diyre la cura de las fracturas del cap en aquo que es envenidor.	And I will tell you the cure for fractures of the head when it is poisoned.
De las plaguas del col.	Of plagues in the neck:
Mays si la plagua accideys en le col, lahoras no es en lu differencia en medicacio, e entre la plagua del cap quan es simpla.	But if the plague happens in the neck, then there is no difference in medicine between that and a simple plague in the head.
Mays si ja le nervi del col es inscis o arteria, lahoras si es nervi, no es en lu engen sino que sia evitada curacio de lu am aquo que fa vehement stipticitat, ayssi cum ziniar e zegi que es vetriol e semblantz a lor quar nozo als nervis e contrazo aquel.	But if the nerve of the neck is cut or an artery, then if it is a nerve, there should be no injury to it but it should be avoided by curing that with something that makes a violent contraction, as well as cinchona and zeger, which are like vitriol and similar to them because they harm nerves and contract that.
E no pauses sobre la plagua alcuna causa de tot freja, quar la sustancia dels nervis es freja e la continuacio de lu es am le cervel, le qual es le pus aut de totz les membres.	And do not put on the plague anything that causes any heat, because the substance of the nerves is hot and their continuation is to the brain, which is the most important part of all the members.
E si’ aquo am que es curat de medicinas leugieras, ayssi cum es caus lavada am aygua dousa, alcuna veguada enfusa en oli rozat o no-rozat, e thucia quan es lavada am aygua dousa e las autras peyras minarantz segon aquesta manieyra, e enguentz humitz.	And if that which is cured by mild medicines, as well as being washed with warm water, some vegetable oil poured on or not roasted, and thucia when it is washed with warm water and the other stones are applied according to this manner, and ointments moistened:
Mays si la plagua es gran, lahoras aministra sutura, o coarta las labias de lu, e aprop cura aquela am pulvils entro que sia sanada.	But if the plague is great, then administer suture or cut the lips of it, and cure that with powder until it is healed.
Mays si a la plagua es profunditat o accideys en lu a la pus bassa partida poyredura, lahoras perfora aquela en le loc mays depremegut.	But if there is depth to the plague or suppuration has happened to it in the lower part, then pierce that in the most depressed place:
Mays si en la plagua ja es inscisa arteria e es conseguit flux de sanc, lahoras separa o secca aquela, o lia aquela, o cauteriza aquela si necessitat te provoca ad aquo.	But if an artery is cut in the plague and blood flows from it, then separate or stop that, or ligature it, or cauterize it if necessity compels you to do so:
Mays si ja ha insciditz les spondils del golayro o tot, e so salvadas las venas del col, lahoras tu ajusta las labias de la codena am sutura sobre la cana del golayro e no toques aquel; abantz egala aquel e reduzeys aquel sobre la sua figura natural, e aprop strenh aquel am strectura decent, e leyssa aquela per alcus jorns; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz en les quals es stipticitat e excitacio entro que sia sanat.	But if the spinal columns of the neck have been cut or all of them, and the veins of the neck have been saved, then you adjust the lips of the wound with suture over the cane of the neck and do not touch that; raise it up and return it to its natural figure, and bind that tightly with a decent binding, and apply powder to that for several days; and cure that with ointments in which there is contraction and excitation until it is healed.
Mays si la plagua ja en le os a fayta enprecio, lahoras percuireys aquela, e lahoras si en lu ha fragmentz de hos, extratz totz aquels que podes de lor; e aquo que a tu no es apparelhat, leyssa aquo entro que la plagua se poyrisca, e sia separat e la egrecio de lu sia alleujada.	But if the plague has made pressure on the bone, then pierce that, and if there are pieces of bone in it, extract all those which you can; and that which you cannot, let that be pierced so that the plague becomes pustular, and separate that and let the discharge of it be removed.
E si la plagua es recent lahoras polveriza sobre aquela polvera la qual t’e recomtada.	And if the plague is recent, then powder that with the powder which has been recounted to you.
Mays si en la plagua es fayta fistula, lahoras cura aquela am aquo del qual la rememoracio vindra aprop en le sieu capitol.	But if there is a fistula in the plague, then cure that with something whose remembrance will come soon in its chapter.
De las plaguas del col o de semblantz quan fayta entre las spallas e es fayta am spaza o am cotel o am lansa o am semblantz.	Of plagues in the neck or of their likes when they are made between the shoulders and are caused by a spear, or a dart, or a lance, or their likes:
Si es percussio de lansa o de cotel, e vezes de lu la profunditat, lahoras considera mays si de la plagua yeys ventositat quan le malaute elena; lahoras sapias que la plagua es mortal.	If it is a wound from a lance or a dart, and there is depth to it, then consider more if the plague has windiness when the patient breathes; then know that the plague is deadly.
E si en lu no es profunditat e la plagua es recent am le sieu sanc, lahoras tu pauses en lu de la primieyra horo polvera, e no strenhas aquel per que no sia le sanc retengut en la profunditat de lu e que retorne al cor e que aucigua le malaute, mays pausa en lu enguent atractiu, e deslia aquela doas veguadas le dia.	And if there is no depth to it and the plague is recent with its blood, then you put on it in the first hour powder, and do not bind that so that the blood is not retained in its depth and returning to the heart and making the patient faint; but apply an attractive ointment to it, and let that be loosed twice a day.
E si l’enguent no es a tu present, lahoras tu pausa en le orrifici de la plagua coto viel per que sucque aquo que yeys de las humiditatz; e fay que le malaute dorma sobre la plagua per que corra aquo que es en lu ajustat.	And if the ointment is not available to you, then you put in the orifice of the plague a piece of cloth soaked so that it draws out what there is of moisture; and let the patient sleep on the plague so that what is bound in it flows out.
Mays si ja de la plagua son passatz tres dias o mays e no accideys al malaute spasme ni tremor de cor mal ni strictura de ale, e vezes las autras dispozicios bonas de lu, lahoras sapias que plagua es salva; e adonc cura aquela am calguas e am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanada.	But if three days or more have passed from the plague and no spasms or tremors of the heart or bad tightness occur to it, and you see its other good dispositions, then know that the plague is saved; and cure that with cauteries and the other treatment until it is healed.
Mays si la sanacio de lu es excusada, e ja tot temps es uberta, lahoras sapias que ja es fayta fistula; cura donc aquela per le sieu capitol.	But if its healing is hindered and all time has passed, then know that a fistula has already been made; cure it therefore according to its chapter.
E si la plagua es per inscisio de spaza o de cotel, e es simpla en la superficia del pietz o del dos, lahoras cura aquela am aquo que es precedit de sutura, si es gran, o am polvera, si es petita.	And if the plague is from a wound of a spear or a dart and is simple on the surface of the foot or the sole, then cure that with what precedes of suture, if it is great, or powder, if it is small.
Mays si ja ha fayta enprecio en le os, e so ja de lu inscizas pessas, lahoras tu torqua la plagua e coyta ad extrayre aquelas pessas, si so separadas.	But if there is pressure on the bone and broken pieces in it, then you twist the plague and cut to extract those pieces, if they are separated.
Mays si no so separadas, lahoras leyssa las entro que se poyresca la plagua, que la extraccio de lor es alleujada.	But if they are not separated, then pierce them so that the plague becomes pustular, for their extraction is removed.
E de las autras plaguas accidentz en les autres membres le juvament en curacio es le juvament de aquo que havem dit.	And of the other accidental plagues in the other members the youth in cure is the youth of what has been said.
De las plaguas del ventre.	Of plagues in the belly:
L’indisposicio la qual accideys en le ventre es o gran, o pauc, o migiera.	The indisposition that happens in the belly is either great or small or middling.
De la gran alcunas veguadas yeys le budel o nervi del budel, per que es fayta intromissio de lor e la sutura de lor esser pus vehement e pus subtil.	Of the great some times see the bowels or nerves of the bowels, because there is made penetration and their suture is very violent and very fine.
E disrupcio petita es fayta dificil per autra manieyra, e siec se que la reduccio de lor es pus dificil, si no te coytes de la intromissio de lor al sieu loc tantost, quar se ubre e es engrossat per que le intrament de lu es fayt difficil.	And small disruption is made difficult by another way, and it is known that its reduction is more difficult if you do not cut off the penetration of them into their place at once, because it opens and is swollen so that the insertion of it is made difficult.
E donc la milhor disrupcio es migiera, quar en aquela no es dificil la reduccio del budel, ayssi cum es dificil en las doas specias denant ditas.	And therefore the best disruption is middling, because in that there is not difficult reduction of the bowels, just as it is difficult in both species mentioned before.
E sapias que sutura del ventre es segon quatre manieyras, mays doas suturas son comunas que conveneysso en suturas de las autras plaguas del cors.	And know that the suture of the belly is according to four ways, but two sutures are common which are used in sutures of the other plagues of the body.
E duas autras suturas proprias comunican a las autras plaguas, mays empero so mays proprias en la sutura del ventre.	And two other sutures proper communicate with the other wounds, but they are more proper in the suture of the belly.
E yeu recomti a tu quascuna am exposicio e declaracio.	And I will return to you each one with its exposition and declaration.
Donc dic que quan la plagua es petita e es eyssit alcuna causa del budel per aquela, e es fayt dificil a reduzir aquel, lahoras aquo es en una de doas manieyras: o per parvitat de la disrupcio ayssi cum havem dit, o quan al budel es venguda inflacio per la frigiditat de l’ayre.	Therefore, I say that when the wound is small and some cause of the intestine comes out through it, and it is difficult to return it, then it is in one of two ways: either by the smallness of the disruption as we have said, or when the intestine has become inflamed due to the coldness of the air.
E donc quan aquo es ayssi, lahora cove que tu scalfes aquel enayssi que tu submerges una sponga ho drap humit en aygua tebeza sola, o que coguas en aygua squinant, e cyperum, e spic, e embroques am aquela le budel entro que la imflacio sia resolvuda.	And therefore, when it is like this, then you should scorch it so that you soak a sponge or cloth in warm water alone, or grab it in squill water, and cypress, and spic, and embrocate with that the intestine inside until the inflammation is resolved.
E alcunas veguadas fa aquo vi en le qual ha stipticitat, e es milhor que la aygua sola en resolucio de la imflacio.	And sometimes it does this in the one in which there is stippling, and it is better than plain water in resolving the inflammation.
E donc cum tu vezes la imflacio esser resolvuda, lahoras tu humecta le budel am aygua en la qual es coyta altea e malvas, quar per aquo es alleujat le intrament de lu am pauca causa.	And therefore, when you see the inflammation resolved, then you moisten the intestine with water in which there is alder and malva, for by this, the instrument of it is alleviated with little cause.
Mays si es escusat le intrament de lu aprop aquesta curacio, lahoras scindeys la disrupcio un petit am strument am le qual so inscididas emorroydas.	But if the intestine of him is broken due to this cure, then split the disruption a little with an instrument by which hemorrhoids are incised.
E la curacio primieyra es milhor, quan es propriada que no es seccio, e no sia occupacio a seccar aprop necessitat e defaliment.	And the first cure is better when it is not cut and there is no need to dry and starve.
Del instrument, sec se la forma de lu:	Of the instrument, know its form:
La una partida de lu torta aguda, e l’autra partida no-acuta, e la extremitat subtil, e no sia am la subtilitat de spatum, abantz sia obtusa un pauc.	One part of it is acute and bent, and the other part is not acute, and the extremity is fine, and let it not be as fine as a spatula, but rather obtuse a little.
E donc cum la plagua es amplificada e yeys fora le budel, lahoras cove que la sua reduccio sia segon la forma de lu natural, en le sieu loc propri, si es possible sobre aquo, quar milhor es.	And therefore, when the wound is enlarged and you see the intestine out, then let its reduction be according to its natural form, in its proper place, if possible on it, for it is better.
Mays quan la disrupcio es ampla, e es en la partida pu bassa del ventre, lahoras cove que tu fassas jazer le malaute sobre le sieu dos, e pausa las suas cambas pus autas que·l sieu cap; e si es en la partida pus desus del ventre, lahoras tu pause le cap de lu e·l pietz pus autz que las partidas dejos.	But when the disruption is broad and it is in the lower part of the belly, then let the patient lie on his back, and place his legs higher than his head; and if it is in the upper part of the belly, then let him lie on his chest and the feet higher.
E semblantment si la disrupcio es en una de las doas partz del ventre, lahoras pausa la tua entencio e la tua consideracio tostemps en aysso per que la partida en la qual es la plagua sia pus auta que l’autra.	And likewise, if the disruption is in one of the two parts of the belly, then pay attention and consider this all the time so that the part in which there is the wound be higher than the other.
E ayssi cove que tu aministres aquo en las plaguas grans e en las plaguas migieras.	And thus let you administer this in great wounds and in minor wounds.
E en las plaguas petitas, pausa aquo que es a tu preparat, e aprop fay que·l ministre sia entre las tuas mas pyatados, le qual tengua la disrupcio tota am la sua ma e ajusta las labias de lu, e aprop descuebre de aquela ad aquel que siec la sutura alcuna causa aprop autra.	And in small wounds, apply what is prepared for you, and let the minister be between your fingers, who holds the wound entirely with his hand and adjusts its lips, and uncover from it to that which sews the suture any cause or another.
E aquesta es la manieyra de sutura comuna: una que prenguas la agula, o comte de agula segon la cantitat de la amplitut de la plagua; e aprop layssa de la extremitat de la disrupcio del dit anular, e strenh la agula una, otre que tu no metas fiel en las doas extremitatz de la codena, am doas extremitatz del ciphac que es dejos la codena de las partidas dedintz, entro que fassas aquela penetrar de aquela partida; e tu ja has agreguadas doas extremitatz de la codena e doas extremitatz del ciphac, e so faytas quatre ordes.	And this is the common way of sewing: one that you take the needle, or count of needle according to the quantity of the amplitude of the wound; and let it be from the extremity of the disruption of the ring finger, and strengthen the needle one, another that you do not put a thread in both extremes of the cord, with two extremes of the tape which is under the cord of the fingers inside, so that you make it penetrate from that part; and you have already added two extremes of the cord and two extremes of the tape, and so are made four turns.
E aprop strenh am fiel doble en le circuit de la agula, e alcunas veguadas de doas partz ensemps, e aprop agregua las doas labias e la plagua per agreguacio decent; e aprop layssa la grossitut del dit e fiqua una autra agulha en aquela, e aprop lia aquela am fiel ayssi cum fiest am la primieyra agulha; e no cesses far aquo si es necessitat am las agulhas entro que ajas complida tota la contriccio de la plagua.	And let it be strengthened with a double thread in the circuit of the needle, and sometimes from two parts together, and let the two lips and the wound be drawn together by a decent gathering; and let go of the thickness of the finger and take another needle in that, and let it be bound with a thread as it is tied with the first needle; and do not cease to do this if it is necessary with needles until you have completed all the contraction of the wound.
E sian las agulhas migieras entre groceza e subtilitat, quar las agulhas subtils mot leugierament insciden la carn; e las grossas so de dificil intrament en la codena, e donc per aquo cove que sian migieras en subtilitat e grosseza.	And let the needles be smaller between thickness and fineness, for thin needles move farther into the flesh; and thick ones are of difficult instrument in the cord, and therefore let them be smaller in thickness and fineness.
E no cove que la agulha sia ficada en doas extremitatz de la codena propdana mot, per so que la carn no sia inscidida leugierament e que la plagua se huebra devant la sua consolidacio.	And let the needle not be placed in two extremes of the cord propped so that the flesh is not pierced farther and that the wound opens before its consolidation.
E no sian prolonguadas de sutura per que la plagua no sia prohibida de consolidacio.	And they are not to be prolonged in sewing so that the wound is prohibited from consolidation.
E aprop inscideys las extremitatz de las agulhas per so que no ledescan le malaute deves le sieu dormier; e pausaras sobre la sutura pulvils expanduts de tota partida, les quals tenguan las extremitatz de las agulhas; e layssa aquelas entro que sapias que la plagua ja es consolidada.	And let the extremes of the needles be pierced so that they do not hurt the patient from his sleep; and you will place on the suture powdered herbs expanded from all parts, which have the extremes of the needles; and let them go in so that you know that the wound is consolidated.
E aquestas specias de sutura am agulhas en cal manieyra es pus convenient en las plaguas petitas, quar habasta en la sutura de lor una agulha o doas o entorn aquelas.	And these species of sewing with needles in what manner is more convenient in small wounds, for it holds in the sewing of them one needle or two or around those.
Mays la segonda sutura es cominal: e es que tu aministres am sutura las quatre extremitatz, de la codena e doas extremitatz del ciphac, en una veguada, am agulha en la qual sia fiel envolopat engual en subtilitat e grosseza.	But the second sewing is common: and it is that you administer with sewing the four extremes, of the cord and two extremes of the tape, in one go, with a needle in which is wrapped thread in both thickness and fineness.
E aprop quan am la agulha auras penetrat aquestas quatre extremitatz, reduzeys la agulha de aquela meteyssa partida de la qual comensest, per so que le fiel retrayt caja de la pus subirana partida a la plagua, per so que la sutura sia segon sutura de drap am la qual les draps so strengutz.	And let it be when with the needle you have penetrated these four extremes, reduce the needle from that meted part from which you begin, so that the thread drawn back box from the most superficial party to the wound, so that the sewing is according to sewing of cloth with which the cloths are tightened.
E pausa entre quascuna sutura la quantitat del gros del dit mendre.	And place between each sewing the quantity of the thickness of the little finger.
E aquesta sutura sabo les homes.	And this sewing is known to men.
E am tal sutura yeu cozegui la plagua la qual era accidida a un home en le sieu ventre le qual era stat plaguat am un cotel, e era la disrrumpcio de la plagua major de un palm, e era eyssit dels budels entorn dos palms del budel del mieg loc e era la disrupcio en le mieg del membre; e adonc yeu reduzegui aquel depus que le budel havia stat foro la plagua per xxiiii horas.	And with such sewing, I sewed the wound which was inflicted on a man in his belly, and it was the rupture of the wound larger than a palm, and it was come out of the intestines about two palms from the intestine of the middle location, and it was the disruption in the middle of the limb; and therefore I reduced it after that the intestine had been out of the wound for twenty-four hours.
E la plagua fo consolidada en le spazi de xv dias o entorn, e curegui aquel e es sanat; e aprop aquo visquec per motz ans, e es conversat en las suas disposicios.	And the wound was consolidated in the space of fifteen days or around, and he healed it and is well; and therefore, this lived by words years, and is in his dispositions.
E les autres metges havian jutgat que no fora sanat; e per miracle foc, quar yeu no curegui aquel am enguent, quar era en loc en le qual enguent no era atrobat ni deguna medicina, mays pausegui sobre la plagua coto viel dos veguadas lo dia e ablucio assiduo am aygua de mel entro que foc sanat.	And the other physicians had judged that he would not be healed; and by miracle it was, for I did not cure that with ointment, for it was in a place where ointment was not applied nor any medicine, but placed over the wound cut vinegar twice a day and frequent washing with honeyed water until it was healed.
Mays yeu diyre dos specias de sutura proprias segon narracio de Paraula.	But I say two species of proper sewing according to the narration of the Word.
E es que tu comenses am sutura de la codena, e entrometas agulha de la partida deforo a la partida dedintz.	And it is that you begin with sewing of the cord, and pierce the needle from the part out to the part inside.
E donc cum la agulha penetra en la codena e en aquel meteys lacertz segon rectetut e en longetut de tot le cos, e layssa la extremita del ciphac en le qual has entromesa la agulha; e fay penetrar en la autra extremitat la agulha de la partida dedintz a la partida deforo en l’autra extremitat del mihat.	And therefore, when the needle penetrates into the cord and in that you measure lengths according to rectitude and in length of all the body, and let the extreme of the tape be in the part in which you have pierced the needle; and let it penetrate in the other extreme from the part inside to the part out in the other extreme of the mihit.
E don cum tu auras fayta aquela penetrar, lahoras tu fay aquela penetrar autra veguada en aquela meteyssa extremitat del mihat de la partida deforo a la partida dedintz; e leyssa la extramitat del ciphac que es en aquest latz, e fay penetrar la agulha en l’autra extremitat de la partida dedintz a la partida deforo.	And when you have done that to penetrate, then let it penetrate another go in that meted extreme of the mihit from the part out to the part inside; and let the extreme of the tape which is in this side, and let the needle penetrate in the other extreme of the part inside to the part out.
E fay penetrar am aquela la tua penetracio am la qual fas aquela penetrar en le ciphac en la extremitat del mirat la qual es en la partida de lu entro que tot aquel penetre.	And let it penetrate with that your penetration with which you make it penetrate in the tape in the extreme of the mihit which is in the part of him so that all that penetrates.
E aprop comensa de aquest meteys costat e cus aquel am la extremitat que es del ciphac en l’autra latz, e extratz la agulha de la codena la qual penetrec, e aprop redutz aquela en aquela codena e cos la extremitat del ciphac que es en l’autra costat am aquesta extramitat del mirat; e extratz aquela de la codena la qual es de part de lu.	Then begin on this side of the groin, and with that hand take hold of the end which is at the head in the other side, and pull out the needle from the ligature which has penetrated, and then return it into that ligature and sew up the end of the head which is in the other side with that end of the thread; and pull it out of the ligature on this part of the patient.
E fay aquo una veguada e autra, e fay aquo una veguada aprop autre veguada entro que tu cozes tot aquo que es deforo segon aquel eysemple.	And do this one and another, and do this one then another within, sewing up all that is outside according to that example.
E la suma de aquesta manieyra de sutura es que tu cozes am sutura de pellicies am la qual cozo las pels, enayssi que tu cozes le ciphac una veguada de la part de la extremitat de la codena, e que leysses aquela autra veguada entro que la ajas complida.	And the whole of this manner of sewing is that you sew with a skin-sewing in which you sew the head one side from the end of the ligature and leave the other side between so that it is filled up.
Mays la segonda specia de sutura propria la qual dieys eyssament Gualia , e aquest es de sermo de lu e per lu recomtat, es que tu cozas aquela segon semilitut am la qual alcus medicantz cozo aquela, enayssi que agreguan tota partida a la sua compar partida a lu convenient per natura; e aplican la extremitat de autre de lu e la extremitat del mirat al autra extremitat de lu, e aquo es fayt segon que yeu a tu recomti.	But the second species of proper sewing which I call the way of Gualia, and this is of speech of him and recommended by him, is that you sew it according to semilitude with which someone medicated sewed it, just as they join the whole divided part to its compared part convenient by nature; and apply the end of another to the other end of it, and this is done according to how your experience dictates.
Cove que tu fiques la agulha en la extremitat del mirat a tu propdana de la partida deforo, e fassas aquela penetrar a la partida dedintz en aquel sol, e leysses dos extremitatz del ciphac; e aprop revolveys la agulha e fay aquela penetrar de foro a la dedintz en dos extremitatz del ciphac.	Because you place the needle in the end of the head towards you near the outside part, and cause it to penetrate into the inside part in that sole, and join two ends of the head; then turn around the needle and cause it to penetrate from outside to the inside at both ends of the head.
E aprop revolveys aquelas cascunas, e fay penetrar quascunas de la partida dededintz entro a la partida deforo en dos extremitatz del mirat autras que so en le latz contrari.	And turn around those corners, and cause to penetrate some of the outside part into the inside part in both ends of the head other than on the contrary side.
E aquesta manieyra de sutura es milhor de la sutura comuna leugiera, e es sutura de la qual precedic rememoracio.	And this manner of sewing is better than the common lighter sewing, and it is sewing from which I have remembered an account.
Aquest es le sermo de Gualia	This is the speech of Gualia.
E mays le diyssero alcus, sutura del ventre es rectificada am dos agulhas, so es que tu entrometas en aquestas a quascunas un fiel, e comensa am intromiccio de agulha de aquo que es deves tu, e fay aquela penetrar entro al autra latz segon sutura de aquels les quals cozo les cuers engualment.	And they said that some sew the belly rectally with two needles; so you place in these one a needle, and begin with the penetration of the needle from that which is behind you, and cause it to penetrate into the other side according to sewing of those who sewed bodies head-to-toe.
E sapias que quan disrupcio es en le mieg loc del ventre, lahoras la sutura de lu es pus difficil que dels autres locs del ventre.	And know that when the disruption is in the middle of the belly, then the sewing of it is more difficult than of other places of the belly.
Mays le juguament de medicacio de plagua es jutgament de las autras plaguas.	But the judgment of medication of plague is judgment of the other plagues.
La qual causa es quar quan tu consieguas la plagua recent am le sieu sanc denant que l’ayre altera aquela, e reduses le budel e cozes aquela e aptas aquela decentment, lahoras pausa sobre aquela polvera encarnativa.	The which cause is that when you perceive the plague recently with its blood before the air alters it, and reduce the hernia and sew it and apt it decently, then place upon it powdery encarnative.
E si le ayre ja ha alterada la plagua, lahoras pausa sobre aquela alcus enguentz les quals so a tu presens entro que fassan peyra dura e cajan les fiels, e sian consolidatz ciphac e mirat; e aprop cura aquela ayssi cum es la curacio de las autras plaguas entro que sia sanat.	And if the air has already altered the plague, then place upon it some unguents which are to you present so that they make hard stone and enclose the threads, and are consolidated head and wound; and cure that thus as is the cure of other plagues when it is healed.
Mays si a tu no so presens las medicinas, lahoras pausa sobre aquela tantost, pus que comensa a getar brac, coto viel, e permuta aquel dos veguadas le dia, ayssi cum a tu e ensenhat, entro que sia sanat, quar tu no indigeysses de autra medicacio en motas disposicios quan las plaguas so simplas.	But if you are not present the medicines, then place upon it immediately, for when it begins to bubble up blood and cut off the old flesh, and change that twice a day, just as you and your teacher have taught, until it is healed, for you do not need other medicine in many dispositions when the plagues are simple.
Mays si tu temes que la plagua comunique en lesio als membres principals, lahoras cove que tu submergas lana leon en oli de trempada qualiditat, o en oli rozat, e pausa aquela en le circuit dels locs que so entre les angonas e dejos las aysselas.	But if you fear that the plague communicates to the principal members, then know that you should soak lion wool in oiled quality, or in rosin oil, and place that in the circuit of the places which are between the angles and below the joints.
E si sent dolor o putrefaccio en les sieus budels, quar motas veguadas aquo s’endeve, lahoras cristeriza aquel am vi stiptic negre tebe, e majorment si la poyredura es pervenguda en le budel e es fayta exitura penetrant entro la conquavitat de lu.	And if there is pain or putrefaction in your intestines, how many times that is done, then christen it with black styptic wine, and especially if the putrefaction is derived in the intestine and a penetration hole is made into its cavity.
E sapias que aquela que es del budel gros es de pus leugiera sanacio que aquela que es en les budels subtils.	And know that that which is of the gross intestine is a lighter cure than that which is in the subtle intestines.
E es de dificil sanacio quar le budel le qual es apelat “gegunu” no recep sanacio de plagua que caja en lu de tot; e aquo es per la gran multitut de venas que so en lu e per la magnitut de lu que so en aquelas, e per subtilitat del cos de aquel, e per propinquitat de aquel a natura de nervis.	And it is a difficult cure because the intestine which is called “gut” does not receive cure of plague that boxes into it from all; and that is by the great multitude of veins which are in it and by its magnitude of that in those, and by subtlety of body of that, and by proximity of that to nature of nerves.
Mays si aquo que procezeys de la plagua es la tela, e conseguas aquela recent, redutz aquela segon la tua rectetut am la qual reduzes les budels engualment.	But if that which proceeds from the plague is the fabric, and you attain that recently, reduce it according to your rectitude with which you reduce the intestines head-to-toe.
Mays si es passat a lu spazi e ja es feyt vert o negre, lahoras que tu strenguas aquela am fiel sobre le loc que es denigrat de lu, per so que vengua fluxs de sanc, quar en la tela so venas e arterias.	But if it has passed to space and is already done green or black, then that you strengthen that with thread over the place which is made black of it, in order that come flows of blood because in the fabric there are veins and arteries.
E aprop inscideys aquo que es otra aquel liament, e pausa dos extremitatz del fiel pendentz de la partida dejos de la plagua foro lu, per que sobre tu sia alleujada la atraccio de lu deves le cazement de la tela e emissio del brac de la plagua.	Then insert that which is other that binding, and place two ends of the thread depending on the party below the plague outside it, in order that over you be elevated the attraction of it by need of the settling of the fabric and emission of the blood of the plague.
Rememoracio de las plaguas quan accideysso en le budel.	Remembering of the plagues when they happen in the intestine.
Quan accideys disrupcio en le budel e es petita, lahoras es possibla que sia resteurada en alcus homes, per aysso quar yeu vi aquel le qual era stat plaguat en le sieu ventre am percussio de lansa et era la plagua de la part dreyta del stomac, e la plagua era antiquada e fayta fistula, e eyssic de lu gestio e ventositat.	When disruption happens in the intestine and it is small, then it is possible that it be restored in some men, because I saw a man who was plagued in his belly by penetration of lance, and the plague was of the right part of the stomach, and the plague was old and made fistula, and was taken out of him and ventositat.
Adonc yeu pansegui la curacio de lu ja sia que no era confizat en la sanacio de lu, mays cessegui subtiliar aquel entro que foc sanat e le loc es consolidat.	Then I followed the cure of him although he was not confident in the cure of him, but I continued to sublimate that until it was healed and the place is consolidated.
E yeu pus que vi le loc ja consolidat, timegui sobre le malaute que endevengues sobre lu accident de mal en le sieu ventre; e no endevenc alcu per aquo mal accident e romas en las suas milhos disposicios mangant e bevent, e aprop entrec en banh e es exercitat en sos ditz.	And I saw that the place was already consolidated, and I followed the matter which he incurred upon it accident of evil in his belly; and he did not incur any for that evil accident and remained in his many dispositions eating and drinking, and appropriately entered into bath and is exercised in his limbs.
E ja diysero alcus experimentados que quan endeve plagua en le budel, e es petita, lahoras cove que sia liada segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu prenguas fromiguas de grans caps; e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua e pausa una fromigua de aquelas que aja la boca uberta sobre las doas labias de la plagua; donc quan pren sobre aquelas e strenh la sua boca, abscindeys le cap de lu, quar adhereys e no es dissolvut.	And they said some experienced that when there is plague in the intestine, and it is small, then know that it be tied according to this way: and is that you take thimbles of great fingers; then adjust the two lips of the plague and place a thimble of those which has an open mouth over the two lips of the plague; therefore when it takes upon them and tightens its mouth, cut off the end of it because it adheres and is not dissolved.
E aprop pausa autra formigua prop la primieyra, e no cesses aquo a far am formiguas una aprop autra segon la quantitat de tota la plagua.	And then place another thimble near the first one, and do not cease that to do with thimbles one by one according to the quantity of all the plague.
E aprop reduzeys aquela e cos la plagua; e romanguan aquels caps annexces en le budel entro que·l budel sia sanat; e no accideys al malaute degun nocument.	Then reduce it and sew the plague; and let those thimbles remain attached in the intestine until the intestine is healed; and may no accident happen to evil.
E ja es possible que·l budel sia liat am fiel subtil lo qual es fayt del budel de bestia annexs am lu, pus que es mes en agulha; e es que tu prenguas la extremitat de aquestz fiels de budel, e sia mot descarnat, e aprop lia la extremitat de lu am fiel de li, envolopat, e aprop entromet aquel fiel en agulhas e cos am aquel le budel, e areduzeys aquel en la disrupcio.	And it is possible that the intestine be tied with thread subtle which is made of intestine of beast attached to it, because it is thinner than needle; and is that you take the end of those threads of intestine, and let there be some flesh removed, and then tie the end of it with thread of li, wound up, and then insert that thread in needles and sew with that the intestine, and reduce that in the disruption.
E aquesta manieyra de sutura am formiguas no es sino segon via de fiducia e d’esperansa.	And this way of sewing with thimbles is not but according to way of confidence and hope.
Mays si la plagua es gran e ampla, majorment si es en un dels budels subtils, quar lahoras no es engen sino subtiliacio, e no es sanacio de lu de tot.	But if the plague is large and wide, especially if it is in one of the subtle intestines, for then there is not but subtilization, and not complete cure of it.
De curacio de zuchem e fistula.	Of cure of ulcer and fistula.
Sapias que tota plagua e apostema quan se envilheseys e se Antiqua, e es fayt ulcus, e no es consolidat e geta braç tot temps e no es abscindit, lahoras, en qualque membre sia, universalment es nompnada fistula e nos la apelam aquela azukem.	Know that all plague and ulcer when it is inflamed and becomes old, and is made ulcer, and is not consolidated and flows blood all the time and is not cut off, then in whatever member it is, universally is called fistula and we call that ulcer.
E fistula segon veritat es nodacio feutrada, dura, blanqua am la qual no es dolor e a la qual es conquavitat ayssi cum es conquavitat de pena de ausel; e per aysso nompnat aquela alcus rizatz, id est pena.	And a fistula according to truth is a knotted, stuffed, hard, white node with which there is no pain and to which the cavity is as it is in the cavity of a bird's egg; and for this reason that one is called an ovum, that is to say, an egg.
E es en alcus homes humida, la qual geta brac; e fort leu la humiditat es abscidida en alcunas horas.	And in some men it is moist, emitting pus; and quickly the moisture is discharged in a few hours.
E alcunas veguadas aquesta humiditat es mota, e es pauca, e es grossa, e es subtil.	And sometimes this moisture is thick, and is small, and is coarse, and is subtle.
E yeu ja he denant dit en la divisio, lahoras cum yeu diyssi las plaguas, que tot ulcus que no es sanat ni no es en lu nuda carn, no es aquo sino per una de ix causas: de las quals la una es o per pauquesa de sanc en le cos; o per malicia de lu; o quar entre lu e las labias es carn dura prohibent nativitat de carn; o quar es de mota legesa; o quar aquel ulcus en si meteys es poyrit e la materia que es a lu tramesa es de mala qualitat; o quar la medicina es enconvenient en la curacio de lu; o quan corrupcio catz en la regio, e es pestilencia; o per proprietat de regio ayssi cum endeve a Saragossa , en la qual es fayta difficil degestio de las malautias, e es tardada en aquela sanacio de apostema per natura; o quar en lu es os un, o motz osses.	And I have already mentioned in the division that when I speak of ulcers, any ulcer which does not heal and is not naked flesh is caused by one of nine reasons: one of which is due to lack of blood in the body; or due to malice of the patient; or because there is hard skin between the patient and their clothes, preventing the growth of new skin; or because it is composed of thick matter; or because the ulcer itself is infected and the matter within it is of poor quality; or because the medicine applied is unsuitable for treating it; or because corruption has entered the region, causing a pestilence; or due to the nature of the region where the patient resides, such as in Zaragoza, where digestion is difficult and wounds take time to heal naturally; or because there is bone, or many bones, within the ulcer.
Ja e mostrat totas aquelas causas, e·ls senhals de aquelas e la curacio de lor am medicinas en la divisio.	I have already described all those causes, their signs and their treatment with medicines in the division.
E cove assi que yeu fassa a tu saber la curacio de fistula la qual es fayta per via de operacio am ma.	Now I will explain to you the treatment of a fistula which is caused by surgery with the hand.
E sapias que fistula accideys en totz les membres del cos; quar de aquelas son fistulas que perveno a las venas grantz e arterias, o als nervis, o al ciphac, o al budel, o a la vesica, o ad alcuna de las costas, o ad alcu dels spondils del dos, o ad alcuna de las juncturas compostas per composicio ayssi quo de la ma e del pe; e de aquelas so que dan a lu propinquitat del membre principal e de semblantz.	And you should know that fistulas occur in all parts of the body; for some of them affect the large veins and arteries, or the nerves, or the brain, or the intestine, or the bladder, or one of the ribs, or one of the vertebrae, or one of the composite joints such as those of the hand and foot; and some affect the vicinity of a principal member, or its likes.
E donc aquela de aquestas fistulas que es segon aquesta manieyra es de las malautias de dificil sanacio, e no recep curacio, e occupacio am aquela es trebalh e ignorancia.	And therefore, one of these fistulas which is caused in this way is among the most difficult diseases to heal, and does not accept treatment, and its occupation is labor and ignorance.
E si es de las fistulas alcuna la profunditat de la qual no perve ad aquestz locs que e dit, e esperas e confizas en la curacio de lu, e vols pervenir a cognicio de lu, lahoras pren tenta de eram o de ferr, e si la fistula va segon rectetut, e perquireys aquela am lu.	And if there is any fistula whose depth does not reach these places which I have mentioned, and you hope for its healing, and trust in its treatment, and wish to attain knowledge of it, then take a probe made of iron or steel, and if the fistula is straight, probe it with this.
Mays si la fistula es tortuissitat, lahoras investigua aquela am tenta de plom subtil, quar plom am la levitat del sieu cors es alleujat e curvat deves la tortuositat.	But if the fistula is tortuous, then investigate it with a probe made of thin lead, for lead, by virtue of its light weight, is drawn and bent along with the tortuosity.
E si la fistula es havent motz horrificis, no es a tu possible que signifiques sobre lu am tenta.	And if the fistula has many windings, it is not possible for you to probe it.
Adonc cristeriza le orrifici per sos orrificis, quar la humiditat per la qual clisterizas aquela va deves las autras orrificis e corr de lor.	Therefore, cleanse the orifice with a cloth through its openings, for the moisture by which you cleanse it flows through these openings and comes out of them.
E aprop inquier exquisitament, segon qual manieyra a tu es possible que conoguas si aqui has os o nervi, e es la conquavitat de la fistula longinqua o propdana, o es una fistula a la qual so motz orrificis e esta sobre aquo tot am la suma de la tua fortaleza, am la tua enterroguacio, am la qual enterroguas le malaute, e la invencio de la dolor deves la tua compressio am la ma sobre le loc, e semblantz de las significacios e de las causas accidentz al apostema.	And then probe carefully, according to what manner it is possible for you to know whether here there is bone or nerve, and whether the fistula's cavity is distant or close by, or is an ulcer whose many openings are all upon that, through your examination of the patient with your hand over the area, and through the signs and the causes of the pain which result from your compression of the area with your hand, and through similar things.
E cum tu auras stat sobre totas aquelas causas am stacio veraya, lahoras ve a la curacio segon confidencia: e es que tu consideras lahoras si es fistula apparent propinqua o en loc sal, longinqua de junctura, o de nervi, o de arteria, o de vena, o de un dels locs les quals yeu a tu e ditz.	And when you have examined all those causes with true attention, then proceed to the treatment according to confidence: and it is that you consider whether the fistula is an apparent one close by, or in a salty location, distant from a joint, or from a nerve, or from an artery or vein, or from one of the places which I have mentioned to you.
Lahoras tu secca la fistula segon que denant es dit de la naracio de lu, e osta aquo que es en aquela filtracio e de carns corrumpudas, e aquo que es nascut en le orrifici de la carn, o de theil e de semblantz, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	Then dry the fistula as has been said previously about its description, and prevent anything which is in that filtration and of corrupt flesh, and cure what is born in the orifice of the flesh, or of skin and its likes, and heal it within until it is healed.
Mays si la fistula es de longinqua profunditat, e es segon rectetut, lahoras cove que inscidas aquela en le preon atant quant a tu sira possible, e aprop mondifica aquela de totas las suas carns corrompudas; e aprop administra calguas envolopadas en medicinas acutas, e intromet aquelas entro a la conquavitat de la fistula, la qual has conprenduda am ferr.	But if the fistula is of great depth and is straight, then you should insert it into the fistula as far as possible for you to reach, and then cleanse it of all its corrupt flesh; and then administer hot poultices wrapped in sharp medicines, and place those within the cavity of the fistula which you have probed with iron.
E fay aquo am aquela alcunas veguadas entro que la medicina acuta corroda tot aquo que es romas en la conquavitat de la fistula de la corrupcio.	And do this several times until the sharp medicine corrodes all that is broken within the cavity of the fistula caused by corruption.
E aprop restaura aquela am enguentz les quals engendran carn sana entro que sia sanada.	And then heal it with ointments which generate healthy flesh within until it is healed.
Mays si no es sanada per aquo, lahoras tu cauteriza aquela segon que havem recomtat.	But if it is not healed by this, then you should cauterize it according to what we have recommended.
Mays si la causa de fistula es os e es deves tu certificat aquo, lahoras tu inquireys aquela e secca aquela segon que havem recomtat, si tu no prohibeys alcuna causa de vena o de nervi o de membre principal ayssi cum havem dit.	But if the cause of the fistula is bone and this is certain to you, then you should probe it and dry it as we have said, unless you forbid any cause of vein or nerve, or of a principal member as we have said.
Mays si le os es a tu descubert e es en lu alcuna corrupcio e negror, lahoras tu ratz aquel entro que la corrupcio sia hostada tota; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que lu encarne entro que sia sanat.	But if the bone is revealed to you and there is corruption and blackness in it, then cut away all of the corruption; and then heal it with that which makes new flesh within until it is healed.
E si no es sana e gieta brac ayssi cum fazia, lahoras sapias que tu no est pervengut a la eradicacio tota de la corrupcio; e adonc tu descuebre sobre lu segondanament e exquisitament fay la razio de lu e la mundificacio de lu am la deriera fortalasa tieua, e aprop restaura aquel.	And if it does not heal and still emits pus as before, then you should know that you have not attained the complete eradication of the corruption; and then uncover it again and probe it carefully once more with your sharpest strength, and then cleanse it and heal it.
E donc si es sanat, bo es; e sino, lahoras sapias que aquela corrupcio es en la profunditat longinqua del cors, la qual no ha conseguida, e adonc a tu en aquel no es engen sino laysar aquela.	And therefore, if it is healed, well and good; but if not, then you should know that this corruption is in the great depth of the body which has not been reached, and therefore in this one for you there is nothing to do except to lay aside that one.
E si le os corromput es petit, o es a tu possible atirar aquel, lahora tu le atira am forceps subtils las quals conveno ad aquo.	And if the corrupted bone is small, or it is possible for you to pull it out, then you should pull it out with fine forceps which are suitable for this.
E si so motz osses, lahoras exquisitament fay la extraccio de totz aquels, e de aquels no laysses denguna causa am la tua fortaleza.	And if there are many bones, then carefully perform the extraction of all of these, and of those do not leave any cause with your strength.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat alcuna causa de las humiditatz, e en lor inscizio no ha temor ni error, lahoras inscideys aquelas liaments o carns si so aqui, e deliura les osses.	But if you encounter any resistance from the moistures, and in their incision there is no fear or error, then insert those limbs or flesh if it is here, and separate the bones.
Mays si a tu no es preparacio de ostar les osses de la tua hora, lahoras pausa sobre la plagua aquo que poyresca la plagua aquela, e layssa aquela entro que aquo es al enviro de aquels osses de carns e de liamentz, e guarda la plagua que no sia consolidada, e sia constrengida la seccio la qual tu has inscidida en la tua operacio.	But if you are not prepared to set the bones at this hour, then pause over the wound what will make the wound swell, and leave it until that is in the environment of those bones of flesh and of limbs, and guard the wound so that it is not consolidated, and the section which you have cut in your operation is restricted.
Habantz, si temes, pausa sobre lu coto submers en sopre trissat am oli, o coto submers en anguent egipciac, o en alcu dels enguentz vertz, quar quan poyriran aquelas liaments, e les osses son de lor seperatz la ablacio, e de aquels atraccio es alleujada.	Have patience, if you fear, pause over it a cloth steeped in soap, or a cloth steeped in Egyptian ointment, or one of the green ointments; for when these limbs are pulled, and the bones are separated from their connection, and the attraction is eased from them.
Mays si es un gran os ayssi cum le os de camba o de coyssa o semblantz ad aquels, e aquo que de lu es corromput es la facia de lu tant solament, lahoras ratz aquela am resio tant solament derriera entro que sia ostada aquela negror e corrupcio, e aprop restaura la plagua.	But if it is a great bone like the bone of the arm or the leg, or their likes, and what is corrupted in it is only its fascia, then cut away that fascia behind where the blackness and corruption are, and then heal the wound.
Mays si aquo que de lu es corrumpyt es gran partida, e la corrupcio ja ha conseguida la medulla del os, lahoras es causa necessaria cerrar aquel e aquel tot inscidir entro al loc on es pervenguda la corrupcio, e lahoras cura aquel entro que sia consolidada.	But if what is corrupted in it is a large part, and the corruption has already reached the marrow of the bone, then it is a necessary cause to close it and to cut it all within where the corruption is reached, and then heal it within until it is consolidated.
E yeu recomti a tu aquo que endevenc ad un home en la sua coyssa per que pausez aquela a eyssempli e adjutori sobre la tua operacio.	And I have advised you that in order to pause that for the patient in his bed so that he rests as an example and helper upon your operation.
Foc un home jove per etat entorn xxx ans, al qual accideys dolor en la sua cueyssa, e de las partidas dedintz mauguda es sobre la materia dedintz le cors entro que la materia es pervenguda a la cueyssa, e es materia de apostema am gran apostema, e no foc a lu causa extrinseca.	Let there be a young man about 30 years of age, to whom pain occurs in his head, and from the parts within, the cause is due to the matter within the body which has reached the head, and it is matter of an abscess with a large abscess, and there is no cause extrinsic to him.
E adonc foc extendut le temps am aquela per la error dels metges entro que l’apostema es hubert, e acorrero de lu materias motas, e la sua curacio foc aprop pausada entro que la camba foc fistulada, e faytz son en lu motz orrificis les quals totz getavan poyredura e las humiditatz del cos.	And then the time was prolonged because of the error of the doctors while the abscess was open, and matters arose in him, and his treatment was paused until the chest became fistulated, and they made in him terrible wounds which all discharged pus and the humors of the body.
E adonc le curec multitut de metges entorn dos ans, e no foc en aquels savia ma en la art, entro que yeu fu appelat.	And then many doctors treated him for about two years, and there was no improvement in his condition until I was called upon to treat him.
E vi la camba de lu e las materias que corrian de lu aquels orrificis per gran cors; e ja le cos de aquel home era tot stabozit e la color de lu era citrina.	And I saw his chest and the matters which ran from him through those openings, for a great wound; and indeed the body of that man was all swollen and his color was yellowish.
E adonc yeu intromesi la tenta ad un de aquels orrificis e pervenguec la tenta al os.	And then I inserted a probe into one of those openings, and the probe reached the bone.
E aprop yeu e perscrutat tostz les orrificis e trobegui aquels pervenir a lor de totas partidas de la camba.	And so I probed all of the openings and found that they all led to various parts of the chest.
E adonc yeu me coytegui e inscidegui sobre un dels orrificis aquels entro que descrobegui una partida del os, e atrobegui aquel corromput, e ja era terros e corrumput e denigrat; e era ja corrumpuda una partida de la camba entro que havia penetrat entro a la mezola.	And then I cut into one of those openings and discovered an opening in the bone, and it was already rotten and blackened, and indeed a part of the chest was already corrupted where it had penetrated into the mediastinum.
E adon yeu serregui aquo que a mi era discubert e preparat del os descubert.	And then I sewed up that which had been discovered to me, and prepared the uncovered bone.
E yeu cujegui que no fos en le os sino aquela corrupcio la qual abscidigui e serregui, e yeu ja havia derraziguada.	And I saw that there was not in the bone, but only corruption which I had excised and sewn up, and indeed I had already removed it.
E aprop pausegui la restauracio de la plagua am medicina consolidativas per lonc temps, e no es consolidada.	And then I prescribed the restoration of the wound with consolidating medicine for a long time, and it was not consolidated.
E aprop yeu iteregui e descubregui sobre le os segondament sobre le descubriment primier, e atrobegui continua corrupcio am le os.	And then I iterated and discovered again over the bone secondly on the first discovery, and found continued corruption with the bone.
E serregui aquo que a mi apares de aquela corrupcio, e aprop yeu fo perforsat fayre la curacio de lu e restauracio, e no es restaurat.	And I sewed up that which appeared to me from that corruption, and indeed it was necessary for me to perform the cure and restoration of him, and he was not restored.
E adonc yeu descubri sobre lu autra veguada e no cessegui inscidir le os petit a petit particuladament e perforsa la restauracio de lu, e no es restaurat entro que inscidigui entorn un palm de lu, e aquel extraxi am la medula sua, e aprop restauregui aquel am medicinas, e es consolidat leugierament e sanat.	And then I discovered another wound in him and did not cease to pierce the bone little by little particularly and perform the restoration of him, and he was not restored until I had pierced around one palm of him, and that was extracted with its marrow, and indeed I restored that with medicines, and it is consolidated slightly and healed.
E no es necessaria iteracio en la operacio de lu e seccio de lu sino per la disposicio de la freulesa de lu e per la paucitat de la tollerancia de lu e paor de lu de mort, quar a lu accidia en totas horas per superfluitat de evacuacio sincopi mala.	And there was no necessity of iteration in the operation and section of him except for the disposition of his frailty and for the scantiness of his tolerance and fear of death, because lethargy beset him in all hours by excess of evacuation.
E donc sanat es per sanacio entiera, e nada es en loc de os carn dura; e es fayta bona la disposicio de lu en le sieu cors e retornec la vertut de lu; e es conversat en las suas disposicios e no fec a lu contrarietat en ambulacio ni nocument en denguna causa.	And therefore he is healed with whole healing, and nothing remains in the place of the hard bone; and his disposition is good in his body and he has regained his strength, and he is conversant in all dispositions and suffers no contradiction in walking nor harm in any cause.
Mays si es os eminent en loc del cors ja trauquat, lahoras cove que tu secces aquel segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu prenguas liament e strenh aquel en la extremitat de aquel os eminent, e comanda ad alcu que extenda aquel en sus; e pausa aquel liament de lana pus gros del primier liament; e aprop lia aquel sobre la carn que es dejos le os, e exten la extramitat de lu per que atires la carn a las partidas dejos, e tu descuebras la carn sobre le loc le qual voles serrar per que la serra no leda la carn.	But if the prominent bone is extracted from its place in the body, then you shall cut that secondly in this manner: and it is that you shall take a ligature and strengthen that at the end of that prominent bone, and command someone to extend that in their hand; and tie that ligature of woolen yarn thicker than the first ligature; and indeed tie that over the flesh that is beneath the bone, and extend the extremity of it so as to draw the flesh to the parts below, and you shall uncover the flesh over the place which you wish to cut so that the saw does not cut the flesh.
E pausa fust o taula dejos le os decentment, quar quan tu fas aquo no es prohibida la serra que no secce la carn corrumpuda.	And place a post or table beneath the bone adequately, for when you do this there is not prohibited that the saw does not cut the corrupted flesh.
E cove que sia la serradura sobre le loc corrumput petit a petit, quar si es en la concavitat del os corrupcio e no appar en la sua apparicio al sentiment, e forssa a serratura de lu autra veguada.	And let the sawing be on the corrupted place little by little, for if it is in the concavity of the bone corruption and does not appear in its appearance to feeling, then force another saw against it.
E si le os es corrumput e no-eminent, abantz es la una partida continuada am la autra, e la corrupcio es al mieg loc o en partida de lu, lahoras tu descuebre la carn de totas partz tota; e aprop pausa fust dejos, e aprop serra aquel de la primiera partida la on es la corrupcio entro que sia continuada la serratura del autra partida.	And if the bone is corrupted and not prominent, before it is one continuous part with the other, and the corruption is in its middle or in a part of it, then you uncover the flesh from all parts entirely; and indeed place a post beneath it, and indeed saw that at the first part where there is corruption so that the sawing is continued with the other part.
E sia la serradura segon le loc de la corrupcio un petit, segon que havem dit.	And let the sawing be according to the place of the corruption a little, as we have said.
E si la corrupcio es en la junctura, inscideys aquela junctura corrumpuda, e serra le os la on es continuat del autra part.	And if the corruption is in the joint, insert that corrupted joint, and saw the bone where it continues from the other part.
E si de la corrupcio es en la continuacio de doas juncturas, lahoras no es en lu razio sino engen.	And if the corruption is in the continuation of two joints, then there is not reason for that except cunning.
E si la corrupcio es en le pecte de la ma o del pe, es mot dificil; empero cove que tu inquieras la corrupcio en qual manieyra appareys a tu, e que abradas aquela, e mondes aquela segon quascuna disposicio la qual es a tu possibla, e am cascum engen sia rectificat a tu, quan no fa a tu contrarietat vena o nervi.	And if the corruption is in the palm of the hand or the foot, it is very difficult; however let you inquire into the corruption in whatever manner appears to you, and that you open it up, and cut it according to each disposition which is possible for you, and indeed with any cunning be rectified for you when it does not cause you contradiction vein or nerve.
E sapias qual es inscididors e las serras a inscidir aquestz osses son motz segon le situament dels osses, e la preparacio de aquels, e la grosseza de aquels, e la subtilitat e la grandeza e la parvitat de aquels, e la duricia e la lor raritat; per que cove que tu prepares a tota specia de operacio estrument convenient ad aquela opperacio.	And know that there are many incisers and saws to incision these bones according to the situation of the bones, and their preparation, and the thickness of them, and the subtlety and the greatness and smallness of them, and the hardness and thinness; so that when you prepare for every specie of operation convenient instrument for that operation.
E sapias que aquela operacio significa a tu sobre la specia del strument del qual indigeysses; quan am tu es gran studi e lonc e conoyssensa de las manieyras de aquesta art, e testimoni de manieyras de malautias, quar lahoras ja tu las avias per tu meteys aquo que es convenient a lu dels sturmentz a tota malautia.	And know that that operation signifies for you on the specie of the instrument from which you lack and have long and profound knowledge of the manners of this art, and experience of manners of diseases, for indeed then you had from your masters that which is convenient for them of instruments for every disease.
E yeu so a tu formant en la fi de aquest capitol le nombre dels instrumentz les quals pausaras cum eyssimples am les quals proceziras a la tua prohibicio la qual experimentaras sobre las autras.	And you know that there are to you in the end of this chapter the number of instruments with which you shall form them with simples and which you shall process for your prohibition, which you experience on the others.
Forma de serra:	Form of saw:
Forma de autra serra:	Form of other saw:
Forma de autra serra:	Form of another saw:
Forma de autra serra gran:	Form of another great saw:
Forma de ray:	Form of a file:
Sia le cap de aquest ray segon la forma de cap de clau stellat, e les puntz de lu sian segon la forma dels puntz alstefegi.	Let the head of this file according to the form of the head of a star-shaped key, and its points according to the form of the points of an awl.
E no conveneys sino que am aquel sian confricadatz les caps de las juncturas quan so corrumpudas, o es la boca gran ampla.	And it is not convenient except that with it be rubbed the heads of joints when they are corrupted, or is a great mouth wide.
Forma de razori major dels autres:	Form of greater razor than the others:
Forma de razori menor:	Form of lesser razor:
Forma de razori lat:	Form of broad razor:
Forma de serra autra decentment fayta: sia fayt arc de lu pus sobira e la acuitat de lu de ferr, e le membre de lu de boys punhal descentment fayt.	Form of another saw adequately made: let it be made arch of it more superior and the acuity of it of steel, and the member of it of a dagger adequately made.
Forma de lu:	Its form:
Forma de razori en la qual ha concavitat:	Form of a razor in which there is concavity:
Forma de razori autra subtil:	Form of another subtle razor:
Forma de autra razori de curvada extremitat:	Form of another razor of curved extremity:
Forma de rasori petit semblant a tenta:	Form of small razor resembling tent:
Forma de incisori am le qual so inscidit les osses:	Form of inciser with which bones are cut:
Forma de inscisori autra minor:	Form of other smaller inciser:
Forma de un autra inscissori; aquest semblant a ray, e la extremitat de lu es cum serra, e es exhibit en motz locs en la razio dels osses:	Form of another inciser; this resembling a file, and the extremity of it is like a saw, and it is used in many places on the bones:
Forma de ray lo qual conveneys a rasio de aquel que es perforat dels osses:	Form of a file which is convenient for piercing of the bones:
E la extremitat de lu es triangulada e de aguda extremitat.	And the extremity of it is triangular and of acute extremity.
E es fayt de ferr de India , e semblantment cove que totas las causas que havem ditas de rasoris e de inscissoris e de serras.	And it is made of Indian steel, and similarly let all the causes which we have said of razors and of incisers and of saws.
De inscizio extremitatz e de la serratura dels osses.	Of incision extremities and of the sawing of bones.
Las extremitatz se poyresso o per causa intrinseca o per causa extrinseca, o cum tu auras medicat aquela corrupcio per curacio de aquelas medicinas e la curacio no comfereys, o vezes la corrupcio anar deves le membre la qual no percuteys denguna causa, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquel membre entro aquo la hon acossec la corrupcio, per que le malaute evasesca per aquo de mort o de malicia que es major defeliment del membre.	The extremities are swollen or for intrinsic cause or for extrinsic cause, or as you have medicated that corruption with those medicines and the healing does not confer, or the corruption returns to the member from which there is no cutting of any cause, then let you incision that member where the corruption lies so that the patient escapes death or great harm which is greater defect of the member.
E le senhal de aquel al qual accideys, es que·l membre es fayt negre entro que sia cujat que foc la ja comburit, o se poyreys aprop la negror entro que la poyredura aquela ane entro aquel membre que siec lu e que prengua tot le cors; e donc coyta te am inscizio de aquel.	And the sign of that to which it happens is that the member becomes black while being cooked, or you will see the blackness entering where that burning has entered into that member which dries it and takes over the whole body; and therefore cut off that part with a sharp knife.
E semblantment si es causa de la corrupcio percussio de alcunas causas venenosas ayssi cum de scorpio mari o de vupera o de rutela e de semblantz.	And similarly, if it is caused by the impact of some venomous causes, such as scorpion venom or snake or toad, and similar.
E si la corrupcio o la percussio es en la extremitat del dit, lahoras tu inscideys le dit e no dones spazi a la corrupcio per que ane entro a la ma.	And if the corruption or impact is in the fingertip, then you cut off the finger and do not give space to the corruption so that it goes into the hand.
E semblantment si accedeys a la ma, lahoras tu inscideys aquela de la razit del focil, e no dones spazi a la corrupcio entro que prengua en le focil del bras.	And similarly, if it happens to the hand, then you cut off that part from the root of the arm, and do not give space to the corruption so that it takes over the arm.
E si envezeys aquel, lahoras inscideys le bras entro al coyde en la junctura.	And if instead it happens in the arm, then cut off the arm at the bend of the elbow joint.
E si passa otra la corrupcio e la vezes enviro le coyde, lahoras en aquel es la mort del malaute; e aministrar autra causa otra aquo en curacio es quantitat de vertut.	And if the corruption passes further and turns around the elbow, then that is the death of the patient; and in the administration of another cause in a cure, it is a quantity of virtue.
E semblantment fay del pe quan corrupcio envezeys le dit del pe, lahoras tu inscideys aquel entro ad un dels nozes.	And similarly, if corruption happens in the toe, then you cut off that part at one of the joints.
E si pren en la pente del pe, lahoras tu inscideys tot le pe.	And if it takes over the sole of the foot, then you cut off the whole foot.
Mays si pueja entro al denol, lahoras tu inscideys la camba entro a la junctura del denol.	But if it can enter into the toenail, then you cut off the leg at the joint of the toenail.
E si la corrupcio ja es pervenguda sobre le denol, lahoras en lu no es engen sino dimissio, e layssar le malaute a la mort.	And if the corruption has already come upon the toenail, then there is no remedy in him but dismissal, and let the patient die.
E la manieyra de inscidir le membre o de serrar lu es que tu strenhas le liament en la partida pus dejos la qual voles inscidir, e strenh autre liament sobre le loc; e extenda le ministre un liament a las partidas dejos, e extenda le ministra autra liament en sus; e tu separa la carn la qual es entre dos liamentz ain spatum lat entro que sia descuberta tota la carn; e aprop sia inscidit o serrat.	And the manner of cutting off the member or binding it is that you tighten the ligament in the part lowest where you want to cut, and tighten another ligament over the location; and extend one ligament to the lowest parts, and extend the other ligament above; and you separate the flesh which is between two ligaments so that all the flesh is exposed; and then let it be cut or bound.
E cove que sia pausat drap de li de totas partidas per so que no toque le loc sa, e que vengua al malaute lesio ajustada e apostema caut.	And cover what has been cut with linen from all sides so that it does not touch the wound itself, and let the patient come healed and scarred.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc quan obras, lahoras tu cauteriza le loc coytadament, o pausa sus lu alcunas polveras restrenhentz le sanc; e aprop retorna a la tua medicacio entro que sia complida.	But if it happens that there is flow of blood when the wound opens, then you cauterize the location burnt or place upon it some powders which constrict the blood; and then return to your medicine until it is completed.
E aprop lia le membre plaguat am liament al u convenient, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And then bind the affected member with a ligament in a convenient way, and cure that until it is healed.
E yeu recomti a tu aquo que endevenc a un home en le sieu pe, aquest meteys accident le qual yeu e a tu recomtat, le qual es quar accidic a lu negror en le sieu pe am adustio que era asemblada a combustio de foc.	And now I return to you that which I promised to a man in his foot, this medicine incident which I and you have recorded, which is when darkness comes upon him in his foot with burning which was similar to fire.
E aquela corrupcio accidic primierament en le sieu dit entro que tendec tot le pe.	And that corruption happened first in his toe so that it spread throughout the foot.
E adonc aquel home preparec per si meteys pus que vic la curacio anar al membre am la vehemencia de lu que atrobec de dolor e de adustrio de lu, e el inscidic aquel pe entro a la junctura, e foc sanat.	And then that man prepared for himself remedies more than he could bear the cure going to the member with the strength of it which was tormented by pain and burning, and he cut off that foot at the joint, and it healed.
Lonc temps accidic a lu aquela meteyssa corrupcio en le dit de la ma indic.	A long time ago that corruption happened in the finger of the hand indicated.
E adonc venc a mi, e so me perforsat repercutir aquela superfluitat am aquo que pausegui sobre la ma de las medicinas, aprop la mundificacio del cos de lu; e no es repercussa la superfluitat e comensec anar al autra dit entro que comensec en la ma.	And then it came to me, and so I was forced to strike that superfluity with what I placed upon the hand of medicines, and then the cleansing of his body; and the superfluity is not struck back and begins to go to another finger as it begins in the hand.
E el apelec me a inscidir la ma de lu, e yeu no volgui far aquo sperant sobre la repercussio de aquela superfluitat, e mays que temegui deves la inscizio de la ma de lu mort, quar la vertut del malaute era sobre cazement.	And he begged me to cut off his hand, and I did not wish to do that hoping about the striking back of that superfluity, but because I feared the cutting off of his hand, for the virtue of the patient was great.
E pus que el se desperec de mi, es retornat en la sua terra e pervenguec a mi que aquel home preparec e inscidic la sua ma tota, e es sanat.	And after he had despaired of me, he returned to his own land and found that man preparing and cutting off his whole hand, and he healed.
E no he adhuzida aquesta narracio sino per que sia adjutori sobre aquo que catz de aquesta malautia, e que sia significacio per la qual sia significada e segon la qual sia obrat.	And I have not added this narration except that it be an aide about what is caught of this disease, and that it be a sign by which it is known and according to which it is performed.
De cura sinuum et qualitate clisterizationis cum medicinis.	Of the cure of sins and quality of enema with medicines.
Quan accideys apostema en alcus membres carnozes e·l spazi de l’apostema es prolonguat entro que fa colleccio de sania, e aprop es romput e perforat, e es eyssida de lu la sania, e roman le loc vuoyt quays cum si era vayssel, e la codena que es desobre lu ayssi cum drap subtiliat, e no es pervengut a deriera corrupcio, e no inprimeys en le os o en nervi ni en liament, es apelat sinu, e no es nompnat fistula.	When apostema happens in some fleshy members and the space of the apostema is prolonged so that it makes a collection of pus, and then it is broken and pierced, and the pus comes out of it, and the place is empty as if it were a vessel, and there is not any impression on the bone or nerve or ligament, it is called sinus, and it is not named fistula.
Mays empero si le spazi es prolonguat entro que la corrupcio enprema en alcun membre, lahoras es appelada fistula e no zukem.	But however if the space is prolonged so that the corruption presses upon some member, then it is called fistula and not sinus.
E la cura de lu es que inscidas aquela codena tota ayssi cum es revolvut, e majorment quan es subtiliada e es fayta cum drap, e comfizas que no adhereys al loc per la sua corrupcio.	And the cure of it is that you cut off that canal totally as it is turned over, and especially when it is thinned out and is made with linen, and you press so that it does not adhere to the location by its corruption.
Mays si tu speras que la codena adheresca e que aquela corrupcio no aja conseguit per deriera consecucio, e en la codena ha spassitut de cara, lahoras tu cura aquel am clisteri.	But if you hope that the canal adheres and that corruption has not been achieved by later consequence, and in the canal there is passing of pus, then you cure that with an enema.
E es que consideras al sinu, e lahoras si es gran, e·l brac que yeys es de fetent odor, lahoras clisteriza aquel am medicament egipciac le qual es de oli e vi agre e ziniar recebent partidas enguals, e sian ajustadas en un vayssel, e sian coytas sobre le foc entro que’l medicament se fassa rog e pervengua a specitut de mel.	And it is that you consider the sinus, and if it is large, and the arm which comes has a fetid odor, then enema that with Egyptian medicine which is of oil and sour wine and resin received divided in a vessel, and are tied over the fire until the medicine is cooked to a consistency of honey.
E aprop tu pren de lu aquo que es necessari e dissolveys lu am aygua e mel; e clisteriza am aquel le sinu, e strenh le orrifici de lu, e layssa la medicina en lu per la quantitat de doas horas.	And then you take from it what is necessary and dissolve it with water and honey; and enema with that the sinus, and tighten the orifice of it, and let the medicine remain in it for the quantity of two hours.
E aprop extratz aquela am sprecio; e fay aquo per tantz dias entro que sia mundificat le sinu e sia remauguda la pudor.	And then take it out with care; and do this for so many days until the sinus is cleansed and the swelling is diminished.
E alcunas veguadas es clisterizat am aygua de cendre, quan no es a tu prezent aquest medicament; e es que tu prenguas la cendra de vitz, e met sobre lu aygua; e aprop cola aquela e clisteriza aquel am ela entro que te confizes que·l sinu lahoras es ostat.	And sometimes it is enema with water of ash when that medicine is not present to you; and it is that you take the ash of wood, and put upon it water; and then strain that and enema with it that sinus until you are confident that the sinus is finished.
E si le malaute no ha tollerancia sobre le medicament egipciac ni l’aygua de la cendre, lahoras clisteriza aquel am aygua e mel e quays sia mesclat ziniar trissat, e clisteriza aquel am vi e mel mesclat, quar de proprietat de mel es que mondifique e lave, e le vi fa adherir le sinu, e majorment quan en le vi ha superfluitat de stipticitat e de siccitat.	And if the patient has no tolerance for Egyptian medicine or water of ash, then enema with water and honey and powdered resin mixed, and enema that sinus with wine and honey mixed, because by property of honey it cleanses and washes, and wine makes the sinus adhere, and especially when there is superfluity of dryness and stiffness.
E cum tu fas aquo alcunas veguadas e te comfizes que·l sinu ja es remaugut, lahoras clisteriza aquel am aquo que fa naysser la carn en lu.	And when you do this several times and you are confident that the sinus is diminished, then enema with what makes the flesh to come together in it.
E es que prenguas de enguent dyafinicon e dissolveys aquel am oli rozat e vi stiptic; o que clisterizas aquel am alcunas medicinas e enguentz autres que hajan las proprietatz les quals ja he yeu scritz en le tractat dels enguents.	And it is that you take some unction of myrrh and dissolve that with rose oil and astringent wine; or enema with some medicines and other unguents which have the properties which I have written in the treatment of the ointments.
E si le orrifici del sinu es streyt en le qual no es recebuda la canula del clisteri, lahoras tu le amplifique aquel am ferr petit a petit, e pausa en lu calgua envolopada en enguent egipciac o en enguent basilicon entro que sia amplificat.	And if the orifice of the sinus is narrow so that the cannula of the enema does not go in, then you enlarge it with a small iron little by little, and place over it a sponge wrapped in Egyptian ointment or basilicum ointment until it is enlarged.
E semblantment si le orrifici es ample, lahoras tu agregua las labias de lu am sutura e layssa de lu quantitat en la qual intre le clisteri ses addicio.	And similarly if the orifice is wide, then you gather the lips of it with a stitch and leave from it the quantity in which the enema goes in its addition.
E si le orrifici de lu del qual corr le brac es elevat a las partidas desus, lahoras secca aquel en le pus bas loc que es en lu per que le brac corra entro dejos, quar quan le brac es coartat en la preondeza de sinu la carn esser en lu engendrada.	And if the orifice of it through which the arm goes is raised to the parts above, then dry that in the pus which is in it so that the arm goes in from below, for when the arm is constricted in the depth of the sinus the flesh is engendered in it.
E si no es a tu possible seccar le sinu entro al enviro del os pus bas segon que voles, lahoras te perforssa que prepares le membre am preparacio per la qual corr de lu le brac leugierament segon que es a tu apparelhat e que no sia en lu retengut alcuna causa del brac.	And if it is not possible for you to dry the sinus within the bone pus, then you perforate the member with preparation by which blood flows out of it gently according to your attire and that there is no cause for the blood being retained in it.
E pren medicinas consolidativas que sian pausadas sobre le sinu convenientz ad aquo que vols exxten aquelas sobre drap de li.	Take consolidative medicines that are placed on the sinus appropriately so that you extend them on the cloth.
E le drap sia de tan gran quantitat cum fa la comunicacio de tot le sinu; e aprop inscidey am las forfexs en le dreyt del orrifici del sinu un trauc pus ample un pauc que l’orrifici del sinu; e aprop exten sobre autre drap de li dels enguentz leons segon la quantitat del trauc, e pausa le sobre aquel per posicio longinqua del orrifici del sinu per que sia aleujat le eyssiment del brac de lu e no ostes le drap gran sino aprop alcus dyas una veguada.	And the cloth should be of such a great quantity as to make the communication of all the sinus; and insert forceps into the right side of the orifice of the sinus, a little wider than the orifice of the sinus; and extend on another piece of cloth from it, the lions according to the quantity of the cut, and place it over that in a distant position from the orifice of the sinus so that the discharge of blood from it is far away and not near the cloth for a few days.
Mays aquel que es sobre le orrifici del sinu, le qual remauguas en tota hora per so que yesca aquo que es ajust en lu del brac.	But that which is over the orifice of the sinus, which drips all the time so that it dries up whatever is inside the blood.
E per que sapias si aquo que corr de lu del brac es mot o pauc, o es digest, o es no-digest.	And so that you know if what flows from it is a lot or a little, or is digested, or not digested.
E am aysso tu considera le loc de aquel sinu, si en lu sent le pacient dolor o no, e si es en lu apostema.	And so you consider the location of that sinus, if the patient feels pain in it or not, and if there is an abscess in it.
E cum la tua medicacio es prolonguada en la tal manieyra, e vesas la matiera que es gitada sobre le orrifici del sinu ja adhereys, o se apropria adherencia, lahoras le mayti tu le deslia o le tertz dia, e quan deslias la plagua, lahoras muda le drap per autre e renova le enguent.	And when your treatment is prolonged in such a way, and you see the matter that is dried over the orifice of the sinus already adhering, or it has appropriate adhesion, then you loosen it on the third day, and when you loosen the wound, then change the cloth for another one and renew the ointment.
Mays si del sinu aprop lon spazi yeys virus subtil, lahoras no te desperes de la adherencia de li, quar la sanacio de lu se apropria, quar so alcus homes en les quals tarda generacio de carn en las lors plaguas, e de aquels so en les quals es fayt le contrari de lu.	But if the sinus has a long space and you see subtle pus, then do not despair of its adhesion, because its healing is appropriate, for there are some people in whom generation of flesh occurs on their wounds, and from whom it is made in the contrary way.
E si del sinu aprop motz dias es yssit brac indigest, lahoras sapias que·l sinu no adhereys; e si es tardada la adherencia del sinu e es la causa prolonguada, lahoras tu ajusta en exsiccacio de las medicinas, e si las medicinas so humidas en lor substancia e en la sua vertut, son seccas ayssi cum enguent dyafinicon, quan es en lu ajustada superfluitat de addicio de zegi.	And if blood that is not digested flows from the sinus for several days, then you should know that the sinus does not adhere; and if the adhesion of the sinus is delayed and it is a prolonged cause, then you apply in drying medicines, and if the medicines are moist in their substance and in their virtue, they are dried as with ointment of theriac, when there is excess of addition of honey.
E le mays derier am le qual es curat, es que prenguas de enguent dyafinicon e sia dissout en oli rozat, e sia sobre lu vojat vi antic engual en la sua substancia, e aprop comfeys aquel am lu, e usa de aquel.	And the best medicine for it is to take theriac ointment and dissolve it in rose oil, and pour on it old wine that is equal in its substance, and apply this to it, and use it.
E ja fa semblant en aquela accio, quan no y a brac, enguent dyafinicon, mel quan es coyt entro que sia engrossat, e usa de lu; o que prenguas mirra e aloen e enses, e trissa tot e polveriza sobre le mel quan es sus le foc, e aprop lineys aquo sobre drap e strenh aquel sobre le sinu; e lineys aquel am le mel le qual has cuoyt entro que es engrossat, e polveriza sobre drap e strenh aquel.	And so do this action when there is no blood: ointment of theriac, honey when it has been boiled until it is thickened, and use that; or take myrrh and aloes and mix them together, then grind them all into powder over the fire, and spread it on cloth and apply it to the sinus. And spread the honey that you have boiled until it is thickened over the cloth and apply it.
E alcunas veguadas so administratz am lu aristologia longua e razitz de lili celesti (e es lili celesti) e farina de errs e centaurea, e usa de aquels simples o ajustatz, trissa aquels e cribela e polveriza sobre le mel le qual he recomtat; e husa de lu.	And sometimes they are applied to it with a long aristo logic and roots of celestial lily (and that is celestial lily) and farina of wormwood and centaurea, and use those simples or prepare them, grind them and sift them into powder over the honey that he has recommended; and use it.
E si es prolonguat le sinu, e no es sanat per aquesta curacio, lahoras sapias que la corrupcio es en le preon de lu, e ja fa enquisicio en les osses o en les autres membres durs o als liaments; lahoras tu le cura am curacio fistular, ayssi cum desus es dit.	And if the sinus is prolonged and is not healed by this treatment, then you should know that corruption is in its root, and so do examination in the bones or in the other hard members or tendons; then you treat it with treatment of a fistula, as is said above.
De curacio de panarici et unguis attritae et incisione digiti additi et sectione.	Of treatment of panaries and nails worn away, and addition of incision of the finger, and section.
Panarici es apostema le qual nays dejos la ungla del dit pous de la ma o del pe, e fort leu nays en les autres ditz, e cum es prolonguat e la sua curacio es mens prezada, o es apostemat de apostema caut, o es corrumput, e gieta brac entro que corrodeys la razitz de la ungla, e fort leu corromp aquela tota, e fort leu perve la sua corrupcio al os entro que es a lu odor fetent, e es fayta la extremitat del dit lada, e la color de lu es fayta fusca.	Panaries is an abscess that arises under the nail of the finger of the hand or the toe, and it is very rare in other fingers, and as it is prolonged, its cure is more difficult, or it is an abscess of a cauterized wound, or it is corrupted, and it causes blood to flow inside that corrode the roots of the nail, and very much corrupts all of it, and the corruption very much permeates the bone within which has a fetid odor, and the extremity of the finger becomes lopsided, and its color becomes dark.
E donc quan tu auras aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu inscidas am ferr tota la superfluitat que es romasa de la ungla e aprop cauteriza la plagla aprop aquo, quar cauteri mot es juvatiu en aysso.	And so when you have that which we have said in the division and do not confer your cure, then you should know that you pierce with iron all the superfluity that is rotted from the nail and appropriately cauterize the wound there, because burning is beneficial in that.
Mays si le os es sa e la ungla es sana, e las addicios de la ungla vuoydas ja compremen las carns a las partidas dedintz, e comensan lu punger e ledeysso aquela, lahoras cove que tu pauses ray subtil dejos le angle de la ungla que pungeys la carn, e impelleys aquela sus e inscideys aquela carn am facilitat, e pausa sobre aquo que roman de la carn de las medicinas comburentz corrosivas entro que sia tot remaugut; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	But if the bone is healthy and the nail is healed, and the additions of the nail are filled with flesh to the parts within, and it begins to prick and hurt that, then you should know that you place a thin needle below the edge of the nail that pricks the flesh, and push that up and insert the flesh with ease, and put on that which comes from the flesh of corrosive medicines until everything is dried. And so cure that with ointments until it is healed.
Mays si la corrupcio ja enprem en le os, lahoras cove que tu inscidas le os aquel e le extraguas, car nul temps no es sanat que sia en lu le os corrumput.	But if the corruption has already pervaded the bone, then you should know that you pierce that bone and extract it, for it will never be healed as long as the corrupted bone remains.
E si vezes la corrozio e la corupcio anar en le dit, lahoras tu inscideys aquel en un dels nozes segons que es premesa la sua rememoracio, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if you see the corrosion and corruption going into the finger, then you insert it into one of the nuts according to how its memory is pressed, and so cure that until it is healed.
Mays si a la ungla endeve percussio o atricio, e endeve en aquela dolor vehement, lahoras cove que tu al comensament fleubotomes le malaute, e aprop secca la ungla am spatum agut am seccio transversa desus en jus, e guarda te que la seccio no pervengua entro a la carn que es dejos la ungla, quar tu faras accidir al malaute dolor vehement, e sira causa a nativitat de la carn ajustada superflua en le loc; e aprop cura aquel loc am aquo que ceda dolor.	But if the nail has been knocked against something or hit, and it hurts very much, then you should know that at the beginning you apply phlebotomes to the finger, and appropriately dry the nail with a pointed spatula by making a transverse cut on it, and be careful that the cut does not go into the flesh under the nail, for you will cause vehement pain in the finger, and a cause of generation of superfluous flesh in the location; and so cure that place from which there is pain.
Mays dit ajustat, le qual es nat en las mas de alcus homes, fort leu es carnos tot, e fort leu so en lu osses, o fort leu es en lu ungla.	But a finger that has been born in the hands of some people is very much flesh, and very little bone, or it is in the nail.
E alcus de lu son natz en la razit de la junctura, o es la nativitat de lu en alcus nozes dels ditz.	And some are born in the root of the joint, or its generation in some knuckles of the fingers.
Mays aquel que es nat en alcus nozes del dit no se mau, e aquest que es nat en las juncturas fort leu es maugut.	But that which is born in some knuckles of the finger does not hurt, and that which is born in the joints is very much hurt.
E de aquels que son natz carnoses, la seccio es leugiera, e es que tu inscidas aquel deves la sua razitz am spatum lat.	And of those which are born fleshy, its cut is easier, and you insert that below its root with a wide spatula.
Mays de aquel que es nat en la razitz de la junctura, la curacio es dificil; e donc guarda te de la abscizio de lu.	But of that which is born in the root of the joint, its cure is difficult; and so be careful about its incision.
Mays en aquel que es nat en dit deves les nozes, cove que tu inscidas al comensament la carn de lu am inscizio redonda entro al os, e aprop serra am una de aquelas serras convenientz ad aquo, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	But of that which is born in the finger at the knuckles, you should know that you pierce the flesh of it with a round incision into the bone, and cut it with one of those appropriate saws, and so cure that until it is healed.
Mays consolidacio la qual accideys als ditz entre lor motas veguadas o per nativitat del home que nays enayssi, o per consolidacio de plagua o per combustio de foc, o per semblantz, adonc cove que secces aquela consolidacio entro que les ditz retorno a la sua forma natural.	But consolidation that occurs in the fingers between their joints several times or by generation of the person who is born so, or by consolidation of a wound, or by burning fire, or similarly, then you dry up that consolidation until the fingers return to their natural shape.
E aprop pausa entre lor draps de li enfuzes en oli rozat per que no sian consolidatz leugierament, e separa entre aquels, o pausa entre aquels una lamina de plom subtil entro que sia consolidat segon que cove.	And so place between those pieces of cloth moistened in rose oil so that they are not consolidated easily, and separate between them, or place between them a thin lead plate so that it is consolidated according to how you wish.
E semblantment si accideys consolidacio en alcus ditz am la palma, lahoras tu secca aquela consolidacio segon que es preparada e conveneys a la figura del membre.	And similarly, if consolidation occurs in some fingers with the palm, then you dry up that consolidation according to how it is prepared and convenient for the figure of the member.
De inscizio de vices, so son varicas.	Of incision of wounds, so are varicose veins.
Vices so son varicas, e so venas envolutas grossas plenas de superfluitatz melencolicas las quals veno en motz dels membres del cors, e le major adveniment de lor en las cambas, e majorment en las cambas dels itinerantz e dels laborantz e dels portantz.	Varicose veins are engorged and twisted veins filled with melancholic superfluities, which appear in the extremities of the body, most commonly in the legs, particularly in the legs of travelers, laborers, and carriers.
Adonc cove que tu administres purguacio del cors de colera negra alcunas veguadas am expulcio fort, e aprop sangna le pacient de la vena basilica.	Thereafter, when you administer purgation of the body from black bile several times with strong expulsion, then bleed the patient from the basilic vein.
Mays la curacio de lor am ferr es segon dos manieyras: la una es que sia inscizas e sia atirat aquel sanc negre, e l’autra manieyra es que sia elevada la vena e sia extrayta tota.	The treatment for them is according to two methods: the first is that it be incised and that black blood be drawn out; the other method is that the vein be elevated and all of it extracted.
La seccio de lu es segon aquesta manieyra: embroca al comensament la camba am aygua cauda mot entro que le sanc gros sia resolvut, que es feculent de la camba, e aprop strenh la camba del malaute a la partida pus sobirana de la coyssa entro a la partida dejos del denol am una benda, e aprop secca la vena en un loc, o en dos, o en tres am seccio ampla, e aprop eleva le sanc negra am la tieua ma de la partida dejos de la camba entro en sus, e desus en jus, entro que del sanc sia yssida la quantitat que voles e que vezes habastar, e la qual tollera la vertut del malaute.	The incision is done in the following way: first moisten the leg with warm water so that the gross blood, which is feculent, is dissolved; then tightly press the patient's leg from the highest part of the thigh to the lowest part of the groin with a bandage, and then dry the vein at one, two, or three locations with a broad incision, and elevate the black blood with your hand from below upwards into it, so that the quantity you want and can endure is discharged; the strength of the patient will tell you how much.
E aprop lia aquela, e comanda a lu que abstengua de las viandas colera negra engendrantz.	Then tie that up, and command him to abstain from foods that engender black bile.
E itera la curacio per fleubotomia quan las venas so umplidas e aquo notz al malaute.	And repeat the treatment by phlebotomy when the veins are filled and pain is felt by the patient.
Mays la elevacio de lor es segon aquesta manieyra: tu que razas la camba del malaute, si en lu so motz pels, e aprop met le en banh e embroca la camba de lu am aygua cauda entro que s’enrogesesca e las venas sian exuberadas; o que sia exercitat per exercici fort, si banh no es a tu present, entro que·l membre sia scalfat.	But the elevation of them is according to this manner: you who raise the leg of the patient, if in it are found varicose veins, and then put him into a bath and moisten his leg with warm water so that it becomes engorged and the veins are swollen; or that he be exercised by strong exercise, if no bath is available, so that the limb is heated.
E aprop secsa la codena en le dreyt de la vena per seccio en le lonc o en le derier de lu deves le denol, o en le pus bas de lu deves lo talo.	And then cut the vein at the bend of the leg in its length or behind it near the groin, or below it near the ankle.
E aprop uobre la codena am uncis e excorja la vena de tota part entro que appara al sentiment, e es deves la appericio de lu que vezes aquela roga declinant a negror.	And then open the vein with scissors and scrape out the vein in all parts where it appears black, and you should draw out its content until the patient's feeling is diminished; this will be indicated by its turning from black to red.
E donc cum evazeys e de la codena tu vezes aquela blanca quays sia corda.	And then with a needle pierce the vein, and when you see it white and quivering, tie it with a string.
E aprop tu met dejos aquela le ray entro que sia elevada e sia gitada de la codena, e sospen aquela am onci orp leon.	And then put below it the vein so that it is elevated and drained of blood, and suspend it with a silk thread tied to an iron hook.
E aprop secsa autra seccio aprop aquela seccio per tres ditz, e aprop excorja la codena de la partida desus de la vena entro que apparia.	And then cut another section below that section with three incisions, and scrape out the vein from above it where it appears; this will be indicated by its appearance.
E aprop eleva aquela e inscideys aquela en deriera seccio deves le talo, e aprop extratz aquela e eleva aquela entro que sia yssida per la seccio segonda, e aprop extratz aquela de la seccio que es sobre aquela.	And then elevate it and pierce it with a needle in the rear incision below the ankle; then extract it and elevate it so that it is discharged through the second incision, and then extract it from above that incision.
E fay aquo entro que extraguas aquela de la seccio que es pus sobirana o pus auta de totas las seccios, entro que tota es yssida; e lahoras inscideys aquela.	And then do this so that you extract it from the incision which is highest or lowest of all the incisions, so that it is all discharged; then pierce it there.
E si no obezeys a tu ad extrayre e elevar, lahoras intromet una agulha am fiel fort doble e ligua aquela e extratz la, o intromet dejos lu le ray e revolveys la tua ma a tota part entro qu’en sia getada.	And if it does not obey you in being extracted and elevated, then insert a strong bent needle into it and ligature it and extract it, or insert it below the vein and rotate your hand all around so that it is drained from all parts.
E guarda te que no sia inscidida; quar si es trencada, es fayt a tu dificil elevar aquela mot e es vengut sobre le malaute per aquela nocument.	And beware that it not be cut; for if it is cut, it will then be difficult for you to elevate it and it will be harmful to the patient.
E cum aquela tota auras fora-gitada, lahoras pausa sobre le loc de la plagua lana submerssa en vi e oli rozat e oli no-rozat, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And when all of it has been drained out, then place over the wound wool soaked in wine and rose oil, and cure it until it is healed.
E si la vit es contrayta havent tortuositat a la qual sia envolucio a las partidas, e no es segon rectitut segon que havem dit, lahoras cove que tu fendas sobre aquela a tota partida de tortuositat de lu e als locs de envolucio de lu, e aprop suspen aquela am uncis entro que eleves aquela tota.	And if the vein is contracted and has tortuosity from which there is an infiltration into the parts, and it is not according to rectitude as we have said, then you should split it at all parts of its tortuosity and suspend it with a hook so that you elevate it entirely.
E guarda te deves la tua seccio que no inscidas la vena e que no plagues aquela, quar dificil sira a tu elevar aquela; e serva la tua prudencia en aquela.	And beware that you do not cut the vein and harm it, for it will then be difficult for you to elevate it; and exercise your prudence in doing this.
Forma del inscident am le qual es seccada vit:	The shape of the incision by which it is dried:
Forma de unci orp:	Shape of iron hook:
No es a lu accuitat ayssi cum als uncis ni es de aguda extremitat per so que no plague la vena; e es de grossa flexibilitat leon, quar si era subtil, inscidira la vena per la sua subtilitat; habantz es en lu superflua grosseza ayssi cum havem dit.	It is not curved with hooks nor of acute extremity so that it does not harm the vein; and it is of great flexibility, for if it were subtle, it would cut the vein because of its subtlety; there is superfluous thickness in it as we have said.
De extraccio venae cruris.	Of extraction of the vein of the leg:
Aquesta vena es engendrada en las cambas en terras caudas ayssi cum al- Ategi en terra de Arabics e en las terras de India caudas e aridas de pauca teneritat e en las quals no nays erba ni aybre.	This vein is engendered in the legs in warm lands as in Al-Ategi in the land of Arabs, and in the hot and arid lands of India with little gentleness, and in which there is no grass or trees.
E fort leu es engendrada en autres locs del cors otra las cambas.	And it is also engendered strongly in other parts of the body besides the legs.
E la gestacio de lu es de putrefaccio que ve dejos la codena ayssi cum venen dedintz le cors serpentz e vermps e scarides e verms engendrantz entre la codena e la carn.	And its gestation is from putrefaction which comes below the vein as from venomous snakes and worms and scars and worms engendered between the vein and the flesh.
E senhal de la suscepcio de l’adveniment de lu es de aquesta vena que accideys en la camba enflammacio vehement; e aprop le loc es vesicat; e aprop comensa la vena yssir del loc de aquela vesicacio quays sembla razit de planta.	And the sign of its advent is that this vein inflames violently in the leg, and then the location becomes blistered, and then the vein starts to discharge from that blister which seems like a plant root.
E adonc cum appar de lu la extremitat, lahoras cove que tu envolvas sobre aquela una pessa de plom del qual sia le pes de una drac. entro a ii drac., e noza aquela e layssa le plom suspendut de la camba.	And then when the end appears, then you should wrap around it a piece of lead, which weighs one-sixth of a drachma. Wrap this and leave the lead suspended from the leg.
E tantas veguadas cum yeys de lu alcuna causa a las partidas defora, envolveys aquo em plom e noza aquel.	And as many times as you see it coming out of the parts, wrap it in lead and suspend that.
E si mot es prolonguat, lahoras tu inscideys una partida de lu e envolopa le romanent; e no inscidas aquela de razit entro que sia fora yssida, quar si inscideys aquela es contrayta e intra en la carn e fa accidir apostema e poyredura en le loc e ulceracio mala.	And if it is prolonged, then you pierce a part of it and wrap the remainder; and do not cut that which has been pierced so that it is discharged, for if you pierce it, it will be contracted and go into the flesh and cause an abscess and swelling in that location and ulceration.
Per que cove que sia tractada suaument e sia extrayta petit a petit, entro que sia fora-gitada del derier de lu e no remangua de lu alcuna causa en le cors.	For let it be drawn out little by little so that it is discharged from below and does not cause any harm in the body.
E de aquesta vena es yssit en alcus homes que es en la sua longitut de v palms e de detz e ja es pervengut a mi que yssic un de xx palms.	And this vein is found in some men who are of the length of 5 or 10 palms, and I have seen one that was of 20 palms.
E si es inscidida en la hora de la sua medicacio, lahoras intromet lo ray en le trauc de lu e perfora aquela am lonc trauc am le cors, entro que sia evacuat tot aquo que es en la materia, e administra putrefaccio del loc per alcus dias am medicinas; e aprop cura aquela per la curacio de apostemas.	And if it is cut during the hour of its medication, then insert the end into the incision and pierce it with a long needle into the body so that everything in the matter is discharged, and then administer putrefaction of the location for several days with medicines; and then cure it with the cure for abscesses.
E aquesta vena alcunas veguadas ha motz ramps, e majorment quan apar a la junctura del pe o en le pe, e veno a lu motz orrificis, e es yssit de quascu orrifici ram.	And this vein sometimes has swollen bumps, and mostly when it appears at the joint of the leg or in the leg, and comes to it bumps of openings, and is discharged from each opening.
E donc cura aquela ayssi cum havem dit en la divisio e am aquo que es desus dit.	And then cure it as we have said in the division and with what is above it.
De sectione super vermes generatos sub cute et dicitur aegritudo bovina.	Of section of worms engendered under the skin, and it is called bovine disease.
Aquesta malautia es nompnada en alcuna terra deves nos malautia bovina per so quar motas veguadas endeve als bious e es verm pauc un le qual es nat entre la codena e la carn, e va en tot le cos pujan e devalan, e es mostrat al sentiment deves le sieu anament de membre en membre entro que disromp la codena e yeys fora.	This disease is named in some land because of the bovine disease due to which it moves the cows and is a worm which is found between the vein and flesh, and goes all through the body pushing and falling, and is shown by its feeling as it moves from limb to limb breaking the vein and coming out.
E la generacio de lu es per putrefaccio de alcunas humors ayssi cum accideysso verms e serpentz e lombrics e ascaridas en le ventre.	And its generation is from putrefaction of some humors as when venomous worms and snakes and roundworms and ascarias are engendered in the belly.
E es temut per la malicia de lu, quar quan el va en le cors e es elevat al cap, e es pervengut al huel, lahoras fort leu uebre en lu e intra e destruzeys le huel, e aquo endeve motas veguadas.	And it is feared for its malice, for when it goes through the body and is elevated to the head, then it breaks out in him and pierces the mouth, and then it comes out many times.
E donc quan tu voles curar aquel e extraire lu, lahoras no se fa si no deves la sieua ambulacio e apparacio de lu al sentiment, e adonc cove que tu strenhas aquo que es sobre lu e aquo que es dejos lu am liament e constriccio fort, e aprop secca sobre lu e extratz aquel.	And so when you want to cure him and extract it, then it is not done unless you first make him feel a strong pain and contraction on what is above him and what is below him, and then quickly dry the area and extract it.
E si es preondat en la carn e no le atrobes, lahoras tu pausa cauteri am foc sobre le loc entro que mora, e la major causa que es temuda es corrupcio de lu am la qual corrump le loc ayssi cum havem dit.	And if it is buried in the flesh and you cannot pull it out, then you must apply a cautery with fire to the place where it is, and the main cause that is feared is corruption of the tool, by which it corrupts the area as we have said.
May si tu vezes aquel esser pervengut al cap prop del huel, lahoras strenh sobre le sobrecil am fort strictura, e aprop secsa sobre lu, e extratz aquel; e cove que·l malaute use de mondificacio del sieu cors am medicinas evacuantz humors putridas malas, e guarda se de viandas generantz putrefaccio.	Now if you want the stone to reach the head quickly, then stretch the scalp tightly with a strong contraction, and quickly dry the area and extract the stone; and let the patient use purifying medicines for his body that evacuate rotten humors, and guard against foods that cause putrefaction.
De sectione super aegritudinem nafir.	On the treatment of gout.
Aquesta malautia es nompnada en nostra terra nafir, e es dolor la qual ve en alcus membres, e aprop es permudada de membre en membre.	This illness is named in our country 'nafir', and it is a pain that comes to some parts of the body, and soon travels from part to part.
E yeu ja e vista aquela segon que yeu te recomtare.	And I have seen this according to how I will tell you.
Yeu fu apelat a una femna malauta ad una vila, e descubric le sieu bras e vi una imflacio petita en la vena funis del bras, e pus que fu romas per una hora, vi aquela imflacio anar ayssi cum va verm pujan ad aquest, mays pus leugierament que esser por, ayssi cum si fos argent viu quan corr de loc en loc.	I was called to a sick woman in a town, and I uncovered her arm and saw a small inflammation in the vein of the arm, and as soon as it had broken for an hour, I saw that inflammation go just like a worm moving from place to place, more quickly than you could imagine, just like live silver when it moves from place to place.
E adonc anet s’en la dolor de aquel loc e fiquet se en le muscle, e aprop aqui stec per una hora.	And then the pain went into that part and settled in the muscle, and so I stayed there for an hour.
E aprop correc en l’autre cors entro que pervenc al autre bras.	And so it went through the rest of the body until it reached the other arm.
E aprop recomtec a mi que revolvia se per tot le cors sieu segon que yeu vi; e fo trop meravelat de la permutacio de lu e de la velocitat de membre en membre.	And so I understood that it was moving through all of his body as I saw it; and I was very astonished at its movement from part to part.
E yeu ja havia vist denant aquo en les mieus huels segon aquela manieyra, empero yeu he vistz motz les quals atroban dolor esser permutada de membra a membre.	And I had seen this before in my own eyes according to that way, however I have heard of pains being transferred from part to part.
Mays no vi aquo am les huels ayssi cum en la femna.	But I did not see it with my own eyes as I did in the woman.
E yeu no cogiti esser aquo sino que es per aquo quar la femna era de viela, on so de secs cors e de venas descubertas, e en aquesta apparec al sentiment aquela ventositat permutada.	And I did not think that it was anything but because the woman was old and had thin skin and exposed veins, and in this appeared to the senses that changing windiness.
E es necessari que no apparesca segon aquesta retro-curacio en aquels que son delicioses e am cors humitz de venas ameguadas.	And it is necessary that this does not appear according to this back-cure in those who are delicate and have moist bodies with hidden veins.
E cum tu voles la curacio de lu, e le pacient sent aquela dolor, lahoras no es a tu aparent al huel ayssi cum havem dit, lahoras tu strenh sobre aquel e dejos lu leugierament e secse sobre aquel entro que sia yssida aquela ventositat coartada, e cauterize le loc.	And when you want to cure it, and the patient feels that pain, then it is not for you to appear at the head as we have said, then you stretch on that and underneath him quickly and dry over him where that windiness has gone, and cauterize the area.
Mays si tu no la vezes am los tieus huels, alhoras tu cura aquel am excussio del cors e am aquo que expelleys ventositatz, e carmina aquelas am pillulas fetidas e am pillulas de serapi e semblantz.	But if you do not see it with your own eyes, then you cure him by expelling the humors and by that which expels windiness, and treat those by pilules of farts and pilules of serapi and similar.
De extraccio de sagetas.	On the extraction of stones.
Sagetas son diversificadas segon las specias, e segon les locs dels cors en les quals cazo, quar la lor diversitat es que de aquellas so que han grans puntas, e petitas, e concavas, e sordas, so es solidas; e de lor so que han tres angles, e de aquelas a las quals so que han lenguas; e de aquelas a las quals so astelas.	Stones are various according to their species, and according to the parts of the body where they are found, because their diversity is that some have great points, and small, and hollow, and blunt, and some are solid; and of those some have three angles, and others are like tongues; and of others are like splinters.
E aquela que es segon les membres e las pessas en las quals cazo es segon dos manieyras: quar les membres o so membres principals concaus, ayssi cum le cervel, le cor, e·l fitge, e le pulmo, e les ronhos, e les budels, e la vezica, e a lor semblantz; e donc quan catz en alcu de aquestz membres e aparo a tu senhals de mort, la qual causa yeu recomtare aprop, lahoras cove que tu evites extraccio de aquela sageta en aquels quar la mort siec aquel en le qual en las majors disposicios, e quan a tu no appareysso aquestz mals senhals, e la sageta no es amaguada en la profunditat del membre, lahoras tu extratz aquela e cura la plagua.	And those which are according to the members and weights in which they are found are according to two ways: for the members are either principal causes, like the brain, heart, liver, lung, intestines, bladder, and their likes; and so when a stone falls into one of these members and you feel a sign of death, which I will tell you about soon, then beware of extracting that stone in those who show these signs of death, and when you do not see these signs, and the stone is not deep in the member, then extract it and cure the wound.
E dels senhals del servel es quan catz en lu sageta, e trespassa le os, e es yssit del cyphac le qual es sobre le cervel, quar accideys per lu soda vehement, e scotomia, e vertige, e rogor en les huels, e imflamacio e rogor de la lengua, e spasme e permixtio de entendament e vomi de colera, e fort leu es abscindida la paraula e es destruida la votz, e es yssit del loc de la plagua humiditat blanca semblant a pols, e yeys de lu semblant ad aquositat de la carn.	And the signs of the brain are when it falls into the brain and pierces the skull, and is raised from the cyphax which is above the brain, because accidents occur through it like violent soda, and scotomia, and vertigo, and heat in the ears, and inflammation and heat of the tongue, and spasm and mixture of senses and vomiting of bile, and the voice is broken and destroyed, and moisture white like dust is emitted from the wound.
E donc si appareyso a tu aquestz senhals, lahoras tu abste de la curacio e de la extraccio de la sageta, si non es fora.	And so if you see these signs, then refrain from the cure and extraction of the stone unless it is out.
Mays les senhals de la sageta quan catz en le cor, so que ela es prop de la mamila senestra, e sent am aquela quays sia ficada en causa dura, e no es causa vueda; e fort leu le movement de la sageta es semblant a movement del pols, e corr de la plagua sanc negra, e siec aquel fregiditat de las extremitatz, e suzor freja, e sincopi; e donc sapias que la mort descen ses tot dopte.	But the signs of the stone when it falls into the heart are that it is near the left breast, and feels as if it were stuck in a hard cause, and it is not a soft cause; and quickly the movement of the stone is like the movement of the pulse, and black blood runs from the wound, and it brings chill to the extremities, and cold sweat, and fainting; and so know that death descends with it.
E les senhals quan la sageta ha plaglat le pulmo so eyssiment de sanc spumos de la plagua, e les vayssels que so prop del col so apostematz, e es mudada la color del malaute, e expira sperit gran aut, e demanda atraccio de ayre freg.	And the signs when the stone has wounded the lung are emission of bloody foam from the wound, and the vessels that are near the throat are swollen, and the patient's color is changed, and he breathes heavily, and asks for cool air.
E si catz la sageta en le velament le qual es en le pietz, e la dolor lahoras es prop de las costas petitas, e es fayt le ale gran am vehement dolor e am sospir, e no so maugutz totz les membres dels muscles.	And if the stone falls into the membrane which is in the feet, then the pain is near the little ribs, and there is made a wound great by violent pain and by sighing, and not all the members of the muscles are affected.
E si catz la sageta en le stomac, lahoras fort leu yeys de la plagua vianda alcuna indigesta.	And if the stone falls into the stomach, then quickly you will see some undigested food from the wound.
E si catz la sageta en le ventre, e es ficada en lu, yeys alcuna fenda de la plagua, o la tela, o budel le qual es disromput, e no es speransa en la curacio de lu extraccio de la sageta.	And if the stone falls into the belly and is stuck in it, you will see some wound of the wound, or the membrane, or intestine which has been torn, and there is no hope for curing it except by extracting the stone.
E si la sageta catz en la vesica, e es yssida defora urina, e procesesca de lu alcuna causa a las partidas defora, e fort leu es dolor sobre le malaute, lahoras sapias que es mortal.	And if the stone falls into the bladder and urine is emitted from it, and some wound goes from it to the parts outside, and quickly there is great pain on the patient, then know that it is mortal.
Mays les autres membres ayssi cum es la cara, le col, e·l golayro, e las spallas e le adjutori, e les spondils del dos, e la furcula, e la coysa, e la camba e a lor semblantz dels membres, son salvatz segon las majors disposicios quan la sageta no atroba vena ni arteria e no es sageta venenosa.	But the other members like the face, neck, throat, shoulders and armpits, and the bones of the back, and the jaw, and the hip, and the leg and its likes of the members are safe according to the best dispositions when the stone does not block a vein or artery, and it is not a venomous stone.
E yeu recomtare aquo a tu que he vist del esser de aquestas sagetas, per que signifiques per aquo sobre la curacio tieua.	And I will tell you this that I have seen of these stones so that you understand it about your cure.
La qual causa es, quar en un home cazec sageta en le lacrimal del huel de lu en la razitz del nas, e yeu extrayssi aquela a lu del autra partida, dejos le grays de l’aurelha de lu, e es sanat, e no accidic en le huel de lu nocument.	The cause of which is, because in an old man a stone fell into the tear gland of his eye at its root in the nostril, and I extracted that from him at the other side, below the eyebrow, and he was healed, and did not occur in his eye any harm.
E extrayssi autra sageta a un Juzeu la qual cazec en lu en lo grays del sieu huel, dejos la palpebra pus dejos, e la sageta ja era occultada e no so conseguit de aquela sino una petita extremitat am la qual adhereys al sieu fust, e era gran sageta de las sagetas agudas dels Turcs , am ferr leon en la qual no havia aurelhas.	And I extracted another stone from a Jew in which it had fallen into him at the edge of his eye, below the eyebrow, and the stone was already hidden and he had not obtained it except for a small end with which it adhered to his stem, and it was a great sharp stone with lion’s ferrule.
E senat es le Juzieu , e no accidic en le sieu huel mal accident.	And the Jew was healed, and there was no harm done to his eye.
E extrayssi una autra sageta a un home Crestia la qual era cazuta en le golayro, e era sageta arabica, e es aquela a la qual so aurelhas; e adonc yeu inscidegui sobre aquela entre doas guidegi, e ja era submersa en le golayro de lu; e adonc yeu so subtiliat am aquela, e aprop extraxi aquela, e es sanat le Crestia .	And I extracted another stone from a Christian man which had fallen into his throat, and it was an Arabic stone, and it was that to which there are eyebrows; and then I inserted it between two teeth, and it was already submerged in his throat; and then I pricked it with that, and quickly I extracted it, and the Christian was healed.
E extraxi autra sageta a un home la qual era cazuta en le sieu ventre, e cogitegui que moris per aquela; e donc, pus que foro passatz xxx dias e no es mudat sobre lu alcuna causa de las suas disposicios, inscidegui sobre la sageta e engenagui sobre aquela, e es sanat, e no accidic a lu accident mal.	And I extracted another arrow from a man who had fallen into his belly, and I thought he would die from it; and so, since thirty days had passed and there was no change in him from any cause of his dispositions, I made an incision over the arrow and pulled it out, and he healed, and no evil accident happened to him.
E vi mays un home en le qual cazec una sageta en le dos de lu, e consolidada es la plagua sobre lu, e pus que foc aprop set ans, yssic la sageta en la razitz de la coyssa.	And I saw a man in whom an arrow had pierced his back, and the wound was closed over him, and since it was about seven years, the arrow came out at the root of his thigh.
E vi una femna a la qual cazec sageta en le sieu ventre, e la plagua es consolidada dedintz lu, e no es mudada en las suas disposicios en re, e la femna no atrobec nocument en alcunas de las suas opperacios naturals.	And I saw a woman in whom an arrow had pierced her belly, and the wound was closed within him, and she was not changed in any of her dispositions in terms of urination or defecation, and the woman did not suffer damage in any of her natural functions.
E vi un autre home al qual cazec sageta en la sua cara e consolidada es la plagua e romas la sageta, no atrobant aqui mota dolor, e motz semblantz ad aquestz.	And I saw another man to whom an arrow had pierced his face, and the wound was closed, and he broke the arrow, not feeling any pain, and moved similar movements.
E extrayssi la sageta del home dels princeps del rey que era cazuda en le mieg loc del nas sieu e ja havia declinat a la partida dreyta un petit, e occultada era tota la sageta.	And I extracted the arrow from the king's son who had fallen in the middle of his nose and had already tilted to the right a little, and the whole arrow was hidden.
E yeu fu appelat a la curacio de lu aprop le cazement de la sageta entro a tres dias.	And I was called for his cure when it was three days since the arrow had pierced him.
E adonc yeu atrobegui la plagua de la sageta mot streyta; e adonc yeu inquirigui aquela am tenta subtil, e no sentigui aquela; mays el la sentia puncio dejos la aurelha dreyta, e adonc speregui que aquela punccio era per la extremitat de la sageta.	And then I found the wound of the arrow very tight; and then I probed it with a subtle probe, and he didn't feel it; but he felt a sting below his right ear, and then I perceived that this sting was from the tip of the arrow.
E amplastregui le loc am emplaustre en le qual es vertut atrectiva e digestiva, confizant de mi que·l loc se apostemes per que appares a mi le loc de la sageta, per que secces sobre aquela.	And I applied to the site an ointment in which is virtue atractive and digestive, trusting from me that the site would quickly heal for me to see the location of the arrow, so that it would dry up over it.
E no accidic en le loc accident significant que la sageta hagues conseguit aquel loc; e yeu continuegui am le emplaustre sobre lu per motz dias e no accidic accident; e consolidada es la plagua entretant, e romas le malaute de la extreccio de lu per spazi de motz dias entro que un jorn sentic la sageta dintz le sieu nas e recontec aquo a mi.	And there happened in the site no significant accident that the arrow had achieved that site; and I continued to apply the ointment on it for many days and there happened no accident; and the wound healed meanwhile, and the piercing of him was closed over a period of several days until one day he felt the arrow within his nose and he recognized this to me.
E adonc yeu pausegui sobre la plagua medicina acuta corrosiva per motz dias entro que foc ubert, e am la tenta yeu assagegui aquel, e atrobegui la extremitat de la sageta subtil, la qual adhereys al fust.	And then I applied to the wound sharp corrosive medicine for several days until it opened up, and with a probe I probed that, and found the tip of the arrow subtly, which was adherent to the shaft.
E aprop yeu ajustegui en la apersio de la plagua per aquela medicina acuta entro que apparec a mi visiblament la extremitat de la sageta, e passec a mi temps am aquo per le spazi de temps entro quatre meses.	And then I continued to use the sharp medicine in the perception of the wound until the tip of the arrow appeared visibly to me, and it took me a while with that for the space of four months.
E aprop pus que la plagua foc amplificada, e foc a mi possible entrometre las forfexs en lu, e remaure aquela, e no obezic ad eyssiment, lahoras yeu no cessegui subtiliar e ingeniar sobre aquela am manieyras de engen, entro que comensegui un dia sobre aquela am manieyras de engens pendre lu am forceps descentment faytas, segon que vindra la forma de aquelas en la fi del capitol, entro que extraxi aquela; e aprop restauregui aquela plagua.	And then when the wound was enlarged and it was possible for me to insert forceps into it and pull on it without resistance, I did not cease to probe and operate on it with tools until one day I began to operate on it with forceps according to their shape, as will be described in the end of this chapter; and so I extracted that arrow, and then restored that wound.
E alcus metges jutgavan que la cartillage del nas no es restaurada, e yeu restauregui aquela e la plagua es consolidada, e sanat es le malaute per sanetat entiera, e no noguec en lu en deguna causa.	And some doctors judged that the cartilage of the nose was not restored, but I restored it and the wound healed, and the patient recovered entirely and there was nothing wrong with him.
E yeu recomti a tu la qualitat de extraccio de alcunas sagetas per que pauses aquo regla e significacio sobre aquo que no he dit, quar las partidas de aquesta art e las difinicios de aquela no so conprehendudas am narracio ni no comprehen aquelas le libre.	And I will tell you the quality of the extraction of some arrows so that you pause with this rule and meaning on it which I have not said, for the parts of this art and its definitions are not comprehended by narration or understanding of that book.
E le artifexs savi compara am pauc sobre mot; e am aquo que es present sobre aquo que es absent; e atroba operacio novela e instrument novel deves le descendement de las causas extranhas del art quan accideysso.	And the wise artisans compare a few things about motion and about what is present concerning what is absent, and find new operation and new instruments due to the descent of strange causes of the art when it happens.
E donc yeu dic que sagetas no son fora-gitadas dels membres en les quals son ficadas sino segon dos manieyras: o per atraccio del loc en le qual intrec; o per le contrari de la autra partida.	And so I say that arrows are not expelled from the members in which they are placed except according to two ways: either by attraction of the site into which they enter or by repulsion of the other side.
E aquela que es gitada per le loc don es intrada, o es sageta procedent en loc carnos, e es atirada e fora-gitada.	And that which is expelled through the site from which it is entered is an arrow proceeding in a fleshy site and is shot out and expelled.
E si no obezeys a eyssiment de la hora en la qual catz, lahoras cove que tu la laysses per alcus dias entro que poyresca la carn que es al enviro de lu, e sia alleujada l‘atraccio de lu e la sua egressio.	And if it does not yield to the exit of the hour in which it catches, then leave it for several days until the flesh around it becomes dry and be separated from its attraction and its exit.
E semblantment si es ficada en os e no obezeys a tu a eyssiment, lahoras layssa aquela per alcus dias e itera aquela am atraccio e mocio en quascun dia, e ja es fora-gitada.	And similarly if it is placed in bones and does not yield to you at exit, then leave that for several days and repeat that with attraction and motion every day, and it will be expelled.
E si no obezeys a tu eyssiment aprop alcus dias, lahoras cove que tu perforas en le circuit de la sageta en aquel os de tota partida am taravel subtil entro que·l loc sia amplificat de la sageta, e aprop extratz aquela.	And if it does not yield to you after several days, then pierce around the arrow in that bone throughout its whole length with a subtle probe until the site is enlarged and extract that.
E si la sageta es ficada en le os del cap e ja ha procezit en un dels ventres del cervel, e apparo en le malaute alcus de aquels accidentz les quals yeu e ditz, lahoras abste de la extraccio de la sageta e layssa aquela entro que·l sieu esser sia equat aprop alcus dias; quar si la sageta perve al ciphac, lahoras la mort no es a lu prolonguada.	And if the arrow is placed in the bone of the head and has already progressed into one of the brains, and appears in the patient some of those accidents which I have said, then abstain from extracting the arrow and leave it for several days until its being is equalized; for if the arrow pierces the brain, then death will not be prolonged.
E si la sageta no es ficada sino en le cors del os tant solament e no passa entro al ciphac, e roman le malaute per alcus dias, e no accideys a lu denguna causa de aquels accidentz, lahoras tu engenia en la atraccio de la sageta e en la atraccio de lu.	And if the arrow is not placed except in the core of the bone only and does not pass within the brain, and the patient remains for several days without any cause of those accidents happening to him, then you probe with the attraction of the arrow and his attraction.
Mays si es mot ficada e no obezeys a tu a extraccio, lahoras tu aministra taravels en le circuit de la sageta ayssi cum havem recomtat, e aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat.	But if it is deeply placed and does not yield to your extraction, then you minister probes around the arrow as we have recommended, and then cure the site until it is healed.
Mays si la sageta ja es amaguada en le loc del cors, e es amaguada del sentiment, lahoras tu inquireys aquela am tenta, e si tu sentas aquela, lahoras atira aquela am alcus sturmentz les quals so convenientz a la atraccio de lu.	But if the arrow is hidden in the site of the body and is hidden from sensation, then you probe that with a probe, and if you sense that, then shoot that with certain tools which are convenient to its attraction.
E si no podes sobre lu per la constriccio de la plagua e per la longitut del preon, e aqui no es os ni nervi ni vena, lahoras tu fen sobre la plagua entro que sia amplificada e que sia possible extrayre la sageta.	And if you cannot operate on him due to the constriction of the wound and due to the length of the bone, and here there is no bone or nerve or vein, then you work over the wound until it is enlarged and it is possible to extract the arrow.
E si so a lu aurelhas am las quals sia tenguda, lahoras tu deliura la carn en la qual es ficada de tota partida am tot le engen que poyras far; e ingenia sobre aquo, si no podes sobre la evasio de la carn en la fractura de las aurelhas e en torssio de aquelas entro que obezesca.	And if it is held in the ears with which it is held, then you loosen the flesh in which it is placed throughout its whole length with every operation that you can do; and operate on that, if you cannot operate over the exit of the flesh in the fracture of the ears and in the twisting of those until he yields.
E quan tu administras la extraccio de la sageta en quascun loc on sia, lahoras tu usa am torcio de la tua ma am forceps a totas partidas entro que fassa aquela obezir; e subtilia am deriera subtilitat que la sageta no sia trencada e que sia fayta a tu dificil atraccio de lu e de aquela extraccio.	And when you administer the extraction of the arrow in any site where it is, then use with twisting of your hand with forceps at all parts until he yields; and probe with very subtle probe so that the arrow is not broken and that it be made to you difficult attraction of it and of that extraction.
E si no podes sobre aquela de la tua hora, lahoras tu layssa per alcus dias entro que se poyrescan las partidas que so en le circuit de lu, e aprop itera aquela quar lahoras es alleujada.	And if you cannot operate on that from your hand, then leave it for several days until the parts that are in its circuit dry up, and then repeat that because by then it is separated.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat flux de sanc, lahoras tu administra aquo que havem dit de curacio en le sieu capitol.	But if you meet counteraction of bleeding, then you administer what we have said of cure in its chapter.
E guarda la tua vertut de inscizio de vena o de nervi, o de corda, e aministra engen en tota manieyra a tu possibla de la evasio de la sageta; e fay aquo am facilitat e tranquillitat e tarditat e fermetat ayssi cum yeu e a tu recomtat.	And guard your virtue of cutting vein or nerve, or tendon, and operate in every way possible for the exit of the arrow; and do that with facility and tranquility and slowness and firmness as we and you have recommended.
E donc que fassas contrayre la sageta per so que·l malaute sia segon la figura segon la qual foc deves le cazement de la sageta en lu, quar es mays juvatiu.	And therefore when you contract the arrow so that the patient is according to its figure according to which it has had the piercing of the arrow in him, for it is more advantageous.
Mays si aquo no es a tu possible, lahoras tu aministra aquo que es a tu possible per las figuras.	But if that is not possible for you, then you minister what is possible for you through the figures.
Mays las sagetas que son fora-gitadas per le contrari del autra partida, o que ja de lu procezeys alcuna partida a las partidas de fora, o fa gilbositat la extramitat de la sageta per sentiment de la partida pus desus de la codena propdana e vezes aquela eminent; adonc tu secsa sobre aquela; e sia la seccio segon la quantitat en la qual prenguan las forceps; e aprop atira aquela, quar ela es fayta leugiera a eyssiment.	But the arrows that are expelled by repulsion of the other side, or which have already proceeded into the parts outside, or make softness of the exit of the arrow due to sensation of the part above the tendon and move that prominent; then you cut over that; and let the incision be according to the quantity in which they hold the forceps; and then shoot that, for it is made looser to exit.
Mays si es retenguda en le os, lahoras tu tortz lama segon contrarietat entro que la sageta enprema en le os, e amplifique a si meteys, e aprop extratz aquela.	But if it is retained in the bone, then you twist the lance according to its contrary position within the bone, and enlarge it with the lance itself, and then extract it.
E sino, layssa aquela per alcus dias, e aprop itera aquela entro qu’en yesca.	And if not, leave it for several days, and then repeat the process where it is stuck.
E si le fust de la sageta es en aquela, lahoras tu impelleys aquela am lu.	And if the shaft of the lance is stuck in it, then you push it out with your hand.
Mays si le fust es cazut e voles aministrar inpulsio, lahoras tu intromet e aquela, si es sorda, sturment concau per so que intre la concavitat de lu en la coa de la sageta e aprop impelleys aquela am lu.	But if the shaft has fallen and you want to administer a blow, then you enter it into the hole so that it goes into the hollow of the lance, and then push it out with your hand.
Mays si la sageta es concava, lahoras tu impelleys aquela am sturment fort intrant en aquela, quar la sageta es alleujada per aquela.	But if the lance is hollow, then you push it out with a strong blow by entering it into the hole, for the lance is driven out by that.
E si la sageta es entoxiguada, lahoras cove que tu concaves tota la carn en la qual es le vere, si es a tu possible aquo, e aprop cura aquela am aquo que si conveneys.	And if the lance is poisoned, then you should hollow out all the flesh in which the poison is, if it is possible for you to do so, and then cure it with whatever is appropriate.
E si la sageta catz en le pietz, o en le ventre, o en la vesica, o en le costat, e es propinqua per so que tu tocas aquela am la tenta, e es a tu possible secsar sobre aquela, lahoras secsa sobre aquela e guarda te de inscizio de vena o de nervi, e extratz aquela, e aprop cos la plagua si indigeys, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	And if the lance pierces the foot, or belly, or bladder, or side, and is close enough that you can touch it with your finger, and it is possible for you to cut on it, then cut on it and be wary of cutting a vein or nerve, and extract it, and sew up the wound if necessary, and cure it until it is healed.
Forma de forceps am las quals so atiradas las sagetas:	Form of forceps by which the lances are pulled out::
Sian las extremitatz de lor cum a bec de ausel que son faytas cum serra quan prendon sobre la sageta per so que no la layssen.	Their ends are like a bird's beak, serrated so that they grip the lance and don't let go.
E de aquelas son faytas motas specias, grans, paucas e migieras, segon la quantitat de la grandeza de la sageta e de la sieua pauqueza, e de la amplitud de la plagua, e de la constriccio de lu.	And from these are made several species, large, small, medium, or mixed, according to the quantity of the size of the lance, and its painfulness, and the amplitude of the wound, and the constriction.
Forma de impellent concau de aquesta extremitat conquava ayssi cum pena de ausel per so que sia alleujat le intrament de la sageta en lu, e impulcio de aquela sorda:	Form of hollow impact from this hollow end like an owl's beak so that the implement of the lance within it is driven out, and impact of that hollow::
Forma de impellent de sorda extremitat:	Form of impact of hollow end::
ayssi cum ray per so que sia alleujat le intrament de lu en la sageta concava e es impellida am aquel.	so that the implement of it within the hollow lance is driven out and pushed with that.
De fleubotomia de las venas.	Of bleeding of the veins.
Las venas de fleubotomia de las quals corr costuma de fleubotomar so .xxx., de las quals so en le cap .xvi., so es doas venas pulsatils las quals so aprop las aurelhas, dic alhasisain; doas herbas que so en les dos templars apparentz; e doas venas que so en dos lacrimals de dos huels que son appeladas aspicientz; e la vena preparada en le mieg loc del front, e la vena que es en la extremitat del nas; e doas guidegi que so al col; e doas venas que so en la labia desus; e doas venas que so en la labia dejos; e — aquestas so las venas que so appeladas algelic —; e so doas venas que so dejos la lengua.	The veins from which bleeding usually flows are .xxx. of which are in the head, there are two pulsating veins which are close to the ears, called alhasisain; two herbs that are in the temples; and two veins that are in the eyelids of the eyes, called aspicientz; and the vein prepared in the middle of the forehead, and the vein that is at the end of the nose; and two blood vessels that are on the neck; and two veins that are on the upper lip; and two veins that are on the lower lip; and — these are called algelic —; and there are two veins that are below the tongue.
Mays las venas que so fleubotomadas en les brasses so .v.; quar de aquelas es una cephalica, e es deves le latz silvestre; e le poble appela “la vena del cap”, e sorda, e es vena migiera, e es composta de un ram de la basilica, e de autre ram de la cephalica; e nomna aquela le poble “vena de tot le cors”, e basilica es vena la qual es pausada en le latz domestic, e es nomnada “citillar”, e nompnan aquela les vulguars “vena del ventre”; e funis del bras, e es pausada sobre le focil, e es aquela en la qual es fleubotomat, e es aquela que appar sobre le poutz per apparicio manifesta; e salvatella, e es la vena que es entre lo dit auricular e·l pus petit dit, e so en lu dos ramps.	But the veins that are bled in the arms are .v.; because one of them is the cephalica, and it comes from the wild lime tree; and the people call it “the vein of the head”, and it is hollow, and it is a small vein, and it is composed of a branch of the basilica, and another branch of the cephalica; and the people call it “vein of all the body”, and basilica is the vein which rests on the domestic lime tree, and it is called “citillar”, and the vulgar people call it “vein of the belly”; and funis of the arm, and it rests on the wrist, and it is the one that is bled, and it appears obviously above the hand; and salvatella, and it is the vein between the small auricular vein and the little finger, and there are two ramps in it.
E en le pe e la camba so tres venas; la una de aquelas es que es dejos la curvatura del denolh del latz silvestre; e la segonda es sophena, e·l loc de lu es dejos la camba del latz domestic; e la vena sciatica, e·l loc de lu es dejos la camba del latz silvestre; e en la camba son autras venas semblantz ad aquelas.	And in the foot and leg there are three veins; one of these is below the curve of the tooth of the wild lime tree; and the second is sophena, and its location is below the leg of the domestic lime tree; and the sciatic vein, and its location is below the leg of the wild lime tree; and in the leg there are other veins similar to these.
Le juvament de las venas que so aprop las aurelhas es a cataris antics e emigranea e sahafati e ulceracios del cap malas antiquas.	The opening of the veins that are close to the ears is for ancient catarrh and emigration and bad old ulcers in the head.
E la qualitat de sagnar aquelas es segon que yeu recomti a tu: es que sia ras le cap del malaute, e sia freguat le cap del malaute en le occipiti en le loc de amdoas las venas am drap ample am bona fricacio; aprop strenha le malaute le sieu col am una benda entro que apparan las doas e les locs de lor so aprop las aurelhas en dos locs depremegutz del cap; e quereys aquela am le tieu dit, e si tu sentes le pols de aquelas am le dit tieu, aqui senha am tenta.	And the way to open those veins is according to what you see: it is that one should cut the head of the patient, and rub the head of the patient in the occiput at the location of both veins with a wide bandage with good friction; then tie the patient's neck with a bandage so that they appear the two and their locations at the sides of the ears, in two places depressed from the head; and feel those with your finger, and if you feel their pulse with your finger, here is a sign by touch.
Aprop tu pren la lancea cutellar, e es aquela que es inscident, e aprop tu intromet aquel dejos la vena en la codena entro que·l fleubotomi vengua al os.	Then you take the cutting lance, and it is that which is incident, and then you insert it below the vein in the codon so that the bleeding comes to the bone.
E aprop eleva la tua ma am la vena e la codena a las partidas desus e inscideys la vena am inscizio inscident.	And then elevate your hand with the vein and the codon to the sides above, and insert the vein with incident incision.
E sia la longitut de la inscizio la quantitat de dos ditz ajustatz o entorn de aquo; e fay yssir del sanc atant quant voles.	And let the length of the incision be the quantity of two fingers adjusted or around that; and make the blood flow as much as you want.
E aprop strenh am pulvils e layssa aquela entro que sia sanada.	And then tie it with a bandage and leave it until it is healed.
E ja e precedit en le comensament del libre la inscizio de aquelas e de lor la cauterizacio.	And now I have spoken in the beginning of this book about the incision of these and their cauterization.
Mays de las doas venas arterias que so als templars le juvament de la fleubotomia es a emigranea antiqua e sode malvada e obtalmia assidua e cors de superfluitatz acutas effusas als huels.	But of the two arterial veins that are in the temples, the opening of their bleeding is for ancient emigration and evil bad eye and constant body of pointed sharp things flowing out from the eyes.
E la qualitat de fleubotomar aquelas es segon que yeu recomti a tu: constrengua le malaute le sieu col mot entro que apparan las doas venas al sentiment per appericio manifesta e sia demonstrat le pols de lor dejos le tieu dit; e lahoras tu senha am tenta.	And the way to open them is according to what you see: compress the patient' neck a lot so that the two veins appear by obvious appearance, and let their pulse be felt below your finger; then you sign with touch.
E aprop tu eleva la codena desobre la vena a las partidas desus am le tieu dit indic, e intromet le fleubotomi inscident dejos, e eleva la vena en sus; e inscidey aquela ayssi cum has fayt en las doas venas autras; e fay correr del sanc segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	Then you elevate the codon above the vein to the sides with your finger, and insert the bleeding below, and elevate the vein above; and insert it as you have done in the other two veins; and let the blood flow according to the quantity of your need.
E aprop deslia la coartacio del malaute, e pausa le tieu dit sobre la vena per una hora, e aprop pausa sobre aquela coto e pulvils e strenh aquela desus am fort constriccio, e layssa aquela entro que sia sanada.	Then loosen the compression of the patient, and place your finger on the vein for an hour, and then place a cut and bandage over it with strong compression, and leave it until it is healed.
E ja es precedida la rememoracio de lor, e de aquelas la inscizio, e la atraccio en le comensament del libre.	And now the memory of them is preceded, and of their incision and attraction in the beginning of this book.
E donc le juvament de fleubotomia de la vena del front es aprop la fleubotomia de la cephalica a las malautias antiquas de la cara e a emigranea e rogor e ulceracios fetidas.	And so the opening of bleeding from the vein in the forehead is for ancient illnesses of the face and emigration and heat and rotten, fetid ulcers.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es segon que yeu recomti a tu; so es que·l malaute strenha le sieu col am una benda entro que apparesca la vena; e aprop pren le insturment le qual es nompnat fossori del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And the way to open it is according to what you see; it is that the patient compresses his neck with a bandage so that the vein appears, and then take the instrument which is called fossor, of which this is the form::
Pausa la puncta eminent la qual es al cap del fossori sobre aquela vena e percuteys sobre lu am penche o am autre causa en la manieyra de lu, e layssa lo sanc correr segon la quantitat la qual voles; e aprop deslia la perforacio del malaute e strenh aquela entro que sia sanada.	Place the point of the fossor which is at the end of the instrument on the vein, and pierce it with a needle or with another cause in the manner of it, and let the blood flow according to the quantity that you want; then loosen the piercing of the patient and tie that up until it is healed.
E alcunas veguadas es uberta am fleubotomi lat, empero no cove que·l fleubotomi sia de acuta extremitat ayssi cum les autres fleubotomis, abantz sia de lada extremitat, e fleubotoma aquela segon le tranvers, quar le os es propda e fort leu trencaria en lu le fleubotomi quan es subtil.	And sometimes it is opened with bleeding lat, however, it does not appear that the bleeding is of acute extremity like the other bleeding, but it is of flat extremity, and that vein is opened according to the transverse, because the bone is close and strong and would break it in it when it is subtle.
Mays le juvament de las duas venas que so als lacrimals de dos huels per scabia del huels per rogor e sebol en les huels, e a las malautias de la cara.	But the opening of the two veins that are in the eyelids of the eyes for heat of the eye and heat in the eyes, and for illnesses of the face.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia es que·l malaute strenha le col sieu am una benda, e aprop fleubotoma aquelas, e tu sias stant sobre le cap de lu.	The quality of phlebotomy is that the patient tightens his neck with a bandage, then you phlebotomize them, and you stand over him.
E sia fayta la fleubotomia segon le transvers a longitut un pauc am fleubotomi pauc, quar en le loc no es carn; e si le fleubotomi es subtil, fort leu la extremitat de lu es trencada.	And phlebotomy is done according to the transverse vein, and a little along the length of it, because there is no flesh in that place; and if the phlebotomy is subtle, soon its end is broken.
E aprop fay correr del sanc atant quant es a tu necessari, e pausa sobre aquelas coto, e strenh aquelas per una nueyt, e aprop deslia aquelas.	Then cause the blood to flow as much as it is necessary for you; and stop the bleeding on those, and tighten them with a new ligature; and then loosen the ligature.
Mays le fleubotomi de la vena del nas es conferent a febre acuta e a soda vehement, e a las malautias de la cara e emigranea e rogor que accideys en la cara, e majorment quan es antiqua.	But phlebotomy of the nose vein is relevant to acute fever and violent vomiting and diseases of the face and hemorrhoids and redness that occurs in the face, and especially when it's old.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute strenha le sieu col e aprop te le sieu nas am la tua ma sinistra, e pren le fleubotomi subtil lonc e fica aquela en le mieg loc del cap del nas segon rectitut, quar la vena no appar al sentiment aqui, e quar le sanc comensa a fluir tantost.	And the quality of phlebotomy for him is that the patient tightens his neck and you hold his nose with your left hand; and take the phlebotomy subtley long, and place it in the middle part of the nose's head according to its rectitude, because the vein does not appear to feeling here, and because the blood begins to flow immediately.
Cove que tu ultimes la tua ma am le fleubotomi petit a petit e fassas correr del sanc segon la tua necessitat; e aprop lia aquela per una nuoyt, quar aquela es restaurada leugierament.	And you finish with your hand with the phlebotomy little by little and make the blood flow according to your need; and then tie it with a ligature, because it is restored quickly.
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de las doas guidegui a constriccio de ale e a comensament de lepra e a motas malautias e inpetige e malas ulceracios corrosivas ayssi cum herpotromeno.	But phlebotomy of the two small veins leads to constriction of the throat and to the onset of leprosy and many diseases, and also to bad corrosive ulcers like scrofula.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquelas es que el malaute strenha dejos quascuna en le sieu col am liament; e estia le artifexs sobre le cap del malaute, e le malaute sia sezent sobre una sezela.	And the quality of phlebotomy for those is that the patient tightens each one under his neck with a bandage, and the operator stands over the patient's head while the patient sits on a stool.
E aprop fleubotoma la vena al lonc am fleubotomi ample petit a petit; e aprop extratz de sanc segon temprada quantitat o segon aquo que vezes de necessitat que es ad aquo; e aprop fay semblant del autra vena.	And then phlebotomize the vein along its length with small, ample phlebotomies little by little; and draw blood according to a moderate quantity or according to what you see is necessary for that; and then do likewise on the other vein.
E aprop deslia le liament e strenh las doas venas am strictura migiera per so que·l malaute no sia prefocat, e laysa entro al mati quar la plagua es sanada.	And then loosen the bandage and tighten the two veins with a slight ligature so that the patient is not suffocated, and lay down the patient because the plague is healed.
E le juvament de la fleubotomia de las venas algerich, comfereys a petitas apostemas e pustulas de la boca e corrupcio de las gengivas e malas ulceracios e fissuras, e a malas ulceracios que so en le nas e en le circuit de lu.	And phlebotomy of the algerich veins brings about small abscesses and pustules in the mouth and corruption of the gums and bad ulcers and fissures, and bad ulcers that are in the nose and its circuit.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquelas es que fases cezer le malaute denant tu, e strenh le col de lu am una benda, e aprop revolveys las labias de lu e reguarda a doas venas de las quals la una es de la dextra de la labia e la segonda de la senestra; e la demonstracio de quascuna es per la negror de quascuna de amdos, e aquo mays es quar en le circuit de aquelas so venas menudas negras; e adonc inscideys cascuna per inscizio inscident.	And the quality of phlebotomy for those is that you cause the patient to open his mouth before you, and tighten his neck with a bandage, and then turn back his lips and look at two veins, of which one is on the right side of the lip and the second on the left; and the demonstration of each is by their blackness, and that is because in the circuit of those there are small black veins; and so cut into each with an incision cutting.
Mays si dubitacio es dejos tu, e no sabes qual es de aquelas, lahoras tu enten a inscisio de la major de aquelas, e de la pus manifesta de aquelas.	But if doubt is under you, and you don't know which is that one, then you go to an incision of the largest of those, and of the most pus evident of those.
E fay le semblant de las doas venas que so en las labias desus.	And do likewise on the two veins that are above the lips.
Mays costuma corr mays a inscidir las doas venas que so en la labia dejos.	But custom is to rather cut into the two veins that are below.
Mays de doas venas que so dejos la lengua le juvament es aprop la fleubotomia de la cephalica a prefocacios que so en le guolayro, a la malautia de la uvula, e a malautias de la boca.	But of the two veins that are below the tongue, phlebotomy brings about the headache to suffocations that are in the gullet, and diseases of the uvula, and diseases of the mouth.
E la qualitat de fleubotomar aquelas es que segue le malaute entre las tuas mas denant le solel, e eleva la lengua de lu, e reguarda dejos la lengua, de la un latz de lu vena e del autre latz vena, e la color de quascuna es declinant a negror.	And the quality of phlebotomizing those is that you follow the patient's head before the sun, and lift up his tongue, and look under his tongue, of one side of it veins and of the other side of it veins; and the color of each is declining to blackness.
E adonc fleubotoma quascuna; e guarda te que no ultimes la tua ma en fleubotoman aquelas, quar dejos aquelas so arterias.	And then phlebotomize each one; and beware that you do not finish with your hand in phlebotomizing those, because below those are arteries.
E las tuas venas que so fleubotomadas en le coyde so en las quals corr costuma en totz les homes, e la fleubotomia de lor es fayta segon dos manieyras, o pongen am le fleubotomi mirtilat o olivar a subtilitat declinant; o secsar am fleubotomi cutellar, e apelha si alnessil, e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And the veins that are phlebotomized in the head are those through which blood usually flows in all men, and phlebotomy of them is done according to two ways, either with mirtilat or olive-wood at declining subtlety; or cutting with a knife, and it is called if without smell, and this is its form:
E aquest alnessil es que conveneys a seccio e de aquels so specias latz e subtils segon la amplitut de las venas e segon la strictura de aquelas.	And that without-smell is that it convokes to a section and of those are specific sides and thin according to the amplitude of the veins and according to the tightness of them.
Forma de fleubotomi mirti:	Form of mirtilat phlebotomy:
sia le latz de lu ayssi cum vezes, e conveneys a obrir las venas concavas plenas procedentz apparentz grossas, e ad aquelas que conteno sanc gros torbat.	It is the side of it thus with times, and it convokes to open the full concaved veins apparent thick gross; and at those that contain gross turbid blood.
E aquesta es la forma de fleubotomi olivar:	And this is the form of olive-wood phlebotomy:
E aquest fleubotomi es de menor latitut e de pus subtil extremitat, e conveneys a fleubotomia de venas subtils que conteno sanc subtil citri.	And that phlebotomy is of lesser width and of more subtle extremity, and it convokes to phlebotomy of subtle veins that contain citric subtle blood.
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de la vena basilica la qual es una de tres venas: quar extratz le sanc de las malautias que so dejos le guolayro e·l col, e de aquo que siec le pietz e·l ventre.	But phlebotomy of the basilic vein, which is one of three veins; for drawing blood from diseases that are below the gullet and neck, and that affect the feet and belly.
E conveneys al fleubotomador, quan fleubotomia aquela, que guarde be aquela e sia sobre-temor en aquela, quar dejos lu ha arteria, e si erra e ajusta en la punctura del fleubotomi, inscidira aquela arteria e accidira fluxs de sanc, per so que cove que no fleubotomes aquela am fleubotomi pungent, abantz sia sectant cum alnessil.	And it convokes the phlebotomist, when phlebotomizing that one, to guard and be over-careful at it, because below it there is an artery; and if he err and hit in the puncture of the phlebotomy, cut into that artery and occur blood-flow, so that he must not phlebotomize it with pointed phlebotomies, rather cut with a knife as above with without-smell.
E si no appar la basilica per apparicio manifesta, lahoras cove que tu laysses aquela e que tu mudes a la autre, o que cerques alcun ram sieu; o que fleubotomes en loc de lu finis del bras, quar aquela es manifesta; e secsa aquela am fleubotomi alnessil ayssi cum havem dit.	And if the basilic does not appear by evident appearance, then you leave it and move to the other one, or seek some branch of it; or phlebotomize at the end of the arm, because that one is evident; and cut into it with a knife as above with without-smell.
Mays si tu voles la fleubotomia de lu meteyssa, lahoras cove denant la strictura del bras que toques le loc entro que conogues le loc dels pols, e aprop senha sobre lu am tencha; e aprop lia le bras e secsa la vena am seccio concava am fleubotomi alnessil ayssi cum havem dit; e guarda te que caja la percussio per alcu spazi del loc de la arteria.	But if you want the phlebotomy of it meteyssa, then before the tightness of the arm touch the place between which you know the pulse's location, and then sign on it with your hand; and then tie the arm and cut into the vein with a concaved section with a knife as above with without-smell; and beware that the concussion occur at some space of the artery' location.
E quan tu vezes, cum strenhes le liament, imflacio en le loc que has senhat am tencha, lahoras aquela inflacio es inflacio de la arteria, e donc squiva aquela.	And when you see, as you tighten the ligature, swelling at the location that you have signed with your hand, then that swelling is an artery's swelling; and so loosen it.
E si vezes le sanc fluir en la fleubotomia ayssi cum aurina de enfant, e·l sanc es subtil rog, lahoras sapias que es del sanc de la arteria; e lahoras tu coyta e pausa le tieu dit sobre aquel per lonc spazi; e aprop osta le tieu dit, e si lo sanc es abscindit, quar motas veguadas es abscindit, lahoras tu strenh le bras e layssa aquel.	And if you see the blood flow in the phlebotomy as an infant's, and the blood is thin red, then know that it is of the artery; and then you close and place your finger over it for long space; and then stop your finger, and if the blood is abscinded, because many veins are abscinded, then you tighten the arm and leave that one.
E guardes le malaute de la moccio de lu, e sia sobre-temor de lu e no maugua aquel per alcus dias entro que sia sanat.	And keep the patient of the youth of it, and be over-careful at it and do not maltreat him for some days until he is healed.
Mays si le sanc no es abscindit, e vezes que deves tu no es present medicina ad aquo, lahoras tu inscideys la arteria, si appar a tu; quar la extremitat de lu es contrayta, e es abscindit le sanc; o que prenguas scorsa de fistic, e fen aquela, e pren la una maytat e strenh aquela sobre le loc de la vena am strictura descent am liament e am pulvils entro al autra dia.	But if the blood is not abscinded, and you see that there is no medicine present at it; then you cut into the artery, if it appears to you; because its extremity is contracted, and the blood is abscinded; or take a splinter of fistic, and open it, and take one mat and tighten it over the vein' location with a ligature, and on the next day.
E lahoras si le sanc es abscindit, bo es; e sino, lahoras cura aquel am aquo del qual es precedit a la rememoracio del loc de las polveras abscindentz flux de sanc.	And then if the blood is abscinded, good; and if not, then heal that one with what it is preceded by the reminder of the location of the abscinded veins flow of blood.
E la abscizio del sanc de lu es dificil en motas disposicios per le loc petit de la plagua e la possibilitat del liament del bras.	And the abscission of the blood from it is difficult in many dispositions because of the small location of the plague and the possibility of the arm' ligature.
Mays de la vena fusca la fleubotomia es juvament que extratz lo sanc de la partida subirana del cap e a la partida dejos del cors; per aquo quar es composta de ram de la basilica e de ram de cephalica, ayssi cum havem dit.	From the dark vein, phlebotomy is beneficial when one draws blood from the upper part of the head and from the lower part of the body; because of this, it is composed of a branch of the basilic vein and of a branch of the cephalic vein, as we have said.
E cove al fleubotomant aquela que sia sobre-temor en la fleubotomia de lu, quar dejos aquela es un nervi; e adonc si ajusta en la punctura del fleubotomi e atroba le nervi, accidira a lu stupor, e es difficil la sanacio de lu, e fort leu no es sanat de tot, E aquest nervi motas veguadas apar al sentiment; e si es ocultat ad alcus homes e es subtil e no es monstrat, lahoras cove que tu pauses le fleubotomi am le qual tu fleubotomas am seccio de alnessil, e evita le nervi am la tua fortalesa.	And beware of the phlebotomist when he is above fear in the phlebotomy of the patient, because below that there is a nerve; and then if he pierces the phlebotomy and hits the nerve, stupor will occur to him, and it is difficult for him to be healed, and often he is not healed at all. And this nerve moves many times, visible to the senses; and if it is hidden from some men and is subtle and not shown, then you should place the phlebotomy with which you phlebotomize with section of alnessil, and avoid the nerve with your strength.
E si la vena es entre dos nervis, lahoras tu fen la vena en la longitut.	And if the vein is between two nerves, then you split the vein in length.
Le juvament de la fleubotomia de la vena cephalica es que atratz le sanc del cap e comfereys a las malautias dels huels.	The benefit of phlebotomy from the cephalic vein is that it draws blood from the head and alleviates illnesses of the joints.
E cove en aquest propriament, si vols que la fleubotomes pungen am fleubotomi olivar o am fleubotomi mirti; quar es la pus salva de totas las venas, quar no es dejos lu arteria ni nervi.	And beware of this in particular: if you want the phlebotomist to pierce with olive-wood phlebotomy or with myrtle-wood phlebotomy; because it is the safest of all veins, for it does not pierce an artery or nerve.
Mays empero conveneys a tu deves la fleubotomia que guardes que am le fleubotomi no punguas le cap del lacert tant solament, e cerques le loc pus leugier, e no notz a lu, si no es atrobat am la percussio primieyra que sia sobre aquela am fleubotomia alcunas veguadas.	However, you should always take care that with the phlebotomy, you do not pierce only the head of the lymph node, but seek the location further away, and do not hit it, unless it is hit by the first percussion that is made over it several times.
Mays empero fort leu es apostemat en alcus homes, quan no es fleubotomat en la primieyra percussio, mays no notz en re aquel apostema.	However, very rarely is an abscess found in some people when they are not phlebotomized on the first percussion, but do not notice that abscess.
Mays la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquela e les accidentz de lu so motz, en les quals te cove cogitar en lor rectificacio.	However, the quality of that phlebotomy and its accidents are many, in which you should consider their correction.
Le primier de lu es del qual cove que sapias que fleubotomia no es aministrada sino en conservacio de sanetat e per speransa de lu e cautela de aveniment de malautias, e que sia fayta fleubotomia en la una de las venas que so en le coyde, so es: cephalica, fusca e basilica; e que sia fayta fleubotomia al comensament de primaveyra, sobre dejun en primaviera e autunppne, e en invern aprop la comestio, quan apparo significacios de replecio.	The first of these is that you know that phlebotomy is not administered except for the preservation of health and for hope in it and precaution against onset of illnesses, and that phlebotomy be done at the beginning of spring, after breakfast in spring and autumn, and in winter after eating, when appearances of fullness appear.
E sia fayta fleubotomia e le tertz dia o al primier pus que del jorn siran passadas tres horas.	And phlebotomy be done on the third day or the first after three hours of the day have passed.
Mays fleubotomia que es aministrada, mays quan provoca convenencia e necessitat ad aquo, o de nuoyt o de dia, en tota hora e en tot temps.	But phlebotomy that is administered, but when it produces convenience and necessity, or at night or during the day, at any time and at all times.
E cove que efant no sia fleubotomat entro que aja xiiii ans, e femna que sia prenhs no sia fleubotomada sino del quart mes entro al sete, e les viels no sian fleubotomatz les quals ja han passatz lx ans.	And beware of an infant not being phlebotomized until he is 14 years old, and a pregnant woman should not be phlebotomized except in the fourth month between the seventh month, and the elderly should not be phlebotomized if they have passed 60 years.
E cum alcu vol esser fleubotomat per qualque manieyra sia, cove que mondifique les sieus budels denant la fleubotomia am clisteri leon, si en aquels ha mota fenda retenguda, per so que las venas no atiro las superfluitatz en la fleubotomia dels budels, que son puridas, e que no noguan als membres principals.	And when someone wants to be phlebotomized for any reason, beware that the bowels are cleansed before phlebotomy with lion's milk clyster, if in them there is a retained split, so that the veins do not throw out the superfluities in the phlebotomy of the bowels, which are purified, and that they do not harm the main members.
E no sian fleubotomatz les pascientz naucea sacertiva e crapula, ni evasent de malautia ni de ebretat entro que aquo sia remaugut aquo de lor, ni malaute de ydropici, e mays que fleubotomia sia temuda aprop colica passio e aprop vomit, e aprop cos de ventre, e aprop multiplicacio de coyt e de trebal e de exercici de dejunis o de vigilias e de tota causa que dissolveys la vertut, o sia corpore28 o animal.	And those who are phlebotomized should not be nauseous or sick from any illness, nor from drunkenness, nor from malady or from fainting until they have been restored to their senses, nor from dropsy, but phlebotomy should be feared especially when there is colic pain and especially vomiting, and especially pain of the belly, and especially multiplication of cough and of fever, and especially from cause that dissolves strength, or is corporeal or animal.
E aprop considera en subtiliacio de humos denant aquo si le sanc es gros, am viandas e beures, e am medicinas si aquo es a lu possible ad aquo.	And especially consider in the subsiding of humors before that if the blood is thick, by means of foods and drinks, and by means of medicines if that is possible for him.
E aprop intre en banh si alcuna causa no prohibeys, o sia excersitat per alcun exercici per so que·l sanc sia subtiliat.	And especially enter into a bath if any cause does not prohibit it, or be exercised by some exercise so that the blood is subsided.
E pausa la fleubotomia de lu en le pietz del dia, so es enviro la hora de tercia, ayssi cum havem dit.	And pause the phlebotomy of him in the afternoon of the day, so it is around the hour of terce, as we have said.
E perforsa te que·l pietz de aquel sia guardat en aquel dia de totz mals accidentz animals, ayssi cum es angustia, ira, temor, e de totz accidentz corporals, ayssi cum es trebal e pena superflua e coyt e semblantz a lor.	And you should ensure that the foot of that one is guarded in that day from all animal accidents, so it is anxiety, anger, fear, and from all corporal accidents, so it is labor and excess pain and cough and their likenesses to them.
E a la sua sezelha fassa esser presentz las causas en le us de la qual corr costuma dels homes am aromaticitat e odorament e am bals e semblantz ad aquels segon la cantitat de possibilitat.	And at his bath make the causes be present in the use of which the humors usually leave men by aromatization and odorant and by balms and their likenesses according to the quantity of possibility.
E segua le fleubotomador sobre un coyssi que sia pus aut que·l coyssi de aquel que deu esser fleubotomat.	And the phlebotomist should follow on a cushion that is more high than the cushion of him who should be phlebotomized.
E aprop extragua le sieu bras, e fregue aquel am la sua ma le fleubotomador doas o tres veguadas; e aprop strenha le liament am correia e involva aquel doas veguadas.	And especially extend his arm, and rub that by the phlebotomist's hand two or three times; and especially tighten the ligament with a belt and wrap that twice.
E sia la strictura temprada, quar la strictura quant no es engual, o la strictura es am superfluitat, lahoras prohibeys de fluxs del sanc; o es am mollificacio, e lahoras prohibeys le cors del sanc eyssament.	And the tightness should be moderate, because tight tightness or looseness is a prohibition of blood flows; or it is for softening, and then the blood of the body goes out.
E aprop la strictura, cove que aquel que deu esser fleubotomat fregue las suas mas ensemps entre lor entro que las venas sian imfladas, e sian declaradas al sentiment.	And especially the tightness, beware that him who should be phlebotomized rubs his hands together in between them so that the veins are inflated and are declared to the senses.
E aprop le fleubotomador unte le sieu fleubotomi am un pauc de oli antic propriament; e aprop pausa le sieu di indic de la ma senestra sobre aquela vena, dejos le loc del qual vol la fleubotomia, per que la vena fuja un pauc, e la percussio sia sessada quar de las venas es la qual atrobas ayssi cum corda fugent deves la fleubotomia, e de aquelas es que es plena de ventositat e quan pauses le fleubotomi sobre aquela es contrayta deves le fleubotomi, e es desceubut le fleubotomador; e le fleubotomi no uobre la vena, e si uobre, aquela es streyta.	And especially the phlebotomist anoints his phlebotomy with a little of the old oil properly; and especially pause your right hand's index finger over that vein, below the location from which you want the phlebotomy, so that the vein goes out a little, and the percussion is struck because from which veins it is that is drawn, as well as a string, and from those is that is full of windiness, and when you pause the phlebotomy over that, it is constricted for him; and the phlebotomy does not open the vein, and if it opens, that one is constricted.
E donc, per aquo cove que·l fleubotomador sia fermat e sia sollicit en totas aquestas causas.	And so, for this beware that the phlebotomist be quiet and be solicited in all these causes.
E aprop depause le fleubotomi, mays si la vena es huberta en una veguada, lahoras bo es; e sino, tu itera aquo autra vaguada dejos aquel loc un pauc, o sobre lu am festinacio, si le loc no es apostemat.	And especially pause the phlebotomy, but if the vein is opened in one turn, then it is; and if not, you iterate that again another time below that location a little, or over it with pressure, if the location is not abscessed.
Et si le loc es apostemat, o le malaute se spauresca, lahoras tu le layssa per un dia o per dos, e no strenha le liament, quar fort leu atirara apostema caut, ni no intre en banh.	And if the location is abscessed or the illness is scared, then you will leave it for one or two days and do not tighten the ligament, because very likely it will hit an abscess cauterization, nor enter into a bath.
E aprop itera la fleubotomia si la ama.	And especially iterate the phlebotomy if the mother.
E si la apercio es petita e corr sanc subtilment, e temes que non yesca sanc la cantitat que voles, lahoras tu itera le fleubotomi en aquel trauc segon rectitut e ajusta en la appercio un pauc, e fay aquo am festinacio denant que·l loc sia apostemat, quar le loc es apostemat en motz homes deves pauca apercio.	And if the wound is small and the blood flows subtly, and you fear that it does not draw blood in the quantity that you want, then iterate the phlebotomy in that stab according to rectitude and adjust in the wound a little, and do that with pressure before the location is abscessed, because the location is abscessed in many men requires little wounds.
Mays si vezes aquel ja apostemat, lahoras no iteres sobre lu, quar no escusa a tu alcuna causa; e pausa sobre aquel alcuna partida de la fenda de oli, quar alleuja le cors del sanc.	But if he is already abscessed, then do not iterate over him because it does not excuse you any cause; and pause over that any part of the wound with oil, because it stimulates the blood of the body.
E es milhor en aquest loc que oli e que les autres olis.	And it is better in this location that olive oil and than other oils.
E semblantment aministra fenda de oli en tota fleubotomia am la qual fleubotomes las venas deves la prohibicio de cors de sanc, e fan aquo tyriaca alfadoc e sagzenea quan es pausat de la una de aquelas sobre le loc, quar le sanc es subtiliat e es revolvut quan es gros.	And similarly administer olive oil in every phlebotomy when the phlebotomist draws blood of the prohibition of the body's blood, and do that with theriaca and aloes when it is paused one of those over the location, because the blood is subsided and is rolled when it is thick.
E si en le loc de la fleubotomia es engendrat gran apostema, quar motas veguadas accideys, e majorment ad aquel que no es stat sangnat sino aquela veguada, o en la apercio de la vena pauca, e lahoras tu coyta, e pausa sobre le loc sponja infuza en aygua e sal, un pauc scalfada, e strenh aquela per una hora, quar es dissolvut.	And if in the location of the phlebotomy a large abscess is engendered, because many times it happens, and mainly to him who has not been bled except that turn, or in the wound little, and then you should put together, and pause over the location sponge soaked in water and salt, a little warmed, and tighten that for one hour, because it is dissolved.
E cove que fassa aquo aprop le yssiment del sanc de aquela vena am compliment de lu o de autra vena.	And whoever does this should make a tourniquet of that vein by tying it or another vein.
E si roman en le loc per alcus dias alcuna negror o viriditat, no notz aquo; e si voles, pausa sobre aquel alcuna causa de aloen e de mirra dissolvut, o alcuna causa de suc de mentastre o de calament o semblant de lu.	If something black or green remains in the wound for several days, do not worry about it. And if you want to, apply some aloe vera gel mixed with myrrh, or some marjoram juice, or a similar remedy.
E motas veguadas accideysso apostemas e eminencias deves fleubotomia de la basilica.	And often after such operations, abscesses and bumps occur due to phlegmon of the basilic vein.
E donc pausa la tua ma sobre aquela, e si lahoras tu atrobas mollicia deves la tua compressio sobre aquela, lahoras aquela eminencia es malvada e mala; e adonc guarda te que pauses sobre aquela alcuna causa de aquo que havem dit, quar fort leu fluira de la arteria sanc.	And then put your hand over it, and if you suddenly feel softness under your compression on it, then that lump is harmful and bad. So be careful not to apply anything we have mentioned on it, for the arterial blood will flow out profusely.
E fay emplaustre am aquo en que es stipticitat, per que le loc sia endurat, e aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	And make a poultice with something astringent so that the wound is hardened, and then treat it with another treatment until it heals.
E cove que extraguas del sanc a tot hom segon la quantitat de la sua vertut e segon la color vencent sobrc le sanc segon que appar.	And whoever draws blood from a person according to the amount of its virtue and according to the color prevailing over the blood, according to how it appears.
Quar si le sanc es negre, lahoras tu le layssa yssir entro que sia rog; e semblantment si tu le vezes gros, lahoras tu le layssa yssir entro que sia subtiliat; e semblantment si es agut, entro que sia ostada la acuitat de lu.	For if the blood is black, then let it flow out until it turns red; and likewise, if you see it is thick, then let it flow out until it becomes thin; and likewise, if it is sharp, let its acuteness be abated.
E cove ad aquel que es ple e fort e ha necessitat de extraccio de sanc en una veguada, que sia amplificada la fleubotomia de la vena e le fleubotomi sia lat.	And whoever is full and strong and needs bloodletting in one go, let the tourniquet of the vein be loosened and the phlebotomy be wide.
E en aquel que es freul, sia fayt le contrari de aquel, e cove que extragua aquel en tropas veguadas, e que le trauc sia streyt.	And for someone who is frail, let the opposite be done to him; and whoever draws his blood in several go, let the incision be narrow.
E le milhor que es administrat en fleubotomia de vena es que sia la seccio transversa, no punctura.	And the best method for phlebotomy of a vein is that it is a transversal section, not a puncture.
E aquesta manieyra de fleubotomia es salva de flux de sanc e de inscizio de nervi, e es pus lausabla e pus salva que fleubotomia segon latitut e longitut.	And this method of phlebotomy is safe from blood flow and nerve injury, and it is more agreeable and safer than phlebotomy according to width and length.
E a la qual es acostumat sobrevenir sincopi deves la fleubotomia, e cove que tu cures aquel denant la fleubotomia am un petit de pa infus en vi de milgranas o de oximel simple scalfat; e extratz a l u del sanc en tres veguadas o quatre.	And whoever is accustomed to fainting due to phlebotomy, and whoever you treat before the phlebotomy with a little bread soaked in wine of pomegranates or simple oxymel heated; and draw out his blood in three or four go.
E si es enfregiditat de compleccio, lahoras prengua denant la fleubotomia pa infus en eyssarop de mirra o en eyssarop de mel aromatizat am specias ayssi cum am pebre, canela, gingiebre e semblantz, o en eyssarop aromatizat e mot odorant.	And if it is a fainting of a complexional nature, then take before the phlebotomy bread soaked in myrrh-syrup or syrup of honey aromatized with spices such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger and the like, or aromatized syrup and many other aromatic things.
E si accideys sincopi deves la fleubotomia, e es causa de lu issiment de mot sanc, lahoras cove que prengua en beure aygua de carn e eyssarop mot odorant subtil; e use de aromaticitat am algualea, e sia linit le sieu pietz am aquela.	And if fainting occurs due to phlebotomy and it is caused by the flow of much blood, then whoever takes bread soaked in wine and aromatized with aloes wood, let him wrap his feet with it.
E usa de las autras causas que havem ditas en la divisio en le capitol de sincopi per evacuacio.	And use the other causes that we mentioned in the division in the chapter on fainting due to evacuation.
E qui vol eventar le sieu bras e dissolver le sieu sanc segonda veguada, cove a lu del qual la fleubotomia es per mota evacuacio, e la vertut de lu es freol, que evacue le sanc petit a petit, so es segon la quantitat de la vertut en les dias continuables.	And whoever wants to open his arm and dissolve his blood the second time, whoever it is from whom the phlebotomy is for great evacuation, and whose nature is cold, let him evacuate the blood little by little according to the amount of its virtue in continuous days.
Mays qui vol eventar le sieu bras, e gitar lo sieu sanc segonda vetz, e le sieu cors es fort, lahoras fassa aquo aprop vii horas o ix de la primieyra fleubotomia.	But whoever wants to open his arm and withdraw his blood the second time, and whose body is strong, then let him do it about seven or nine hours from the first phlebotomy.
Mays qui vol atirar le sanc del cors sieu al contrari de la partida a la qual declina, cove que sia eventat en le segon dia o le tertz.	But whoever wants to withdraw the blood of his body in the contrary direction of the part to which he inclines, let him be bled on the second or third day.
Mays aquel cors en le qual es mot sanc ja scalfat e es acuit e fa accidir febre, cove que sia gitat de lu sanc en una veguada e sia de lu gitada gran cantitat e sia amplificada la apercio entro que accidesca sincopi, pus que tu auras conservadas totas las condicios de fleubotomia; e que pauses la tua ma sobre le pols de lu deves le cors del sanc, per que no endevengua mort en loc de sincopi, quar motas veguadas endeve aquo quan le fleubotomador es ignorant e negligent.	But whoever has much blood already drawn and is acutely hot and experiences fever, let him have his blood drawn in one go, and let a great quantity be drawn from him, and let the tourniquet be loosened so that fainting does not occur due to the phlebotomist's ignorance and negligence.
E no cove quan tu voles desliar le bras e evacua le sanc segonda veguada, cum ja sia claus le orrifici de la vena e sia fayt difficil issiment del sanc, que tu premas subre aquel am vehemencia e encurvat sia extendut leugierament, quar aquo es trop mal.	And do not let anyone, when you want to open the arm and withdraw blood the second time, when the orifice of the vein is already closed and it is difficult for the blood to flow out, press that with force and bend it slightly, for that is very bad.
Habantz le layssa entro que sia fleubotomat segondament; o remau aquo am la acuitat del fleubotomi que es coagulat del sanc en le orrifici de la vena; o pausa sobre aquel de tyriaca alfarach, o de sagzenea, e comprem aquel am compressio leugiera entro que·l sanc sia fora yssit.	Let it flow until it is out; or wipe it with Tyrian purple, or with saw-wort, and apply a light compression on it while the blood is coming out.
E si la vena es apostemada, lahoras layssa aquela e no la toques entro que·l apostema sia sedat.	And if the vein is inflamed, then let it be; do not touch it until the inflammation subsides.
E si necessitat te provoca a evacuar le sanc segondament, e no es excusacio, lahoras tu sagna aquel sobre aquel loc o en l’autre bras en autra vena.	And if you are compelled to evacuate the blood again, and there is no excuse, then let him be bled on that spot or in his other arm in another vein.
E la vena apelada “funis del bras” es fleubotomada en loc de la fusca o de la basilica, quan no so atrobadas o so amaguadas, quar es composta de aquelas.	And the vein called "the cords of the arm" is bled in the place of the basilic or of the basilic, when they are not found or are hidden, for it is composed of them.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute intrometa la sua ma en aygua cauda entro que·l focil se enrogezesca e que la vena apparia manifestament.	And the quality of his phlebotomy is that the patient puts his hand in warm water so that the vein swells and appears visibly.
E aprop sia strengut sobre aquel am liament am strictura migana; e aprop fleubotoma segon le tranvers petit, no latitudinalment ni segon la longitut.	And then let it be bound with a bandage with a slight tightness; and phlebotomize according to the small transversal section, not longitudinally or according to length.
E sia la apercio ampla e sia la tua fleubotomia am la qual tu fleubotomas aquela sobre la junctura de la ma un petit.	And let the incision be wide and your phlebotomy on that joint of the hand be small.
E si es prohibit le fluxs del sanc, lahoras tu itera la ma en l’aygua cauda e layssa le sanc correr en la aygua entro que consieguas la tua necessitat.	And if the flow of blood is prohibited, then you return the hand to the warm water and let the blood flow in the water until you perceive your need.
Mays si tu eras en les dias d’estiu, lahoras tu yest excusat de la iteracio de la ma en l’aygua cauda, e le mes es pausat le cors del sanc en aygua cauda en temps de yvern.	But if you are in the summer days, then you will be excused from returning the hand to the warm water; and let the body of the blood be put in warm water in winter time.
E la fleubotomia de aquesta vena es pus salva que de totas las autras venas, quar dejos lu no ha vena pulsatil, ni nervi.	And the phlebotomy of this vein is safer than all the other veins, for from there is not a pulsating vein nor nerve.
E la fleubotomia de la savatella de la ma dreyta es conferent a las malautias del fetge.	And the phlebotomy of the wrist of the right hand is related to diseases of the liver.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que tu strenguas la ma am liament o am la tua ma, pus que tu l’as mesa en ayga cauda, entro que la vena sia imflada e sia be demostrada al vezement; e aprop fleubotoma aquela transversan; e si inscidas aquela de tot no nozera aquo en re.	And the quality of his phlebotomy is that you bind the hand with a bandage, or your hand, for you put it in warm water, so that the vein swells and it is demonstrated to be safe; and then phlebotomize it transversely; and if it bleeds at all, then do not touch it again.
E conserve que no ultimes la tua ma am la fleubotomi, quar dejos lu so les nervis dels ditz denudatz de carn.	And be careful not to finish your hand with phlebotomy, for from there the nerves of the fingers are bared of flesh.
E aprop itera la ma en l’aygua cauda e laysse correr le sanc en aquela, quar si tu no iteras aquela en l’aygua cauda, le sanc sira coagulat en lo orrifici de la vena, e es prohibit de flux.	And then return the hand to the warm water and let the blood flow in it; for if you do not return it to the warm water, the blood will clot at the orifice of the vein, and its flow will be prohibited.
E cum es extrayt le sanc segon la quantitat de necessitat, lahoras tu pausa sobre la vena oli e sal, per que no sia consolidada coytadament; e semblantment cove que tu fassas en tot ram streyt.	And when the blood is drawn according to the amount of need, then you apply olive oil and salt on it so that it is not coagulated firmly; and likewise, whoever does this on a limb, let him do it with a tight bandage.
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de aquela de la ma senestra, es que es conferent a las malautias de la melsa.	But the benefit of phlebotomy of that of the left hand is related to diseases of the soul.
E fay semblantment en la fleubotomia de lu ayssi cum has fayt en l’autra.	And do likewise in the phlebotomy of him, as you have done in the other.
E le juvament de la vena sephena de la fleubotomia es a las malautias que so en la partida dejos del cos, ayssi cum so malautias de la mayre, e a retencio de mestruas, et a las malautias dels ronhos e ulceracios de coyssas e de cambas antiquas, e a lor semblantz de las malautias.	And the benefit of the phlebotomy of the vein is for diseases that are below in the body, as well as diseases of the mother, and to retention of menstruation, and to diseases of the knees and ulcers of the legs and arms, and their likenesses of diseases.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute entrometa lo sieu pe en aygua cauda e fassa sobre aquel fricacio entro que be apparen las venas; e lia sobre la junctura del pe am correia; e le loc de la vena le talo apparent deves le dit pous, e de aquela so ramificatz en la facia del pe motz ramps.	And the quality of his phlebotomy is that the patient puts his foot in warm water and makes friction on it so that the veins appear; and tie with a bandage around the ankle; and the place of the vein, let him touch it with his finger, and from there let it be branched into the skin of the foot with many branches.
E donc fleubotoma le pus ample ram o dejos la camba deves le talo deves la agreguacio de lu, quar es milhor e pus sal.	And therefore cut off the most abundant blood vessels, or veins, behind the calf, behind the ankle, behind the foot, because it is better and healthier.
E si fleubotomas aquela en la facia del pe, lahoras tu te guarda dels nervis que so dejos aquela sobre la facia del pe, e pausa la tua fleubotomia am la qual tu fleubotomas per le travers, quays cum si tu la volias inscidir.	And if you cut off the vessels on the surface of the foot, then beware of the nerves that are below those vessels on the surface of the foot, and make your incision slantwise across them, as if you wanted to slit them.
E sia le fleubotomi vosil.	Let it be bloodless.
Mays si es prohibit le issiment del sanc; lahoras tu itera le pe de lu en l’aygua cauda e layssa correr le sanc en aquela entro que sia evacuat.	But if the flow of blood is prohibited, then you should raise the foot of the patient in warm water and let the blood run out through that opening which should be evacuated.
E si le fleubotomador erra en la primieyra veguada, lahoras itera am le fleubotomi en sus un pauc, quar le loc es sal; e no temes de lu malician, mays que te guardes dels nervis ayssi cum havem dit.	And if the person who performs the phlebotomy makes a mistake in the first vein, then do it again with a little more blood, because the place is healthy; and do not worry about causing harm, but beware of the nerves as we have said.
E semblantment fay de la sophena del autre pe engualment.	And likewise do on the other leg.
E de la vena sciatica, le loc ayssi cum havem dit es deves le talo dejos la cavilha de la partida silvestra.	And the sciatic vein, the location as we have said is behind the ankle below the wild-horse bone.
E le juvament de la fleubotomia de lu es a dolo de anca quan es per sanc caut.	And the purpose of the phlebotomy on him is for dolour in the hip when it is caused by cold blood.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute intre en banh, e festine e strenha la cueyssa de lu del latz de la ancha entro desus le talo desus quatre ditz an una benda longua subtil, quar no appar sino per aquo.	And the quality of the phlebotomy on him is that the patient enters a bath, and quickly and tightly tie his leg from the side of the broad part above the ankle above four fingers in one long slender bandage, because nothing appears except through there.
E donc quan appar, lahoras tu fleubotoma aquela segon cascun engen que es a tu possible e segon le tranvers, e es milhor; o inscidas aquela per inscizio o secces aquela per seccio, quar le loc de lu es sal.	And therefore when it appears, then you phlebotomize that according to your ability and according to the cross, and it is better; or slit that by incision or cut that by section, because the place of him is healthy.
E ela es en motz homes mot ameguada; e si atrobas aquela, e no appar al sentiment de tot, lahoras fleubotoma alcun ram de lu, e es aquel que appar en le dos del pe enves le dit auricular e le anular.	And she is in most men hidden; and if you find that, and it does not appear to all feeling, then phlebotomize some vein of him, and it is that which appears on the back of the foot under the little finger and the ring finger.
E guarda te dels nervis, e fay correr del sanc la quantitat que voles.	And beware of the nerves, and let the blood flow in the quantity that you want.
E aprop deslia la strictura e pausa sobre le loc de la fleubotomia coto e strenh le loc, quar leugierament es sanat.	Then loosen the ligature and place a bandage over the site of the phlebotomy tightly and firmly, because usually it heals quickly.
De ventozacio e de las qualitatz de uzar de aquelas.	Of ventilation and of the qualities of using those.
Ventozas so de corns, o de eram, o de veyre.	Ventozes are of warts, or blisters, or glass.
E ventozacio es fayta segon doas manieyras: la una de lor es am scarificacio e extracio de sanc, e l’autra es ventozacio ses scarificacio.	And ventilation is done according to two methods: one of them is with scarification and extraction of blood, and the other is ventilation without scarification.
E aquesta ventozacio que es ses scarificacio es segon doas manieyras, quar o es am foc o ses foc.	And this ventilation which is without scarification is according to two methods, because either it is with fire or without fire.
E a las ventozas que so administradas am scarificacio e extraccio de sanc son xiiii locs del cors, dels quals la un en lo qual so pausadas ventozas es alnocrati, e es la deriera partida del cap; e le mieg loc d’el de doas partz del col ensemp; e ventozas del mento dejos la mandibula pus dejos de la boca; e ventozas de doas spatulas; e ventozas de alohoster, e es sobre la fi de la coeta; e ventozas de dos focils, e so de dos brasses; e ventozas de doas cavilhas; e ventozas de doas cuoyssas.	And the vents which are administered with scarification and extraction of blood are twelve locations on the body, one of which is where alnocrati vents are placed, and it is in the back part of the head; and the middle part between two parts of the neck; and vents of the chin below the jawbone just below the mouth; and vents of two spatulas; and vents of alohoster, and it is above the end of the armpit; and vents of two little holes; and vents of two little bones; and vents of two joints.
E ventozacio no extratz le sanc sino de las venas menudas sparssas en la carn, e per aquo no catz la vertut per aquelas, ayssi cum es cazement per fleubotomia; ni no cove que ventozacio sia fayta am foc o ses foc en alcuna malautia fayta per replecio entro que le cors tot sia evacuat.	And ventilation does not extract blood except from the small veins scattered in the flesh, and therefore it has not the virtue through those, just as it is through phlebotomy; nor is there any indication that ventilation be done with fire or without fire in any disease caused by repletion within when the whole body is evacuated.
Mays si necessitat provoca a ventozacio per malautia o per continua, aministrem aquela en tota hora al comensament del mes e en la fi de lu, e en le mieg loc de lu e en qualque temps sia.	But if necessity prompts to ventilation for disease or continuous, we administer that throughout the whole month and in its middle and whenever it is necessary.
La qual causa es quar dels homes es en les quals es sanc multiplicat entro que indigeys de extraccio de lu per ventozacio e atroba en le sieu cap graveza e soda; e de aquels es que atroba replecio e rogor en la sua cara e en le sieu cap, e en le sieu col; e de aquels es que atroba pruziment en la sua cara e en le sieu front e tenebrositat e hebetut en les sieus huels; e de aquels que gieta le loc de la sua ventozacio; e de aquels es que le lor ris es multiplicat; e de aquels es que atroba gustament de sanc en la sua boca, o que la lengua es apostemada e escup sanc; e de aquels es que lor dormir es multiplicat, e de aquels que vetz sanc en lo dormir rogor e antics e plaguas e autras causas a lor semblantz.	The cause of this is that in some men there is blood multiplied within because of extraction through ventilation and it causes heaviness and hardness in their head; and in those there is repletion and heat in their face and head, and in those there is puffing up in the face and front and darkness and dullness in the eyes; and in those that spit blood; and in those whose risk is multiplied; and in those whose taste of blood is increased, or whose tongue is apoplectic and spit blood; and in those whose sleep is excessive, and in those who have blood in their sleep and roguishness and blisters and other causes according to their appearances.
E donc quan vezes en alcuna causa de aquelas, e propriament si es en le tertz o miga del mes, lahoras comandam ventozacio esser fayta pus que so passadas del dia dos o tres horas.	And therefore when it happens for any of those causes, and especially if it is in the third or middle of the month, then we command ventilation to be done after two or three hours have passed of the day.
E juvament de ventozacio de la nuca es que quan aquela confereys a gravitat en le cap e ad aquo que es efondit als huels; mays cove que aquo sia aprop evacuacio de tot le cors.	And the purpose of ventilation at the nape is that when it confers heaviness in the head and to that which is bent down in the eyes; but let that be when there is proper evacuation of the whole body.
E aquesta ventoza es en le loc de fleubotomia de la cephalica.	And this ventilation is in the place of phlebotomy of the cephalic.
E no es legut que use de lu aquel que es de frega complecio, o en le qual es catarr, quar dona ad aquel gran nocument.	And it is not proper to use that which is of complete friction, or in which there is catarrh, because it does great harm to him.
E per aquo no cove que uso de aquela les vielhs, e en les caps dels quals so malautias frejas.	And therefore let there be no use of that for the old, and in the heads of which there are cold diseases.
Mays ad aquel que sobre aquela es continuant sobre lu es fayta oblivio; e per aquo cove que tu comandes al ventozador que depause la sua ma un petit am la ventosa a las partidas dejos, temen de la generacio de oblivio.	But to him over whom that is continually done, let there be oblivion; and therefore let the person who performs ventilation not pause his hand lightly with the ventouse on the parts below, fearing the generation of oblivion.
Mays ventozacio de alkehel es en loc de fleubotomia de la vena fusca e de la basilica: e per aquo confereys a asma, e a la constriccio de ale e a la scissura del sturment de ale, e a tos, e a replecio.	But ventilation of alkehel is in the place of phlebotomy of the vein fusca and basilic: and therefore it confers asthma, and constriction of throat, and splitting of windpipe, and cough, and repletion.
E cove que sia enpellida la ventoza alkehel un petit, quar si es pausada dejos, engendra debilitat en le cors e en le stomac.	And let the ventouse of alkehel be applied lightly, because if it is applied below, it generates weakness in the body and stomach.
E la ventozacio de alhagdahan confereys a las dolors accident en le cap e a obtalmia, e emigranea, e prefocacio, e a dolors en las razitz de las dentz; e es en loc de fleubotomia de la basiliqua.	And ventilation of alhagdahan confers accidental pains in the head and to ophthalmia, and migraine, and pre-fever, and pains in the roots of the teeth; and it is in the place of phlebotomy of the basilic.
E cove que comandes al ventozador que no prema la sua ma am scarificacio per que no inscida la arteria e accida fluxs de sanc.	And let the person who performs ventilation not press his hand with scarification so that he does not slit the artery and ignite the flow of blood.
E ventozacio dejos le mento comfereys a alcola en la boca, e a corrupcio de la gingiva, e a semblantz a lor de las malautias que so en la boca, e stan en loc de fleubotomia de aliheric que so en las doas labias.	And ventilation below the chin confers alcolah in the mouth, and corruption of the gums, and appearances like those of diseases which are in the mouth, and they stand in the place of phlebotomy of aliheric which is on both lips.
Mays la ventozacio que es fayta sobre las doas spatulas confereys a caphatan, le qual es fayt per replecio de caliditat.	But ventilation which is done on the two spatulas confers headache, which is caused by repletion of heat.
E la ventosacio de las doas partidas dedintz dels focils confereys juvament de la fleubotomia de tres venas, so es de la basilica, fusca e cephalica, quar aquela atratz le sanc de totas aquelas venas pus manudas que so en la carn, e aquelas venas menudas de las autras venas pus grossas entro que pervengua la atraccio a las tres venas.	And ventilation of the two parts within the little holes confers benefit of phlebotomy from three veins, that is, basilic, fusca and cephalic, because it draws blood from all those veins more slender than those larger veins through which the attraction comes to the three veins.
E comanda al ventozador que trop no procezesca en scarificacio, quar le loc es denudat de carn, e dejos lu so nervis e arterias.	And command the person who performs ventilation not to go too far in scarification, because the place is stripped of flesh, and below it are nerves and arteries.
E es una ventoza am la qual es ventozat sobre alshosses e confereys a las emorroydas del cul e a las ulceracios pus dejos.	And it is ventilation by which is ventilated above the hips and confers to the hemorrhoids of the anus and to the ulcers below.
E cove que comandes al ventozador que sia gran ventoza, e que sia de eram, quar le loc indigeys de fort seccio; e fort leu so traucadas ventozas subtils e sia scarificat am scarificacio.	And let the person who performs ventilation make it a strong ventilation, and that it be of blisters, because the place needs strong sectioning; and let them be strongly ventilated with slender ventouses and be scarified by scarification.
Mays ventozas de las cambas minueysso per minuicio manifesta, quar atiran le sanc de tot le cors, e comfereysso a dolors antiquas dels ronhos e de la mayre, e de la vesica; e provocan las mestruas, e comfereysso a bothor e ademil; e stan en loc de fleubotomia de doas sophenas, e alahorcoben, e de doas cavilhas.	But vents of the legs minified by manifest diminishment, because they draw blood from all the body, and confers to old pains in the knees and hip, and in the womb; and they provoke menstruation, and confers to colic and ademil; and they stand in the place of phlebotomy of two sophens, and behind the navel, and of two little bones.
Enpero mot debelitan tot le cors e fan accidir sincopi en motz homes.	Yet some weaken the whole body and cause syncope in many people.
E de las ventozas alahorcoben le juvament es propda al juvament a las ventozas de doas cambas.	And from the armpits to the groin, the jugular vein is close to the arm vein at the sides of the body.
E la qualitat de la posicio de las ventozas es que pauses la ventoza al comensament vueda e sucguas per succio temprada, e no prolongues la posicio de las ventozas, mays pausa aquelas leugierament, e reman aquelas coytadament, e que las humors venguan al loc per adveniment engual.	And the quality of the position of the armpit is that you place the armpit at the beginning, and it drips through suction gently, and do not prolong the position of the armpits, but pause them lightly, and let those remain firmly, and so that the humors come to their location through equal movement.
E no cesses iterar aquo e continuar entro que veja le loc ja enrojezir e inflar e que appara la rogor del sanc.	And do not cease to repeat this and continue until he sees the place become red and swollen and the blood appears.
E lahoras tu scarifiqua e itera la succio pauc a pauc, e aprop considera en la dispozicio dels cors.	And then you scrape and repeat suction little by little, and then consider the disposition of the body.
Quar aquel home que es de tendra carn de rars pors, cove que tu le scarifiques una veguada e no pus, per que le loc no sia ulcerat.	For if he is of thin skin and delicate flesh, you should not cut him deeply, but only slightly, so that the place is not ulcerated.
E comanda al ventozador que amplifique la scarificacio e pronde un pauc, e atempre la succio am facilitat.	And command the wounder to enlarge the incision and take a little, and moderate the suction with ease.
E si en le sanc es grossitut, lahoras cove que scarifiques doas veguadas, quar en la primieyra veguada es uberta la via de subtiliacio al sanc e a la aquositat de lu.	And if the blood is thick, then you should make two incisions, because in the first cut is opened the way of subtlety to the blood and to his moisture.
Mays en la segunda a la perscrutacio aquisida de la extraccio del sanc gros.	But in the second it acquires penetration through the extraction of the thick blood.
E si le sanc es mot feculent, lahoras sia fayta scarificacio la tersa veguada per que consiegua le derier.	And if the blood is very foul, then let there be made a third incision so that he may succeed in his purpose.
E derierament, quan volem extrayre le sanc pauc a pauc o un petit, abasta a nos una scarificacio.	And finally, when we wish to extract blood little by little or a little bit, it suffices us with one incision.
E si volem extraccio de mot sanc, scarificam am mota scarificacio; e si nos conoyssem que·l sanc es gros, lahoras cove que scarifiquem per scarificacio preonda.	And if we want to extract a lot of blood, then we scarify with a broad incision. And if we know that the blood is thick, then we should scarify with a deep incision.
E le terme de scarificacio en la qual es la profunditat de la codena tant solament.	And the term of scarification in which there is the depth of the vein so only.
E si aquel del qual la codena es grossa, dura, fusca, e les sieus pors so streytz, cove que les locs de las ventosas sian untatz lenitius, apertius resolutius; si es en temps d’estiu, ayssi cum es oli de aloen o oli de violat, o oli de amellas dossas, o oli de cemensa de coja; e si es en temps ivern, lahoras oli narci, o oli de liri, o oli de camamilla, o de sanc, e ad aquels semblantz.	And if he whose vein is thick, tough, dark, and whose pores are narrow, then the places of the armpits should be anointed gently, opened, and resolved; if it is in summer time, so with oil of aloe or oil of violet, or oil of almond, or oil of camphor; and if it is in winter time, then with oil of nutmeg, or oil of lily, or oil of camomile, or blood, and to those similar things.
E si la superfluitat es grossa, freja, lahoras le oli sia amaranti, o oli de balsamita, o oli de aloen, o oli aneti, e a lor semblantz.	And if the superfluity is thick and tough, then the oil should be of amarant, or oil of balsam, or oil of aloe, or oil of anise, and to their likenesses.
Mays si le ventozador es de amples pors de tendra carn, lahoras cove que sia prohibit de oli, e cove que ad aquest les locs de ventozas de lor aprop la ventozacio sian lavatz am ayguaros o am aygua freja de solatrum, o am aygua de coja, o am aygua de bordolaguas, e semblantz ad aquelas.	But if the wounder is of broad pores and delicate flesh, then let oil be prohibited from him; and let the places of the armpits, before the armpit, be washed with lye water or hot water of soda, or water of camphor, or water of cow, or water of borage, and to those like things.
E aquel del qual le sanc es de mota humiditat, lava las suas ventozas am vi agre, o am aygua de mirt e sumac e semblant ad aquels.	And let him whose blood is of great moisture wash his armpits with sour wine, or water of myrrh and sumach, and like things to those.
E de aquel del qual las superfluitatz son grossas, lava las suas ventozas am vi antic, o am aygua de sansuc, que es majorana, o de decoccio de anet, o de camamilla, e a lor semblantz.	And of him whose superfluities are thick, wash the armpits with old wine, or water of sage, which is greater, or of fennel, or of camomile, and to their likenesses.
E cove que la ventozacio sia guardada denant de banh; habantz cove que sia aministrada aprop issiment del banh per una hora o per doas, e cove que dorma aprop la ventozacio.	And let the armpit be kept before bathing; having them administered close to bathing for an hour or two, and let him sleep with the armpit.
Quid est quo oportet ut regatur ventosandus aus phlebotomatus ante ventosationem.	What is it that it is necessary to bleed a person who has been bled before being bled again?
Cove que consideras al comensament: lahoras si le ventozador o aquel que·s deu fleubotomar es coleric e ventz sobre lu sanc agut e imflamacio, lahoras cove que prengua causas infrigidantz, ayssi cum milgranas acetosas, e endivia an vi agre e laytuguas, e secanabin, e julep, e a lor semblantz.	Consider at the beginning: if the wounder or he who is to bleed has a hot and inflammatory blood, then let him take frigid causes, so with milky acetous milks, and endive in sour wine, and lettuce, and wormwood, and julep, and to their likenesses.
E pausa a lor viandas ayssi cum poletz, e carns de auzels serbiges, e viandas conditas am agras, e a lu semblantz.	And give him food so with poults, and flesh of young birds, and seasoned foods with vinegar, and to their likenesses.
E de aquel del qual la compleccio es freja, cove que prengua en beure eyssarop almiva, o eyssarop de alsecanabin de semensas, e sumac, e vi mot odorant migier entre viel et noel; e que a lu sia comendat que use de paucitat de beure e de mangar, e pausa las viandas de lu poletz e canabir e pissers e petitz auzels e colombat.	And of him whose complexion is hot, let him take in drinking essarop with honey, or essarop of wormwood seeds, and sumach, and very odorous wine between white and new; and that he be commanded to use little of drinking and eating, and give his food poults, and cabbages, and peppers, and small birds, and pigeons.
E cove que en lo dia de ventozacio e de fleubotomia le beure sia major que la vianda.	And let him drink more than he eats on the day of bleeding and phlebotomy.
E cove que sia donat en beure en alcunas horas ad alcus homes tyriaca alpharac, o medicamentz de musc, so es muscada, o alcelita denant la ventozacio o denant fleubotomia o aprop, per so que·ls membres principals sian confortatz e que·l sanc sia subtiliat; e no cove que prenguan aquela scalfatz.	And let him be given in drinking at certain times to some men theriaca alpharac, or medicine of musk, as it is musked, or alcelita before bleeding or phlebotomy, so that the principal members are comforted and the blood is subtle; and let not them take those cuts.
Mays las ventozas que so ses scarificacio sian ventozas que so pausadas sus le fetge, e sobre la melsa e podagra, e sobre le umbelic, en les locs dels jonolhs, e la pixida del ancha, quar aquestz membres no suffertan scarificacio sobre si.	But the armpits that are not scarified shall be armpits that are paused over the liver, and on the mensa, and podagra, and over the navel, and in the places of the joints, and the pubis of the groin, because these members do not suffer scarification upon themselves.
E no es querit per aquelas sino atraccio de sanc de membre, ayssi cum pausam ventosa sobre mamilha en malautia de flux de sanc del sanc de las nars; e usam de aquela per que sia dissolvuda ventositat freja inviscade del membre, ayssi cum pausam sobre le ventre e l’umbelic; quar aquela rarifique le membre e scalfa lu e ramau la dolor quar resolveys ventositat.	And it is not desired for those except attraction of blood from a member, as with pause armpit over mamma in malady of flux of blood of the blood of the nar's; and use that so that subtle thick armpit is dissolved freja, as with pause upon the belly and navel; because that rarefies the member, and cuts it, and eases the pain from which resolves armpit.
E ja es pausada sobre les ronhos quan accideys en lor opilacio o poyra, quar per vertut de atraccio fort leu huobre opilacio e erradica le poyra de son loc.	And it is paused over the nails when they happen in their bending or breaking, because by virtue of strong attraction their bone bending and eradicates the pain from its place.
E semblantment fa quan es pausada sobre le fetge e la melsa deves ventositat en aquels enclausa.	And likewise it does when it is paused over the liver and mensa, it must armpit in those who are inclosed.
E aquestas ventozas so administradas vuedas amb succio tant solament; e alcunas veguadas so administradas am foc.	And these armpits are administered seen with suction only so gently; and some times they are administered with fire.
E alcunas veguadas so administradas plenas de aygua tebeza en las malautias de la melsa.	And some times they are administered full of tepid water in maladies of the mensa.
E aquo es per que la ventoza sia umplida e sia pus gran, so es aygua cauda sola o aygua en la qual sian cuytas herbas ad aquo convenientz.	And this is why armpit is filled and is great, so it is water only or water in which are cooked herbs to that convenient.
Forma de ventoza aministrada am foc: sia la amplitud del orrifici de dos ditz, segon que nos la havem formada; e la quantitat del preon sia la maytat de un palm; e sia en lo latz de lu, en le loc que es en le circuit, la maytat de lu, le trauc sia petit segon la quantitat que intre en lu una agulha.	Form of armpit administered with fire: let the aperture of the orifice be two fingers, according to which we have formed it; and the quantity of the cup be the length of a palm; and be in its breadth, in the place that is in the circuit, the length of him, the puncture be small according to the quantity that enters into him an awl.
Sia fayta de eram rog o citri, de grosses marges, leon, enguals e terses per so que no leda le membre deves la sua posicio sobre lu.	Let it be made of ram or citron wood, of thick margins, lion, nails and terses so that it does not lead the member let its position over it.
E sia al mieg de lu vergua transversa de eram o de ferr, on es pausada candela am lo foc.	And let be at the middle of it a transverse rod of ram or iron, where is paused candle with the fire.
E ja sia aquesta ventoza gran major de aquela la qual havem recomtat; e la pauca mendre de aquela segon las malautias e la etat de aquel que usa de aquela.	And let this armpit be greater and larger than that which we have described; and the small less of that according to the maladies and the state of him who uses it.
E las ventosas dels efantz e extenuatz so autres que las ventozas dels joves e de grosses corssas.	And the armpits of children and exhausted others are smaller than the armpits of young people and of large bodied people.
E la qualitat de pausar aquesta ventoza am foc sobre le membre es que extenda la meca am foc de lenha decentment denant una pauca candela de cera, e pausa aquela sobre le mieg de la vergua transversa en le mieg loc de la ventoza, per que le foc sia accendut enviro la partida dejos per que no sia comburit le cors del malaute.	And the quality of pausing this armpit with fire over the member is that he extends the mace with decently burning wood before a little candle of wax, and pause that over the middle of the transverse rod in the middle place of the armpit, so that the fire be kindled around it from below so that it is not burned the malady's body.
E aprop sia pausada sobre le membre del malaute, e le dit sia sobre le trauc que havem dit, entro que quan tenem las ventozas e non indigem que osten le dit e que yesca la vapor sobre aquel trauc, lahoras la ventoza sira tantost dissolvuda.	And then it should be placed on the patient's limb, and the doctor should be over the wound that we mentioned, while we hold the ventouse and do not allow the doctor to see the wound and for the vapor to escape from that wound, then the ventouse will immediately dissolve.
E prop igneys la meca segon la sua manieyra, e itera aquela si indigeyssas de aquela.	And then light the candle according to its usual way, and repeat that if necessary.
Mays en ventosa que es aministrada en la malautia de plauressi, am aygua, en la qual no ha vergua transversa ni trauc, e no es aministrada sino que sia umplida de aygua, e es pausada sobre le membre tant solament.	But in ventouse that is administered for pleurisy, with water, in which there is no transverse vein or wound, and it is not administered unless it is filled with water, and it is placed on the limb only.
E aquesta es la forma de lu: E aquesta ventoza quant plus es gran, tant es milhor, per que puya recebre gran quantitat de aygua.	And this is how it is done: And the larger this ventouse is, the better, so that it can receive a large amount of water.
Capitol .xcvii.	Chapter .xcvii.
Sanguissuguas no so administradas en motz membres sino en les membres en les quals non es possible posicio de ventosas, per la parvitat de aquels, ayssi cum le pot e gingiva e semblantz a lor; o en membre denudat de carn, ayssi cum le dit e·l nas e lors semblantz.	Leeches are not administered on small limbs but on those where it is not possible to place ventouses due to their small size, such as the fingers, toes and similar; or on limbs that have been stripped of flesh, such as the fingers, nose, and similar.
E la qualitat de usar de aquelas que si has trobadas sanguisugas que so en las ayguas dossas de poyredura mundas.	And use only those leeches that you have found in the double-watered waters of purity.
E aprop sian layssadas le dia e la nueyt en aygua dossa entro que sian famolentas, e que no romangua alcuna causa en le ventre de aquelas; e aprop sia evacuat le cors en le comensament am fleubotomia e am ventozas; e aprop fregua le membre del malaute entro que s’enrojezesca; e aprop sian pausadas sobre lu.	And then they should be kept in double-watered water for a day and night so that they become hungry, and no cause remains in their bellies; and the body should be evacuated at the beginning with phlebotomy and ventouses; and then the patient's limbs should be rubbed until they turn red; and then they should be placed on the patient.
E cum son umplidas e caso.	And when they are full and swollen:
E si es possible succio del loc am ventoza, es mays derier en juvament.	And if it is possible to suck the wound with a ventouse, it is better to do so directly.
E sino, lahoras lava le loc am vi agre e aprop am mota aygua; e sia freguat e expremut.	And if not, then wash the wound with sweet wine and then with warm water; and it should be rubbed and pressed.
E si es prolonguat le cors del sanc aprop le cazement de las sanguissuguas, e es aquo resudan, lahoras tu enfon un drap de li en aygua freja, e pausa aquel de sobre entro que sia abdida la resudacio.	And if the flow of blood is prolonged due to the attachment of leeches, and it sweats, then you dip a piece of cloth in warm water and place it over the sweat.
E si le sanc es multiplicat, lahoras polveriza sobre lu vitriol trissat, o guallas e semblantz a lor de las causas stipticas, entro que·l sanc sia abscidit; o sian pausadas sobre le loc las maytatz de favas excocicadas, e sian layssadas entro que las favas aderescan al loc, e es le sanc abscidit.	And if the blood is multiplied, then powder vitriol ground three times, or gallnuts and similar of the astringent causes, over it until the blood is stopped; or place the pods of cooked fava beans over the wound and leave them until the beans adhere to the wound, and the blood stops.
E cove, si es necessaria, iteracio de sanguissuguas, quan es possible mudar aquelas.	And if necessary, repeat the leeches when possible.
E si las sanguissuguas son prohibidas de suspenssio, lahoras sia freguat le loc am sanc recent o fique una agulha en les locs entro que yesca sanc; e aprop sian pausadas, quar aquelas quan sento alcun sanc tantost adarysso.	And if the leeches are prohibited from suspension, then rub the wound with fresh blood or leave a needle in the wounds so that blood flows; and then they should be placed, for when they feel some blood they will immediately attach.
E quan voles que cajan, polveriza sobre aquelas un pauc de aloen trissat, o sal, o cendre, e cazo tantost.	And when you want them to let go, powder them with a little ground aloe, or salt, or ash, and they will let go immediately.
Ayssi comensa lo prolec de la tersa partida: de restauracio.	Thus begins the theory of the third part: on restoration.
Aquest capitol es motas veguadas necessari en la art de medicina; e es restauracio de fractura e de dislocacio accident en les osses.	This chapter is many times necessary in the art of medicine; it is restoration from fracture and accidental dislocation in bones.
O, filh, sapiatz que jactan se de aquest capitol les fols metges e les vulguars e aquels que degun temps no reguardero les libres dels Antics ni legiro de aquels una letra.	Or, son, understand that the foolish doctors and the common people and those who have not read the books of the Ancients nor understood a letter from them speak of this chapter.
E per aquesta causa es fayt que aquesta manieyra dels scients in terra nostra es privat; e yeu no ho e obliat en aquo degun temps be de tot; e no he adhibit aquo que apres, sino per longitut de lectio dels libres dels Antics e studi sobre le entendement de aquels, entro que extrayssi la sciencia de aquels.	And for this reason, the manner of the wise in our land is private; and I have not been obliged to do so at any time up until now; and I have not applied that which teaches, except through length of reading the books of the Ancients and studying their understanding, so that I extracted the science from them.
E aprop adirigui a experiment e studi en la longitut de la mieua vida.	And I added to it experience and study throughout the length of my life.
E yeu ja he de aquo descrit en aquest capitol tot aquo que conte la mieua sciencia e sobre le qual es passat lo mieu experiment; pus que agui abreujat aquo a vos autres e deliuregui aquo de occupacio de elonguacio; e abreujegui aquo en la fi de abreujacio; et e monstrat aquo en la fi de declaracio; e formegui en aquo motas formas dels sturmentz que so administratz en aquel, cum es fayt per addicio de declaracio, ayssi cum he fayt en dos capitols precedentz.	And I have already described in this chapter all that my science and the experience of my life teach me; for I have abridged it for you and freed you from the burden of lengthiness; and I have abridged it at the end of abridgment; and I have demonstrated it at the end of demonstration; and I have formed many forms of the instruments that are administered in it, as has been done by addition of demonstration, just as I have done in two preceding chapters.
Capitol primier.	First chapter.
Summae et collectiones ex esse fracturae ossium, ex eis quarum praemissio necessaria est, antequam incipiamus rememorationem membrorum fraftorum et diversorum si uniuscuiusque.	Summary and collections of being fractured bones, from which its premise is necessary, before we begin to remember the members are fractured and diverse.
Cove donc que diguam en le prohemi de aquest capitol las summas del sermo; e les capitols al entendament dels quals en le comensament es forsat le artifexs e a stacio sobre la veritat de aquels; so es vos e aquels que so promptz que sapian o aprenguan aquesta art nobla autres de vos.	Therefore, let us begin the beginning of this chapter with summaries of speech; and the chapters to the understanding of which in the beginning it is forced that the artisans and at station upon the truth of those; so are you and those who are prompt that know or learn this noble art from you.
E donc dic que quan accideys a alcu fractura o dislocacio o torcio o cazement, lahoras cove que tu te coytes al comensament am fleubotomia o aleyar aquel, o quascu ensemps, si no prohibeys alcuna causa, ayssi cum debelitat de vertut, o es aquel al qual accideys effant, o viel en decrepitat, o es temps de vehement calor, o de vehement freg.	And therefore I say that when it happens to someone a fracture or dislocation or twist or displacement, then indeed you should begin at first with phlebotomy or bleeding of that, or any enema, if no prohibited cause, except weakness of strength, or is one to whom it happens infant, or old in decrepitude, or time of violent heat, or violent rubbing.
E aprop sia content en vianda sieua de erbas frejas e de carns de auzels e de crabotz; e prohibem carns grossas e umplir si de viandas e de tota vianda que umple las venas de sanc, entro que siras segurat de apostema caut, e si no temes efusio de materia al membre.	And then let it be content in food of its own of fresh herbs and of meats of birds and crabs; and forbid thick meats and filling if of foods and of all food that fills the veins with blood, so that you become secure from apostema cauter, and if you do not fear effusion of matter to the limb.
E lahoras retorne le malaute al sieu regiment primier am le qual corr costuma de lu.	And then return the patient to his first regimen with which he was accustomed.
E donc cum le os trencat comensa esser restaurat, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia pascut de viandas nutritivas de nutriment mot e gros e greu en les quals sia viscositat, ayssi cum so viandas faytas de froment cueyt am aygua, e ris, e caps, e pes, e ventres de vacas, e huous, e peys fresc, e vi gros e semblants ad aquels, e am aquest regiment es fayta coagulacio de fractura pus leugierament e miels.	And therefore when the broken bone begins to be restored, then indeed let the patient be fed with nutritious foods of food mot and gross and heavy in which is viscosity, just as are made foods of wheat cooked in water, and rice, and peas, and fish, and bellies of cows, and hams, and fresh peas, and vi grose and similar to those, and with this regimen the coagulation of fracture is done more easily and better.
E sapias que les osses trinquatz quan so en les homes que so en la primiera vilura e en los decrepitz, no es possible que sian continuatz e sian consolidatz segon lur natura per la exsiccacio dels membres de lor.	And understand that the fractured bones when they are in the elderly and in the decrepit, it is not possible for them to be continued and consolidated according to their nature due to the drying of their members.
E son consolidatz e continuatz segon lor natura tot temps per la exsiccacio de aquels membres, e so continuatz e consolidatz aquels que so de lor en la fi de la lenitat, ayssi cum les osses dels petitz effantz.	And are consolidated and continued according to their nature at all times due to the drying of those members; and they are continued and consolidated according to their nature by lengthening, just as are the bones of children in the end of their softness.
Mays empero natura ajusta e amnecteys sobre le os trencat de tota partida alcuna causa semblant a glut en le qual es grossitut que adhereys e strenh aquel entro que so ensemps conglutinatz e liatz ensemps, entro que venen la fi de fortitut e de fermesa, ayssi cum foc al comensament, entro que denguna causa no prohibeys aquel de las suas obres.	But indeed nature adjusts and knits over the fractured bone of every part any cause similar to glue in which there is thickness that adheres and strengthens it together, so that they come to an end of strength and firmness, just as fire at the beginning, so that no cause prohibits that from its works.
E per aquesta causa es necessari que pauses las viandas del malaute, viandas en las quals so gravitat e viscozitat e grosseza, ayssi cum havem dit.	And for this reason it is necessary to stop the patient's food, foods in which there are heaviness and viscosity and grossness, just as we have said.
Mota diversitat de fractura segon diversitat del membre.	The diversity of fracture according to the diversity of the limb.
E sapias que las specias de fractura son diversas segon la diversitat dels membres, quar fractura del os de la camba es diversa de la fractura del os del cap; e la fractura del os del pietz es divers de la fractura del os del dos; e semblantment totz les autres membres son diverses entre lor.	And understand that the species of fracture are diverse according to the diversity of the limbs, for the fracture of the bone of the leg is diverse from the fracture of the bone of the head; and the fracture of the bone of the foot is diverse from the fracture of the bone of the nose; and similarly all the other limbs are diverse among themselves.
E yeu venc am rememoracio de tota specia de fractura, expausada en le sieu capitol distincta del autre.	And I have conquered with remembrance of every species of fracture, explained in its own chapter distinct from another.
Mota diversitat de fractura en si meteyssa.	There are many kinds of fractures in the metatarsus.
E son diversificadas las specias de fractura del os en lor meteyssas; quar es fayta fractura arcuada otra aquo que accidan en lu stellas; e alcunas veguadas es fayta fractura segon la longitut del os: e so las fracturas de lu satagia e astelhas e addicios procedentz e no-procedentz, ayssi cum es fayt en la pena quan es preparada a escriure, e es fractura am plagua e disrupcio en le cap, e es fractura fissura petita.	There are many kinds of fractures in the metatarsal bones; some have an arched fracture, others occur in the stars; and sometimes there is a fracture according to the length of the bone: so it is with the fractures of the sesamoid and splint bones, and also those that come from within and those that do not, as happens when one prepares to write, and there are fractures of fissure, small crack.
E a tota specia es engen o turment propri en restauracio de lu segon que vindra rememoracio de lu distincta en les sieus locs.	And in all species there is pain or discomfort inherent in restoration according to that which will come to remembrance of them in their own places.
Mota senhal de fractura del os.	There are signs of bone fracture.
E per aquo es conoguda fractura del os: es tortuositat de lu, e de aquel eminencia e appericio de lu al sentiment, e so de lu quan compremes aquel am la tua ma.	And by this is known the bone fracture; it is by its crookedness and appearance to the senses, and also by your compressing it with your hand.
E donc quan no es en le loc tortuositat apparent ni so no es feyt deves le tieu tocament quan toques le os am agitacio e le malaute no atroba gran dolor, lahoras no es aqui fractura.	And therefore when there is no crookedness in the place that is apparent, nor so by your touching it as you press upon the bone with shaking and the patient does not find great pain, then here there is no fracture.
Habantz es possible que sia tortuositat o petita fissura, adon no cove que tu mauguas aquel am la tua ma e am compressio de tot; habantz pausa sobre lu de las medicinas de las quals ve rememoracio aprop aquel moment le qual conveneys al loc; e aprop sia streyt per strictura subtil.	It is possible that there is crookedness or a small crack, then do not wonder if you find no pain by pressing upon it with your hand and compressing it all over; in this case place upon it medicines of which you have remembrance at the moment that suits the part; and let there be stricture by subtle compression.
E sapias que·l loc quan es arcuat e no es scindit en dos o otra aquo que no accidan en lu satagie, cum es remauguda tota partida de la sua compar, lahoras cove que comenses de la tua hora a rectificacio de lu habantz que a lu accida apostema caut.	And know that the place when it is arched and not split in two or otherwise that does not happen in the sesamoid bones, as the whole part is lacerated from comparison to its like, then know that you must begin from your hour of correction upon it if it happens that there occurs an abscess by cautery.
E si a lu accida apostema caut, lahoras layssa aquel per alcus dias entro que cesse le apostema; e aprop engualha aquel segon quascuna manieyra que podes de levitat e de engen.	And if an abscess occurs by cautery, then leave it for several days until the abscess ceases; and then heal that according to any method you can of elevation and comfort.
E sapias que restauracio de lu e agulacio de lu es pus leugiera que del os en le qual accideysso sathagie.	And know that restoration of it and piercing of it is easier than of the bone in which occurs the sesamoid.
E aprop strenh aquel segon que vindra la rememoracio de lu.	And strengthen that according to that which will come to remembrance of you.
Mays si en le os so satagias, lahoras es necessaria extencio de aquest membre trencat de doas partz, si es la ma o le pe; o am la tua ma si le membre es petit; o am doas cordas o am una corda e la ma.	But if in the bone there are sesamoid bones, then extension of this broken member from two parts is necessary, whether it is the hand or foot; or with your hand if the member is small; or with two cords or one cord and the hand.
E sia la tua posicio am la qual pauses le membre loc engual segon la sua figura natural, mentre que las partidas so extandudas del membre trenquat, lahoras te perforsa que fassas retornar aquelas addicios am engen e segon quascuna manieyra que poyras en lor locs.	And let your position be that by which you hold the member in place according to its natural figure while those parts are extended from the broken member, then you will have to return those joints with comfort and according to any method you can in their places.
E guarda te segon la tua forssa que no accida sobre le malaute per la tua operacio delor ni lesio; e perforsa te segon le tieu poder que tu appliques la un os am l’autre son companho segon lors milhors formas.	And guard yourself according to your strength so that nothing happens to the patient through your operation of pain or injury; and know according to your ability that you apply one bone to its companion according to their best forms.
E cove que en aquela hora aprofitablament tu toques am la tua ma aquel, e si vezes aqui alcuna causa diversa, rectifiqua aquel e enguala aquel per la quantitat de la tua vertut.	And know that in that hour advantageously you touch it with your hand, and if you see here any different cause, correct that and heal that according to the quantity of your skill.
E exquiva vehement extenssio e compressio, ayssi cum fan mots fols metges que motas veguadas fan accidir apostema caut per la sua operacio, o fan accidir contraccio en le membre ayssi cum havem vist aquo per la operacio de lor motas veguadas.	And avoid violent extension and compression, as do foolish doctors who many times cause an abscess cautery through their operation or cause contraction in the member as we have seen that through their many operations.
E aprop annecteys, aprop equacio e decent operacio e strictura de aquel membre, e repaus e tranquilitat; amoneste le malaute sobre aquo e fay le squivar que no maugua aquel en la hora de las suas vigilias e del sieu dormir, e ves la sua revolucio e agitacio, e deves la sua egestio, e deves totz les sieus movementz am tota la sua vertut; e aguarda se que la posicio del membre sia posicio am la qual sia asegurada la dolor, la qual causa es quar quan sent en la disposicio de la posicio del membre delor o lesio; lahoras cove que permutes aquel ad autra disposicio de aquela am la qual non senta dolor; e guarda am aquo que la posicio de lu aquela sia dreyta e engual, per so que al membre non accida tortuositat quan es restaurat.	And then connection, equitation and decent operation and compression of that member, and rest and tranquillity; warn the patient about this and let him avoid hurting himself in the hour of his vigils and sleeping, and watch his revolution and agitation, and attend to his excretion, and attend to all his movements with all your skill; and know if the position of the member is a position by which there is pain or injury, then change that to another position by which he does not feel pain. And guard against this so that the position of it be straight and healed, so that no crookedness happens to the member when restored.
E la qualitat de la strictura del membre tranquat es aquela que yeu recomti; per que sapias que·ls membres trencatz so diversificatz en lor parvitat e en lor grandeza e en la forma de aquels.	And the quality of compression of the broken member is that which you reckon; for know that the broken members are varied in their smallness and in their greatness and in the form of them.
E de aquels que son petits ayssi cum le bras e·l dit e·l focil e semblantz ad aquels, lahoras cove que la envolucio sia de drap mol subtil.	And of those which are small as with the arm and the finger and the wrist and similar to them, then know that the envelopment is of very fine linen.
Mays aquels que so grosses ayssi cum la cuoyssa o la camba, cove que en aquels sia envolucio lada e dura, quar la liadura lada connecteys le membre gran e strenh aquel de tota part am strictura engual, enayssi que en lu no intre macula.	But those which are large as with the thigh or leg, then know that the envelopment is of strong linen, for the strong binding connects the large member and strengthens it all around by a healed compression, so that in it there enters no stain.
E aprop comensa, aprop la tua evacuacio de equacio, pausar liament convenient ad aquo, sobre le loc de aquela fractura am tres envolucios o quatre segon que·l membre mereys; e strenh la tua ma un petit am le liament.	And then begin, and your evacuation of equitation, pause convenient support to that, over the place of that fracture with three or four envelops according to that the member merits; and strengthen your hand a little by the binding.
E aprop ve am aquel a la partida pus sobirana del loc de la fractura, e strenh mens que no foc la tua strictura am la qual has strengut le loc de la fractura.	And then go to that at the most upper part of the place of the fracture, and strengthen mind so as not to weaken your compression by which you have strengthened the place of the fracture.
E aprop elongua te am envolucio del loc de la fractura un pauc, e mollifiqua la strictura petit a petit, entro que prenguas del loc sa una gran partida.	And then lengthen yourself by enveloping the place of the fracture a little, and weaken the compression a little by little as you take from the place a great part.
E aprop pren una autra benda e envolveys aquela autra veguada sobre le loc trenquat am envolucio, e aprop ve am las envolucios a la partida pus dejos de la fractura; e sia la tua operacio en la strictura de la envolucio e en mollificacio de aquela segon que havem dit en la envolucio primieyra desus.	And then take another bandage and wrap that other part over the broken place with envelopment, and then go to the envelops at the most lower part of the fracture; and let your operation be in compression of the envelopment and in softening of that according as we have said in the first envelopment above.
E aprop pausa entre las volucios de stopa leon o drap am le qual sia engualada la tortuositat de la fractura, si en lu es tortuositat; e sino, no pauses en lu alcuna causa.	And then pause between the envelops of lamb's wool or linen with which is healed the crookedness of the fracture if there is crookedness in it; but if not, then do not pause for any cause.
E aprop pausa sobre lu autra benda, e aprop enguala sobre aquestas envolucios stelhas decentment faytas tantost, si en le loc no es imflacio o apostema caut, e lahoras pausa sobre lu aquo que sede le apostema aquel e que oste la imflacio; e layssa aquela per alcus jorns; e lahoras tu strenh sobre lu las stelhas.	And then pause over it another bandage and then heal upon these envelops decently made splints as soon as in the place there is no inflammation or abscess, and then pause over that which causes the abscess and which heals the inflammation; and leave that for several days; and then strengthen over it the splints.
E sian las stelhas de la maytat de canna lada raza, e be formada saviament; o sian de fust de pi; o de ramps de palma ; e sia le ample de quascuna stelha segon aquesta forma e aquesta figura:	And let the splints be of the measure of light cane split and carefully formed; or they are of wood of pine, or of rattan of palm; and let the width of each splint according to that form and figure.
Empero cove que la astelha que es pausada sobre aquela fractura sia pus grossa e pus lada un petit que las autras astelhas, e la longitut de la stela segon qu’es legut al membre en magnitut e parvitat; e aprop strenh sobre las astelhas am autra benda segon la tua primieyra strictura; e aprop lia desus am fiel decentment segon que havem dit de strictura, e es que sia la tua strictura segon le loc de la fractura mes, e quant mes es alonguat de la fractura, es mendre la strictura.	But let the splint that is paused over that fracture be thicker and lighter than the other splints, and the length of the splint according as it is longer to the member in greatness and smallness; and then strengthen upon the splints with another bandage according to your first compression; and then bind over it with a decent file according as we have said of compression, and let your compression be according to the place of the fracture more, and as much as the fracture is lengthened, so let the compression be less.
E cove que les fils sian migiers en grossesa e subtilitat, e sian de li mol; e si les fils so grosses, ayssi cum yeu he vist per la operacio de alcus fols pausantz les lors fils de cordas de li tort, e es error gran, quan catz la strictura fora equalitat.	And let the threads be moderate in thickness and fineness, and let them be of linen; and if the threads are thick as we have seen through operation of certain foolish doctors, the threads of cords of linen, and it is a great error when compressing there is inequality.
E eyssament fils subtils no so convenientz, quar tu no consaguiras per strictura am aquels aquo que voles, e no cove que entre astela e astela haja mens de un dit.	And thin threads are not convenient, for you will not achieve by compression with them that which you want, and let there be space between splint and splint the width of one finger.
E si le malaute es ledit per las extremitatz de las stelas aprop la strictura en les locs sas, lahoras pausa dejos aquelas de stopa leon o lana carmenada entro que aquo no li fassa lesio.	And if the patient is hurt by the ends of the splints then pause under those lamb's wool or woven linen so that it does not injure him.
Alcunas veguadas fractura es am plagua, e accideys disrupcio en la codena, e yeu vindre am rememoracio en aquela en le capitol segon singularitat.	Sometimes the fracture is by blow and happens disruption in the tendon, and I have come to remembrance in that in the head according to its particularity.
E sapias que ges tot membre trencat no es streyt am stelhas al primier dia; la qual causa es quar le membre, quan es gran, no cove que pauses sobre lu stelhas sino aprop v dias o vii o mays, segon la tua seguratat de adveniment de apostema caut.	And know that not every broken member is bound by splints on the first day; the cause is because the member, when it is great, do not pause over it splints unless after several days or seven or more, according to your certainty of advent of abscess.
E aquesta es la manieyra dels emplaustres am les quals les Antics restauravan, les quals so pausatz sobre fractura e dislocacio e torcio.	And this is the method of the plaster casts with which the Ancients restored [bones], which are placed on fractures and dislocations and twists.
Manieyra de emplaustra comu abruejat de restaurament de fractura, convenient a motas compleccios e majorment a las femnas e als efantz, quar es de aquo sobre le qual no ventz calor ni freg: e es que prenguas de polvera de moli, e es la medula de la farina que pen deves le movement de la mola en las paretz del moli.	Method of plastering as a remedy for the restoration of fractures, suitable for many complications and especially for women and children, because it is that on which no heat or friction comes: and it is to take from the dust of grinding, and it is the core of the flour that passes through the movement of the mill in the walls of the mill.
E comfeys aquel ayssi cum es, sino que cribelles aquel am album de huou, e pausa la comfeccio de lu no-spessa ni subtil; e aprop usa de aquela.	And cook it as it is, but strain it through an egg white, and make the consistency of it neither thick nor thin; and use that one.
Autra manieyra de emplaustre restaurant fractura e dislocacio e torcio: recipe de assafetida, de lapdanum, de acacia, de enula, e migrach, que es razit de milgraner salvage, de totz ana drac. x; de mirra e aloen ana drac. v; alochil ana drac. xx; totz sian trissatz e cribellatz e sian mesclatz am aygua alichil o am album de huou si la compleccio del malaute es scalfada; e aprop usa de aquest emplaustre, quar es de bona composicio e restaura les osses trencatz leugierament, e confereys a motz homes.	Another method of a healing plaster for fractures and dislocations: Take assafetida, frankincense, acacia, enula, and myrrh, which is resin from wild pomegranates, all in the proportion of one drachma each; myrrh and aloe, five drachmas each; aloes, twenty drachmas. Mix these together and add honey or egg white if the patient's complexion is scorched; then use this plaster, for it is of good composition and quickly restores broken bones, and it benefits many people.
Autra manieyra de emplaustre le qual comfereys a fractura e torcio: recipe migrach e met de altea blanca ana drac. x; de mirra e de aloen ana drac v; de acacia drac. vi; de bol armenic drac. .xx.	Another method of a plaster that benefits fractures and dislocations: Take myrrh, met de altaia blanca one drachma each; myrrh and aloe five drachmas each; acacia six drachmas; armenic bole twenty drachmas.
Totz sian trissatz en mortier am mota contricio, e sian cribellatz, e sian comfitz am aygua o am album de huou e sia administrat.	All of these shall be ground in a mortar with a little vinegar, and strained, and made into a paste with water or egg white and then administered.
Manieyra de emplaustre a juncturas e osses separatz de lors locs, e seda dolor accident en aquels e a fissuras e fractaduras: sia presa lana sutza e sia submersa en vi agre e oli cuyt e sia pausat sobre le loc.	Method of plastering at joints and bones separated from their sockets, and for pain incident in those, and to splits and fractures: take soft wool and soak it in sweet wine and olive oil, and place it on the site.
Mays en aquest emplastre no es vertut de restauracio, de apostema caut e expelleys dolors propriament.	Let this plaster have no virtue of restoration, but cauterize and expel pains properly.
Autra manieyra de emplastre que restaura os trancat: pren fuelas de figuier sort e fuelas de papaver salvatge; contereys tot e fay emplastre de lor.	Another method of plastering that restores a broken bone: take stalks of fig and stalks of wild poppy; mix them all and make plaster from them.
Manieyra de emplastre abreujat aministrat deves la restauracio de fractura de os e quan tu voles resolucio del romanent de apostema: recipe razitz de altea, de camamilla e flors de violes, de farina de ers, de totz ana partida .i.; sian totz trissatz e sian cofitz am vi, si·l membre no es scalfat.	Method of plastering quickened administered for the restoration of broken bones and when you want resolution of the residue of an abscess: take resin of alder, of chamomile and violets flowers, of flour of erys, of all these a part .i. shall be all ground and shall be mixed with wine if the member is not wounded.
Mays si es scalfat, lahoras comfeys aquel am aygua de coliandre humit o am aygua e usa de lu.	But if it is wounded, then cook that with water of coriander moistened or with water and use that one.
Autra manieyra de emplastra pus fort en resolucio que aquest primier, quan accideys apostema dur deves la restauracio del membre: recipe de razitz de altea e de semensa de li, e de balaustia, e mellilot, majorana, flors de viol, de camamilla, de totz ana partida i engual; totz sian trissatz e sian cofitz am aygua de sauze o am aygua dousa o am vi, tot aquo segon la qualitat del membre e le repaus de la color de lu.	Another method of plaster even stronger in resolution than this first one, when it happens to the abscess dureness during the restoration of a member: take resin of alder and of larch wood, and of dill seeds, and myrrh, marjoram, violets flowers, chamomile, of all these a part i equal; let all be ground and mixed with water of vinegar or with sweet water or with wine, all according to the quality of the member and the color of it.
Mays Ypocras no diyssec en le sieu libre que sia pausat sobre le membre trenquat deves la restauracio de lu sino cerot fayt de cera e de oli e no autre causa; e recomtec que sia migier entre grossitut e subtilitat.	But the Hypocras does not dry in the air, let it be placed on the broken member during its restoration, unless a cerot is made of wax and oil and nothing else; and that it be between thickness and thinness.
Mays a Gualia es vist que sian pausatz sobre le membre trencat deves la restauracio de lu e las causas en las quals es exsiccacio am petit de caliditat so ayssi cum mirra, enses e semblantz a lor de aquelas causas que havem recomtadas.	But it is seen that they are placed on the broken member during its restoration and the causes in which there is dryness due to small heat are also like those of those causes that we have recounted.
Manieyra de emplastre que comfereys a lesio e dolor: recipe migat, de cezes, de pels de home inscizes o pena de auzel, e de altea, e sal, partidas enguals; sian trissatz e cribellatz e sian cofitz, e sia fayt emplastre.	Method of plastering that confers to injury and pain: take milk, of eggs, of hair of a human head or bird feathers, and resin of alder, and salt, all in equal parts; let them be ground and strained and made into a paste.
Mays la quantitat segon la qual cove que romangua la liadura e aprop sia disliada, es que consideres si no es accidit dolor ni pruziment ni le os es trencat no es maugut de son loc, lahoras tu no deslies de motz jorns.	But the amount according to the skin that was bitten let it be loose, and then let it be dissolved; consider if no pain nor swelling nor the bone broken not is moved out of its place, then you do not remove for many days.
E si accideys al loc dolor vehement o prusiment o imflacio, lahoras tu te coyte o deslie aquel en la hora, e osta le emplastre de lu.	And if it happens to the site a violent pain or swelling or inflammation, then you cut it off or remove that one in the hour, and replace the plaster on it.
E pren drap de li e spongia marina leon humida, e submergeys aquela en aygua tebeza, e am aquela lava le loc entro que cesse aquel pruziment e la dolor sia sedada; e aprop layssa repausar le membre per una hora; e aprop pausa sobre lu lana sutza submersa en vi agre e oli o oli rozat, e lia sobre lu per una nuoyt entro que sias segur de apostema caut, e que repause la imflacio del membre, e sia remauguda la dolor de lu.	And take linen and sea sponge moistened with warm water, and soak that one in tepid water, and with that wash the site until that swelling and pain is stayed; and then let the member rest for an hour; and then place on it soft wool soaked in sweet wine and olive oil or rose-water, and let it be bound over it for a night while you are sure of the abscess cauterization, and that the inflammation of the member is allayed and the pain of it is stayed.
E aprop itera aquela strictura subtil e emplastre petit e no·l strenhas per la tua constriccio primieyra, e subtilia am aquel entro que sia sanat.	And then repeat that gentle binding and small plaster, and do not tighten it by your first compression, and apply gently that one until it is healed.
E si vezes que le apostema e la rogor e la dolor e la imflacio e tots les accidentz ja so remaugutz de tot, e indigeysses de emplastre e de strictura, lahoras tu itera aquel ayssi cum has fayt al comensant engualment.	And if the abscess and heat and pain and inflammation and all accidents are already allayed, and you have removed the plaster and the binding, then repeat that one just as you did at the beginning equally.
E si no accideys al membre alcuna causa de aquelas que havem ditas, lahoras no deslies aquel sino aprop tres dias o quatre o v o .vii.; e alcunas veguadas tot aquo es layssat per xx dias segon que a tu appar per la desliadura del membre, ayssi cum havem dit, entro que la fractura adhereys, e se acosta a la coagulacio de la carn sobre aquel.	And if there does not happen to the member any cause of those which we have said, then do not remove that one except after three days or four or five or seven; and some times let it be left for xx days according to what you see by the loosening of the member, just as we have said, until the fracture adheres and comes close to the coagulation of the flesh on that one.
E lahoras ajusta en la strictura mays que en la tua strictura primieyra tota, e ayusta en la engrossacio de la vianda del malaute, segon que es precedida la rememoracio de lu.	And then tighten in the binding just a little more than in your first binding a little, and increase in the thickness of the food of the patient, according to what is preceded by its memory.
Mays si tu vezes le loc de la fractura ja desiccar e extenuar mays que no cove, lahoras sapias que·l nutriment es prohibit pervenir ad aquel; e donc embroca aquel am aygua tebeza deves tota veguada que delias aquel; e sia aquo en totz tres dias; e alleuja la strictura un petit, e per aquesta operacio corr al membre le nutriment, e es sanat leugierament.	But if you see the site of the fracture dried and weakened except that it does not have pain, then understand that the nourishment is prohibited from coming to that one; and therefore moisten that one with water tepid due to total wetting that of the member; and let that one be for three days; and loosen the binding a little, and by this operation strengthen the member, and is healed quickly.
Mays aquo que fan les fols restauradors de la fractura del membre autra veguada quan no es restaurat al comensament, segon que cove, e es restaurat segon tortuositat, es error segon la operacio de lor, e temor gran, e si fos dreyturier aquo agrandit les Antics en lors libres e agueran am aquo obrat.	But that which the foolish restorers of the fracture of the member see another wetting when it is not restored at the beginning, according to how it hurts, and is restored according to tortuosity, is error according to their operation, and great fear, and if they were correct that one would be enlarged by them in their sockets and would have been turned on.
E yeu no he vist ad alcu de lor aquo far, per que es pus razonable que aquo no fassa.	And I have not seen any of them do that, because it is more reasonable that that one does not happen.
Capitol segon: De fractura quan accideys en le cap.	Chapter according to: Of fracture when it happens in the head.
Las specias de fracturas son motas, e las figuras de lor son diversas, e las causas son distinctas, quar de fracturas alcuna es fayta per percussio de spaza, e la percussio osta tot le os entro al ciphac, le qual es dejos le os, ayssi cum fay ayssa en le fust, e per aquo aquesta specia es nompnada ascial; o la spaza inscideys alcuna partida del os, e inscideys la carn de lu e no passa la inscizio entro al derier de lu; e aquesta specia de fractura es nompnada levatio absoluta.	The species of fractures are many, and the figures of them are diverse, and the causes are distinct, because of fractures any is done by concussion of a staff, and the concussion hits all the bone within the skull, which is below the bone, just as it does that in the trunk, and for that one this species is named ascial; or the staff hits one part of the bone, and hits the flesh of it and does not pass the incision into the lower one of it; and this species of fracture is named absolute elevation.
E la plagua de aquestas doas fracturas o es gran o pauca, e de fractura que es contricio o atricio; e causa de lu es percussio am poyra o cazement sobre peyra, e a lor semblantz.	And the crack of both these fractures is large or small, and the fracture which is compression or traction; and the cause of it is concussion with a club or stone on stone, and to them resembling.
E aquesta fractura o es penetrant que ja apropinqua al pannicol le qual es dejos le os; o es en la facia del os, e la plagua de aquestas doas fracturas o es gran o pauca.	And this fracture either penetrates to the membrane which is under the bone, or it is on the surface of the bone, and the plague from these two fractures may be large or small.
E de fractura es que es ameguada en le os, en la subtilitat del cabel petita, e per aquo es nompnada aquesta specia fractura capillar.	And a fracture that is hidden in the bone, in the thin layer beneath the hair, and for this reason this type of fracture is called a capillary fracture.
E es fractura que es fayta o per cazement o per percussio de peyra e a lu semblantz, que fa intrar alcuna lamina del os a las partidas dedintz, e es fayta en le loc concavitat ayssi cum accideys als payroles de eram quan accideys a lor percussio e es partida de lor intrada a las partidas dedintz.	And this fracture is caused either by an object falling on it, or by the impact of a stone and similar objects, causing a small piece of bone to enter into the joints within, just as it happens to the fingers when they are struck with a stone or something similar, and resulting in a break in their interior.
E majorment es fayt aquo en les cors de osses humitz, ayssi cum so caps de efantz.	And this mainly occurs in the bones of the head, as well as the skull of infants.
E so a totas aquestas specias fracturas satagias, so son pessas ayssi cum stelhas separadas.	And all of these types of fractures are bound together by small threads.
E yeu vindre am reremoracio de tot aquo en son loc.	And in all of this, you should be mindful of the following:
E conoyssem totas aquestas specias de fractura per deteccio sobre aquelas e per inquisicio de lor am tentas e ostament de carn corrumpuda que es sobre lor.	And you can recognize all these types of fractures by examining their characteristics and through the inquiry of symptoms, as well as observing the discolored flesh that lies above them.
E specia capillar es conoguda per aysso que es descubert sobre le os, e es abstergit, e linit sobre lu am tentha, quar la fractura appar negra.	And capillary fracture is known by its appearance over the bone, and it is uncovered and cleaned, and when there is a black spot above it after probing, then the fracture is clear.
Mays en la curacio de fractura considera al comensament les accidentz del malaute, e lahoras si tu vezes per los accidentz que signifique per significacio manifesta sobre paor, ayssi cum es vomit de colera, e extencio, e perdement de entendament, e abscizio de votz, e sincopi, e febre acuta, e eyssiment dels huels e rogor de aquels, e semblantz a lor dels accidentz en las majors disposicios, ses dopte no es sanat.	In the treatment of fractures, we must first consider the patient's condition, and if you see symptoms that clearly indicate fear, such as vomiting in cholera, and extension, and loss of consciousness, and fainting, and acute fever, and swelling of the joints, and heat in those, and similar symptoms in major conditions, then the patient is not healable.
E si vezes accidentz no-correntz tu speras salut, lahoras tu comensa la curacio de lu.	And if you see no such symptoms indicating bad prognosis, then you can begin the treatment.
La qual causa es quar si es vengut a tu le plaguat en le comensament cum es plaguat e aquo es en les dias de ivern, lahoras cove que tu studias en le ostament del os denant le dia xiiii segon tota disposicio.	The reason for this is that if the wound has come to you in the beginning as it was and it is in the days of winter, then you should study the appearance of the bone before the fourteenth day according to all conditions.
E si es en les dias d’estiu, lahoras cove que te coytes ostar le os denant le vii dia, habantz que aquo que es dejos le os sia corromput del pannicol, e que accidescan les accidentz que havem recomtatz.	And if it is in the days of summer, then you should wait to examine the bone until the seventh day, making sure that what lies beneath the membrane is not corrupted, and that the symptoms we have mentioned occur.
E si la fractura ja es pervenguda al pannicol cubrent le cervel, e es am partidas menudas e atricio, lahoras cove que inscidas la partida conminuta e atrita, segon que yeu recomtare a tu.	And if the fracture has already reached the membrane covering the brain, and it is crushed into minute particles and ground up, then you should insert the ground-up particles according to what I will tell you.
E es que tu razas le cap del malaute plaguat, e descuebres sobre le os segon costuma e manieyra a tu possible segon la figura de la plagua, e que sia leugier sobre le malaute.	And it is that you scrape the head of the patient and uncover the bone according to custom and in a way possible to you according to the shape of the wound, and that it lies lighter on the patient.
E si accideys a tu deves la deteccio del os, fluxs de sanc o apostema caut, lahora tu te oppausa a lu am aquo que cove, e es que huemplas le loc de draps infuzes en vi e oli rozat, e fassa repausar la plagua entro que sia sedat le apostema, e sies segur de fluxs del sanc; e aprop comensa en la circuicio del os e en la ablatio de lu.	And if it happens to you that you must examine the bone, or there is a flow of blood or pus, then you should apply something that suits best, and it is that you dress the wound with clothes dipped in wine and rose oil, and let the wound rest until the pustule is healed, and be certain to stop the flow of blood; and then begin on the circuit around the bone and in its ablation.
E aquo sia segon una de dos manieyras de operacio.	And it should be according to one of two methods of operation.
E la una manieyra es que tu inscidas le os am inscisori de streyt tal, e aquesta es la forma de lu: E aprop administra un autre inscissori aquest, un pauc pus lat que aquel; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And one method is that you insert the bone with a sharp incision, and this is its form: And then administer another incision, slightly wider than the first; and this is its form:
E aprop administra mays le inscissori pus lat que·l segon.	And then you place the bone with a stitch made by the location of where it was incised and ground; and if it happens to you by stitch, then you should apply it according to the manner of stitching. And then administer the incision wider than the first.
E cove que sia deves tu nombre de inscissoris diverses, dels quals alcus so pus latz que alcus autres; e alcus de lor so pus breus que·ls autres e sian en le derier de acuitat de las suas extremitatz, e sian de ferr indi o felod.	And you should know that you need several incision knives, some of which are wider than others; and some are shorter than others, and they are in the shape of aiguille or chisel.
E usa de lor am facilitat en percussio sobre le inscissori per so que no concutesca le cap e leda aquel.	And use them with ease when striking against the incision knife so that you do not hit the head and lead that one.
E si le os es fort, dur, lahoras cove que perfores en le circuit de lu denant que tu administres los inscissoris am les taravels, les quals so nomnatz taravels no-profundantz.	And if the bone is strong and hard, then you should drill into its circuit before administering the incision knives with the drills, which are called non-deepening drills.
E no so nomnatz ayssi sino quar aquels no pausan le terme de l’os del test ad aquo que es aprop lu, per so quar al taravel es redonda extremitat o marge sobre aquel que es dejos le cap de lu agut semblant a marge o a cercle petit, le qual prohibeys esser submergit e passar la spissitut del os.	And they are not named so but because those do not stop at the end of the bone but to the taravel which is round in its extremity or edge over that which is under the head of it sharp resembling an edge or a small circle, which prohibits from being submerged and passing through the thickness of the bone.
E es convenient que tu prenguas de aquestz taravels gran nombre dels quals quascu convenesca a la spicitut de quascun os, entro que sia a tu present en tottz testz del cervel la extremitat del qual sia aguda, la quantitat en longitut e brevitat sia segon la quantitat de spicitut de aquest test.	And it is convenient that you take many of these drills, each of which suits the thickness of each bone, while it is present in all parts of the head, whose extremity is sharp, and the quantity in length and breadth is according to the quantity of thickness of that part.
E aquesta es la forma de tres specias de teravels: La qualitat de perforar en le circuit del os trencat es que pauses le teravel sobre le os e revolvas aquel am les tieus ditz entro que sapias que l’os ja es penetrat; e aprop permuda le terevel ad autre loc, e pausa aquo que es entre tot trauc la quantitat de la grosseza del ray o enviro aquo.	And this is the form of three types of drills: The quality of drilling into the circuit of the broken bone is that you stop the drill on the bone and turn it with your fingers while you know that the bone has been penetrated; and then change the drill to another location, and pause what is between all traces the amount of thickness of the thread or wire.
E aprop inscideys am inscissoris aquo que es entre quascun trauc del os, e fay aquel pus subtil que podes sobre aquo en fi de levitat, ayssi cum havem dit, entro que erradiques le os, o am la tua ma, o am alcuna autra causa per alcus sturmentz les quals auras apparelhatz ad aquo, ayssi cum tanalhas e forceps subtils.	And then insert with incision knives what is between each crack of the bone, and make it more subtle that you can at the end of elevation, as we have said, within that erradiquing the bone, or with your hand, or with any other cause by some tools which you have prepared for that, as tweezers and subtle forceps.
E cove que tu guardes am tota cautela que l’inscissori no toque alcuna causa del ciphac.	And you should be careful that the incision knife does not touch any nerve of the brain.
E donc cum auras circuit le os perforan, e sira separat del ciphac si es continuat am lu, e auras aquel extrayt, cove que razas e enguales aquel en la asperitat de lu de aquo que es en le os am autra sturment semblant a inscissori, mays empero cove que sia pus teon e pus subtil que les autres inscissoris.	And then when you have completed the circuit of the bone and separated it from the brain if it is continued with it, and you have extracted that, you should scrape and bite that in the asperity of it of what lies in the bone by another instrument similar to an incision knife, but however, let it be thicker and more subtle than the other incision knives.
E si roman alcuna partida dels osses petitz e satagias, lahoras pren aquela am facilitat am aquo que es deves tu dels sturmentz; e aprop aquo cura la plagua am lichinis e enguentz les quals havem ditz.	And if any of the small bones and threads are broken, then take that easily with what suits you of those tools; and then cure the wound with poultices and ointments as we have said.
E l’autra manieyra de operacio es leugiera, longinqua de paor, la qual diyssec Gualia e la lauzec per gran lausor; e aquest es le sermo de lu: necessari es a tu en le comensament que comenses descobrir la partida del os del loc en le qual es la fractura pus vehement e pus manifesta, entro que quan auras descubert aquela partida e auras pausat dejos lu la extremitat de aquest inscissori lent e alegre del qual aquesta es la forma:	And the other method of operation is safer and more distant from fear, which says Gualia and the law by great lawgiver; and this is its speech: It is necessary for you in the beginning to begin uncovering the part of the bone where the fracture is most violent and most manifest, within that when you have uncovered that part and have stopped under it the extremity of that incision knife long and gentle, of which this is its form:
E es que la partida lenticular es leon e no inscideys alcuna causa, e la partida aguda es de lu en dos latz avantz en longitut, ayssi cum vezes; que la partida lenticular sia ajustada al ciphac am la facia de lu inscident aguda en le os.	And then you stop over it by what lies in the location of the fracture of the bone and make it according to the shape of the bone that is under it, and insert with the other incision knife wider than the first. And the lenticular crack is lion-shaped and does not insert any cause, and the acute crack is from it on both sides in length, as you see; so that the lenticular crack be adjusted to the brain by the membrane of it inserting acute into the bone.
E aprop percuteys sobre le inscissori de una partida am un petit malhet entro que inscidas tot le os am facilitat ayssi cum es revolvut, e tu sias segur del pannicol que no accida en lu accident que temas en denguna manieyra, e si le medicant14 era le pus fol de totz les homes e le mays ignorant de lor; certament, e si era dorment.	And then pierce over the incision of one crack with a small chisel within that insert all the bones with ease as it is turned, and you be certain of the membrane not striking in it in any way that you fear, and if the patient was the most foolish of all men and the most ignorant of them; certainly, and if he was sleeping.
Lahoras si romania alcuna causa annexa al os del pannicol en alcus locs de os, inscidira aquel de lu am la extremitat del inscissori aquel lenticular, e deliuraria aquel de lu am facilitat, quar es deliurat de lu ses nocument e ses paor.	Then if it pierces any part of the membrane to the bone in some locations of bones, insert that with the extremity of the lenticular incision knife, and loose that from it with ease, for it is loosed from it without harm or fear.
E si fractura del os no penetra entro al pannicol, e aquo que es abscidit o es ostat del os es la facia de lu, e roman en lu asperitat e satagias subtils, lahoras cove que razas aquela asperitat e erradiques aquelas satagias am razoris subtils per les quals tu has preparat le nombre, de diversas quantitatz per que sia a tu possible administrar de aquels en tot loc les pus convenientz de lor e le pus dreyt de aquels segon aquo en que te perduzeys la tua operacio aquel os trencat e la figura de lu.	If the fracture does not penetrate into the muscle, and what is severed or damaged in the bone is its surface, and it remains rough and with subtle jagged edges, then smoothen that roughness and remove those jagged edges with a sharp razor, for which you have prepared the number of different quantities so that you can administer them in the most convenient way possible, and according to what will guide your operation on that broken bone and its shape.
E cove que administres en la tua razio am la qual razes le os al comensament le pus lat de aquels razoris, e aprop usa aprop lu del pus subtil de lu, e no cesses far aquo segon continuitat entro que pervenguas ad aministrar le pus teon e·l pus subtil de totz aquels.	And you will administer in your wisdom with which you shave the bone at the beginning, the sharpest of those razors, and then use it on the most subtle part of it, and do not cease to do this according to continuity until you reach administering the thickest and the most subtle of all of them.
Mays en quascuna de las autras fracturas petitas capillars e fractura subtil, cove que administres cura segon aquo que perduseys ad rectificacio de lu.	But in any other small capillary fractures and subtle fracture, you will administer care according to what you find appropriate for its rectification.
E es causa que no es ameguada sobre totz les quals han studi en aquela art.	And it is a cause that is not covered on all those who have studied in that art.
E stec sobre aquo que nos scriut havem mostrat en grans fracturas.	And we will speak about what we have written about great fractures.
E si le pannicol es retangut quan tu erradiques le os, lahoras cove que prenguas drap de li segon la quantitat de la plagua, e submergeys aquel en oli rozat, e pausa aquel sobre le orrifici de la plagua; e aprop pren autre drap doblat o triplicat e submergeys lu en vi e oli rozat e pausa aquel sobre drap prim e fay aquo al pus leugierament que podes sobre aquel, que no graves le ciphac; e aprop administra sobre aquel liament lat, e no strenhas aquel sino per quantitat que tengua la plagua tant solament.	And if the muscle is stretched when you shave the bone, then take a cloth according to the amount of the wound, and soak it in rose oil, and place it over the opening of the wound; and then take another cloth folded or doubled, soak it in wine and rose oil, and place it over the first cloth and do this as gently as you can so that you do not press on the head; and then administer over that a bandage lightly, and do not tighten it except for the amount that the wound has.
E layssa aquel am aquesta cura per un dia o per dos entro que sias segur de apostema caut; e aprop deslia aquel e aprop aministra medicinas am las quals es superflua siccitat, ayssi cum razitz de lin e farina de errs, e polvera de enses e de aristologia, e de semblantz ad aquels.	And let him stay with this treatment for a day or two until you are sure of cauterized pus; and then loosen it and administer medicines with which there is excess dryness, such as linseed poultices and wheat flour, and powder of eggshells and aristology, and similar things to these.
E es que tu fassas de aquestas medicinas polvera que sia pulverizada sobre la plagua, ayssi cum son secas; e universalment, administra en aquel tota medicina de proprietat de la qual es que abstergesca e no mordique.	And it is that you make of these medicines powder that is sprinkled over the wound, as they are dried; and universally, administer on it all medicine of a property from which it is cleansed and not bitten.
E guarda te segon la tua vertut que la plagua en la tua curacio sia neta; e no sia en lu surdicia de enguent ni autra; ni no layssas agreguar virulencia en lu; quar quan es ajustada sobre le pannicol del cervel, corromp aquel e poyreys aquel, e accideys sobre le malaute aprop aquo malicia maligna.	And guard yourself according to your virtue that the wound in your treatment is clean; and there is no dirtiness of ointment or other in it; nor do you let virulence accumulate in it; for when it is applied on the membrane of the brain, it corrupts it and harms it, and malicious evil happens on the patient accordingly.
E accideys en le ciphac del cap, cum de lu es mondificat le os e majorment quan es menspresada la cura de lu, e es negror en la superficia de lu; e donc considera lahoras si accideys al malaute les accidentz que havem ditz, sapias que es parnicios ses tot dopte.	And it happens in the head, as when the bone is cleansed and especially when the treatment of it is lessened, and there is blackness on its surface; and therefore consider if these accidents happen to the patient that we have said, know that it is deadly unless all is done.
E si no accideys negror sino de la medicina que es pausada desus, e es en vertut de aquela medicina que fassa aquela negror, lahoras cove que tu prenguas de mel una partida e de oli rozat partidas .iii., e am aquels linieys un drap, e aprop pausa aquel sobre le ciphac; e aprop cura aquel am las specias de curacio que conveneys entro que sia sanat.	And if blackness does not happen except from the medicine that is applied above it, and it is from the virtue of that medicine that makes that blackness, then take honey one part and rose oil three parts and soak a cloth with them, and then place it over the head; and then cure that with spices of healing that are convenient so that it is healed.
Capitol .iii.	Chapter .iii.
De restauracio del nas quan es trincat.	Of restoration of the nose when it is broken.
Sapias que no es trencat del nas sino doas partidas ensemps pus sobiranas, o una de aquelas alcunas veguadas, per so quar en lu has dos osses, quar la partida dejos es cartillaginosa, e no es trencada e no accideys a lu sino atricio e tortuositat e sinuitat.	Know that the nose is not broken except in two parts above the most superior part, or one of those some few times, because in it there are two bones, because the lower part is cartilaginous, and not broken, and nothing happens to it except straightness and tortuosity and sinuousness.
Mays si es trencada la una de las doas partidas de lu, lahoras cove que tu intrometas le dit petit en le sieu nas, e que engualhas aquela fractura dedintz am le tieu dit indic, e am le dit pous defora, entro que retorne le nas segon la sua figura natural.	But if one of the two parts of it is broken, then you must insert your little finger into his nose, and press that fracture within with your index finger, and with your thumb from outside, so that the nose returns according to its natural figure.
E sia fayt aquo per tu am facilitat, e guarda te que no caja per aquela tua operacio sobre le malaute delor.	And let it be done by you with facility, and guard yourself that pain does not happen to the patient because of this operation.
E si la fractura es en la pus sobirana partida del nas, e le dit no perve ad aquela, lahoras cove que sia equat am la extremitat del ray en le qual sia petita grossitut.	And if the fracture is in the most superior part of the nose, and the finger does not reach it, then let it be equal with the extremity of the bone on which there is a small thickness.
E si la fractura es en doas partidas, lahoras tu fay le semblant de aquo.	And if the fracture is in two parts, then you make the likeness of that.
E coyta te am restauracio de lu en le primier dia de la fractura, si es possible; e sino, lahoras aprop le vii o·l x deves le repaus del apostema caut.	And guard yourself with its restoration on the first day of the fracture, if it is possible; and if not, then let it be seven or eleven days after the rest of the cauterized pus.
E aprop entromet en la extremitat del nas una meca de drap de li, si la fractura es en una partida, o metz doas calguas, si la fractura es en doas partidas, e sia en la calgua grossitut de tanta quantitat que umpla le trauc del nas.	And then insert at the extremity of the nose a wad of linen cloth, if the fracture is in one part, or put two wads, if the fracture is in two parts, and let there be thickness in the calvada of such quantity that it fills the crack of the nose.
E diysso alcus dels antics restauradors que las calguas sian enfundudas en boder, e sian permudadas en tot dia, mays no es vist a mi; habantz cove que la meca sia enfunduda en album de huou comfit am polvera de moli; e aprop layssa la qualgua entro que l’os sia fermat e sia endurazida la cartillage.	And one of the ancient restorators said that the wads be wrapped in butter, and be changed every day, but I have not seen it; they say that the wad should be wrapped in comfit oil with ground powder; and then let it stay so that the bone is firmed and the cartilage is hardened.
E alcunas veguadas sia entromes en le nas, en loc de calgua, pena de auca pus que es envolopada de drap de li leon; e sia que ja te la fractura del nas pus vehement e que le malaute no sia prohibit de inspiracio.	And some times let an awl be inserted into the nose, in place of the calvada, as a needle that is wrapped in linen cloth; and then let there be the fracture of the nose most violent and that the patient not be prohibited from breathing.
E aquesta causa no es a tu necessaria; e si voles, fay aquo, e si voles, fay calguas.	And this cause is not necessary for you; and if you want, do it, and if you want, do wads.
E si accideys autra veguada apostema caut, emplastra le nas am cerot o am coto enfus en vi agre e oli rozat, o am diaquilon.	And if another cauterized pus happens, plaster the nose with cerot or a poultice steeped in wine, or oil and rose oil, or with diaquilon.
Mays si no accideys apostema caut, lahoras cove que emplaustres aquel defora am farina de sizami e am polvera de enses cofitz am album de huou; e aprop pausa sobre lu stopa leon, e no lies le nas am alcuna causa.	But if cauterized pus does not happen, then plaster it outside with sesame flour and eggshells ground with linseed oil; and then place over it a wad of linen cloth, and do not tie the nose for any reason.
Mays si so trencats les osses del nas am fractura petita o so conminuitz, lahoras cove que scindas sobre aquels, e extraguas aquels am insturmentz que conveno ad aquels; e aprop cos la scissura, e cura aquela am aquo que encarna e consolida, e am emplastres ad aquo convenientz.	But if the bones of the nose are broken with a small fracture or crushed, then split them and extract them with instruments that are convenient for them; and then sew the split, and cure it with that which flesh and hardens it, and with plasters that are convenient for it.
E si accideys plagua dedintz le nas, lahoras cove que cures aquela am calguas e administra canulas de plom entro que sia de tot sanat.	And if a wound happens inside the nose, then cure that with wads and administer lead tubes so that it is completely healed.
Capitol .iiii.	Chapter .iv.
De restauracio de la mandibula quan es trincada.	Of restoration of the mandible when it is broken.
Quan la mandibula dejos es rompuda e la fractura de lu no es am plagua, reguarda lahoras si la fractura es deforas tant solament, e no es trencada en dos e es curvada a las partidas dedintz, lahoras la sua cognicio es leugiera.	When the mandible is broken and its fracture does not have pus, take heed if the fracture is only outward, and not broken in two and bent inward at the parts within, then its knowledge is difficult.
E cove donc, si la fractura es en la part dreyta, que tu intrometas le tieu indic senestre en la boca del malaute; e semblantment si la fractura es an la mandibula senestra, lahoras intromet le dit indic de la ma dreyta; e impelleys am aquel la gilbositat de la fractura dedintz am facilitat a las partidas defora, am la tua autra ma de la partida defora del os; am aquel decentment equa aquelam.	And therefore, if the fracture is on the right part, then insert your left index finger into the mouth of the patient; and similarly if the fracture is on the left mandible, then insert the index finger of the right hand; and press with that the flexibleness of the fracture within with facility to the parts outward, with the other hand from the part outward of the bone; with that decently equal it.
E si la fractura de la mandibula ja es separada en doas, lahoras cove que administres extensio de doas partz segon rectitut entro que sia possibla la equacio de lu.	And if the fracture of the mandible is already separated in two, then administer extension of the two parts according to straightness so that its equality is possible.
E si accideys conmocio de dentz a disrupcio, lahoras strenh aquelas de las quals speras que romandran am fil de aur o de argent o de ceda; e aprop pausa sobre la mandibula trencada cerot, e aprop pausa sobre lu drap duplicat, e pausa sobre le drap gran stelha decentment fayta, o una pessa de sola engual a la longitut de la mandibula; e aprop lia aquela desus segon que a tu es apparelhada la liadura de lu e que conveneys la applicacio, entro que no es destruida.	And if concussion of teeth to disruption happens, then strengthen those of which you expect that they will break with thread of gold or silver or silk; and then place over the broken mandible cerot, and then place over it a doubled cloth, and place over the cloth a large steed decently made, or a sole wad at the length of the mandible; and then tie that above according to how you are equipped with its application so that it is not destroyed.
E comanda al malaute que use de repaus e tranquilitat, e pausa la vianda de lu sorbicios leons.	And command the patient to have rest and tranquility, and give him light food.
E si extimas que ja es alterada la figura en alcuna manieyra, lahoras tu te coyta e deslia aquel al tertz dia; e aprop rectifica aquo que ja es alterat de lu e emplaustra aquel am polvera de moli, am album de huou, o am farina de cisami, pus que tu auras ostat le cerot de lu, e pausa sobre le emplastra lana leon.	And if you see that the figure has been altered in any way, then you cover it and loosen it on the third day; and correct what has already changed and apply powder of millstone, albumen of egg, or flour of beans after removing the cerot, and place over it lamb's wool.
E adonc cum sta annex e ajustat aquel emplastre sobre lu, e la disposicio del os no es alterada, layssa aquel, que no le deslies entro que sia sanat e strenh la fractura; quar motas veguadas aquesta fractura es streyta en tres sempmanas.	And then when it stays in place and the plaster is adjusted over it, and the position of the bone is not altered, leave it until it is healed and strong; for often this fracture is tight in three weeks.
E si autra veguada accida apostema caut, lahoras administra aquo que havem dit motas veguadas en la sedacio de lu entro que sia sanat, e sia remaugut aquel apostema.	And if a ulcer occurs again, then administer what we have said many times in the treatment of it until it is healed and the ulcer closed.
E si la fractura es am plagua, lahoras considera si es pessa del os separada o satagias, lahoras tu te subtilia que ostes aquelas satagias am aquo que conveneys ad aquo en la remocio de aquelas dels sturmentz.	And if the fracture is compound, then you consider whether the bone is split or shattered, then you subtly move those splinters with what is convenient for that in removing them with instruments.
E si le orrifici de la plagua es streyt, lahoras tu le amplifique am le fleubotomi segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	And if the opening of the fracture is tight, then you expand it with phlebotomy according to the quantity of your need.
E aprop quan tu auras ostat aquelas satagias, e de aquelas no sira remaugut re, lahoras tu cos le orrifici de la plagua si es ampla; e sino, pausa sobre aquela un dels emplaustres que conveneysso ad aquo e encarnan aquela, entro que sia sanada.	And then when you have removed those splinters, and there is no pus remaining, you close the opening of the fracture if it is wide; and if not, place one of the appropriate plasters over it and it will heal.
Capitol .v.	Chapter 5:
De restauracio de la furcula quan es trinquada.	Of restoration of the collarbone when it is dislocated.
Motas veguadas es trencada la furcula de la partida denant deves le muscle, e aquela fractura es fayta en una de tres manieyras.	The collarbone of the front part is often broken by the muscle, and that fracture is done in one of three ways.
Quar o es trencada, o seperada, o es seperada en doas partz otra que no accidan satagias; e es leugier a la restauracio de lu; o es ayssi que accideysso en lu satagias, e es dificil a restauracio de lu; o es ayssi que la fractura es am plagua.	Because it is either broken, or separated, or it separates into two parts other than splinters; and it is easier to restore; or it happens in it splinters, and its restoration is difficult; or the fracture is compound.
E la operacio en aquela, quan la fractura es ses plagua, es que tu fassas esser present dos ministres, per so que la un tengua le adjutori e siegua la furcula trencada, e l’autre extenda le col ves aquela partida.	And the operation on it when the fracture is compound is that you have two ministers present so that one holds the assistant and follows the collarbone that is broken, and the other pulls the collar bone towards that part.
E aprop enguala la fractura am les tieus ditz entro que sia fayta la forma de lu segon que cove, e no sia en lu eminencia pauca ni concavitat.	Then bind the fracture with the threads so that it is made in its form according to how it used to be, and there is not a little protuberance or concavity in it.
E si indigeysses mes de extencio, lahoras cove que pauses dejos le titillic del malaute spera de drap o de lana, e sia la grandesa de lu segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat; e exten e eleva la furcula e coarta la spera am la tua ma entro que enguales la frectura segon que cove.	And if you see more swelling, then put under the nape of the patient a pillow of cloth or wool, and let the size of it be according to the quantity of your need; and extend and elevate the collarbone and draw the pillow with your hand so that you bind the fracture according to how it used to be.
E si no podes atirar la extremitat de la furcula a las partidas defora, per so quar es pervenguda al preon, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sua cervitz, e pauses sobre le muscle de lu un coyssi migier en grandeza.	And if you cannot pull the end of the collarbone to the outside parts because it is reached by the chest, then let the patient be inclined on his neck, and place a pillow under the muscle of him that is half in size.
E le ministre prema le muscle de lu a las partidas dejos entro que l’os de la furcula sia elevat que es en le preon en sus, e lahoras tu rectifique la fractura e enguala aquela am les tieus ditz.	And the ministers press the muscle of him to the lower parts so that the bone of the collarbone is elevated above the chest in it, and then you correct the fracture and bind it with threads.
Mays si sentes satagias de la furcula e so maugudas, lahoras cove que fendes sobre aquela e extraguas aquelas satagias am facilitat.	But if you feel splinters of the collarbone and they are swollen, then let that be split over there and pull out those splinters with ease.
E si es retenguda en le os, lahoras tu ingenia inscisio de lu am un dels inscissoris les quals has apparelhatz ad aquo, pus que havias pausat dejos la furcula le sturment que serve le ciphac; e es sturment de fust o de ferr del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And if it is retained in the bone, then you devise an incision of it with one of the instruments which you have prepared for that, after you have placed under the collarbone the instrument which serves the head; and that instrument is of wood or iron whose form is thus:
E es semblant a culier del qual aquesta es la concavitat; e sia la sua latitut segon aquo que has necessitat de lu, segon la grandeza del os o la pauqueza de lu.	And it is similar to a spoon whose concavity is thus; and its breadth be according to what you have need of it, according to the size of the bone or the smallness of it.
Mays la longitut de lu sia segon que es a tu possible a la operacio; que haja doas extremitatz ayssi cum vezes, e la una extremitat sia ample e l’autre streyta.	But its length be according to what is to you possible to the operation; that it has two ends thus, and one end is ample and the other tight.
E si la disrupcio de la plagua la qual has inscidida quan has extraytas la satagia del os es ampla, e yest segur de apostema caut, lahoras tu ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura.	And if the opening of the fracture which you have split when you have pulled out the splinter from the bone is wide, and there is fear of pus, then you adjust the two lips of the fracture with a suture.
E si la disrupcio es pauca, o temes apostema caut, lahoras tu uemple la plagua am draps e pulvils segon la quantitat de la scissura de la plagua.	And if the opening is small, or you fear pus, then you fill the fracture with cloths and powders according to the quantity of the split of the fracture.
E si accideys apostema caut, lahoras infon drap en vi agre e oli rozat e vi, e pausa sobre aquel.	And if pus occurs, then pour cloth into vinegar and rose oil and wine, and place it over that.
Mays la strictura del os quan es ses plagua e ses seccio, es que pauses emplastre fayt de farina de moli am album de huou, e pausa sobre lu stopa leon, e aprop pausa la spera dejos le titillic de lu, si indigeyssas de aquela, e aprop pren humemate, so es torca la qual teno les Sarrazis , que sia mot longua, e sia latitut de lu de un palm o entorn aquel; e aprop pausa pulvils duplicatz sobre la stopa e l’emplastre; e aprop pren una stela de taula subtil de la qual la latitut d’ela sia de tres ditz e en longitut semblantment; e aprop envolopa aquela en drap, e aprop envolopa aquel drap am la stela en lo loc sobre le loc de la fractura; e aprop pausa humemati ayssi cum es revout, e revol aquela sobre le col de lu e dejos le titillic de lu sa e dejos le titillic de lu malaute, e reduzeys aquela sobre tota partida, e quan vezes que la strictura de la fractura am strictura descent, e es aquo que no es occultat sobre tu.	But the binding of the bone when it is compound and broken is that you place plaster made from millstone with albumen of egg, and place it over there; and then place lamb's wool, if pus occurs from there, and then take poultice, so is the which the Saracens hold, that is very long, and its breadth be of one palm or around that; and then pour powders doubled over the poultice and the plaster; and then take a slender stake of wood of which the breadth is three fingers and in length similarly; and then wrap it with cloth, and wrap that cloth with the stake in the place above the fracture; and then pause poultices thus as is reversed, and roll that about the neck of him and under his nape on both sides, and reduce that to all parts, and when the binding of the fracture with its binding descends, and that which is not hidden upon you.
E tot, que no sia mauguda la stelha desobre le os trencat; e per so cove que tu vejas le malaute quascun dia, que quan le liament es mollificat o vezas la stela ja esser remauguda, lahoras tu rectifica aquo e strenh la liadura.	And all, that the stake is not swollen over the broken bone; and then let you see the patient every day, for when the binding is softened or you see the stake already swollen, then you correct that and strengthen the binding.
E aprop pausa le dormir del malaute sobre le col de lu, e pausa dejos le titillic de lu deves le dormir de lu en la nueyt un petit coyssi; per so que am aquel sia elevat le adjutori de lu del latz de aquel, e donc es elevada la la fractura de la furcula a elevacio del muscle; o sia le bras de lu liat al col de aquel.	And then let the patient sleep on his neck, and place under his nape below the nape of him a little pillow; so that with that is elevated the support of him from that side, and thus the fracture of the collarbone is elevated above the chest; or let the arm be bound to the neck of him.
E no deslies le liament si no accideys en le loc prusiment o apostema, entro a xii dias.	And do not loose the binding unless pus occurs in that place or pus clearly, until 12 days.
E aprop renovelha le emplastre si has vista la facia de lu ad aquo, e ajusta en la strictura e restaura aquel e layssa entro que sia restaurat e sia coagulat la fractura de la furcula.	And then renew the plaster if you have seen the face of it to that, and adjust in the binding and restore him and leave until it is restored and the fracture of the collarbone is coagulated.
E es strenguda e comfortada segon le mes en xxviii dias, e alcunas veguadas en alcus homes es fayt en mens de temps de aquel.	And it is strengthened and comforted according to the month in 28 days, and some times in some men it is made within that time.
Capitol .vi.	Chapter 6:
De restauracio de fractura de la spalla.	Of restoration of fracture of the shoulder.
Spatula tart es trencada en le loc lat de lu e no so trencatz de lu sino les marges.	Spalla is broken in the wide place of it and not broken of it but the edges.
E donc quan es trencat le loc de lu — e es trencat en le mieg loc de lu — e no es conogut sino per tocament, lahoras segon que es la figura de la fractura sforsa te la preparacio de lu e reduzir aquela segon la figura natural en tota manieyra de engen la qual es a tu possible.	And then when it is broken the place of it — and it is broken in the middle place of it — and not congealed but by touch, then according as the figure of the fracture is removed you prepare it and reduce that according to the natural figure in all manner of art which is to you possible.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc polvera de moli am album de huou e stopa leon; e aprop pausa pulvil de drap duplicat; e aprop pausa sobre lu stela lada de taula subtil segon la quantitat de la spatula tota o mays un pauc.	And then place over the place powder of millstone with albumen of egg and lamb's wool; and then place cloth doubled; and then place over it slender stake of wood according to the quantity of the spatula whole or but a little.
Mays si dejos la stela es concavitat en alcu dels locs de la spatula, lahoras tu enguala aquela concavitat am stopa leon, e aprop pueja la stela segon equalitat.	But if below the stake is concavity in some of the places of the spatula, then you bind that concavity with lamb's wool, and then push the stake according to equality.
E aprop strenh desus am humemati longua ab constriccio decent e am fermesa de la stela entro que no sia remauguda del sieu loc.	And then strengthen above it with long poultice about constriction moderate and firmness of the stake until it is not swollen from there.
E considera le liament en quascun dia; e totas veguadas que sia mollificat, lia autra veguada e stren le e equa la stela si es remauguda del sieu loc.	And consider the ligament every day; and whenever it becomes softened, ligature another turn and tighten it and tie it if it is dislocated from its place.
E jagua le malaute sobre le sieu latz sa.	And let the patient lie on his side.
E la spatula es restaurada en xx dias o en .xxv.	And the spatulum is restored in 20 days or so.
E donc quan es complit aquest nombre, lahoras tu dissolveys le liament, e que tu scias ensegurat quar aquela es dels osses dels quals la cominicio no es temuda ni lor dissolucio.	And therefore when this number is completed, then you shall dissolve the ligament, and you should know that it is of the bones, of which the beginning is not feared nor their dissolution.
E si procezeys del loc del os pessa e pongeys dejos la codena, lahoras tu scindeys sobre lu, e osta le, e fay segon que havem dit en la fractura de la furcula de sadacio de apostema caut si accideys aqui.	And if you proceed from the place of the bone and put beneath the tendon, then you shall split it, and ostiac it, and do according to what we have said in the fracture of the furcula of suppuration of an abscess if it happens here.
Capitol .vii.	Chapter 7.
De restauracio de la fractura del pietz.	On the restoration of a fracture of the foot.
Le pietz alcunas veguadas es romput en le mieg loc de lu e aquo tart endeve; mays las extremitatz de lu mot endeve que so ciccadas e comminuidas.	The feet sometimes are broken in one place and here and there; but the ends of them most often become shattered and comminuted.
E dels accidentz de lu quan es trencat le mieg de lu es que declina a las partidas dedintz e accideys a lu gran dolor, e dificultat en lo hale, e tos, e fort leu e vomeys sanc; e es declarada en lu cavitat en le os trencat e no es occulta al sentiment.	And of its accidents when the middle of it is broken there ensues a sinking to the parts within and pain occurs in it, and difficulty in walking, and cough, and great vomiting and bleeding; and a hollowness is declared in the bone broken and is not concealed from sense.
E la restauracio de lu es que sia resupinat le malaute sobre le sieu dos, e pausa entre las spallas de lu un coyssi; e aprop prem als muscles de lu, e ajusta las costas de lu am las mas de dos costatz, e subtilia te en la operacio de lu e en la equacio segon tota manieyra que es ad aquo possibla e que conveneys ad aquo, entro que retorne la figura del os segon que cove.	And the restoration of it is that the patient be laid upon his back, and place beneath him a cushion; and press upon the muscles of him, and adjust the ribs of him with the hands of two men, and apply underneath in the operation of him and in the setting according to all manner that it is possible for it and convenient to it, until he return the form of the bone according as it covers.
E aprop pausa sobre lu emplastre e estopa e pausa desobre astela de taula subtil de sauze o de caligi e de a lor semblantz en levitat, pus que tu envolopas aquela en drap; e aprop subtilia te en lian aquela sobre le os trencat que no sia maugut; e vay am liadura segon retonditat al dors alcunas veguadas, e strenh aquel am strictura decent; e aprop considera la liadura en tota hora, e quan es mollificada strenh aquela.	And then place upon him plaster and tow, and place over it a board of subtle wood of willow or of alder or of a kind similar to them in lightness, since you wrap that in cloth; and then subtilize in binding that over the bone broken that it not be dislocated; and go with ligature according to roundness to the back sometimes, and tighten that with decent tightness; and then consider the ligature at all times, and when it becomes softened, tighten that.
E si necessitat provoca a desliament de aquela deves corrossio o pruziment, o dolor, o apostema que accideysso en le loc, lahoras tu coyta e deslia aquela e erradica le emplastre e rectifique aquo que accideys per aquo am manieyra de curacio de lu; e aprop reduzeys le emplastre, si vezes ad aquo la facia; e ajusta a lu strictura entro que sia sanat.	And if necessity provokes sloughing or putrefaction or pain or suppuration that occurs in the place, then you cut and unbind that and remove the plaster and rectify what occurs by reason of it with manner of cure of it; and then reduce the plaster, if you see to it the face; and adjust the tightness of him until he is healed.
Capitol .viii.	Chapter 8.
De restauracio de las costas quan son trincadas.	On the restoration of ribs when they are cracked.
Sapias que fractura de las costas no catz sino en locs grosses que siegon le dos; e de las extremitatz de lor de la partida denant no accideys ad aquelas contricio sino per aquo quar so cartillaginosas.	Know that fracture of the ribs does not occur except in gross places which accompany the back; and of their ends from the part in front, contriction does not occur to those except by reason of what are cartilaginous.
E cognicio de lu no es amaguada al sentiment deves la inquisicio de lu am les ditz.	And knowledge of it is not concealed from sense by reason of the inquiry of it with the fingers.
E la restauracio sia ayssi que enguales la fractura am les ditz segon la manieyra possibla, entro que sia engulhat segon que cove, e aprop emplastre e strenh le os trencat am stela, si indigeys de aquel.	And the restoration is that you swallow the fracture with the fingers according to the possible manner, until he return according as he covers, and then plaster and tighten the bone broken with splint, if it occurs to him.
E si la fractura de las costas es declinant a las partidas dedintz, lahoras accideys al malaute dolor vehement e punctura, ayssi cum punctura que accideys ad aquel que ha pleureci, e per aquo quar le os ponh le velament; e accideys a lu difficultat de hanelit, e tos, e vomit de mot sanc; e aquesta es de dificil curacio.	And if the fracture of the ribs is sinking to the parts within, then occurs to the patient vehement pain and piercing, thus with piercing that occurs to him who has pleurisy, and by reason of what the bone puts the membrane; and occurs to him difficulty in handling, and cough, and vomiting of much blood; and this is of difficult cure.
E ja les Antixs so engeniatz en aquela am motz engientz.	And then theants are engendered in it with evil geniuses.
E de lor so que diso: cove que pauses viandas del malaute que engendro imflacio e ventositat, per que le ventre sia imflat e sia extendut, e la fractura sia impellida a las partidas defora.	And of them I say: lay upon him viands that engender inflammation and flatulence, so that the belly be inflated and extended, and the fracture be pushed to the parts outside.
Mays nos avoreyssem aquo per so que no sia causa leugiera a generar apostema caut, si no accideys; e si ja accideys, lahoras ja ajuda ad aquo.	But we shall eat it so that it not be cause to generate suppuration of an abscess, unless it occurs; and if it occurs, then help it.
E diyssero alcus de lor que sia pausada desus ventoza e aprop que sucque am fortitut; e es semblant a ratiocinacio, mays empero es temut que la ventoza atire las superfluitatz al loc per la debilitat.	And said some of them that it be laid upon him wind-pipe and then that suck with strength; and is similar to rationale, but nevertheless it is feared that the wind throw the superfluities to the place by reason of the weakness.
E diyssero alcus de lor: cove que·l loc sia cubert am lana que ja es submersa en oli caut, e sian pausatz pulvils entre las costas entro que sia umplida, que sia la liadura engual quan envolopas aquela segon retonditat; e aprop sia curat le malaute am curacio de pleuresi de vianda e de medicina.	And said some of them: let the place be covered with wool which is already soaked in hot oil, and let poultices be laid between the ribs until it is full, that the ligature be wrapped when you wrap that according to roundness; and then let the patient be cured by cure of pleurisy with food and medicine.
E si causa vehement constrenh le malaute la qual no sufferta, e le os punh le velament am punctura ledent, temem sobre le malaute, lahoras cove que fendam sobre le loc, descubram de la costa trencada, e aprop pausem desobre aquela instrument que conserve le ciphac, la rememoracio del qual es precedida, e que inscidam le os am facilitat, e extraguam aquel.	And if cause vehement constriction to the patient which does not suffer it, and the bone puts the membrane with piercing pain, fear about the patient; then let the instrument be laid upon the place, the remembrance of which is preceded, and that we incise the bone with facility, and extract it.
E aprop que ajustem las doas labias de la plagua, si es gran, am cozidura, e curem aquela am emplastres entro que sia sanada.	And then adjust the two lips of the wound, if it is large, with cauterization, and cure that with plasters until it is healed.
E si accideys dedintz apostema, lahoras tu coyta e enfon pulvils en oli rozat e pausa sobre le loc, e que sia curat le malaute am aquo que cove a la apostema dedintz.	And if occurs inside suppuration of an abscess, then cut and apply poultices in rose-oil and place over the place, and let the patient be cured by it that occurs to the suppuration inside.
E sia ressupinat sobre le latz sobre le qual dorm, entro que sia sanat.	And he is laid upon his back on which he slept until he is healed.
Capitol .ix.	Chapter 9.
De restauracio de fractura del spondil del dos e del col.	On the restoration of fracture of the vertebra of the back and of the neck.
Alcunas veguadas endeve fractura als osses del col, e tart endeve a lor atricio, e semblantment als spondils del dos.	Sometimes fracture occurs to the bones of the neck, and it happens to them attrition, and similarly to the vertebrae of the back.
E cum aquo accideys ad alcu e voles saber si sara sanat o no, lahoras considera, quar si vezes las sieuas mas ja mollificadas e stupefaytas e mortas e no pot maure aquelas ni extendre ni strenher aquelas e quan constrenges aquelas am les tieus ditz o punges aquelas am agulha e no sent en aquelas dolor, lahoras sapias que no es sanat, e en las mes de disposicios es mortal.	And if it occurs to one and you wish to know whether he will be healed or not, then consider, for if you see the fingers soft and stupor and dead and cannot move them nor extend them nor tighten them, and when you tighten those with your fingers or prick them with an awl and do not feel in those pain, then know that it is not healed, and in the midst of dispositions it is mortal.
E si mau aquelas e sent en aquelas constriccio am les ditz e punctura, lahoras sapias que la nucha de l’os es salva e que le malaute guereys am curacio.	And if you move them and feel in them constriction with the fingers and piercing, then know that the kernel of the bone is saved, and the patient will be cured by cure.
E si ve als spondils del col le semblant ad aquo e voles saber si sira sanat o no, lahoras considera als pes de lu.	And if you see the vertebrae of the neck like that and wish to know whether it will be healed or not, then consider the feet of him.
Lahoras si tu vezes que so ja mollificatz, accideys ad aquels aquo que es accidit en las mas, e aprop quan jatz sobre le sieu dos, yeys ventozitat e egestio ses la sua volontat, e alcunas veguadas es resupinat sobre le sieu dos e vol urinar e no pot, lahoras sapias que es mortal, e adonc no trebales en la curacio de lu.	Now if you see that they are already soft, occurs to him what occurred in the fingers, and then when he lies upon his back, has windiness and ejaculation according to his will, and sometimes is laid upon his back and wishes to urinate and cannot, then know that it is mortal, and therefore do not labor in his cure.
Mays si no accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, la causa es milhor e pus leugiera.	But if does not occur any cause of them, the cause is better and less remote.
E la curacio de lu es que te perforses a la sedacio del apostema caut que pauses sobre le spondil atrissat oli rozat sol, o am mugols de huous asatz; pausa sobre aquela aquel alcunas veguadas le dia entro que sia sedat le apostema caut.	And his cure is that you pierce to the suppuration of an abscess which you pause over the vertebra attritted with hot oil or with leaves of holly-bush set; pause over it some times the day until the suppuration of an abscess is settled.
E lahoras pausa un dels emplastres confortantz e exsitans, e strenh sobre aquel am liament; e comanda al malaute que use de repaus e de tranquillitat e que no dorme sobre la partida am la qual atroba dolor entro que sia sanat.	And then pause one of the comforting and fomenter plasters, and tighten over it with ligature; and command the patient that he use repose and tranquility and that he not sleep on the part from which he has pain until he is healed.
E si accideys deves la atricio del os satagias o alcuna causa que ja es seperada de lu, lahoras cove que secces sobre la codena e que ostes aquel os; e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua, am sutura si es gran; e aprop cura aquela am alcu encarnatiu dels enguentz, entro que sia sanat.	And if occurs by reason of the attrition of the bone, or any cause that is already separated from him, then let it be cut over the cavity and that ostiac the bone; and then adjust the two lips of the wound with suturing if it is large; and then cure that with something incarnate of the gums, until he is healed.
Mays si es trencat le derier del os alhoses, e es la fi de la coeta, lahoras cove que tu entrometas le dit pous de la ma senestra en le cul, e que enguales le os trencat am l’autra ma segon que es possible per equacio segonda; e aprop pausa sobre lu emplastre e astelha, si indigeysses de aquels, e aprop strenh aquel.	But if the bone of the buttocks is broken, and it is the end of the tailbone, then you should put the little finger of your left hand into the anus, and bite the broken bone with your other hand as much as possible in a second position; then place plaster and splints over it, if you have those, and tighten it.
E si sentes satagias trencadas en lu, lahoras tu fen sobre aquela, e osta aquel, e cura la plagua am la curacio que es precedida entro que sia sanada.	And if you feel broken bones in it, then you should open it and splint it, and treat the wound with the treatment that is preceded until it is healed.
Capitol .x.	Chapter 10.
De restauracio de la ancha.	On restoring the hernia.
Les osses de las anchas tart so trencats, e si trencan, lahoras la fractura de lor no es sino communicio en las extremitatz de aquelas e son inscidas en la longitut e declinan a las partidas dedintz; e accideys al malaute dolor en le loc e punctura, e la camba es stupefacta quan es fractura.	The bones of the pelvis are twisted, and if they are broken, their fracture is only in their extremities, and they are inclined towards the interior; and there is pain in the affected area and a puncture wound, and the leg is paralyzed when it is fractured.
E la restauracio de lu es que tu extendas la tua ma sobre aquel entro que sia sobre la fractura qual es la figura de lu.	And its restoration is that you should extend your hand over it so that it covers the fracture, depending on how it appears.
E si fractura es en la extremitat de lu tant solament, lahoras tu enguala aquela segon que a tu es apparelhat per equacio engual entro que sia asemblat a la sua figura natural.	And if the fracture is only in its extremity, then you should bite it according to how it appears to you through a second bite so that it is joined to its natural shape.
Mays si la fractura es en le lonc o que ja declina a las partidas dejos, lahoras tu fay jaser le malaute sobre le sieu ventre entro que sia preparada a tu la restauracio de aquela fractura.	But if the fracture is in the hip joint or what inclines downward to the inside, then you should have the patient lie on his belly so that you can prepare for the restoration of that fracture.
E donc quan auras engualada aquela, pausa sobre lu emplastre, e aprop pausa sobre aquel astela de fust o de codena, e strenh per strictura sobre la qual no temas punctacio de fractura ni remocio de la stelha.	And when you have bitten it, place plaster over it, and also place splints made of wood or rope over it, and tighten it so that there is no fear of puncture from the fracture or removal of the splint.
E enguala la concavitat am aquo que uempla aquela entro que aquela prengua la strictura segon equalitat, e comanda al malaute que dorma sobre le sieu dos o desobre le sieu costat sa.	And bite the cavity with something that fills it so that it takes on the tightness according to equality, and command the patient to sleep on his back or on his side.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras tu cessa de extencio de lu e de la sua restauracio entro que sia sedat le apostema caut, e pausa sobre lu aquo que sede aquel segon que es precedit; e aprop retorna a la restauracio de lu, e strenh aquel ayssi cum cove.	But if there is an abscess that has formed, then you should cease from extending it and restoring it until the abscess is dried up, and place over it what dries that up according to how it is preceded; then return to its restoration, and tighten it thus.
E si accideysso en le os satagias o son comminuidas, lahoras tu las tratz.	And if they occur in the bones or are crushed, then you should treat them.
Capitol .xi.	Chapter 11.
De restauracio de la fractura del adjutori.	On restoring the fracture of the arm.
Adjutori es aquo que es entre le coyde entro al cap de la spalla.	The arm is what is between the elbow and the top of the shoulder.
E si es trencat, lahoras la restauracio de lu es en una de doas manieyras, de las quals es la una que tu prenguas fust pla de migiera groceza segon aquesta forma:	And if it is broken, then its restoration is in one of two ways, and the first is that you take a wooden splint according to this shape:
E sian liatz en doas extremitatz dos liamentz, e aprop sia suspendut del loc elevat.	And let there be ties on both ends of these two strings, and let it be suspended from the elevated site.
E segua le malaute sobre una sezela; e aprop gieta fora le sieu bras trencat sobre le fust entro que pervengua al titillic de lu en le mieg loc del qual sia annexa la curvitat del fust.	And let the patient walk on a crutch, and let him stretch out his broken arm over the splint so that he reaches the tip of it at the site where the curvature of the splint is attached.
E aprop suspen sobre aquel alcuna causa greu, o·l minestre extenda aquel a las partidas dejos; e aprop le metge eque la fractura am las sieuas mas ensemps, entro que la fractura retorne segon que cove.	And let some heavy weight be suspended over it, or let the servant extend it downward; and then the doctor should press the fracture with his hands, so that the fracture returns as it should.
E l’autra manieyra es que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sieua cervitz e suspen la ma del col de lu am liament; e aprop comanda a dos ministres que la un de lor tengua aquo que es desobre la fractura am las suas mas; e l’autre tengua le pus dejos de lu; e quascu de lor extenda a la sua partida.	And the other way is that the patient be reclined on his neck and let the servant suspend the arm by the shoulder with a string; and then command two servants, one of whom holds what is over the fracture with his hands, and the other the lower part of it; and each of them should extend it to his side.
E si voles que la extencio sia pus fort, lahoras tu strenh sobre la fractura am liament e sobre aquela am autre liament, e quascu dels dos ministres extendan a doas suas partidas.	And if you want the extension to be stronger, then tighten over the fracture with one string and another string over that, and let each of the two servants extend it to his side.
E donc si la fractura es propinquada a la extremitat del muscle, lahoras cove que sia pausat la mitat del liament sobre le citillic e l’autre dejos la fractura deves le coyde.	And therefore if the fracture is near the extremity of the muscle, then it must be paused at the tip of the string and the other below the fracture beyond the elbow.
E semblantment si la fractura es propdana al coyde, lahoras cove que sia pausat le liament sobre aquel loc e sobre aquel coyde.	And likewise if the fracture is near the shoulder, then let the string be paused at that site and over the shoulder.
Enguala aquela am facilitat e ses trebal, e aprop quant sira engualada segon que cove e es applicada per bona applicacio, lahoras strenh aquela si no accideys apostema caut.	Bite it with ease and without labor, and then when it is bitten according to how it should be and is applied well, tighten it if there is no abscess.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras layssa la strictura entro al vii dia, e pausa sobre lu lana sutza enbeguda en vi agre e oli rozat entro que repause le apostema, e lahoras tu stren aquela.	But if there is an abscess, then cease the tightening on the seventh day, and place soft wool soaked in wine and rosewater over the abscess so that it reposes, and then tighten it.
E la manieyra de strenher aquela es que pauses emplastre sobre la fractura, e aprop pausa envolopament de drap nau sobre le emplastre; e aprop ajuste le bras sobre aquel adjutori, e pause la sua ma uberta sobre le sieu muscle.	And the way to tighten it is to place plaster over the fracture and then place a covering of new cloth over the plaster, and then adjust the arm around that arm, and let his hand hang open over his muscle.
E pausa le drap e strenh sobre le adjutori le bras per so que·l bras sia en loc de stelhas, si no prohibeys de aquo alcuna causa del os trencat.	And place the cloth and tighten it around the arm so that the arm is in the place of splints, unless there is some cause from the broken bone that prohibits it.
E lahoras usa de stelhas.	And then use splints.
E es que pauses sobre la fractura aquela stela que sia pus lada e pus fort de las autras stelas; e pausa entre quascuna stela la latitut del dit, e sia la longitut de las stelas segon la trencadura am addicio de tres ditz de tota partida.	And it is that you place over the fracture that splint that is wider and stronger than the others; and place between each splint the width of a finger, and let the length of the splints be according to the fracture with an addition of three fingers from the entire side.
E aprop strenh sobre las stelas am la strictura la qual he dita al comensament del capitol.	And then tighten over the splints with the tightness that has been said at the beginning of this chapter.
E es que la tua strictura sobre le loc de la fractura sia pus streyt.	And it is that your tightness over the site of the fracture be stronger.
E quant pus es alonguada la fractura sia la strictura menor.	And when the fracture is more elongated, then let the tightness be less.
E donc si vezes le situament de las stelas e la strictura ayssi cum havem dit en la hora en la qual restauras le membre al sieu assituament, lahoras tu fay.	And therefore if you see the position of the splints and the tightness thus as we have said in the time in which you restore the member to its setting, then you should do it.
E si temes apostema caut, lahoras tu layssa la strictura e las stelas entro al dia vii ayssi cum havem dit.	And if you fear an abscess, then let the tightness and the splints be ceased on the seventh day as we have said.
E aprop considera le liament en totas partidas per tres dias per so que no accida en le loc pruziment o imflacio; o es prohibida la vianda pervenir al membre per disposicio de superfluitat de strictura; e donc rectifiqua tot aquo segon que havem dit.	And then consider the string in all parts for three days so that there is no occurrence of pus or inflammation; or let food come to the member because of excess of tightness, and then rectify all that according to what we have said.
Mays si tu yest sobre confizanssa que no accida alcuna causa de aquo, lahoras no deslias la liguadura sino aprop tres dias o mays.	But if you are over-confident that it will not occur, then do not loosen the ligature but rather after three days or more.
E sia la sua dormicio del malaute sobre le sieu dos, e las sieuas mas sian sobre le stomac.	And let the patient's sleep be on his back, and let his hands be over his stomach.
E pausa sobre le adjutori cocena plena de lana engualment, e considera en tota hora de la nueyt o del dia que no sia deliada ni dissolta la figura del membre trencat, o que sia le liament mollificat, donc rectifica aquo tot am la tua vertut.	And place over the arm a full cloth that has been bitten, and consider at any hour of night or day that it is not loosened nor dissolved, or that the figure of the broken member is changed, then rectify all with your skill.
E pausa la vianda del malaute segon le orde le qual havem denant mes, enayssi que la vianda sia subtil en le comensament entro que es comensat strenher; e lahoras cove que egrossas la vianda de lu.	And let the patient's food be according to the order that we have mentioned before, so that the food is subtle in the beginning while it is commenced, and then let it become coarse, and then tighten over it.
Quar de constuma del adjutori e de la camba de lu es que sian strengutz en xl dias; e lahoras cove que sian desliatz e sia administrat banh e sia medicat am enguentz los quals rectifican aquel.	The custom of the arm and of its bed is that they are strong for 40 days, and then let them be loosened and let bath be administered and medicine be applied which rectify it.
E si la fractura es layha atrita, lahoras tu no deslies de aquela le liament e las stelhas entro a l dias o entro a dos meses.	And if the fracture is dried, then you should not loosen from it the string and the splints until 14 days or two months.
Capitol .xii.	Chapter 12.
De restauracio de fractura del bras.	On restoring the fracture of the arm.
Bras es compost de dos osses les quals so appelatz dos focils; dels quals la un es petit, e es aquel que siec le dit pous, e l’autre es gran e es aquel le qual es pausat dejos le petit dit, de la partida pus dejus.	The arm is composed of two bones, which are called two rays, one of which is small and is that which supports the fingers, and the other is large and is that which is placed below the small one, from the more distant part.
E fort leu es trencat le focil major solament, o le petit, e fort leu son trincatz ensemps.	And the stronger of them is broken only, or the weaker, and they are broken together.
E quan es trencat le focil petit desus, lahoras la restauracio de lu es leugiera, e la sanacio de lu es pus leugiera.	And when the small ray is broken above it, then its restoration is easier, and its healing is easier.
E quan es trencat le focil de lu dejos la fractura de lu es mala, e la sanacio de lu es dificil.	And when it is broken below it, then the fracture of it is bad, and its healing is difficult.
E pus mala de aquela es quan son trencatz dos osses essemps.	And another of that disease is when two of these bones are broken.
Donc si l’os le qual es trencat es le focil petit desus, lahoras es convenient al metge, deves la restauracio de lu, que pauze petita extencio am facilitat entro que aquel sia engualhat.	Therefore, if the bone that is broken is the small bone above it, then it is appropriate for the doctor, in order to restore it, to put a small extension on it with ease while that [bone] is healing.
Mays si le focil gran es aquo que es trincat, lahoras cove que pause extencio pus vehement.	But if the large bone is the one that is broken, then it must put on a more violent extension.
E si les dos focils so ensemps trincatz, lahoras cove que tu pauses la extritura mot pus fort.	And if both bones are broken at the same time, then you must put on the most powerful extension.
E cove que pauses la figura de la ma deves la restauracio de lu e la extencio de lu estenduda sobre un coyssi, e sia le pols de la ma a las partidas desus, pus aut que totz les autres ditz, e le dit auricular sia pus bas dels autres ditz, e le malaute sia cezent sobre una cezela cayrada.	And you must put the shape of your hand for its restoration and extension stretched out over a pillow, with the palm of your hand at the ends above, more elevated than all the others said, and the finger auricular lower than all the others said, and let the patient be lying on his back on a raised bed.
E sia un coyssi denant lu en la altetut o endreyt de lu, per so que·l malaute no encorra trebalh.	And there must be a pillow under him in the height or slope of him, so that the patient doesn't roll around.
E aprop le ministre extenda le bras de la partida pus dejos am la sieua ma o am liament, e autre ministre extenda desus semblantment.	And then the assistant extends the arm at the lower joint with his hand or with a bandage, and another assistant extends above similarly.
E aprop le metge engualhe le os entro que redugua aquel segon la milhor figura que pot.	And then the doctor applies poultices to the bone as he reduces it to the best figure that he can.
E si en la factura del os so satagias, lahoras te perforsa raduzir tota pessa en le sieu loc am la tua vertut.	And if in the making of the bone there are knots, then you pierce and reduce all weight in its place with your strength.
E si appar en lu satagia separada que punh la codena e no es a tu speransa en la restauracio de lu, lahoras tu fen sobre lu e osta aquela segon la manieyra la qual havem dita desus.	And if it appears in him separate knots that pierce the tendon and you don't have hope in its restoration, then you cut on it and treat it according to the manner which we said above.
Mays si la fractura es am plagua, yeu ja he fayt ad aquo capitol singular, e donc pren la curacio de aquel.	But if the fracture is with pus, I have already written about that topic particularly, and so take its cure.
E si accideys apostema caut al comensament de la tua restauracio, lahoras tu lineys un drap am cerot fayt de oli rozat e cera blanca, e sia migier entre specitut e subtilitat, e strenh drap sobre aquel am strictura subtil entro que le apostema sia cedat; e lahoras remau le cerot e pausa emplastre preparat de polvera de moli am clayre de huou, e aprop pausa stelhas; e sia la stela la qual es pauzada sobre aquela fractura pus lada e pus fort.	And if a wound happens at the beginning of your restoration, then you line up a cloth with rosin and white wax, made medium between thickness and thinness, and stretch cloth over that with subtle pressure until the wound yields; then remove the cerot and apply plaster prepared from mortar ground with oil, and put on splints; let the splint which is laid over that fracture be wider and more sturdy.
E sapias que·l nombre de las stelas del bras so vi en las majors disposicios, o sia la fractura en un focil o en dos focils ensemps.	And know that the number of splints on the arm vary according to its different dispositions, or whether the fracture is in one bone or two bones together.
E aprop pausa la tua strictura sobre le loc de la fractura pus fort e pus vehement, e quan mays sira la extrictura a las partidas desus de la fractura o a las partidas pus bassas de lu, pausa la strictura un pauc pus molh segon que es precedida la rememoracio de lu en le comensament del capitol.	And then put your compression over the site of the fracture more strongly and violently, and when you loosen the compression at the ends above the fracture or the ends below it, put on the compression a little more gently according to how it is remembered in the beginning of the chapter.
E les draps que so envolopatz sobre la fractura sian draps mols humitz, e no sian durs ni aspres, e·l fiel am le qual es strenhut sia de li propriament migier entre subtil e gros, ayssi cum havem recomtat.	And the cloths which are wrapped over the fracture must be soft moistened cloths, and not hard or rough, and the fiber with which it is tightened must be of a medium between thin and thick, as we have recommended.
E considera le membre e·l liament aprop alcus dias.	And consider the member and the bandage after a few days.
E si accideys alcuna causa de la qual rectificacio es necessaria, ayssi cum prusiment le qual accideys al membre, e lahoras cove que tu enbroques le membre am aygua cauda entro que cesse aquel pruziment.	And if any cause happens which necessitates a re-setting, as we have written about the happening to the member, then you must put on the member with water bath until that swelling ceases.
E leysses le membre no costreyt entro que repause, e aprop torna la strictura.	And loosen the member not constricted so that he can rest, and then return the compression.
E si la extrictura ja es mollificada e l’os ja es remaugut e semblantz ad aquels, lahoras rectifiqua tot aquo am la tua vertut.	And if the compression is already loosened and the bone is already reduced and like those, then reset all that with your strength.
E considera mays si le nutriment es prohibit pervenir al membre per superfluitat de strictura, quar lahoras cove que mollifiques aquel un petit e laysses aquel per alcus dias entro que corra ad aquel le nutriment, e aprop strenh aquel.	And consider if the nourishment is prohibited from coming to the member due to excess of compression, then you must loosen that a little and let it be for some days so that its nourishment can run to that, and then tighten that.
Mays si al malaute no accideys alcuna causa de aquelas que havem ditas, lahoras no cove que sia desliat entro aprop xx dias o enviro de aquels.	But if the patient does not have any of those causes which we have said, then there must not be loosed for twenty days or around that time.
E aprop sia suspenduda la ma del malaute per la sua vertut de movement agitatius, e fay aquel dormir sobre le sieu dos.	And then let the patient's hand be suspended by its strength from a moving activity, and do that sleeping on his back.
E sapias que aquesta fractura es restaurada en xxx dias o en xxxii dias, o fort leu es restaurada en xxviii dias, e tot aquo es segon la disposicio de las compleccios e las disposicios de la vertut.	And know that this fracture is restored in 30 days or around that time, or rather it is restored in 28 days, and all that is according to the disposition of the complexities and dispositions of strength.
Capitol .xiii.	Chapter 13.
De restauracio de fractura de la pinche de la ma e dels ditz.	Of restoration of fracture of the finger of the hand and of the fingers.
Sapias que a la pinche de la ma e als nuzes dels ditz tart endeve fractura, e no accideys a lor sino atricio motas veguadas.	Know that to the finger of the hand and to the nails of the fingers there can be many fractures, and there does not happen to them except for great violence many times.
E quan accideys a la ma fractura o atrissio, lahoras cove que·l malaute segua cayrat e denant lu lies cezent segon equalitat, e aprop pausa la ma de lu sobre aquela extenduda.	And when it happens to the hand fracture or sprain, then let the patient be lying on his back and his hand over that stretched out.
E aprop le ministre extenda les osses trencatz e·l metge engualhe aquels entro que sian congongitz am bona congoncio.	And then the assistant extends the broken bones, and the doctor applies poultices to them as he reduces them to good conjunction.
E lahoras cove que pause emplastre e estopa, si no accideys apostema caut; e aprop pausa stela desus segon la quantitat del loc, e tu ja has envolopada aquela en drap de li.	And then you must put on plaster and bandage, if there isn't wound cauterized; and then put splints over that according to the quantity of the site, and you have already wrapped that in cloth.
Mays si la trincadura es en las partidas dedintz deves le ventre de la palma, e lahoras fay semblant de spera de drap, e comanda al malaute que strenha aquela am la sua palma trincada; aprop sia strenguda am drap lonc.	But if the fracture is in the joints of the fingers you must put on bandage, and command the patient to tighten that with his palm fractured; then let it be tightened with long cloth.
E sia la stelha de cuer am drap en le qual sia levitat, per so que le cuer sia aplicat a la palma; e strenh aquela segon que cove.	And let the splint of horn be with cloth in which is raised, so that the horn is applied to the palm; and tighten that according to how it is commanded.
Mays si la fractura es a las partidas defora, lahoras cove que pauses desus stela e autre estela de la partida dejos en la palma, per so que la ma sia uberta e dreyta; e aprop pausa la strictura, ayssi cum es revolvuda la ma a la rateta entre les ditz am liamentz.	But if the fracture is to the outer joints, then you must put splints over that and another splint on the joint below the palm, so that the hand can be opened and straight; and then put on the compression as the hand is rotated between the fingers with bandages.
E si accideys fractura a alcu dels nozes dels ditz, lahoras si es le dit pous, sia engualat segon que cove e aprop sia strenhut am la palma e si·t voles, pausa a lu astela petita dreyta per so que sia elevada la fractura e no sia mauguda.	And if fracture happens to any of the nails of the fingers, then if it is the thumb it must be reduced according to how it is commanded and then let it be tightened with the palm, and if you want, put a little splint on it straight so that the fracture is elevated and not bent.
Mays si la fractura es en les autres ditz, ayssi cum en aquel del mieg loc, o en le indic, o en le auricular, o en le anular, lahoras sia engualhat e liat am le dit sa le qual siec aquel; o sian totz liatz segon continuacio, e es milhor; o pausa sobre aquel stela petita, ayssi cum havem dit en le pous.	But if the fracture is in the other fingers, as in the index, or middle, or ring finger, or little finger, then let it be reduced and tied to the finger which is that, or they are all tied according to continuity, and a small splint is better over that, as we have said for the thumb.
E considera, en la tua restauracio, e aprop aquela, la disposicio de apostema caut e oppose — am la tieua operacio — am aquo que cove quan accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, segon que es iterada la narracio de lu.	And consider in its restoration, and then that wound cauterized and opposed — by your operation — with what happens when any cause of those happens, according to how its narrative is repeated.
Capitol .xiv.	Chapter 14.
De restauracio de fractura del os de la coyssa.	Of restoration of fracture of the bone of the thigh.
Le os de la cueyssa motas veguadas es trencat e es declarat al sentiment segon que es convertit a la partida denant e a la pus sobirana.	The bone of the thigh many times is broken and is declared in the feeling according to how it is converted to the joint in front and the most upper.
E la restauracio de lu se fa enayssi que·l liament es strenhut sobre la fractura e autre liament dejos la fractura, e le malaute sia prostrat sobre le sieu ventre e sobre la cara.	And its restoration is done so that the bandage is tightened over the fracture and another bandage below the fracture, and let the patient be lying on his back and on his face.
E aprop le ministre extenda tot le liament a la sua partida segon la qualitat, quan la fractura es en le mieg loc del os.	And then the assistant extends all of the bandage to its joint according to its quality when the fracture is in the middle location of the bone.
Mays si es propdana a la razitz de la cueyssa, lahoras sia le liament propda al denolh a la partida del pentenilh, per so que la extencio caja en sus, e le autre liament dejos la fractura.	But if it is propinquitous to the hip of the thigh, then let the bandage be propinquitous to the groan at the joint of the patella, so that the extension is made in that, and the other bandage below the fracture.
E semblantment si la trencadura es propdana al denolh, lahoras sia fayt le liament propda al denol, e sia la extencio a las partidas dejos.	And similarly if the fracture is propinquitous to the groan, then let the bandage be made propinquitous to the groan and the extension at the joints below.
E aprop le metge enguale le os am amduas las sieuas mas entro que reduzesca aquel segon la semblansa natural e l’os es conjungit per bona conjunccio; lahoras cove que pauses emplastre e strictura, si no accideys al membre apostema.	And then the doctor reduces the bone with both of his hands as he reduces that according to its natural resemblance and the bone is conjoined by good conjunction; then you must put on plaster and compression if the wound doesn't happen to the member.
Mays si accideys en lu apostema, lahoras tu layssa aquel per alcus dias entro que l’apostema caut sia cedat, e aprop retorna a la tua curacio.	But if pus occurs in it, then you should leave it for several days until the abscess has drained, and then return to your treatment.
La strictura de lu sia ayssi fayta: cove que envolopes sobre la fractura una benda dura, e dobla aquela dos o tres veguadas, e remaugua de lu superfluitat; e aprop envolopa la camba entro que pervengua al talo e a la razitz de la cueyssa.	To create a splint: Cover the fracture with a hard bandage, and fold it over two or three times, and apply a poultice to draw out any superfluous fluid; then wrap the leg so that it extends from the toe to the root of the head.
E intromet lonc fiel entre la cueyssa e la camba prop del denol a las partidas dejos, e venguan las extremitatz del fiel de la partida pus sobirana de las doas partz, e aprop revolveys sobre la camba e la cueyssa aquo que superflueys de la benda.	And insert a long needle between the head and the leg near the jaw at the point where the jaw is most prominent, and let the ends of the needle emerge from the highest point of both sides; then turn the needle around on the leg and head so that any superfluous fluid drains from the bandage.
E aprop pausa sobre la cueyssa en le loc de aquela fractura astelhas, e pausa de aquelas una stela sobre le os de la camba.	Then place a wooden splint over the fracture on the head and another over the bone of the leg.
E aprop uempli las vacuitatz entre la camba e la cuoyssa am draps mols, per so que sia coagulada la extrictura.	Then fill the cavities between the leg and the head with soft rags so that the fracture is bound up.
E aprop comensa am strictura fort del mieg sobre le loc de la fractura am tres envolucios o quatre, e quant mays tu te alonhas am liament del loc de la fractura, la tua strictura sia menor e pus leugiera e pus molha.	Then begin by binding the fracture strongly with three or four bandages over the site of the fracture; and as you draw closer to the site of the fracture, your bindings should be looser and softer and more pliable.
E aprop exten a doas extremitatz del fiel a las partidas dejos entro que pervengua a la cavilha del pe, e strenh amdoas las extremitatz de las stelhas del autra part per so que·l liament no sia remaugut del sieu loc.	Then extend the needle to both ends at the lowest point between the leg and the head until it reaches the ankle of the foot, and tighten both ends of the splints on the other side so that they are not drawn out from their position.
E aprop leyssa la strectura sobre aquel, don esta ayssi que no accideys al membre corrosio ni apostema caut ni emflacio e semblantz ad aquels; e si accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, adonc cueta te am desliament de lu, e rectifica aquo que accideys tot aprop, segon que havem dit motas veguadas.	Then let the binding be over that, in such a way that no corrosion or abscess or swelling and its likes occur to that member; and if any of those things do occur, then release him from that binding, and rectify what has occurred completely according to what we have said several times.
Mays si en le os es pessa del os la qual pongua, lahoras cove que tu engualhes aquel segon que a tu es possibla; e sino, fen sobre lu e remau aquel, e cura am aquo del qual es precedida la rememoracio entro que sia sanat.	But if a piece of bone is protruding from the bone, then you should cut it off according to what is possible for you; and if not, then leave it and treat it with that which precedes the remedy described until it is healed.
E alcunas veguadas es strenhuda aquesta fractura de la coyssa otra aquo que sian ajustadas a lu stelhas, ayssi cum havem dit en le adjutori e·n le bras.	And sometimes this fracture of the head is bound with splints other than those described above so that they are tightened around it; as we have said before in the case of the helper and the arm.
Mays empero en la restauracio de lu en tal manieyra fayta no accideys al malaute claudicacio; e si es restaurada sola, otra aquo que li sia applicada l’autra camba, lahoras es necessari que claudique aquel del qual es tostemps.	But however it is restored in that way, the patient does not experience any limp; and if it is restored alone, or rather the other leg is applied to it, then it is necessary that he limps from whichever one it was restored.
E sapias que la coyssa es strenhuda en xl dias o un pauc mes o un pauc mens, e tot aquo es segon la diversitat de las compleccios e de las autras dispozicios.	And know that the head is bound for 40 days or a few months or more, and all of this depends on the differences in the complications and other dispositions.
Capitol .xv.	Chapter 15.
De restauracio de la fractura de la rodela del denolh.	On the restoration of the fracture of the jaw.
Sapias que fractura de la rodela del denol tart endeve, mays accideys a lu motas veguadas atrissio.	Know that the fracture of the jaw is painful, but it occurs in many different ways.
Mays si accideys a lu fractura, lahoras no es sino fissura o trauc en las suas partidas, e aquo es am plagua o ses plagua, e sobre aquo tot es estat am le sentiment.	But if a fracture does occur to it, then it is no more than a crack or break in its parts; and that is due to coldness or heat, and over that all is affected by sensation.
E la restauracio de lu es enayssi que sia engualat aquo que es romput de las partidas de lu am les ditz entro que sia agreguat e conjongit segon que es possible per equacio e facilitat e fabricacio.	And its restoration is achieved by having what is broken in its parts glued together with the teeth, within their limits, and joined together according to what is possible through equation and facility and fabrication.
E aprop pausa emplastre e pausa sobre aquel stela redonda, si indigeysses de aquela; e strenh desus am strictura ad aquo convenient.	Then apply plaster and place over that a round splint if necessary; and tighten it with bindings according to what is convenient.
E aprop considera totas las disposicios las quals havem recomtadas en las autras fracturas, ayssi cum es apostema caut e semblant ad aquels enaissi que se oppause a tot accident am aquo que a lu es convenient entro que sia sanat.	And consider all the dispositions which we have recounted in the other fractures; as well as the abscess and its likes which oppose themselves to everything according to what is convenient for it until it is healed.
Capitol .xvi.	Chapter 16.
De restauracio de la fractura de la camba.	On the restoration of the fracture of the leg.
Sapias que en la camba so dos osses dels quals la un es gros, e es le nompnat per nom de la camba; e l’autra es subtil, e es nompnat focil.	Know that in the leg there are two bones of which one is thick and is named by name the leg; and the other is slender and is named the shank.
E accideys a quascus de las specias de fractura aquo que accideys als dos osses del bras, e per aquo es fayta restauracio de lu ayssi cum restauracio del bras engualment, e la operacio de lu es una.	And it occurs to each of the species of fracture that which occurs to the two bones of the arm; and for that reason its restoration is achieved by having both bones glued together, as well as the arm being bound up, and the operation on it is the same.
E si so trincatz dos osses ensemps, la camba es convertida a totas partidas.	And if the two bones are broken apart, then the leg is completely broken.
E si es trinquat le os pus subtil, la camba es convertida a las partidas Denant.	And if only the more slender bone is broken, then the leg is broken in front.
E si es trincat le os pus gros, atrobas aquel dejos, e es de aquelas causas que no so a tu ameguadas.	And if only the thicker bone is broken, then it is broken below, and that happens for causes which are not up to you.
E aprop aministra extencio e equacio e liguacio de las astelas segon aquel engualment.	Then administer extension and equation and connection of the splints according to that gluing.
Mays empero cove, si la fractura de la camba es laja havent motas satagias, que la extencio sia mendre e pus leugiera, e alleuja am la tua vertut.	But however, if the fracture of the leg is jagged having many projections, then let the extension be less and more pliable, and draw it to you with your strength.
E en la camba es alcuna causa de operacio sobre le bras, e es quan tu engualas las stelhas e que comples tota la tieua operacio, lahoras tu prendras pessas de fustz de pi le qual es pausat dejos las cauzas las quals so pausades en solies, e so faytas eyssament de brancas de palma; aligeys de aquelas a las quals es petita groceza, e no sia ges de las manudas, e sia la longuesa de aquelas segon la longuesa de la camba, e del denol entro al pus dejos.	And in the leg there is some cause for operation on the arm; and it is when you glue the splints and complete all of your operation that you will take measures of wood from the pine tree which is paused below the causes which are paused in solitudes, and they are made evenly with white palm branches; join those to which there is a small thickness, and it is not wood of the hands, and let its length be according to the length of the leg, and from the head to the most below.
E aprop envolopa sobre quascuna drap en doas envolucios segon la longitut de lu, e pausa la una sobre la partida de la camba de la una part e l’autra del autra part, e sian del denol entro al pus bas loc del pe.	Then wrap over each bandage two wrappings according to the length of it, and place one over the part of the leg on one side and the other on the other side, and they are of the head from the most below to the location of the ankle of the foot.
E aprop lias las doas stelhas en tres locs de doas extremitatz e al mieg loc, quar am aquesta strectura la camba es prohibida de clinar a la partida dextra e sinistra, e sta per bona stacio.	Then tie the two splints in three locations at both ends and at the middle location, for with this binding the leg is prohibited from bending on either side, and it stands in good position.
E ja es aministrat un brasset de fust segon la longuesa de la camba; e sia pausada en lu la camba per so que conserve aquel de movement.	And already a staff of wood according to the length of the leg has been administered; and let it be paused on it so that it conserves that of movement.
E majorment cove que tu fassas aquo en fractura, e quan am aquela es plagua propriament.	And mainly you should do this in fracture, and when it is glued properly.
E aprop considera en quascun jorn la camba e studia am aquel per derier studi, e tu le guardes de apostema e de imflacio o de autres causas semblantz; e cum accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, lahoras opausa te a lu am aquo que cove entro que sia sanat.	And consider the leg in each day and study it with that final study, and keep an eye out for abscess and inflammation or other causes like them; and when any of those things occur, then release it from that with what is appropriate to achieve healing.
Capitol .xvii.	Chapter 17.
De la fractura del talo e dels osses del pe e dels ditz.	On the fracture of the ankle and the bones of the foot and the toes.
Al talo no accideys fractura de tot; mays als osses del pe accideys fractura alcunas veguadas; e als ditz del pe pauc accideys fractura, e no accideys a lor sino atricio en las mes de disposicio.	To the ankle fracture does not occur at all; but to the bones of the foot fracture occurs in some ways; and to the toes of the foot few fractures occur, and they do not occur to them except for attrition in the parts of disposition.
E si als osses del pe endeve fractura e vezes aquels osses esser elevatz sobre si entre lor, lahoras le malaute pause le sieu pe sobre la terra preparat ayssi cum anant.	And if to the bones of the foot indeed fracture and those bones are raised up on each other, then let the patient stand on the ground prepared thus.
E aprop pausa la un pe sobre aquo que es elevat de aquels osses, e aprop calca aquels, e prem, e engualha aquels entro que torno en los locs.	Then pause the foot of one over that which is raised of those bones, and press them, and glue them within so that they turn in the locations.
E aprop pausa emplastre e stopa desus, e pausa dejos le ventre del pe una petita taula a la qual sian dos caps plas.	Then apply plaster and stop it above, and pause below the belly of the foot a little table to which are two tops placed.
E aprop strenh aquela am le pe am strectura descent, pus que tu has envolopada aquela am draps e am autres causes de las quals indigeys.	Then tighten that with the foot with descending binding, since you have wrapped it with bands and with other causes of which it is necessary.
E cum a lu passan tres dias o quatre, lahoras tu deslia le liament, quar tu atrobaras les osses engualatz, o sian trincatz o sian dislocatz, e la operacio en aquels es ayssi co coneysses.	And when three days or four have passed, then release the binding, for you will find the bones glued together, or they are broken or displaced, and that operation on them is achieved thus.
Mays si alcus ditz son trincatz, lahoras restaura aquels, e enguala aquels ayssi cum yeu e recomtat a tu en la restauracio dels ditz de la ma.	But if some toes are broken, then restore them and glue them thus with oil and with the remedy which you have used in restoring the toes of the hand.
E aprop pausa al dit trincat stela segon la longitut del dit, e sia pus lada de lu un pauc; e aprop dejos le pe aquesta taula la qual e a tu recomtada, e strenh aquela am strictura decent.	Then pause the cut stem according to the length of the finger, and let it be a little lower than the foot; and then lower the leg to this table which has been described to you, and tighten it with a decent grip.
Mays si aquo que es trincat dels osses so dos o tres o mays, lahoras tu pausa sobre quascun dit astela de la sua quantitat envolopada en drap leon, e strenh la taula en le pus bas del pe, e sia stant sobre la un dels caps de la taula foro le ventre del pe per que la tengua am bona retencio.	But if what is cut from the bones is two or three or more, then you place on each finger a number of splints equal to the number of fingers, wrapped in linen, and tighten the table at the lowest part of the foot, and let it stand on one of the ends of the table with a hole through the belly of the foot so that it has good retention.
E es convenient a tu que no oblides que no consideres totas las causas las quals que e ditas a tu en las autras fracturas dels accidentz que havem dit; e opausa te a tot accident am aquo que cove.	And it is convenient for you to not forget that you should not consider all the causes which have been described to you in other fractures of the accidents which we have said; and apply yourself to every accident with what covers it.
Capitol .xviii.	Chapter .xviii.
De fractura del conh de la femna e del os del pentenilh e de la vergua del home.	Of fracture of the head of the femur and of the bone of the penis and of the rod of the man.
Quan le conh de la femna es trincat, lahoras fay aquela ceser en cezela cayrada, e aprop enclina aquela a la partida del dos un petit, e sia tenguda detras.	When the head of the femur is fractured, then have her lie on her side with her hips turned to one side, and let her hand be held behind her back.
E aprop la matrona umpla le conh de coto, e sia fayt en le conh de lu ayssi cum spera; e aprop la femna sia concutida, e eleva le dos de lu petit a petit, quar tot aquo es fora-getat entro que sia denant la partida del conh ayssi cum spera e l’os trincat retorna.	And let the midwife fill the hip with cotton, and have a needle made of bronze in the head of the bone; and let the woman be bound, and lift up her hips little by little, for all this is forgotten until it comes before the head of the bone and the fractured bone returns.
E aprop pausa pulvils sobre le dos de lu, e quan vol urinar remaugua le coto am facilitat e aprop urine, e reduzeys e retorna aquel segon la manieyra segon la qual mezist aquel al comensament, e aprop retorne al sieu pulvil primier.	And then place powdered herbs on her hips, and when she wants to urinate, loosen the hip with ease and let her urinate, and reduce it and return it according to how you moved it at the beginning, and then return it to its first position.
E fassa ayssi per vii dias o enviro aquels, quar aquel es restaurat.	And do this for seven days or around those, for that is restored.
E si voles, pren una vezica de ovela e strenh sobre le trauc de lu una canula de canavera; e entromet tota la vesica en le conh de lu, e aprop ensuffla en la canula am vertut entro que la vesica sia imflada dedintz le conh, quar la fractura retorna.	And if you wish, take a sheep's bladder and place it over the head of the bone a catheter made of linen; and insert the entire bladder into the head of the bone, and then insufflate air into the catheter so that the bladder is inflated within the head of the bone, for the fracture returns.
E aprop sia umplida de coto e estia per alcus dias segon que havem recomtat, entro que sia sanat.	And then let it be filled with cotton and stored for several days according to what we have recommended, until it is healed.
E quan le os del pentenil de home o de femna es trincat, lahoras aministra en la restauracio e agulacio de lu aquo que havem recomtat en l’os del anca.	And when the bone of the penis of a man or woman is fractured, then administer in its restoration and stitching what we have recommended for the bone of the hip.
E aquo que es dreyt no es occultat en aquestas fracturas proprinquas e que pauc endeveno, majorment ad aquel al qual es alcun studi e us e enten aquest meu libre mot; quar aquela fractura significa a tu en las majors disposicios via dreyturiera en la restauracio e en la strictura de lu, e donc enten be.	And that which is straight is not hidden in these nearby fractures and which few indeed, especially to one who has some study and use of this my book; for that fracture indicates to you in the greatest dispositions a direct path in its restoration and in its tightness, and therefore understand well.
Mays en la vergua del home quan es trincada, pren guarguamela de auca, e met la vergua en aquela; e aprop pausa sobre lu envolucio de drap, e sia envolopada, e aprop sia layssada per tres dias o enviro aquels, e sia sanada.	But in the rod of a man when it is fractured, take poplar bark, and place the rod in it; and then place a covering of linen on it, and let it be wrapped, and then let it rest for three days or around those, and let it be healed.
Capitol .xix.	Chapter .xix.
De restauracio de fractura dels osses quan es am plagua.	Of restoration of fractured bones when they are with pus.
Convenient es ad aquel al qual accideys fractura am plagua, e majorment si le os es gran ayssi cum es le os de la cuoyssa o de l’adjutori, o semblant ad aquel, que tu te cuoytes e fleubotomes aquel tantost si las condicios de fleubotomia a tu o testifican ayssi cum desus havem dit.	It is convenient for one to whom fracture with pus occurs, and especially if the bone is large like the bone of the thigh or the adductor, or similar to that, that you cure it and bleed it immediately if the conditions of phlebotomy testify to you as we have said above.
E si la plagua eflueys sanc, lahoras cove que tu te coytes a la retencio de lu enayssi que tu polverizes sobre lu zegi trissat, si a tu autra causa no es present.	And if the pus flows out with blood, then have you cure it to retain it in place as you powder over it powdered quicklime, if no other cause is present.
E aprop comensa restaurar la fractura en aquel meteys dia, e no prolongues aquo, si no accideys apostema.	And then begin to restore the fracture on that same day, and do not prolong it, unless an abscess occurs.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras tu layssa la restauracio de lu entro al ix dia, entro que sia cedat le apostema, e no apropinques a lu en le tertz dia e·l iiii de tot, quar tu faras accidir mals accidentz.	But if an abscess occurs, then let you leave the restoration of it until the ninth day, within which the abscess has subsided, and do not approach it on the third day and the fourth of all, for you will cause harmful accidents.
Mays si le os trencat es eminent sobre la codena descubert, lahoras cove que te perforses reduzir aquel e engualar aquel am las tuas mas am facilitat e am pauca extencio.	But if the broken bone is prominent above the uncovered armpit, then you should perforate and reduce it with your hands with ease and with little extension.
Mays si extencio no es a tu preparada e la equacio de lu am las tieuas mas, lahoras tu reduzeys aquel am las tuas mas am aquest sturment; e es sturment le qual es fayt de ferr, la longitut del qual es de vii ditz o de viii e la latitut del qual es segon la quantitat de la plagua; e per aquo es necessari al metge que prengua de aquels tres o quatre segon la quantitat que indigeys ad aquo en la curacio en tota specia de fractura.	But if extension is not prepared for you and the alignment with your hands, then you should reduce it with this instrument; and this instrument is made of iron, whose length is seven or eight digits and whose width is according to the amount of the wound; and therefore it is necessary for the doctor to take one of these three or four according to the quantity required in the cure in every kind of fracture.
E sia redon, e sia en lu pauca groceza per so que no sia doblat deves la comprecio sobre aquel en la hora de la operacio.	And it should be rounded and have little roughness so that it is not bent due to pressure on it during the operation.
E sia de aguda extremitat al qual sia marge en las sieuas extremitatz; e sia le desus de lu a grossetut tendent, e de la maytat de lu entro a las partidas.	And its upper part should be thick, and its lower part thin and pointed at the ends; and it should be half as wide as its length between the points.
E aquesta es la forma de lu:	And this is its form:
E es nompnat en grec “labre volentz atelarem”, so es paleta pauca.	And it is named in Greek "labris velens atelarem", which means a slightly curved palette.
Per que cove que sia pausada la extremitat de lu acuda elevada sobre la extremitat del os eminent.	So that its end may be placed elevated above the prominent end of the bone.
E inpelleys aquel en una veguada entro que retorne le os, e sia engualat am alcuna equacio.	And press it into a hollow space so that it returns the bone and is aligned with some adjustment.
E donc esforsa te engualar las extremitatz de la fractura entre lor, e si la extremitat de lu trencada es subtil, e no pren aquela le sturment per bona axcepcio, lahoras cove que tu inscidas la extremitat de aquel os entro que l’insturment haja poder de aquo.	And then try to align the ends of the fracture between them, and if the broken end is thin, and does not accept the instrument for good extension, then you should insert the end of that bone so that the instrument can do it.
Mays si no podes reduzir le os de tot am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras enscideys aquel am aquo que coveneys a lu dels inscizoris les quals havem ditz; o serra aquel am una de las serras en qualque manieyra sia a tu possible.	But if you cannot reduce the bone at all with what we have recommended, then cut it with one of the saws which we have mentioned; or cut it in some way that is possible for you.
E aprop ratz aquel que roman en le os de asperitat e de scorsas menudas.	Then scrape away anything that remains on the bone of roughness and fine flakes.
E cum le os es reduzit, e aprop la reduccio le malaute atroba dolor vehement ledent, lahoras sapias que le os no es retornat al sieu loc natural; e adonc fay aquo quar tu confereyses al malaute gran juvament.	And when the bone is reduced and the patient feels intense pain as a result, then you should know that the bone has not returned to its natural place; and thus you will confer great benefit on the patient.
Cum es complida la tua restauracio la qual fas al os, e lahoras submergeys drap en vi stiptic negre, e propriament si es en estiu, e no pauses sobre la plagua cerot ni autre causa en la qual sia oli, per so que no fassa en lu accidir poyredura e corropcio.	When you have completed your restoration of the bone and then submerge a cloth in black styptic vinegar, and especially if it is summer, do not apply wax or any other cause in which there is oil, so that no putrefaction and corrosion occur on it.
E aprop aministra stelas en la hora del tieu compliment de la restauracio de l’os, e layssa la plagua descuberta enayssi que inscidas le trauc am forfexs e uses de envolucios segon la quantitat de la plagua.	And then administer stabs in the hour of your completion of the restoration of the bone, and leave the wound uncovered unless you insert the tool with forceps and use bandages according to the amount of the wound.
E guarda te am tota cautela que no strenhas la plagua am la fractura, quar motas veguadas an fayt aquo les fols metges, e fero accidir sobre les sieus malautes mort o malautia corrodent o zuthement, so es sania.	And be very careful not to tighten the wound with the fracture, for many times they have done this foolish doctors and caused on their patients death or corruption or putrefaction, which is madness.
E si la tieua strictura leugiera, molli, diversa de la strictura de las autras fracturas.	And if your grip is looser, softer, and different from the grip of other fractures.
E si la plagua es gran o es plagua mala, e temes sobre aquel alcus accidentz mals les quals havem recomtatz, e atrobas dolor en le loc, lahoras no cove que pauses sobre aquel astelas, mays fay ad aquel envolucio de draps durs en loc de stelas e strenh lu am aquelas.	And if the wound is large or evil, and you fear some bad accidents that we have recommended, and feel pain in the place, then do not place any stabs on it, but make a bandage of hard cloths in place of those.
E cum aprop un dia o dos vezes ja la plagua comensar, que en lu sia engendrat brac, lahoras tu osta desus le drap le qual havias pausat sobre aquel am vi, e aprop aministra calguas, enguentz am les quals de nostra constuma es que mediquem las plaguas, ayssi cum enguentz tetrafarmacon e semblantz ad aquel.	And when a day or two has passed and the wound begins to heal, then remove the cloth that you placed over it with vinegar, and then administer poultices according to which of our remedies we usually use for wounds, thus with poultice tetrafarmacon and similar to those.
E conveneys a tu que deslias le liament e considera la plagua en quascun dia mati e vespre entro que sia consolidada e fermada, e cove que·l membre sia preparat en tal manieyra que la poyredura corra de lu a las partidas dejos am facilitat.	And it is fitting for you to loosen the bandage and examine the wound every day morning and evening until it is healed and closed, and so that the member is prepared in such a way that putrefaction runs from it into its parts with ease.
si a la plagua passan motz dias, e no es consolidada ni es abscindit de lu le brac, lahoras sapias que aqui so satagias de las petitas per que cove enquieras la plagua am tenta.	If several days have passed and the wound is not healed or closed with a scab, then you should know that here are small worms for which it is fitting to pierce the wound with a needle.
E de aquelas satagias aquelas que so separadas remau e extratz, aquelas que de lor no so separadas e pongen le membre e fan accidir dolor, perforsa te a inscidir aquelas segon que a tu aquo es possibla.	And of those worms, separate the ones that are apart and remove them; but those that are attached to the member and cause pain, pierce them according to what is possible for you.
E si accideys a la plagua zuchem o eluchen, so es stiomenios, o autra specia de corrupcio e de putrefaccio, lahoras cove que pauses a quada un de aquels am aquo que conveneys a lu de la curacio del qual es precedida narracio en le sieu capitol.	And if it happens to the wound that pus or blood flow from it, which are signs of corruption or putrefaction, then you should apply one of those remedies according to what is appropriate for its cure, of which a description precedes in their chapter.
E de aquo en le qual cove que stia lo mieu sermo e tu fassas present la tua pessa: quan os gros es trincat, emineys sobre le membre ayssi cum le os de la coyssa e del ajutori e semblantz ad aquels dels membres grans, e que no presumas atraccio de lu, ni la extraccio de lu quar motas veguadas accideys per aquo la mort; habantz layssa aquel entro que poyresca, quar fort leu cayra per si aprop xx dias o .xxx.; e lahoras cura la plagua si a tu es vist, e si no layssa aquela.	And from this in which you should be wary and make your judgment: when a large bone is broken, it protrudes above the member as well as the bone of the thigh and the helper, and resembles those of the large members, and do not presume traction on it, nor its extraction because many times it has happened due to that death; leave it alone unless it putrefies, for very often it falls by itself after about 20 or 30 days. And then cure the wound if you see it, and if not, leave it.
Capitol .xx.	Chapter .XX.
De la curacio de nodacio que accideys en le vestigi de alcuna fractura.	Of the cure of a nodule that happens in the track of any fracture.
Motas veguadas accideys aquesta nodacio en le vestigi de sanacio de fractura, e majorment que es prop de las juncturas, e es orrasada per lu la figura del membre; e fort leu prohibeys le membre de la sua operacio natural.	Many times this nodule happens in the track of healing of a fracture, and mostly it is near the joints, and the figure of the member is obstructed by it; and very often it prohibits the member from its natural operation.
Adonc considera si la nodacio es recent e aministra en aquela medicinas que han stipticat ayssi co es aloen, e enses, e mira, e sercacollo, e acrassia, e semblantz ad aquels; enayssi que prenguas de aquela alcunas o totas, e comfesiys aquelas am vi stiptic, o am album de huou, o am vi agre, e pausa aquela sobre la nodacio en estopa, e constringeys aquelas sobre lu per bona constriccio.	Then consider if the nodule is recent and administer on it remedies that have dried like aloin, and myrrh, and mithridate, and sarcocolla, and similar to those; and take some of them or all of them, and moisten them with vinegar or with milk, and apply that to the nodule on a piece of cloth, and constrict it over it for good contraction.
E leyssa extrictura que no deslies aquela per motz dias; e aprop deslia aquela e itera autra, entro que sia remauguda la nodacio; o strenh sobre aquela lamina de plom descentment, quar plom ha proprietat de remaure tot aquo que es imflat en les membres.	And leave the constriction so that you do not remove it for several days; and then remove it and repeat it, until the nodule is healed; or tighten over it a sheet of lead descending, because lead has the property of healing everything that is inflamed in the members.
Mays si nodacio ja es en peyra convertida e streyta es e nessessitat provoca a ostar aquela coytadament, e lahoras scindeys aquela per la partida pus sobirana de lu, e inscideys la superfluitat e eminent, o ratz aquela am alcus rezoris entro que sia remauguda; e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	But if the nodule is already turned to stone and tight and it causes necessity to cut it away painfully, then split it through the part of pus above it, and remove the superfluity and prominence, or cut it with any forceps until it is healed; and cure that as it is healed.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter .XXI.
De restauracio de fractura quan es restaurada e aprop aquo roman le membre subtil e freul no segon la sieua natura.	Of the restoration of a fracture when it is restored and then something happens to the member subtile and frail, not according to its nature.
Quan fractura de os es restaurada, e aprop aquo roman le membre subtil e freul, lahoras aquo no es fayt sino per motas causas: de las quals la una es multitut de solucio del liament e de la liguacio de lu fayta no segon que cove; o per superfluitat de strictura dels liamentz entro que·l nutriment sia prohibit correr al membre; o per multitut de embrocaccio superflua; o per movement superfluent no en la sua hora; o per pauquesa de sanc en le cors del malaute e per debelitat de lu.	When a bone fracture is restored, and then something happens to the member subtile and frail, then it is not done except for many causes: one of which is abundance of swelling of the bandage and of its ligature not according to how it should be; or due to superfluity of constriction of the bands within which the nourishment is prohibited from running to the member; or due to abundance of pressure on the member; or due to movement beyond its time.
E curacio de aquo es dar a mengar al malaute e far le cor de lu tendre entro que·l sanc sia multiplicat en lu; e aministra banh; e entromet gaug e leticia sobre lu.	And the cure of this is to make the patient eat and warm his chest so that blood is multiplied in him; and administer bath, and apply hot poultice on it.
E aprop pausa pegua sobre le membre, per so que la pegua atire a lu mot nutriment, o continua embrocacio de lu am aygua tebeza, entro que·l nutriment corr e retorne a la sua figura natural.	And then apply a poultice on the member so that the poultice attracts nourishment to it, or continue embrocation of it with warm water, until the nourishment runs and returns to its natural figure.
Capitol .xxii.	Chapter 22.
De curacio dels osses trincatz quan so restauratz tortuozament e prohibeys la operacio de lor de aquo que cove.	Of the cure of broken bones when they are healed crookedly and the operation of them is prohibited by that which covers them.
Quan accideys al membre ja restaurat aprop la sanacio de lu de tortuositat e eminencia al os trincat e nodacio, e es per aquo fededa de forma del membre, mays empero le membre no es prohibit de la sieua operacio natural, lahora no cove que tu recipias la paraula de aquel que exsistima aquel membre sia de novel trincat.	When it happens to the member already restored near the healing of it from crookedness and protuberance to the broken bone and knotting, and it is because of that which feeds the form of the member, but indeed the member is not prohibited from its natural operation, however it does not cover that you receive the word of him who examines that member be of newly broken.
Mays ja so statz motz fols metges e restauradors les quals han fayt aquo en nostra tera; e aquesta operacio es mot vituperable perduzent a gran temor le senhal de la qual es mortal.	But there are foolish doctors and restorators who have done this in our land; and this operation is very blameworthy presenting great fear, the sign of which is deadly.
Mays si claudicacio e nodacio son recentz, lahoras cove que sian enbrocatz am aygua tebeza en la qual so coytas erbas mollificantz, ayssi cum son fuelas de altea e razitz de lu, e mellilot, e semblantz ad aquels; e sia fayt a lu emplastre am emplastre mollificatio ayssi cum dyallaquilon ben fayt; o que sia preza mucillage de razit de altea e sia contucida am gray de gualina o am oli de cirami, e sia emplastrat am aquel; o que sian prezes figuas grassas e sian trissadas am fems de colom, e semblantz ad aquels de las medicinas que son nompnadas amermans consolidacio.	But if the limp and the knotting are recent, then they should be bathed in tepid water in which soft herbs are steeped, such as mallows of altaia and its root, and mallow, and similar to these; and let an ointment be made with a softening liniment just like diaquilon well made; or let mucilage be made from the root of altaia and let it be mixed with egg white of silk or with olive oil of ceramic, and let it be plastered with that; or let fat figs be cut up into pieces with dove's dung, and similar to those of the medicines which are named mother's milk consolidation.
E alcunas vetz es dissolvuda am assidua fricacio leugiera que sia am las mas humidas, e sia administrat movement del membre a tota partida en totas horas.	And sometimes it is dissolved by frequent gentle friction which should be with moist hands, and let the member be moved in all directions at all hours.
Mays si tortuositat ja es anada denant e es fayta fort e convertida es en peyra e provocada es necessitat a curacio de lu am ferr, lahoras cove que sia le pus desus cecsat e la continuacio del os sia dissolvut, e sia inscidit aquo que superflueys de nodacio de aquel meteys am le os am inscissoris subtils, e sia aministrada facilitat en aquel am sollicitut e studi.	But if crookedness has gone ahead and is made strong and turned into stone and has caused the need for a cure of it with iron, then let the pus be cut away above and the continuation of the bone be dissolved, and what is superfluous of the knotting of that metal with the bone be cut away with fine instruments, and let facility be administered in that by solicitude and study.
Capitol .xxiii.	Chapter 23.
De sermo en dislocacio.	Of speech on dislocation.
Dislocacio es eyssiment de alcuna de las juncturas del sieu loc, per que es prohibida de movement, e es orrezada la figura del membre, e fa venir sobre le malaute dolors e lesios grans.	Dislocation is displacement of one of the joints of its place, by which it is prohibited from movement, and the figure of the member is marred, and brings great pains and injuries upon the patient.
Donc quan accideys ad alcu dislocacio, lahoras cove tantost perforsar que sia reduzit, e no tarde aquela reduzir, quar si es tardada, le loc es apostemat e fort leu am aquo es fayta dificil la reduccio de dislocaccio.	Therefore when dislocation happens to anyone, then let it be immediately reduced, and not delayed that reduction, for if it is delayed the place is apoplectic and very strong with that dislocation is made difficult.
E per aysso no cove que sia maugut ni stendut en la hora de la apostemacio, quar motas veguadas fa venir spasme e dolors ledentz.	And because of that it should not be stretched or bent in the hour of apoplexy, for many times it brings on spasm and pains to the patient.
Mays quan aquo accideys, lahoras cove que tu te coytes a la flaubotomia del malaute, e aprop sia layssat entro que repause le apostema; e aprop le membre sia embrocat am aygua cauda e oli, e aprop sia reduzit am facilitat.	But when that happens let the patient be placed in the bath and let him rest until the apoplexy is gone; and let the member be fomented with warm water and oil, and let it be reduced by ease.
E tot membre sia curat am aquo del qual la rememoracio vindra en son loc.	And let every member be cured with that from which the memory will come back to its place.
E yeu ja e ordenatz les capitols de dislocacio segon que es precedit en fractura; de la partida del cos pus sobirana entro a la partida pus dejos.	And I have ordered the chapters of dislocation according to that which precedes in fracture, from the upper part of the body first to the lower part.
Capitol .xxiiii.	Chapter 24.
De curacio de dislocacio de la mandibula dejos.	Of the cure of dislocation of the lower jaw.
So dislocadas las doas mandibulas si no tart; e la dislocacio de amdos es fayta segon una de dos manieyras: que o son remaugudas de lurs locs per pauca remocio, e so mollificadas un petit; o so dislocadas per entiera dislocacio e complida, entro que sian mollificadas a la partida de la junctura entro que corro saliva del malaute e que no puesca tenir aquela ni puesca claure la sua boca, e la lengua de lu sia envolopada en sa paraula.	Both mandibles are dislocated if not tight; and the dislocation of both is done in one of two ways: that they are pulled out of their place by little movement, and are made soft a bit; or they are dislocated by entire dislocation and completed, until they are soft at the joint where saliva runs from the patient and he cannot hold it nor can close his mouth, and his tongue is wrapped in his speech.
Mays quan la dislocacio de lu es pauca, lahoras en las majors disposicios retorna per si an pauca causa.	But when the dislocation of him is slight, then in the major dispositions it returns by itself for little cause.
Mays si la dislocacio es entiera e complida, lahoras cove que sia administrada reduccio de lu leugierament, e no sia tardada de tot.	But if the dislocation is entire and completed, then let the reduction of it be administered gently, and not be delayed at all.
E es que·l ministre tengua le cap del malaute, e entrometa lo metge le dit pous de la una sieua ma en la razit de la dislocacio de la mandibula dedintz la boca de lu, si la dislocacio es de la una part; o que entrometa les sieus dos pouzes ensemps, si la dislocacio es de doas partz, e les autres ditz de las mas de lu sian defora am les quals enguale; e comanda al malaute que cesse las suas mandibulas e absolva aquelas anar de quascuna partida; e le metge engualhe la mandibula e enpellisca la mandibula entro que retorne al sieu loc.	And it is that the minister hold the head of the patient, and let the doctor put his finger of one hand in the root of the dislocation of the mandible within the mouth of him if the dislocation is on one side; or that he puts both fingers together, if the dislocation is on two sides, and the others are outside with which he holds them; and command the patient to cease his mandibles and stop those from any part; and let the doctor grip the mandible and press the mandible in until it returns to its place.
E si dificil es la reducio de lu, e majorment si amdos las mandibulas so essemps dislocadas, lahoras aministra evoporacio am aygua cauda e oli, entro que sia fayta leugiera la reduccio de amdos e no tardes la reduccio de amdos de tot, ayssi quo havem dit.	And if the reduction of him is difficult and especially if both mandibles are dislocated, then administer evaporation with warm water and oil, until the reduction of both is made easier and do not delay the reduction of both at all, as we have said.
E donc cum retornam e so engualadas, e es clausa la boca del malaute e no es mollificada, lahoras pausa sobre aquelas polvils de drap am cerot, e sia fayt de cera e oli rozat; e aprop sia liat am facilitat am liamens mols.	And therefore when it returns and is pressed, and the mouth of the patient is closed and not made soft, then place upon those powders of cloth with cerot, and let it be made of wax and rose oil; and let it be bound by ease with gentle ligatures.
E sia le dormir del malaute sobre le sieu dos, e·l cap de lu sia stant entre dos aurelhes, per so que no maugue aquel a la partida dreyta ni a la sinistra; e no li fassas per forsa masteguar alcuna causa; habans la sieua vianda sia forbicio leon, entro que quan las dolors sian remaugudas e las mandibulas so nozadas, lahoras maugue aquo que vol.	And let the patient sleep on his back, and let his head stand between two pillows so that he does not bend to the right nor to the left; and do not force him to chew for any cause; having his food be porridge of lion, until when pains are pulled back and the mandibles are knotted, then let him chew what he wants.
E aquo sia aministrat am facilita, e no trebalhe sobre la apercio de la boca deves la comestio e beure e ocitatio, entro que la mandibula sia nozada e sanada.	And that should be administered with ease, and do not work on the opening of the mouth after eating and drinking and waking up, until the mandible is knotted and healed.
E si es dificil la reduccio de duas mandibulas quan so dislocadas en alcuna hora e no so convertidas als lors locs, lahoras motas veguadas accideysso febres e soda assidua, e fort leu es alerguat le ventre del malaute, e fort leu e vomeys colera pura.	And if the reduction of two mandibles is difficult when dislocated at any time and not turned to their places, then many times it happens that fevers and great thirst occur, and very often the belly of the patient is swollen, and very often he vomits pure blood.
E quan tu vezes aquo, lahoras sapias que es perdicio; e motas veguadas mor aquel al qual accideys aquo en x dias.	And when you see that, then know it is perilous; and many times that person dies who experiences that in a few days.
Capitol .xxv.	Chapter 25.
De reduccio de la dislocacio de la furcula e de la extremitat del muscle.	Of the reduction of the dislocation of the collarbone and of the extremity of the muscle.
Furcula no es dislocada del latz dedintz per la sua continuacio am le pietz; e alcunas veguadas es dislocada a la partida defora, e aquo es declarat al sentiment.	Collarbone is not dislocated on the side through its continuation with the shoulder; and sometimes it is dislocated at the outer part, and that is declared by sensation.
E la restauracio de lu es que·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu dos e extenda les sieus brasses.	And its restoration is that the patient hangs over his back and extends his arms.
E aprop coarta le loc am la tua palma am fort coartacio, quar ela retornara.	And let the place be pressed by your palm with strong compression, for it will return.
E aprop pausa sobre aquela emplastre e pulvils e strenh aquela.	And let the plaster and powders and strength be paused upon that.
Mays la extremitat de aquel que siec le coyde e·s continuat am aquel, no es dislocada en alcun dia; lahoras cove que sia reduzida e engualhada segon que havem dit e segon que es a tu aparelhat.	But the extremity of that which seems the shoulder and is continued by that, is not dislocated in any day; then let it be reduced and pressed according to what we have said and according to what is your apparatus.
E aprop pausa sobre aquela emplastre, e pulvils, e extrictura, e comanda al malaute adherir a trenquilitat e a repaus entro que sia sanat.	And let the plaster and powders and compression be paused upon that, and command the patient to adhere to tranquility and rest until it is healed.
E am aquesta meteyssa curacio es reduzida la extremita del muscle quan es separada del sieu loc.	And by this method of cure the extremity of the muscle is reduced when separated from its place.
Capitol .xxvi.	Chapter 26.
De la reduccio de la dislocacio del muscle.	Of the reduction of the dislocation of the muscle.
Sapias que·l muscle no es dislocat sino segon tres manieras, de las quals es la una que sia dislocat a la partida del titillic a la partida dejos.	Know that the muscle is not dislocated except in three ways, of which the first is that it is dislocated at the joint of the head to the lower part.
E la segonda es que sia dislocat a la partida desus del muscle, e aquo es fayt tart; e no es dislocat a las partidas detras per la spalla; e no es dislocat a las partidas denant per les nervis.	And the second is that it is dislocated at the upper part of the muscle and that is done tight; and it is not dislocated to the rear parts by the shoulder; and it is not dislocated to the front parts by the nerves.
E majorment es dislocat e defora eyssit a las partidas dejos deves le titillic, e majorment en aquels dels quals las carns son paucas, leugierament es dislocat; mays en aquels en les quals so motas carns, es eyssit fora am dificultat.	And it is mainly dislocated and protrudes out of the lower parts where there is a tremor, and it is mainly dislocated in those where the flesh is thin, but in those with a lot of flesh, it comes out with difficulty.
E fort leu accideys ad alcus homes percussio o cazement, e le muscle de lu es apostemat de apostema caut, e es cujat per aquo que ja sia dislocat.	And soon after some people are hit or injured, and the muscle of them is bruised with a bruise, and it is cured by what has already been dislocated.
Adonc cove que tu sproes aquo entro que estias sobre-sertetut de lu, e lahoras procesiscas en la curacio de lu.	Now, when you have spoken about what you were doing over him, then continue with the treatment of him.
E es conoguda la dislocacio de lu quan es a las partidas dejos deves le titillic; per so que distingescas entre le muscle dislocat e·l muscle sa, quar tu atrobas entre aquels diversitat manifesta; e atrobas en le cap del muscle concavitat e dejos le titillic deves le tocament del cap del muscle ayssi quo un huou, e al malaute no pot redusir la sua ma a la sieua aurelha, ni maure aquela per totz movementz.	And it is known that the dislocation is in the lower parts where there is tremor; so that you distinguish between the dislocated muscle and the healthy muscle, because you see a clear difference among them; and you see in the head of the muscle a hollow and under the tremor due to the touch of the head of the muscle like a pea, and the patient cannot reduce his hand to his ear, nor move it at all.
Si es dislocat deves le pietz o ensus, e tu lahoras atrobas manifest tocament, e no es amaguat.	If it is dislocated above or below, and you clearly see the touch, and it is not hidden.
E de aquesta dislocacio es fayta leugiera reduccio quan es fresca e le malaute es enfant.	And this dislocation is quickly reduced when it is fresh and the patient is a child.
E la reduccio de lu es que·l ministre eleva la ma de lu a las partidas desus; e aprop pause les tieus pouses dejos le titillic de lu, e eleva la junctura am fortaleza en sus al sieu loc, e·l ministre eleva la ma de lu, e extenda aquela en sus; e aprop pausa aquela dejos quar ela retorna leugierament.	And its reduction is that the minister lifts up the patient's hand to the parts above; and then places his fingers under the tremor of the patient, and raises the joint with strength in the direction of its location, and the minister lifts up the patient's hand and stretches it out upwards; and then he lets it drop because it returns quickly.
Mays si per aquo que havem dit no retorna, e so del comensament que accidic la dislocacio, motz dias, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia banhat en aygua cauda e sia aministrada enbrocacio que mollifique e liniesca ayssi cum si so coytz razitz de altea, e fenugrec, e melillot en aygua, e sia administrada.	But if it does not return from what we have said and many days pass, then the patient should be bathed in warm water and a poultice that softens and liniment should be applied as if his thigh was frostbitten, with mustard, and fennel, and melilot in water, and should be administered.
E aprop le malaute sia ressupinat sobre le sieu dos e sia pausat dejos le titillic de lu espera de lana que sia engual entre levitat e strictura, e aprop le metge pause le sieu talo sobre la spera, e eleva le cap del muscle am vertut, e atire la ma del malaute per que no sia mauguda a las partidas dejos, e autre ministre tengua le cap del malaute, que no sia maugut a las partidas dejos, quar aquela tantost retorna al sieu loc.	And then the patient should be laid on his back and placed under the tremor of him, with a pad that is half-way between being lifted up and tightened, and then the doctor puts his thumb on the ball, and lifts the head of the muscle with strength, and pulls the patient's hand so that it is not pulled down to the lower parts; and another minister holds the head of the patient so that it is not pulled down to the lower parts, because it immediately returns to its place.
E si voles, reduzeys aquel segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu fassas esser prezent un home le qual sia pus lonc que·l malaute, e estia de la part de aquel latz, e entrometa le sieu muscle dejos le titillic del malaute e eleve le titillic de lu a las partidas desus entro que·l malaute sia suspendut en ayre, e autre ministre tire la ma del malaute de las partidas dejos del sieu ventre.	And if you want, reduce that second in this way: and it is that you make a man who is taller than the patient stand on that side, and he stands on his part, and inserts his muscle under the tremor of the patient and lifts the tremor of him to the parts above while the patient is suspended in the air; and another minister pulls the patient's hand from the lower parts of his belly.
Mays si le malaute es leugier, lahoras cove que am lu que autre causa sia suspenduda, per so que grave aquel, quar la dislocacio retorna tantost.	But if the patient is thin, then it should be suspended by someone else for the sake of heaviness, because the dislocation returns immediately.
E es reduzit eysament segon autra manieyra: e es que sia ficat en terra un fust lonc le cap del qual sia redon de figura, ayssi cum pilo de mortier, que no sia gros ni subtil, e aprop sia pausat dejos le malaute; pus que so pausatz sobre·l cap del fust draps leons, e·l malaute sia stant segon la longitut del fust, e aprop sia extenduda la ma de lu a las partidas dejos del autra part; e sia extendut le cos de lu del autre part am fortaleza, quar la junctura retorna al sieu loc am velocitat.	And it is also reduced in another way: and it is that a long post whose head is rounded in shape, like mortar, not thick or thin, be placed under the patient; and after he is placed on top of the head of the post, lionskin blankets are placed under him; and the patient stands according to the length of the post, and then his hand is extended to the lower parts of the other side; and his body is extended with strength from the other part, because the joint returns to its place quickly.
E si es dificil reduccio de lu per totas las causas que havem ditas, lahoras usa de aquesta cura: e es que tu prenguas un fust la quantitat del qual sia en le lonc de dos brasses, e latitut de aquel sia de quatre ditz, e la grossetut de lu sia aleujat en le preon del tittilic segon aquesta forma:	And if its reduction is difficult because of all the causes we have said, then use this treatment: and it is that you take a post whose length is two cubits, and width of that is four digits, and thickness of it is lessened in the amount of a thumb, and shape of it is like this form:
E aprop sobre le cap redon sian liatz drap leons per so que·l fust no ledesca le malaute.	And then on the rounded head lionskin blankets are placed so that the post does not chafe the patient.
E aprop sia pausat dejos le titillic del malaute, e sia extenduda la ma o le bras sobre·l fust entro a las partidas dejos, e sia liat le fust sobre le adjutori e le bras e la extremitat de la ma.	And then the tremor of the patient is placed under it, and his hand or arm is extended over the post to the lower parts; and the post is tied around the armpit and arm and the end of the hand.
Aprop sia pausat le bras sobre un scalo de scala segon la latitut, e la ma sia extenduda a las partidas dejos, e l’autre cos sia suspendut de l’autre part, quar la junctura intra tantost.	Then the arm is placed over a step of a ladder according to its width; and the hand is extended to the lower parts, and his other body is suspended from the other part, because the joint enters immediately.
E cum le intrament de lu es complit segon quascuna maniera que es a tu possibla, e lahoras cove que tu pauses dejos le titillic spera de lana de engual quantitat; e aprop pauza emplastre perparat de polvera de moli am enses e album de huou sobre tot le muscle, ayssi quo es revolvut desus, e aprop strenh dejos le titillic am strictura decent; e le liament sia revolvut sobre le emplastre, e la ma de lu sia annectida al col de lu, e sia leyssat, e no sia mauguda la ma de lu per vii dias.	And when its instrument is completed according to any manner that is possible for you, then you place under the tremor a pad of wool of equal quantity; and then place plaster prepared from moly with honey over all the muscle, as if it was rolled on top, and then tie down the tremor with tightness decent; and the bandage is rolled over the plaster, and his hand is connected to his neck, and he is left, and his hand is not chafed for seven days.
E cove que sia pausada la vianda del malaute pauca, entro que·l membre sia confortat, quar es pus leugier a la sanacio de lu.	And let the food of the patient be little while his member is comforted, because it is easier for his healing.
E aprop la vianda sia donada major aprop vii o v e sia exercitat un movement; e donc si es fermat e no es mollificat, lahoras ja es sanat.	And then food be given more generously after seven or eight days and exercise be done; and if it is堅固 and not softened, then he is healed.
Mays si la junctura es dislocada motas veguadas per humiditat que accideys a lu o per autra causa, lahoras cove que en aquela sia administrat cauteri am tres traucs, segon que denant es dit en le capitol de cauteri.	But if the joint is dislocated many times because of moisture that happens to him or for another cause, then in that let cautery be administered with three holes according as it is said before in the chapter on cautery.
E si tot aysso es fayt e aprop vii dias es desliat le liament e la junctura no es fermada, e le emplastre e la strictura son reduzitz sobre lu alcunas veguadas, e no es fermada e catz e no pot elevar aquel bras a las partidas desus, lahoras sapias que·ls nervis de lu, les quals so al cap del muscle, ja so inscizes o extendutz o mollificatz, e sapia que la junctura nul temps no sira ficada en loc sieu.	And if all this is done and then after seven days the bandage is loosened and the joint is not closed, and the plaster and tightness are removed from him several times, and it is not closed, and there is no strength in his cat and he cannot lift that arm to the parts above, then know that his nerves which are at the head of the muscle are cut or extended or softened, and know that the joint never will be set in its place.
De la dislocacio de aquela qu’es fayta deves le pietz e la mamilha o las partidas detras, la reduccio es fayta am impulcio e extencio am las mas, entro que retorne.	Of that which is dislocated at the feet and breast or behind, its reduction is made by pushing and extending with hands as it returns.
E sia administrada en aquela l’autra strictura, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	And then the other tightness is administered, and that is cured within as it is healed.
E si accideys aprop la sanacio gravitat en le membre e tarditat en le movement de lu, lahoras le malaute uze de banh motas veguadas entro que aquela gravitat sia alleujada e que retorne a la natura de lu primiera.	And if the healing happens to be delayed in the member and delay in its movement, then the patient should take baths many times as that heaviness is relieved and he returns to his nature first.
Capitol .xxvii.	Chapter .XXVII.
De curacio de dislocacio del coyde.	Of curing of dislocation of the elbow.
Sapias que la junctura del coyde es dislocada am difficultat e semblantment retorna am difficultat; e aquela es dislocada a totas partidas, e majorment a la partida denant a la partida detras, e la dislocacio de lu no es amaguada a tu quar es cazent dejos le vezement o dejos le tocament segon qualque figura sia dislocat, e quan ajustes le coyde disloguat am le sa, aquo es a tu declarat manifestament, quar la junctura es concavada e no pot doblar le bras, ni tocar am aquel le sieu muscle.	Know that the elbow joint is dislocated with difficulty and returns with difficulty; and it is dislocated to all parts, and especially to the part in front of the part behind, and its dislocation is not hidden from you because it is hanging down or touching under according to what figure it is dislocated, and when you adjust the dislocated elbow with the healthy one, that is manifestly declared to you, because the joint is hollowed out and cannot bend the arm, nor touch with that the muscle.
E cove que·t coytes, e reduzescas la dislocacio tantost denant que vengua a lu apostema caut, quar si ve a lu apostema caut, dificil es la reduccio de lu, e fort leu no es sanat de tot; e majorment quan es a las partidas detras, quar pus mala es de totas las autras specias de dislocacio, e de major dolor, e motas veguadas deyssen am aquela la mort.	And let your elbows be extended and the dislocation reduced at once before it comes to an abscess, because if it comes to an abscess, its reduction is difficult indeed and rarely healed at all; and especially when it is behind, for it is worse of all kinds of dislocation, and of greater pain, and often results in death.
E la restauracio de lu, quan es aquela que es possibla reduzir, es que la ma de lu sia extenduda am doas mas, e le bras de lu sia expandut, e las mas del metge sian sobre le coyde e dejos lu, e el empellisca la junctura am les pouzes de las suas mas ensemps, o am la razit de la sua palma entro que torne en son loc.	And its restoration when it is possible to reduce, is that the patient's hand be extended with two hands; and his arm be spread out, and the doctor's hands be on the elbow and under him, and he press the joint with the tips of his fingers or with the palm of his hand as he pulls upwards, until it returns to its place.
Mays si la dislocacio es a las partidas denant, lahoras retorna ayssi que dobla la ma am la sua ma, entro que percuta le coyde am la razit de la sua palma.	But if the dislocation is in front, then return it by folding your hand with his hand, while you strike the joint with the base of your palm.
E si la dislocacio no obezeys a la reduccio, lahoras aministra vehement extencio e mot fort.	And if the dislocation does not yield to reduction, then administer a strong extension and forceful motion.
E es que dos ministres extendan le bras, e tenguan aquel eyssament dos ministres per so que no sia remaugut deves la extencio.	Two ministers should extend the arm, while two other ministers hold the patient's head in place, so that it is not moved by the extension.
E aprop sia revolvut le bras deves tota part, pus que es envolopat drap doblat lonc sobre la ma de lu, o liament.	Then the arm should be rotated in all directions, while a long folded cloth or bandage is wrapped around his hand or wrist.
E quant le metge toca la junctura am la sua ma, unte aquela am alcun oli per so que aquo sia aquelas causas las quals ajudan en lubricitat de la junctura am facilitat; e aprop empellesca la junctura am empulcio vehement entro que retorne.	And when the doctor touches the joint with his hand, he should apply some oil to it to help lubricate and facilitate its movement; then he should forcefully push the joint while returning it to its proper position.
E aprop la reduccio de lu cove que sia pausat sobre aquela empastre en le qual sia stipticitat e excequacio am album de huou, e sia extrenhut am strictura descent, e·l bras sia suspendut del col, e sia layssat per alcus dias.	And after its reduction, the patient's arm should be placed on a poultice made of ingredients that will help draw out and reduce inflammation; it should be tightly bound with a bandage, the arm suspended from the elbow, and left for several days.
E aprop sia desliat; e donc si la junctura es formada en le sieu loc, lahoras tu deslia le liament de lu e layssa aquela.	And then it should be loosened; and if the joint is formed in its proper position, you should loosen the bandage and leave it alone.
E si vezas la junctura no be strenher, lahoras tu itera le emplastre e·l liament, e layssa aquela per alcus dias entro que sia extrenhuda; e aprop deslia aquela.	And if you see that the joint is not strong, then you should reapply the poultice and bandage, leaving it for several days while it is reduced; then loosen and remove the bandage.
Mays si accideys a lu gravitat aprop la reduccio de la junctura, e la disposicio de lu es en movement, lahoras aministra humectacio en banh e fricacio subtil, e comprecio, entro que sia aleujat; o pausa sobre la junctura aleliati, so es coyssa de moto grassa; e aprop sia liada, e layssa aquela sobre le os le dia e la nueyt.	But if there is a problem with the reduction of the joint, and its condition is such that movement is not possible, then apply moist heat and gentle friction, along with compression, while it is elevated; or place on the joint a liniment made from a fat that is suitable for ointments; then bind it, and leave it in place day and night.
E aprop osta aquela, e met aquel en banh; e quan suza, lahoras tu fregua la junctura am fricacio temprada, e aprop itera sobre aquela aleliati, so es ronhonal de moto, una veguada, e la segonda, e la .iii.a.,	Then remove the bandage and place him in a bath; and when he is dry, gently rub the joint with mild friction, then reapply the liniment made from rose oil three times, once each day for three days.
corrupcio ja es pervenguda sobre le denolam intrament de banh, entro que sia linit.	Corruption has already occurred on the interior of the tooth because of the water used for bathing.
E si voles, pausa sobre aquela fenda de vaca humida e scalfada am boder e stren sobre aquel; e fay aquo alcunas veguadas, quar aquela es humida e reduzeys a la sua disposicio.	And if you wish, place on it the udder of a cow that has been made warm and soft with milk, then bind it tightly over the joint; do this several times, as long as the poultice remains moist and reduces in size.
Capitol .xxviii.	Chapter .XXVIII.
De curacio de dislocacio de malassen, so es de la junctura que es entre·l bras e la ma.	On the treatment of a dislocation of the elbow joint.
Malassen de la ma alcunas vetz es deslocada, e la reduccio de la dislocacio de lu es leugiera, e·l contrari es de las autras juncturas, mays empero cove que sia velocitat en la reduccio de lu en la hora en la qual es deslocada, denant que le loc sia apostemat o que accida en lu apostema caut.	The elbow joint is sometimes displaced, and its reduction is easier, unlike other joints; however, speed in reducing it is important at the time of displacement, before the site becomes inflamed or an abscess forms.
E la reduccio de la dislocacio de lu es que tu pauses la junctura de la ma del malaute sobre una taula e le ministre extenda la ma de aquel, e le metge pause la sua ma o o la sua palma sobre la iminencia de la junctura, e empellisca aquela entro que retorne al sieu loc.	To reduce the dislocation of this joint, you should have the patient's elbow placed on a table, while one minister extends his arm and another doctor places his hand or palm on the joint's prominence; then the doctor should push the joint back into place.
Mays empero cove que sia considerat si la palma ja es ostada al ventre de la ma, lahoras le malaute pause le dos de la sua ma sobre una taula deves la extencio e la reduccio; e si la dislocacio es precedent deves le dos de la ma, lahoras sia la posicio de la ma de aquel intrinicequement sobre la taula, per so que la ma del metge caja sobre aquela iminencia de la junctura.	However, if the palm is already pressed against the elbow joint's belly, then the patient should rest his arm's forearm on a table during extension and reduction; and if the dislocation occurs above the elbow joint, then the patient's hand should be placed intrinsecally on the table so that the doctor's hand can push on the joint's prominence.
E donc si retorna tantost, bon es; e sino, lahoras strenh aquela am empastre cedant le apostema e layssa aquel; e no iteres aquo, quar sino, no soferta ni no podes sobre la reduccio de lu pus que passan a lu dias.	And if it returns immediately, that is good; otherwise, loosen the bandage, let the poultice draw out inflammation and leave it in place; do not repeat this treatment, or you will not be able to bear or reduce the joint until several days have passed.
Mays empero la junctura roman segon la sua tortuositat; e no notz al malaute alcuna causa, sino que la ma es mollificada e no pot strenher alcuna causa; lahoras sapias que les nervis son trincatz o trissatz, e lahoras no es engen en lu sino que sia strenhuda am cauteri prop le cazament de lu e fort leu aquo confereys alcuna causa.	However, the joint will bend according to its degree of displacement; and if the patient feels no pain, but his hand is limp and cannot be strengthened, then know that the nerves are either torn or cut, and there will be no remedy except to strengthen it with a cautery near its attachment and apply pressure strongly.
Donc cum malassem es retornada, lahoras pausa sobre lu empastre le qual havem recomtat, e sia layssat e strenhut per v dias; e aprop sia desliat e sia layssat e la ma de lu sia excercitada.	Therefore, when the dislocation has been reduced, place on it the poultice we have recommended, and leave it in place for three days; then loosen and remove it, and exercise the patient's hand.
Mays si le movement de lu es ostat e accideys en lu alcuna gravitat, lahoras leniys aquela am aygua cauda e am fricacio alcunas veguadas, entro que sia alleujat.	But if there is any stiffness or pain in the joint, then gently apply warm water and friction several times while elevating it.
Capitol .xxix.	Chapter .XXIX.
De la curacio de dislocacio dels ditz.	On the treatment of a dislocation of the knuckles.
Alcunas veguadas so dislocatz les ditz a tota partida.	Sometimes the knuckles are fully displaced.
E quan es dislocat alcun dit de aquels al dos de la palma o al ventre de lu, lahoras sten le dit e impelleys la dislocacio de lu am les tieus pouses, entro que retorne.	And when a knuckle on the back or underside of the hand is displaced, then grip it and push the joint back into place with your fingers, while returning it.
E aprop sostenta le cap del dit, e suspen aquel deves la part a la qual es dislocat, e layssa aquel per dos dias.	Then support the knuckle' head, suspend it from the part to which it is displaced, and leave it in place for two days.
E aprop suspen aquel e exten aquel entro que dreyt sia engualhat en aquel sieu dia.	Then suspend and extend the joint until it is straightened out on that day.
E quan sira noyt, lia aquel segon aquela narracio, e no cesses desliar aquel en le dia e exercitar am movement, e lia aquel en la noyt; e fay aquo per alcus dias entro que sia streyt.	And when evening comes, loosen it according to that narrows and do not cease loosening it during the day and exercising with movement, then tighten it at night; do this for several days until it is tight.
E fay semblant am aquo, si es dislocat al ventre de la ma, e lia aquel ad aquela partida e fay am aquo la tieua primiera operacio, entro que sia sanat.	And when doing this, if it is displaced on the underside of the hand, then grip it and push it back into place to that side, while performing its first operation; then it will be healed.
E semblantment fay am aquo quan es dislocat a las autres partidas.	And similarly do this when it is displaced to other sides.
Capitol .xxx.	Chapter .XXX.
De la curacio de dislocacio dels spondils del dos.	On the treatment of a dislocation of the shoulder joint.
Quan accideys ad alcun dels spondils del dos o del col dislocacio complida, e so remaugutz motz spondils de lors locs, lahoras en aquela no es curacio, quar la mort se coyta al malaute.	When a complete dislocation occurs in one of the shoulder joints or neck, and the bones stick out from their sockets, then there is no cure; death overtakes the patient.
E senhal de aquo es que la egestio del malaute es fora-eyssida ses voluntat, e no pot retenir aquela; e motas veguadas so mollificatz alcus membres de lu o doas cambas de lu o dos brasses de lu, o un de aquels; o es remaugut un spondil de son loc, quar motas veguadas es remaugut e motas veguadas es fayta la remocio de aquels a quatre partidas.	And its sign is that the patient's mouth is turned outward without his will, and he cannot hold it in; also, sometimes only some of his limbs or two arms or two legs, or one of these, are affected; or sometimes a shoulder joint is displaced from all sides, as the joints are pushed out by all four parts.
Donc aquela ja es remauguda a las partidas detras e es nompnada gelbozitat.	Then it is pushed out to the back and is called dislocation.
Mays la curacio de lu es que lahoras consideras si la gelbozitat accidey de puerissia, quar lahoras en aquela no es curacio ni de aquela no es sanacio de tot.	But its treatment is to consider whether the dislocation occurs from youth, because in that case there is no cure or remedy for it either.
Mays en aquela que ve per cazement o per percussio o per semblant ad aquels, ja diyssero les Antics las manieras de curacio am sermo prolixs, del qual lo mays retorna am profieyt; mays yeu ja e abreujat de aquel del qual lo pauc escusa del trop de lu, per la mieua propinquitat a la entencio mieua exposicio, am la qual he aquo expausat et format ex instrument divers de aquel am le qual mostrero aquo e espausero aquel.	But when it occurs from hitting or striking or similar to these, the Ancients have written their ways of treatment with prolix speech, from which we return with great profit; but I have simplified that which few have described of the excess of its parts, because of my proximity to its intention with which I have exposed and formed it with various instruments.
E dic que en gelbosita que accideys de la partida denant en le pietz, no es engen ni sanacio de aquela; e semblantment en aquela que es fayta a dos latz.	And I say that in dislocation that occurs to the front part of the feet, there is no remedy for it; and similarly when it is done to both sides.
E de aquelas no es curada sino aquela que accideys en le dos propriament am aquo que yeu recomti.	And none are cured except those that occur precisely in the shoulder joint with what I have described.
E es que·l malaute sia extendut sobre la sua cara sobre pug engual prop de paret, e sia extendut dejos lu esturment molh per so que no sia lidit le pietz de lu.	And that the patient be extended over his face, with his armpits pushed against a wall, and his arms stretched out below him so that he does not drag his feet.
E aprop un fust dreyt sia pausat, ficat en la terra en la extremitat del pug entorn le cap de lu, e autra fust en aviro les pes de lu en l’autra extremitat del pueg.	Then a straight stick is placed upright in the ground at his head's end, and another stick placed under his feet at the other end of the bed.
E·l ministre tengua le fust, e no sia fermat en fossa; e autre ministre tengua l’autre segon aquela forma.	And one minister holds the stick, and it is not secured in a hole; and another minister holds the other, then formed similarly.
E aprop envolopa sobre le cap del malaute e dejos les titillic liamen leon ferm; e exten la extremitat del liamel al fust le qual es deves le cap de lu, e lia aquel en lu; e aprop strenh l’autre liament sobre las ancas de lu les denols de lu, e deves las cambas de lu; e aprop ajusta totz les liamentz e lia aquels en l’autre fust le qual es deves les pes de lu.	And then wrap around the head of the patient and let them tickle the lion's tail firmly; and extend the end of the rope to the stake which is the head of him, and tie that in him; and then tighten the other rope over his hips and the heels of him, and tie it to the stakes on his feet; and then adjust all the ropes and tie them to the other stake which is by his feet.
E aprop le ministre cascu extenda le liament a la partida del fust, e no sian remaugutz les dos fustz e les liamentz dels sieus locs en les quals son ficatz, mays empero no so fermatz ayssi cum havem dit.	And then the minister should extend the rope to the tip of the stake, and not be untied the two stakes and the ropes from their places where they are tied, but rather they should be loosened as we have said.
E le metge pause las suas palmas sobre le spondil am fortaleza entro que retorne, o que pause sobre aquela una taula, e aprop que ajuste sobre la taula les sieus pes entro que retorne.	And the doctor should place his palms over the spine with strength until it returns to its position, or that he lies on a table and then adjusts his feet onto the table as he returns to his original position.
Mays si no retorna per aquesta forma, lahoras pren una taula de la qual la latitut o la longitut sia en aviro de tres brassas, e cava en la paret de la qual havem dit que es prop le malaute un loc en le qual intre la extremitat de la taula.	But if it does not return in this way, then take a table of which the breadth or length is in proportion to three fathoms, and dig into the wall of which we have said is near the patient a place in which the end of the table can fit.
E aprop pausa la maytat de la taula sobre le spondilh, e·l metge pause les sieus pes sobre l’autre extremitat, e estrenha be entro que le spondil sia coartat e que retorne al sieu loc.	And then place half of the table over the spine, and the doctor should place his feet over the other end, and tighten well until the spine is constricted and returns to its original position.
E si tu voles, obre am torn le qual es revolvut am la ma; e es que tu fiques en terra deves le cap del malaute en le derier del pug dos fustz, la longitut dels quals sia d’un bras, e deves le cap de lu en le derier del pug eyssament dos fustz; e sia la longitut que es entre quascun fust un palm, e ja es fayt en quascun fust trauc en le qual corr torn, e quascun sia mot fermat en terra per so que no sia maugut.	And if you wish, open with a turn which is wound around the hand; and it is that you place in the ground under the head of the patient at the end of a stake, the length of which is two fathoms, and under his head at the end of a stake of three fathoms; and let the distance between each stake be one palm, and it is already made on each stake a hole in which runs a rope, and each is very firmly tied to the ground so that it does not come undone.
E sia mes un fust redon en le qual es le torn, e sia revolvut en les dos traucs dels dos fustz.	And let there be another stake which is round in which is the turn, and let it be wound around the two stakes.
E en la extremitat de lu es un trauc en le qual es format le fust, la longueza del qual es un palm am aquo que es revolvut; e en les dos autres fustz es semblant de aquel.	And in its end is a hole in which the rope is formed, the length of which is one palm for that with which it is wound; and in the other two stakes are similar to that.
E aprop strenh les liamentz que has streyt en le pietz del malaute en le trau le qual es deves le cap de lu, e les liamentz que has streyts en las coyssas de lu en le torn le qual es deves les pes de lu.	And then tighten the ropes which you have tightened in the feet of the patient in the stake which is under his head, and the ropes which you have tightened in his thighs in the turn which is under his feet.
E aprop deves quascun torn e stia un ministre que torssa le torn am la sua ma, e le metge engualhe le spondil segon que havem dit.	And then tie each turn and have a minister twist the turn with their hand, and the doctor should smooth out the spine as we have said.
E aquesta es la forma del torn:	And this is the form of the turn:
E aprop pus que le spondil es retornat, e le loc es engualhat, lahoras cove que pauses empastre exciccatiu am album de huou, e aprop estopa; e aprop pause sobre le empastre astela de taula de la qual la latitut sia de tres ditz o enviro aquels, e la longitut de lu sia quantitat que prengua le loc de la gelbositat, e sobre la partida del spondil sa.	And then after the spine has returned and the place is smoothed, then cover that with a plaster made of egg white, and then stop it; and then place over the plaster a board of table which its breadth is three inches or surrounding, and the length of it is the quantity which covers the location of the hernia, and over the end of the spine.
E aprop sia liat am liament le qual havem dit, e uze le malaute de nutriment subtil entro que sia sanat.	And then let it be tied with a rope as we have said, and use for the patient subtle food until he is healed.
E si roman alcuna iminencia en le loc en la fi de la sanacio, lahoras cove que sian aministradas medicinas que moilifico e liniscan am aministracio de la taula per lonc temps, la qual havem recomtada; e ja es aministrada en aquel loc lamina de plom.	And if any swelling remains in the area at the end of the healing process, then cover it with medicines that soften and smoothen with administration of the table for a long time, which we have recounted; and a leaf of lead is already administered in that area.
E alcunas veguadas accideys imminencia en le derier dels spondils del dos, e es cujat per aquela dislocacio; e es aquel os le qual ja imineys per que no cove que sia fayta prosompcio a lu am aquesta medicina, quar fort leu fara a tu accidir mort.	And sometimes a swelling occurs in the back of the two spines, and it is cured by that dislocation; and it is that bone which already swells for which one should not be made to bend with this medicine, for fear that he may die from it.
Capitol .xxxi.	Chapter .xxxi.
De curacio de anca dislocada.	Of the cure of a dislocated hip.
Sapias que la junctura del ancha e la junctura del muscle no endeve sino dislocacio tant solament, e no accideys ad aquelas aquo que accideys a las autras juncturas de petita remocio e concavitat.	Know that the joint of the bone and the joint of the muscle do not end in anything but dislocation only, and it does not happen to those which happens to the other joints of small removal and concavity.
E la junctura de la ancha es dislocada segon quatre manieyras, quar es dislocada a las partidas dedintz, o a las partidas defora, o a las partidas denant, o a las partidas detras.	And the joint of the bone is dislocated according to four ways, for it is dislocated from the inside parts, or from the outside parts, or from the front parts, or from the back parts.
E majorment es dislocada a las partidas dedintz, e pauc a las partidas denant o a las partidas detras.	And most often it is dislocated from the inside parts, and seldom from the front or back parts.
E senhal de la dislocacio de lu a las partidas de dintz es quar, quan tu ajustas la camba del malaute sana am la malaute, es pus longua e·l denolh es pus heminent que de la sana, e·l malaute no pot doblar le sieu pe deves le lenguonar, e es le loc que siec le lengonar apostemat de apostema caut, per so que·l cap de la coyssa ja es pervengut aqui.	And the sign of its dislocation from the inside parts is that when you adjust the hip of the sick man with the sick man, it is longer and the heel is more prominent than of the healthy one, and the sick man cannot bend his foot due to the tongue, and it is the location which has the tongue apposed by apostema cautery, because the head of the thigh has already arrived here.
E·l senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio es a las partidas defora, es que les accidentz de lu so contraris ad aquest accident.	And the sign of that which happens to dislocation from the outside parts is that its accidents are contrary to those accidents.
E senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio a las partidas denant es quar expan la camba sieua segon compliment, mays empero no dobla aquela ses dolor que es en le denol, e si se perforsa ad anar e no pot sobre aquo a las partidas denant; e la urina de lu es retenguda e l’engonar de lu es apostemat, e deves la ambulacio de lu sobre le talo.	And the sign of that which happens to dislocation from the front parts is that it stretches its thigh according to compliment, but it does not bend that side without pain which is in the heel; and if it tries to walk and cannot walk over that side to the front parts; and his urine is retained and his tongue is apposed, and it should have walking over the instep.
E senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio a las partidas detras es que no expande le denol, ni no puesca doblar aquel denant que doble le engonar, e la camba de lu es pus breva que l’autra, e l’engonar es mollificat, e·l cap de la coyssa es deves aquel loc.	And the sign of that which happens to dislocation from the back parts is that it does not stretch the heel nor can bend that side which bends the tongue, and its thigh is shorter than the other one, and the tongue is softened, and the head of the thigh is under that location.
Mays reduccio de las specias de aquesta dislocacio es que tu consideras, lahoras, si la dislocacio es vetusta et antiqua, que ja es anticada am le havent aquela aprop tu aministras reduccio de lu e roman segon la sua disposicio, lahoras no es en aquela curacio de tot; e adonc no cove que en aquela sia fayta prosompcio.	But the reduction of the parts of this dislocation is that you consider, then, if the dislocation is old and ancient, and it has already been administered by you, according to its disposition, then it is not in that cure at all; and therefore one should not be made over that.
Mays en aquel del qual la dislocacio es recent, e es una de las quatre specias de dislocacio, lahoras te coyta ad aquo que volvas la junctura e extendas aquela a las partidas dedintz e a las partidas defora, e mau aquela a la dextra e sinistra, quar fort leu retorna e no indigeys de autra cura.	But in that one of which the dislocation is recent, and it is one of the four kinds of dislocation, then you approach that to what you want to turn the joint and extend it to the inside parts and outside parts, and move it to the right and left, for it will surely return and does not need another cure.
Mays, si no retorna en aquesta manieyra, lahoras cove que tu prepares ministre fort e extendas la camba de lu de la partida pus dejos, o am las suas mas, o am liament lo qual es liat sobre la camba desus le denol; e autre ministre extenda la ma de aquel desus enayssi que meta las suas mas dejos les titillics de lu; e aprop strenha am liament leon sobre la razit de la coyssa, e tengua autre ministre ters le extremitat del liament.	But if it does not return in this way, then you should prepare a strong minister and extend the thigh of him from the lowest part, or with his hands, or with a rope which is tied over the thigh above the heel; and another minister extends his hand of that above the nails that touches his nails under his tongue; and then tighten with lion-skin rope over the root of the thigh, and let another minister press the end of the rope.
E sia extencio de lu o de la partida dedintz a l’angonar a la partida de la furcula, o de la partida detras a la partida del dos.	And let its extension be from the inside part to the anus, or from the back part to the front part.
E sia la extencio de totz aquels en una veguada entro que·l malaute sia elevat am le sieu cos de terra e que romangua pendent.	And let the extension of all those in one way be while the sick man is raised by his body from the ground and that he dangles hanging.
E aquesta specia de extencio es specia cominal a totas quatre.	And this kind of extension is common to all four.
E donc si la dislocacio retorna am aquo que havem dit, sira bo; e sino, lahoras es necessari a tota specia aquo que dire de la propria curacio.	And therefore if the dislocation returns in that way which we have said, it is good; and if not, then it is necessary for all kinds that are of their own cure.
En la reduccio de lu propria, quan es dislocada, e la dislocacio es a las partidas dedintz, cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre le sieu latz sa; e aprop pausa les liamentz sobre la razit de la coyssa en aquel loc le qual entre le cap de la coyssa e·l loc que es dejos le langonar; e aprop exten le liament en sus de la part del angonar a la pus auta partida de la furcula.	In the reduction of it, when it is dislocated, and the dislocation is from the inside parts, let the sick man be raised on his side; and then place the ropes over the root of the thigh in that location between the head of the thigh and the location which is under the tongue; and then extend the rope above from the part of the anus to the highest part of the furcula.
E aprop autre ministre fort prengua les brasses de lu, e amerme le loc gros de la coyssa malaute e extenda a las partidas deforo per extencio vehement, quar aquela retorna en le sieu loc.	Then another strong person should grab the patient's arms, push on the large part of the patient's hip, and stretch out the parts on the outside with great force, because that will return to its place.
E aquesta specia es de pus leugiera curacio am la qual aquest membre es reduzit que las autres specias.	And this species is of more gentle cure by which this member is reduced compared to the others.
Mays si es excusat sobre tu e no obezeys al entrament am aquesta specia de curacio de tot, lahoras cove que sian liatz les dos pes del malaute ensemps am liament fort, leugier, sobre amdos les talos e amdos les denols.	But if you are excused and do not obey this cure with this species of cure for everything, then make sure that both feet of the patient are tied together with strong, loose laces, on both heels and on both toes.
E sia la longitut de quascun de son par la quantitat de quatre ditz, e sia la camba malaute extenduda mays que l’autre per quantitat de dos ditz.	And let the length of each of his parts be the quantity of four fingers, and let the sick leg be extended more than the other by a quantity of two fingers.
E aprop le malaute sia suspendut sobre le cap del fust, e que sia en la mayso; e sia la longitut de lu de la terra la quantitat de dos brasses.	Then let the sick person be suspended over the head of the bed, and let them be in a horizontal position; and let their length from the ground be the quantity of two arms.
E aprop comanda a un jove fort que minuesca le cap de la coyssa, e sia suspendut am le malaute autre jove, e l’autre jove minuent la coysa am fortaleza empellesca, quar la junctura retorna al sieu loc am velocitat.	Then command a strong young man to reduce the hip joint, and let another young man support the sick person, and let the other young man push with strength and reduce the hip, because the joint will return to its place quickly.
Mays en la reducio propria, quan es dislocacio a la partida defora, cove que·l malaute jaga sobre pug segon que havem recomtat en le havent gelbozitat; e sia strenhut le liament sobre la camba malauta propriament e sobre le pietz de lu.	But in the proper reduction, when there is dislocation to the outside part, make sure that the sick person lies on their side as we have recommended in having a hernia; and let the laces be tightened around the sick leg properly and around the foot.
E aprop dos fustz sian pausatz, la un als pes de lu, e l’autre al cap; e aprop sian pausatz fustz ajustatz al mieg del pueg ficat sobre·l qual draps humitz sian envolopatz, per so que·l malaute no sia dampnajat per que·l fust sia entre las coyssas de lu, per que deves la extencio a las partidas dejos no sia atirat.	Then let two boards be placed, one under the foot of the patient and the other under his head; and let boards be placed close to each other under the pillow on which dampened cloths are wrapped, so that the sick person does not get hurt because the board is between their thighs, so that the extension to the outside parts below is not pulled.
E aprop quascun ministre extenda a la sua part, e·l metge am la sua ma enguala la reduccio segon l’art.	Then let each assistant extend their part, and let the doctor with his hand guide the reduction according to the article.
Donc, si obezeys a revercio, sira bo grandament; e sino, pausa sobre aquela diligentment e ayssi quo havem dit en gelbozitat per aquela engualment.	Therefore, if you obey this reversal, you will be saved greatly; and otherwise, apply it diligently and also as we have said in hernia for that purpose.
Mays cove que·l malaute jagua sobre les sieus latz sa quetament.	But make sure the sick person lies on their side quietly.
E quan la dislocacio es a las partidas denant, lahoras cove que la camba sia extenduda leugierament, e es segon aquesta meteyssa narracio sobre pueg; e le metge pause la palma de la sua ma dreyta sobre·l langonar malaute, e aprop coarte aquel am l’autra ma, e am aquela coartacio pausa aquel extendut a las partidas dejos a la partida del denol.	And when the dislocation is to the front parts, then let the leg be extended slightly, and it is according to this measurement of the story on the pillow; and let the doctor place the palm of his right hand over the sick hip, and let him grip that with his other hand, and with that grip, let him extend that to the front parts at the toe.
E si la dislocacio es a las partidas detras, lahoras no cove que·l malaute sia extendut a las partidas dejos, e es elevat sobre la terra; habantz cove que sia pausat sobre causa dura, ayssi cum cove le eyssament si l’ancha de lu es dislocada a las partidas defora, segon aquo que havem dit del jasement de lu sobre dos anchas; e es sobre la sua cara e les liamentz sian extendutz, segon que havem dit, no ha guayre.	And if the dislocation is to the back parts, then let the sick person not be extended to the front parts and be elevated above the ground; unless that it is placed on a hard cause, as well as how the movement will be if his neck is dislocated to the outside parts, according to what we have said about his movement on two axes; and let him be on his back, and the laces be extended, according to what we have said, no more.
E cove que sia aministrada compressio am taula sobre le loc al qual yeys la junctura.	And make sure compression is administered with a board on the location where there is pain in the joint.
Donc cum la reducio es complida segon que cove — e·l senhal de la reduccio de lu no es amaguat a tu, e es que tu extendas del malaute doas cambas, e quan tu vezes aquelas enguals e le malaute extrenh la sieua camba e expandeys aquela ses excusacio, lahoras sapias que·l membre segon que cove es retornat — e lahoras tu ajusta doas coyssas e pausa empastre e extrenh am benda ayssi que la ancha no sia mauguda en alcuna de las partidas; e adheresca le malaute a repaus per tres dias o per quatre.	Therefore, when the reduction is done according to what you have — and the sign of the reduction of it is not hidden from you, and let you extend two legs of the sick person, and when you see those angles and the sick hip expands that angle and you stretch without excuse, then know that the member according to what you return — and then you adjust both thighs and apply plaster and expand with bandage so that the joint is not damaged in any of the parts; and let the sick person rest for three or four days.
E aprop deslia le liament e l’empastre, e compara la una camba am l’autra.	Then untie the laces and the plaster, and compare one leg with the other.
Lahoras, si vezas aquelas enguals en vustament, lahoras sapias que la dislocacio ja es fermada, e adonc layssa le malaute anar.	Then, if you see those angles in a straight line, then know that the dislocation is already closed, and then let the sick person get up.
E si vezas alcuna causa de mollificacio, lahoras tu retorna e emplastra aquel, e extrenh aquel segon la tua primiera strectura, e layssa aquel en tres dias.	And if you see any cause of softening, then return and plaster that, and stretch that according to your first stretching, and let him rest for three days.
E aprop deslia aquel, e fay aquel tardar en ambulacio sobre quascu per alcus dias, entro que sia confortat.	Then untie that, and make that person delay in walking on anyone for a few days, until it is comforted.
Capitol .xxxii.	Chapter .xxxii.
De curacio de dislocacio del denolh.	Of the cure of dislocation of the toe.
Le denolh es dislocat segon tres manieyras, quar es dislocat a las partidas defora, e a las partidas dedintz, e a las partidas dejos mays a las partidas detras; e a las partidas denant no es dislocat.	The toe is dislocated according to three ways, because it is dislocated to the outside parts, and to the inside parts, and to the bottom parts more than the back parts; and to the front parts it is not dislocated.
E le senhal de dislocacio de lu es que comandes al malaute que aplique la sua camba am la coyssa; lahoras sapias que·l denol es dislocat.	And the sign of its dislocation is that you command the sick person to apply their leg with their hip; then know that the toe is dislocated.
E la restauracio de totas las manieyras de lu es que fassas cezer le malaute dreyt, enayssi que ja extenda la sieua camba, si pot sobre aquo; adherir le tieu dos a la cara de lu, e pausa le pe de lu entre les tieus pes; e aprop fay adherir le denol de lu am las tuas palmas, e rete aquelas entre les tieus ditz sobre le denolh de lu am fortaleza, e autre ministre extenda le sieu pe entro que·l denol retorne a son loc.	And the restoration of all its ways is that you make the sick person stand up straight, so that he extends his leg, if he can on that; attach two fingers to their face, and place their foot between their feet; then make adhere the toe of their foot with your palms, and hold those between your fingers over their toe with strength, and let another assistant extend their foot while the toe returns to its place.
E senhal de reddicio de lu es que la sua camba adharesca am la coyssa am levitat no-laboroza.	And the sign of its reduction is that their leg adheres to the hip with a non-laborious elevation.
E aprop emplastra aquel e fay adhirir la camba am la coyssa, e aprop lia aquelas emsemps am una benda per tres dias o per quatre, e aprop deslia aquelas.	Then plaster that and make adhere the leg to the hip, and then bind those together with a bandage for three or four days, and then untie those.
E no uze le malaute de ambulacio per alcus dias, entro que sia sanat e cofortat.	And do not use the sick person's leg for walking for a few days, until it is healed and comforted.
Mays si la reduccio de lu a tu es excusada, lahoras aministra fort extencio am liamentz dels quals en la curacio de la hancha precedit narracio.	But if its reduction to you is excused, then administer strong extension with laces of which in the cure of the hip preceding narrative there is mention.
Capitol .xxxiii.	Chapter .xxxiii.
De la curacio de la dislocacio del talo.	Of the cure of dislocation of the instep.
Le talo alcunas veguadas es remaugut per petita remocio, e alcunas veguadas es dislocat segon compliment, e la dislocacio de lu es fayta o a las partidas dedintz o a las partidas deforo.	The instep is sometimes soft due to minor damage, and sometimes it is dislocated, and its dislocation is done either to the inside parts or to the outside parts.
E le senhal de la dislocacio de lu es que vezes le talo imflat procedent a la partida a la qual es dislocat.	And the sign of its dislocation is that you see the instep swollen proceeding to the part to which it is dislocated.
Mays la curacio de la remocio de lu es de leugiera reddicio, e es que sia extendut am facilitat am las mas e sia engualhat entro que retorne.	But the cure of its softness is gentle reduction, and it is extended with ease with the hands and made straight while returning.
Mays en la curacio de lu quan es dislocat segon compliment, cove que fasses cezer le malaute dreyt, e tengua aquel un ministre fort e valent de la partida detras del dos de aquel en le mieg loc de lu.	But in the cure of it when it is dislocated according to compliment, make the sick person stand up straight, and let one strong and powerful minister from behind hold the instep in the middle location of him.
E aprop te tu am la tieua ma dreyta le pe de la pus sobirana part, e am la tua ma sinistra de la part pus dejos del pe en le loc de la cavilha.	Then you with your right hand hold their foot from the highest part, and with your left hand from the lowest part of the foot in the location of the ankle.
E aprop atira le pe a tu am la tua ma dreyta, e aprop am la sinistra per dos veguadas, e aprop exten am la sinistra; e empelleys le pietz del pe am la dreyta deves la camba ses trebalh.	Then pull their foot to you with your right hand, and then twice with the left, and then extend with the left; and push the instep of the foot with the right because the leg is not labored.
E fay aquo doas veguadas segon que havem comtat.	And do that two times according to what we have counted.
E aprop empelleys le pietz del pe a la camba la tersa veguada, e tu es a la cavilha.	Then push the instep of the foot to the leg on the third time, and you are at the ankle.
Donc si retorna en una veguada o en dos segon aquesta manieyra, e si vezes le pe engualhat, es bo; e sino, lahoras sobre lu itera la operacio, quar aquel retorna.	Therefore, if it returns in one or two times according to this way, and if you see the foot swollen, it is good; and otherwise, repeat the operation on him because he will return.
Mays si a tu es prohibida la reduccio de lu am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras fay jaser le malaute sobre le sieu dos sobre terra, e estrenh un paysel mot en terra fermat, e que caja entre las coyssas de lu, e tu ja has envolopat sobre lu drap per so que no ledesca le malaute.	But if you are prohibited from reducing it by what we have recommended, then make the sick person lie on their back on the ground, and tighten a rope tied in the ground tightly, and let it be between their thighs, and you have already wrapped a cloth around him so that the leg does not turn.
E aprop le ministre de lu tengua las suas coyssas, e aprop autre ministre extenda le pe am las suas mas o am liament que lie sobre le col del pe; e aprop extenda aquel quascun ministre contre extencio del sieu par, e le payssel sia extant entre las coyssas del malaute retinent aquel, per so que·l cos de lu no sia atirat a las partidas dejos deves la sua extencio.	And then the minister of the patient should have his thighs extended, and another minister should extend the foot with his hands or with the bandage that is wrapped around the ankle; and each minister should be extended against the extension of their part, and the patient should be retained between the thighs so that the body is not pulled down below its extension.
E aprop le metge enguala la dislocacio am las sieuas mas, e autre ministre tengua la coyssa sana a las partidas dejos, quar la dislocacio retorna am la facilitat.	And then the doctor should reduce the dislocation with his hands, and another minister should hold the healthy thigh down, because the dislocation will return with ease.
E donc cum retorna la dislocacio e es declarada a tu la sanetat de la reduccio de lu, lahoras pausa emplastre e extrenh aquela am liamentz fortment, e ligua le pe am liament a la camba.	And when the dislocation has returned and you have seen the health of its reduction, then apply a plaster and bind that with strong bandages, and tie the foot to the leg.
E cove que temes o te guardes dels nervis les quals so detras sobre le talo, per que le liament sobre aquel no sia vehement e leda aquel fortment.	And beware of the nerves that are behind on the ankle, so that the bandage over them is not too tight and it does not lead to pain.
E aprop layssa aquel per dos dias o per tres; e si le liament es mollificat, extrenh aquel.	And then leave it for two or three days; and if the bandage softens, tighten it.
E aprop deslia aquel en le ters dia o en le quart, e prohibeys le malaute de anament per xl dias.	And then loosen it on the third or fourth day, and prohibit the patient from walking for 40 days.
Mays si es forsat de anar denant aquel spazi, no es fayta segurtat que la dislocacio no sia sobre lu dissolvuda e corrumpuda, e aprop aquo que no recipia curacio.	But if he is forced to walk within that space, there is no guarantee that the dislocation will not be dissolved and corrupted, and then it will not receive a cure.
E si accideys a lu apostema caut, lahoras cove que tu aministre en la cedacio de lu aquo en lo qual precedic la nostra narracio, en autre loc de curacio e de embrocacio, entro que sia remauguda.	And if pus occurs, then you should administer to him in the manner that we have narrated before, at another place of cure and fomenting, until it is healed.
Capitol .xxxiiii.	Chapter 34.
De curacio de dislocacio dels ditz dels pes.	Of cure for dislocation of the big toes of the feet.
Cove que aquel qu’es dislocat sia engualhat am pauca extencio ses trebal; e aquo que no es dificil, abantz es leugier.	Let him who is dislocated be reduced with little extension, and this is not difficult, but rather easy.
Mays si la dislocacio es en alcus nozes del dos del pe, lahoras cove que fassas cezer le malaute le sieu pe sobre loc engual de la terra o sobre taula, e sia estant ayssi cum si anava.	But if the dislocation is in any knuckle of the big toe, then let him sit with his foot elevated on the ground or on a table, and be in that position as if he were walking.
E aprop tu sta de pes, e pausa le tieu pe sobre aquo que imineys de las juncturas, e aprop calca aquel am le tieu pe am vertut entro que retorne, e que vejas aquel ja engualhat e no aparesca en le loc eminencia.	And then you stand up and place your foot on what is below the joints, and then press it with your weight until it returns, and see that it is already reduced and there is no swelling in the joint.
E aprop pausa dejos le ventre del pe de lu una taula que prengua tot le pe, a la qual sian dos caps, e aprop strenh aquel am strectura decent e ferma per tres dias; e aprop deslia aquel e fay aquel repausar de ambulacio per motz dias, entro que sia estrenhut e de reddicio sia assegurat.	And then place below his foot on a table that takes the whole foot, and which has two ends, and then tighten it with decent and firm compression for three days; and then loosen it and let him rest from walking for several days, until he is fully healed and recovery is assured.
Capitol .xxxv.	Chapter 35.
De las specias de dislocacio que sian faytas am plagua o am fractura o am quascuna ensemps.	Of the kinds of dislocation that are made with a wound or with a fracture, or with any other impaction.
Quan accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, e tu te perforssas en la curacio de aquela e en la restauracio de lu, motas veguadas succezeys la mort.	When one of those happens, and you see yourself in the cure of that and the restoration of him, several times death succeeds.
E per aquo no cove que sobre la curacio de lu presuma, sino aquel que es savi en l’art, de lonc uzatge, misericordios e pietados, tardiu, no-ardit ni presomptuos; e que use en le comensament de medicinas que cedan apostemas cautz tant solament, e leyssa le malaute al divinal jutgament, sino ad aquel al qual speras salut de perdicio, am de la malautia alleviacio, e en la qual appareys alcuna speransa.	And therefore you should not presume in the cure of him, but he who is wise in the art, longsuffering, merciful and compassionate, tardy, not impatient or presumptuous; and that he use in the beginning of medicines that soothe cauterized wounds, let the patient come to divine judgment, unless he to whom you hope for salvation from destruction, from wickedness alleviation, and in which some hope appears.
E adonc esforsa te tantost far de lu la reduccio en le comensament de la causa, denant que endevengua apostema caut.	And then endeavor immediately to make the reduction at the beginning of the cause, before it develops into a cauterized wound.
E adonc si le membre retorna segon que volem, lahoras aministra regiment le qual ceda apostema caut e cura la plagua am aquo que conveneys a lu dels enguentz desiccatius.	And then if the member returns as we want, then administer treatment that yields cauterized wounds and cures the wound with what suits it of the drying remedies.
E si dislocacio es am fractura e accideys en le os satagias separadas, lahoras tu perforsa le stement de lor, e fay en aquo so que havem dit en las malautias simplas de aquo que es precedit en les locz de aquels.	And if the dislocation is with a fracture and the bones are separated, then you see the statement of them, and do in what we have said in the simple diseases of that which precedes in the places of those.
E guarda e esquiva segon la tua vertut aquel del intrament en las vias de temor segon que a tu es precedida la mia predicacio; quar aquo es milhor a tu deves le tieu Creator, e mays permanent a la tua gloria, e mays saludos al tieu cos verays aquels en le tieu temps.	And guard and avoid according to your ability that of the instrument in the ways of fear as my prophecy has preceded you; for what is better for you owes to your Creator, and more permanent to your glory, and healthier to your true body, those in your time.
Ayssi fineysso las paraulas de Albucasim perfieytament de las quals Dieus ne sia benezeyt.	Thus end the words of Albucasim perfectly, from which God be blessed.
Amen.	Amen.
