قال واضع هذا الكتاب لمّا أكملت لكم يا بنىّ هذا الكتاب الذى هو جزء العلم فى الطبّ بكماله وبلغت الغاية فيه من وضوحه وبيانه رأيت أن أكمله لكم بهذه المقالة التى هى جزء العمل باليد.	He said: I have imposed this book, since I have completed for you, O sons, this book which is a part of the science of medicine in its entirety and has reached the ultimate in clarity and explanation. I thought that I should complete it for you with this chapter, which is a part of the practical work with the hand.
لأنّ العمل باليد محسنه فى بلدنا وفى زماننا معدوم البتّة حتّى كاد أن يدرس علمه وينقطع أثره.	For the manual work is honored in our country and in our time, unmatched by any other, so that one would wish to study its arts and have its benefits continued.
وإنّما بقى منه رسوم يسيرة فى كتب الأوائل قد صحّفته الأيدى وواقعه الخطاء والتشويش حتّى استغلقت معانيه وبعدت فائدته.	And there only remained of it small remnants in the books of the ancients, which had been distorted by careless copying and errors, and which had become confused to the point that its meanings were obscured and its usefulness was lost.
فرأيت أن أحييه وأؤلّف فيه هذه المقالة على طريق الشرح والبيان والاختصار وأن آتى بصور حدائد الكّى وسائر آلات العمل إذ هو من زيادة البيان ومن وكيد ما يحتاج اليه.	So I decided to revive it and compile this chapter in the manner of explanation, clarification, and concise expression, and to provide illustrations of surgical instruments and other tools of the work, as this is a means of increased clarity and one of the things that are needed.
والسبب الذى لا يوجد صانع محسن بيده فى زماننا هذا لأنّ صناعة الطبّ طويلة وينبغى لصاحبها أن يرتاض قبل ذلك فى علم التشريح الذى وصفه جالينوس.	And the reason that there does not exist in our time a skilled craftsman with his hands is that the craft of medicine is long and it is necessary for its master to have previously studied the science of anatomy, which Galenius has described.
حتّى يقف على منافع الأعضاء وهيآتها ومزاجاتها واتّصالها وانفصالها ومعرفة العظام والأعصاب والعضلات وعددها ومخارجها والعروق النوابض والسواكن ومواضع مخارجها.	So that he may stand on the benefits of the organs, their forms, and their relationships, and their connections and disconnections, and the knowledge of the bones, nerves, muscles, and their numbers, and their origins and endings, and the tendons, and the ligaments, and the places of their endings.
ولذلك قال ابقرات إنّ الأطبّاء بالاسم كثير وبالفعل قليل ولا سيّما فى صناعة اليد، وقد ذكرنا نحن من ذلك طرفا فى المدخل من هذا الكتاب.	For this reason, Hippocrates said that there are many physicians in name, but few in deed, and not many are skilled in the craft of the hand, and we have mentioned a part of that in the introduction to this book.
لأنّه من لم يكن عالما بما ذكرنا من التشريح لم يخل أن يقع فى خطاء يقتل الناس به كما قد شاهدت كثيرا ممّن تصوّر فى هذا العلم وادّعاه بغير علم ولا دراية.	For it is not possible for one who does not know what we have mentioned about anatomy to avoid making mistakes that kill people, as I have seen many who have pretended to this science and claimed it without knowledge or understanding.
وذلك أنّى رأيت طبيبا جاهلا قد شقّ على ورم خنزيرىّ فى عنق امرأة، فأبرى بعض شريانات العنق فنزف دم المرأة حتّى سقطت ميتة بين يديه.	For example, I saw a ignorant physician who made an incision on a tumor in the neck of a woman, and he cut some of the veins of the neck, so that the woman's blood gushed out until she fell dead at his hands.
ورأيت طبيبا آخر قد تقدّم فى اخراج حصاة لرجل قد طعن فى السّن وكانت الحصاة كبيرة فتهوّر فأخرجها بقطعة من جرم المثانة.	A physician once preceded me in extracting a kidney stone from a man who had been stabbed in the back and had a large stone, so he was puzzled and extracted it with a piece of the testicle.
فمات الرجل الى نحو ثلاثة أيّام، وكنت قد دعيت الى اخراجها فرأيت من عظم الحصاة وحال العليل ما قدّرت عليه ذلك.	The man died after about three days, and I had been invited to extract it, so I saw the bone of the stone and the condition of the ureter that made me suspect that.
ورأيت طبيبا آخر كان يرتزق عند بعض قوّاد بلدنا على الطبّ.	I also saw another physician who used to pretend to be knowledgeable about medicine among some of our countrymen.
فحدث لصبّى اسود كان عنده كسر فى ساقه بقرب العقب مع جرح فأسرع الطبيب بجهله فشدّ الكسر على الجرح بالرفائد والجبائر شدّا وثيقا ولم يترك للجرح تنفّسا.	A young black slave had a fracture in his leg near the knee with a wound, so the physician hastily applied a tight bandage to the fracture over the wound, and didn't leave any space for the wound to breathe.
ثم اطلقه على شهواته ثمّ تركه أيّاما وأمره أن لا يحلّ الرباط حتّى تورّم ساقه وقدمه وأشرف على الهلاك.	Then he wrapped it with a bandage, and left him for a while, ordering him not to remove the bandage until his leg and foot became swollen and were about to burst.
فدعيت اليه فأسرعت حل الرباط فنال الراحة واستقلّ من اوجاعه إلّا أنّ الفساد قد كان استحكم فى العضو ولم أستطع ارداعه.	I was then called to him, so I hastened to remove the bandage, and he felt relief and his pains were alleviated, except that the corruption had already settled in the limb, and I could not restore it.
فلم يزل الفساد يسعى فى العضو حتّى هلك.	The corruption did not cease to spread through the limb until he died.
ورأيت طبيبا آخر بّط ورما سرطانيّا فتقرّح بعد أيّام حتّى عظمت بلية صاحبه وذلك أنّ السرطان اذا كان محضا من خلط سوداوىّ فإنّه لا ينبغى أن يعرض له بالحديد البتّة.	I also saw another physician who performed a cauterization on a cancerous patient, and it became ulcerated after some days, to the point that his testicles became greatly swollen, because if the cancer is not mixed with melancholy humors, then it is not advisable to expose it to iron cautery.
إلّا أن يكون فى عضو يحتمل أن يستأصل جميعه.	Unless it is in an organ that can tolerate being entirely removed.
ولهذا يا بنّى ينبغى لكم أن تعلموا أنّ العمل باليد ينقسم قسمين عمل تصحبه السلامة وعمل يكون معه العطب فى اكثر الحالات.	For this reason, my son, it is fitting for you to learn that manual work is divided into two types: a type that preserves health, and a type that includes harm in most cases.
وقد نبّهت فى كلّ مكان يأتى من هذا الكتاب العمل الذى فيه الغرر والخوف فينبغى لكم أن تحذروه وترفضوه.	And I have warned you in every place in this book about the work that contains risk and danger, it is fitting for you to avoid it and reject it.
لئلّا يجد الجاهل السبيل الى القول والطعن فخذوا لأنفسكم بالحزم والحياطة ولمرضاكم بالرفق والتثبّت.	When the patient complains of pain in the back and the neck, take care to straighten and stabilize.
واستعملوا الطريق الافضل المؤدى الى السلامة والعاقبة المحمودة وتنكّبوا الامراض الخطرة العسيرة البرؤ.	And use the best method that leads to health and excellent preservation, and remove the dangerous and difficult diseases.
ونزّهوا انفسكم عمّا تخافون أن يدخل عليكم الشبهة فى دينكم ودنياكم فهو ابقى لجاهكم وارفع فى الدنيا والآخرة لأقداركم.	And inject yourselves with what you fear will enter into your religion and your creed, for it is more beneficial to your dignity and will elevate in this world and the hereafter your prestige.
فقد قال جالينوس فى بعض وصاياه لا تداووا مرض سوء فتسمّوا أطبّاء سوء.	For Galenous has said in one of his wills, do not treat a bad disease or you will be called bad doctors.
وقد قسمت هذه المقالة على ثلثة ابواب.	And this chapter has been divided into three sections.
الباب الاوّل.	The first section.
فى الكّى بالنار والكّى بالدواء الحادّ مبّوب مرتّب من القرن الى القدم وصور الآلات وحدائد الكّى وكلّ ما يحتاج اليه فى العمل باليد.	The cautery by fire and the cauterization by sharp medicine, from the knee to the foot, and the illustrations of the instruments and tools of the cautery, and all that is needed for it in hand work.
والباب الثانى.	The second section.
فى الشقّ والبطّ والفصد والحجامة والجراحات وإخراج السهام ونحو ذلك كلّه مبوّب مرتّب وصور الآلات.	On incision, puncturing, venesection, cupping, and surgeries, and the extraction of arrows, and all that is similar, arranged and illustrated with instruments.
والباب الثالث.	The third section.
فى الجبر والخلع وعلاج الوثى ونحو ذلك مبوّب مرتّب من القرن الى القدم وصور الآلات.	On reduction and setting of fractures, and treatment of abscesses, and similar things, arranged and illustrated from the knee to the foot, with illustrations of instruments.
الباب الاوّل.	The first section.
فى الكّى.	On cauterization.
وقبل أن نذكر العمل به ينبغى أن نذكر كيفيّة منافعه ومضارّه وفى اىّ مزاج يستعمل.	And before we mention the operation, it is necessary to mention how it is performed, its disadvantages, and in which temperament it is used.
فأقول إنّ الكلام فى كيفيّة منفعة الكّى ومضارّه كلام طويل وعلم دقيق وسرّ خفىّ وقد تكلّم فيه جماعة من الحكماء.	So I say that the discussion about the usefulness of cauterization and its disadvantages is a long discussion, a subtle science, and a hidden secret, and many of the wise have spoken about it.
واختلفوا فيه وقد اختصرت من كلامهم اليسير مخافة التطويل.	And they have differed in it, and I have summarized for you the easiest of their speech, fearing lengthiness.
فأقول إنّ الكّى ينفع بالجملة لكلّ سوء مزاج يكون مع مادّة وبغير مادّة حاشى مزاجين وهما المزاج الحارّ من غير مادّة والمزاج اليابس من غير مادّة.	I say that cauterization is beneficial for every type of fever, whether it occurs with or without a humour, including the hot and cold fevers that occur without a humour.
فأمّا المزاج اليابس مع مادّة فقد اختلفوا فيه فقال بعضهم إنّ الكّى نافع فيه وقال آخرون بضدّ ذلك إنّ الكّى لا يصلح فى مرض يكون من الحرارة واليبوسة لأنّ طبع النار الحرارة واليبوسة.	As for the cold fever with a humour, they have disagreed about it, for some of them said that cauterization is beneficial in it, and others said the opposite, that cauterization is not suitable for a disease caused by heat and coldness because fire increases heat and coldness.
ومن المحال أن يستشفى من مرض حارّ يابس بدواء حارّ يابس، وقال الذى يقول بضدّ ذلك إنّ الكّى بالنار قد ينفع من مرض حارّ يابس يحدث فى ابدان الناس.	And it is implausible that a hot and cold medicine could cure a hot and cold disease, and those who hold the opposite view say that cauterization with fire may be beneficial for a hot and cold disease that occurs in people's bodies.
لأنّك متى اضفت بدن الانسان ورطوبته الى مزاج النار اصبت بدن الانسان باردا.	For when you apply heat to the human body and its moisture, the human body becomes cool.
وأنا اقول بقوله لأنّ التجربة قد كشفت لى ذلك مرّات الّا أنّه لا ينبغى أن يتصوّر على ذلك الأمر الّا من قد ارتاض ودرب فى باب الكّى دربة بالغة.	And I say that in agreement with him, because experimentation has revealed it to me many times, but it is not fitting that one should form an opinion on this matter except for one who has practiced and been trained extensively in the field of cauterization.
ووقف على اختلاف مزاجات الناس وحال الامراض فى انفسها واسبابها واعراضها ومدّة زمانها.	And he has stopped to consider the differences in people's fevers, and the conditions of illnesses themselves, their causes, symptoms, and durations.
وأمّا سائر الامزجة فلا خوف عليك منها ولا سيّما الامراض الباردة الرطبة فقد اتّفق جميع الاطبّاء عليها ولم يختلفوا فى النفع بالكّى فيها.	As for the rest of the fevers, you have no fear from them, nor any concern about the cold and moist diseases, for all doctors agree on this and there is no disagreement about the benefit of cauterization in them.
واعلموا يا بنّى أنّ من سرّ التعالج الكّى بالنار وفضله على الكّى بالدواء المحرق لأنّ النار جوهر مفرد لا يتعدّى فعله العضو الذى كوى ولا يضرّ بعضو آخر متّصل به إلّا ضررا يسيرا.	And know, my son, that the secret of cauterization with fire and its preference over cauterization with burnt medicine is because fire is a simple essence whose action does not extend beyond the organ that it burns, and it does not harm another organ connected to it except for a slight damage.
والكّى بالدواء المحرق قد يتعدّى فعله الى ما بعد من الاعضاء وربّما احدث فى العضو مرضا تعسر مداواته وربّما قتل، والنار لشرفها وكرم جوهرها لا تفعل ذلك الّا أن افرطت.	And cauterization with burnt medicine may extend its action to other organs, and perhaps cause a disease in the organ that makes it difficult to treat, or perhaps kill, but fire, due to its noble and dignified essence, does not do that unless it is excessive.
وقد اتّضح لنا ذلك بالتجربة لطول الخدمة والعناية بالصناعة والوقوف على حقائق الأمر.	This has been clarified to us through experimentation and long service and carefulness in the industry and awareness of the facts of the matter.
ولهذا استغنيت عن طول الكلام، ولو لا أنّه لا يليق بكتابى هذا لأوردت عليكم فى النار سرّا غامضا وكيفيّة فعلها فى الاجسام ونفيها للامراض بكلام فلسفىّ برهانّى يدقّ عن افهامكم.	And because of this, I have dispensed with lengthy speech, for if it were not that it would not be fitting for my book, I would have presented to you in the fire a secret and a subtle and obscure philosophy of making it and its action on bodies and its benefit for diseases with philosophical argumentation that would strike your minds.
واعلموا يا بنّى أنّهم قد اختلفوا فى الزمان الذى يصلح فيه الكّى وجعلوا افضل الزمان زمان الربيع.	And know, O sons, that they have differed regarding the time in which cupping is most beneficial and made the best time the spring season.
وأنا اقول إنّ الكّى قد يصلح فى كل زمان من اجل أنّ الضرر الواقع من قبل الزمان يستغرق فى المنفعة التى تستجلب بالكّى.	And I say that cupping is beneficial in every time, as long as the harm that occurs because of the time is outweighed by the benefit that is obtained through cupping.
ولا سيّما إن كان الكّى من اوجاع ضروريّة قويّة محفدة لا تحتمل التأخير لما يخاف منها أن يعقب ببلية هى اعظم من يسير الضرر الداخل من قبل الزمان.	And it is not a condition that the cupping be from necessary, strong, and compelling causes that do not tolerate delay, for what one fears from it, that it will cause a disease, is less than the harm that enters because of the time.
ولا يقع ببالكم يا بنّى ما يتوهّموه العامّة وجهّال الاطبّاء أنّ الكّى الذى يبرئ من مرض مّا لا يكون لذلك عودة ابدا وتجعلوه لذاما.	And let it not occur to you, O sons, what the common people and some of the physicians imagine, that the cupping which cures a certain disease will not have a return ever and they make it a defect.
وليس الامركما ظنّوا من اجل أنّ الكّى انّما هو بمنزلة الدواء الذى يحيل المزاج ويجفّف الرطوبات التى هى سبب حدوث الاوجاع.	And the truth is not as they thought, because cupping is in the position of a medicine that changes the constitution and dries up the moistures that are the cause of the occurrence of diseases.
إلّا أنّ الكّى يفضل على الدواء بسرعة نجحه وقوة فعله وشدّة سلطانه.	But rather, cupping is preferred to medicine because of the speed of its effect and the strength of its action and the intensity of its dominance.
وقد يمكن أن يعود المرض وقتا مّا من الزمان على حسب مزاج العليل وتمكّن مرضه وقوّته وما يتهيّأ فى جسمه من اجتماع الفضول فيه واهمال نفسه فى اكتسابها من الاغذية ونحو ذلك من الاسباب.	And it is possible that the disease may return after a time, according to the constitution of the patient and the establishment of his disease and its strength, and what is formed in his body from the gathering of humors in it, and his neglect in acquiring them from nutrition, and similar things from the causes.
اللّهمّ الّا أن يكون المرض الذى يستعمل فيه الكّى مرضا لطيفا وفى عضو قليل الفضول والرطوبات.	The operation should not be performed except in the case of a disease for which the use of cauterization is suitable, and in an organ with little fat and few blood vessels.
مثل كّى الضرس عن الوجع ونحوه فقد يمكن أن لا يعود فيه ذلك الوجع وذلك يكون فى الاقلّ.	Like cauterization of the tonsils and its equivalent, it is possible that the place will not become ulcerated again, and this occurs in the least.
وأمّا قول العامّة ايضا أنّ الكّى آخر الطّب فهو قول صواب لا الى مايذهبون هم لأنّهم يعتقدون أن لا علاج ينفع بدواء ولا بغيره بعد وقوع الكّى والامر بخلاف ذلك.	And as for the statement of the common people that cauterization is the last resort, it is a correct statement, not because we think that there is no treatment that can benefit except by cauterization or otherwise, but rather because they believe that no treatment can benefit after cauterization has been performed, and experience shows the opposite.
وإنّما معنى إنّ الكّى آخر الطّب إنّما هو أنّنا متى استعملنا ضروب العلاج فى مرض من الامراض ولم تنجع تلك الادوية ثمّ استعملنا آخر شىء الكّى فينجع فمن هاهنا وقع إنّ الكّى آخر الطّب.	And the meaning of "cauterization is the last resort" is that when we have used various treatments for a disease and those treatments do not work, then we use cauterization as a last measure, and it is effective.
لا على المعنى الذى ذهب اليه العامّة وكثير من جهّال الاطبّاء.	Not in the meaning that the common people and many ignorant physicians have gone to.
وقد ذكرت الاوائل أنّ الكّى بالذهب افضل من الكّى بالحديد وانّما قالوا ذلك لاعتدال الذهب وشرف جوهره وقالوا إنّه لا يتقيّح موضع الكّى وليس ذلك على الاطلاق.	And the ancients mentioned that cauterization with gold is better than cauterization with iron, and they said that because of the moderation of gold and the nobility of its substance, and they said that it does not cause putrefaction in the place of the cauterization, and that is not absolute.
لأنّنى قد جرّبت ذلك فوجدته انّما يفعل ذلك فى بعض الابدان دون بعض والكّى به احسن وافضل من الحديد كما قالوا الّا أنّك اذا احميت المكواة فى النار من الذهب لم يتبيّن لك متى تحمى على القدر الذى تريد لحمرة الذهب.	For I have tested it and found that it only does that in some bodies and not others, and cauterization with it is better and more excellent than with iron, as they said, except that if you heat the cauterizing instrument made of gold in the fire, it will not become apparent to you when it reaches the degree of heat that you desire for the redness of the gold.
ولأنّه يسرع اليه البرد وإن زدت عليه فى الحمى ذاب فى النار وانسبك فيقع الصانع من ذلك فى شغل فلذلك صار الكى بالحديد عندنا اسرع واقرب من الصواب للعمل إن شاء الله.	For it quickly loses its heat and if you increase the heat, it melts in the fire and pours onto you, so the artisan suffers from that during his work, therefore cauterization with iron has become faster and more effective for us to perform, God willing.
وقد رتّبت هذاالباب فىالكّى على فصول نظّمتها من الرأس الى القدم ليسهل على الطالب ما يريد منه إن شاء الله.	The chapter on surgical procedures is arranged in a way that the sections are organized from head to foot so it would be easy for the student to find what he needs, if God wills.
الفصل الاوّل.	The First Chapter.
فىكىّ الرأس كيّة واحدة.	Surgery of the head in one chapter.
تنفع هذه الكيّة من غلبة الرطوبة والبرودة على الدماغ اللتين هما سبب للصداع وكثرة النزلات من الرأس الى ناحية العينين والاذنين وكثرة النوم ووجع الاسنان واوجاع الحلق.	This surgery benefits from relieving the excess humidity and cold on the brain which are causes for headache and excessive discharge from the head to the sides of the eyes and ears and frequent sleep and aching of the teeth and pain in the throat.
وبالجملة لكلّ مرض يعرض من البرودة كالفالج والصرع والسكات ونحوها من الامراض.	And in general, it benefits every disease that is caused by cold, such as epilepsy, convulsions, and sciatica, and other similar diseases.
صورة هذه الكيّة أن تأمر العليل اوّلا بالاستفراغ بالدواء المسهل المنقى للرأس ثلاث ليال او اربع على حسب ما توجب قوّة العليل وسنّه وعادته.	The method of this surgery is that the patient should be treated first by purging with medicine that cleanses the head for three or four nights, according to the severity of the disease and its strength and habit.
ثمّ تأمره أن يحلق رأسه بالموسى ثمّ تقعده بين يديك متربعا قد وضع يديه على صدره.	Then he should be treated by shaving his head with a razor, then you should place him between your hands, leaning, having placed his hands on his chest.
ثمّ تضع اصل كفّك على اصل انفه بين عينيه فحيث انتهى اصبعك الوسطى فعلّم ذلك الموضع بالمداد.	Then you should place the base of your palm on the base of his nostrils between his eyes, so that when your middle finger reaches, you should mark that spot with the marker.
ثمّ احم المكواة الزيتونيّة التى هذه صورتها.	Then cauterize the marked spot with the cauterizing iron whose shape is as this figure.
انكشف من العظم قدر رأس الخلال او قدر حبّة الكرسنّة فارفع يدك والّا فأعد يدك بالحديدة نفسها او بغيرها إن بردت.	Scrape from the bone an amount the size of a hazelnut kernel or a fennel seed, then lift your hand and return with the same edge or another one if it has cooled.
حتّى ترى من العظم ما ذكرت لك ثمّ خذ شيئا من ملح فحلّه فى الماء وشرّب فيه قطنة وضعها على الموضع واتركه ثلاث ايّام.	Until you see from the bone what I have mentioned to you, then take a piece of salt, dissolve it in water, and soak a dressing in it, and apply it to the spot, and leave it for three days.
ثمّ احمل عليه قطنة مشرّبة فى السمن واتركها عليه حتّى تذهب الخشكريشة من النار ثمّ عالجه بالمرهم الرباعىّ الى أن يبرأ إن شاء الله.	Then apply to it a dressing soaked in ghee, and leave it on until the inflammation goes away from the fire, then treat it with rose ointment until it heals, if God wills.
وقد قالوا ان الجرح كلّما بقى مفتوحا يمدّ القيح فهو افضل وانفع.	They said that if the wound remains uncovered, pus will form, and it is better and more beneficial.
وذكر بعضهم بأن يكوى الجلد الى العظم وتمسك المكواة حتّى يحترق بعض ثخن العظم ثمّ يجرّد بعد ذلك ما احترق من العظم ثمّ يعالج.	Some of them mentioned that the flesh should be cauterized to the bone, and the cauterization should be held until some of the thickness of the bone is burned, then the burnt part of the bone is scraped after that, then treated.
وقال آخرون ينبغى أن يبالغ بالكّى حتّى يؤثر فى العظم تأثيرا قويّا حتّى يسقط من العظم كهيئة القيراط اوالفلكة الصغيرة وزعموا انّه ينفّس من ذلك الموضع ابخرة الرأس ويترك الجرح مفتوحا زمانا طويلا.	And others said that the cauterization should be exaggerated until it has a strong effect on the bone, to the point where it removes a piece of bone like a small piece of cloth or paper, and they claimed that because of this, brain vapor will be emitted from that location, and the wound is left uncovered for a long time.
ثمّ يعالج حتّى يندمل، ولست أرى هذين النوعين من الكّى البتّة الّا فى بعض الناس وعلى طريق الغرر وتركه عندى افضل ومع السلامة اذا كانت فإنّ الرأس يعضف متى تفرّق اتصاله الطبيعىّ كما قد شاهدناه فى سائر الاعضاء.	Then it is treated until it forms a callus, and I do not see these two types of cauterization except in some people and on the way of extravagance, and leaving it is better and more preserving if the brain is intact when its natural connection is dispersed as we have seen in other organs.
ولا سيّما متى كان رأس العليل ضعيفا بالطبع والنوع الاوّل من الكّى اسلم وافضل عندى واياه استعمل فاعمل به تسلم إن شاء الله.	And not how much more when the head of the patient is weak by nature, and the first type of cauterization is safer and better in my opinion, and I have used it and made it successful, God willing.
الفصل الثانى.	The Second Chapter.
فىكىّ الرأس أيضا.	Cauterization of the head also.
اذا حدث فى جملة الرأس وجع مزمن وطال ذلك بالعليل واستعمل الإيارجات والقوقايات والسعوطات والأدهان والضمادات ولا سيّما إن كان قد كوى الكيّة الواحدة التى وصفنا فلم ينفعه شىء من ذلك فانظر.	If there is a gathering in the head and it is chronic and has lasted for a long time with the patient, and he has used enemas, and hoods, and poultices, and bandages, and compresses, and not one of them was beneficial, especially if he had been cauterized with the single cauterization that we described.
فإن كان رأس العليل قوّى البنية بالطبع ولم يكن ضعيفا وكان يجد بردا شديدا فاكوه كيّة أخرى فوق تلك قليلا.	For if the patient's head is strong by nature and not weak, and he feels severe cold, then cauterize him with another cauterization a little above that one.
ثمّ اكوه على كلّ قرن من رأسه كيّة حتّى يذهب ثخن الجلد وينكشف من العظم القدر الذى وصفنا.	Then cauterize each side of his head until the thickness of the flesh disappears and the bone is exposed to the extent that we described.
واكوه كيّة فى مؤّخّر رأسه فى الموضع الذى يعرف بالفأس وخفّف يدك فى هذه ولا تكشف العظم فإنّ العليل يجد لها ألما شديدا خلاف ألم سائر كيّات الرأس كلّها وسأذكر هذه الكيّة فى موضعها.	Make an incision in the back of his head, at the place known as the occiput, and lighten your hand in this, and do not expose the bone, for the patient will feel a severe pain, unlike the pain of other head operations, all of which I will mention in their respective places.
وينبغى أن تكون المكواة التى يكوى بها قرنا الرأس ومؤخّره ألطف من المكواة التى يكوى بها وسط الرأس وهذه صورتها.	It is preferable that the suture which sews the edge of the head and its back be finer than the suture which sews the middle of the head, and this is its form.
الفصل الثالث.	The Third Section.
فىكىّ الشقيقة غير المزمنة.	Surgery of the non-ossified nose.
اذا حدث فى شقّ الرأس وجع مع صداع وامتدّ الوجع الى العين فاستفرغ العليل بالادوية المنقية للرأس واستعمل سائر العلاج الذى ذكرت فى تقاسيم الامراض فإن لم ينجع ذلك فالكىّ فيها على وجهين.	If there occurs a fracture in the skull with a crack and the crack has extended to the eye, then let the patient vomit with emetic for the head and use other treatments which I mentioned for fractures, if that does not work then operate on it in two ways.
إمّا الكىّ بالدواء الحادّ المحرق وإمّا بالحديد.	Either by cauterization with a sharp heated instrument or by iron.
فأمّا الكىّ بالدواء المحرق فهو أن تأخذ سنّا واحدا من الثوم فتقشره وتقطع اطرافه من الجهتين ثمّ شقّ موضع الوجع من الصدغ بمبضع عريض حتّى يصير فيه موضعا تحت الجلد يسع فيه السنّ.	Then, the operation with the heated instrument is that you take a single thread of flax, scrape it and cut its edges from both sides, then make an incision in the place of the fracture on the temple with a straight razor until you create under the skin a space where the thread will fit.
فيدخل فيه تحت الجلد حتّى يغيب ثمّ شدّ عليه برفائد شدّا محكما وتتركه قدر خمس عشرة ساعة ثمّ حلّه وأخرج الثوم واترك الجرح يومين او ثلثة ثمّ احمل.	Then it is inserted under the skin until it disappears, then tightened with a tight bandage and left for ten to fifteen hours, then loosened and the flax removed and the wound is left for two or three days, then bandaged.
عليه قطنة مغموسة فى السمن حتّى يقيح الموضع ثمّ تعالجه بالمرهم الى أن يبرأ إن شاء اللّه، وإن شئت فعلت ذلك ببعض الادوية المحرقة التى آتيتها فى المقالة الثامنة عشر فى الادوية المحرقة.	A piece of cloth soaked in fat is placed on it until the place becomes clean, then treated with ointment until it heals, God willing, and if you wish, you can do that with some of the cauterizing medications which I mentioned in the twelfth chapter on cauterizing medications.
وأمّا كيّها بالحديد فعلى هذه الصفة: تحمى المكواة التى هذه صورتها:.	And as for the operation with iron, it is done according to this method: The cauterizer which is of this shape:.
وتسمّى المكواة المسماريّة لأنّ رأسها كهيئة المسمار فيها بعض التقبيب وفى وسطها نتوّ صغير.	The suture is called the "Mukawwa" because its head resembles an arrowhead with some bending and in its middle there's a small knot.
ثمّ تضعها على موضع الوجع وتمسك يدك وانت تدير الحديدة قليلا قليلا، ويكون القدر الذى تحرق من ثخن الجلد مثل نصفه.	Then you put it in the place of the wound and hold your hand, and as you move the needle a little, little, and the amount that is burned from the thickness of the skin is like half of it.
وترفع يدك لكيلا تحرق الشريان الذى من اسفل فيحدث النزف، ثمّ تشرّب قطنة فى ماء الملح وتضعها على الموضع وتتركه ثلثة ايّام.	And you lift your hand so that you do not burn the vein that is below, lest hemorrhaging occur, then you dip a piece of cloth in salt water and put it on the place and leave it for three days.
ثمّ تحمل القطنة بالسمن ثمّ تعالجه بالمرهم الى أن يبرأ إن شاء الله.	Then you grease the cloth with butter, then change it with mutton fat until it heals, God willing.
وإن شئت كويت هذه الشقيقة بالطرف السكّينىّ الناتى من المكواة وتحفظ من قطع الشريان فى هذه الشقيقة غير المزمنة خاصّة.	And if you want, you close this wound with the sharp edge that comes from the needle, and you beware of cutting the vein in this non-pulsating wound in particular.
الفصل الرابع.	The fourth chapter.
فىكّى الشقيقة المزمنة.	Suturing the pulsating wound.
اذا عالجت الشقيقة بما ذكرنا من العلاج المتقدّم وما ذكرنا فى تقاسيم الامراض فلم ينجع العلاج ورأيت من العلّة ما لا يقوم بها ما ذكرنا من الكّى الاوّل بالدواء او الكىّ بالنار.	If you treated the wound with what we mentioned of previous treatments and what we mentioned in the chapters on diseases, and the treatment did not work, and you saw from the illness what cannot be treated by what we mentioned of cauterization first with medicine or cauterization with fire.
فينبغى أن تحمى المكواة السكّينيّة حتّى تبيضّ بعد أن تعلّم على موضع الوجع بخطّ طوله نصف اصبع او نحوه وتترك يدك مرّة واحدة وانت تشدّها حتّى تقطع الشريان وتبلغ نحو العظم.	Then it is necessary to cauterize the sharp needle until it whitens, after you place it on the wound with a line the length of half a finger or about that, and you leave your hand once and as you press it until the vein is cut and it reaches near the bone.
الّا أنّه ينبغى لك أن تتحفّظ من اتّصال الفكّ الذى يتحرّك عند المضغ فتحرق العضل او العصب المحرّك له فيحدث التشنّج.	But it is necessary for you to beware of the connection of the jaw that moves during chewing, lest you burn the muscle or the moving nerve, and stiffness occurs.
وكن على حذر ورقبة من نزف دم الشريان الذى قطعت فإنّ فى قطعه الغرر.	And be on your guard and beware of the hemorrhage of the vein that you cut, for in its cutting there is danger.
ولا سيّما لمن جهل ما يصنع ولم يكن دربا مجرّبا وترك العمل اولى.	Do not entrust to one who is ignorant of what he does and has not been trained in a tested and tried school the care of a wounded person, and leave the operation to him.
وسيأتى ذكر تدبير النزف العارض من الشريان على وجهه فى موضعه من الكتاب إن شاء اللّه، فإن رأيت من العلّة ما لا تقوم به هذه الكيّة.	And the mention of the management of the bleeding artery in its place in this book, if God wills, for I have seen from the ailment what does not stand up to this procedure.
ورأيت جسم العليل محتملا فاكوه كيّة فى وسط الرأس كما وصفنا وعالج الجرح حتّى يبرأ إن شاء الله.	And I have seen the body of the patient responding well to cauterization in the middle of the head, as we have described, and the wound has been treated until it healed, if God wills.
وإن شئت استعملت الكىّ الذى ذكرنا فى باب سلّ الشريان بالمكواة ذات السكّينين فإنّه كىّ افضل من هذا وأنجع.	And if you wish, I have used the cauterization that we mentioned in the chapter on burning the artery with the cautery of the two sharp edges, for it is a better and more beneficial cauterization than this.
الفصل الخامس.	The Fifth Chapter.
فىكىّ اوجاع الأذنين.	On the cauterization of the diseases of the ears.
اذا حدث فى الأذن وجع عن برد وعولج بالمسهلات وسائر العلاج الذى ذكرنا فى التقسيم ولم يذهب الوجع فاحم المكواة التى تسمّى النقطة التى هذه صورتها.	If there occurs in the ear a disease due to cold and phlegm, and it was treated with medications and other treatments that we mentioned in the division, and the disease did not go away, then cauterize with the cautery which is called "the dot", whose shape is like this.
ثم تنقط بها بعد إحمائها حول الأذن كلّها كما تدور او حولهما جميعا إن كان الوجع فيهما.	Then puncture with it, after heating it, around the entire ear, as if it is rotating, or around both of them altogether, if the disease is in both of them.
وتبعد بالكىّ من أصل الأذن قليلا بعد أن تعلّم الموضع بالمداد ويكون الكىّ قدر عشر نقط فى كلّ أذن او نحوها ثمّ تعالج المواضع حتّى يبرأ إن شاء الله.	And the cauterization is done slightly at the base of the ear, after the area has been prepared with a poultice, and it consists of about ten punctures in each ear or approximately that number, then the areas are treated until they heal, if God wills.
الفصل السادس.	The Sixth Chapter.
فىكىّ اللقوة.	On the cauterization of tonsillitis.
اللقوة التى تعالج بالكّى انّما تكون من النوع الذى يحدث من البلغم على ما ذكرت فى تقاسيم الامراض.	The tonsillitis that is treated with the cautery, it is not the type that occurs from phlegm, as I mentioned in the divisions of diseases.
ويجتنب كىّ النوع الذى يحدث من جفوف وتشنّج العصب.	And beware of cauterizing the type that occurs from a foul mouth and constriction of the nerves.
متى عالجت هذا النوع من اللقوة بالايارجات والسعوطات والغراغر فلم ينجع علاجك فينبغى أن يكوى العليل بثلاث كيّات.	The treatment of this type of ulcer with poultices and dressings did not heal, so it is necessary to cauterize the wound in three seats.
واحدة عند أصل الأذن والثانية أسفل قليلا من صدغه والثالثة عند مجتمع الشفتين.	One at the root of the ear, and the second below the clavicle, and the third at the meeting of the lips.
واجعل كيّك من ضدّ الجهة المريضة لأنّ الاسترخاء انّما يحدث فى الجهة التى تظهر صحيحة.	And let your cauterization be on the opposite side of the diseased area, because relaxation only occurs in the side that appears to be healthy.
وصورة الكىّ أن تكويه كيّة بإزاء طرف الأذن الأعلى تحت قرن الرأس قليلا وأخرى فى الصدغ ويكون طولها على قدر طول الابهام.	The description of the cauterization is that you should cauterize one on the upper side of the ear, below the frontal bone, a little, and another on the clavicle, and its length will be equivalent to the length of the molar teeth.
تنزل بالكّى يدك حتّى تحرق قدر نصف ثخن الجلد، وهذه صورة المكواة وهى نوع من السكّينيّة التى تقدّمت صورتها الّا أنّها ألطف منها قليلا كما ترى.	Bring down your cauterization iron until you burn half the thickness of the skin, and this is the description of the cauterization, which is a type of searing, its shape has been advanced, but it is milder than it, as you see.
وينبغى أن يكون السكّين فيه فضل غلظ قليلا، ثمّ تعالج الموضع بما تقدّم ذكره حتّى يبرأ إن شاء الله.	And it is necessary that the searing iron has a slightly thick edge, then treat the area with what was previously mentioned until it heals, God willing.
الفصل السابع.	The Seventh Chapter.
فىكىّ السكتة المزمنة.	Cauterization of the apoplectic sickness.
اذا أزمنت السكتة وعالجتها بما ذكرنا ولم ينجع علاجك ولم يكن بالعليل حمّى فاكوه أربع كيّات.	If the apoplexy has occurred and you treated it with what we mentioned, but your treatment did not work and it was not in the wound that had become inflamed, then cauterize four times.
على كل قرن من رأسه كيّة وكيّة فى وسط الرأس كما ذكرنا وكّيّة فى موخّر الرأس على ما تقدّم.	One cauterization on each of his forehead, and one in the middle of the head as we mentioned before, and a cauterization at the back of the head as previously stated.
وصفة المكاوى على ما تقدم، وقد يكوى ايضا كيّة على فم المعدة فيكون ابلغ، ثمّ تعالج بما تقدّم.	The description of the cauterizations is as previously mentioned, and he may also be cauterized on the opening of the stomach, which would be more effective, then treat with what was previously stated.
الفصل الثامن.	The Eighth Chapter.
فىكىّ النسيان.	Cauterization of the tonsils.
الذى يكون من البلغم ينبغى أن يسقى العليل اوّلا من الايارجات الكبار والحبوب المنقية للدماغ.	The one that is caused by phlegm, it is necessary to evacuate the wound either from the large poultices or the purging of the brain.
ثمّ يحلق رأسه كلّه وتحمل على مؤخّره ضماد الخردل المكتوب فى مقالة الاضمدة تحمله مرات فإنّه ضرب من الكىّ.	The suture should be sewn on the entire width of his wound and it will hold onto the end of the surgical needle, which has been threaded with the doubly twisted thread for the sake of strengthening it.
وافعل ذلك على الرتبة بعينها التى ذكرتها هنالك فإن برىء بذلك والّا فاكوه ثلاث كيّات فى مؤخّر رأسه تكون مصطفّة من اعلى الرأس الى اسفل العنق.	And perform that on the step with its two eyes that were mentioned there, for if it is extracted thus and washed three times in the back of his head, it will be aligned from the top of the head to the bottom of the neck.
واجعل بين كلّ كيّة وكيّة غلظ اصبع ثمّ يعالج الكىّ بما تقدّم، فإن اردت الزيادة وكان العليل محتملا لذلك فاكوه الكيّة الوسطى.	And make between each suture and the next, a thickness of a finger, then treat the sutures with what has been previously mentioned, for if you desire an increase and the patient is inclined to it, wash the middle suture.
فإن اردت الزيادة فاكوه على القرنين ثمّ تعالجه حتّى يبرأ، وتكون المكواة زيتونيّة على الصورة التى تقدّمت.	For if you desire an increase, wash it on the two sides, then treat it until it heals, and let the washing be olive oil of the type previously mentioned.
الفصل التاسع.	The Ninth Chapter.
فىكىّ الفالج واسترخاء جميع البدن.	And it relaxes the veins and loosens all the body parts.
ينبغى أن تتقدّم فى تنقية الرأس بالايارجات وما ذكرنا ثمّ احلق رأس العليل ثمّ اكوه كيّة فى وسط الرأس وكيّة على كلّ قرن من الرأس وكيّة على مؤخّره.	It should proceed with the purification of the head with the purgatives and what we have mentioned, then sew the patient's head, and wash a suture in the middle of the head and a suture on each side of the head and a suture at its back.
وثلاثا على فقارات العنق، فإن احتجت فى علّة استرخاء البدن الى أكثر من ذلك وكان المريض محتملا لذلك والمرض قويّا مستحكما فاكوه أربع كيّات على فقارات ظهره.	And three on the sides of the neck, for if it is necessary for the relaxation of the body to more than that and the patient is inclined to it and the illness is strong and confirmed, wash four sutures on the sides of his back.
وأبلغ بالكىّ حتى تحرق من الجلد أكثره وترفع يدك ثمّ تعالجه على ما تقدّم ذكره حتّى يبرأ إن شاء الله، وتكون المكواة زيتونيّة.	And bring the cautery to him until it burns from the flesh its excess and raise your hand, then treat it with what has been previously mentioned until it heals, God willing, and let the washing be olive oil.
الفصل العاشر.	The Tenth Chapter.
فىكىّ الصرع.	And it induces epilepsy.
انّما يكوى المصروع الذى يكون صرعه من قبل البلغم، فينبغى أن ينقى دماغه اوّلا باليارجات الكبار وبسائر العلاج الذى ذكرنا فى التقسيم اذا كان العليل كبيرا وكان محتملا لأخذ الادوية.	When the epileptic whose epilepsy is from the phlegm, it should be cleansed from his brain either with the strong purgatives or other treatments that we have mentioned in the division, if the patient is an adult and is inclined to taking medicine.
فأمّا إن كان صبيّا لا يحتمل الادوية فليستعمل الغراغر والمملضغ المنقية للدماغ قبل ذلك بأيّام كثيرة مع تحسين اغذيته.	If the patient is a young boy who cannot withstand the operation, then the trephine and the choristic operations for the brain should be performed before that by many days with improvement of his diet.
ثمّ يحلق رأسه ثمّ اكوه الكيّة الواحدة فى وسط الرأس على ما تقدّم فى الصفة وكيّة أخرى فى مؤخّره.	Then he should shave his head, then bandage a single bandage in the middle of the head as previously mentioned in the description, and another bandage at the back of it.
وعلى كلّ قرن من رأسه كيّة، فإن كان المريض قويّا وكان محتملا فاكوه الكيّات التى ذكرت فى صاحب الفالج واسترخاء البدن على فقارات العنق وفقارات الظهر، وتكون المكواة زيتونيّة على الصفة التى تقدّمت.	And a bandage on each side of his head, if the patient is strong and can tolerate it, then he should be bandaged with the bandages mentioned for the case of hemorrhoids and relaxation of the limbs at the joints of the neck, the joints of the back, and the bandage should be oily according to the aforementioned description.
فإن كان العليل صبيّا فاجعل المكواة لطيفة على هذه الصورة.	For if the patient is a young boy, then make the bandage gentle in this manner.
الفصل الحادى عشر.	The twelfth separation.
فى كىّ المالنخوليا.	On the extraction of the mandibular bone.
اذا كان سبب المالنخوليا رطوبات فاسدة وبلغم غليظ فاكوه الكيّات التى ذكرنا فى صاحب الفالج.	If the cause of the mandibular swelling is a cold and putrid humor, then he should be bandaged with the bandages that we mentioned for the case of hemorrhoids.
إن كان سبب المالنخوليا فضل مائل الى السوداء وكان جسم العليل مرطوبا فاسقه ما ينقى دماغه على ما تقدّم فى التقسيم.	If the cause of the mandibular swelling is a melancholy humor and the patient's body is cold and putrid, then he should be given a purgative to clean his brain as previously mentioned in the chapter on purging.
ثمّ احلق رأس العليل ثمّ اصنع كعكة محكمة من كتان كالدائرة ثمّ أنزلها فى وسط رأسه والعليل قاعد متربّعا يمسك من كلّ جهة ثمّ خذ رطلا واحدا من سمن الغنم العتيق.	Then shave the patient's head, then make a tight cap from cotton like a circle, and put it in the middle of his head, with the patient sitting upright holding one from each side, then take a single egg from old fat.
ثمّ سخّنه على النار سخونة معتدلة قدر ما يحتمل الاصبع اذا أدخل فيه ثمّ تفرغه وسط رأسه فى الدائرة وتتركه حتّى يبرد، تفعل ذلك بالعليل كلّ أسبوع مرّة مع سائر تدبيره الجيّد حتّى يبرأ إن شاء اللّه.	Then heat it on the fire a moderate heating, as much as the fingers can tolerate if they are inserted in it, then pour it into the middle of his head inside the circle and let it cool until it cools down, do this to the patient every week with other good treatment until he recovers, God willing.
وإن شئت كويته تنقّطا صغارا كثيرة من غير أن تمسك يدك بالمكواة بل يكون تشميما فإنّ هذا النوع من الكّى يرطب الدماغ باعتدال.	And if you want to make a small compress, make many small dots without holding your hand on the bandage, but rather lightly touching it, for this type of bandage relaxes the brain moderately.
ثمّ تحمل عليه قطنة مشرّبة فى السمن او فى شحم الدجاج.	Then apply to it a piece of fat from a goat or from the fat of a rooster.
الفصل الثانى عشر.	The twelfth chapter.
فى كىّ الماء النازل فى العين.	On the descent of water in the eye.
اذا تبيّن لك ابتداء الماء النازل فى العين بالعلامات التى ذكرت فى التقسيم فبادر فاسق العليل ما ينقى رأسه واحمه من جميع الرطوبات وعرّقه فى الحمّام على الريق أيّاما.	If the beginning of the descent of water in the eye becomes clear to you by the signs which I mentioned in the section, then hasten to open the cataract and protect it from all moisture and wash it with hot water repeatedly.
ثم مره بحلق رأسه واكوه كيّة فى وسط الرأس ثمّ اكوه كيّتين على الصدغين إن كان ابتداء نزول الماء فى العينين جميعا او من الجانب الواحد إن كان فى العين الواحدة.	Then shave the hair from the top of his head and make an incision in the middle of the head, then make two more incisions on the sides, if the beginning of the descent of water is in both eyes or one side, if it is in one eye.
ثمّ اقطع بالمكواة جميع الاوردة والشريانات التى تحت الجلد ولتكن الكيّات فيها طول فى عرض الصدغين وتحفّظ من نزف الدم.	Then cut with the instrument all the uveal and choroid layers that are beneath the skin, and let the incisions be deep to the width of the sides, and beware of excessive bleeding.
فإن رأيت شيئا منه فاقطعه على المقام بأىّ علاج أمكنك وسنأتى بالحكمة فى سلّ الشريانات وقطعها والتحفّظ من النزف.	For if you see any of it, then cut it at the place with any treatment that you can, and proceed with caution in dissecting the choroids and cutting them and beware of bleeding.
وقد يكوى فى القفا تحت العظمين كيّتين بليغتين.	And sometimes two incisions are made in the skull beneath the bones with a gouge.
الفصل الثالث عشر.	The thirteenth chapter.
فى كىّ الدموع المزمنة.	On the incision of the congealed blood.
اذا كانت دموع العين مزمنة دائمة وكانت من قبل الأوردة والشريانات التى فى ظاهر الرأس من خارج الرأس وتيقّنت أنّ ذلك من فضول باردة غليظة بلغمانيّة فاكوه الكىّ الذى وصفت بعينه فى ابتداء الماء النازل.	If the blood in the eye has coagulated and is permanent, and it was from before the uvea and choroids that are on the outside of the skull from the head, and you think that this is because of a cold, gross, and humid phlegm, then make an incision as I described specifically at the beginning of the descent of water.
كيّة فى وسط الرأس وكيّتين على الصدغين وكيّتين فى القفا تحت العظمين وإن احتجت الى زيادة فاكوه كيّة فى كلّ جانب من ذنب العين على طرف الحاجب بمكواة صغيرة.	An incision in the middle of the head, and two on the sides, and two in the skull beneath the bones, and if there is a need for more, then make an incision on each side of the eye towards the corner of the eyebrow with a small instrument.
الفصل الرابع عشر.	The Fourteenth Chapter.
فى كىّ نتن الأنف.	On surgical operations on the nose.
اذا عالجته بما ذكرنا فى التقسيم ولم ينجع العلاج فبادر فاسق العليل القوقايا ثلاث ليال ثمّ احلق رأسه وأكوه الكيّة الوسطى بالمكواة الزيتونيّة.	If the treatment mentioned in the incision does not work, then make a quick decision and cut the upper part of the nose for three days, then shave his head and dress the middle with an ointment made from olive oil.
ثمّ اكوه بالمكواة المسماريّة كيّتين فوق الحاجبين تحت الشعر قليلا وتحفّظ من الشريان لا تقطعه، وهذه صورة المسماريّة.	Then dress it with the dressing of mastic, two bandages above the eyebrows, under the hair slightly, and be cautious of the veins, do not cut them, and this is a picture of the mastic.
الفصل الخامس عشر.	The Fifteenth Chapter.
فى كىّ استرخاء جفن العين.	On surgical operations for relaxing the eyelid.
اذا استرخى جفن العين عن مرض او رطوبة فاكو الجفن كيّة واحدة بهذه المكواة الهلاليّة.	If the eyelid becomes relaxed due to a disease or weakness, then dress the eyelid with one bandage using this dressing of sweet almond.
وإن شئت فاكوه فوق الحاجبين قليلا كيّتين فى كلّ جهة وتباعد من الصدغين ويكون طول كلّ كيّة على طول الحاجب.	And if you want, then dress above the eyebrows slightly, two bandages on each side, keeping a distance from the temples, and let the length of each bandage be as long as the eyebrow.
ولا تبالغ يدك بالكىّ بل على قدر ما يحترق ثلث الجلد، وتكون صورة المكواة على هذه الصفة.	And do not overdo it with the dressing, but to the extent that one third of the skin is exposed, and the dressing will be in this form.
الفصل السادس عشر.	The Sixteenth Chapter.
فى كىّ جفن العين.	On surgical operations for the eyelid.
اذا انقلبت اشفارها الى داخل فنخست العين فالكىّ فيها على نوعين.	If its margin is inverted to the inside, so that it touches the eye, then dress it in two ways.
إمّا الكىّ بالنار وإمّا الكىّ بالدواء المحرق، فأمّا كيّها بالنار فتأمر العليل قبل ذلك أن يترك اشفاره إن كان ممّن ينتفها حتّى تطول وتستوى.	Either dressing with fire, or dressing with the burnt dodder, so first dress it with fire, and before that, let the upper part be massaged until its margin is straightened and becomes even.
فإن نخسته عند نباتها فتشدّ عينيه بعصابة لئلّا تتحرّك حتّى تنبت فإذا نبتت واستوت فضع رأس العليل فى حجرك ثمّ تعلّم على جفن العين بالمداد علامة على شكل ورقة آس.	For if you touch it when it is sprouting, its eye will become constricted with a thread-like vessel that moves until it sprouts, and if it has sprouted and straightened, then put the head of the eyelid on your palm, and then make a sign on the margin of the eyelid with the ink, in the shape of a reed leaf.
ويكون ابتداء العلامة بالقرب من الاشفار ثمّ تضع تحت الجفن قطنة مشرّبة فى بياض البيض او فى لعاب البزرقطونا ثمّ تحمّى مكواة هذه صورتها.	The beginning of the operation will be near the nostrils, then a curved needle is placed under the eyelid, in the white of the eye or in the lacrimal canthus, and this procedure is performed.
ثمّ تكوى على الشكل الذى علّمت قليلا قليلا فى مرّات كثيرة حتّى يحترق سطح الجلد الذى هو كشكل ورقة الآس كلّه ظاهره خاصّة وعلامة صحّة عملك أن ترى جفن العين قد تشمّر والشعر قد ارتفع عن لحمة العين.	Then it is cauterized in the shape that I described, a little at a time, repeatedly, until the surface of the flesh is burned, like the shape of a piece of paper, all of its exterior is a special sign and a sign of the correctness of your action is that you see the eyelid has contracted and the hair has risen from the conjunctiva of the eye.
فارفع يدك حينئذ واتركه ثلاثة أيّام، ثمّ احمل عليه قطنة بالسمن حتّى تنقلع الخشكريشة ثمّ عالجه بالمرهم حتّى يبرأ إن شاء اللّه، فإن عاد شىء من الشعر بعد وقت واسترخى الجفن.	Leave your hand then and let it be for three days, then apply to it a dressing with wax until the eschar falls off, then treat it with the balm until it heals, God willing, if some of the hair returns after a time and the eyelid relaxes.
فأعد الكىّ على ذلك الموضع كما فعلت اوّلا، فإن كان الشعر فى الجفن الأسفل فاكوه حتّى يرجع الى موضعه الطبيعّى ولا ينخس الشعر العين، وأمّا الكىّ بالدواء المحرق فهو أن تأمر العليل أن يترك الاشفار حتّى تطول وتستوى.	And the tarsus returns to its place as it was at first, and if the hair is in the lower eyelid, then extract it until it returns to its natural place and the hair does not harm the eye, and as for the treatment of the burned ciliary process, it is that you order the patient to leave the eyelashes alone until they grow and become even.
ثمّ تصنع من الكاغد صورة ورقة آس ثمّ خذ من الصابون المعهود ومن الجير غير المطفأ من كلّ واحد وزن درهم او نحوه فتسحقهما جميعا سحقا جيّدا وتفعل ذلك بالعجلة لئلا يجفّ.	Then make from the paper a shape of a piece of paper, then take from the soap a quarter of a dirham or its weight and from the unburned talc a quarter of a dirham, then crush both of them thoroughly and well, and do that quickly so it does not dry.
ثم تبسط منه على الكاغد الذى صنعت كهيئة ورقة الآس وتضعه على جفن العين الواحدة او الاثنتين وتضع تحت العين قطنة مشرّبة فى بياض البيض ورأس العليل فى حجرك.	Then spread from it on the paper that you made in the shape of a piece of paper, and put it on one eyelid or both, and place under the eye a curved needle in the white of the eye, and the head of the patient is in your lap.
وتضع اصبعك السبّابة فوق الدواء وتزمّه قليلا وأنت تحركه كلّما حسّ العليل بلذع الدواء لأنّه يجد له لذعا كالنار فما دام يجد اللذع فاترك الدواء وحرّكه باصبعك فإذا سكن اللذع فانزع الدواء واغسل العين بالماء.	And you put your index finger on the ciliary process and hold it a little, and you move it as the patient feels the pain of the cauterization because he finds it painful like fire, and as long as he feels the pain, leave the cauterization and move it with your finger, and if the pain subsides, then remove the cauterization and wash the eye with water.
وانظر فإن رأيت الجفن قد ارتفع كما يرتفع عند التشمير بالنار او بالقطع وإلّا فأعد عليه من الدواء على الموضع الذى لم يؤثّر فيه الدواء ولم يسودّ حتّى تستوفى عملك وتتشمّر العين ثمّ تضع عليه القطن بالسمن حتّى تنقلع جلبة الحرق.	If you saw that the eyelid has risen as it rises when smelling narcissus or cutting, then apply a remedy to the place where the remedy did not affect and did not take effect until your work is absorbed and the eye is anointed, then put cotton with ghee until the inflammation of the burn subsides.
ثمّ تعالجه بالمرهم النخلىّ او غيره حتّى يبرأ، وينبغى لك عند العمل أن تتحفّظ غاية التحفّظ أن لا يسقط فى العين من الدواء شىء فإن استرخى الجفن بعد ايّام ونخش من الشعر شىء فى العين.	Then treat it with the narcissus ointment or something else until it heals, and beware during the work to be extremely careful that not a single drop of the remedy falls into the eye, for if the eyelid relaxes after a few days and there is a hair in the eye.
فأعد الدواء على ذلك الموضع الذى استرخى من الجفن خاصّة كما فعلت اوّلا ثمّ عالجه حتّى يبرأ، وهذه صورة ورقة الآس.	Apply the remedy on that specific place of the eyelid where it has relaxed, just as you did at first, then treat it until it heals, and this is the picture of the page of Al-As.
واعلم أنّ أعين الناس قد تختلف فى الصغر والكبر فعلى حسب ذلك فليكن تشميرك، وليس بخفىّ طريق الصواب على من كانت له دربة بهذه الصناعة.	And know that people's eyes may differ in size, so according to that, your anointing should be, and do not hide the path of truth from one who has had experience in this craft.
الفصل السابع عشر.	The Seventeenth Chapter.
فى كىّ الناصور الذى يعرض فى مأق العين.	On the cataract that appears in the corner of the eye.
اذا عالجت الناصور بما ذكرنا فى تقاسيم الأمراض فلم ينجع علاجك فينبغى أن يكوى على هذه الصفة.	If you treated the cataract with what we mentioned in classifying the diseases, and your treatment did not work, it is fitting that it be cauterized according to this characteristic.
تأمر العليل أن يضع رأسه فى حجرك ويمسك رأسه خادم بين يديك إمساكا لايتحرّك ولا يضظرب برأسه.	The patient should place his head on your lap and the servant should hold his head between your hands, holding it firmly so that he does not move or jerk his head.
ثمّ تضع قطنة مبلولة فى بياض البيض او فى لعاب البرزقطونا على عينيه ثمّ تحمى المكواة التى هذه صورتها.	Then you put a wet cotton in the white of the eye or in the saliva of the Barbary nut on his eyes, then cauterize with the cautery whose picture is this.
تكون مجوّفة كهيئة انبوبة ريش النسر من الطرف الواحد الذى يكون به الكىّ وإن شئت أن تكون منفوذة الطرف الآخر وإن شئت كانت مصمتة كالمرود الّا أنّ هذه المجوّفة أفضل لعملك إن شاء الله.	It is a tube made from the quill of a bird's feather, with one end being where the cataract is, and if you like it can be perforated at the other end, and if you like it can be closed like the marrow, but this tube is better for your work, God willing.
ثمّ تعصر الناصور إن كان مفتوحا وتخرج منه المدّة وتنشفه او كان غير مفتوح فتفتحه وتستخرج قيحه ثمّ تضع حينئذ عليه المكواة وهى حامية جدّا فتمسك بها يدك حتّى تصل الى العظم.	The vein is cut, if it was open and the blood came out and it was stopped, or if it was not opened then it would be opened and its contents would be taken out, then a hot and very tight dressing would be applied on it, which you hold with your hand until it reaches the bone.
وأبعد يدك قليلا عند الكىّ من العين الى ناحية الانف لئلّا تخطئ يدك او يقلق العليل فتقع المكواة فى شحمة العين فتفسدها، فإن وصلت فى أوّل كيّة الى العظم وإلّا فأعد المكواة مرّة ثانية إن احتجت الى ذلك.	And move your hand slightly from the side of the eye towards the nose, lest your hand misses or the eyelid is injured, and the dressing falls into the fat of the eye, so that it would be damaged. If it reached in the first application to the bone, then enough, otherwise apply the dressing a second time if there's a need for that.
واتركه ثلاثة ايّام ثمّ احمل عليه قطنة بالسمن وعالجه بالمرهم المجفّف حتّى يبرأ، فإن مضى له أربعون يوما ولم يبرأ فاحمل عليه الدواء الحادّ الأكّال حتى ينكشف العظم واجرده على ما سيأتى ذكره فى بابه إن شاء الله.	And bandage it for three days, then apply on it a dressing with fat and treat it with dried marham until it heals. If forty days passed and it did not heal, then apply on it the sharp and acidic medicine until the bone is exposed, and God willing, I will mention its treatment in another chapter.
ووجه آخر من كىّ الناصور ذكره بعض الاوائل، تعمد الى موضع الناصور تشقّه ثم تضع فى نفس الشقّ قمعا رقيقا هذه صورته.	And another method of treating the nasal vein, mentioned by some of the predecessors, is to make an incision at the site of the vein, then a thin tube like this shape is placed in the same incision.
وتصبّ فيه قدر وزن درهم رصاصا مذابا وتمسك يدك بالقمع إمساكا جيّدا مزموما ولا يتحرك العليل البتّة لئلّا يسيل الرصاص المذاب الى عينه وينبغى أن تضع على عين العليل قطنة مبلولة فى بياض البيض او فى الماء.	And pour into it an amount weighing a dirham of melted lead, and hold the tube firmly with your hand, tightly grasped, so that the eyelid does not move, lest the melted lead flows into his eye. And it is recommended that you put on the eyelid a dressing soaked in egg white or water.
فإنّ الرصاص يحرق موضع الناصور ويبرئه برءا عجيبا، فإن برئ الناصور بما ذكرنا من الكىّ والعلاج وإلّا فلا بدّ من استعمال ثقب الأنف وردّ الناصور الى مجرى الأنف على ما سيأتى فى موضعه الأخصّ به.	For the lead burns the site of the vein and heals it with a wonderful healing. If the vein does not heal with what we mentioned of applications and treatments, then there is no choice but to use the nasal septum perforator and return the vein to the passage of the nose, as will be described in its specific place.
الفصل الثامن عشر.	The Twelfth Chapter.
فى كىّ شقاق الشفة.	On the treatment of lip clefts.
كثيرا ما يحدث شقاق فى الشفة يسمّى الشعرة ولا سيّما فى شفاه الصبيان فإنّه كثيرا ما يحدث، اذا عالجت هذا الشقاق بما ذكرنا فى التقسيم فلم ينجع العلاج فأحم مكواة صغيرة سكّينيّة على هذه الصورة.	Often a fissure occurs in the lip which is called the hair lip and it does not just happen to children's lips, for it often happens. If you treated this fissure with what we mentioned regarding the incision and the treatment did not work, then cauterize a small area according to this method.
يكون جوفها على رقّة السكّين ثمّ تضعها حامية بالعجلة فى نفس الشقاق حتّى يصل الكىّ الى عمق الشقاق ثمّ تعالجه بالقيروطى حتّى يبرأ إن شاء الله.	Its interior is on the smoothness of the cautery, then it is placed hot with the tongs in the same fissure until the cautery reaches the depth of the fissure, then treated with ky, until it heals, God willing.
الفصل التاسع عشر.	The 19th chapter.
فى كىّ الناصور الحادث فى الفم.	On cauterizing the nasal polyp that occurs in the mouth.
اذا عرض فى اصل اللثاث او فى الحنك او فى اصول الاضراس ورم ثمّ قاح وانفجر وصار من جرى القيح ناصور ثمّ عالجته فلم ينجع فيه العلاج فينبغى أن تحمى مكواة على قدر ما يسع فى الناصور.	If it appears in the root of the teeth or in the palate or in the roots of the gums and becomes inflamed and ulcerated and burst and became a source of pus, then it is a nasal polyp, then you treated it and the treatment did not work, it is advisable to cauterize a cautery according to the size that will fit the polyp.
ثمّ تدخلها حامية فى ثقب الناصور وتمسك يدك حتّى تصل الحديدة محمية الى غوره وآخره وتفعل ذلك مرّة او مرّين ثّم تعالجه بعد ذلك بما ذكرنا من العلاج الى أن يبرأ إن شاء اللّه.	Then you insert it hot into the polyp's hole and hold your hand until the pointed cautery reaches its interior and edge, and do that one or two times, then treat it after that with what we mentioned of treatment until it heals, God willing.
فإن انقطعت المادّة وبرئ وإلّا فلا بدّ من الكشف على المكان وينزع العظم الفاسد على حسب ما سيأتى فى بابه إن شاء اللّه.	For if the decayed material is cut off and it heals, then there is no need, otherwise, it is necessary to expose the place and extract the decayed bone according to what will be suitable for its hole, God willing.
الفصل العشرون.	The 26th chapter.
فىكىّ الاضراس واللثاث المسترخية.	On cauterizing the decayed teeth and the rotten gums.
اذا استرخت اللثاث من قبل الرطوبة وتحركّت الاضراس وعالجتها بالادوية ولم تنجع فضع رأس العليل فى حجرك ثمّ أحم المكواة التى تأتى صورتها بعد هذا بعد أن تضع الانبوبة على الضرس.	If the gums became rotten from before the gum disease and the teeth were shaken and you treated them with medications and it did not work, then put the head of the scalpel on your knee, then cauterize the cautery that its shape will be shown after this, after you place the speculum on the tooth.
وتدخل فيها المكواة حامية بالعجلة وتمسك يدك قليلا حتّى يحسّ العليل بحرارة النار قد وصلت الى أصل الضرس ثّم ترفع يدك ثمّ تعيد المكواة مرّات على حسب ما تريد ثمّ يملأ العليل فمه من ماء الملح.	The scalpel enters with a gentle touch on the tonsil and you hold your hand slightly firm until the heat of the cauterization has reached the basis of the tonsil, then you lift your hand, then you repeat the application several times as needed, then the tonsil is filled with saltwater.
ويمسكه ساعة ويقذف به فإنّ الضرس المتحرّكة تثبت واللثة المسترخية تشتدّ وتجفّ الرطوبة الفاسدة.	And a bandage is applied to it for an hour, and then he spits on it, so the movable tonsil becomes steady and the relaxed uvula becomes tense and the putrid mucus is dried up.
الفصل الحادى والعشرون.	Surgical Instruments and Equipment.
فى كىّ وجع الضرس.	Incision of the tonsil.
اذا كان وجع الضرس من قبل البرد او كان فيها دود ولم ينجع فيه العلاج بالأدوية فالكىّ فيها على وجهين إمّا الكىّ بالسمن وإمّا الكىّ بالنار.	If the tonsillectomy was due to prior ulceration or if it contained worms and the treatment with medication did not work, then the excision is performed in two ways, either excision with a scalpel or excision with cauterization.
أمّا الكىّ بالسمن فهو أن تأخذ السمن البقرىّ فتغليه فى مغرفة حديد او فى صدفة ثمّ تأخذ قطنة فتلفّها على طرف المرود ثمّ تغمسها فى السمن المغلى وتضعها على السنّ الوجعة بالعجلة وتمسكها حتّى تبرد.	As for the excision with a scalpel, it is that you take beef tallow and melt it in an iron spoon or in a copper one, then you take a cotton swab, wrap it around the handle of the cautery instrument, dip it into the melted tallow and apply it to the ulcerated tonsil with a gentle touch and hold it until it cools.
ثمّ تعيدها مرّات حتّى تصل قوّة النار الى أصل الضرس، وإن شئت أن تغمس صوفة او قطنة فى السمن البارد وتضعها على السنّ الوجعة وتجعل فوقها الحديدة المحميّة حتّى تصل النار الى قعر السنّ.	Then you repeat this several times until the heat of the cauterization reaches the basis of the tonsil, and if you want, you dip a cotton swab in cold tallow and apply it to the ulcerated tonsil and put the protected iron instrument on top of it until the cauterization reaches the bottom of the tonsil.
وأمّا كيّها بالنار فهو أن تعمد الى أنبوبة نحاس او أنبوبة حديد ويكون فى جرمها بعض الغلظ لئلّا يصل حرّ النار الى فم العليل، ثمّ احم المكواة التى تأتى صورتها وتضعها على نفس السنّ وتمسك يدك حتّى تبرد المكواة تفعل ذلك مرّات.	As for cauterizing it with fire, it is that you take a copper or iron tube and make sure there is some thickness to it so the heat of the fire reaches the mouth of the tonsil, then you hold the cauterization instrument, which I described earlier, and apply it to the same tonsil, and hold your hand until the instrument cools, you do that several times.
فإنّ الوجع يذهب إمّا ذلك النهار بعينه وإمّا يوما آخر، وينبغى فى إثر ذلك الكىّ أن يملأ العليل فمه بالسمن الطيّب ويمسكه ساعة ثمّ يقذف به، وهذه صورة المكواة.	For the cautery, it is moved either on that particular day or another day, and after that, a pipe is filled with sweet almond oil and applied for an hour, then poured into it, and this is a picture of the device.
تكوى بأىّ طرف شئت وعلى الحسب الذى يمكن، وهذه صورة الأنبوبة.	It is cauterized on either side of the lung, as needed, and this is a picture of the tube.
الفصل الثانى والعشرون.	The second amputation and the excision.
فى كىّ الخنازير.	On the surgical instruments.
اذا كانت الخنازير عن البلغم والرطوبات الباردة ولم تكن تنقاد للنضج بالأدوية وأردت نضجا سريعا فأحم المكواة المجوفة التى هذه صورتها منفوذة الطرفين.	If the sputum is due to phlegm and cold humors and has not been purified by medications, and has a swift descent, then cauterize the hollow tube whose picture is shown with both ends open.
ليخرج الدخان عند الكىّ من الطرف الآخر وضعها محمية على نفس الورم مرّة وثانية إن احتجت الى ذلك حتّى تصل الى عمق الورم فإن كان الورم صغيرا فاجعل المكواة على قدر الورم.	So that the smoke comes out from the other end when cauterizing, and apply it repeatedly to the same tumor until it reaches the depth of the tumor, if the tumor is small, make the tube the size of the tumor.
ثمّ اتركه ثلثة ايّام واحمل عليه قطنة مغموسة فى السمن حتّى يذهب ما احترق بالنار ثمّ عالجه بالمرهم والفتائل حتّى يبرأ إن شاء الله.	Then leave it for three days and apply a cotton pad soaked in oil until what was burned by the fire disappears, then treat it with ointments and bandages until it heals, God willing.
الفصل الثالث والعشرون.	The third amputation and the excision.
فى الكىّ من بحوحة الصوت وضيق النفس.	On the surgical instruments for tracheotomy and relief of dyspnea.
اذا غلبت الرطوبات على قصبة الرئة ولا سيّما اذا كان ذلك مع برودة المزاج فينبغى أن يستفرغ العليل أوّلا بالأدوية المسهلة، ثمّ تكويه كيّة فى نقرة النحر عند أصل الحلقوم فى الموضع المنخفض.	If the humors have overcome the trachea and the lung, either with or without cold dysuria, it is necessary that the patient first evacuate by medications that ease, then cauterize a tube in the Adam's apple at the base of the throat in the depressed area.
فاحذر أن تصل بالكىّ الى الحلقوم ولا تحرق من الجلد إلّا نصفة، ثمّ اكوه كيّة أخرى عند مفصل العنق فى آخر خرزة منه بليغة وتكون المكواة مسماريّة على الصفة التى تقدّمت.	Be careful not to reach the trachea with the cautery, and do not burn more than half of the skin, then cauterize another tube at the joint of the neck at the end of its prominence with a ligature, and the tube should be constricted on the anterior surface that you have previously mentioned.
ثمّ عالجه بما تقدّم ذكره حتّى يبرأ إن شاء الله.	The treatment of a wound that has been previously mentioned, with the hope that God will grant recovery.
الفصل الرابع والعشرون.	The twenty-fourth chapter.
فى كىّ مرض الرئة والسعال.	On treating diseases of the lung and cough.
اذا كان السعال ومرض الرئة عن رطوبات باردة ولم يكن بالعليل حمّى ولا سلّ وكان المرض مزمنا فاكوه كيّتين فوق الترقوتين فى المواضع المنخفضة الليّنة الفارغة وكيّة أخرى فى وسط الصدر بين الثديين.	If the cough and disease of the lung are due to cold humors and it is not a hot bilious or phlegmatic disease, and the disease is chronic, then cauterize two spots above the floating ribs in the lower empty and lax regions and another spot in the middle of the chest between the breasts.
وتكون المكواة مسماريّة على الصورة التى تقدّمت، وإن شئت فليكن كيّك تنقيطا بالمكواة التى تسمّى النقطة وقد تقدّمت صورتها فى تنقيط وجع الأذنين وتكون النقط من ثلاثين نقطة الى نحوها.	And the cauterization is made according to the previous description, and if you wish, then make your cauterization by puncturing with the cautery called "the dot" whose image has been previously described, and the dots range from thirty dots or thereabouts.
ثمّ تعالجه بما تقدّم ذكره حتّى يبرأ، وقد تصنع مكواة ذات ثلاث شعب على هذه الصورة ويستعجل بها الكىّ لأنّك تكوى بها فى مرّة واحدة ثلاث كيّات، وهذه صورة المكواة.	Then treat it with what has been previously mentioned until it recovers, for you can make a cauterization instrument with three branches according to this image and the physician will hasten it because you can perform three cauterizations at one time, and this is the image of the cauterization instrument.
الفصل الخامس والعشرون.	The twenty-fifth chapter.
فى كىّ الابط.	On treating hemorrhoids.
اذا انخلع رأس العضد بسبب رطوبات مزلّقة او لم يثبت فى حين ردّه عن تخلّعه حتّى يصير له ذلك عادة تردّ ثمّ ينخلع عند أدنى حركة تعرض كما شاهدناه فينبغى أن يردّ الفكّ اوّلا.	If the head of the shoulder becomes dislocated due to loose humors or it does not stabilize when it is reduced from its dislocation, until it becomes a habit for it to dislocate and then dislocates with the slightest movement, as we have seen in the case of Nabgha, then the jaw should be reduced first.
ثمّ يستلقى العليل على ظهره او على الجانب الصحيح ثمّ ترفع الجلد الذى فى داخل الابط الى فوق بأصابع من يدك اليسرى إن كان المفصل انخلع الى داخل.	Then the patient lies on his back or on his right side, then the skin that is inside the anus is lifted upwards with the fingers of your left hand if the joint has dislocated to the inside.
ثمّ تحمى المكواة ذات السفّودين التى هذه صورتها.	Then heat the cautery instrument with two points, whose image is as follows.
ثمّ تكوى بها الجلد حتّى تنفذها الى الجانب الآخر ويأتى شكل الكىّ أربع كيّات، وقد يكوى بمكواة ذات ثلاث سفافيد فيكون شكل الكىّ حينئذ ستّ كيّات وتكون السفافيد على رقّة المورد.	Then cauterize the skin until it penetrates to the other side and the shape of the cauterization becomes four punctures, or you can cauterize with a cautery instrument with three points and its shape will be six punctures, and the points are on the tenderness of the myrtle.
وهذه صورة المكواة ذات الثلاث سفافيد.	This is an illustration of the suture with three threads.
وقد يزاد على هذا العدد واحدة فتكون الكيّات ثمانيا، ثمّ تحمل على الكّى الكرّات المدقوق مع الملح ثمّ تلزم العليل الدعة ولا يحرّك العضو زمانا حتّى يقوى، وإن كان الخلع الى فوق وقلّما يكون ذلك.	And sometimes one more thread is added, making the threads eight, then these are carried on curved needles with thread, and the suture is tightened just enough, and not moved until it heals. If the wound is in a place that moves a lot, this may not be sufficient.
فاكوه فوق المنكب كيّة واحدة مسماريّة جيّدة او كيّات كثيرة تنقيطا فإنّ المفصل يشتدّ وتذهب الرطوبة ويبرأ العليل.	A single new thread is placed above the mukab, or several threads are punctured, then the joint becomes strong and the moisture disappears and the wound heals.
الفصل السادس والعشرون.	The twenty-sixth section.
فى كىّ المعدة.	Suture of the stomach.
اذا حدث فى المعدة برد ورطوبات كثيرة حتّى أخرجها عن مزاجها وكثرت النزلات اليها وعولجت بصنوف العلاج فلم ينجع فينبغى أن يستلقى العليل على ظهره ويمدّ ساقيه ويديه ثمّ تكويه ثلاث كيّات.	If there is a wound in the stomach with much heat and many moistures, so that it extrudes from its location, and many evacuations come to it, and it is treated with various treatments, but does not improve, then it is necessary for him to lie on his back and stretch out his legs and hands, then three sutures are applied.
كيّة تحت ملعقة الصدر بقدر أصبع بمكواة مسماريّة وكيّتين أسفل عن جنبتى الكيّة الواحدة حتّى يأتى شكل الكيّات مثلّثا وأبعد بينهما لئلّا تجتمع اذا تقيّحت ويكون عمق الكّى قدر ثلثى ثخن الجلد ويكون شكل الكيّات.	A suture is placed below the clavicle to the size of a finger, with a thread, and two sutures are placed below the first suture, so that the shape of the sutures comes out triangularly, and they are far from each other, unless they meet when tightened, and the depth of the suture is one third the thickness of the skin, and the shape of the sutures.
على هذه الصورة وعلى هذا القدر بلا مزيد.	According to this illustration and to this size without addition.
وإن شئت كويته كيّة واحدة كبيرة فى وسط المعدة على هذه الصورة.	And if you want, one large suture is applied in the middle of the stomach according to this illustration.
وتكون المكواة التى تكوى بها هذه الكيّة الواحدة على شكل دائرة على هذه الصورة.	And the thread with which this single suture is applied will be in a circular shape according to this illustration.
وقد تكوى المعدة تنقيطا لمن جزع من هذا الكىّ وهو أن تعلّم على المعدة نقطا على القدر الذى تريد بالمداد ثمّ تكويه بمكواة نقطيّة ثمّ تعالجه بالعلاج الذى تقدّم حتّى يبرأ،.	And the stomach may be sutured with punctures, that is, you mark on the stomach points to the size that you want by pricking, then you apply a puncturing thread, then you treat it with the aforementioned treatment until it heals.
الفصل السابع والعشرون.	The Seventh and Twentieth Operation
فى كىّ الكبد الباردة.	On excising the cold abscess of the liver.
اذا عرض من الكبد وجع عن برودة ورطوبة او عن ريح غليلة حتّى خرجت من مزاجها الطبيعى خروجا مفرطا وعولج العليل بما ذكرنا فى التقسيم فلم ينجع ذلك.	If a liver shows up with cold and hardness or due to fetid bile, until it comes out of its natural passages in excessive discharge, and the disease is treated with what we mentioned in the sectioning, but that does not work.
فينبغى أن يستلقى العليل على قفاه وتعلّم بالمداد ثلاث كيّات على هذا الشكل وهذا المقدار بعينه على الكبد أسفل من الشراسيف حيث ينتهى مرفق الإنسان.	Therefore, it is necessary that the patient lies on his back and is given a poultice for three days, of this shape and size specifically for the liver below the ribs where the human arm ends.
ويكون بعد كلّ كيّة وكيّة على غلظ الأصبع ويكون الكىّ على طول البدن مستقيما ولا تزمّ يدك بالمكواة نعمّا.	And after each poultice, the poultice is replaced with a new one on the thickness of the plaster, and the poultice stays straight along the abdomen, and do not press your hand on the poultice either from above or below.
وليكن قدر ما تحرق من ثخن الجلد قدر نصفه لا مزيد، ويكون العليل قائما على قدميه فإن لم يكن قائما فيكون مضطجعا قد مدّ ساقيه ورفع ذراعيه، وهذه صورة المكواة.	And the amount that is burned from the thickness of the skin should be half of it, not more, and the patient should be standing on his feet, if he is not standing then he should be lying with his legs stretched out and his arms raised, and this is the image of the poultice.
وقد يمكنك أن تكوى هذه الكيّات بالمكواة السكّينيّة اذا كان معك رفق وحذق بالصناعة وتحفّظ لئلّا تمعن فى الكىّ فتحرق الجلد كلّه فتحرق البطن وتصل الى الأمعاء فإنّ الجلد هناك رقيق فاعلمه.	And you can apply these poultices with the Sakkiniyyah plaster if you have a helper and artisan who is skilled in the craft and preserves some of it, for if you put too much on the poultice, it will burn all the skin, then burn the abdomen and reach the intestines, because the skin there is thin, so treat it gently.
الفصل الثامن والعشرون.	The Eighth and Twentieth Operation
فى بطّ ورم الكبد بالكىّ.	On applying a poultice to the liver for inflammation.
اذا عرض فى الكبد خراج وأردت أن تعلم إن كان ذلك الورم فى لحم الكبد او فى صفاقه فإنّه إن كان فى لحم الكبد فإنّه يجد العليل ثقلا ووجعا بغير حدّة.	If there appears in the liver a tumor and you want to apply a poultice, know that if it is in the flesh of the liver or in its peritoneum, then if it is in the flesh of the liver, the patient will feel heaviness and discomfort without limit.
وإن كان فى صفاق الكبد كان مع الوجع حدّة شديدة ورأيت أنّه قد أعيا الأطبّاء علاجه فينبغى أن يستلقى العليل على قفاه ثمّ تعلّم على الموضع الوارم بالمداد.	And if it is in the peritoneum of the liver, there will be severe pain with the discomfort, and you have seen that the doctors are unable to treat it, therefore it is necessary that the patient lies on his back, then a poultice is applied on the inflamed area with the plaster.
ثمّ تحمى المكواة فى النار وهى المكواة التى تشبه الميل وهذه صورتها.	The cauterization is performed on the wound while it is hot and the cauterization that resembles a probe and this is its image.
وتكويه بها كيّة واحدة حتّى تحرق الجلد كلّه وتنتهى بالكىّ الى الصفاق حتّى تخرج المدّة كلّها ثمّ تعالجه بعلاج الخراجات حتّى يبرأ.	And it is cauterized with a single cauterization until the entire tumor is burned and the cauterization is raised to the peritoneum until the entire mass comes out, then it is treated with medications for abscesses until it heals.
وهذا النوع من الكىّ لا ينبغى أن يستعمله إلّا من طالت دربته فى صناعة الطبّ وجرت على يديه هذه الامراض بالتجربة مرارا فحينئذ يقدم على مثل هذا العمل وتركه عندى أفضل.	And this type of cauterization should not be used except by one whose experience has been lengthy in the art of medicine and who has performed these operations on his hands through experimentation many times, so that he is skilled in such a work and leaves it to no one else.
الفصل التاسع والعشرون.	The 29th chapter.
فى كىّ الشوصة.	On the cauterization of the eschar.
ذكرت الاوائل الكىّ بأصول الزراوند للشوصة الباردة على هذه الصفة وهوأن تأخذ من أصول الزراوند اليابس الطويل أصلا واحدا أطول ما تجد منه ويكون كغلظ الأصبع ثمّ تغمسه فى الزيت وتقده فى النار.	The ancients mentioned cauterization with the roots of aloe for cold eschars, which is that you take from the roots of long-stemmed aloe one root as thick as an reed and as long as you can find, then soak it in oil and burn it in the fire.
ثمّ تكويه كيّة واحدة فيما بين اتّصال الترقوة بالعنق وكيّتين صغيرتين دون الاوداج قليلا مائلة الى الناحية التى تحت اللحية وكيّتين عظيمتين فوق الثديين فيما بين الضلع الثالث والرابع.	Then cauterize once in the area between where the trachea meets the neck, and two small cauterizations below the ears slightly angled towards the side under the jaw, and two large cauterizations above the breasts between the third and fourth ribs.
وكيّتين ايضا فيما بين الضلع الخامس والسادس مائلة الى خلف قليلا وكيّة أخرى وسط الصدر وأخرى فوق المعدة وثلاث كيّات من خلف واحدة فيما بين الكتفين واثنتين عن جنبى الصلب أسفل من الكىّ الذى يكون فيما بين الكفين.	And two cauterizations also between the fifth and sixth ribs, angled slightly towards the back, and one cauterization in the middle of the chest and another above the stomach and three cauterizations from behind, one after another, between the shoulders, and two beside the clavicle below the cauterization that is between the hands.
ولا ينبغى أن تعمق يدك بالكىّ بل يكون فى ظاهر الجلد تشميما، وقد ذكر بعض الاوائل أنّ من الناس من كان يستعمل مكواة من حديد شبه الميل فيحميها ويدخلها فيما بين الاضلاع حتّى ينتهى بها الى نفس الورم.	And it is not proper that your hand be deep with the cauterization, but rather it should be on the surface of the tumor, a small pinpoint. Some of the ancients mentioned that some people used to use an iron instrument resembling a probe, and would heat it and insert it between the tissues until he reached the actual tumor with it.
ويخرج المدّة كما ذكرنا فى ورم الكبد، وفى هذا البطّ بالكىّ من الغرر إمّا أن يموت العليل من ساعته وإمّا أن يعرض فى الموضع ناصورٌ لا برء له.	The abscess comes out as we mentioned in the case of liver inflammation, and in this incision of the spleen, either the patient dies from its blow or a nodule forms at the site with no scar.
الفصل الثلاثون.	The Twenty-Ninth Chapter.
فىكىّ الطحال.	Incision of the spleen.
اذا عالجت مرض الطحال بما ذكرنا من العلاج فى التقسيم فلم ينجع علاجك فالكىّ فيه على ثلاثة أوجه كلّها صواب أحدها أن تكويها ثلاث كيّات اوأربع مصطفّة على طول الطحال.	If you have treated the spleen's disease with what we mentioned in terms of treatment in cauterization and your treatment did not work, then make an incision in it in three ways all of which are correct, one of them is that you make three or four cauterizations aligned along the length of the spleen.
على شكل كيّات الكبد التى تقدّم شكلها ويكون بين كلّ كيّة وكيّة قدر غلظ الأصبع او أكثر قليلا وتكون صفة المكواة الصفة التى ذكرنا فى كىّ الكبد سواء ولا تعمق يدك بالكىّ وصورة العليل ملقى على ظهره.	In the shape of liver cauterizations, which we previously described its shape, and it is between each cauterization and another a distance of about the thickness of the reed or slightly more, and the quality of the cauterization is the quality that we mentioned in the cauterization of the liver, and do not deepen your hand in the incision, and the image of the spleen is thrown on its back.
والوجه الآخر فى المرفق وترفع الجلدة التى قبالة الطحال حيث تنتهى مرفق العليل المرفق وترفع الجلدة التى قبالة الطحال حيث تنتهى مرفق العليل اليسرى ويكون رفعك الجلد على عرض البدن لتقع الكيّات على طول البدن.	And the other aspect is in the arm and lifting the skin that faces the spleen where the arm of the left side ends, and lifting the skin that faces the spleen where the arm of the left side ends, and your lifting of the skin should be on the width of the abdomen so that the cauterizations fall along the length of the abdomen.
ثمّ تدخل السفّودين محميّة جدّا حتّى تنفذ بهما الجلد من الناحية الأخرى ثمّ تخرج المكواة فتكون الكيّات أربعا، وإن شئت أن تكوى بالمكواة الأخرى ذات الثلاثة سفافيد.	Then you insert the two needles very carefully until they penetrate the skin from the other side, then you withdraw the cauterization and it will be four cauterizations, and if you wish, you can cauterize with another cauterization that has three needles.
ثمّ تعالج موضع الكىّ بعد أن تتركه يمدّ القيح أيّاما كثيرة فهو أنجع من سائر ما تقدّم من العلاج.	Then you treat the site of the cauterization after letting it suppurate, either with a poultice or a dressing, and it is more effective than all the previous treatments.
الفصل الحادى والثلاثون.	The Twenty-Ninth Chapter.
فى كىّ الاستسقاء.	Incision of the Dropsy.
الكىّ إنّما ينفع فى الاستسقاء الزقّىّ خاصّة، اذا عالجت المستسقى بضروب العلاج الذى ذكرنا فى التقسيم فلم ينجع علاجك فينبغى أن تكويه أربع كيّات حول السرّة وكيّة واحدة على المعدة.	Cauterization, it is effective in the case of ascites, specifically, if you have treated the patient with dropsy using the treatments we mentioned in cauterization and your treatment did not work, then it is necessary that you make four cauterizations around the navel and one on the abdomen.
وكيّة أخرى على الكبد وكيّة على الطحال وكيّتين وراء ظهره بين الخرزات واحدة قبالة صدره وأخرى قبالة معدته، ويكون قدر عمق الكىّ قريبا من ثخن الجلد، ثمّ تترك الكىّ مفتوحا يمدّ القيح زمانا طويلا.	Another suture on the liver and a suture on the spleen and two sutures behind his back between the ribs, one opposite his chest and the other opposite his abdomen, and the size of the suture is close to the thickness of the skin, then the suture is left open to discharge pus for a long time.
ولا تخل العليل من العلاج بعد الكىّ بما ينبغى لتجمع له المعنيين فيسرع اليه البرء، وصورة المكواة التى يكوى بها الظهر تكون مسماريّة على ما تقدّمت صورتها والتى يكوى بها الظهر تكون زيتونيّة.	Do not neglect the after-treatment of the patient after the suture with what is necessary to bring together the injured parts in the fastest way, and the shape of the plaster that is applied on the back becomes musary on what has been previously described, and the one that is applied on the back becomes zaituni.
الفصل الثانى والثلاثون.	The 32nd chapter.
فى كىّ القدمين والساقين.	On the suture of the feet and the legs.
اذا تورمتا فى المستسقى وامتلأتا ماء أصفر فينبغى أن يكوى على ظهر القدم فى النقرة التى بين الخنصر والبنصر.	If they become swollen in the ankles and filled with yellow water, it is necessary to apply a plaster on the back of the foot in the hollow between the talus and the cuboid.
وأقم يدك بالمكواة ولا تعوّجها ثمّ ارفع يدك ولا تعيدها البتّة فإنّه يرشح الماء الأصفر وتكون المكواة على هذه الصورة.	And apply your hand with the plaster and do not shape it, then lift your hand and do not bend it at all, for it will drain the yellow water and the plaster will be in this shape.
ثمّ تكوى على الساقين كيّتين كيّتين فى كلّ ساق ويكون الكىّ بالطرف السكّينّى من المكواة ويكون الكىّ على طول الساق واحدة تحت الركبة وأخرى أسفل منها نحو وسط الساق وعلى كلّ فخذ كيّتين كيّتين.	Then two sutures are applied on the legs, two sutures on each leg, and the suture is at the edge of the plaster, and the suture is along the length of the leg, one below the knee and another below that towards the middle of the leg, and on each thigh two sutures.
واترك الكىّ مفتوحا بغير علاج زمانا طويلا يرشح منه الماء ثمّ تعالجه بسائر ما ذكرنا.	And leave the suture open without treatment for a long time, so that water drains from it, then treat it with some of what we have mentioned.
الفصل الثالث والثلاثون.	The 33rd chapter.
فى كىّ الإسهال.	On the suture of the testicles.
اذا كان الاسهال من برد ورطوبات حتّى اضعف القوى الماسكة والهاضمة التى فى المعدة والمعاء وعولج ذلك بضروب العلاج ولم يبرأ ورأيت العليل محتملا للكىّ وافر القوّة فاكوه كيّة كبيرة على معدته.	If the testicle is due to cold and congestion, such that the retaining power is weakened and the haemorrhoid in the stomach and anus, and this is treated with enemas and does not heal, and I saw the patient needing a suture and having much strength, so I applied a large suture on his abdomen.
على ما تقدّم فى كىّ المعدة بمكواة الدائرة وأربع كيّات حول السرّة لطاف بالمكواة المسماريّة اللطيفة وكيّة على القطن فوق العصعص كبيرة او كيّتين.	As previously mentioned in the section on excising the intestine with a circle of sutures and four knots around the navel, there are delicate intestinal sutures, and a suture above the large bowel or two small ones.
فإن رأيت الرطوبات وافرة والعليل محتملا لذلك فاكوه كيّة على العانة وكيّة على كل خاصرة وربّما زدت كيّتين صغيرتين على المعدة بقرب الكبيرة فإنّه علاج منجح لا يخطأ نفعه إن شاء اللّه.	For if you see the sutures are too many and the intestines are restricted, then make a suture on the groin and a suture on each flank and sometimes add two small ones on the intestine near the large one, for it is a successful treatment that does not fail in its benefit, God willing.
الفصل الرابع والثلاثون.	The thirty-fourth chapter.
فى كىّ بواسير المقعدة.	On excising the rectal prolapse.
اذا كان فى المقعدة بواسير مزمنة كثيرة او واحدة وكانت من أخلاط غليظة باردة او رطوبات فاسدة وعولجت بما ذكرنا فى التقسيم فلم ينجع العلاج فاكو العليل ثلاث كيّات على أسفل خرز الظهر تحت المائدة قليلا مثلّثة.	If there is a chronic rectal prolapse in the anus, either many or one, and it is from thick, cold, bilious humors or hard, dry sutures, and it has been treated with what we mentioned in the section, but the treatment did not work, then make three sutures at the bottom of the spine under the buttocks, a little triangular.
وكيّة تحت السرّة بمثل أصبعين وإن قدّرت أنّ معدته قد بردت وطعامه لا ينهضم ورايت وجهه متورّما فاكوه على المعدة كيّة كبيرة على ما تقدّم وكيّة على كبده.	And make a suture under the navel like two fingers, and if you suspect that his intestine has cooled and his bowel does not retain, and his face is troubled, then make on the intestine a large suture as previously mentioned, and a suture on his liver.
وأخرى على طحاله بمكواة مسماريّة واترك الكىّ مفتوحا زمانا ثمّ عالجه حتّى يبرأ إن شاء الله.	And another on his spleen with a delicate intestinal suture, and leave the sutures open for a while, then treat him until he recovers, God willing.
الفصل الخامس والثلاثون.	The thirty-fifth chapter.
فى كىّ الثآليل.	On excising the tonsils.
بعد قطعها اذا قطعت الثؤلول فاحم المكواة التى تشبه الميل ثمّ أدخلها حامية فى نفس الثؤلول المقطوع وامعن يدك حتّى تصل المكواة الى فم العرق الذى تسيل منه الدماء تفعل ذلك مرّة او مرّتين.	After cutting them, if the tonsils are cut, then take a suture that resembles a probe, and insert it gently into the same cut tonsil, and hold your hand until the suture reaches the mouth of the vein from which the blood flows, do this once or twice.
فإن كانت الثآليل كثيرة فاكو كلّ واحد كيّة على ما وصفنا ثمّ عالجها بما يوافقها من المراهم حتّى تبرأ، وإن كويته كيّة ايضا كبيرة على القطن كان أبلغ فى النفع.	For if the tonsils are many, then make each one a suture as we described, and treat them with ointments that suit them until they recover. And if you make a large suture on the navel, it is more beneficial in the treatment.
الفصل السادس والثلاثون.	The Twenty Sixth and Thirty Sixth Operation.
فى كىّ الناصور الذى يكون فى المقعدة ونواحيها.	On the excision of the tonsil which is in the fauces and its surroundings.
اذا لم يجب العليل الى الشقّ والعمل الذى وصفنا فى موضعه وجبن عن ذلك فربّما برئ بالكىّ فإذا حدث بأحد ناصور وأزمن جرى القيح منه والرطوبات الفاسدة فأوّل ما ينبغى لك أن تقيسه بمسبار رقيق.	If the patient did not respond to the incision and the operation that we described in its proper place, we will leave that aside, for sometimes the cure occurs by excising the tonsil, so if an infection occurred in one of the tonsils and a foul discharge flowed from it along with putrid matter.
ثمّ اعرف قدر غوره بالمسبار ثمّ احم المكواة التى تشبه الميل ثم أدخلها حامية فى نفس الناصور على استقامة غور الناصور والقدر الذى دخل فيه المسبار وأعد عليه الكىّ حتّى تحترق تلك الأجسام الفاسدة كلّها مّرة او مرّتين او ثلاثا على قدر حاجتك.	Then feel the size of its cavity with the scalpel, then take a cautery iron that resembles a spatula, and insert it gently into the tonsil in the direction of the depth of the tonsil and the place where the scalpel entered, and apply the cautery until those putrid bodies are completely cauterized once, twice or thrice according to your need.
وتحفّظ من حرق عصب إن كان هناك او عرق عظيم وإن كان الناصور يفضى الى جرم المثانة او الى جرم المعاء.	And beware of cauterizing a nerve if it is there, or a large blood vessel, and if the tonsil extends to the carotid artery or to the jugular vein.
فتحفّظ من هذه المواضع كلّها، وإنّما تفعل ذلك اذا كان الناصور فى موضع لحمّى وقدّرت أنّه غير منفوذ، ثمّ عالج الموضع حتّى يبرأ، فإن انختم الموضع وانقطع عنه الموادّ وبقى كذلك زمانا فاعلم أنّه قد برئ على الكمال.	So beware of all these places, and you only do that if the tonsil is in a position of fleshy tissue and you think it is not perforated, then treat the place until it heals, for if the place became closed and the discharges stopped coming from it and it remained so for some time, then know that it has healed completely.
وإن لم ينقطع عنه الموادّ فاعلم أنّه منفوذ او فى غوره عظم فاسد او نحو ذلك ممّا يأتى ذكره فى موضعه.	And if the discharges did not stop coming from it, then know that it is perforated or that there is a foul corrupted bone in its cavity or something similar that will be mentioned in its proper place.
الفصل السابع والثلاثون.	The Twenty Seventh and Thirty Seventh Operation.
فى كىّ الكلى.	On the excision of the tonsils is not correct translation, here is the correct one
اذا حدث فى الكلى وجع عن برد او ريح غليظة ونقص لذلك جماع العليل فينبغى أن تكويه على المتنين على نفس الكلى كيّة على كلّ كلية بالمكواة المسماريّة التى تقدّم ذكرها وربّما كويناه ثالثة فى نفس المائدة فتأتى ثلاث كيّات مصطفّة فيكون أبلغ فى النفع.	If an infection occurred in the tonsil and it became hard like a stone or there was a thick foul discharge and a decrease in the movement of the uvula, it is proper to cauterize it with the same cautery iron that we previously mentioned, one cauterization on each tonsil, and sometimes a third cauterization is performed on the same pillar, so three cauterizations are applied successively.
الفصل الثامن والثلاثون.	Chapter on Suturing and Trephining
فى كىّ المثانة.	On the suture of the eyelid.
اذا حدث فى المثانة ضعف واسترخاء عن برد ورطوبات حتّى لا يمسك العليل البول فاكوه كيّة فى أسفل السرّة على المثانة حيث يبتدئ شعر العانة وكيّة عن يمين السرّة وأخرى عن شماله.	If there is weakness and relaxation in the eyelid due to cold or ulcers, so that the eyelash does not hold the eyelid, then perform a suture at the bottom of the eyebrow on the eyelid where the hair of the eyebrow starts, and another on the right side of the eyebrow and one on the left.
ويكون بعد الكىّ من كلّ جانب على قدر عقد الإبهام وتكويه كيّة فى أسفل الظهر او كيّتين إن احتجت الى ذلك وتكون المكواة مسماريّة على ما تقدّم.	And it should be after the suture on each side, according to the size of the knot of the thumb, and a suture at the bottom of the back or two sutures if needed, and the bandage should be tight as mentioned before.
الفصل التاسع والثلاثون.	Chapter Nine and Thirty.
فى كىّ الرحم.	On the suture of the womb.
اذا حدث فى الرحم مادّة من برد ورطوبات فامتنعت بذلك عن الحبل وفسد طثمها وتعذّر دروره او حدث لها عند مجيئه وجع فينبغى أن تكوى ثلاث كيّات حول السرّة كما ذكرنا فى كىّ المثانة.	If there occurred in the womb a mass due to cold or ulcers, so that it separated from the placenta and its ligaments became loose and its movement became difficult, then when it is extracted, perform for it three sutures around the navel, as we mentioned in the suture of the eyelid.
وكيّة على القطن أسفل الظهر او كيّتين وتكون المكواة مسماريّة.	And a suture on the navel below the back or two sutures, and the bandage should be tight.
الفصل الأربعون.	Chapter Forty.
فىكىّ تخلّع الورك.	On the suture of the hernia.
قد تنصّب رطوبات مخاطئة الى حقّ الورك فتكون سببا لخروجه عن موضعه وعلامته أن تطول الساق على الأخرى اذا قست بعضها الى بعض وتجد موضع الخلع فيه فراغ فينبغى أن تكوى العليل على حقّ الورك نفسه كيّة شبه الدائرة.	Sometimes a mucous ulcer forms on the right side of the hernia, which is the reason for its protrusion from its place, and its sign is that when one leg is placed over the other, if they are pressed against each other, and it finds the place of the hernia empty. It is necessary to perform a suture on the right side of the hernia itself, a circular-like suture.
بعد أن تعلّم بالمداد حول الحقّ كما يدور ليقع نفس الحقّ فى وسط الدائرة وتكون المكواة التى تقدّم صورتها فى كىّ المعدة فإن لم تحضرك هذه المكواة فاكوه ثلاث كيّات بالمكواة الزيتونيّة الكبيرة.	After the suture is performed with the thread around the hernia, as it goes around to place the hernia in the middle of the circle, and the bandage should be like the one described before in the suture of the intestine. If this bandage does not suffice you, then perform three sutures with a large olive oil bandage.
وصيّر للكىّ عمقا على قدر ثخن الجلد كلّه ثمّ عالجه حتّى يبرأ إن شاء الله.	Make an incision on the eyelid according to the thickness of the whole eyelid, then dress it until it heals, God willing.
الفصل الحادى والأربعون.	Surgical instruments and equipment.
فى كىّ عرق النسا.	On the surgical procedure for a varicose vein in the leg or on a surgical operation for varices.
اذا حدث وجع فى حقّ الورك وكان سبب ذلك برد ورطوبات وعالجت العليل بما ذكرنا فى التقسيم ولم ينجع العلاج وأزمن ذلك فينبغى أن يسهل العليل من الأخلاط الغليظة بحبّ المنتن او حبّ الصبّارى ونحوه.	If a tumor occurs in the groin and is caused by cold and rheumatism, and the aforementioned treatments for tumors do not work, it is advisable to alleviate the condition with laxatives such as metonylion or soapwort and similar.
ثمّ اكوه ووجه الكىّ فيه على ضربين إمّا كىّ بالأدوية المحرقة وإمّا كىّ بالنار والكىّ بالنار يكون على وجوه كثيرة أحدها أن تكوى على حقّ الورك نفسه ثلاث كيّات مثلّثة على هذه الصورة.	Then cauterize it and apply the cautery in two ways, either with cauterization by medicines or by fire, and the cauterization by fire is done in several ways, one of which is to apply three triangular cauterizations on the tumor itself.
وتصير لها عمقا صالحا ويكون بعد ما بين كلّ كيّة وكيّة على قدر غلظ الأصبع وتكون المكواة زيتونيّة وقد يكوى كيّة فى الوسط على رأس الورك نفسه فتكون اربع كيّات وإن شئت فاكوه بالدائرة التى تقدّم ذكرها فى كىّ تخلّع الورك كيّة واحدة.	And make for it a suitable incision and let there be between each cauterization and the next, an interval of the thickness of a bowstring, and the cauterization is with olive oil, or one can apply a cauterization in the middle on the top of the tumor itself, thus making four cauterizations, or if you wish, you can cauterize with the aforementioned method for the operation for the varicose vein, only one cauterization.
لتكون الدائرة تحيط بجميع الورك وتحرق ثخن الجلد كلّه، هذه صفة الكىّ فى عرق النسا اذا كان الوجع لازما للورك نفسه ولم يكن يمتدّ الى الفخذ والساق.	The circle should encircle the entire tumor and burn through the thickness of the skin, this is the description of the cauterization for varicose veins if the tumor adheres to the tumor itself and does not extend to the thigh and leg.
فإن امتدّ الى الفخذ والساق فاكوه كيّتين على الفخذ على الموضع الذى يشير عليك العليل بالوجع فيه وكيّة فوق العرقوب بأربع أصابع الى الجهة الوحشيّة قليلا وتكون المكواة سكّينيّة ويكون عمق الكيّة على قدر ثخن الجلد فقط.	For if it extends to the thigh and leg, then cauterize two cauterizations on the thigh at the place where the tumor indicates by the pain, and one cauterization above the varicose vein, four fingers towards the outer side, slightly, and the cauterization is with vinegar, and let the incision be only as thick as the skin.
وإن أشار الى أن الوجع يمتدّ الى نحو اصابع الرجل فاكوه حيث أشار عليك بمكواة النقطة ثلاثا او اربعا او أكثر إن احتاج الى ذلك، وإن أشار بالوجع تحت الركبة نحو الساق فاكوه هناك كيّة واحدة سكّينيّة.	And if it indicates that the tumor extends towards the toes of the foot, then cauterize where it indicates to you with a dot-shaped cauterization, three or four times, or more if needed. And if it indicates pain under the knee towards the leg, then cauterize there once with vinegar.
وتحفّظ فى جميع كيّك من أن تبلغ بالكىّ الى أن تحرق عصبا او شريانا عظيما فتحدث بذلك على العليل آفة رديئة او زمانة.	Be careful in all your operations so as not to reach with the cauterization iron until you burn a large nerve or a big blood vessel, thus causing by this an old or recent affliction on the patient.
وقد شاهدت واحدا وثانيا ممّن كوى فوق العرقوب وبولغ فى الكىّ فتزكّم الساق حتّى بلغ الزكام القدم وتثقّب كلّه وفسد جميع الرجل ثمّ حدث الاسهال والموت بعد ذلك، فإن كان الوجع فى الجهتين جميعا كويتهما على هذه الصفة بعينها.	And I have seen a single cauterization and a double one, where the cautery was applied above the ankle joint and with excess in the operation, so that the foot became charred until it reached the tibia, and all of it became mummified, then the entire leg became black and gangrenous, and afterwards, diarrhea and death occurred. If the cauterization is on both sides, both are treated in the same manner.
وقد ذكر بعض العلماء من الحكماء فى كىّ الورك كيّا هذه صفته يصنع شبه القدح من حديد ويكون قطره نصف شبر ويكون عند فمه على غلظ نواة التمر او اقلّ قليلا وفى داخل ذلك القدح قدح آخر وقدح ثالث.	And some of the wise men of medicine have mentioned in their book on surgery, a cautery iron of this description: it is made from a rod of iron and its diameter is half a finger, and at its mouth it is as thick as a date stone or slightly thinner, and inside that rod there are two or three holes.
ويكون بعد ما بين كلّ قدحين بقدر عقد الإبهام ويكون الأقداح مفتوحة من الجهتين ويكون ارتفاعها نحو عقد او عقدين وتتّخذ لها مقبضا من حديد قد أحكم فى الأقداح وهذه صورته.	And it is made after that, with the space between each of the holes being about the size of a thumb, and the holes are open on both sides, and their height is about one or two finger joints, and an iron handle is attached to them, which is fixed into the holes, and this is its shape.
ثمّ تحمى فى النار حتّى تحمرّ وترمى الشرر ثمّ توضع على حقّ الورك والعليل متّكئ على الجانب الصحيح فتكويه ثلاث كيّات مستديرة فى مرّة واحدة ثمّ تتركه ثلاثة أيّام وتضمّده بالسمن وتترك الجرح مفتوحا أيّاما.	Then it is heated in the fire until it becomes red and stops sparkling, then it is applied to the right of the scrotum and the patient lies on his right side, so that it cauterizes three times successively at once, then it is left for three days, and dressed with fat, and the wound is left open for several days.
كثيرة ثمّ تعالجه بالمرهم حتّى يبرأ، قال واضع هذا الكتاب هذا النوع من الكىّ قلّما استعملناه لشناعته وهول منظره ولقلّة من نجد ممّن يصبر عليه الّا أنّه من جيّد الكىّ لمن صبر عليه وأصيب به موضعه.	A poultice is then applied to it, until it heals. The author of this book said: I have rarely used this type of cauterization due to its severity and frightening appearance, and few are those who can tolerate it, except that it is one of the best cauterizations for those who can endure it and are suitable for it.
وأمّا الكىّ بالأدوية المحرقة فهو أن تصنع قدحين شبه الحلق التى ينزل فيها رتاجالباب مننحاس او من حديد.	As for cauterization with burnt medication, it is that two cautery irons are made, similar to the awl, into which a wick of cotton or flax is inserted, or made from iron.
يكون فى حاشيتهما ارتفاع قدر عقدين او نحوهما ويكون بعد ما بينهما قدر غلظ الأصبع وتكون مفتوحة الأسفل مفتوحة الأعلى ويكون قد مسكت بعضها ببعض على هذه الصورة.	There is an elevation in its margin of about two carpal bones or so, and after that between them there is a quantity of dense wrist tendons, the lower part being open and the upper part being open. Some of these are intertwined with each other in this way.
ثمّ تنزلها على حقّ الورك والعليل مضطجع على جنبه الصحيح وتزمّ يدك نعما ثمّ تصبّ بين الدائرتين من الماء الحادّ وهو مدفأ بالنارقليلا وتمسكه قدر ساعة رمليّة ويصبر العليل على لذعه وحرقته فإنّه يجد لذعا كالنار.	Then you should lower it to the side of the scapula and elbow, lying on his right side, and press your hand strongly, then pour between the two rings from the sharp water, which is warmed with the narqila, and he warms it for about an hour of the sand clock, and the patient bears its heat, and if he feels a heat like the heat of the fire.
حتّى يهدأ اللذع ثمّ ترفع يدك بالآلة وتمسح الماء الحادّ عن الورك كلّه بالماء العذب ثمّ تتركه ثلاثة أيّام وتحمل عليه السمن حتّى يذهب سواد الحرق وتتركه أيّاما يجرى منه القيح فإنّه أبلغ فى النفع.	Until the heat is alleviated, then you lift your hand with the scalpel and wipe the sharp water from the scapula entirely with the sweet water, then you leave it for three days and apply fat to it until the blackness of the burning goes away, and you leave it for some days during which the pus comes out, for it is more beneficial in treatment.
ثمّ تعالجه بالمراهم حتّى يبرأ، فإن امتدّ الوجع الى الفخذ او الساق صنعت له قالبا فيما يمسك الماء على حسب ما صنعت بالورك سواء، وهذه صفة الماء الحادّ وقد أثبتّه فى مقالة إصلاح الأدوية.	Then you treat it with ointments until it heals, for if the injury extends to the thigh or leg, you make for him a poultice that retains water according to what you did on the scapula, and this is the description of the sharp water, which he discussed in his chapter on the reform of medicines.
تأخذ من ملح القلى ومن الجير غير مطفأ من كلّ واحد جزءا فتسحقهما وتضعهما فى قدر جديدة قد ثقبت أسفلها ثقبة واحدة صغيرة على قدر ما يدخلها المرود وتضع تحت قاع القدر قدرا أخرى مزجّجة.	You take a portion of the salt of the clay and a portion of unburnt talc, from each one a part, then you crush them and put them in a new pot that has been perforated at its bottom with one small hole according to what the morrow will enter, and you put under the bottom of the pot another perforated pot.
وتلقى على القلى والجير من الماء العذب ما يغمرهما بأصبع بعد أن تزمّهما بيدك زمّا جيّدا وتترك القدر حتّى ينزل الماء الحادّ فى أسفل القدر المزحّجة ثمّ تجمع ذلك الماء كلّه ثمّ تلقيه على جير آخر وقلى آخر مجدّدين ايضا.	And you pour on the clay and talc sweet water to cover them with a cloth, after that you press them strongly with your hand, and you leave the pot until the sharp water descends into the bottom perforated pot, then you collect all that water, then you pour it again on other talc and other clay, both of which have also been pounded.
فإنّه يكون حينئذ قوىّ الحدّة جدّا يتصرّف فى كثير من أعمال الطبّ وفى كىّ سائر الأعضاء لأنّه يفعل فعل النار بعينها، ومن الأدوية ما يكوى بها الورك أيضا مثل الثافسيا وعسل البلاذر والجير مع الصابون ممروخين.	For then it becomes very sharp and performs many functions in medicine, and also cauterizes some of the organs because it acts like a hot needle with its tip, and among medications there are those that can cauterize with it such as thapsia and honey of buckthorn and soap with lye.
وزعم جالينوس حكاية عن رجل من القدماء علاجا لوجع الورك وعرق النسا وعظّم أمره جدّا وزعم أنّه لا يحتاج الى غيره من العلاج وأنّه يبرئ من مرّة واحدة.	Galienus told a story about an ancient man who treated the cauterization of varicocele and the arteries, and he considered it very important and claimed that he did not need anything else for treatment and that it cures with a single application.
حتّى أنّه ربّما أدخل الحمّام محمولا وخرج منه قد برئ وهو أن يوخذ من الشيطرج الأخضر فإن لم يوجد الأخضر فيؤخذ اليابس الحديث فينعم دقّه مع شىء من شحم ويوضع على الورك حيث الوجع او فى الساق او فى الفخذ.	Until he perhaps inserts the warm mutton fat, and exits being cured, or that the green plaster is taken, if the green is not found, then the fresh yelp is taken, its dough kneaded with a piece of grease, and applied on the varicocele where there's inflammation, or on the leg, or on the thigh.
وتشدّ وتترك قدر ثلاث ساعات او بقدر ما يحسّ العليل بسكون الحرقة ثمّ أدخله الحمّام فإذا ندى بدنه فأدخله الحوض فإنّ الوجع يذهب ويبرأ بإذن الله، فإن لم يبرأ فأعد عليه الضماد بعد عشرة أيّام مرّة أخرى.	And it is bound and left for about three hours or as long as the patient feels the warmth, then the warm mutton fat is applied to him, if his belly becomes moist, then the warm application is reapplied, for the varicocele disappears and cures with God's will, if it does not cure, then the poultice is reapplied after ten days once again.
فإنّه يبرأ إن شاء الله، واعلم أنّه لا ينبغى أن يستعمل أحد الكى بهذه الأدوية الّا بعد استفراغ البدن، وقد ذكر دياسقوريدس أنّ بعر الماعز اذا كوى به عرق النسا نفع منه.	For it cures, God willing, and know that it is not suitable for anyone to use these medications except after purging the body, and Dioscorides mentioned that the goat's hair, if cauterized with the artery of the women, has a benefit.
ويكون الكىّ على هذه الصفة، يؤخذ صوف فيشرب فى الزيت العتيق ويوضع على المكان العميق الذى فيما بين الإبهام من اليد وبين الزند وهو الى الزند أقرب ثمّ خذ بعرة ماعز جافّة.	And the cauterization will be of this type, taking a woolen fabric, dipped in old oil, and applied on the deep place that is between the thumb of the hand and the wrist, and it is closer to the wrist, then take a dry goat's hair.
فألهبها بالنار حتّى تصير جمرة ثمّ ضعها على الصوف واتركها حتّى تطفأ ثمّ خذ غيرها فلا تزال تفعل ذلك الى أن يصل الحسّ بتوسّط العضد الى الورك ويسكن الوجع بإذن اللّه وهذا الضرب من الكىّ يسمّى الكىّ البعرى.	So ignite it with fire until it becomes a burning coal, then put it on the woolen fabric and leave it until it extinguishes, then take another one and do not cease doing that until the sensation reaches the middle of the nerve to the varicocele and the inflammation subsides with God's will, and this type of cauterization is called the goat hair cauterization.
الفصل الثانى والأربعون.	The second and fourth operations.
فى كىّ وجع الظهر.	A cautery on the nape of the neck.
قد يعرض الوجع فى الظهر من أسباب كثيرة إمّا عن سقطة او ضربة او استفراغ مفرط ونحو ذلك ويكون من انصباب مادّة باردة رطبة والكىّ إنّما يقع فى هذا الصنف وحده.	The cautery on the nape of the neck may be indicated by many causes, either from a fall or a blow or excessive vomiting, and the like, and it becomes from an abundance of cold, moist material, and the cautery only occurs in this type.
الذى يكون من انصباب مادّة باردة فينبغى بعد استفراغ العليل بحبّ المنتن ونحوه أن يكوى على ظهره حيث الوجع ثلاثة صفوف على عرض المائدة نفسها بعد أن تعلّم الموضع بالمداد فى كلّ صفّ خمس كيّات او أكثر على قدر ما ترى من احتمال العليل وقوّته.	That which becomes from an abundance of cold, moist material, after vomiting the bilious phlegm and the like, it is hoped that he will be cauterized on his nape where the cautery would be in three rows along the width of the same maida, after the area has been prepared with a dressing, in each row five cauteries or more according to what is seen from the likelihood of the bilious phlegm and its strength.
ويكون الكىّ بمكواة النقطة وإن شئت كويته ثلاث كيّات او أربعا بمكواة مسماريّة متوسّطة على هذه الصورة.	And the cautery would be with one application of the point, and if you wish, apply it three or four times with a moderate cauterization in this form.
الفصل الثالث والأبعون.	The third and thirtieth operations.
فى كىّ ابتداء الحدبة.	A cautery at the beginning of the ridge.
كثيرا ما تعرض هذه العلّة للأطفال الصغار وعلامة ابتدائها فى الطفل أن يحدث عليه ضيق النفس عند القيام والحركة وتجد فى آخِر فقارات ظهره خرزة قد برزت تنتو على سائر الخرزات.	This condition often occurs in small children, and a sign of its beginning in the child is that he experiences shortness of breath when standing and moving, and you find on the back of his neck a protruding tubercle that stands out from other tubercles.
فإذا رأيت ذلك وأردت توقيفها فاكوه بمكواة تكون دائرة على هذه الصورة.	And if you see this and want to treat it, cauterize it with one application that forms a circle in this form.
لتأخذ الكيّة على كلّ جهة من الفقارة باستواء وإن شئت كويته حول الفقارة بمكواة النقطة صفّين او ثلاثة ولتكن النقط قريبة بعضها من بعض ثمّ تعالج الموضع حتّى يبرأ بما ذكرنا.	Take the cautery on each side of the tubercle equally, and if you wish, apply it around the tubercle with one application, two or three rows, and let the points be close to each other, then treat the area until it heals as we mentioned.
وتحفّظ أن تستعمل الكىّ فى الحدبة التى تكون من تشنّج العصب،.	And beware that the cautery is not used on the ridge that is caused by a tightening of the nerve.
الفصل الرابع والأربعون.	The fourth and fortieth operations.
فى كىّ النقرس وأوجاع المفاصل.	Treatment of fractures and dislocations of joints.
اذا كانت أوجاع المفاصل عن رطوبات باردة تنصبّ الى أىّ عضو كان من الجسم فإذا حدثت الأوجاع فى الرجلين فمن عادة الأطبّاء أن يسمّوا ذلك نقرسا خاصّة.	If the dislocations of the joints are due to cold humors that flow to any member of the body, then if they occur in the legs, it is customary for physicians to call that a gout specifically.
فإذا عولج النقرس البارد السبب بضروب العلاج الذى ذكرنا فى التقسيم ولم تذهب الأوجاع فإنّ الكىّ يذهب بها وهو أن تكويه بعد الاستفراغ حول مفصل الرجلين كيّات كثيرة وتكون المكواة زيتونيّة متوسّطة على هذه الصورة.	And if the cold gout, which is the cause, is treated with the remedies that we mentioned in the chapter and the dislocation does not go away, then the treatment makes it go away, which is to bandage it after purging around the knee joint many times, and the bandage being oily and moderate like this.
وإن احتجت أن تنقّط على وجه الرجل فافعل بمكواة النقطة، فإن صعدت الأوجاع الى الركبتين او الى سائر المفاصل وكثيرا ما يعرض ذلك فاكوه على كلّ ركبة ثلاث كيّات او اربعا من كلّ جهة بهذه المكواة الزيتونيّة بعينها.	And if you need to apply a poultice to the face of the knee, then do so with a poultice for that purpose. If the dislocation rises to the knees or to other joints and this often happens, then apply it to each knee three or four times from each side with this oily poultice.
فإن احوجت الى أكثر من هذا الكىّ فاكوه ولا تعمق يدك بالكىّ بل يكون نحو ثخن الجلد فقط، فإن صعدت الأوجاع الى الوركين او الى الظهر فاستعمل ما ذكرنا من الكىّ فى بابه.	For if you need more of this treatment, then apply it, and do not press your hand with the treatment, but let it be about the thickness of the skin only. If the dislocation rises to the hips or to the back, then use what we mentioned from the treatment in its section.
فإن كانت الأوجاع فى اليدين فقط فنقّط حول الزندين كما تدور صفّين، فإن بقيت الأوجاع فى الأصابع فنقّطها على كلّ عقدة نقطة وعلى مشط اليد، فإن صعدت الأوجاع بعد أيّام الى المرفقين او الى المنكبين.	For if the dislocation is in the hands only, then apply a poultice around the wrists as the fingers move. If the dislocation remains in the fingers, then apply a poultice to each joint and on the palm of the hand. If the dislocation rises after some days to the elbows or to the shoulders.
فاكوهما من كلّ جهة ولا يخلُ العليل من التدبير الجيّد وأخذ الأدوية فإنّه إن أحسن الغذاء واستفرغ البلغم فإنّه يبرأ مع هذا الكىّ إن شاء الله.	Then apply it to both from each side and do not neglect a strong regimen and taking medications, for it is that if the digestive system is in good condition and the phlegm is purged, then it will recover with this treatment, God willing.
الفصل الخامس والأربعون.	The forty-fifth chapter.
فى كىّ الفتوق.	Treatment of hemorrhoids.
اذا عرض فتق فى الأربيّة وانحدر بعض المعاء والثرب الى الخصية وكان ذلك مبتدئا قريبا فينبغى أن تأمر العليل بترك الأكل يومه وأن يستعمل من المليّنات ما يحدر به البراز عن جوفه.	If a hemorrhoid appears in the rectum and some of the rectal tissue and blood have fallen into the anus, and it is a recent development, then it is hoped that the regimen will be modified to avoid eating on that day and that he will use a laxative to evacuate the feces from his bowels.
ثمّ يضطجع بين يديك على ظهره وتأمره أن يمسك نفسه حتّى يبرز الثرب او المعاء ثم تردّه بأصبعك ثمّ تعلّم بالمداد تحت الفتق على عظم العانة علامة تشبه نصف الدائرة أطرافها الى أعلى البدن.	Place the animal on its back and make it hold itself still until the intestine or spleen protrudes, then press it with your fingers, and feel with the middle finger under the navel for a mark resembling half a circle, its edges towards the upper abdomen.
ثمّ تحمى مكواة هذه صورتها.	Then cauterize a mew which has this shape.
حتّى تأتى بيضاء ترمى الشرر ثمّ تردّ المعاء او الثرب الى جوفه ثمّ يضع خادم يده على الموضع لئلّا يبرز المعاء وقد فرجت بين ساقى العليل ووضعت تحته وسادة وخادم آخر يعقد على ساقيه.	Until a white bile comes out, then press the spleen or intestine back into his belly, and a servant places his hand on the place so that the spleen does not protrude, having first placed it between the patient's legs and put a cushion under it, and another servant holds his legs.
وآخر على صدره يمسك يديه ثمّ تنزل المكواة على العلامة نفسها ويدك بالمكواة واقفة مستقيمة وتمسكها حتّى تبلغ بها العظم او تعيدها مرّة أخرى إن لم تبلغ بالأولى الى العظم.	And another servant is on his chest holding his hands, then the cauterizing iron is lowered to the same mark and your hand with the iron upright and you hold it until it reaches the bone or you repeat it again if it does not reach the bone with the first.
وتحفّظ جهدك من بروز المعاء فى حين كيّك لئلّا تحرقه فيحدث بذلك على العليل إمّا الموت وإمّا بليّة عظيمة، واعلم أنّك متى لم تبلغ بالكىّ العظم لم ينجح عملك، وينبغى أن تكون مكواة الصبيان لطيفة على أقدارهم وللكبار على أقدارهم.	And you control your effort to prevent the spleen from protruding while you are cauterizing him, lest he moves and this causes death or great harm to the patient. And be aware that if the cauterization does not reach the bone, your operation will not be successful. It is necessary that the cauterizing iron for children is delicate on their limbs and for adults coarse on their limbs.
ثمّ تعالج موضع الكىّ بعد ثلاثة أيّام بالسمن حتّى تذهب خشكريشة النار ثمّ تعالجه بسائر المراهم حتّى يبرأ وليكن العليل مضطجعا على ظهره اربعين يوما حتّى ينختم الجرح.	Then treat the place of cauterization after three days with fat until the roughness of the burn disappears, then treat it with other ointments until it heals. And let the patient lie on his back for forty days until the wound is closed.
وينبغى أن تجعل غذاءه مدّة علاجه ما يليّن بطنه لئلّا يبرز المعاء عند التزحّر والتبرّز ثمّ اذا أراد القيام بعد الأربعين يوما فتستعمل رباطا محكما وتمسكه أربعين يوما أخر ويقلّ من التعب والامتلاء من الطعام والشراب والصياح الشديد.	And it is necessary that you make his food during the period of treatment something that softens his belly, lest the spleen protrudes when he coughs and exerts himself. And if he wants to stand up after forty days, then use a tightened bandage and keep it on for forty more days, and reduce the fatigue and fullness from food, drink, and severe diarrhea.
فإنّه اذا استعمل هذا التدبير هكذا برئ برؤا تامّا إن شاء الله، وسأذكر علاج الفتوق بالشقّ فى بابه إن شاء الله، وأمّا الفتق الذى يحدث فى سائر البطن وكان مبتدئا فإن أردت أن لا يزيد فاكو الفتق منه كيّة مستديرة على قدره.	For if this regimen is administered, it will cure the ailment, God willing, and I will mention the treatment of hernias with a pad in its opening, God willing. As for the hernia that occurs in other parts of the abdomen and was chronic, then you should not increase it, but rather make an incision on the hernia corresponding to its size.
وليكن ما تحرق من الجلد مثل ثلثيه ثمّ عالجه بما ذكرنا فإنّه لا يزيد إن شاء الله، وقد ذكر بعض الأوائل أن يكوى الفتق بمكواة مثلّثة على هذه الصورة.	And let the burnt part of the flesh be like one-third, then treat it with what we mentioned, for it will not increase, God willing. Some of the ancients have mentioned that the hernia should be cauterized with a cauterization like this image.
بعد أن تعلّم على الفتق بالمداد وتصير الخطّ الذى بالعرض فى الجانب الأعلى من الفتق والخطّ الآخر الى اسفل وتنزل يدك فى الوسط بكيّة واحدة مسماريّة والكىّ الأوّل اسهل وأفضل إن شاء اللّه.	After you have treated the hernia with a poultice and cauterized the line that is along the width at the upper edge of the hernia, and the other line below, and you insert your hand in the middle with one curved incision, and the first incision is easier and better, God willing.
الفصل السادس والأربعون.	The 46th Chapter.
فى كىّ الوثى.	Incision of the tonsils.
اذا حدث فى بعض الأعضاء عن سقطة او ضربة وجع ودام ذلك الوجع زمانا طويلا ولم ينجع فيه العلاج بالأدوية فينبغى أن يكوى بمكواة النقطة ويكون كىّ كلّ عضو على حسب كبره وصغره وضعفه وقوّته.	If an injury occurs in some of the organs due to a fall or a blow, and the injury persists for a long time, and treatment with medication is not effective, then it should be cauterized with a cauterization point, and the incision of each organ should be according to its size, smallness, weakness, and strength.
وتمكّن الوجع والوثى منه فإن برئ من الكىّ الأوّل وإلّا فتعيد عليه الكىّ لأنّ من عادة هذه الأوجاع أن تنتقل من العضو الى ما قرب منه فينبغى أن تتبعها بالكّى حتّى يبرأ العليل.	And if the injury and the tonsil are cauterized, then it will be cured from the first incision, and if not, then the incision should be repeated for it, because it is the custom of these ailments that they transfer from one organ to what is nearest to it, so it should be followed with incisions until the affected part is cured.
الفصل السابع والأربعون.	The 47th Chapter.
فى كىّ الجذام.	Incision of the gangrenous tissue.
أمّا المجذومون فقد ينتفعون بالكّى نفعا عظيما ولا سيّما صنف الجذام الذى يكون من قبل تعفّن البلغم والسوداء.	As for those with gangrene, they will greatly benefit from the incision, and not just any kind of gangrene, but the type that occurs due to excess of phlegm and melanosis.
فإذا أردت كيّه نظرت فإن كان الجذام مبتدئا وعالجته بما ذكرنا فى التقسيم ولم ينحّط ولم يتوقّف وخفت على العليل أن يستولى الفساد على جميع مزاجه فاكوه على الرأس خمس كيّات.	If you perform a rhinoplasty, then inspect it, and if the prosthesis is new and its treatment is as we mentioned in the shaping, and it was not perforated and did not become misshapen, and one fears that the mucus will dominate all of its passages, then apply to the head five dressings.
الواحدة فى وسط الرأس المعهودة والثانية أسفل منها نحو الجبهة عند نهاية الشعر واثنتين على القرنين وواحدة من خلف على نقرة القفا وأمعن يدك بالكىّ قليلا حتى يؤثّر فى العظم تأثيرا يسيرا.	One dressing in the middle of the head, the second below it towards the forehead at the end of the hair, and two on the temples, and one from behind on the nape, and press your hand with the dressing slightly so that it has a slight effect on the bone.
وتنقلع منه قشور ليسهل تنفّس البخارات الغليظة منها وتكويه كيّة أيضا على نفس الطحال على ما تقدّم، وأمّا إن كان الجذام قد استمرّ على العليل وظهر ظهورا بيّنا فينبغى أن تكويه هذه الكيّات التى ذكرنا فى الرأس.	And scrape off from it a thin layer so that the thick vapors can breathe easily, and also apply a dressing on the same spleen as previously mentioned. If the prosthesis has remained on the mucus and appeared with clear appearance, then it is necessary to apply these dressings that we mentioned on the head.
وكيّة على طرف الأنف وكيّتين على الوجنتين وكيّتين على فقارات العنق وستّا على فقارات الظهر وواحدة كبيرة على العصعص عند عجز الذنب وأخرى فوقها فى نفس المائدة واثنتين على الأوراك على كلّ ورك واحدة.	A dressing on the side of the nose, and two dressings on the cheeks, and two dressings on the vertebrae of the neck, and six on the vertebrae of the back, and one large one on the coccyx at the base of the tail, and another above it in the same region, and two on the hip joints, one on each hip joint.
واثنتين على الركبتين واحدة على كلّ ركبة واثنتين على المنكبين واثنتين على المرفقين واثنتين على ترائب الصدر وتكويه على كلّ مفصل من مفاصل أصابع يديه ورجليه كيّة وعلى كلّ كعب من رجليه وزندى يديه.	And two dressings on the knee joints, one on each knee joint, and two on the shoulders, and two on the elbows, and two on the ribs of the chest. Apply a dressing on each joint of his hands and feet, and on each ankle of his feet and wrist of his hands.
وتحفّظ من العصب الذى على مؤخّر الكعبين لئلّا تحرقهما، وقد يكوى كيّة على عظم العانة وأخرى على فم المعدة وأخرى على الكبد، واعلم أنّك كلّما زدت كيّا كان أنفع وأنجع.	And preserve the nerve that is at the back of the ankles, lest it be irritated. He may apply a dressing on the pubic bone, and another on the mouth of the stomach, and another on the liver. Know that each additional dressing makes it more effective and beneficial.
واعلم أنّ العليل لا يجد للكىّ وجعا كما يجده الصحيح من أجل أنّ بدنه قد خدر، وينبغى أن تكون المكاوى من الكبر والصغر على حسب الأعضاء والمفاصل على ما تقدّم من صفات الحدائد.	And know that the mucus does not feel the dressing as the healthy one feels it, because its inner part has become calloused. It is necessary for the dressings to be large or small according to the organs and joints, as previously mentioned, in terms of the characteristics of the bandages.
ثمّ عالج الكىّ بدقيق الكرسنّة مع العسل وسائر العلاج حتّى يبرأ إن شاء اللّه تعالى.	The treatment of the anal fistula with the thinness of the razor's edge, along with honey and other remedies, will heal if God Almighty wills.
الفصل الثامن والأربعون.	Chapter Eighty-Four.
فى كىّ الخدر متى خدر عضو من الأعضاء وعولج بالأدوية والأدهان والضمادات فلم يبرأ فاكو نفس العضو المنخدر بكيّات على حسب ما يستحقّ عظم العضو او صغره وليكن كيّك واغلا فى ثخن الجلد قليلا.	If a member becomes ulcerated, and the ulceration is treated with medicines, poultices, and bandages, but does not heal, then cauterize the ulcerated member with cauterizations according to what the size of the member deserves, whether it is large or small, and let your cauterization and incision be slight in the thickness of the skin.
ثمّ تعالجه بالمرهم حتّى يبرأ، وقد يكوى لبعض الخدر الذى يعرض لليد والرجل فى فقارات الظهر عند مخرج العصب الذى يحرّك ذلك العضو فيذهب الخدر.	Then treat it with the salve until it heals, and sometimes a fistula that appears on the hand or foot, at the vertebrae of the back where the nerve exits which moves that member, disappears.
ولا يقدم على ذلك إلّا من كان بصيرا بتشريح الأعضاء ومخارج الأعصاب المحرّكة للبدن،.	And none should proceed with this except one who is experienced in the dissection of the members and the exits of the nerves that move the body.
الفصل التاسع والأربعون.	Chapter Ninety-Four.
فى كىّ البرص.	On the treatment of vitiligo.
اذا تقادم البرص ولم ينجع فيه حيلة من حيل الطبّ فأكو عليه كيّا فيه عمق قليلا على قدر ثخن الجلد حتّى يذهب البياض ويتغيّر لونه.	If vitiligo has become chronic and no trick from the tricks of medicine is effective for it, then cauterize it with a slight cauterization in the depth to the extent of the thickness of the skin until the whiteness disappears and its color changes.
ثمّ تعالجه بدقيق العدس مع دهن الوردوورق لسان الحمل ودم الحمام او دم الخطاطيف من كلّ واحد جزء ويخلط الجميع ويطلى على خرقة ويلزم الموضع حتّى يبرأ.	Then treat it with a thin cloth of Adas, along with an ointment of rose oil, galenite, and mastiche, each a part, mixed together and applied on a cloth and bound to the area until it heals.
الفصل الخمسون.	Chapter Fifty.
فىكىّ السرطان.	On the treatment of cancer.
اذا كان السرطان مبتدئا وأردت توقيفه فاكوه بمكواة الدائرة حواليه كما تدور، وقد ذكر بعض الحكماء أن يكوى كيّة بليغة فى وسطه ولست أرى أنا ذلك لأنّى أتوقّع أن يتقرّح وقد شاهدت ذلك مرّات.	If the cancer is beginning and you want to stop its progression, cauterize it with a circular cauterization around it as it turns, and some wise men have said that a cauterization should be made with a cautery in its center, but I do not see that because I fear that it will become worse, and I have seen this happen many times.
فالصواب أن يكوى حواليه بدائرة كما قلنا او بكيّات كثيرة.	The suture should be tightened around it in a circle, as we have said, or with many knots.
الفصل الحادى والخمسون.	Surgical instruments and the fifty [cases].
فى كىّ الدبيلة.	On excising the uvula.
اذا حدث بأحد دبيلة وقد أبطأت فى النضج إمّا من قبل الفضل الفاعل لها وإمّا من قبل سنّ العليل اذا كان شيخا قليل الدم وإمّا من قبل الزمان وأردت أن تسرع فى نضج الدبيلة فاكو حواليها بكيّات صغار كثيرة تنقيطا.	If an uvula is formed and has become thickened, either due to the action of the humour that is responsible for it, or due to old age if the person is elderly and lacking in blood, or due to a condition that causes it to grow rapidly in thickness of the uvula, then one should make many small knots around it.
ثمّ اتركها فإنّها تسرع بالنضج فإن أردت بطّها بالكىّ فاحم المكواة التى هذه صورتها.	Then leave it, for it will grow rapidly in thickness, if you want to cut its base with a surgical instrument, then make an incision shaped like this.
وأنزلها فى وسط الدبيلة حتّى تنفذ الجلد ولتكن الكيّة ممّا يلى الأسفل ليسهل جرى القيح ثم تعالجها بما ينبغى حتّى تبرأ.	And insert it into the middle of the uvula until the tissue is penetrated and the incision is made below, so that the pus can flow out easily, then treat it with what is appropriate until it heals.
الفصل الثانى والخمسون.	The second surgical procedure and the fifty [cases].
فى كىّ الآكلة.	On excising the tonsils.
الآكلة إنّما هى فساد يسعى فى العضو فيأكله كما تأكل النار الحطب اليابس فإن رأيت الآكلة فى موضع يحتمل الكىّ بالنار فاحم مكاوى مسماريّة كثيرة صغارا وكبارا على حسب ما يصلح لذلك الموضع الذى فيه الآكلة.	The tonsil is a decay that occurs in the organ, and it eats away at it like fire eats away at dry wood. If you see the tonsil in a place where it can be cauterized with a branding iron, then make many small and large incisions according to what is suitable for that location where the tonsil is.
ثمّ اكوها من كلّ جهة حتّى يستأصل الفساد كلّه ولا يبقى منه شىء البتّة، ثمّ تتركه ثلاثة أيّام وتحمل على المواضع المكويّة الكبريت المسحوق مع الزيت حتّى تنقلع الخشكريشة كلّها وجميع الفساد.	Then cauterize it from every side until the decay is completely removed and none of it remains, then leave it for three days and apply to the cauterized areas a mixture of vitriol and oil until all the roughness and decay are peeled away.
ثمّ تعالجه بالمراهم المنبتة للحم فإن رأيت بعد ثلاثة أيّام أنّ اللحم ينبت نباتا صحيحا لا فساد فيه وإلّا فأعد الكىّ على ما بقى من المواضع الفاسدة، وقد تعالج الآكلة بالدواء الحادّ.	Then treat it with a dressing that promotes the growth of flesh, and if you see after three days that the flesh is growing properly without any decay, then that is good, otherwise repeat the cauterization on the remaining decayed areas, for the tonsil can also be treated with sharp medication.
فإنّه يقوم مقام بالنار اسرع نفعا وقد ذكرت علاجها بالدواء الحادّ فى التقسيم فتأخذه من هناك متى احتجت اليه.	For it serves the purpose of the Narciss, and has a more immediate effect, and I have mentioned its treatment with sharp medication in cauterization, so it is removed from there when needed.
الفصل الثالث والخمسون.	The third and fifty-first chapter.
فى كىّ المسامير المعكوسة وغير المعكوسة.	On the suture of the curved and non-curved sutures.
كثيرا ما تحدث فى اسافل القدمين هذه العلّة وهى شىء خشن يوّلم الرجل، والكىّ فيها على وجهين إمّا الكىّ بالنار وإمّا الكىّ بالماء الحادّ.	Often this ailment occurs in the soles of the feet, and it is a rough thing that harms the foot, and the treatment for it is by two methods: either cauterization with Narciss or cauterization with sharp vinegar.
فأمّا الكىّ بالنار فهو أن تحمى المكواة المجوّفة الشبيهة بريش النسر تصنع من حديد على قدر ما يحيط بالمسمار من كلّ جهة وتكون رقيقة الحاشية ثمّ تنزلها حامية على المسمار ثمّ تدير يدك بالمكواة حول المسمار حتّى تصل المكواة الى عمق المسمار.	And as for the cauterization with Narciss, it is that you heat a curved tongs-like instrument, made from iron, to the size that surrounds the ankle on all sides, and its edge is thin, then you lower it onto the ankle while it's hot, and you turn your hand with the tongs around the ankle until the tongs reach the depth of the ankle.
وتتركه ثلاثة أيّام يهمّ بالقيح ثمّ تضمدها بالخبازى البرّيّة المدقوقة بالملح وتترك الضماد عليها ليلة فإنّها تنقلع من أصولها ثمّ تعالج موضع الجرح بالمرهم المنبت للحم حتّى يبرأ، فإن كانت المسامير غير معكوسة.	And you leave it for three days with the bandage, then you dress it with the barley poultice mixed with salt, and you leave the dressing on it for a night, then it is pulled out from its roots, and the place of the wound is treated with the plaster that promotes flesh growth until it heals, if the sutures are not curved.
وكثيرا ما تحدث فى سطح البدن ولا سيّما فى الأيدى والأرجل فينبغى أن تأخذ انبوبة من نحاس او من حديد او من ريش النسر وتنزلها على المسمار او الثؤلول ثمّ تلقى فى الأنبوبة من الماء الحادّ قدرا يسيرا.	And often it occurs on the surface of the skin, and not only in the hands and feet, so you take a tube made from brass or iron or Narciss, and lower it onto the ankle or the hock, then you pour into the tube a small amount of sharp vinegar.
وتمسك يدك وأنت تديرها مع غمز يدك قليلا لكى تؤثّر حاشية الأنبوبة فى أصل المسمار ويجد الماء الحادّ السبيل الى الغوص الى أصل المسمار ويصبر العليل قليلا على لذع الماء الحادّ ساعة.	And you hold your hand, and while turning it, you press your hand slightly so that the edge of the tube affects the base of the ankle, and the sharp vinegar finds its way to the depth of the ankle, and you leave it for a little while on the bite of the sharp vinegar for an hour.
ثمّ تتركه فإنّ المسمار ينقلع بأصوله، هكذا تفعل بها واحدة واحدة حتّى تأتى على جميع ما منها فى الجسم ثمّ تعالج مواضعها بعد أن تنقلع بما ينبت اللحم من المراهم.	Leave it then to be absorbed, for the suture will take hold with its roots, doing so bit by bit until it has taken hold of all that is in the body, then treat the affected areas after absorption of what the flesh will grow from the ulcers.
الفصل الرابع والخمسون.	The fourth and fiftieth chapter.
فى كىّ النافض.	On the suture of the nose.
اذا حدث بأحد نافض من برد فى العصب او من حمّى ربع او غير ذلك فينبغى أن تكويه أربع كيّات او خمسا على خرز الظهر بين كلّ خرزة كيّة وفى صدره كيّة.	If a man suffers an injury on one of his nostrils, either from a blow with a staff or from quartan fever or anything else, it is advisable that four or five cauterizations be applied to the vertebrae of the back, between each vertebra one cauterization and on his chest one cauterization.
وعلى معدته كيّة بالمكواة الزيتونيّة فإنّ النافض يسكن ويسرع بنضج المرض البارد.	And on his stomach a cauterization with the application of the olive oil, for the nose will be quieted and the cold infection will be hastened by the expulsion of the disease.
الفصل الخامس والخمسون.	The fifth and fiftieth chapter.
فى كىّ البثر الحادث فى البدن.	On the suture of the accidental wound in the body.
قد تندفع فى البدن بثور قبيحة تكون عن موادّ باردة غليظة فاسدة فينبغى أوّل ظهورها أن تكوى على رأس كلّ بثرة كيّة لطيفة بعود آس قد أوقد طرفه بالنار او بأصل الزراوند الطويل او بمكواة عدسيّة.	There may be a suture in the body of an ugly tumor which results from cold, coarse, putrid materials, it is advisable that as soon as they appear, a light cauterization be applied to the top of each tumor with a thin iron rod, whose end has been heated by fire or with the long rod of the aurum causticus, or with an application of soap.
وقد تكوى الدماميل فى اوّل اندفاعها على هذه الصفة فلا يزيد ويتبدّد الفضل الفاعل لها ويبرأ منها العليل إلّا أنّه ينبغى أن يكون ذلك بعد استفراغ العليل بالفصد.	And the warts may be cauterized at first onset in this manner, but it is not advisable to do so, for the active humor will increase and the ulcer will become worse, unless that is done after bloodletting has purged the ulcer.
الفصل السادس والخمسون.	The sixth and fiftieth chapter.
فى كىّ النزف الحادث عند قطع الشريان.	On the suture of the hemorrhage which occurs when a blood vessel is cut.
كثيرا ما يحدث نزف الدم من شريان قد انقطع عند جرح يعرض من خارج او عند شقّ ورم او كىّ عضو ونحو ذلك فيعسر قطعه.	It often happens that there is a hemorrhage of blood from a blood vessel which has been severed, when there is an external wound, or when a tumor is cut, or a member is amputated, and the like, so that its cutting is difficult.
فإذا حدث لأحد ذلك فاسرع بيدك الى فم الشريان فضع عليه اصبعك السبّابة وشدّه نعما حتّى يحصر الدم تحت اصبعك ولا يخرج منه شىء ثمّ تضع فى النار مكاوى زيتونيّة صغارا وكبارا عدّة وتنفح عليها حتّى تصير حامية جدّا.	If it happens to one of them, then insert your index and middle fingers into the jugular vein and press down on it with your fingers so that the blood is constricted under your fingers and does not flow out, then you put several small and large olive oil compresses on the fire until they become very hot.
ثمّ تأخذ منها واحدة إمّا صغيرة وإمّا كبيرة على حسب الجرح والموضع الذى انفتق فيه الشريان وتنزل المكواة على نفس العرق بعد أن تنزع اصبعك بالعجلة وتمسك المكواة حتّى ينقطع الدم.	Then you take one of them, either small or large, depending on the wound and the location where the artery is severed, and you place the compress on the same vein after you quickly remove your fingers, and you hold the compress until the blood stops.
فإن اندفع عند رفعك الأصبع من فم الشريان وطفأ المكواة فخذ مكواة أخرى بالعجلة من المكاوى التى فى النار المعدّة ولا تزال تفعل ذلك بواحدة بعد أخرى حتّى ينقطع الدم.	For if the bleeding resumes when you lift your fingers from the mouth of the artery and the compress slips, then quickly take another compress from the ones on the fire that have been prepared, and do not stop doing this one after another until the bleeding stops.
وتحفّظ لا تحرق عصبا يكون هناك فتحدث على العليل بليّة أخرى، واعلم أنّ الشريان اذا نزف منه الدم فإنّه لا يستطاع قطعه ولا سيّما اذا كان الشريان عظيما إلّا بأحد أربعة أوجه إمّا بالكىّ كما قلنا وإمّا ببتره اذا لم يكن قد انبتر.	And be careful not to burn the nerve that is there, for if you do, you will cause another affliction. And know that if blood flows from an artery, it cannot be stopped except by one of four methods: either with a clamp, as we have said, or with a ligature, if it has not already become constricted.
فإنّه اذا بتر تقلّصت طرفاه وانقطع الدم وإمّا أن يربط بالخيوط ربطا وثيقا وإمّا أن توضع عليه الأدوية التى من شأنها قطع الدم والشدّ بالرفائد شدّا محكما.	For if it becomes constricted, its ends shrink and the blood flow stops, or it can be tied with threads, a tight binding, or medicines that are known to stop the blood and constrict can be applied with firm bandages.
وأمّا من يحاول قطعه برباط او بشدّ بالخرق او وضع الأشياء المحرقة ونحو ذلك فإنّه لاينقطع بذلك البتّة إلّا فى الندرة فإن عرض لأحد ذلك ولم يحضره طبيب ولا دواء فليبادر بوضع الأصبع السبّابة على فم الجرح نفسه كما وصفنا.	And whoever tries to stop it with a ligature or constriction with a tight bandage, or application of cauterizing agents and the like, will not stop the bleeding except rarely. If one of these occurs and there is no doctor or medicine present, then he should quickly put his index finger on the mouth of the wound itself, as we have described.
ويشدّه جدّا حتّى ينحصر الدم وينطل من فوق الجرح وعلى الشريان والأصبع لا تزول من عليه بالماء البارد الشديد البرد دائما ختّى يجمد الدم ويغلظ وينقطع وفى خلال ذلك تنظر فيما يحتاج اليه من كىّ او دواء.	And he should press down firmly until the blood is constricted and flows out from above the wound, and on the artery, cold water, very cold, is poured continuously so that the blood becomes coagulated and clots and stops, and during this time, one looks to see what is needed, either a clamp or medicine.
الباب الثانى.	The Second Method
فى الشقّ والبطّ والفصد والجراحات ونحوها.	In the incision, splitting, venesection, and surgeries, and their likes.
قال خلف قد ذكرنا فىالباب الأوّلكلّ مرض يصلح فيه الكىّ بالنار والدواء المحرق وعلله وأسبابه وآلاته وصور المكاوى وجعلت ذلك فصولا من القرن الى القدم.	Khaleefah said: We have mentioned in the first chapter, all diseases for which cauterization with the iron or the burned medicine is suitable, and their causes and tools and pictures of the cauteries, and made them chapters from the ear to the foot.
وأنا أسلك فى هذاالباب ذلكالمسلك بعينه ليسهل على الطالب مطلوبه..	And I will mention in this chapter a specific type of cauterization to make it easy for the student to find what he is looking for.
قبل أن أبدأ بذلك فينبغى أن تعلموا يا بنىّ أنّ هذاالباب فيهمن الغرر فوق مافىالباب الاوّلفى الكىّ.	Before I start with that, it is necessary for you to know, my sons, that this chapter contains things more wonderful than what was mentioned in the first chapter regarding cauterization.
ومن أجل ذلك ينبغى أن يكون التحذير فيه أشدّ لأنّ العمل فى هذاالباب كثيراما يقع فيه الاستفراغ من الدم الذى به تقوم الحيوة عند فتح عرق او شق على ورم او بطّ خراج او علاج جراحة او إخراج سهم او شقّ على حصاة ونحو ذلك ممّا يصحب كلّها الغرر والخوف ويقع فى أكثرها الموت.	And for this reason, it is necessary that the warning be more severe, because the action in this chapter is very critical and often involves bleeding from the blood on which life depends, when opening a vein or splitting to remove a tumor or cyst or abscess or surgical treatment or removing an arrow, or splitting to remove a stone, and similar things, all of which are accompanied by terror and fear, and most of which result in death.
وأنا أوصيكم عن الوقوع فيما فيه الشبهة عليكم فإنّه قد يقع إليكم فى هذه الصناعة صنوف من الناس بضروب من الأسقام فمنهم من قد ضجر بمرضه وهان عليه الموت.	And I advise you to beware of falling into that which is suspicious, for it may happen to you in this profession, types of people with various diseases, among them is one who has despaired of his illness and death has become easier for him.
لشدّة ما يجد من سقمه وطول بليّته وبالمرض من التقرّر ما يدلّ على الموت، ومنهم من يبذل لكم ماله ويغنيكم به رجاء الصحّة ومرضه قتّال فلا ينبغى لكم أن تتساعدوا من اتاكم ممّن هذه صفته البتّة.	Because of the severity of what he finds from his illness and the length of his suffering, and the gravity of the disease that indicates death, and among them is one who will offer you his wealth and will bribe you with it in anticipation of health, and his disease is incurable, so it is not suitable for you to be swayed by someone like this.
وليكن حذركم أشدّ من رغبتكم وحرصكم ولا تقدموا على شىء من ذلك الّا بعد علم يقين يصحّ عندكم بما يصير اليه العاقبة المحمودة، واستعملوا فى جميع علاج مرضاكم تقدمة المعرفة والإنذار بما تؤول اليه السلامة.	Let your caution be more severe than your ambition and greed, and do not proceed with anything until certain knowledge is established with you, in accordance with the noble intention, and apply in all treatments of your patients a combination of recognition and warning that leads to safety.
فإنّ لكم فى ذلك عونا على اكتساب الثناء والمجد والذكر والحمد، ألهمكم اللّه يا بنّى رشده ولا حرّمكم الصواب والتوفيق إنّ ذلك بيده لا إله الّا هو.	For you have in that the strength to acquire praise, glory, remembrance and gratitude, may God grant you, O sons of Rashed, neither prohibit you from the right nor deprive you of guidance, for that is in His hand, no god but He.
وقد رتّبت هذاالباب فصولاعلى ما تقدّم فى باب الكىّ من القرن الى القدم ليخفّ عليكم مطلب ما تريدون منه إن شاء الله.	And I have organized this chapter in sections following what has been previously mentioned in the chapter on the knee, so it will be easier for you to find what you are looking for, God willing.
الفصل الأوّل.	The first section.
فىعلاج الماء الذى يجتمع فى رؤوس الصبيان.	On treating the alopecia that gathers on the heads of children.
إنّ هذا السقم كثيرا ما يعرض للصبيان عند الولادة اذا ضغطت القابلة رأس الصبّى بغير رفق وقد يعرض أيضا من علّة خفيّة لا تعرف.	For this alopecia often appears in children at birth if the midwife presses on the child's head with no mercy, and it may also appear due to a hidden cause that is not known.
ولم أر هذه العلّة فى غير الصبيان وجميع من رأيت منهم أسرع اليه الموت فلذلك رأيت ترك العمل به ولقد رأيت منهم صبيّا قد امتلأ رأسه ماء والرأس يعظم فى كلّ يوم.	And I did not see this ailment in anyone other than children, and all of those whom I saw were near death. Therefore, I thought it was best to abandon treatment for it. And I have seen a child whose head was full of alopecia, and the head increases in size every day.
حتّى لم يطق الصبىّ يقعد على نفسه لعظم رأسه والرطوبة تتزايد حتّى هلك.	Until the child can no longer sit up by himself because of the size of his head, and the decay increases until he dies.
وهذا الرطوبة إمّا أن تجتمع بين الجلد والعظم وإمّا أن تجتمع تحت العظم على الصفاق، والعمل فى ذلك إن كانت الرطوبة فيما بين الجلد والعظم وكان الورم صغيرا فينبغى أن تشقّ فى وسط الرأس شقّا واحدا بالعرض ويكون طول الشقّ نحو عقدين حتّى تسيل الرطوبة وهذه صورة المبضع.	And this decay, either it gathers between the skin and the bone, or it gathers under the bone on the periosteum. And the treatment for it, if the decay is between the skin and the bone and the tumor is small, is to make a single incision in the middle of the head from side to side, about two fingers long, until the decay flows out, and this is an illustration of the procedure.
فإن كانت الرطوبة أزيد والورم أعظم فاجعلها شقّين متقاطعين على هذه الصورة:.	For if the decay is more and the tumor is larger, make two incisions that cross each other like this:.
وإن كانت الرطوبة تحت العظم وعلامته أن ترى خياطات الرأس مفتوحة من كلّ جهة والماء ينخفض اذا عصرته بيدك الى داخل وليس بخفىّ ذلك عليك فينبغى أن تشقّ فى وسط الرأس ثلاثة شقوق على هذه الصورة.	And if the decay is under the bone, and its sign is that the sutures of the head are open on all sides, and the alopecia sinks when you press it with your hand inward, do not be hesitant about that, for it should be incised in the middle of the head with three incisions like this.
وبعد الشقّ تخرج الرطوبة كلّها ثمّ تشدّ الشقوق بالخرق والرفائد ثمّ تنطله من فوق بالشراب والزيت الى اليوم الخامس ثمّ تحلّ الرباط وتعالج الجرح بالفتل والمراهم ولا تترك شدّ الرأس باعتدال وتغذّى العليل بكلّ غذاء جافّ قليل الرطوبة.	After the incision, the entire hernia is extracted, then the edges of the wound are tightened with stitches and bandages. A dressing with vinegar and oil is applied from above until the fifth day, then the bandage is removed and the wound is treated with poultices and ointments. The head is not to be tightly bandaged, and the patient is fed a light diet with minimal humidity.
الى أن يقوى العضو ويبرأ، وصفة أخرى من الشقّ أن تنظر حيث يظهر عظم الورم واجتماع الماء لأنّه قد يكون فى مؤخّر الرأس أكثر او فى مقدّمه او فى اليمين او فى الشمال.	Until the member becomes strong and heals, another type of incision is that which looks for where the bone of the tumor appears and the gathering of water, because it may be in the back of the head or in its front or on the right side or on the left.
فتقصد بالشقّ حيث ظهر لك الورم وامتلاء الماء فتشقّه على ما يمكنك وتحفّظ أن تقطع شريانا فتحدث نزفا فيموت العليل من ذلك النزف مع استفراغ الرطوبة.	You make an incision where the tumor appears to you and the accumulation of water, so you cut as much as you can and be careful not to cut arteries, lest you cause hemorrhaging, for the patient may die from that hemorrhage along with vomiting of the hernia.
الفصل الثانى.	The second separation.
قطع الشريانين اللذين خلف الاذنين المعروفين بالحسيسين.	Cutting the two arteries that are behind the two well-known ears, known as the jugulars.
متى عرض لأحد نزلات حادّة الى العينين او الى الصدر وأزمن ذلك ولم ينجع فى ذلك علاج الأدوية فأبلغ العلاج فى ذلك قطع هذين الشريانين.	When a severe hemorrhage appears to the eyes or to the chest and that becomes chronic, and the treatment with medications is not effective, then the treatment for that involves cutting these two arteries.
فينبغى اذا أردت قطعهما أن تحلق رأس العليل بالموسى ثمّ تحكّ الموضع بخرقة خشنة ليظهر الشريان ثمّ تشدّ رقبة العليل بفضل ثوبه ثمّ تنظر حيث ينبض العرق وموضعاهما الموضعان المتخفّضان اللذان خلف الأذنين وقلّ ما تخفى إلّا فى بعض الناس.	If you want to cut them, then you should hang the patient's head with a napkin, then scrub the area with a coarse cloth so that the artery appears, and you tighten the patient's neck with the help of his garment, then you look for where the vein throbs and its location, which is one of two hidden places behind the ears, but rarely is it hidden except in some people.
ثمّ تعلّم عليهما بالمداد ثمّ تقطعهما بالمبضع النشل قطعا الى العظم ويكون ذلك بعرض الرأس وإن شئت أدخلت المبضع من تحت الشريان وتنتره الى فوق بالقطع ويكون طول القطع نحو أصبعين مضمومتين.	Then you mark the artery with the index finger, and cut it with the scalpel, a cut to the bone, which is at the width of the head, and if you want, you insert the scalpel from under the artery and push it upwards with the cut, and the length of the cut is about two folded fingers.
فإنّ العرق اذا انقطع خرج الدم خروجا نبضيّا يثب الى قدّام وثوبا متواترا، فإن لم يظهر الشريان للحسّ فينبغى أن تقدر من الأذن بعد قدر ثلاث أصابع ثمّ تعلّم بالمداد وتشقّ الى العظم، والذى ينبغى أن.	For if the vein is severed, blood spurts out in a pulsating manner, leaping to the front and back repeatedly, then if the artery is not felt by touch, it is estimated from the ear after the distance of three fingers, then pressed with a bandage and incised to the bone, and that which is estimated.
ترسل من الدم سّت أواق على التوّسط وربّما أرسلت منه أكثر او أقل كلّ ذلك على قدر ما يظهر لك من قوّة العليل وامتلاء شرياناته، ثمّ تنظر الى الجرح فإن بقى على العظم من الصفاق شىء فاقطعه.	You excise from the blood, a piece of the same size, and how much you excise from it, more or less, all depends on what appears to you from the strength of the part and the fullness of its veins, then you look at the wound, if there remains on the bone from the peritoneum a piece, then you excise it.
لئلّا يعرض ورم حارّ ثمّ تشدّ الجرح بفتيلة من خرق كتان ثمّ عالجه بالمراهم حتّى يبرأ،.	The wound is exposed to heat, then a hot application is applied, then the wound is dressed with a bandage of linen cloth, then treated with ointments until it heals.
الفصل الثالث.	Chapter Three.
فىسلّ الشريانين اللذين فى الأصداغ.	The two arteries in the arms are ligated.
اذا حدث بإنسان شقيقة مزمنة او نزلات حادّة من قبل رطوبات حرّيفة وحرارة فى عضلات الاصداغ او صداع مزمن شديد ونحو ذلك وعولج بضروب علاج الطّب فلم ينجع ذلك فقد جرّبنا فى هذه الأمراض سلّ الشريانات من الأصداغ او كيّها كما وصفنا.	If a person has a chronic or acute disease due to the accumulation of hot and heated materials in the muscles of the arms, or severe and chronic headache, and similar things, and was treated with beating treatments from medicine but it did not work, we have tried in these diseases ligating the arteries of the arms or cauterizing them as we described.
ووجه العمل فى سلّها أن يحلق العليل الشعر الذى فى الأصداغ وتقصد الشريان الظاهر فى الصدغ فإنّه يتبيّن لك من نبضه وقلّ ما يخفى الّا فى الفرد من الناس.	The purpose of the operation in ligating them is that the weak vein that is in the arms, and the intended artery is the visible one in the arm, for it becomes apparent to you from its pulsation, and rarely is it hidden except in thin people.
او عند شدة البرد فإن خفى عليك فليشدّ العليل رقبته بفضل ثوبه ثمّ تحكّ أنت الموضع بخرقة او تكمّد الموضع بماء حارّ حتّى يظهر الشريان ظهورا بيّنا واضحا.	Or when the cold is severe and it is hidden from you, then the weak vein will be pressed by the virtue of its bandage, then you scratch the place with a rough cloth or compress the place with hot water until the artery appears in a clear and obvious appearance.
ثمّ تأخذ المبضع الذى هذه صورته.	Then take the suture that is suitable for it.
ثم تسلخ به الجلد برفق حتّى تصل الى الشريان ثمّ تلقى فيه صنّارة وتجذبه الى فوق حتّى تخرجه من الجلد وتخلّصه من الصفاقات التى تحته من كلّ جهة فإن كان الشريان رقيقا فتلويه بطرف الصنّارة.	You dissect to the jaw with care, making sure to reach the artery, then you ligate it with a thread and pull it upwards with care, extracting it from the jaw and freeing it from the tissues that are beneath it on all sides, for if the artery is weak, you wrap it with the tip of the thread.
ثمّ تقطع منه جزءا على قدر ما يتباعد طرفاه وتنقبض ولا تحدث نزفا فإنّه إن لم يبتر ولم ينقطع لم يرق الدم اصلا ثمّ استفرغ من الدم من ستّ أواق الى ثلاث.	Then you cut from it a part according to how much its sides retract and constrict, and do not cause hemorrhage, for if it did not become numb and was not severed, the blood would not flow out properly, then bleeding from it stops in six to three.
فإن كان الشريان عظيما فينبغى أن تربطه فى مكانين بخيط مثنّى قوىّ وليكن الخيط إمّا من ابريسم وإما من أوتار العود لئلّا يسرع اليه العفن قبل التحام الجرح فيحدث النزف.	For if the artery is large, it is better to tie it at two places with a strong double thread, and let the thread be either of horsehair or of tendons of the bow, so that the blood does not flow quickly before the wound has closed, which would cause hemorrhage.
ثمّ تقطع فضل ما بين الرباطين تفعل ذلك فى تلك الساعة او بعد وقت آخر، وإن شئت أن تكويه كيّا الى العظم بمكواة سكّينيّة حتّى ينبتر أطرافه فيقوم مقام هذا العمل بعينه او أفضل كما قلنا.	Then you cut the excess between the ligatures, you do that at that hour or after another time, and if you want, you sew it to the bone with a silk suture until its edges contract, then this action takes its place or is even better as we said.
الّا إن كان العليل به حمّى او محرور المزاج لأنّ الكىّ ممّا يعين على إفناء الرطوبات فيكون أوكد فى المنفعة، وينبغى بعد سلّ الشريانين أن يحشى الموضع بالقتن البالى وتوضع عليه الرفائد المحكمة وبعد الحلّ يعالج بالادوية اليابسة التى تنبت اللحم وبالفتل حتّى يبرأ إن شاء اللّه.	But if the wound is inflamed with fever or has a disturbed temperament, because the cautery is something that causes the humidity to be suppressed, it should be stronger in utility, and after ligating the arteries, it is better to stuff the area with wet cotton and put on it tight bandages, and after the evacuation, treat it with topical medicines that generate flesh and with fat until it heals, God willing.
فإن حدث فى خلال عملك نزف من الشريان فبادر الى قطعه إمّا بالكىّ وإمّا أن تملأ الموضع بالزاج وتشدّ يدك حتّى ينقطع الدم فإن لم يحضرك من ذلك شىء فضع أصبعك حتّى يجمد الدم.	For if during your operation there is hemorrhage from the artery, hasten to cut it off either by cauterization or by filling the area with astringent and tightening your hand until the blood stops, and if none of these methods are available, then put your finger on it until the blood clots.
وانطل الموضع بالماء الشديد البرد حتّى تسكن الحدّة وتشدّه على ما ينبغى، وممّا هو أخفّ وأسهل من سلّ الشريان أن تكوى العرق بهذه المكواة ذات السكّينين بعد أن تعلّم الموضعين بالمداد.	And pour on the area cold water to calm the inflammation and tighten it as necessary, and what is lighter and easier than ligating the artery is to sew the vein with this silk suture after dressing the areas with poultice.
وتنزلها حامية جدّا حتّى تبلغ الى العظم وينقطع العرق فى موضعين لكى يتباعد ما بين طرفيه فإنّه لا يلتحم بهذا الكىّ البتّة، وهذه صورة المكواة.	It descends with great force to the bone and the vein is cut in two places, for the space between its sides becomes wide apart, then it does not unite with this kind of forced separation, and this is a picture of amputation.
تكون حادّة السكّينين تشبه المقدّتين الصغيرتين إلّا أنّها تكون أقلّ حدّة من السكّين كثيرا لأنّه إن كانتا حادّتين كالسكّين أسرع اليهما البرد ولم ينقطع اللحم بسرعة، فإذا كان فيهما بعض الغلظ امتسك فيهما حرّ النار.	The sharpness of the scalpel resembles the small knife except that it is much less sharp than the razor for if it were as sharp as the razor, the flesh would be cut very quickly and wouldn't be grasped by the quick passage, so if there was some coarseness in them, heat from the fire would grasp it.
وقطعت اللحم بسرعة، وهذا العمل أفضل من كلّ عمل وأخف وأسهل، وليكن بعد ما بين السكّينين قدر غلظ الأصبع.	When the flesh is cut quickly, this action is better than any other action, lighter and easier, and let there be after what is between the two scissors the thickness of a needle.
الفصل الرابع.	The Fourth Chapter.
فىعلاج سيلان الدموع الحارّة الدائمة الى العينين.	Treatment for the hot, lasting tears that flow into the eyes.
اذا كانت الدموع دائمة وكان سيلانها من العروق التى على قحف الرأس من خارج ولم يكن ينتفع فيها بشىء من علاج الطّب بالأدوية ورأيت وجه العليل قد احمّر.	If the tears are lasting and their flow is from the veins that are on the surface of the head from the outside, and you didn't benefit from any treatment with medicine, and you saw the face of the ailment had become red.
ويحسّ فى جبينه دبيبا كدبيب النمل وعيناه مهزولتان رطبتان قد تأكّلت اشفارهما وتشبّطت اجفانهما من حدّة الدموع فاضطرّت الاوائل فى علاجها الى هذا العمل ويسمّونه العلاج بالسيف، وهو أن تأمر العليل بحلق الشعر الذى فى جبهته.	And he feels in his forehead ants crawling like the crawl of ants, and his eyes are weak and disheveled, his eyelashes tangled and his jawbones constricted from the sharpness of the tears, so the doctors were forced to treat it with this action, which they call treatment by the sword, and it is that the ailment is treated by shaving the hair that is on the forehead.
ثمّ تشقّ فى الجبهة ثلاثة شقوق متوازية على طول الجبهة ويكون طول الشقّ نحو أصبعين الشقّ الواحد موازيا لطول الأنف فى وسط الجبهة والثانى على البعد قليلا من حركة العضل الذى فى الصدغ والثالث من الجهة الأخرى.	Then an incision is made in the forehead, three parallel incisions along the length of the forehead, and the length of each incision is about two fingers, one incision parallel to the length of the nose in the middle of the forehead, the second slightly away from the movement of the muscle that is in the temple, and the third on the other side.
وتحفّظ من قطع الشريانين اللذين فى الجانبين وأبعد يدك من اتّصال الفكّين ويكون بعد كلّ شقّ قدر ثلاث اصابع مضمومة وليكن معك قطع إسفنج معدّة او خرق ناشفة كثيرة بما تنشف الدم.	And be cautious of cutting the two veins that are in the cheeks, and keep your hand away from the connection of the jaws, and after each incision there should be about three fingers held back, and let there be with you a cut sponge or a lot of soft lint to absorb the blood.
ثمّ تدخل المبضع الحادّ الطرفين الذى هذه صورته.	The surgeon should not intervene with the two sides that have this form.
من الشقّ الذى يلى الصدغ الى الشقّ الأوسط وتسلخ به جميع الجلد الذى فيما بين الشقّين مع الصفاق الذى على العظم ثمّ تفعل ذلك ايضا من الشقّ الأوسط الى الشقّ الثالث ثمّ تخرج هذا المبضع.	From the side that goes to the clavicle to the middle side and scrape with it all the flesh that is between the two sides with the peritoneum that is on the bone, then do the same thing from the middle side to the third side, then extract this flesh.
وتدخل فى الشقّ الأوّل ايضا آلة أخرى تسمّى سكّينيّة حادّة من الجهة الواحدة وملساء غير حادّة من الجهة الأخرى وهذه صورتها:.	And enter in the first incision another instrument called a sharp skewer from one side and a blunt one from the other side and this is its form:
وتصير جانبها الحادّ الى فوق نحو اللحم الملصق بالجلد وجانبها الأملس نحو العظم وتدفعها حتّى تنتهى الى الشقّ الأوسط وتقطع بها جميع الأوعية التى تنزل من الرأس الى العينين من غير أن يصل القطع الى ظاهر الجلد.	And bend its sharp edge upwards towards the flesh attached to the flesh and its blunt edge towards the bone, and thrust it until it reaches the middle incision, and cut with it all the vessels that descend from the head to the eyes without the cut reaching the visible skin.
ثمّ تفعل ذلك فى الشقّ الأوسط الى الشقّ الآخر، وبعد أن يسيل من الدم القدر المعتدل تعصر المواضع من قطع الدم الجامد ثمّ تصير فى كلّ شقّ فتيلة من قطن بال وتضع عليها رفادة قد بلت بشراب وزيت او خلّ وزيت.	Then do the same thing from the middle incision to the other incision, and after a moderate amount of blood has flowed, stop the places where the flow of blood has stopped, then put in each incision a thread of cotton and put on it a dressing that has been soaked in rose oil or violet oil.
لئلّا يحدث ورم حارّ وفى اليوم الثالث تحلّ الرباط وتستعمل التنطيل الكثير بالماء الفاتر ثمّ تعالجه بمرهم الباسليقون بدهن الورد وسائر ما تعالج به الجراحات الى أن يبرأ إن شاء الله.	Unless a hot tumor occurs, and on the third day the dressing is removed and a large amount of cold water is used, then it is treated with basilicon ointment mixed with rose oil and other things that surgeons use to treat wounds until it heals, God willing.
الفصل الخامس.	The Fifth Chapter.
فىعلاج الدموع والنزلات الى العينين من باطن الرأس.	On the treatment of tears and discharges to the eyes from the bottom of the head.
متى حدث لأحد نزلات كثيرة حادّة حرّيفة دائمة وترى العينين منه مهزولتين صغيرتين وقد ضعف نظرهما والأجفان متقرحة وتساقط الأشفار منهما.	When there occurs to someone a frequent, sharp, hot and lasting discharge, and the eyes are weak from it, and they are small and his vision is weakened and the eyelids are ulcerated and the lashes fall out.
ويكون فى عمق الرأس وجع حادّ مؤلم وعطاس متتابع فاعلم من هذه الأعراض أنّ تلك الموادّ والنزلات إنّما تجىء من عروق كثيرة عميقة وأفضل العلاج فيها هذا العلاج، وهو أن تأمر العليل بحلق جبهته ثمّ تشقّ شقّا واحدا فى وسط الجبهة.	And there is in the depth of the head a sharp and painful pain and a successive and intense headache, so know from these symptoms that those materials and discharges come from many deep veins, and the best treatment for them is this treatment, which is to cauterize the fontanel with an iron, then make a single incision in the middle of the forehead.
او أرفع قليلا بالعرض وتبتدئ بالشقّ من الصدغ الأيسر الى الصدغ الأيمن ويكون الشقّ الى العظم وأبعد يدك عن عضل الصدغين المتحرّكين عند المضغ حتّى اذا انكشف العظم ونشفت جميع الدم بالإسفنج.	Raise the skin slightly with the edge and cut from the left temple to the right temple, making the incision down to the bone, and keep your hand away from the movable jaw joints when chewing, until the bone is exposed and all the blood is wiped with a sponge.
ففرّق بين شفتى الشقّ بالقطن البالى او بفتل من الكتان ثمّ تشدّ من فوق بالرفائد وتشرّب الرفائد بالشراب والزيت لئلّا يحدث ورم حارّ ومتى حللتها ورأيت أنّ الورم الحارّ قد نقض فينبغى أن تحكّ العظم حتّى يبدأ فيه نبات اللحم.	Separate the lips of the incision with a blunt instrument or a piece of cloth, then tighten from above with bandages, and smear the bandages with oil and resin so that no heat occurs, and when you have applied them, if you see that the hot tumor has been reduced, it is a sign that you should begin to scrape the bone until the growth of the flesh begins.
ثمّ تعالجه بالتدبير المجفّف الذى ينبت اللحم مثل أن يؤخذ من دقيق الحنطة جزآن ومن القلفونيا اربعة اجزاء ويهيّأ منهما مرهم ويستعمل فى نبات اللحم فى مثل هذه الجراحات.	Then treat it with a dry poultice that promotes the growth of flesh, such as taking from wheat flour two parts and from rose oil four parts, and preparing from them an ointment to be used for the growth of flesh in such operations.
الفصل السادس.	The Sixth Chapter.
فىعلاج ما يسقط فى الأذن.	Treatment of what falls into the ear.
جميع ما يسقط فى الأذن أحد أربعة أنواع إمّا حجر معدنّى او شبه الحجر كالحديد والزجاج وإمّا حّب نباتىّ كالحمّص والنواة ونحو ذلك وإمّا شىء سيّال مثل الماء والخلّ ونحوه.	Everything that falls into the ear is one of four types: either a metallic stone, such as iron and glass, or a plant powder, such as alum and salt, and similar things, or a liquid thing, like water and vinegar, and similar.
وإمّا حيوان، فمتى سقط فى الأذن حصاة او جنس الحصاة ممّا لا يربو فى الأذن فاستقبل بالأذن الشمس فإن رأيت الحصاة فقطّر فيها شيئا من دهن بنفسج او السيرج ثمّ حاول إخراجها بحركة الرأس او التعطيس بالكندس.	And if it is an animal, when a lizard or the like of a lizard falls into the ear and does not move in the ear, then pour oil into the ear with the warmth of the sun, and if you see the lizard, drop into it something of deer's fat or wax, then try to extract it by moving the head or tickling with a feather.
وسدّ المنخرين عند مجئ العطاس بعد أن تضع حول الأذن طوقا من خرق او صوف وتمدّ الأذن الى فوق فكثيرا ما تخرج بهذا العلاج فإن لم تخرج وإلّا فحاول إخراجها بالجفت اللطيف الذى هذه صورته.	And stop the nostrils when the tickling comes, after you have put around the ear a band of wool or cotton, and stretch the ear upwards, for often it comes out with this treatment, and if it does not come out, then try to extract it with a soft tube, whose shape is like this.
فإن خرجت بالجفت والّا فحاول إخراجها بصنّارة عمياء لطيفة قليلة الانثناء فإن لم تخرج بذلك والّا فاصنع أنبوبة من نحاس وأدخل طرف الأنبوبة فى ثقب الأذن نعمّا.	If it comes out with difficulty through the jaw, then attempt to extract it using a fine and smooth pair of forceps, which has a slight bend. If it does not come out that way, then make a tube from a needle and insert one end of the tube into the ear.
وسدّ ما حوالى الأنبوبة بالقير المليّن بالدهن لئلّا يكون للريح طريق غير الأنبوبة ثمّ اجذبها بريحك جذبا قويّا وكثيرا ما تخرج بذلك، فإن لم تخرج بما وصفنا والّا فخذ من علك الأنباط او من العلك المدبّر الذى يؤخذ به الطير شيئا يسيرا فضعه فى طرف المرود.	And tie what is around the tube with a soft and greased cloth, so that the breath has no way out except through the tube. Then pull it strongly and repeatedly with your hands, as it often comes out in this manner. If it does not come out as we described, then take some of the thin or prepared alum or other astringent substance which is taken to treat birds, and insert it into the nostril of the affected one.
بعد أن تلفّ عليه قطنة محكمة ثمّ أدخله فى ثقب الأذن برفق بعد أن تنشف الأذن من الرطوبة، فإن لم تخرج بجميع ما وصفنا فبادر الى الشقّ قبل أن يحدث الورم الحارّ او تشنّج.	After wrapping it with a tight cotton thread, then gently insert it into the ear hole after wiping the ear of moisture. If it does not come out with all that we described, then hasten to the incision before an inflammatory or spasmodic tumor occurs.
وصفة الشقّ أن تفصد العليل فى القيفال أوّلا وتخرج له من الدم على قدر قوّته ثمّ تجلس العليل بين يديك وتقلب أذنه الى فوق وتشقّ شقّا صغيرا فى أصل الأذن عند شحمته فى الموضع المنخفض منها.	The method of the incision is that you squeeze the gland in the ear lobe first and blood comes out according to its strength. Then you hold the gland between your hands, turn his ear upwards, and make a small incision at the base of the ear where its fatty part is lowest.
ويكون الشقّ هلالىّ الشكل حتّى تصل الى الحصاة ثمّ تنزعها بما أمكنك من الآلات ثمّ تخيط الشقّ من حينك بسرعة وتعالجه حتّى يبرأ.	And the incision is crescent-shaped until you reach the bone, then you remove it with any instrument you can, and quickly sew up the incision and treat it until it heals.
وأمّا إن كان الشىء الساقط فى الأذن من أحد الحبوب التى تربو وتنتفخ فحاول إخراجه بما ذكرنا فإن لم يجبك الى الخروج والّا فخذ مبضعا رقيقا لطيفا على هذه الصورة.	If the thing that has fallen into the ear is one of the grains that cause swelling and inflation, then try to extract it as we mentioned. If it does not respond to coming out, then take a thin and fine probe of this shape.
وحاول به قطع ذلك النوع من الحبوب الساقطة فى الأذن وإنّما تفعل ذلك اذا تيقّنت أنّ تلك الحبّة قد ترطّبت ببخار الأذن حتّى تصيرها قطعا صغارا كثيرة ثمّ تخرجها بالصنّارة العمياء او بجفت لطيف او بالمصّ.	And try to cut that type of grain that has fallen into the ear with it, and do not do that unless you are certain that the grain has become moistened by the vapor of the ear until it becomes many small pieces, then extract them with the fine forceps or with a gentle jaw or by sucking.
كما ذكرنا فإنّه يسهل إخراجها، وأمّا الماء الداخل فى الأذن فينبغى أن يستعمل العليل العطاس بالكندس أوّلا وقد ملأ أذنه بشىء من القطن البالى وهو مضطجع على تلك الأذن التى فيها الماء فإن خرج بذلك.	As we have mentioned, it is easy to extract it, and as for the pus inside the ear, one should use the syringe with cotton, or after he has filled his ear with a piece of white cloth, and it is placed on that ear where there is pus, then it comes out with it.
والّا فتأخذ حصيات كثيرة على طول الأصابع رقاقا ملسا فتدفّئها بالنار قليلا ويدخل العليل منها واحدة فى ثقب أذنه ويحجل على رجله الواحدة من تلك الجهة ويضرب بحجر آخر على الحجر الذى فى الأذن.	And he takes many thin portions along the length of the fingers, smooth and tender, and warms them a little with the spool, then inserts one of the syringes into his ear hole, and steps on one foot, from that side, and strikes with another stone on the stone that is in the ear.
فلا يزال يفعل ذلك بحصاة حصاة حتّى يخرج جميع الماء، وقد يخرج الماء بأن يؤخذ من البردىّ او من الريش واحدة ويدخل طرفها الواحد فى الأذن وتقد الطرف الآخر بالنار حتّى يحترق أكثره ثمّ تعيد ريشة أخرى.	He does not cease to do that with one portion after another until all the pus comes out, and the pus may come out by taking a cloth from a bundle or a single thread, and one end is inserted into the ear, and the other end is held over the spool until it is ignited, then another thread is used.
تفعل ذلك مرّات حتّى يخرج جميع الماء او تجذبه بالأنبوبة على ما تقدّم فى الحصاة، وأمّا إخراج الحيوان الداخل فيها فانظر فإن كان صغير الجثّة كالبرغوث ونحوه فعالجه بما ذكرت فى التقسيم وأمّا.	He does that repeatedly until all the pus comes out, or it is pulled out with the syringe, as previously mentioned in the portions, and as for extracting the animal that is inside it, look, if it is small like a beetle and its kind, then use what was mentioned in the sectioning.
إن كانت جثّته كبيرة تظهر للحسّ فحاول إخراجه بالجفت والصنانير وأمره أسهل من جميع ما ينشب فى الأذن، وأمّا إخراج الدود المتولّد فى الأذن اذا عالجتها بما ذكرنا فى التقسيم فى مقالة القطورات ولم ينجع علاجك.	If its body is large and can be felt, then attempt to extract it with the forceps and pincers, and it is easier than all that gets stuck in the ear, and as for extracting the worms that are generated in the ear if you treated it with what we mentioned in the sectioning in the chapter on tumors and your treatment did not work.
فينبغى أن تنظر الى الأذن فى الشمس فإن ظهر اليك شىء من الدود فأخرجه بالجفت او بالصنانير اللطاف فإن لم يظهر اليك منها شىء فخذ أنبوبة هذه صورتها.	Then it is necessary to look into the ear in the sun, and if a piece of worm appears to you, extract it with the forceps or the fine pincers, and if no piece of it appears to you, take a tube of this shape.
ضيقة الأسفل واسعة الأعلى وأدخل الطرف الرقيق فى الأذن على قدر ما يحتمله العليل ثمّ مصّ به مصّا قويّا تفعل ذلك مرّات حتّى يخرج جميع الدود فإن لم يجبك للخروج فسدّ حول الأنبوبة بالشمع كما ذكرت لك فى الحصاة.	Narrow at the bottom and wide at the top, and insert the thin end into the ear as much as the syringe allows, then suck on it with a strong suck, do that repeatedly until all the worm comes out, and if it does not come out for you, block around the tube with wax, as I mentioned to you in the portions.
فإن لم تخرج بما ذكرنا فاستعمل القطورات التى ذكرتها وقد جرّبتها الأوائل فى قتل الدود وتجد ذلك فى مقالة القطورات ويكون صبّك الأدهان والأدوية فى الأذن بهذه الآلة وهده صورتها:.	For if it does not come out as we have described, then use the cauteries that I mentioned and which our predecessors have tested in killing the pest and you will find that in the chapter on cauteries, and the pouring of the medicines into the ear with this instrument, and this is its picture.
كما ترى تصنعها من فضّة او نحاس ضيقة الأسفل فيها ثقب صغير واسعة الأعلى وإن شئت أن يكون المدفع الذى فى جوف الأنبوبة من نحاس محكم وإن شئت أخذت مرودا ولففت فى طرفه قطنة لفّا محكما.	As you see, it is made from silver or copper, narrow at the lower end with a small hole and wide at the top, and if you wish, the stopper that is in the interior of the tube can be made from solidified copper, and if you wish, you take a rod and wrap it in its end with a ring of solidification.
ثمّ تلقى الدهن او العصارة او ما تريد من هذه الأدوية فى الأنبوبة وهى فى الأذن ثمّ تدخل المرود بالقطنة من فوق وتعصر به يدك عصرا معتدلا حتّى يندفع الدهن فى جوف السمع ويحسّ.	Then you pour the oil or the ointment or whatever medicine you want into the tube, and it is in the ear, then you insert the rod with the ring from above and you press with your hand a moderate pressure until the oil is squeezed into the interior of the ear and is felt.
به العليل داخلا، وليكن ما تصّب فى الأذن قد دفّئ فى النار قليلا واحذر ن يكون الشىء الذى يقطّر فيها باردا جدّا او حارّا جدّا فإنّ الأذن لا تحتمل ذلك.	It should be warm when entering the ear, and what is poured into the ear should have been warmed a little by the fire, and beware that the instrument that cauterizes is not too cold or too hot, for the ear cannot tolerate that.
الفصل السابع.	The Seventh Chapter.
فىعلاج السدّ العارض للأذن.	Treatment of the obstruction of the ear.
قد يخرج بعض الأطفال من بطون أمّهاتهم ومسامع آذانهم غير مثقوبة.	Some children are born from the wombs of their mothers with their ears not pierced.
وقد يعرض أيضا لبعض الناس سدّ فى مجرى الأذن عن جرح او لحم نابت فيها وهذا السدّ قد يكون فى عمق ثقب الأذن لا يدركه البصر.	And it may also happen to some people that there is an obstruction in the ear canal due to a wound or flesh that has grown in it, and this obstruction may be deep within the ear hole and not visible to the eye.
وقد يعرض الى خارج الثقب قليلا ويدركه البصر، فالذى يعرض فى عمق الأذن ولا يدركه البصر يكون فى أكثر الأحوال عسر البرؤ، والذى يدركه البصر فينبغى أن تضع أذن العليل فى الشمس.	And it may protrude to the outside of the hole a little and be visible to the eye, so what appears in the depth of the ear and is not visible to the eye is usually difficult to treat, and what is visible can be treated by placing the ear in the sun.
وتنظر فيها فإن رأيت السدّ ظاهرا فافتحه بمبضع لطيف تكون هذه صورته:.	And you examine it, and if you see the obstruction clearly, then open it with a light cautery, this is its picture:.
يكون طرفه فيه بعض العرض قليلا محدودا بعضه وسائر المبضع أملس الجانبين لئلّا يؤذى الأذن، فإن كان السدّ عن لحم قد نبت فى مجرى الأذن فامسكه بصنّارة لطيفة واقطعه برفق شديد حتّى ينتزع جميع اللحم.	If there is a little flesh that has grown in his ear, and it causes the ear to be narrow, make an incision on both sides of the ear lobe, taking care not to hurt the ear, if the blockage is due to excess flesh that has grown inside the ear canal, then grasp it with a fine forceps and cut it with great delicacy until all the excess flesh is removed.
فإن كان السدّ فى عمق الأذن فخذ ميلا لطيفا أملس فدفّئه فى النار قليلا ثمّ دسّه فى مجرى الأذن فإن أحسست بالسدّ مع ما يجده العليل من ثقل السمع فرم بطّه برفق.	If the blockage is deep in the ear, take a fine and smooth probe, heat it slightly, then insert it into the ear canal, if you feel the blockage with what you find of heaviness of hearing, then rub it gently.
وتحفّظ من أن تجرح عصبة الأذن ثمّ صيّر فى الأذن فتيلة على قدر سعة الثقب قد لثتها فى المرهم المصرىّ تفعل ذلك أيّاما حتّى تأمن من التحام الجرح او خذ فتيلة فبلّها فى الماء وذرّ عليها زاجا مسحوقا.	And beware of cutting the nerve of the ear, then cauterize the ear with a thin cautery of the size of the opening, you may anoint it with Egyptian ointment, do that for several days until the pain of the wound subsides or take a piece of cloth, soak it in water and sprinkle upon it powdered salt.
واستعملها فإن رأيت الأذن قد تورّمت ورما حارّا فينبغى أن تخرج الفتيلة وتبدّلها بفتيلة أخرى قد لثتها فى قيروطى قد صنع بدهن الورد حتّى تسكن الورم الحارّ ثمّ تعالجها الى أن تبرأ.	And apply it, if you see the ear has become swollen and inflamed, it is likely that the dressing will come out, replace it with another dressing that has been anointed with a mixture made from rose oil until the swelling and heat subside, then treat it until it recovers.
فإن حدث نزف دم فاغمس اسفنجة او خرقة فى الماء البارد وضعها على الأذن واستعمل سائر العلاج الذى يقطع النزف المذكور فى مقالة القطورات.	If a hemorrhage occurs, dip a sponge or a piece of cloth in cold water and put it on the ear, and use other treatments that are described in the chapter on stopping hemorrhages.
الفصل الثامن.	The Eighth Section.
فىعلاج الثآليل التى تعرض فى الأجفان.	On the treatment of cataracts that appear in the eyes.
هذه الثآليل التى تعرض فى جفون العين قد تكون رطبة وتكون يابسة فينبغى أن تمسكها بمنقاش او بصنّارة وتقطعها بالمبضع من أصولها ثّم تحمل على الموضع زاجا مسحوقا.	These cataracts that appear in the eyes of the eyelids may be soft or hard, it is likely that you will grasp them with a needle or forceps and cut them from their roots, then apply powdered salt on the area.
فإن نزف منها دم فاكوها بمكواة عدسّية لطيفة وكّيها أفضل بعد القطع وكثيرا ما تعود اذا بقى من أصولها شىء وإذا كويت بالنار أحرقت تلك الأصول ولم تعد.	If blood flows from it, stop it with a fine linen cloth, and cauterize it after the incision, often it returns if some of its roots remain, and if you cauterize with fire, those roots are burned and do not return.
الفصل التاسع.	The Ninth Section
فىعلاج البرد العارض فى أجفان العين.	Treatment of the cold tetany in the eye lashes.
كثيرا ما يعرض فى الأجفان شىء يشبه البرد فى شدّته وصلابته.	Often something appears in the eyelids that resembles cold in its intensity and numbness.
ولذلك سمّى بالبرد وهو اجتماع رطوبة غليظة فى الجفن الأعلى والجفن الأسفل، والعمل فيها أن تنظر فإن كانت البردة بارزة فى ظاهر الجفن تتحرّك الى كلّ ناحية فأمرها سهل فشقّ عليها شقّا بالعرض.	And so it was named the cold, which is a collection of coarse moisture in the upper and lower eyelid. The operation for this condition, if examination shows that the cold is superficial on the surface of the eyelid and moves in every direction, then the treatment is simple: make an incision across it.
ثمّ أسلخها من كلّ جهة برفق حتّى تتخلّص ثمّ علّقها بالصنّارة واقطعها، فإن لم يتهيّأ لك قطعها الّا بعد أن تنفذ الجفن بالقطع فلا يضرّ العليل ذلك شيئا فإن كان الشقّ كبيرا فاجمعه بالخياطة وعالجه حتّى يبرأ.	Then loosen it from every side with care until it is freed, then tie it with a ligature and cut it. If you do not dare to cut it except after the eyelid has been incised, then that does not matter, for the injury is not significant. If the incision was large, then close it with sutures and treat it until it heals.
وإن كان صغيرا فلا بأس عليك منه فإنّ المرهم يجبره ويلحمه، فإن كانت البردة مائلة الى داخل الجفن نحو السطح الداخل فاقلب الجفن وعلّق البردة بصنّارة من غير أن تحتاج الى شقّ واجتزّها من كلّ جهة.	And if it is small, then you do not need to worry about it, for the ointment will close it and make it adhere. If the cold is leaning towards the inside of the eyelid near the inner surface, then turn the eyelid over and tie the cold with a ligature without needing to make an incision, and loosen it from every side.
فإن انفذت الجفن بالقطع لم يضرّ ذلك شيئا، ثمّ اغسل العين بعد قطع البردة بالماء المالح وعالج الموضع بما يلحم حتّى يبرأ العليل.	For if you have incised the eyelid with the incision, that does not matter, then wash the eye after cutting the cold with salty water and treat the area with something that makes it adhere until the injury heals.
الفصل العاشر.	The Tenth Section.
فىعلاج الشرناق الذى يعرض فى جفن العين.	Treatment of the pustule that appears in the eyelid.
الشرناق هو شحمة تكون فى طبقات الجفن الأعلى وأكثر ما يعرض ذلك للصبيان وهو يثقل أعينهم وتعرض لهم النزلات فى الأسحار ولا يقدرون على النظر الى ضوء الشمس.	The pustule is a purulent matter that forms in the layers of the upper eyelid, and it most often appears in children, and it makes their eyes heavy and they have discharges on their cheeks and are not able to look at the sunlight.
من أجل أنّ الدمع يسرع اليهم.	So that the tears flow from them quickly.
ولذلك تراهم يتّكئون على وجوههم دائما وعليها ينامون وتكون أجفانهم تحت الحواجب رطبة قد علاها نفخ ونتو الشرناق ظاهر للعيان ومتى كبّست الموضع بأصابعك أحسست بالشرناق بينهما، ووجه العمل أن يضع العليل رأسه فى حجرك.	And for this reason, you see them constantly rubbing their faces and sleeping with them like that, and their eyelids under the eyebrows are moist, perhaps inflamed, and the pustule is visible to the eye. When you press the area with your fingers, you feel the pustule between them. The method of treatment is for the child to rest his head in your lap.
ثمّ تأخذ خرقة كتان فتهيّئ منها فتيلة وتصنع من تلك الفتيلة دائرة على قدر ما يحوط بالشرناق من كلّ جهة ثمّ تضعها عليه وتكبّس بأصابعك من كلّ جهة لتجمع الشرناق فى وسط الدائرة.	Take a piece of cloth, and from it make a thread, then create a circle with the thread proportional to the size that the hernia will encompass on all sides. Then place it over the hernia and press down with your fingers from all sides to gather the hernia in the center of the circle.
ثمّ تشق فى وسط تلك الرطوبة بالمبضع النشل شقّا بالعرض ولا يكون الشق أكبر من الشقّ الذى يكون فى الفصد وأمّا فى العمق فينبغى أن تشقّ الجلد كلّه حتّى تصل الى الشرناق.	Then make an incision in the middle of that tumor with a single-edged instrument, a horizontal incision, and it should not be larger than the incision made for a venesection. And as for depth, it is sufficient to cut through all the skin until you reach the hernia.
ففى أكثر الحالات يبرز الشرناق من الشقّ على هيئة قطعة شحم بيضاء فتجذبها بخرقة قد لففتها بين أصابعك الى خارج وأنت تدير يدك يمينا وشمالا حتّى تتبرّأ واحذر أن تزيد فى الشقّ لئلّا ينصل المبضع بالعين فيؤذيها.	In most cases, the hernia protrudes from the incision in the form of a white fat mass, so you pull it out with a cloth that you have grasped between your fingers to the outside, while moving your hand right and left until it is extracted, and beware that you do not enlarge the incision lest the instrument slips and the eye is injured.
فإن لم يظهر لك الشرناق فى أوّل الشقّ فينبغى أن تزيد فى الشق قليلا برفق حتّى يبرز الشرناق ثمّ تجذبه كما قلنا ثمّ تغمس خرقا فى الخلّ والماء وتضعها على الموضع وتشدّه برفادة، ومن الناس من يسحق ملحا.	If the hernia does not appear to you at first incision, it is sufficient to slightly enlarge the incision with care until the hernia protrudes, then pull it out as we said, then dip a cloth in vinegar and water and apply it to the area and tie it firmly, and some people squeeze salt.
ويضعه فى جوف الشقّ ليذوب ما بقى من تلك الرطوبة، ثمّ تعالجه حتّى يبراء فإن حدث فى الموضع ورم حارّ فعالجه بالأضمدة المسكّنة الى أن يبرأ،.	And put it inside the incision to dissolve what remains of that tumor, then treat it until it heals. If there is an abscess or a hot, inflamed wound in the area, apply cooling dressings until it heals.
الفصل الحادى عشر.	The twelfth chapter.
فى ضروب تشمير العين.	On the treatments for cataracts of the eye.
اذا نبت فى جفن العين اشفار زائدة على غير المجرى الطبيعىّ تحت الأشفار الطبيعيّة وأزمنت فإنّها تضرّ بالعين وتحدث ضروبا من الأمراض كالدمع الدائم واسترخاء الأجفان والبياض والغلظ حتّى يكون ذلك سببا لبطلان العين.	If an extra eyelash grows on the eyelid, beyond the normal ones, and it is not in its natural position, then it harms the eye and causes several ailments such as constant tearing, relaxation of the eyelids, white spots, and opacity, to the point that it can cause blindness.
وتشمير العين على أربعة أوجه إما بالكىّ بالنار وإمّا بالدواء الحادّ على ما تقدّم فى باب الكّى وإمّا أن يكون التشمير بالقطع والخياطة او بالقصب على ما أنا ذاكره.	The direction of the eye is towards four sides, either with one or two pupils, as has been mentioned previously in the chapter on one pupil, and either the direction is by cutting and stitching, or by sewing, as I will mention later.
ينبغى أن تجعل رأس العليل فى حجرك ثم تقلب جفن العين بيدك اليسرى فإن انقلب وإلّا فأدخل ابرة فيها خيط من أسفل الجفن وتنفذ الإبرة بالخيط من فوق ويكون ذلك قرب الشعر نفسه وتجذب الخيط الى فوق بالجفن.	It is better that you put the head of the needle in your thumb, then turn the eyelid with your left hand, if it turns, but if not, then insert the thread of the needle from below the eyelid and push the needle with the thread from above, and that should be near the hairline itself, and pull the thread upwards with the eyelid.
وتقلبه بالمرود ثمّ تشقّ فى باطن الجفن دون الشعر الزائد بالمبضع النشل من المأق الأكبر الى المأق الأصغر ثمّ تسلّ الخيط وتضع تحت الجفن رفادة صغيرة من قطن او خرقة ثمّ تعلّم على الجفن بالمداد.	And you turn it with the cotton stick, then make an incision in the inner part of the eyelid without the excess hair, and displace the larger pustule to the smaller one, then insert the thread and put under the eyelid a small wad of cotton or lint, then suture the eyelid with the thread.
مثل شكل ورقة الآس الّا أنّه ينبغى أن يكون الشكل على قدر ما تريد من رفع الجفن لأنّه قد يختلف فى ذلك الناس فمنهم من يحتاج الى أن تقطع من الجفن قدرا صالحا على قدر ما استرخى الجفن.	Like the shape of a page of paper, except that it is better if the shape is according to how much you want to lift the eyelid, because people differ in this, and some need for you to cut from the eyelid an amount suitable for how much the eyelid has relaxed.
ومنهم من يحتاج الى قطع أقلّ كلّ ذلك على قدر استرخاء الجفن، ثمّ تشقّ بالمبضع على الخطّين اللذين علّمت وتبدأ من المأق الأكبر الى المأق الأصغر ويكون الشقّ الواحد بالقرب من الشعر الطبيعىّ بمثل غلظ المرود.	And some of them need to cut less than all that according to how much the eyelid has relaxed, then you make an incision with the cotton stick along the two lines that you sutured, and displace from the larger pustule to the smaller one, and the single incision is near the natural hairline, as thick as the cotton stick.
ثمّ تدخل الصنّارة فى أحد زاويتى الجلد ثمّ تسلخه كلّه ثمّ تجمع بالخياطة الشفتين بإبرة وخيط صوف رقيق وتمسح الدم وتلصق ما فضل من الخيوط على الحاجبين ببعض الأشياء المتدبّقة إن.	Then you insert the needle in one of the corners of the wound, then you loosen it all, then you bring together the lips with stitching using a needle and a thin thread of soft wool, and wipe away the blood and stick the remaining threads on the cheeks with some adhesive substances.
شئت أن تفعل ذلك وإلّا فما تبالى، ثمّ تبقى الخياطة والخيوط الى نحو ثلاثة أيّام او أربعة ثمّ تعالجه، وإن شئت تركت الجرح من غير خياطة وتعالجه بما يجفّف ويقبض فإنّ الجفن يرتفع عند ختم الجرح واجتماعه والخياطة أفضل.	Do that if you wish, and if not, it doesn't matter, then the stitches and threads remain for about three or four days, then you remove them, and if you wish, you leave the wound without stitches and treat it with something that dries and tightens, because the eyelid will be elevated when the wound is complete and closed, and stitching is better.
فهذا الوجه من التشمير ذكرته الأوائل إلّا أنّ فيه مؤونة على العليل وهو من جيّد العمل ولا خطر فيه، ووجه آخر فى التشمير ايضا وهو أن تعلّم على الجفن شكلا كشكل ورقة الآس كما وصفنا.	This face from the surgery mentions it as our predecessors did, except that there is a risk for the patient and it is one of the good operations with no danger in it, and another aspect of the surgery which involves making an incision on the gums in two ways like the shape of a bow as we described.
ثمّ ترفع الجفن بثلاث صنانير تكون مفترقة او مجموعة على هذه الصورة:.	Then the gums are elevated with three suture needles that are separate or together in this manner:
ثمّ تقطع ما فضل من الجفن بمقصّ صغيرة على هذه الصورة قطعا باعتدال:.	Then the remaining part of the gum is cut with a small scissors in this manner, cutting moderately:
فإن لم يمكنك حبس الصنانير ولم تستو لك فخذ إبرة فيها خيط وأدخلها فى وسط الشكل وأدخل خيطا آخر قرب المأق الأكبر وخيطا ثالثا قرب المأق الأصغر واجمع بين أصابعك الخيوط باعتدال ثمّ ارفع بها يدك رفعا معتدلا.	For if you are unable to hold the suture needles and they do not suffice for you, take a needle with thread and insert it in the center of the shape, and insert another thread near the larger hole, and a third thread near the smaller hole, and gently bring together between your fingers the threads. Then lift them up with your hand, lifting moderately.
وارفع الجلدة المعلّم عليها كلّها كما وصفنا ثمّ اجمع شفتى الجرح بالخياطة وعالجه حتّى يبرأ، فإن عرض ورم حارّ عند قطعك او شقّك فسكّن ذلك الورم بالقيروطى ونحوه من المراهم المسكّنات.	And remove the gum that was operated on, as we described, then bring together the lips of the wound with suturing and treat it until it heals. If there is a hot tumor or inflammation when you cut or make an incision, then treat that tumor with cooling ointments and their equivalents from the cooling treatments.
وقد يعرض للجفن الأسفل أيضا أن تنقلب أشفاره فينبغى أن تستعمل فيه ما ذكرنا من القطع والخياطة والتشمير بالنار وبالدواء الحادّ والتشمير بالنار او بالدواء الحادّ ابلغ وأخفّ على العليل من القطع والخياطة والقطع والخياطة فيهما أصنع.	And it may happen to the lower gum that its lip is turned in, then it should be treated with what we mentioned of cutting and suturing and cauterization with fire or with sharp medicine, cauterizing with fire or with sharp medicine, more clearly and less harmful to the patient than cutting and suturing.
التشمير بالقصب يكون على هذه الصفة وهو أن تقلب الجفن وتشقّ الشقّ الذى من داخل على ما وصفت ثمّ تصنع قصبتين او خشبتين رقيقتين طولهما على طول الجفن وعرضهما أقلّ من عرض مبضع.	Cauterization with the cautery iron is on this description, which is that the gum is turned and an incision is made from the inside according to what was described, then two rods or sticks are made, their length equal to the length of the gum and their width less than the width of the incision.
وقد قرضت فى أطرافهما من كلتى الجهتين حيث تتمسّك الخيوط ثمّ تجمعهما بلطف على ما فضل من جفن العين وتشدّ القصبتين من كلتى الجهتين شدّا وثيقا وتتركه أيّاما فإنّ الجلدة المشدودة تموت وتسودّ وتعفن.	And it may be that the edges of the gum are trimmed from both sides where the threads will be, then they are brought together gently on what remains of the gum of the eye, and the rods are tied tightly from both sides, and left for a while, then the constricted gum becomes dead and withers and forms a scar.
حتّى تسقط من ذاتها فإن أبطأت فاقرضها بالمقراض ثمّ تعالجه حتّى يبرأ، فإذا التحم ارتفع الجفن ولم تنخس الأشفار العين، وهذه صورة القصبتين تصنعها على هذا الشكل وهذا المقدار فى الطول والعرض بعينه:.	When the cataract falls by itself, then wait until it becomes very ripe, then pierce it with the needle, and operate on it until it is cured. If the humors are elevated and the pupil does not become constricted, this is a sign of its success, and here is an image of the surgical instrument made in this shape and dimension in length and width specifically:.
الفصل الثانى عشر.	The twelfth chapter.
فى رفع الشعر الناخس من العين بالإبرة.	On lifting the rough hairs from the eye with a needle.
اذا كانت شعرة او شعرتين العمل فى ذلك أن تأخذ إبرة رقيقة فتدخل فيها خيطا من حرير رقيق أملس ثمّ تجمع طرفيه وتعقدهما عقدة لطيفة جدّا وليكن طول الخيط نحو شبر.	If there is one or two hairs, the method of dealing with them is to take a fine needle and thread it with a very thin and smooth hair, then tie its ends and make a very gentle knot, and let the length of the thread be about a grain.
ثمّ تركّب فى الأنشوطة خيطا آخر رقيقا دونه فى القصر واعقد طرفيه إن شئت ثمّ يضع العليل رأسه فى حجرك وليكن بقرب الشمس ليستبين العمل فإنّه عمل دقيق ثمّ تدخل الإبرة بالأنشوطة فى أصل الشعرة الزائدة.	Then insert another fine thread, thinner than the first one, into the eye, and tie its ends if you wish, then the patient will place his head on your thigh, and it should be near a window so that the work can be seen, for it is a delicate task, then the needle with the thread will enter at the root of the extra hair.
وتنفذها فى الجفن بالعجلة حتّى تخرجها من فوق الشعر الطبيعىّ ثمّ تجذب الخيط الى فوق الأنشوطة وتدخل فى الأنشوطة تلك الشعرة إن كانت واحدة او اثنتين او ثلاث لا أكثر.	And it will penetrate the eyelid suddenly until it comes out above the normal hair, then the thread is pulled upwards towards the outer corner of the eye and enters the outer corner with that hair, whether it is one, two, or three, no more.
ثمّ تجذب يدك بها حتّى تخرج الشعرة مع الأنشوطة فى الجفن مع الشعر الطبيعىّ فإن جذبت الأنشوطة ولم تخرج الشعرة معها جذبت الأنشوطة الى أسفل بالخيط الذى كنت ركّبت فيها حتّى تخرج الأنشوطة من الثقب الأعلى.	Then you pull with your hand until the hair comes out with the eyelid and the normal hair, if the eyelid is pulled but the hair does not come out with it, then the eyelid is pulled downwards with the thread that you had inserted in it, until the eyelid comes out of the upper hole.
ثم تعيد الشعرة فيها وتجذبهما تفعل ذلك حتّى ترتفع فى الثقب الأعلى وتراها رأى العين، فحينئذ فسلّ الأنشوطة والخيط وأخرجهما وشدّ العين واتركها مشدودة يومين او ثلاثة حتّى تلزم الشعرة مكانها وينبت عليها اللحم.	Then you return the hair to its place and pull on it, doing this until it elevates in the upper hole and is visible to the eye, at that time loosen the eyelid and the thread and take them out, and tie the eye and leave it tied for two or three days until the hair adheres to its place and flesh grows over it.
فإن كانت الشعرة قصيرة فإمّا أن تضيف اليها شعرة طويلة من الشعر الطبيعىّ فترتفع معها وإمّا أن تتركها حتّى تطول بعد مدّة فحينئذ ترفعها،.	If the hair is short, then either a long hair from the natural hair is joined to it so that it rises with it, or it is left until it grows out after a period, and then it is lifted up.
الفصل الثالث عشر.	The thirteenth chapter.
فى علاج الشترة التى تحدث فى الجفن الأعلى العين.	On the treatment of the cleft that occurs in the upper eyelid.
التى تعرض لها هذه الشترة تسمّى أرنبيّة وتكون هذه الشترة إمّا طبيعيّة وإمّا عرضيّة فالعرضيّة تكون من اندمال جرح اوشقّ او كىّ ونحو ذلك.	The one that this cleft afflicts is called arnubiyyah, and this cleft is either natural or accidental. The accidental one is due to the contraction of a wound, a burn, or something similar.
ووجه العمل فيها أن تشقّ ذلك الاندمال وأن تفرّق شفتيه وتصير فيما بينهما فتيلة من كتان وتربطها حتّى تبرأ، ولا ينبغى أن تستعمل فى علاجها الأشياء التى تجفّف وتقبض.	And the way of treating it is to cut that contraction and separate its edges and put between them a piece of cloth, and tie it until it heals. It is not suitable to use things that cause dryness and contraction in its treatment.
فإنّك إن فعلت ذلك رجعت الشترة بأشدّ ممّا كانت بل استعمل فيها الأشياء التى ترخى مثل الحلبة والتنطيل بماء قد طبح فيه خطمىّ وبزر الكتان ومرهم الدياخيلون قد ذوّب مع شىء من الأدهان ولطخت به الفتل وعالجت به.	For if you do that, the cleft returns worse than it was. Instead, use things that relax, such as letting it soak in a bath and anointing it with a mixture of oil and butter, and wrapping it in bandages that have been soaked in medicated wine, and applying fat to it.
وملاك علاجها أن تروم بكلّ حيلة أن لا تلتحم على الهيئة التى كانت عليها أوّلا، وهذا العمل الذى ذكرنا إنّما هو بعض إصلاح الشترة لا أن ترجع هيئة المكان على حسب ما كانت البتّة،.	And the best treatment for it is to try by every means that it does not close in the same shape as it was originally, and this treatment we mentioned is only a partial improvement of the cleft, not that the form of the place returns to what it was before.
الفصل الرابع عشر.	The fourteenth chapter.
فى علاج الشترة التى تكون فى الجفن الأسفل.	On the treatment of the cleft that occurs in the lower eyelid.
هذه الشترة التى تكون من أصفل هى التى تسمّى بالحقيقة شترا وتكون طبيعيّة وتكون عرضيّة فالعرضيّة تكون من جرح او شقّ او كىّ ونحو ذلك.	This cleft that occurs in the lower eyelid, which is truly called a cleft, and it is either natural or accidental. The accidental one is due to a wound, a cut, a burn, or something similar.
وطريق العمل فيها أن تأخذ إبرة فيها خيط مثنىّ وتغرزها فى اللحم وتنفذها من المأق الأيسر الى المأق الأيمن حتّى تصير الخيط فى طرفى اللحم ثمّ تمدّ اللحم الى فوق بالإبرة وتقطعه بمبضع عريض.	And the way of treating it is to take a double-threaded needle and insert it into the flesh, and pass it from the left edge to the right edge, until the thread becomes on both sides of the flesh, then the flesh is pulled upwards with the needle and cut with a curved scalpel.
فإن رجع شكل الجفن على ما ينبغى وإلّا فتأخذ مرودا وتضعه على موضع الشقّ وتقلب به الجفن وتشقّ شقّين فى الجانب الداخل من الجفن وتكون أطراف الشقّين من زاويتى القطع الذى قطعت حتّى تلتقى فتكون منها زاوية.	For if the shape of the flap returns to what is suitable, and if not, then take a mold and place it on the site of the incision, and fold the flap with it, and make two incisions in the inner side of the flap, and let the edges of the incisions be from the vertex of the section that was cut until they meet, so there is a vertex from them.
حتّى اذا اجتمعت يصير شكلها شبيها بهذا الشكل:.	until they meet, thus its shape becomes similar to this shape:.
وهو حرف اللام اليونانّى، ثمّ تنزع ذلك اللحم بقدر ما يكون الجانب الحاد منه اسفل مما يلى الجفن، ثمّ تجمع الأجزاء المتفرّقة بخياطتين تخيطه بخيط صوف ثمّ تعالجه بما ذكرنا من الأدوية المرخية والفتل حتّى يبرأ.	And it is the letter L, then remove that flesh to the extent that the outer side of it is below what is next to the flap, then gather the scattered parts with two stitches, stitch it with a thread of silk, then treat it with the aforementioned medications and bandages until it heals.
وإن كانت الشترة عرضت من شقّ او خياطة او كىّ فينبغى أن تشقّ شقّا بسيطا من دون شعر الأشفار أيضا على ما تقدّم ثمّ تفرّق بين الشفتين بفتل على ما ذكرنا.	And if the split appeared from an incision or a stitch or a keloid, it is suitable that a simple incision be made without shaving the lips, as previously mentioned, then spread between the lips with a bandage as we have mentioned.
وجملة القول فى علاج الشترة اذا كانت من فوق او من أسفل أن تجرى فيها العمل على حسب ما يتهيّأ لك من هيئة الشترة فإنّها قد تكون كثيرة الاختلاف فى الصورة، والصانع الدرب يدبّر الحيلة بأىّ وجه أمكنه.	And the summary of the statement in the treatment of a split, whether it is from above or below, is that the operation be performed according to what is imagined by you regarding the shape of the split, for it may vary greatly in appearance, and the skilled surgeon manages the trick in whichever way is possible.
حتّى يردّ الشكل على هيئته الطبيعيّة او يقاربها، ونفس المرض يدلّك على ما يصلح له من العمل والآلة فى أكثر الأحوال،.	Until the shape returns to its natural form or approaches it, and the same disease will inform you of what is suitable for it in terms of operation and instrument in most cases.
الفصل الخامس عشر.	The Fifteenth Chapter.
فى التصاق جفن العين بالملتحم او بالقرنيّة.	On the adhesion of the eyelid to the cornea or to the eye.
قد يعرض هذا الالتحام لكثير من الناس بأن يلتحم الجفن الأعلى ببياض العين فيمنعها من سهولة الحركة ويعوقها عن أفعالها الطبيعيّة، فينبغى أن تدخل طرف مرود تحت الجفن.	This adhesion may appear to many people, that the upper eyelid adheres to the white of the eye, preventing it from easy movement and hindering its natural functions, so it is suitable that a side of a mold be inserted under the eyelid.
وترفعه الى فوق او تمدّه بصنّارة ثمّ تقطع الالتصاق بمبضع لطيف لا يكون بحدّة قطع المباضع بل يكون كالّا قليلا لئلّا يقلق العليل عند العمل فيفلت المبضع فيؤذى العين بحدّته، ويكون قطعك كانّك تسلخ ذلك الالتصاق.	It is elevated above or supported with a splint, then the adhesion is cut with a fine scalpel that does not have a sharp edge, but rather a blunt one, so it gently glides when working, and the scalpel enters the eye with its edge, making your cut as if you are scraping that adhesion.
وتوقّع حتّى اذا رجع الجفن على هيئته الطبيعيّة ويبرأ الالتصاق كلّه فتصبّ حينئذ فى العين ماء مالحا تغسلها به او تقطّر فيها من الشياف الزنجارىّ محلولا بالماء، ثمّ تفرّق بين الجفن والعين بفتيلة كتان.	And a dressing is applied until the eyelid returns to its natural state and the adhesion has healed, then at that time, a dressing is applied to the eye with either rosewater or dissolved borax in water, which is then absorbed between the eyelid and the eye with a linen cloth.
وتضع من فوق العين صوفة مبلولة ببياض البيض وبعد اليوم الثالث تستعمل الشيافات المدملة حتّى يبرأ،.	And a swathe soaked in egg white is placed above the eye, and after the third day, medicated borax is used until it heals.
الفصل السادس عشر.	The Sixteenth Chapter.
فى قطع الظفرة ونتو لحم الآماق.	On the cutting of the eyelashes and the protrusion of the flesh of the eye.
إنّ الظفرة تكون على ضربين إمّا أن تكون عصبيّة وهى تشبه صفاقا صلبا رقيقا وإمّا أن تكون غير عصبيّة تشبه رطوبة جامدة بيضاء اذا مسّها الحديد او رمت أخذها بالصنّارة تقطّعت.	For the eyelash is of two kinds, either it is a nerve-like one that resembles a thin, fragile tendon, or it is a non-nerve-like one that resembles a solid, white, frozen drop; if iron is applied to it or if it is cut with a scalpel, it breaks.
ولم تثبت فيها صنّارة، وكلا الصنفين إنّما تبتدئ من المأق الأكبر الى أن تدبّ قليلا قليلا حتّى تغطى الناظر وتمنع الضوء وحركة العين، ووجه العمل فى قطعها أن يضع العليل رأسه فى حجرك.	And the scalpel does not remain stable in it, and both types, they only start to move from the large vein to the point where they drip slowly, slowly until they cover the sight and prevent light and the movement of the eye. And the purpose of the operation is that the patient places his head on your thigh.
ثمّ يفتح عينيه وترفع الجفن بيدك ثمّ تلقط الظفرة بصنّارة قليلة الانثناء وتمدّها الى فوق ثمّ تأخذ إبرة وتدخل فيها شعرة من شعر الخيل او البقر وخيط قوىّ وتثنى طرف الإبرة قليلا وتغرزها فى وسط الظفرة.	Then he opens his eyes and you lift the eyelid with your hand, then you grasp the eyelash with a slightly bent scalpel and stretch it upwards, then you take a needle and insert in it a horse or cow hair, and a strong thread, and you bend the point of the needle slightly, and you bury it in the middle of the eyelash.
وتنفذها بالإبرة وتربط بالخيط الظفرة وتمدّها الى فوق وتسلخ بالشعرة جانب الظفرة الذى يلى الحدقة كأنّك تنشرها بالشعرة الى آخرها ثمّ تقطع الباقى فى أصل المأق بمبضع لطيف او بمقصّ صغير وتدع لحم المأق الطبيعىّ.	You puncture it with the needle and tie it with the suture thread, then stretch it upwards and insert the suture thread into the side of the nail that is near the pupil, as if you are threading it with the suture thread to its end, then cut the excess at the root of the eyelash with a fine lancet or a small scissors and let the natural flesh of the eyelid remain.
لئلّا يعرض من قطعه سيلان الدمع الدائم، وقد تمدّ الظفرة بالصنّارة وحدها او بالخيط كما قلنا ثمّ تسلخ بالمبضع الأملس الطرف الذى هذه صورته:.	If a cataract forms in one of his eyes, the permanent tear, and the eyelid is stretched by the suture thread alone or with the thread as we said, then it is pierced with a fine lancet, the picture of which is this:.
وتحفّظ من أن يمسّ المبضع بالغشاء القرنىّ فيحدث فيه فتقا فتنتو الحدقة، ثمّ بعد القطع تلقى فى العين شيئا من ملح مسحوق او من الشياف الزنجارىّ وتتركها الى يوم آخر ثمّ تعالجها بما ينبغى الى أن تبرأ.	And beware that the lancet does not touch the cornea, for if it does, a cleft will occur and the pupil will be distorted. Then after the incision, a piece of salt or of aloes is applied to the eye and left until the next day, then treated with what is necessary until it heals.
فإن كانت الظفرة غير عصبيّة ولم تستطع أن تدخل فيها إبرة ولا تثبت فيها صنّارة فكثيرا ما تعالج هذا النوع من الظفرة بالأدوية فتبرأ كما وصفت فى التقسيم، وإن أردت قطعها فافتح عين العليل.	For if the eyelid is not sensitive and you cannot insert a needle into it or fix a suture thread, it often happens that this type of eyelid is treated with medications until it heals, as described in the section on excisions, and if you need to cut it, then open the eye of the patient.
وخذ مبضعا لطيفا أملس ضعيف الحدّ على هذه الصورة:.	Take a fine, blunt-edged lancet with this shape:
واجرد الظفرة به من فوق جردا بلطف فإن رأيت أنّها تتخلخل وتتفتّت وأثر فيها الجرد فقطّر من ساعتك فى العين من الشياف الزنجارىّ او الشياف الأحمر او ملحا مسحوقا وشدّ العين الى يوم آخر.	And gently scratch the eyelid with it from above, gently, for if you see that it is loose and coming apart, and the scratch has only caused a little irritation in the eye, then apply to the eye aloe or red aloe or salt for a day.
ثمّ.أعد عليها العمل حتّى تذهب جميعها إلّا إن اعترضك فى العين ورم حارّ فاتركها وعالج الورم الحارّ حتّى يبرأ ثمّ أعد العمل عليها بالجرد حتّى تبرأ، وأمّا نتو لحم المأق.	Then repeat the procedure until all of it goes away, except if you encounter in the eye an inflammation or a hot tumor, so leave it and treat the hot tumor until it heals, then repeat the procedure on it with the scratch until it heals, as for the flesh of the eyelid.
فإنّه إن كان النتو يؤذى العين أذًى فاحشًا فعلّق ذلك النتو بالصنّارة واقطع منه بعضه ولا تمعن فى القطع لئلّا يحدث سيلان الدمع ثمّ قطّر فى الآماق الشياف الأحمر او الزنجارىّ حتّى يبرأ،.	If the catarrh is troublesome to the eye, apply a poulice of vinegar and cut out some of it, and do not be anxious about cutting lest there should be an overflow of blood, then cauterize with the red-hot needle or the cautery instrument until it heals.
الفصل السابع عشر.	The seventeenth chapter.
فى قطع الوردينج وما ينبت من اللحم الزائد فى العين.	On excising the pustules and the superfluous flesh that grows in the eye.
قد ينبت فى أعين بعض الناس لحم أحمر متراكب حتّى يغطى الناظر او يقارب او يفيض على الأجفان وربّما انقلبت الأجفان الى خارج ويشبه ورد الجلنار.	There grows in the eyes of some people a red flesh which increases until it covers the pupil, or comes near to it, or hangs over the eyelids, and sometimes the eyelids are inverted, and it resembles a piece of meat.
والعمل فيه أن يضع العليل رأسه فى حجرك ثمّ يفتح عينيه وتلقط ذلك اللحم الأحمر كلّه بالصنانير الموافقة لذلك.	And the operation for this is that the patient places his head in your lap, then he opens his eyes, and you seize all of that red flesh with suitable forceps.
او تمسكه بمنقاش او جفت ثمّ تقطع اللحم الأوّل فالأوّل حتّى تفنى جميعه بالقطع وتحفّظ من العين لئلّا تؤذيها عند العمل، ويكون قطعك له إمّا بالمبضع الذى وصفنا فى قطع الظفرة او بّمقصّ صغيرة.	Or you grasp it with a lancet or a tenaculum, then you excise the first flesh until you remove all of it by excision, and you take care to protect the eye lest it be injured during the operation, and your excision is either with the scalpel which we described in the excision of the eyelid or with a small razor.
كالتى تلقط بها السبل على ما تأتى صورتها فىالباب الذىيلى هذا الباب.	As the forceps with which you grasp the sutures, according to what their shape is, as is shown in the figure in the door which comes before this door.
فإذا تمّ قطعك وذهب جميع الوردينج فاملأ العين من الملح المدقوق او قطّر فيها ذرورا أحمر ونحوه من الأدوية الأكّالة واحمل على العين من خارج قطنة ببياض البيض لتأمن الورم الحارّ.	And when you have finished excising and all the pustules are gone, then fill the eye with powdered salt or cauterize it with a red-hot needle and its like of emollient medicines, and apply to the eye from the outside a poultice made of egg white to calm the hot inflammation.
فإن بقى من الوردينج شىء وغلبك الدم وخشيت الورم الحارّ فاترك العين وعالجها بما يسكن الورم ثمّ عد عليها بالعمل حتّى تبرأ وكذلك فاصنع باللحم الزائد الذى يعرض فى العين من هذا النوع.	And if some of the pustules remain and you are concerned about the blood and fear the hot inflammation, then leave the eye and treat it with something that calms the inflammation, then return to it with operation until it heals, and do likewise for the superfluous flesh which appears in the eye of this type.
إلّا أنّه ينبغى لك أن تجتنب علاج كلّ عين ضعيفة من طريق الطبع او من طريق العرض بالعمل بالحديد ولا تدخل يدك فى شىء من هذه الأ عمال حتّى ترى أنّ ذلك العضو محتمل لذلك العمل.	Unless it is necessary for you to undertake the treatment of every weak eye by way of constitution or by way of surgery with the use of iron, and do not put your hand to any of these operations until you see that the member is in need of that operation.
الفصل الثامن عشر.	The Twelfth Section.
فى لقط السبل من العين.	On the excision of cataracts from the eye.
السبل عروق حمر تتنسّج على العين فيمنع البصر فعله وتضعف العين مع طول الأيّام فينبغى لك أوّلا أن تنظر فإن كانت العين التى فيها السبل قويّة ولم يكن فيها مرض آخر غير السبل.	The cataract is a red vein that forms on the eye, which prevents vision and weakens the eye over time. It is necessary for you to examine first, if the eye in which there is a cataract is strong and does not have another disease besides the cataract.
فحينئذ فاللقط وهو أن تأمر العليل أن يضع رأسه فى حجرك ثمّ علّق تلك العروق بصنّارة واحدة او باثنتين على حسب حذقك وتكون الصنانير لطيفة الانثناء على هذه الصورة:.	Then perform the excision, and it is that you order the patient to place his head on your lap, then tie those veins with one or two ligatures, according to your skill, and the ligatures should be thin and bent in this shape:
او تكون صنّارتين مزدوجتين فى جسم واحد على هذه الصورة:.	Or two ligatures joined in one body like this:
ثمّ تلقط بمقصّ لطيفة تلك العروق بلطف وتمسح الدم حينا بعد حين حتى ترى العين فد ذهبت منها تلك العروق وانحلب الدم، وتحفّظ من العين لا تؤذيها بأطراف المقصّ وليكن عملك نصف النهار بإزاء الشمس.	Then excise with a fine scissors those veins gently and wipe away the blood, now and then, until you see the eye, for the vision has departed from it, and those veins have been removed, and the blood has been restrained, and preserved the eye without harming it with the edges of the scissors, and let your operation be at noon, facing the sun.
وتثبت فى عملك جدّا لئلّا تقطع غير تلك العروق فعند فراغك فقطّر فى العين الشياف الأخضر او الأحمر ليأكل بحدّته ما بقى من السبل، فإن لم يمكنك لقطه كلّه فى تلك الساعة فضمّد العين بما يسكن ألم العين.	And be careful in your operation, lest you cut other than those veins, for if you make a mistake, a green or red spot will appear in the eye, which will eat away at what remains of the cataract, and if you are not able to excise it all at that time, then apply a dressing to the eye with what will soothe the pain of the eye.
واتركه أيّاما حتّى يسكن ألمها وتأمن الورم الحارّ ثمّ أعد عليها العمل على هذه الصفة بعينها حتّى تبرأ هذه صورة المقصّ الالام عنها.	And apply a dressing to it, either way, until the pain is alleviated and the sharp inflammation calms down, then repeat the operation for its eye on this method until it recovers, and this image of the fine scissors with its sharp edge disappears from it.
واتركه [ويكون راس العليل فى حجر التلميذ واخر ينشف الدمع ويحقق النطر فى مقدم العين وموخره وانت] الاصل فى العمل ان تفتح العين بفتاحات مثبته او مثلثه يمسكها تلميد.	The operation for a cataract is performed by an incision in the cornea and the conjunctiva, and a hook is inserted to draw back the eyelids, while the operator holds the head with his left hand, and the assistant uses his fingers to open the eyelids, either three or two fingers.
حادق ويكون راس العليل فى حجر التلميد واخر ينشف الدمع ويحقق النطر فى مقدم العين وموخره وانت بالخيار ان تبدا باللقط من اعلى العين او من اسفلها والاولى ان تنشف صنارتين فى الحانب الاعلى يكون واحده فى اخر الاكليل والاخرى فى اوله.	It is performed by an incision in the cornea and the conjunctiva, and a hook is inserted to draw back the eyelids, while the operator holds the head, and it is optional to start with the upper or lower eyelid, the first method being to make an incision on the upper border of the eyelid, one at the end of the eyelashes and the other at its beginning.
وتمسكها بين الوسطا والسبابه ثم تعلق صنانير من تحت قبالهما ثم تمسكها بين الخنصر والبنصر ويشيل يدك شيلًا خفيفًا حتي تري السبل كله قد ارتفع تقطع من الغرب الاصغر ان شيت بالمقص وان شيت بمبضع لطيف.	He holds it between the middle and index fingers, then hooks are suspended from beneath them, then he holds it between the little finger and the thumb, and you stretch your hand a gentle stretch until you see the cataract has risen, you cut it from the smaller side of the iris, either with a single motion or a light one.
وتدحل المهّت على ابره وتستبرى السبل كله حتي يرتفع على الملحم ولا تقطع التنشف فان الدمع والدم تصع (تميع ) عليك.	The cataract settles on the sieve, and you examine the whole of the cataract until it rises against the lens, but you do not cut the conjunctiva, for if blood and tears mix, they will confuse you.
ثم اقطع بالمقص ما زاد على الاكليل من فوق ومن اسفل حتى لا يبقى ناشب الا فى القرنيه فان امكنك ان ترفعه من على القرنيه سلخ بالمهتّ فهو احسن وقد يتهيا فى بعض الناس.	Then cut with the single-motion instrument what exceeds the eyelid, from above and below, until nothing remains hanging in the corner of the eye, for if you are able to lift it from the corner of the eye with the sieve, it is better, but it may become loose in some people.
واذا قطعته كان يحرح محلقه اياما يسكن وجعها ويامن الورم الحار ثم اعد العمل عليه.	And if you cut it, it would irritate its location, either it would be quiet and its place would become inflamed, then the inflammation would become hot, then return to performing the operation on it.
الفصل التاسع عشر.	The nineteenth chapter.
فى ردّ الريشة الى الأنف.	On pushing back the eyelid towards the nose.
تسمّى الأطبّاء الريشة ناصورا، اذا عالجتها بالكىّ او بالدواء الحادّ المحرق على ما تقدّم وصفه ولم تبرأ فليس الحيلة فيها إلّا أن تشقّ على الورم عند نضجه وتستخرج جميع الرطوبة التى فيه او القيح.	The physicians call the eyelid "nāṣūra", if it is treated with cauterization or sharp caustic medicine as previously described and characterized, but it does not heal, then there is no treatment for it except to make an incision on the inflamed part when it becomes ripe, and to extract all the pus or discharge that is in it.
حتّى ينكشف العظم فإذا انكشف العظم ورأيت فيه فسادا او سوادا فاجرده بآلة هذه صورتها:.	When the bone becomes visible, then if the bone is exposed and you see in it a fistula or a sinus, treat it with this instrument which is depicted in this figure.
وتسمّى الخشنة الرأس تصنع من الحديد الهندىّ ويكون رأسها مدوّرا كالزّر قد نقشت نقش المبرد او الإسكلفاج نقشا رقيقا فتضعها على موضع الفساد من العظم ثمّ تديرها بين أصبعيك وأنت تزّم يدك قليلا حتّى تعلم أنّ ذلك الفساد قد انجرد.	And the head of the rasp is made from Indian iron and its head is rounded like a drill, upon which is engraved an engraving, either of a file or a rasp, a delicate engraving. It is placed on the site of the fistula in the bone, then turned between your fingers, while you hold your hand slightly firm until you feel that the fistula has been dislodged.
وتفعل ذلك مرّات ثمّ تجبر الموضع بالأدوية المجفّفة القابضة فإن انختم الموضع ونبت فيه اللحم وانقطع جرى المدّة وبقى أربعين يوما ولم يتجدّد عليه ولم يرم ولم يحدث فيه حادث.	And you repeat this action several times, then you treat the site with dried medicines that promote scarring. If the site has closed and flesh has grown in it and the discharge has cut off by itself after a period of time, and it remained for forty days without any change, and did not become putrid, nor did any accident occur to it.
فاعلم أنّه قد برئ، وإلّا فليس فيه حيلة إلّا ردّ الناصور الى ثقب الأنف على هذه الصفة وهى أن تكشف عن العظم ثانية بالحديد او بالدواء الحادّ فإذا انكشف العظم فخذ مشعبا على هذه الصورة:.	Know that it has healed, and if not, then there is no trick in it except to return the nasal polyp to its hole in the nose, with this characteristic, which is to expose the bone again with the iron or with the sharp medicine. If the bone becomes visible, take a rasp of this figure:
يكون طرف الحديدة مثلّثا وعودها مخروطا مجلوبا الى الطرف كما ترى ثمّ ضعه على العظم نفسه ويكون ذلك قرب المأق وأبعد يدك من العين قليلا ثمّ أدر يدك بالمشعب حتّى ينفذ العظم ويحسّ به العليل.	The side of the instrument is triangular and its handle is a cone-shaped one that narrows down to the end, as you see. Then place it on the bone itself, which is near the orbit, and keep your hand away from the eye slightly. Then turn your hand with the rasp until the bone is perforated and the ulna feels it.
بأن يجد الريح تخرج منه اذا أمسك يده على أنفه فحينئذ أجبر الموضع بالأدوية القابضة المجفّفة كما أعلمتك فإذا نبت اللحم وصلب المكان فإنّ المادّة التى كانت تنصّب الى خارج ترجع الى الأنف فيكون ذلك أخفّ على العليل إن شاء الله.	So that he finds the polyp coming out of it, if he puts his hand on his nose. So I treat the site with dried medicines that promote scarring, as I have taught you. And if flesh grows and the place becomes solid, then the matter that used to protrude to the outside returns to the nose, and this is easier for the patient, God willing.
الفصل العشرون.	Tenth chapter: On the excision of the antral fistula.
فىردّ نتو العين.	On the return of the nasal polyp to the nose.
اذا نتت العين بجملتها ولم تحدث فى البصر آفة ولا نقصان فينبغى أن تسهل العليل ثمّ تفصده فى القيفال ثمّ تضع محجمة فى القفا من غير شرط وتمصّ مصّا رقيقا.	If the eyelid is injured with its lashes and there is no defect or weakness in the sight, it should be treated simply by applying a soft dressing to the eyelid without any condition, and then a gentle compress should be placed.
ثمّ تضع على العين لطوخا صنع من أقاقيا وصبر ولبان وعنزروت ثمّ تشدّ العين من فوق على الضماد برفائد كثيرة، وصفة الرفائد أن تأخذ حرقا ليّنة كثيرة فتثنى كلّ خرقة منها على أربع طيّات تصنع منها كثيرة.	Then a plaster made of aqaqya, sabr, labban, and anzaroot is applied to the eye, then the eye is bandaged from above with numerous fastenings, and the fastenings are prepared by taking many linen rags, each of which is folded four times, making many of them.
ثمّ تضعها واحدة على أخرى على قدر ما تحتاج اليه العين ثمّ تشدّ عليها بخرقة صلبة شدّا قويّا وتعيد المحجمة بالمصّ من غير شرط ثمّ تنزع المحجمة وتترك العين مشدودة يوما وليلة.	Then they are applied one on top of the other, as much as the eye needs, then fastened with a strong dressing, and the compress is reapplied with the dressing without any condition, then the dressing is removed and the eye is left bandaged for a day and a night.
فإن استرخى الرباط فى خلال ذلك فينبغى أن يشدّ نعمّا ثمّ انزع الرباط بعد يوم وليلة كما قلنا فإن رأيت العين قد رجعت وإلّا فأعد الضماد والرفائد والشدّ والمحجمة حتّى ترجع.	For if the bandage becomes loose during that time, it should be tightened, and the bandage is removed after a day and a night, as we said, and if you see that the eye has returned to health, well, otherwise, reapply the dressing, the fastenings, the tightening, and the compress until it returns to health.
الفصل الحادى والعشرون.	Surgical Instruments and Tools.
فى قطع العنبية.	On cutting for cataract.
اذا عرض فتق فى الطبقة العنبيّة ثمّ نتت وبرزت خارج الأجفان كهيئة العنبة وقبحت صورة الإنسان لذلك وأردت قطعها فالعمل فيها على ما أصف.	If a fissure appears in the crystalline lens, and it protrudes and bulges out of the eyelids like a cataract, and the appearance of the person is disfigured by it, then the treatment for it is as I have described.
وهو أن تدخل إبرة فى أصل العنبة من أسفل الى فوق ثمّ تدخل إبرة أخرى فيها خيط مثنىّ من ناحية المأق وتنفذها وتدع الإبرة الأولى على حالها.	And it is that a needle enters into the base of the cataract from below to above, then another needle with double thread enters from the side of the corner and pulls it out, and the first needle is left in place.
ثمّ تقطع موضع انثناء الخيط المثنىّ وتربط به بعض العنبة حول الإبرة وتشدّها نعمّا ثمّ تخرج الابرة وتضع على العين صوفا مبلولا ببياض البيض وتدعها حتّى تسقط الخيوط مع العنبة ثمّ تعالج العين بما يقوّيها.	Then the place of the folded double thread is cut, and part of the cataract around the needle is tied to it, and it is tightened, then the needle is removed, and a soaked poultice of egg white is applied to the eye, and left until the threads come out with the cataract, then the eye is treated with what will strengthen it.
حتّى يبرأ الجرح، وقد تشدّ العنبة من كلّ جهة بدائرة من خرقة حتّى تزداد العين نتوا نعمّا ثمّ تبطّ بمبضع رقيق يصل الى غور العين فتسيل الرطوبة البيضيّة وتنزل العين وتذبل على المقام ثمّ تشدّها حتّى تبرأ.	The wound will heal, and the conjunctiva will stretch from all sides with a circle of flesh until the eye grows a new membrane, then it calms down with the application of a gentle ointment that reaches the bottom of the eye, making the white part of the eye slippery and bringing down the eye, which freezes on its base, then it stretches until it heals.
الفصل الثانى والعشرون.	The second separation and the muscles.
فى علاج الكمنة.	In the treatment of cataracts.
هذه العلّة التى تسمّى الكمنة إنّما هى مدّة تجتمع فى العين تشبه الماء النازل وليس به، ووجه العمل فى ذلك أن تقعد العليل على كرسىّ منتصبا ثمّ تأخذ رأسه بيديك من الجهتين.	This ailment which is called cataract, indeed it is a drop that gathers in the eye resembling falling water and not being so, and the method of treatment for it is to make the patient sit on an upright seat then take its head with your hands from both sides.
وتحرّكه حتّى ترى المدّة تصير الى أسفل بعينك ثمّ تثبت ولا تزول وينطلق النور ويرى العليل الأشياء كما كان يراها، وإن لم تنزل الى أسفل علمنا أنّه الماء، فإن لم يتهيّأ نزول المدّة بما ذكرنا.	And shake it until the drop falls to the bottom of your eye, then stops and does not move, and the light returns and the patient sees things as he used to see them. If it does not fall to the bottom we suspect it is water, and if it does not seem to fall with what we mentioned.
وإلّا فأجلس العليل بين يديك ثمّ خذ مبضعا رقيقا وشقّ به فوق الغشاء القرنىّ قليلا عند اتّصال الملتحم بالغشاء القرنىّ فى الإكليل حتّى تخرج المادّة.	And if not, then make the patient sit between your hands, then take a fine needle and make an incision above the cornea slightly at the junction of the conjunctiva with the cornea in the corner until the substance comes out.
فإذا خرجت فقطّر فى العين ماء حارّا قد مزجت فيه عسلا او ماء قد أغليت فيه حلبة وعسلا ثمّ تعالج بسائر العلاج حتّى يبرأ،.	Then if it comes out, pour hot water in the eye, which has been mixed with honey or water in which a piece of dough and honey have been dissolved, then treat it with other treatments until it heals.
الفصل الثالث والعشرون.	The third separation and the muscles.
فى قدح الماء النازل فى العين.	On the evacuation of the falling water in the eye.
قد ذكرنا أنواع الماء فى التقسيم وأيّها يصلح للقدح بكلام مشروح مفسّر فتأخذه من هناك على الصحّة، فحينئذ ينبغى أن تجلس العليل بين يديك متربّعا قبالة الضوء قرب الشمس.	We have mentioned the types of water in the division, and which one is suitable for evacuation with explicit words explained, so take it from there on the condition, then it is necessary to make the patient sit between your hands upright facing the light near the sun.
وتربط عينه الصحيحة وتشدّها شدّا جيّدا، ثمّ ترفع جفن عينه بيدك اليسرى إن كانت العين التى فيها الماء العين اليسرى او بيدك اليمنى ان كانت العين اليمنى.	Tie its correct ligament and tighten it strongly, then lift the eyelid of the eye with your left hand if the affected eye is the left eye or with your right hand if the affected eye is the right eye.
ثمّ تضع طرف المقدح قرب الاكليل بغلظ مرود فى نفس بياض العين من جهة المأق الأصغر ثمّ تدفع المقدح بقوّة وأنت تديره بيدك حتّى ينفذ فى بياض العين وتحسّ بالمقدح أنّه قد وصل الى شىء فارغ.	Then you place the point of the needle near the sclera with a moderate movement in the direction of the white of the eye from the side of the smaller ciliary body, then you push the needle with force while directing it with your hand until it penetrates the white of the eye and you feel with the needle that it has reached an empty space.
وينبغى أن تصير قدر ذهاب المقدح الى العمق قدر البعد الذى يكون من الصبىّ الى آخر السواد وهو إكليل العين فإنّ النحاس تراه فى نفس الناظر رأى العين لصفاء الغشاء القرنىّ، ثمّ تصير المقدح الى فوق الى الموضع الذى فيه الماء.	And it is desirable that the depth of the penetration of the needle be the distance from the cornea to the end of the ciliary body, which is the limit of the iris, for the metal will appear in the vision of the observer as a view in the clarity of the corneal membrane, then the needle moves upwards to the place where there is the cataract.
ثم تكبسه الى أسفل مرّة بعد مرّة فإن نزل الماء من ساعته فإنّ العليل يرى ما فتح عليه بصره من ساعته والمقدح فى عينه ثمّ يسكن قليلا فإن صعد الماء فأنزله ثانية من غير أن تخرج المقدح.	Then you press it downwards time after time, and if the cataract falls from its edge, then the patient sees what has been opened for him by his vision and the needle in his eye, then you let it settle for a little while, and if the cataract rises again, you push it down again without withdrawing the needle.
فإذا استقرّ ولم يصعد فأخرج المقدح برفق وأنت تفتل به يدك قليلا قليلا ثمّ تذوب فى الماء شيئا من ملح صاف أندرانى وتغسل به العين من داخل ثمّ تضع من خارج العين كلّها مشاقة او صوفا مبلولا.	For if it settles and does not rise, you withdraw the needle gently and while moving your hand slightly, then you dissolve in the eye a piece of pure Andrani salt, and wash the inside of the eye with it, then you apply to the outside of the entire eye a poultice or a soaked dressing.
بدهن ورد وبياض بيض وتربط معها العين الصحيحة، وأمّا نحن وأهل زماننا فنضع عليها الكمون المدقوق مع بياض البيض، فإن لم يجبك المقدح للدخول فى العين لصلابتها لأنّ من الناس من تكون عينه صلبة جدّا.	You anoint it with the fat of a rose and the white of an egg, and tie the correct eye with it, and as for us and our contemporaries, we apply to it powdered kammon with the white of an egg, for if the needle does not penetrate the eye because of its hardness, since some people have very hard eyes.
فينبغى أن تأخذ المبضع الذى يسمّى البريد الذى هذه صورته:.	It is desirable that you take the instrument which is called Al-Bared, whose shape is this:
فتثقب به نفس الملتحم فقط ولا تمعن فى الثقب وإنّما هو أن تطرّق للمقدح موضعا لطيفا ثمّ تدخل المقدح على ما ذكرنا، وعند كمال عملك تهيّئ للعليل مضطجعا محكما ينام فيه على ظهره فى بيت مظلم.	Puncture the nostril with a fine instrument, and do not consider the puncture itself, but rather make an incision in the location of the ethmoid bone, then insert the instrument as we have mentioned, and when you are finished with the operation, prepare the patient for rest, lying on his back in a dark room.
ويمتنع من جميع الحركات ومن السعال وتجعل طعامه ما تليّن به طبيعته ولا يحرّك رأسه يمينا ولا شمالا البتّة ويكون الرباط على حاله الى اليوم الثالث ثمّ تحلّه فى ذلك البيت المظلم وتجرّب بصره.	And he is abstained from all movements and coughing, and his diet is made what soothes his nature, and he does not move his head to the right or left for a day or two, and the bandage remains in its condition until the third day, then it is undone in that dark house, and his vision is tested.
وتريه أشياء ثمّ تردّ الرباط الى اليوم السابع ولا ينبغى أن تفعل ذلك فى وقت العلاج او بعد القدح من ساعتك بل ينبغى أن تجتنب ذلك من قبل أن الماء يصعد سريعا بالنظر الشديد.	He is given a rest, then the bandage is returned until the seventh day, and it is not suitable that you do that during the time of treatment or after the cauterization, but rather it is suitable that you avoid that before the water rises quickly with severe examination.
فإن عرض ورم حارّ فينبغى أن تحلّ العين قبل السابع وتصلح ذلك بما يسكن الورم حتّى اذا سكن فحينئذ تطلق بصره وتضع على وجه خمارا يدرب بصره من تحته أيّاما وهو فى ذلك البيت المظلم ثم.	For if a case of hot inflammation occurs, it is suitable that the eye be undressed before the seventh day, and that is treated with what calms the inflammation until, when it is calmed, then the vision is released and a poultice is placed on its surface which drips onto it from below, while he is in that dark house.
يخرج عن البيت بتدريج ويتصرّف فى أسبابه، واعلم أنّ القدح لا يستغنى فيه المتعلّم عن المشاهدة مرّات فحينئذ يقدم على العمل، وقد بلغنى عن بعض العراقيّين أنّه ذكر أنّه يصنع بالعراق مقدحا منفوذا يمتص به الماء.	He exits the house gradually and cleans himself with his fingers, and know that cauterization cannot be dispensed with in teaching the learner, repeatedly observing, then he proceeds to the operation, and it has reached me from some Iraqis that they mentioned that he makes a cauterizer in Iraq that is perforated which absorbs water.
ولم أر أحدا فى بلدنا صنع ذلك ولا قرأته فى كتاب من كتب الأوائل وقد يمكن أن يكون ذلك محدثا، وهذه صورة أنواع من المقادح ليقف عليها من جهلها:.	And I have not seen anyone in our country who does that, nor have I read it in any book of the ancients, and it is possible that this is an innovation, and this is a picture of types of cauterizers to remove ignorance about them.
تصنع من النحاس خاصّة ويكون طرفها بهذه الرقّة بعينها مثلّثة الطرف حادّة،.	It is made from brass specifically, and its end is as thin as an eye with a pointed tip.
الفصل الرابع والعشرون.	The fourth and fortieth operation
فى علاج اللحم النابت فى الأنف.	On the treatment of nasal polyps.
قد تنبت فى الأنف لحوم مختلفة زائدة منها شىء يشبه العقربان الكثير الأرجل ومنها ما يكون لحما سرطانيّا متحجّرا كمد اللون ومنه ما يكون لحما ليّنا غير كمد اللون.	There can be an overgrowth in the nose of various excess flesh, including something that resembles a centipede with many legs, and among them is flesh that becomes hard like a walnut, and among them is soft flesh not like a walnut.
فما كان من هذه اللحوم ليّنة ليست بخبيثة ولا سرطانيّة، فينبغى أن تجلس العليل بين يديك مستقبل الشمس وتفتح منخره وتلقى الصنّارة فى تلك اللحوم ثمّ تجذبها الى خارج ثمّ تقطع ما أدركت منها بمبضع لطيف حادّ من جهة واحدة.	So if the flesh is soft, not annoying or hardened, you should sit in a well-lit place facing the sun, open the nostril, and put the forceps into that flesh, then pull it to the outside, then cut what you have grasped with a sharp, fine instrument from one side.
حتّى تعلم أن اللحم كلّه قد ذهب فإن بقى منه شىء لم تستطع قطعه فاجرده بأحد الآلات اللطاف برفق حتّى لا يبقى منه شىء فإن غلبك الدم او عرض ورم حارّ.	Until you know that all the flesh has gone, and if some of it remains that you cannot cut, then use one of the fine instruments gently until none of it remains, for if blood overflows or inflammation and hot infection appear.
فقابله بما ينبغى او كان من الأورام الخبيثة فبادر فاكوه حتّى ينقطع الدم وتذهب جميع اللحوم ثمّ تلقى فى الأنف بعد القطع خلّا وماء او شرابا فإن انفتح الأنف وسلكت منه الرطوبة الى الحلق.	Then treat it with what is suitable, or if it is from the annoying tumors, then hasten to cauterize it until the blood stops and all the flesh disappears, then put in the nose after cutting cotton and water or a potion, for if the nose opens and the moisture passes into the throat.
فاعلم أنّه قد برئ، فإن لم تنفذ الرطوبة على ما ينبغى فاعلم أنّ داخله لحما نابتا فى أعلى العظام المتخلخلة لم تصل الآلة بالقطع اليها فحينئذ ينبغى أن تأخذ خيطا من كتان له بعض الغلظ.	And know that it has healed, but if the moisture does not pass as it should, then know that inside there is still excess flesh in the upper part of the nasal bone that the instrument did not reach with the cutting, so in this case it is suitable to take a thread of cotton that has some thickness.
وتعقد فيه عقدا كثيرة وتجعل بين كلّ عقدة قدر أصبع او أقلّ ويتحيّل العليل يدسّ طرف الخيط الواحد فى أنفه بمرود او بما أمكنه بعد أن يصنعه مثل الزّر ويجذب ريحه حتّى يصل الى الخيشوم.	And tie many knots in it, and make between each knot the size of a finger or less, and the patient puts one end of the thread into his nose with his finger or however he can, after having made it like an arrow, and pulls in his breath until it reaches the nasal cavity.
ويخرج على حلقه وكثيرا ما يفعل مثل هذا الفعل الصبيان فى الكتّاب وهو أمر يسهل على من أراده، ثمّ تجمع طرفى الخيط الطرف الواحد الذى خرج على الفم والآخر الذى بقى فى الأنف.	And it comes out on his throat, and many times the young boys do this in the schools, and it is something that makes it easy for whoever wants it, then you gather the two ends of the thread, one end that came out on the mouth and the other that remained in the nose.
ثمّ تستعمل نشر اللحم بالعقد التى فى الخيط تفعل ذلك حتّى تعلم أنّ اللحوم قد تقطّعت بعقد الخيط ثمّ تخرج الخيط وتصير فى الأنف بعد مسح الدم فتيلة قد شربتها فى المرهم المصرّى تفعل ذلك ثلاثة أيّام او أكثر.	The suture of the flesh with the thread that is in the needle does this until it learns that the flesh has been sewn with the thread of the needle, then the thread comes out and becomes in the nostril after wiping the blood with a compress that it has absorbed from the ointment for three days or more.
حتّى يأكل المرهم جميع ما بقى من اللحوم ثمّ تصير آخر شىء فى الأنف أنبوبة رصاص أيّاما حتّى يبرأ، فإن احتاج الى علاج يجفّف استعملت ذلك.	Until the ointment eats all what remains of the flesh, then the last thing becomes in the nostril a pipe of lead or until it heals, and if there is a need for treatment, a dried one is used.
وهذه صورة المسعط الذى تقطر به الأدهان والأدوية فى الأنف:.	And this is an image of the syringe with which the oils and medications are dripped into the nostril:.
يضع من فضّة او نحاس شبه القنديل الصغير مفتوح المدهن ومجراه كذلك.	He puts in silver or copper similar to a small candle, open and greased, and its wick likewise.
وإن شئت صنعت الأنبوبة مغلّقة كالقصبة ومدهن المسعط مسطوح.	And if you want, make the pipe closed like a reed and grease the syringe with mastic.
له مقبض فى آخره كما ترى يمسك به اذا سخنت فيه الدهن او ما شئت من العصارات او الأشياء السيّالة.	It has a stopper at its end, as you see, to hold it if the grease or what you want of extracts or dissolving things soften in it.
الفصل الخامس والعشرون.	The twenty-fifth chapter.
فى الثآليل النابته فى طرف الأنف.	Of the polypus that grows at the side of the nostril.
كثيرا ما ينبت فى طرف الأنف ثؤلول فيعظم ويتزيّد مع الأيّام حتّى يقبح منظره.	Many times a growth appears on the side of the nostril, which grows and increases with the days until its appearance is deformed.
ولذلك ينبغى أن تقطعه فى أوّل ظهوره وتستأصل جميعه ثمّ تحمل على الموضع إمّا الكىّ وإمّا الدواء المحرّق الذى يقوم مقام الكىّ، فإن فات قطعه حتّى يعظم فانظر فإن كان متحجّرا صلبا كمد اللون قليل الحسّ.	And for this reason, it is fitting to cut it when it first appears and remove its entirety, then apply to the place either cauterization or the burnt medication that serves as cauterization, if you missed cutting it until it grows, then look, and if it was hard, solid, like the callus, with little sensation.
فلا تعرض له بالحديد فإنّه ورم سرطانىّ وكثيرا ما رأيت من قطع هذا الورم فعادت منه بليّة عظيمة على صاحبه، وإن كان الورم ليّن المجسّة غير كمد اللون ورأيت أنّ القطع يمكن فى جميعه.	Do not touch it with iron, for it is a malignant tumor and I have often seen that cutting this tumor leads to a severe calamity for its owner, and if the tumor is soft to the touch, not like the callus, and you see that cutting can be done completely.
فاستفرغ العليل واقطعه بلا حذر ولا توقّ وعالج الموضع بما يجفّف ويقبض حتّى يبرأ،.	Treat the wound with a dressing and cut it without caution or delay, and apply a plaster to constrict and compress until it heals.
الفصل السادس والعشرون.	The twenty-sixth chapter.
فى خياطة الأنف والشفة والأذن.	On the suturing of the nose, lip and ear.
اذا تفرّق اتّصالها عن جرح او نحو ذلك اعلم أنّه متى حدث تفرّق اتّصال فى أحد هذه الغضاريف فقلّ ما ينجع فيها العمل إلّا فى بعض الناس.	If the connection of a wound or something similar becomes loose, know that when there is a loosening of the connection in one of these sinews, the action rarely succeeds except in some people.
فينبغى متى عرض لأحد شئ من ذلك فانظر إن كان الجرح طريّا بدمه أن تجمع شفتى الجرح بالخياطة ثمّ تعالجه حتّى يبرأ، وإن كان تفرّق الاتّصال قد افترق شفتاه وصار كلّ شقّ صحيحا فينبغى أن تسلخ كلّ شقّ بثخن جلده الظاهر حتّى يدمى.	When one of these things happens, it is necessary to see if the wound is fresh with its blood, so that the edges of the wound can be gathered together by suturing and then treated until it heals. If the loosening of the connection has separated its edges and each side becomes healthy, it is necessary to strip each edge with a thin layer of visible skin until it mends.
ثمّ تجمع الشفتين بالخياطة وتشدّها وتذرّ عليها الشيان واللبان مسحوقين وتضع من فوق الذرور لصقة من المرهم النخلى او غيره من المراهم الملحمة وتتركه مشدودا يومين او ثلاثة ثمّ تحلّه.	Then the edges are gathered together by suturing and tightened, and a poultice of crushed violet and mastic is applied to it, and a plaster of some other warming ointment is placed over it, and it is left constricted for two or three days before being loosened.
وتبدل الدواء وتتركه حتّى تنقطع الخيوط من ذاتها ثمّ تعالجها بالمرهم حتّى يبرأ، وصفة الخياطة أن تجمع تفرّق الاتّصال إمّا بالإبر كما وصفنا فى خياطة البطن وإمّا بالخيط كما عرّفتك هناك،.	The medicine is changed and it is left until the threads are cut off by themselves, then it is treated with an ointment until it heals. The description of the suturing is that it gathers the loosening of the connection either by a needle, as we described in the suturing of the abdomen, or by a thread, as I have shown you there.
الفصل السابع والعشرون.	The twenty-seventh chapter.
فى إخراج العقد التى تعرض فى الشفتين.	On the extraction of the tonsils that are found in the lips.
قد يعرض لكثير من الناس فى داخل شفاههم أورام صغار صلبنة يشبه بعضها حبّ الكرسنّة وبعضها أصغر وأكبر، فينبغى أن تقلب الشفة وتشقّ على كلّ عقدة وتعلّقها بالصنّارة.	It happens to many people that small, hard tumors appear inside their lips, some of which resemble a pea and others are smaller or larger. It is necessary to fold the lip back, make an incision over each tumor, and remove it with forceps.
وتقطعها من كلّ جهة ثمّ تحشو الموضع بعد القطع بزاج مسحوق حتّى ينقطع الدم ثمّ يتمضمض بالخلّ، والملح وتعالج المواضع بما فيه قبض الى أن تبرأ الجراحات،.	Cut it from all sides, then fill the area after cutting with a soothing ointment, until the bleeding stops, and then apply a bandage, and treat the affected areas with what is necessary until the wounds heal.
الفصل الثامن والعشرون.	Tenth and eleventh chapters.
فى قطع اللحم الزائد فى اللثة.	On the excision of excess flesh from the lip.
كثيرا ما ينبت على اللثة لحم زائد تسمّيه الأوائل ابولس فينبغى أن تعلّقه بصنّارة او تمسكه بمنقاش وتقطعه عند أصله وتترك المدّة تسيل او الدم ثمّ تضع على الموضع زاجا مسحوقا.	Often, a surplus of flesh grows on the lip, which the ancients call polyps. It is recommended to tie it with a thread or seize it with forceps and cut it at its base, then let the blood flow, and afterwards apply a soothing ointment to the area.
او أحد الذرورات القابضة المجفّفة فإن عاد ذلك اللحم بعد العلاج فكثيرا ما يعود فاقطعه ثانية واكوه فإنّه لا يعود بعد الكىّ،.	Or one of the dried and astringent pessaries, for if that flesh returns after treatment, it often comes back, so excise it again and cauterize it, for it will not return after cauterization.
الفصل التاسع والعشرون.	Nineteenth chapter.
فى جرد الاسنان بالحديد.	On the scraping of teeth with iron.
قد يجتمع فى سطوح الأسنان من داخل ومن خارج وبين اللثات قشور خشنة قبيحة وقد تسودّ وتصفرّ وتخضرّ حتّى يصل من ذلك فساد الى اللثة وتقبح الأسنان لذلك.	There may gather on the surfaces of the teeth, from inside and out, and between the lips, rough and foul tartar, which may become blackened and give off a bad odor, until it corrupts to such an extent that it reaches the gum, and the teeth become foul because of it.
فينبغى ان تجلس العليل بين يديك ورأسه فى حجرك وتجرد الضرس والسنّ الذى ظهر لك فيه القشور والشىء الشبيه بالرمل حتّى لا يبقى منه شىء وكذلك تفعل بالسواد والخضرة والصفرة وغير ذلك حتّى تنقى.	It is recommended that you sit with a basin between your hands and its edge on your knee, and scrape the tooth on which tartar has appeared, and the roughness resembling clay, until none of it remains, and do the same with blackening, greenness, and yellowing, and other things, until they are cleaned.
فإن ذهب ما فيها من أوّل الجرد وإلّا فتعيد عليه الجرد يوما آخر وثانيا وثالثا حتّى تبلغ الغاية فيما تريد، واعلم أنّ الضرس يحتاج الى مجارد مختلفة الصور كثيرة الأشكال على حسب ما يتهيّأ لعملك.	For if the tartar does not go away from the first scraping, then repeat the scraping on it on another day, and a second, and a third, until you reach your goal in what you want, and know that teeth require various scrapings of different forms and many shapes according to what is imagined for the work.
من أجل أنّ المجرد الذى يجرد به الضرس من داخل غير المجرد الذى يجرد به من خارج والذى يجرد به بين الأضراس على صورة أخرى، وهذه عدّة صور مجارد تكون عندك كلّها معدّة:.	For the purpose that the scraper which is used to scrape the tooth from the inside, is not the same as the one which is used to scrape from the outside, and the one which is used between the teeth is of another form, and these are several forms of scrapers that you should have ready.
الفصل الثلاثون.	The operation on the trachea.
فىقلع الأسنان.	On the extraction of teeth.
ينبغى أن تعالج الضرس من وجعه بكلّ حيلة وتتوانى عن قلعه فليس منه خلف اذا قلع لأنّه جوهر شريف حتّى اذا لم يكن بدّ من قلعه.	It is advisable to examine the wisdom tooth from its position with all skill and caution before extracting it, for if it is not extracted it will be left as a relic, since it is a precious jewel.
فينبغى اذا عزم العليل على قلعه أن تتثبّت حتّى يصّح عندك الضرس الوجع.	It is advisable if the surgeon intends to extract it that he should steady himself until he is sure of the tooth's position.
فكثيرا ما يخدع العليل الوجع ويظنّ أنّه فى الضرس الصحيح فيقلعه ثمّ لا يذهب الوجع حتّى يقلع الضرس المريض، فقد رأينا ذلك من فعل الحجّامين مرارا.	For the surgeon often deceives and thinks he is in the right tooth, and extracts it, then the pain does not go away until the diseased tooth is extracted, for we have seen this happen many times to the actions of surgeons.
فإذا صحّ عندك الضرس الوجع بعينه فحينئذ ينبغى أن تشرط حول السّن بمبضع فيه بعض القوّة حتّى تحلّ اللثة من كلّ جهة ثمّ تحرّكه بأصابعك او بالكلاليب اللطاف أوّلا قليلا قليلا حتّى تزعزعه.	For if the aching tooth is confirmed to you, then it is advisable that you make an incision around the tooth with a gentle touch and apply some force so as to loosen the gum from every side, then move it with your fingers or with fine instruments, gently, very gently, until you dislodge it.
ثمّ تمكّن حينئذ منه الكلبتين الكبار تمكينا جيّدا ورأس العليل بين ركبتيك قد ثقّفته لا يتحرّك ثمّ تجذب الضرس على استقامة لئلّا تكسره، فإن لم يخرج وإلّا فخذ أحد تلك الآلات فأدخلها تحته من كلّ جهة برفق ورم تحريكه كما فعلت أوّلا.	Then grasp it firmly with the two large forceps, grasping well and holding the surgeon's head between your knees, which he has rested so that he does not move, then pull the tooth upright with a jerk, if it does not come out, take one of those instruments and insert it under it from every side with care and movement, moving it as you did previously.
وإن كان الضرس مثقوبا او متأكّلا فينبغى أن تملأ ذلك الثقب بخرقة وتسدّها سدّا جيّدا بطرف مرود رقيق لئلا ينفتّت فى حين شدّك عليه بالكلاليب وينبغى أن تستقصى بالشرط حول اللثة من كلّ جهة نعمّا.	And if the tooth is perforated or has a cavity, it is advisable that you fill the hole with a wick and block it firmly with a thin pointed instrument, lest it unravels while you are tightening it with the instruments, and it is advisable to make an incision around the gum from every side, yes.
وتحفّظ جهدك لئلّا تكسره فيبقى بعضه فيعود على العليل منه بليّة هى أعظم من وجعه الأوّل، وإيّاك أن تصنع ما تصنع جهّال الحجّامين فى جسرهم وإقدامهم على قلعه من غير أن يستعملوا ما وصفنا.	And preserve your effort so that you do not break it, for if some of it remains in the jaw, it will be a greater calamity for the surgeon than his initial pain, and beware that you do not do what foolish surgeons do with their roughness and haste in extraction without employing what we have described.
فكثيرا ما يحدثون على الناس بلايا عظيمة أيسرها أن ينكسر الضرس وتبقى أصوله كلّها او بعضها.	Many severe ailments occur to people, the mildest of which is that the uvula gets inflamed and its roots remain, either all or some of them.
وإمّا أن يقلع ببعض عظام الفكّ كما شاهدناه مرارا، ثمّ يتمضمض بعد قلعه بشراب او بخلّ وملح، فإن حدث نزف دم من الموضع فكثيرا ما يحدث ذلك فاسحق حينئذ شيئا من الزاج واحش به الموضع.	And if the jawbone is extracted along with some of its teeth, as we have seen many times, then it is dressed after extraction with a mixture of vinegar or salty and salty compound, and if there was a hemorrhage from the spot, this often happens, so a piece of lint is applied to the spot.
وإلّا فاكوه إن لم ينفعك الزاج، صورة الكلاليب اللطاف التى تحرّك بها الضرس أوّلا تكون طويلة الأطراف قصيرة المقبض غليظة لئلّا تنثنى عند قبضك بها على الضرس، وهذه صورة الكلاليب الكبار:.	And if the lint does not work for you, then use a leech, the image of the slender leeches that move with their uvula, which should be long-tailed, short-jawed, thick and rough so it bends when you grip it on the uvula, this is the image of the large leeches.
تكون كما ترى غليظة المقابض حتّى اذا قبضت عليها لا تعطى أنفسها ولا تنثنى قصيرة الأطراف، ولتكن من حديد هندىّ او من فولاد محكمة مسقيّة الأطراف وفى طرفها أضراس يدخل بعضها فى بعض فتقبض قبضا محكما وثيقا.	It should be as you see, thick at the jaws, to the point that if you grip it, it does not release itself nor bend, short-tailed, and let it be made from Indian steel or forged iron, with tightened tips and having teeth that one inserts into another, so it grips a tight and firm grip.
وقد تصنع الأطراف كهيئة المبرد فتكون أيضا قويّة الضبط.	And the tips may be made like a file, so they are also strong in their grip.
الفصل الحادى والثلّاثون.	Singular amputation and triple.
فى قلع اصول الأضراس وإخراج عظام الفكوك المكسورة.	In the extraction of the roots of the teeth and the removal of the fractured jawbones.
اذا بقى عند قلع الضرس اصل قد انكسر فينبغى أن تضع على الموضع قطنة بالسمن يوما او يومين حتّى يسترخى الموضع ثمّ تدخل اليه الجفت او الكلاليب.	If some root remains after extracting the tooth, it is advisable to put on the spot a cotton pad with ghee for a day or two until the spot relaxes, then you insert into it the dressing or the leech.
التى تشبه اطرافها فم الطائر الذى يسمّى البلرجة وهذه صورة الكلاليب:.	That which resembles the edges of the beak of a bird called the falcon, this is the image of the leech.
تكون قد صنعت كالمبرد من داخل او كالإسكلفاج فإن لم يجبك للخروج بهذه الكلاليب فينبغى أن تحفر على الأصل وتكشف اللحم كلّه بالمبضع ثمّ تدخل الآلة التى تشبه عتلة صغيرة التى هذه صورتها:.	It should be made like a file, from the inside or like an escalpier, if it is not suitable for you to go out with these leeches, then it is advisable to dig into the root and strip all the flesh with the scalpel, then you insert the instrument that resembles a small forceps, this is its image.
قصيرة الطرف غليظة قليلا ولا تكون مسقيّة لئلّا تنكسر فإن خرج الأصل بذلك وإلّا فاستعن بهذه الآلات الأخر التى هذه صورتها، الأولى مثلّثة الطرف فيها بعض الغلظ:.	The flap is rough, somewhat thick and not very delicate, if it contracts, then the original skin will protrude, otherwise use these other instruments whose shape is like this, with a rough edge.
صورة مثلّثة لطيفة أخرى:.	A picture of another delicate instrument:.
وقد نستعين أيضا بهذه الآلة ذات الشعبتين التى هذه أيضا صورتها:.	We can also use this instrument with two branches, whose shape is also like this:.
وبغيرها من الآلات والحدائد التى تقدّم ذكرها فى جرد الأضراس، وقد نستعين أيضا بهذه الآلة التى تشبه الصنّارة الكبيرة التى هذه صورتها:.	And other instruments and tools that were mentioned earlier in the chapter on surgical equipment, and we can also use this instrument that resembles a large comb, whose shape is like this:.
مثلّثة الطرف المعوّج فيها بعض الغلظ قليلا لئلّا تنكسر، وتكون غير مسقيّة، واعلم أنّ آلات الأضراس كثيرة وكذلك سائر الآلات لا تكاد تحصى والصانع الدرب الحاذق بصناعته قد يخترع لنفسه آلات على حسب ما يدلّه عليه العمل والأمراض أنفسها.	Delicate, with a slightly thick and rough edge, so it contracts, and is not very delicate, and know that there are many surgical instruments, as well as other tools, which are almost countless, and the clever craftsman who is skilled in his craft may invent for himself instruments according to what the work and the diseases themselves indicate.
لأنّ من الأمراض ما لم تذكر لها الأوائل آلات لاختلاف أنواعها، فإن انكسر عظم من الفكّ او من أحد عظام الفم او تعفّن ففتّش عليه فى موضعه بما يصلح له من أحد هذه الآلات والكلاليب التى ذكرت فى إخراج الأصول.	For some diseases, the ancients did not mention instruments because of their varying types, so if a bone of the jaw or one of the bones of the mouth contracts, or becomes swollen, then split it in its place with one of these instruments or the chisels that were mentioned for extracting roots.
ونستعين بجفت هذه صورته:.	And we can use a pair of this shape:.
يكون فيه بعض الغلظ قليلا ليضبط به العظم فلا يفلت حتّى يخرج العظم، ونجبر الموضع بالأدوية الموافقة لذلك، فإن كان العظم فيه عفن يسير فاجرده من عفنه وسواده حتّى ينقى ثمّ عالجه حتّى يبرأ،.	It has a slight thickness to it, so that it can be used to grasp the bone and not let it slip out until the bone is extracted, and we treat the area with suitable medicines for that purpose, if the bone has pus or foulness in it, we clean out its pus and discharge until it becomes pure, then we treat it until it heals.
الفصل الثانى والثلاثون.	Chapter 32.
فى نشر الأضراس النابتة على غيرها.	On spreading the sutured wounds.
الأضراس اذا نبتت على غير مجراها الطبيعىّ قبحت بذلك الصورة ولا سيّما اذا حدث ذلك فى النساء والرقيق فينبغى أن تنظر فإن كان الضرس قد نبت من خلف ضرس آخر.	If the gum has grown over something that is not its natural place, it will be excavated with this shape, and it does not matter if it happens in women or children, it should be looked at, for if the gum has grown from behind another gum.
ولم يتمكّن نشره ولا برده فاقلعه، وإن كان ملصقا بضرس آخر فاقطعه بهذه الآلة التى هذه صورتها:.	If it is not possible to reduce it and it adheres, then cut around it with this instrument the shape of which is thus:.
وهى تشبه المنقار الصغير ولتكن من حديد هندىّ حادّة الطرف جدّا ويكون قطعك له فى أيّام كثيرة لصلابة الضرس ولئلّا تزعزع غيرها من الأضراس، وأمّا إن كان ناتيا متمكّنا لبرادته فابرده بمبرد من هند تكون هذه صورته.	And it is similar to the small beak and is made from Indian iron, very sharp-edged, and your cut with it in many days due to the softness of the abscess and it makes other cauteries tremble, and if it was a natih that has become hardened by its rust, then sharpen it with a whetstone the shape of which is this.
يكون كلّه من هند ونصابه منه رقيق النقش جدّا يكون كالمبرد الذى تصنع به الإبر، تبرد به الضرس قليلا قليلا فى أيّام كثيرة برفق لئلّا تزعزع الضرس فيسقط ثمّ تملّسه آخرا وتجرده ببعض المجارد.	It is made entirely from iron and a thin part of it is very finely sharpened like the needle that you make for sewing, with which you pierce the abscess slightly, very slightly in many days, gently so as not to irritate the abscess, then it falls out and afterwards you massage it with some ointments.
وإن كان ضرس قد انكسر منه بعضه فكان يؤذى اللسان عند الكلام فينبغى أن تبرده أيضا حتّى تذهب بخشونة ذلك الكسر ويستوى ويملاّس ولا يؤذى اللسان ولا يفسد الكلام،.	And if there is an abscess that has become ulcerated in some of it, and the tongue gets pained during speech, then it is advisable to cauterize it also until the roughness of that ulcer goes away and it becomes even and smooth, and the tongue is not pained and speech is not made foul.
الفصل الثالث والثلاثون.	The thirty-third chapter.
فى تشبيك الأضراس المتحرّكة بخيوط الفضّة او بخيوط الذهب.	On the likeness of movable cauteries to the threads of silver or the threads of gold.
اذا عرض للأضراس القدّاميّة تزعزع وتحرّك عن ضربة او سقطة ولا يستطيع العليل العضّ على شىء يؤكل لئلّا تسقط وعالجتها بالأدوية القابضة فلم ينجع فيها العلاج.	If the old abscesses are disturbed, they become irritated and movable from a blow or a fall, and the patient is not able to bite on something that is chewed because it falls, and its treatment with medications that hold does not benefit.
فالحيلة فيها أن تشدّ بخيط ذهب او فضّة والذهب أفضل لأنّ الفضّة تتزنجر وتعفن بعد أيّام والذهب باق على حاله أبدا لا يعرض له ذلك، ويكون الخيط متوسّطا فى الرقّة والغلظ على قدر ما يسع بين الأضراس.	So the trick in it is that you tie with a thread of gold or silver, and gold is better because silver becomes rusty and coarse after days, and gold remains in its state forever, nothing happens to it. And let the thread be in the middle of the abscess and thick enough to pass between the abscesses.
وصورة التشبيك أن تأخذ الخيط وتدخل انثناءه بين الضرسين الصحيحين ثمّ تنسج بطرفى الخيط بين الأضراس المتحرّكة واحدة كانت او أكثر حتّى تصل بالنسج الى الضرس الصحيح من الجهة الأخرى.	And the picture of the likeness is that you take the thread and insert its end between the two correct abscesses, then you push the ends of the thread between the movable abscesses, one or more, until the thread reaches with the pushing to the correct abscess from the other side.
ثمّ تعيد النسج الى الجهة التى بدأت منها وتشدّ يدك برفق وحكمة حتّى لا تتحرّك البتّة ويكون شدّك الخيط عند أصول الأضراس لئلّا يفلت، ثمّ تقطع طرفى الخيط الفاضل بالمقصّ وتجمعهما وتفتلهما بالجفت وتخفيهما بين الضرس الصحيح والضرس المتحرّك.	Then return the thread to the side from which it started and pull your hand with gentleness and delicacy so that the button does not move, and make your tightening of the suture thread at the roots of the teeth so that it does not come undone, then cut the ends of the excess suture thread with scissors and collect them and pass them through the eye of the needle and bury them between the fixed tooth and the movable tooth.
لئلّا توذى اللسان، ثمّ تترك هكذا مشدودة ما بقيت، فإن انحلّت او انقطعت شددتها بخيط آخر فيستمتع بها هكذا الدهر كلّه، وهذه صورة الأضراس وهيئة التشبيك فى ضرسين صحيحين وضرسين متحرّكين كما ترى:.	So that the tongues are secured, then left thus tightened as long as they remain, if they loosen or their tightness is relaxed by another thread, it will be fastened in this manner for the entire duration, and this is the image of the teeth and the formation of the interlocking in two fixed teeth and two movable teeth as you see:
وقد تردّ الضرس الواحد او الاثنين بعد سقوطهما فى موضعهما وتشبّك كما وصفنا وتبقى، وإنّما يفعل ذلك صانع درب رفيق، وقد ينحت عظم من عظام البقر فيصنع منه كهيئة الضرس ويجعل فى الموضع الذى ذهب منه الضرس.	And perhaps a single tooth or two teeth after falling from their place and the interlocking as we described, will return to its position, but if not, then the skilled craftsman will make an artificial one, and he may carve a bone from the bones of a cow and shape it into the form of a tooth and put it in the place where the tooth was lost.
ويشدّ كما قلنا فيبقى ويستمتع بذلك،.	And tighten as we said, and it remains, and he will be pleased with that.
الفصل الرابع والثلاثون.	Chapter Thirty-Four.
فى قطع الرباط الذى يعرض تحت اللسان فيمنع الكلام.	On cutting the ligament that runs under the tongue to prevent speech impairment.
قد يكون هذا الرباط الذى يعرض تحت اللسان إمّا طبيعيّا يولد به الإنسان وإمّا أن يكون عرضيّا من جرح قد اندمل.	This ligament that runs under the tongue is either natural, with which man is born, or it may be a pathological one resulting from a wound that has become inflamed.
والعمل فيه أن تفتح فم العليل ورأسه فى حجرك وترفع لسانه ثمّ تقطع ذلك الرباط العصبىّ بالعرض حتّى ينطلق اللسان عن إمساكه، فإن كان فيه بعض الصلابة والتعقّد وكان ذلك من اندمال جرح فالق فيه صنّارة وشقّه بالعرض حتّى ينبتر الرباط وتنحلّ العقد.	And the operation for it is that you open the patient's mouth and its back in your hand, and you lift up his tongue, then you cut that nervous ligament with a razor until the tongue is freed from its constraint, if there is some hardness and difficulty, and it was due to scarring of a wound, then cauterize it and make an incision with the razor until the ligament becomes paralyzed and the knot is loosened.
واحذر أن يكون الشقّ فى عمق اللحم فتقطع شريانا هناك فيعرض النزف، ثمّ يتمضمض فى اثر القطع بماء الورد او بالخلّ والماء البارد، ثمّ ضع تحت اللسان فتيلة من كتان يمسكها العليل فى كلّ ليلة.	Beware that the incision is in the depth of the flesh, so that an artery is cut there and hemorrhage occurs, then it is treated with a poultice of rosewater or vinegar and cold water, then place under the tongue a piece of cotton held by the patient every night.
لئلّا يلتحم ثانية فإن حدث نزف دم فضع على المكان زاجا مسحوقا فإن غلبك الدم فاكو الموضع بمكواة عدسيّة تصلح لذلك.	If the hemorrhage returns, then apply to the spot a poultice of dried and crushed coriander, if the bleeding is severe, then cauterize the area with a heated cautery that suits this purpose.
ثمّ عالجه بسائر العلاج حتّى يبرأ،.	Then treat it with other treatments until it heals.
الفصل الخامس والثلاثون.	The thirty-fifth chapter.
فى إخراج الضفدع المتولّد تحت اللسان.	On extracting the tonsil that forms under the tongue.
قد يحدث تحت اللسان ورم يشبه الضفدع الصغير يمنع اللسان عن فعله الطبيعىّ وربّما عظم حتّى يملأ الفم، والعمل فيه أن تفتح فم العليل بإزاء الشمس وتنظر من الورم.	A tumor may occur under the tongue resembling a small tonsil, which hinders the tongue from performing its natural function and sometimes grows so large that it fills the mouth, and the operation for this is to open the patient's mouth with the help of an assistant and examine the tumor.
فإن رأيته كمد اللون او أسود صلبا لا يجد له العليل حسّا فلا تتعرّض له فإنّه سرطان وإن كان مائلا الى البياض فيه رطوبة فالق فيه الصنّارة وشقّه بمبضع لطيف وخلّصه من كلّ جهة.	For if you see it as a blackish color or very hard and the patient feels no sensation in it, then do not touch it for it is a cancer, and if it inclines to whiteness and has moisture, then insert the needle into it and incise it with a fine scalpel and evacuate it from all sides.
فإن غلبك الدم فى حين عملك فضع عليه زاجا مسحوقا حتّى ينقطع الدم ثمّ عد الى عملك حتّى تخرجه بكماله ثمّ يتمضمض بالخلّ والملح.	If the blood overflows during your operation, apply to it a poultice of crushed and dried coriander until the bleeding stops, then return to your operation until you remove it completely, then treat it with vinegar and salt.
ثمّ تعالجه بسائر العلاج الموافق لذلك حتّى يبرأ،.	Then treat it with other suitable treatments for this condition until it heals.
الفصل السادس والثلاثون.	The thirty-sixth chapter.
فى علاج ورم اللوزتين.	On the treatment of mumps.
وما ينبت فى الحلق من سائر الأورام قد يعرض فى داخل الحلق غدد تشبه الغدد التى تعرض من خارج تسمّى لوزتين اذا عالجتها بما ذكرت فى التقسيم فلم تبرأ.	And whatever grows in the neck from other tumors, may appear inside the neck as glands resembling the glands that appear on the outside, called mumps, if you treated them with what I mentioned earlier, they would not heal.
فانظر فإن كان الورم صلبا كمد اللون قليل الحسّ فلاتتعرّض له بالحديد وإن كان أحمر اللون وأصله غليظ فلا تتعرّض له أيضا بالحديد خوف نزف الدم بل اتركه حتّى ينضج فإمّا أن تبطّه وإمّا أن يتفجّر من ذاته.	If the tumor is hard like a callus with little sensation, do not cauterize it with iron, and if it is red and its base is tough, do not cauterize it with iron either, for fear of hemorrhage, but let it alone until it becomes inflamed, then either it will suppurate or it will rupture by itself.
وإن كان أبيض اللون مستديرا وكان أصله رقيقا فهذا الذى ينبغى أن يقطع، والعمل فيه أن تنظر قبل العمل إن كان قد سكن ورمه الحارّ سكونا تامّا او نقص بعض النقصان.	And if it is white in color and protruding, and its base is thin, this is the one that should be cut off, and the operation for it is that you examine before the operation if it has been settled and its tumor has a complete settlement or some deficiency.
فحينئذ فأجلس العليل بحذاء الشمس ورأسه فى حجرك وتفتح فمه وتأخذ خادما بين يديك فيكبس لسانه الى أسفل بآلة هذه صورتها:.	So have the patient sit on a chair in the sunshine and his head in your lap, and open his mouth and take a hook between your hands to press his tongue down with an instrument of this shape:
تصنع من فضّة او من نحاس تكون رقيقة كالسكّين فإذا كبست بها اللسان وتبيّن لك الورم ووقع عليه بصرك فخذ صنّارة واغرزها فى اللوزة وتجذبها الى خارج ما أمكن من غير أن تجذب معها شيئا من الصفاقات.	Make it from silver or copper, and make it thin like a blade. If you press the tongue with it and the tumor is visible to you, and your gaze falls upon it, then take a needle and insert it into the tumor and pull it to the outside as much as possible without pulling out any of the surrounding tissues.
ثمّ تقطعها بآلة هذه صورتها تشبه المقصّ الا أنّ طرفيها منعطفان فم كلّ واحد منهما بحذاء الآخر حادّان جدّا تصنع من الحديد الهندىّ او الفولاد الدمشقىّ:.	Then you cut it with an instrument of this shape, resembling scissors except that its two ends are bent, each one facing the other, very sharp. Make it from Indian iron or Damascene steel.
فإن لم تحضر هذه الآلة وإلّا فاقطعها بمبضع هذه صورته:.	For if this instrument is not available, then cut it with a razor of this shape:
حادّة من جهة واحدة وغير حادّة من الجهة الأخرى، فبعد أن تقطع اللوزة الواحدة تقطع الأخرى على هذا النوع من القطع بعينه، ثمّ بعد القطع فتغرغر العليل بماء بارد او بخلّ وماء.	Sharp on one side and not sharp on the other, after you cut one tumor, you cut the other in the same manner of cutting, then after the cutting, the patient gargles with cold water or vinegar and water.
فإن عرض له نزف دم تغرغر بماء قد أغلى فيه قشور الرمّان او ورق الآس او نحو ذلك من القوابض حتّى ينقطع النزف ثمّ تعالجه حتّى يبرأ، وقد ينبت فى الحلق أورام أخر غير اللوزتين فتقطعها على ما ذكرت فى قطع اللوزتين سواء.	For if hemorrhage is presented to him, he gargles with water in which the ash of burnt leeks or wormwood leaves or similar astringents have been soaked until the hemorrhage stops, then treat it until it heals. And sometimes other tumors will grow in the throat, not just the two, so you cut them according to what I mentioned about cutting the two.
وقد عالجت امرأة من ورم كان قد نبت داخل حلقها يضرب الى الكمودة قليل الحسّ قد كاد أن يسدّ الحلق وكانت المرأة تتنفّس عن مجرى ضيّق وكان قد منعها الأكل وشرب الماء.	A woman suffered from a tumor that had developed inside her throat, which was pressing against the gullet, barely allowing for sensation, and almost obstructing the passage, and the woman was breathing with difficulty, and had been unable to eat or drink water.
وكانت قد أشرفت على الموت لو بقيت يوما او يومين والورم قد ارتفع منه فرعان حتّى خرجا على ثقبتى أنفها فبادرت بالعجلة فأغرزت فى أحدهما صنّارة ثمّ جذبته فانجذب منه قطعة صالحة.	And she had almost reached the point of death, if she had remained for a day or two, and the tumor had grown to the point where two roots protruded and came out of her nostrils, so I hastened with urgency, and I inserted a forceps into one of them, then pulled it, and a sound piece was pulled out.
ثمّ قطعتها حيث أدركته من ثقب الأنف ثمّ فعلت ذلك بما برز من ثقب الأنف الأخر ثمّ فتحت فمها وكبست لسانها ثمّ أغرزت الصنّارة فى نفس الورم ثمّ قطعت منه بعضه ولم يسل منه الا دم يسير.	Then I cut it where it was connected to the nostril, then I did the same with what protruded from the other nostril, then I opened her mouth and held her tongue, then I inserted the forceps into the same tumor, and I cut some of it, and only a little blood came out.
فانطلق حلق المرأة وبادرت من ساعتها الى شرب الماء ثمّ نالت من الغذاء فلم نزل نقطع من ذلك الورم مرارا زمانا طويلا والورم يخلف بدلا ممّا يقطع حتّى طال بى وبها ذلك.	The woman's throat was relieved, and I hastened to make her drink water, then she ate nourishment, and we did not stop cutting from that tumor many times over a long period, and the tumor would replace what was cut, until she lived for a long time with it.
فتحيّلت وكويت الورم داخل الحلق علّيّة فتوقّف عن الزيادة ثمّ سافرت عن الجهة ولم أعلم ما فعل اللّه بها بعدى،.	I made an incision and excised the tumor from inside her throat, so it stopped growing, then I sewed up the wound, and I do not know what God did with her after that.
الفصل السابع والثلاثون.	Chapter Thirty-Seven.
فى قطع ورم اللهاة.	On excising the tonsil tumor.
الذى يسمّى عنبة اذا انحدرت نزلة الى اللهاة وتورّمت وكانت بيضاء مستطيلة فإنّها تسمّى عمودا وإن كانت غليظة الأسفل مستديرة فإنّها تسمّى عنبة، اذا عولجت بما ذكرنا فى التقسيم فلم ينجع العلاج.	What is called a "tonsil stone" if it descends into the tonsils and becomes swollen, and it is white and oblong in shape, then it is called a "rod", and if it is rough and rounded at the base, then it is called a "tonsil stone", if treated with what we mentioned earlier for excision, the treatment would not be beneficial.
ورأيت الورم الحارّ قد سكن عنها وكانت رقيقة فينبغى أن تقطعها وما كان منها مجتمعا مستديرا ولم يكن لها طول وكانت دميّة او كمدة اللون او سوداء او لا حسّ لها فينبغى أن تجتنب قطعها.	I have seen the hot tumor which has settled in it, and it is thin, and it seems that cutting it would not be beneficial, and there is no rounded mass, and it does not have length, and it is bloody or blackish or has no sensation, and it seems that cutting it should be avoided.
ففيه غرر على العليل، فينبغى اذا رأيتها على الصفة التى ذكرت من بياضها وطولها أن تجلس العليل بحذاء الشمس وتكبس لسانه بالآلة التى تقدّم وصفها ثمّ تغرز الصنّارة فى العنبة.	Look for the gum on the tonsil, and if you see it on the uvula, which I mentioned because of its whiteness and length, that the tonsil is ulcerated with the sharp of the uvula and its lantery is cauterized with the needle that has been previously described, then the needle is inserted into the tonsil.
وتجذبها الى أسفل وتقطعها بأحد الآلتين اللتين ذكرتهما فى قطع اللوزتين وينبغى أن لا تقطع منها إلّا الذى زاد على الأمر الطبيعى بلا مزيد لأنّك إن قطعت منها أكثر أضررت بالصوت والكلام.	And it is pulled downwards and cut with one of the two instruments that I mentioned for cutting the uvula, and it is preferable not to cut except what exceeds the natural order without excess, because if you cut more, you would harm the sound and speech.
ثمّ بعد القطع تستعمل ما وصفنا فى قطع اللوزتين وتعالجها حتّى تبرأ، فإن جبن العليل عن قطعها فينبغى ان تستعمل الحيلة فى كّيها من غير خوف ولا حذر ووجه الكىّ فيها إنّما هو بالدواء الحادّ وهو أن تضع رأس العليل فى حجرك.	Then after the cutting, what we described for cutting the uvula is used, and it is treated until it heals. If the tonsil is shy about being cut, it is preferable to use cunning in dealing with it without fear or caution, and the way of dealing with it is only through gentle medicine, which is that you put the head of the tonsil on your knee.
ثمّ تكبس لسانه بالآلة التى ذكرنا ثمّ تأخذ من الماء الحادّ الذى ذكرت فى باب الكىّ وتعجن به جيرا غير مطفأ وتجعله لا ثخينا ولا رقيقا وتملأ منه تقعير هذه الآلة وهذه صورتها:.	Then its tongue is cauterized with the instrument that we mentioned, then you take from the gentle water that I mentioned in the chapter on cauterization and knead it into a dough that is not too stiff or too weak, and fill this instrument with it, and this is its shape:
يكون طرفها الذى تضع فيه الدواء له تقعير كتقعير ملعقة المرود، وتضع الآلة بالدواء على اللهاة نفسها والعليل مضطجع على جنبه ليسيل اللعاب من فيه من داخل حلقه لئلّا ينزل منه الى حلقه شىء فيؤذيه.	Its edge, where the medicine is placed for it, has a shape like the shape of a spoon for taking marrow, and you put the instrument with the medicine on the uvula itself and the tonsil is lying on its side so that the saliva does not flow from its mouth from inside its throat lest something falls into its throat and harms it.
ثمّ تمسك يدك بالدواء وأنت تعصرها على اللهاة قدر نصف ساعة حتّى تراها قد اسودّت وسكن لدغ الدواء، وإن شئت أن تأخذ قطنة فتلفّها على طرف مرود وتبلّ القطنة فى الدواء.	Then you hold your hand with the medicine and press it onto the uvula for about half an hour, until you see that it has become blackened and the biting of the medicine has ceased. If you wish, you can take a cotton swab, wrap it around the tip of a probe, and dip the cotton swab into the medicine.
وتدخل المرود بالقطنة فى أنبوبة من فوق حتّى تلصق القطنة على اللهاة تفعل ذلك مرارا حتّى تبلغ ما تريد من كىّ العنبة ثمّ تتركها فإنها تذبل وتصقط بعد ثلاثة أيّام او أربعة، فإن احتجت أن تعيد الدواء أعدته.	And you insert the probe with the cotton swab into the tube from above until the cotton swab sticks to the uvula, do this repeatedly until you achieve what you want from cauterizing the tonsil, then it is left alone. It will become calloused and fall off after three or four days, if you need to repeat the medicine, you repeat it.
وبعد الكىّ تمسح حول العنبة بقطنة مشرّبة فى السمن وتنشف بها ما حولها من الدواء، ثمّ يتمضمض بالماء البارد وتعالج من خارج بالتنطيلات ومن داخل بالغراغر حتّى يبرأ، فهذا النوع من العلاج أسلم من القطع وأبعد من الخوف.	After cauterizing, apply a dressing to the area around the fistula with a poultice in the grease and absorb with it what is around from the medication, then pour cold water and massage from outside with the fingers and from inside with the syringe until it heals. This type of treatment is safer than incision and farther from danger.
وقد تعالج اللهاة أيضا بما هو ألطف من الكّى والقطع تعالج بالبخور على هذه الصفة، يؤخذ فوذنج وزوفا وصعتر وسذاب وشيح وبابونج وقيصوم ونحوها من الحشائش فتجمعها كلّها او بعضها فى قدر وتغمر فى الخلّ.	And the ulcers can also be treated with what is gentler than cauterization and incision, treatment with fumigation of this kind, taking pine resin and castoreum and sagapenum and rue and abyunj and qaysum and similar herbal substances, then gathering all or some of them in a quantity and steeping it in vinegar.
وتغلى والقدر مطيّنة بطين الحكمة وتكون فى وسط الغطاء ثقبة تركّب عليها الآلة المجوّفة على هذه الصفة تصنع من فضّة او نحاس:.	And it is boiled and the quantity is dipped in the fat of wisdom, and there is a perforation in the middle of the coating, on which the shaped instrument is mounted, made from silver or bronze.
وتدخل الطرف الذى فيه الرمّانة فى فم العليل حتّى يصعد البخار الى اللهاة على الأنبوبة حتّى تتكمّد اللهاة نعمّا ثمّ تعيد عليها مرّات حتّى تذبل، وإيّاك أن تصنع هذا العلاج فى أوّل حدوث الورم.	And the side that has the tube enters the mouth of the abscess until the vapor rises to the ulcer through the pipe, until the ulcer becomes swollen with moisture, then it subsides and repeats until it becomes soft, but beware of applying this treatment at the beginning of the tumor's appearance.
فإنّه كثيرا ما تزيد فى الورم وإنّما ينبغى أن تفعل ذلك عند انحطاط ورمها الحارّ، فإن لم تحضرك هذه الآلة فخذ قصبة فركّب فى طرفها قشرة بيضة لئلّا يحترق فم العليل.	For it often increases the tumor, but rather it is suitable to do that when the hot tumor subsides, if you don't have this instrument, take a reed and insert in its side the membrane of an egg so that the mouth of the abscess does not get burned.
لأنّ قشرة البيضة تمنع حرّ البخار أن يحرق الفم وهذا من جيّد العلاج مع سلامته،.	For the membrane of the egg prevents the heat of the vapor from burning the mouth, and this is one of the best treatments with its safety.
الفصل الثامن والثلاثون.	Chapter Eighteen.
فى إخراج الشوك وما ينشب فى الحلق من غير ذلك.	On extracting the tonsil and whatever grows in the throat, besides that.
كثيرا ما ينشب فى الحلق عظم او شوك سمك او غير ذلك فينبغى أن تخرج منها ما كان ظاهرا يقع عليه البصر بعد أن تكبس اللسان بالآلة عند الشمس.	Often, a bone or a fishbone or something else grows in the throat, it is suitable to extract from it what is visible and falls under the sight after the tongue is pressed with an instrument at the gums.
ليتبيّن لك ما فى الحلق، وما لم يظهر لك وتوارى فى الحلق فينبغى أن تقيّئ العليل قبل أن ينهضم طعامه فى معدته فربّما خرج الشىء الناشب بالقئ او يتبلّع العليل قطعة لفت او أصل خسّة.	It becomes clear to you what is in the throat, and what has not appeared to you, and the foreign body is stirred up in the throat, so that it is necessary to extract the foreign body from the throat before it goes down into his stomach, lest the rough thing comes out with vomiting or the foreign body swallows a piece of the lung or a part of the gullet.
او يتبلّع لقمة من خبز يابس او تأخذ قطعة من الإسفنج البحرىّ الليّن فتربطها فى خيط ثمّ يتبلّعها فإذا وصلت الى موضع الشوكة جذّب الخيط بسرعة تفعل ذلك مرّات.	Or it swallows a morsel of dry bread or takes a piece of soft sponge, then ties it to a thread and swallows it, so that when it reaches the place of the obstruction, one pulls the thread quickly, doing that repeatedly.
فكثيرا ما تلصق الشوكة او العظم فيها وتخرج، فإن لم تخرج بما ذكرنا وإلّا فاستعمل آلة من رصاص على هذه الصورة:.	For often the fishbone or the bone sticks to it and comes out, if it does not come out by what we mentioned, then one uses an instrument made of lead in this form:
تكون أغلظ من المرود قليلا وفى طرفها تعقيف يدخلها العليل فى حلقه برفق وهو رافع رأسه الى فوق ويتحفّظ من مسّ حنجرته لئلّا يحدث به سعال ويدفع به العظم او الشوكة، او يدخلها الطبيب بيده،.	It is slightly thicker than a probe and on its end there is a hook, which the patient inserts into his throat with gentleness, raising his head upwards and taking care not to touch his gullet lest he coughs, and lest it pushes the bone or the fishbone, or the doctor inserts it with his hand.
وإدخال العليل لها أحسن لعلمه بموضع الشىء الناشب ويدفع الى أسفل او يجذب يده بالآلة الى فوق كلّ ذلك على قدر ما يتهيّأ له حتّى يخرج،.	And the patient's insertion of it is better for his knowledge of the position of the foreign body, and he pushes it downwards or pulls his hand with the instrument upwards, all of that according to what he imagines for himself until it comes out.
الفصل التاسع والثلاثون.	Chapter 39.
فى إخراج العلق الناشب فى الحلق.	On extracting the foreign body from the throat.
اذا عالجت العلقة بما ذكرنا فى التقسيم من العلاج بالأدوية ولم ينجع فانظر حينئذ فى حلق العليل عند الشمس بعد أن تكبس لسانه بالآلة التى وصفت لك.	If you treated the throat with what we mentioned in the chapter on treatment with medications and it did not work, then look at that time into the patient's throat by the light of the sun after his tongue has been held back by the instrument which was described to you.
فإن وقع بصرك على العلقة فاجذبها بصنّارة صغيرة او بجفت لطيف محكم فإن لم تتمكّن بها وإلّا فخذ أنبوبة مجوّفة فأدخلها فى حلق العليل الى قرب العلقة ثمّ أدخل فى جوف الأنبوبة حديدة محمية بالنار.	For if your eye falls on the foreign body, then pull it with a small forceps or with a thin and sharp hook, if you are not able to do that, then take a curved pipe and insert it into the patient's throat near the foreign body, then insert into the interior of the pipe a needle wrapped in thread.
تفعل ذلك مرّات ويصبر العليل عن الماء يومه كلّه، ثمّ يأخذ إجّانة مملوءة ماء باردا ويفتح فمه فيه ويتمضمض به ولا يبلع منه نقطة ويحرّك الماء حينا بعد حين بيده.	He does that many times and the patient abstains from water for a whole day, then he takes a full syringe of cold water and opens his mouth to it and rinses with it without swallowing a drop, and moves the water around in his mouth for a while.
فإنّ العلقة تسقط على المقام اذا أحسّت بالماء، فإن لم تخرج بما وصفنا فتبخّر الحلق بالبول وبالحلتيت بالآلة التى وصفت فى بخور اللهاة تفعل ذلك مرّات فإنّها تسقط.	For if the syringe feels the water, it spills on the syringe's head, and if it does not come out as we described, then the throat is fumigated with urine and with the inhaler that was described in the inhalation of the larynx, do that many times until it falls.
ووجه العمل فى البخور أن تأخذ قدرا فيها جمر حمّى بالنار والقدر مغطيّة بّغطاء فى وسطه ثقبة فتركّب فى تلك الثقبة طرف الآلة ثمّ تلقى البخور ويضع العليل فمه فى طرف الأنبوبة ويغلّق فمه لئلّا يخرج البخور حتّى يعلم أنّ البخور قد وصل الى حلقه.	And the way of working with the inhaler is that a hot copper piece is taken and put in it, and the piece is covered with a lid in whose middle there is an opening, so one end of the tube is inserted into this opening, then the patient receives the fumigation and puts his mouth on the other end of the pipe, and closes his mouth tightly so that the fumigation does not come out until he feels that it has reached his throat.
فإنّ العلقة تسقط على المقام، فإن لم تسقط وإلّا فيعاد البخور مرّات ويصبر العليل للعطش ويأكل المالح والثوم ولا يشرب ماء فلا بدّ أن تخرج بهذا التدبير، وهذه صورة آلة تجتذب بها العلقة من الحلق اذا وقع عليها البصر.	For if the syringe falls on the beaker, and if it does not fall then the fumigation is repeated many times, and the patient suffers from thirst, and eats salt and garlic, and does not drink water, for it is inevitable that it will come out with this management. This is a picture of the device by which the syringe is extracted from the throat if the vision falls on it.
وهى تشبه الكلاليب كما ترى إلّا أنّ لها هذا التعقيف الذى يدخل الى الحلق وطرفاها تشبه فم الطائر فيها خشونة المبرد اذا فبضت على شىء لم تتركه:.	And it is similar to a spoon as you see, except that it has this configuration which enters into the throat and its edges are like the beak of a bird with roughness of a file, if it were pressed on something it would not leave it.
وآلة أخرى يكبس بها اللسان وهى حلقة واسعة من حديد بقدر ما تسع الفم فوق اللسان تدخل فى الفم قائمة على جانبها فيبقى الفم مفتوحا بغير إرادة العليل ولا يستطيع أن يقلعها البتّة حتّى تنحيها:.	And another instrument with which the tongue is pressed, and it is a wide iron ring as large as to accommodate the mouth above the tongue, it enters into the mouth standing on its side, so the mouth remains open without the patient's effort, nor can he dislodge it until it is removed.
صفة الآلة التى يفتح بها الفم على هذا القياس بعينه.	A description of the instrument by which the mouth is opened on this measure in particular.
الفصل الأربعون.	Chapter on surgical operations for afflictions of the eyelids.
فيهجعل من الكلام فى بطّ الأورام وشقّها.	Incision in the viscera and their wall.
الأورام أنواعها كثيرة متفنّنة على حسب ما يأتّى ذكرها واحدا واحدا فى هذا الكتاب وهى تختلف فى بطّها وشقّها من وجهين أحدهما من نوع الورم فى نفسه وما يحوى من الرطوبات.	The viscera have many kinds, varied and detailed, as their mention comes up one by one in this book, and they differ in their wall and incision in two ways, one of them is the type of the organ itself and what it contains of the intestines.
والنوع الثانى من قبل المواضع التى تحدث فيها من البدن لأنّ الورم الحادث فى الرأس غير الورم الحادث فى المقعدة والورم الحادث فى موضع لحمىّ غير الورم الحادث فى مفصل لكلّ واحد منها حكم من العمل.	And the second type is due to the places in the body where they occur, because the tumor that occurs in the head is not like the tumor that occurs in the hip, and the tumor that occurs in a fleshy place is not like the one that occurs in a joint, each of them has a ruling for the operation.
ومن الأورام ما لا ينبغى أن تبطّ إلّا بعد نضج القيح فيها وكماله ومنها ما ينبغى أن تبطّ وهى نيّة لم تنضج على التمام مثل الأورام التى تكون قريبة من المفاصل.	And among the viscera, there is what should not be incised until after the pus has matured in it and has formed a head, and among them is what should be incised while it is still fresh and has not yet matured, like the viscera that are near the joints.
لأنّ الورم اذا حدث بقرب مفصل وطال أمره حتّى يتعفّن ما حوله ربّما أفسد رباطات او عصب ذلك المفصل فيكون سببا لزمانة ذلك العضو او يكون الورم بقرب عضو رئيس.	For a tumor, if it occurs near a joint and its matter persists until what is around it becomes inflamed, it may corrupt the ligaments or nerves of that joint, causing disability in that limb, or it may be a tumor near a major organ.
لأنّك اذا أخّرت بطّه حتّى ينضج أضررت بذلك العضو الرئيس او يكون بقرب المقعدة فتبطّه نيّا وإنّما وجب أن تبطّ الورم نيّا غير كامل النضج الذى يكون بقرب المقعدة لئلّا يعفن الغور فينفذ الى داخل المقعدة فيصير ناصورا.	Because if you delay incising it until it matures, you will harm the major organ, or if it is near the hip, you should incise it while it is still fresh, and it is not necessary to incise a tumor that is not fully matured, which is near the hip, lest the pus flows and penetrates into the hip, causing a fistula.
ويصير فى حدّ ما لا يبرأ، وينبغى أن تعلم وقت بطّ الأورام التى قد نضجت على التمام وهو عند سكون وجع الورم وذهاب الحمّى ونقصان الحمرة والضربان وتخدّد رأس الورم وسائر العلامات.	And it will become in a condition where it does not heal, and it is necessary to know the time for incising the viscera that have matured completely, which is when there is calmness and the tumor has stopped, and the inflammation has decreased, and the redness has diminished, and the throbbing, and the tension of the head of the tumor, and other signs.
وينبغى أن توقع البطّ فى أسفل موضع من الورم إن أمكن ذلك ليكون أسهل لسيلان المدّة الى أسفل او فى أرقّ موضع من الورم وأشدّ نتوّا، وليكن البطّ ذاهبا فى طول البدن إن كانت الأورام فى نحو اليدين والرجلين.	It is preferable to place the plaster at the bottom of the tumor, if possible, so that it may be easier to slide down or in a thinner place of the tumor and with less adhesion, and let the plaster be flat along the length of the body if the tumors are near the hands and feet.
ومواضع العضلات والأوتار والعصب والشريانات وبالجملة فى جميع المواضع المستوية التى لا انثناء لها، وأمّا التى تنثنى فليذهب بالبطّ على حسب ذلك الموضع وأمّا اذا كان الورم فى المواضع اللحميّة فالأجود أن تترك بطّه.	And the places of muscles, tendons, nerves and blood vessels, and in short all the flat places that have no flexion, but as for those that do flex, let the plaster move according to that place, and if the tumor is in fleshy places, it is better to leave its plaster.
حتّى يستحكم نضجه كما قلنا على التمام فإنّك إن بططته قبل ذلك طال سيلان الصديد منه وكان كثير الوضر والوسخ وربّما صلبت شفتاه وغوره، وبعض الأورام قد تبطّ على عرض البدن عند الضرورة او على حسب ما يحتاج اليه العضو.	When the plaster is fixed as we have said, then you will find that before applying it, the callus has taken out a lot of the pus and has reduced the pain and the swelling, and sometimes the lip has become stiff and its hole, and some tumors are bandaged across the abdomen when necessary or according to what the organ needs.
وينبغى أن تستعمل فى الأورام الصغار بطّا واحدا وفى الأورام الكبار بطّا واسعا او شقوقا كثيرة على قدر عظم الورم، وقد يكون من الأورام ما ينبغى أن يقوّر الجلد ويقطع اذا كان قد صار كالخرقة.	It is preferable to use one plaster for small tumors and a wide plaster or several plasters for large tumors, according to the size of the tumor, and some tumors may need the skin to be cut if it has become like a crust.
وصار فى حدّ ما قد مات مثل ما يعرض فى كثير من الدبيلات والمخابئ، ومنها ما يشقّ شقّا ذا ثلاث زوايا ومنها ما يقطع منه كشكل ورقة الآس كورم الأربيّة.	And it becomes to a certain extent dead, like what happens in many blisters and pustules, some of which burst into a three-angled crack and others cut into a shape like the paper of a pomegranate core.
ومنها ما يستعمل فيه الشقّ المستدير والشقّ الهلالىّ ونحوها من الشقوق، وما لم يكن له رأس مثل الأورام الملس المسطّحة فينبغى أن يبطّ بطّا بسيطا فقط، وينبغى اذا كان الورم عظيما وقد جمع مدّة كثيرة وبططته أن لا تبادر فتخرج القيح كلّه فى ذلك الوقت.	And some of them use a circular incision and a crescent-shaped incision and other types of incisions, and what does not have a head like flat smooth tumors, it is preferable to bandage only with a simple plaster, and it is preferable if the tumor is large and has accumulated a lot of pus that it should not be pressed so that all the pus comes out at that time.
بل أخرج منه بعضه ثمّ شدّ الورم الى يوم آخر ثمّ أخرج بعض القيح أيضا تفعل ذلك مرارا على تدريج حتّى تخرج جميعه.	Rather, some of it is extracted, then the tumor is tightened for another day, and then some more pus is extracted, this is done repeatedly by degrees until all of it is extracted.
ولا سيّما إن كان العليل ضعيف القوّة او امرأة حاملا او طفلا صغيرا او شيخا هرم فإن الروح الحيوانىّ كثيرا ما ينحلّ مع خروج القيح دفعة فربّما مات العليل وأنت لاتشعر فاحذر هذاالباب حذراعظيما.	Do not neglect this, whether the patient is a weak old man or a woman with child or a small boy or an aged senile, for the vital spirit often departs with the sudden emission of the evacuations, and the patient may die before you feel it, so beware of this accident and be very careful.
وبعد بطّك لهذه الأورام ينبغى أن تمسح الجرح وتنظر فإن كان جرح الورم صغيرا او كان الشقّ واحدا بسيطا فاستعمل الفتل من الكتان او القطن البالى وإن كان الورم عظيما وكانت شقوق البطّ كثيرة.	And after you have sewn the wound, it is necessary to dress it and examine it, for if the wound of the tumor is small or the incision is single and simple, use a dressing made from linen or white cotton, and if the tumor is large and there are many incisions.
فينبغى أن تدخل فى كلّ شقّ فتيلة حتّى يصل بعضها الى بعض، وإن كان الورم قد قطعت من الجلد بعضه او قوّرته فينبغى أن تحشوه بالقطن البالى او بهدب الكتان من غير رطوبة وتشدّه الى اليوم الثالث.	It is necessary that you insert a thread in each incision until some of them reach one another, and if the tumor has been cut from the skin or its interior has been excavated, it is necessary to stuff it with white cotton or with linen that has no lint, and tighten it until the third day.
ثمّ تنزعه وتعالجه بما ينبغى من المراهم حتّى يبرأ، فإن عرض نزف دم فى حين عملك فاستعمل الماء البارد والخلّ بعد أن تشرّب فيهما خرقة كتان وتحملها على الموضع من النزف مرّات.	Then you loosen and treat it with the appropriate ointments until it heals, and if there is an emission of blood during your operation, use cold water and vinegar after dipping a linen pad in them and apply it to the place of the bleeding repeatedly.
فإن دام النزف فينبغى أن تستعمل التدبير والعلاج والذرورات التى وصفنا فى مواضع كثيرة من كتابنا هذا ومن التقسيم، فإن كنت فى زمن الشتاء وكان موضع الورم كثير العصب فينبغى أن تبلّ الرفائد بشراب وزيت حارّ.	For if the bleeding persists, it is necessary that you use cauterization and treatment and poultices that we have described in many places in this book and in the division, and if you are in a winter season and the place of the tumor has many nerves, it is necessary that you apply a hot poultice with iris and olive oil.
وتضعها على الموضع، وإن كنت فى الصيف وكانت المواضع لحميّة فينبغى أن تحمل الرفائد مشرّبة بماء وزيت او بشراب وزيت كلّ ذلك بارد حتّى اذا كان اليوم الثالث كما قلنا فينبغى أن تحلّ الورم وتمسحه.	And you apply it to the place, and if you are in summer and the places are humid, it is necessary that you carry the poultice dipped in water and oil or a cold poultice with oil, all of which are cold, until, if it is the third day as we said, it is necessary that you uncover the tumor and dress it.
وتستعمل فى علاجه ما شاكله حتّى يبرأ، فهذا ما تحتاج اليه من معرفة علاج الأورام على الجملة وأمّا طريق التفصيل فقد ذكرت كلّ ورم كيف السبيل الى علاجه مبوّبا ملخّصا،.	And you use for its treatment what is suitable for it until it heals, for this is what you need to know about the treatment of tumors in general, and as for the method of detailing, we have mentioned each tumor and the way to its treatment, explained and summarized.
الفصل الحادى والأربعون.	The surgical suture and the ligatures.
فى الشقّ على الأورام التى تعرض فى جلدة الرأس.	Incision on the organs that are exposed in the skull.
تعرض فى جلدة الرأس أورام صغار وهى من أنواع السلع تحويها صفاقات هى لها ظروف كأنّها حوصلة الدجاجة وأنواعها كثيرة فمنها شحميّة ومنها ما تحوى رطوبة تشبه الحمأة.	The contents of the skull are small organs, and they are types of things that have membranes covering them, which have appearances like the bowel of a hen and its types, for some of them are fatty and some contain moistures resembling marrow.
ومنها ما تحوى رطوبة تشبه الدشيش والحساء ونحو ذلك ومنها ما هى متحجّرة صلبة وكلّها لا خطر فى شقّها وإخراجها ما لم يعترضك عند شقّها شريان.	And some of them contain moisture resembling the brain and its meninges, and similar to that, and some are hardened solid things, and all of them do not pose a danger when incised and extracted unless a blood vessel is exposed during the incision.
والعمل فى شقّها أن تسبرها أوّلا بالآلة التى تأتى صورتها بعد هذا التى تسمّى المدسّ حتّى تعلم ما تحوى فإن كان الذى تحوى رطوبة فشقّها شقّا على الطول شقّا بسيطا على هذه الصورة:.	And the operation for incising it is that you should first probe it with the instrument whose shape will be shown after this, which is called the dilator, until you learn what it contains, for if what it contains is moisture, then you should make a longitudinal incision, a simple incision, in this manner:
وابدأ بالشقّ من خطّ ~ب~ الى خطّ ~ج~ فإذا تفرّغت الرطوبة فاسلخ الكيس الذى كان يحوى تلك الرطوبة واقطعه جميعه ولا تترك منه شيئا البتّة فكثيرا ما يعود اذا بقى منه شىء.	Start the incision from line ~ب~ to line ~ج~, and if the moisture flows out, then extract the capsule that contained this moisture and remove it entirely, and do not leave any part of it, for often it returns if a portion of it remains.
ثمّ اغمس قطنة فى المرهم الصرىّ إن حضر وإلّا فى ماء الملح واملأ به الجرح واتركه الى يوم آخر فإنّه يأكل ما بقى من الكيس، ثمّ أعد عليه القطنة بالمصرىّ ثانية وثالثة إن احتجت الى ذلك.	Then dip a swab in the sharp vinegar, if it is available, or otherwise in salt water, and fill the wound with it, and leave it until the next day, for it will dissolve what remains of the capsule, then apply the swab with the vinegar again a second and third time if there is a need for that.
حتّى تتيقّن أنّه لم يبق من الكيس شىء فحينئذ عالج الجرح بالمراهم حتّى يبرأ، وإن كان الورم تحوى سلعة شحميّة فشقّها على هذه الصورة:.	Until you are certain that nothing of the capsule remains, then treat the wound with ointments until it heals, and if the organ contains a fatty substance, then incise it in this manner:
شقّا مصلّبا والق الصنانير فى شفتى الجرح واسلخه من كلّ جهة ورُمْ جهدك فى إخراج الصفاق الذى يحويها، فإن اعترضك شريان فاصنع ما وصفت لك بعد وكذلك فاصنع فى الورم إن كان متحجّرا من الشقّ.	Make a transverse incision and insert the forceps into the lip of the wound, and extract it from all sides, and exert your effort in extracting the membrane that covers it, for if a blood vessel is exposed to you, then do what I described to you previously, and also do with the organ if it is hardened from the incision.
والعلاج بعينه على ما ذكرت، والشقّ على الورم المتحجّر أسهل لأنّه قليل الدم والرطوبة وقد يكون بعض هذه الأورام التى فى الرأس فى بعض الناس لا رطوبة معها البتّة وذلك أنّى شققت على ورم فى.	The treatment of the case I mentioned, and incision on a chronic abscess is easier because it has less blood and inflammation, and some of these abscesses in the head may not have much inflammation in them.
رأس امرأة عجوز فألفيت الورم كالحجر الصلد خشنا أبيض لم يستطع على كسره ولو رمى به أحد لشجّه، وما كان من سائر الأورام الحادثة فى الرأس غير هذه كالأورام التى تعرض فى رؤوس الصبيان.	I excised a bony hard, white, rough tumor from the head of an old woman, like solid stone, which she was unable to chew with, or anyone else who might have hit her because of it, and this is not among the other accidental tumors that occur in the head except for those found in the heads of children.
وعند أصول الآذان فشقّها كلّها شقّا بسيطا واجعل بطّها من أسافلها ليسهل جرى المادّة الى أسفل ثمّ عالجها بما يوافقها من العلاج،.	And when I reached the basis of the ears, I made a simple incision in all of them and made their bottoms from their lowest parts so that the discharge can easily flow to the bottom, then treated it with what is suitable for it from the treatment.
الفصل الثانى والأربعون.	The 42nd Chapter.
فى الشقّ على الخنازير التى تعرض فى العنق كثيرا ما تعرض هذه الأورام فى العنق وتحت الإبطين وفى الأربيّتين وقد تعرض فى سائر الجسم ويكون الذى يعرض فى العنق منها واحدة ويكون كثيرة ويتولّد بعضها من بعض.	Incision on goiters that occur in the neck often, these tumors occur in the neck and under the armpits and in the groin, and they may occur in other parts of the body, and what occurs in the neck is one tumor, and there are many, and some of them develop from others.
وكلّ خنزيرة منها تكون فى داخل صفاق خاصّ لها كما يكون فى السلع وأورام الرأس كما وصفنا، وأنواع هذه الخنازير كثيرة منها متحجّرة ومنها ما تحوى رطوبات ومنها خبيثة لا تجيب الى العلاج،.	And each of these goiters is in a specific capsule, as is the case with tumors of the spleen and head, as we have described, and there are many types of these goiters, some of which are calcified, and some contain pus, and some are malignant and do not respond to treatment.
فما رأيت منها حسنة الحال فى اللمس وكان ظاهرها قريبا من لون الجلد تتحرّك الى كلّ جهة ولم تكن ملتزقة بعصب العنق ولا بوداج ولا شريان ولا كانت غائرة.	And I have not seen any of them that felt good to the touch, and its appearance was close to the color of the skin, moving in every direction, and it was not adherent to the nerve of the neck or the jugular vein or artery, nor was it pedunculated.
فينبغى أن تشقّها شقّا بسيطا من فوق الى أسفل البدن على هذا الشكل من خطّ ~ج~ الى خطّ ~ب~:.	Therefore, it should be incised with a simple incision from top to bottom of the neck in this shape from line ~j~ to line ~b~.
وتسلخها من كلّ جهة وتمدّ شفتى الجلد بصنّارة او بصنّارتين او بصنانير كثيرة إن احتجت الى ذلك كما قلنا فى أورام الرأس وتخرجها قليلا قليلا وتكون على رقبة ألّا تقطع عرقا او عصبا وليكن المبضع ليس بحادّ جدّا.	Dissect it from all sides and extend the skin of the skull with a suture or two sutures or many sutures if there is a need for that as we said in the chapters on the head, and extract it little by little, and it should be on a rag so it does not cut a vein or a nerve, and let the surgeon not be very hasty.
لئلّا تزيد يدك بالقطع او يقلق العليل فتقطع ما لا تحتاج الى قطعه، فإن قطعت عرقا او شريانا وعاقك عن العمل فضع فى الجرح زاجا مسحوقا او بعض الذرورات التى تقطع الدم.	Lest your hand increase in cutting or the instrument become too fine, so you cut what you do not need to cut. If you cut a vein or an artery and prevented yourself from working, then put on the wound a cauterized zaj, or some of the powders that cut off blood.
وشدّ الجرح واتركه حتّى تسكن حدّة الورم ويسترخى الجرح ويهمّ بالتعفّن فإنّ الدم ينقطع حينئذ فارجع الى عملك حتّى تفرغ، ثمّ تفتّش بأصبعك السبّابة إن كان بقى ثمّ خنازير أخر صغار فتقطعها وتنقيها.	Tighten the wound and leave it until the acuteness of the swelling subsides, and the wound relaxes and is ready for dressing. Then the blood will stop at that time, so return to your work until you are finished, then feel with your index finger, if there remain any, then the small remaining sinews, and cut them and clean them.
فإن كان فى أصل الخنزيرة عرق عظيم فينبغى أن لا تقطع تلك الخنزيرة من أصلها بل ينبغى أن تربطها بخيط مثنى وثيق وتتركها حتّى تسقط من ذاتها من غير مضرّة ثم تحشو الجرح بالقطن البالى وقد غمسته فى المرهم المصرىّ ثمّ تعالجه.	For if there is in the base of the sinew a large vein, it should not be cut from its base. Rather, it should be tied with a double and tight ligature, and left until it drops off by itself without harm. Then fill the wound with yellow wool that has been dipped in Egyptian ointment, and treat it.
وإن قطعت الخنزيرة كلّها فينبغى أن تجمع شفتى الجرح وتخيطه من ساعته بعد أن تعلم أنّه لم تبق فضلة البتّة فإن رأيت أنّه قد بقيت فضلة لعظم الخنزيرة.	And if you cut the entire sinew, it is proper that you bring together the edges of the wound and tie them from its base after you have made sure that no fragment of the sinew remains, unless you see that a piece has remained on the bone of the sinew.
فينبغى أن تقصد بالقطع لأصلها وأسّها وتستعمل الخياطة وما ذكرناه، وما كان من الخنازير تحوى رطوبات فتبطّها بطّا بسيطا حيث يظهر لك موضع نضجها واجعل البطّ ممّا يلى الأسفل كما قلنا.	It is proper that you intend to cut at its base and its origin, and use the suturing and what we mentioned, and whatever sinews are adjacent to the bones, you should tie them with a simple tie where the location of their spurs appears to you, and make the tie as it was said to be below.
ثمّ تستعمل بعد البطّ الفتل بالمرهم المصرىّ ونحوه ليأكل ما بقى من الفساد حتّى اذا رأيت الجرح قد نقى فعالجه بالمراهم المنبتة للحم حتّى يبرأ،.	The application of the plaster should be done after the bandage with the Egyptian ointment and its likes to eat away what remains of the corruption until you see the wound has been purified by the active ointments that generate flesh until it is healed.
الفصل الثالث والأربعون.	Chapter Forty-Three.
فى شقّ الحنجرة عن ورم يحدث فى داخل الحلق.	A incision in the tonsil for a tumor that occurs inside the throat.
ذكرت الأوائل هذا الشقّ فى الحنجرة ولم أشاهد أحدا فى بلدنا صنعه وهذا نسق كلامهم، أمّا أصحاب الذبحة فينبغى أن يجتنبوا شقّ الحنجرة اذ لا ينتفعون بذلك.	The ancients mentioned this incision in the tonsil and I did not see anyone in our country who performed it, and this is what they said, as for those with a tracheal wound, it is better that they avoid the incision of the tonsil since they do not benefit from it.
من أجل أن جميع الأوراد والرئة تكون سقيمة، وأمّا الذين بهم ورم حارّ فى الفم او الحلق او اللوزتين اذا لم تكن علّة فى القصبة فوجب استعمال شقّ الحنجرة للهرب من العطب الذى يكون من الاختناق.	So that all the trachea and lungs are sound, but as for those who have a hot tumor in the mouth or throat or tonsils, if there is no obstruction in the trachea, then it is necessary to use the incision of the tonsil to avoid the damage that comes from choking.
فينبغى اذا أردنا ذلك أن نشقّ الحنجرة تحت ثلاث دوائر من دوائر القصبة او أربع شقّا صغيرا بالعرض فيما بين دائرتين بقدر ما يكون الشقّ فى الصفاق لا فى الغضروف وهذا الموضع موافق للشقّ.	It is better, if we wish to do that, to make an incision in the tonsil under three cartilages of the trachea or four small incisions between two cartilages, as long as the incision is in the soft tissue and not in the cartilage, and this location is suitable for the incision.
لأنّه عديم اللحم وأوعية الدم منه بعيدة، فإن كان المعالج جبانا فينبغى أن يمدّ جلدة الحلق بصنّارة ثمّ يشقّ الجلد حتّى اذا صار الى القصبة جنّب أوعية الدم إن رأى منها شيئا.	Since it has no flesh and the blood vessels are far from it, if the surgeon is inexperienced, it is better that he should stretch the skin of the throat with a hook, then make an incision in the skin until, if he reaches the trachea, he avoids the blood vessels, if he sees any.
ثمّ يشقّ الصفاق الذى وصفنا، ويستدلّ على شقّ القصبة من البلغم الذى يخرج منها مع ما تنخزق ومن انقطاع الصوت وتترك الجرح مفتوحا زمانا فإذا زال الوقت الذى كان يتخوّف فيه الاختناق جمعت شفتى الجرح من الجلد.	Then he should make an incision in the soft tissue as we described, and he knows that he has reached the trachea from the mucus that comes out with what is coughed up and from the interruption of the voice, and the wound is left open for a time, then when the time passes during which he was afraid of choking, the edges of the wound are closed with sutures.
وخطته وحده من غير الغضروف ثمّ تستعمل الأدوية التى تنبت اللحم الى أن يبرأ، قال واضع هذا الكتاب، تفسير جملة هذا الكلام الذى حكيناه إنّما هو اذا رأوا العليل قد سدّ حلقه أحد هذه الأورام التى ذكروا.	Its ligament and separate it from the non-cartilaginous part, then administer medications that stimulate the flesh until it heals. The author of this book said: Interpretation of the phrase "this speech that we have narrated", namely, if they see the patient whose trachea has been blocked by one of these organs that they mentioned.
وأشرف العليل على الموت وهمّ نفسه أن ينقطع ذهبوا الى شقّ الحنجرة ليتنفّس العليل على موضع الجرح بعض التنفّس ويسلم من الموت وإنّما أمروا بترك الجرح مفتوحا حتّى تتقضّى سورة المرض وتكون سورته ثلاثة أيّام ونحوها.	The patient was on the verge of death, and they thought that his breath was about to be cut off, so they made an incision in the trachea to let the patient breathe at the site of the wound for some breathing, and he was saved from death. And they ordered leaving the wound open until the inflammation of the disease subsides and its duration is three days or so.
فحينئذ أمروا بخياطة الجرح وعلاجه حتّى يبرأ، والذى شاهدته بنفسى أنّ خادما أخذت سكّينا فأرسلته على حلقها فقطعت به بعض قصبة الرئة فدعيت الى علاجها فوجدتها تخور كما تخور المذبوح فكشفت عن الجرح.	Then they ordered the suturing of the wound and its treatment until it heals. The one that I saw with my own eyes, a servant took a needle, so she inserted it into her throat, which severed part of the trachea, so I was called to treat her, and I found it to be constricted as the constricted esophagus, so I exposed the wound.
فوجدت الدم الذى خرج من الجرح يسيرا فأيقنت أنّها لم تقطع عرقا ولا وداجا والريح تخرج من الجرح فبدرت فخطت الجرح وعالجته حتّى برئ، ولم يعرض للخادم شىء إلّا بحح فى الصوت لا مزيد.	So I found that the blood that came out of the wound was minimal, so I suspected that she did not cut a vein or an artery, and the breath was coming out of the wound. So I sewed the wound and treated it until it healed, and nothing bad happened to the servant except for a slight change in her voice.
وعادت بعد أيّام الى أفضل أحوالها فمن هنا نقول إنّ شقّ الحنجرة لا خطر فيه،.	And she returned after days to her best condition, so from this we say that making an incision in the trachea has no danger.
الفصل الرابع والأربعون.	The fourth and fortieth chapter.
فى الشقّ على الورم الذى يعرض فى الحلقوم من خارج ويسمّى فيلة الحلقوم.	On making an incision on the tumor that appears in the trachea from the outside, which is called a tracheal fistula.
هذا الورم الذى يسمّى فيلة الحلقوم يكون ورما عظيما على لون البدن وهو فى النساء كثير وهو على نوعين.	This tumor that is called a tracheal fistula, is a large tumor on the side of the neck and it is common in women, and it is of two types.
إمّا أن يكون طبيعيّا وإمّا أن يكون عرضّيا، فأمّا الطبيعىّ فلا حيلة فيه وأمّا العرضىّ فيكون على ضربين أحدهما شبيه بالسلع الشحميّة والضرب الآخر شبيه بالورم الذى يكون من تعقّد الشريان وفى شقّه خطر.	Either it is natural or it is acquired. As for the natural one, there is no treatment for it, and as for the acquired one, it is of two types: one resembles a fatty lipoma, and the other type resembles a tumor that occurs from the complication of the blood vessels, and in its incision there is danger.
فلا ينبغى أن تعرض لها بالحديد البتّة إلّا ما كان منها صغيرا إن سبرتها وفتشّتها بالمدّس فألفيتها تشبه السلعة الشحميّة ولم تكن متعلّقة بشىء من العروق فشقّها كما تشقّ على السلع.	It is not suitable to expose them to the iron spatula except what is small, if you pierced and explored it with a probe and found that it resembled a fibrous, fatty tissue and was not attached to any of the blood vessels, then you should dissect it as one dissects fatty tissues.
وتخرجها بما يحويها من الكيس إن كانت فى كيس وإلّا فاستقص جميعها ثمّ عالج الموضع بما ينبغى من العلاج،.	And extract it along with what it contains from the cyst, if it is in a cyst, or else remove all of it, then treat the site with the suitable treatment.
الفصل الخامس والأربعون.	The forty-fifth chapter.
فى الشقّ على أنواع السلع.	On dissecting the different types of fatty tissues.
السلع أنواعها كثيرة وقد ذكرت جميع أنواعها فى التقسيم وينبغى أن نخبر ههنا الفرق بين السلعة والخراج اذ هو مشكل، فأقول إنّ الخراج يكون معه حرارة وحمّى وأوجاع مخوفة حتّى يهدأ غليان الفضل.	Fatty tissue has many types, and I have mentioned all its types in the sectioning. It is suitable that we inform about the difference between fatty tissue and abscess, as it is confusing. So I say that an abscess occurs with heat, warmth, and hidden pains until the flowing of pus subsides.
ويكمل العفن فحينئذ تسكن الحمّى والحدّة، والسلعة لا تكون معها لا حرارة ولا حمّى ولا أوجاع ويحويها كيس صفاقىّ هو لها ظرف خاصّ ويكون على لون البدن ويكون ابتداؤها كالحمّصة وتصير كالبطّيحة وأكبر وأصغر.	And the abscess is full of pus, so when it is drained, the heat and sharp pain subside. Fatty tissue does not come with heat, warmth, or pains, and it contains a fatty cyst which is its specific envelope, and it is found on the surface of the fundus, and its beginning is like a hernia, and it becomes like a cyst, and it can be larger or smaller.
وهى على نوعين إمّا شحميّة وإمّا أنّها تحوى رطوبة وألوان الرطوبة تكون كثيرة على ما ذكرت فى التقسيم، فينبغى اذا صرت الى علاج السلعة أن تسبرها وتفتّشها أولا بالآلة التى تسمّى المدسّ على ما تأتى صورتها فىالباب الذىبعد هذا.	And it is of two types, either fatty or containing serous fluid. The colors of the serous fluid are many, as I mentioned in the sectioning. It is suitable that if you proceed to treat fatty tissue, you should first probe and explore it with the instrument called the sounder, as its image will be shown in the following chapter.
قدر عظم الورم، ثمّ أخرج المدسّ وانظر الى ما يخرج فى اثره فإن خرج رطوبة سيّالة أىّ لون كانت فشقّها شقّا بسيطا على ما ذكرت فى سائر الأورام وإن لم تخرج فى اثر المدسّ رطوبة فاعلم أنّها شحميّة.	Assess the size of the tumor, then insert the sounder and look at what comes out after it. If a clear serous fluid of any color comes out, dissect it with a simple dissection as I mentioned in treating other tumors. And if no serous fluid comes out after the sounder, then know that it is fatty.
فشقّ عليها شقّا مصلّبا على هذه الصورة كما أعلمتك، وعلّقها بالصنانير واسلخ الجلد من كلّ جهة برفق وتحفّظ بالكيس إن استطعت على ذلك أن تخرجه صحيحا مع السلعة.	Make an incision on it with a straight incision as I have described to you, and hang it with wires and peel the flesh from all sides gently and with caution with the tweezers if you are able to take it out correct with the chain.
فإن انخرق الكيس عند العمل ولم تستطع إخراجه صحيحا فكثيرا ما يعرض ذلك فأخرجه قطعا قطعا حتّى لا يبقى منه شىء فإنّه إن بقى منه شىء قلّ او كثر عادت السلعة على الأمر الأكثر.	For if the cyst ruptures during operation and you are not able to take it out correctly, it often happens that you will take it out in pieces until nothing of it remains, for even if something of it remains, whether little or a lot, the chain will treat the matter sufficiently.
فإن غلبك وبقى منه اليسير فاحش الجرح عند فراغك ببعض الذرورات الأكّالة الحادّة وشدّ الجرح وضع من فوقه ما يسكن الورم الحارّ وعالجه بسائر العلاج حتّى يبرأ، فإن كانت السلعة كبيرة فخط شفتيها وعالجها بما يلحم.	For if it overpowered you and some of the cyst remained, then cauterize the wound with some of the sharp, rough, and biting medicaments, and tighten the wound and put on top of it what will calm the burning inflammation, and treat it with other treatments until it heals. If the cyst was large, then make an incision between its lips and treat it with what will bring together the healing.
فإن اعترضك عرق ضارب او غير ضارب وعرض نزف الدم فبادر فاحش الموضع بالزاج المسحوق واتركه مشدودا يومين او ثلاثة حتّى يتعفّن الجرح ويسكن غليان الدم ثمّ ترجع الى قطع ما بقى من السلعة،.	For if a pulsating or non-pulsating vein obstructed you and there was a flow of blood, then hasten to cauterize the area with the burnt Boss, and let it stay constricted for two or three days until the wound becomes dry and the flow of blood calms, then return to cutting what remains of the cyst.
الفصل السادس والأربعون.	The 46th Chapter.
فى صور الآلات.	On the images of the instruments.
التى تتصرّف فى الشقّ والبطّ منها صور المدسّات وهى ثلاثة أنواع منها كبار ومنها أوساط ومنها صغار.	There are drawn in the incision and the split, images of the surgical instruments, and they are of three types: large, medium, and small.
صورة مدسّ كبير:.	Image of a large surgical knife:.
صورة مدسّ وسط:.	Image of a medium surgical knife:.
صورة مدسّ صغير:.	Image of a small surgical knife:.
تصنع من الحديد الفولاد مربّعة الأطراف محكمة لتسرع الدخول فى الأورام وهذه صور المسابير وتسمّى البرد وهى ثلاثة أنواع أيضا كبار وأوساط وصغار، صورة مسبار كبير:.	It is made from iron and steel, square in shape, with a sharp end for quick entry into the tissues, and these are the images of the dilators, and they are called forceps, and there are also three types of them: large, medium, and small. Image of a large dilator:.
صورة مسبار وسط:.	Figure of a suppository in the middle:
صورة مسبار صغير:.	Figure of a small suppository:
تصلح ليفتّش بها الأورام والجراحات والنواصير والمخابئ عن ما داخلها من العظام وغير ذلك تصنع مدوّرة مصقولة ملساء كالمسلّات من نحاس صينىّ او اسبادروية او من نحاس او من حديد او من فضّة وأفضلها ما صنعت من الاسبادروية.	It should be made curved and smooth, like the metal spoons, from a rod of tin or lead or iron or silver and the best is what is made from tin.
وقد تصنع مسابير أيضا من الرصاص الأسود وتصلح ليسبر بها النواصير التى يكون فى غورها تعويج لتنعطف بلينها مع ذلك التعويج وهى أيضا ثلاثة أنواع لأنّ منها طوال ومنها أوساط ومنها قصار.	And suppositories can also be made from lead, and they should be smoothed so that the nozzles which have a curvature in their cavities can be rounded with them, in spite of that curvature. And these are also three kinds, because some of them are long, and some are medium, and some are short.
على قدر ما يحتاج اليه غور كلّ ناصور ويجعل غلظها على قدر سعة الناصور وضيقه، صورة مسبار من رصاص كبير:.	According to the need of each nozzle, and its thickness is made according to the width of the nozzle and its narrowness. Figure of a large suppository made from lead:
صورة مسبار من رصاص وسط:.	Figure of a medium-sized suppository made from lead:
صورة مسبار من رصاص صغير:.	Figure of a small suppository made from lead:
صور الصنانير وهى أنواع كثيرة لأنّ منها بسيطة أعنى التى لها مخطاف واحد وهى ثلاثة أنواع كبار وأوساط وصغار ومنها الصنانير العميان وهى ثلاثة أنواع ومنها الصنانير ذات المخطافين وهى ثلاثة أنواع ومنها الصنانير المعوّجة ذات المخطافين.	The figures of the sound appliances, and they are many kinds because some of them are simple, with one nozzle, and these are three kinds: large, medium, and small. And some of them are for the anus, and these are also three kinds. And some of them have two nozzles, and these are three kinds. And some of them are curved with nozzles.
وهى ثلاثة أنواع ومنها الصنانير ذات الثلاثة مخاطيف وهى ثلاثة أنواع وجميع هذه الأنوا ع يحتاج كلّ واحد منها فى موضعه، صورة صنّارة بسيطة كبيرة:.	And they are three kinds, and some of them have three nozzles, and these are also three kinds. And all of these types are needed each in its place. Figure of a large simple sound appliance:
صورة صنّارة بسيطة وسط:.	Figure of a medium simple sound appliance:
صورة صنّارة بسيطة صغيرة:.	Figure of a small simple sound appliance:
صورة صنّارة عمياء كبيرة:.	Figure of a large anal sound appliance:
صورة صنّارة عمياء وسط:.	Figure of a medium anal sound appliance:
صورة صنّارة عمياء صغيرة:.	Figure of a small anal sound appliance:
صورة صنّارة كبيرة ذات المخطافين:.	Figure of a large two-nozzled sound appliance:
صورة صنّارة وسط ذات المخطافين:.	Figure of a surgical instrument in the middle of two hooked forceps.
صورة صنّارة صغيرة ذات المخطافين:.	Figure of a small surgical instrument with hooks.
صورة صنّارة كبيرة ذات الثلاثة مخاطيف:.	Figure of a large surgical instrument with three hooks.
صورة صنّارة وسط ذات الثلاثة مخاطيف:.	Figure of a surgical instrument in the middle with three hooks.
صورة صنّارة صغيرة ذات الثلاثة مخاطيف:.	Figure of a small surgical instrument with three hooks.
وهذه صور المشارط التى تشقّ وتسلخ بها السلع والأورام وهى ثلاثة أنواع لأنّ منها كبار ومنها متوسّطة ومنها صغار، صورة مشرط كبير:.	And these are the figures of the lancets which cut and slash with them the bodies and the organs, and they are three kinds because among them there are large ones, and among them there are medium ones, and among them there are small ones, figure of a large lancet:.
صورة مشرط متوسّط:.	Figure of a medium lancet.
صورة مشرط صغير:.	Figure of a small lancet.
تكون أشفارها التى يشقّ بها محدودة والأطراف الأخر غير محدودة وإنّما جعلت كذلك ليستعان بها فى سلخ السلعة عند خوف قطع عرق او عصب وليتآنس بها العليل ويجد الراحة قليلا من الحرقة التى يجدها عند سلخ الورم.	Its edges which cut are limited and the other ends are not limited, and it was made that way to help in cutting the body when fearing cutting an artery or a nerve, and to make it easier for the patient and to find some relief from the pain he finds during the cutting of the tumor.
وهذه صور المخادع وهى ثلاثة أنواع لأنّ منها كبارا ومنها أوساطا ومنها صغارا، صورة مخدع كبير:.	And these are the figures of the perforators and they are three kinds because among them there are large ones, and among them there are medium ones, and among them there are small ones, figure of a large perforator.
صورة مخدع متوسّط:.	Figure of a medium perforator.
صورة مخدع صغير:.	Figure of a small perforator.
تصنع من نحاس شبه المرود الذى يكتحل به وفى الطرف الواحد شبيه ملعقة عريضة من طبقتين تكون فى رأسها شفرة المبضع مخفيّة فيه تشبه لسان الطائر تجرى الى داخل وإلى خارج متى أحببت كما ترى،.	It is made from a piece of iron like the awl, which is hollowed out, and on one end there is something similar to a thick spoon with two layers, in its head there is a hidden blade for the tonsils, it looks like a tongue, going back and forth when desired.
صور المباضع التى تستر بين الأصابع عند بطّ الأورام لا يشعر بها المريض وهى ثلاثة أنواع لأنّ منها كبارا وأوساطا وصغارا، صورة مبضع كبير:.	Figures of the dilators which are inserted between the fingers when pressing the tumors, and the patient does not feel them, and they are three kinds because among them there are large ones, and medium ones, and small ones, figure of a large dilator.
صورة مبضع متوسّط:.	Figure of a medium dilator.
صورةّ مبضع صغير:.	Figure of a small dislocated bone
صور المحاجم التى يقطع بها نزف الدم وهى ثلاثة أنواع لأنّ منها كبارا وأوساطا وصغارا، صورة المحجمة الكبيرة:.	Figures of the surgical instruments which cut to stop bleeding and they are three kinds because there are large, medium and small ones. Figure of the large forceps:.
صورة المحجمة المتوسّطة:.	Figure of the medium forceps:
صورة المحجمة الصغيرة:.	Figure of the small forceps:
تصنع من نحاس او من صينىّ مدوّرة الى الطول قليلا كما ترى وتكون الى الرقّة، ينبغى أن تكون هذه الأنواع من المحاجم عندك كبارا وصغارا لتقطع بها الدم بسرعة عند الضرورة وعند ما لا يحضرك دواء.	It is made from brass or from rounded silver, slightly hollowed as you see, and thin. It is necessary that you have these kinds of forceps, large and small, to cut the bleeding quickly when needed and when the medicine does not arrive.
ولكن لا تستعمل فى قطع الدم فى كلّ موضع من البدن وإنّما تستعمل فى المواضع اللحميّة مثل عضل الساق والفخذ وعضل الذراع والثدى والبطن والأربيّة ونحوها من الأعضاء اللحميّة الرطبة.	But it is not used to cut the bleeding in every place of the body, rather it is used in fleshy places such as the muscle of the leg and thigh and muscle of the arm and breast and abdomen and the armpits and other similar soft and moist organs.
وقد تصنع منها آلات أخر صغار تشبه قشور الفستق على هذه الصورة:.	And also made from them are small instruments that resemble the peel of a pomegranate in this figure:
يقطع بها الدم اذا نزف من موضع الفصد او عند قطع عرق او شريان وقد تصنع منها مدوّرة على هذه الصورة:.	It cuts the bleeding if it flows from the place of phlebotomy or when cutting a vein or artery, and also made rounded in this figure:
الفصل السابع والأربعون.	The 74th Chapter.
فى علج ثدى الرجال.	On the treatment of breast abscesses in men.
الذى تشبه ثدى النساء قد ينتفخ ثدى بعض الناس عند مبلغ الحلم حتّى يشبه ثدى النساء فيبقى وارما قبيحا، فمن كره ذلك فينبغى أن يشقّ على الثدى بشقّ هلالىّ على هذا الشكل.	The one that resembles the breast of women, some people's breast may become swollen at puberty until it resembles the breast of women, and remains as a deformity. Whoever hates this, it is necessary for him to make an incision on the breast with a crescent-shaped incision in this form.
من خطّ ~ب~ الى خطّ ~ج~:.	From line ~b~ to line ~j~:.
ثمّ اسلخ الشحم كلّه ثمّ املأ الجرح من الدواء الملحم ثمّ اجمع شفتى الجرح بالخياطة وعالجه حتّى يبرأ، فإن مال الثدى الى أسفل واسترخى لعظمه كما يعرض للنساء.	Then remove all the fat, then fill the wound with astringent medicine, then close the edges of the wound with sutures and dress it until it heals. If the breast falls to the bottom and becomes relaxed like that of women.
فينبغى أن تشقّ فى جوانبه العليا بشقّين يشبهان شكلا هلاليّا يتّصل كلّ واحد منهما بالآخر عند نهايتهما حتّى يكون الخطّ الأكبر محيطا بالأصغر على هذه الصورة:.	It is necessary to make an incision on its upper sides with two crescent-shaped incisions that connect to each other at their ends, so the larger line becomes a circumference around the smaller one in this figure:.
من خطّ ~ب~ الى خطّ ~ج~ ثمّ تسلخ الجلد الذى فيما بين الشقين وتنزع الشحم وتستعمل ما ذكرنا من الخياطة والذرورات وما يحتاج اليه من العلاج حتّى يبرأ.	From line ~ب~ to line ~ج~, then the suture that is between the two margins is stripped and the fat is cut and the suturing and cauterization are used as we have mentioned, and whatever treatment it needs until it heals.
فإن لم تستوعب قطع ما ينبغى لك قطعه من أجل قلق العليل او من قبل نزف الدم فينبغى أن تحشو الجرح بالقطن المغموس فى المرهم الأكّال وتتركه حتّى يأكل ما بقى من الشحم ثمّ تعالجه حتّى يبرأ،.	For if you cannot bear to cut what it is necessary for you to cut because of the pain of the wound or because of the spouting of blood, it is fitting that you fill the wound with cotton soaked in hot medicament and let it be until the fat is eaten away, then treat it until it heals.
الفصل الثامن والأربعون.	The 84th Chapter.
فى بطّ الأورام التى تعرض تحت الإبط.	In the hollow of the armpits which are exposed underneath.
هذه الأورام التى تعرض تحت الإبط هى من نوع الخنازير صلبة يحويها كيس ومنها ما يحوى رطوبات فما كان منها يحوى رطوبات فينبغى أن يشقّ شقّا هلاليّا على هذا الشكل.	These armpits which are exposed underneath are of the type of hard glands that have a covering, and some of them contain humors, so whatever of them contains humors, it is fitting that it be split in a curved incision in this shape.
من خطّ ~ب~ الى خطّ ~ج~ فإذا استفرغت جميع ما فى الورم من المدّة فاحشه بالقطن البالى واتركه الى يوم آخر ثمّ تنزع القطن.	From line ~ب~ to line ~ج~, then if you have evacuated all that is in the tumor of pus, stuff it with yellow cotton and let it be until the next day, then remove the cotton.
وتعالج بالمرهم الموافق لذلك حتّى يبرأ، فإن كان الورم من نوع عقد الخنازير فشقّ عليه كما ذكرنا فى الشقّ على الخنازير سواء فإن تمادى الجرح الى أن يمدّ القيح فاستعمل فيه الكىّ على ما ذكرنا فيما تقدّم،.	And treat it with the medicament suitable for it until it heals, and if the tumor is of the type of glandular knots, then make an incision on it as we mentioned in the incision on the glands, whether or not, and if the wound becomes so bad that the pus flows, then use the cautery on it as we mentioned previously.
الفصل التاسع والأربعون.	The 94th Chapter.
فى شقّ الورم الذى يعرض من قبل الشريان او الوريد ويسمّى انورسما.	On the incision of the tumor that is exposed because of the vein or artery, and it is called aneurysma.
اذا جرح الشريان والتحم الجلد الذى فوقه فكثيرا ما يعرض من ذلك ورم وكذلك يعرض أيضا للوريد أن يعرض فيه نفخ وورم.	If the artery is wounded and the skin that is above it heals, often a tumor appears from this, and also it appears for the vein, that a swelling and tumor appear in it.
والعلامات التى يعرف بها إن كان الورم والنفخ من قبل شريان او من قبل وريد فالورم اذا كان من قبل الشريان يكون مستطيلا مجتمعا فى عمق الجسد وإذا دفعت الورم بأصبعك تحسّ به كأنّ له صريرا.	And the signs by which it is known if the tumor and swelling are because of an artery or a vein, the tumor, if it is because of an artery, is a protruding collected mass in the depth of the body, and if you push on the tumor with your finger, you feel as if it has a pulse.
والذى يكون من قبل الوريد يكون الورم مستديرا فى ظاهر الجسد، والشقّ على هذه الأورام خطر ولا سيّما ما كان فى الإبط والأربيّة والعنق وفى مواضع كثيرة من الجسد وكانت عظيمة جدّا فينبغى أن تجتنب علاجها بالحديد.	The tumor that forms in front of the vein is a protruding growth on the surface of the body, and the operation on these tumors is hazardous, regardless of whether it is in the armpit, elbow, neck, or many other places on the body, and was considered very dangerous so it seemed to require treatment with caution.
وما كان منها أيضا فى الأطراف او فى الرأس فينبغى أن تجتنب، فما كان منها من انتفاخ فم الشريان فشقّ عليه فى الجلد شقّا بالطول ثمّ تفتح الشق بصنّارات ثمّ اسلخ الشريان وخلّصه من الصفاقات.	And if it was in the extremities or on the head, it seemed to require caution, so if it was a protrusion of blood vessels, an incision was made in the skin lengthwise, then the incision was opened with instruments, and the blood vessel was freed from the ligaments.
حتّى ينكشف ثمّ تدخل تحته إبرة وتنفذها الى الجانب الآخر وتشدّ الشريان بخيط مثنىّ فى موضعين على ما عرّفتك فى سلّ الشريانين اللذين فى الأصداغ ثمّ تنخس بمبضع الموضع الذى بين الرباطين حتّى يخرج الدم الذى فيه كلّه.	Until it becomes exposed, then a needle is inserted underneath it and pierced to the other side and the blood vessel is tied with a double ligature in two places, as you have learned in the suturing of the two vessels in the arms, then pressure is applied to the area between the tightness until all the blood that is in it comes out.
وينحلّ الورم ثمّ تستعمل العلاج الذى يولد القيح حتّى تسقط الرباطات ثمّ تعالجه بالمراهم الموافقة لذلك حتّى يبرأ.	And the tumor is dissolved, then a treatment that generates pus is used until the tightness falls off, then it is treated with ointments suitable for that until it heals.
فإن كان الورم من قبل شقّ الوريد فينبغى أن تمسك بيدك ما أمكنك من الورم مع الجلد ثمّ تدخل إبرة أسفل من الموضع الذى أمسكت بيدك وتنفذها وفيها خيط مثنىّ حتّى تخرجها من الجانب الآخر.	For if the tumor is in front of the vein, it seems that you should grasp with your hand as much of the tumor as possible along with the skin, then a needle is inserted below the place where you grasped with your hand and pierced, with a double thread, until it comes out on the other side.
ثمّ تربط به الورم ربطا جيّدا على حسب ما ذكرت لك فى ربط العنبة من الجهتين بطرفى الخيط، فإن خشيت أن تنسلّ الخيوط فأدخل إبرة أخرى بخيط آخر تحت الورم كلّه عند تقاطع الإبرة الأولى.	Then the tumor is tied securely, as I have mentioned to you in tying the pustules on both sides with the ends of the thread, if you fear that the threads will come loose, then another needle is inserted with another thread under the entire tumor where the first needle intersects.
وشدّ خيوطك فى أربعة مواضع ثمّ شقّ الورم فى وسطه حتّى اذا خرج ما فيه فاقطع فضلة الجلد واترك ما كان منه مربوطا، ثمّ ضع عليه رفادة قد غمستها فى شراب وزيت.	And you tighten the threads in four places, then the tumor is incised in its middle until if what is inside it comes out, you cut the excess skin and leave what remains of it tied, then put on it a dressing that has been dipped in a potion and oil.
ثمّ تستعمل العلاج الذى يكون بالفتل والمراهم حتّى يبرأ،.	The treatment that is made with poultices and ointments should not be used until the wound has formed a scab.
الفصل الخمسون.	Surgical instruments.
فىالورم الذى يعرض من التواء العصب.	On the tumor that arises from the twisting of the nerve.
كما يعرض الورم فى الشريان والوريد كذلك يعرض الورم فى العصب اذا حدث فيه ضربة او حدث عن تعب مفرط او نحوه ويكون أكثر ذلك فى مواضع المعصمين والعقب.	Just as a tumor arises in the artery and the vein, so too does a tumor arise in the nerve if it is struck with a blow or if it undergoes excessive fatigue or something similar, and this occurs more often in the places of the elbows and the back of the knee.
وفى كلّ موضع تتحرّك فيه المفاصل وهو ورم جاسئ يشبه لونه سائر الجسد ويكون فى أكثر الأحوال من غير وجع وإذا ضغط بشدّة أحسّ فيه العليل شبه الخدر ولا يكون الورم مجتمعا فى عمق الجسد.	And in every place where the joints move, there is a tumor that resembles the color of the body and it usually does not hurt, and if you press on it hard, you feel a slight numbness, but the tumor is not deep within the body.
بل يكون تحت الجلد وهو يتحرّك الى كلّ جهة وليس يذهب الى قدّام ولا الى خلف، فما كان منها فى المفاصل فلا ينبغى أن يتعرّض بالحديد فإنّه ربّما أحدث زمانة وما كان منها فى الرأس او فى الجبهة.	It is under the skin and moves in every direction, and it does not go to the front or to the back. What is among the joints should not be touched with a cautery iron, lest it cause an abscess, and what is on the head or on the thigh.
فشقّ الجلد بمبضع، فإن كان الورم صغيرا فامسكه بمنقاش واقطعه من الأصل وإن كان كبيرا فعلّقه بصنّارة واسلخه ثمّ انزعه واجمع الجرح بالخياطة وعالجه حتّى يبرأ،.	Make an incision in the skin with a scalpel, and if the tumor is small, then remove it with forceps from its base, and if it is large, then ligate it with a thread and dissect it out, then grasp it and close the wound with sutures and treat it until it heals.
الفصل الحادى والخمسون.	Surgical instruments for dissection and those for cauterization.
فى قطع الثآليل التى تعرض فى البطن.	On the excision of the dilated blood vessels that appear in the abdomen.
قد تعرض كثيرا لبعض الناس فى بطونهم وفى سائر أبدانهم ثآليل تسمّى الفطريّة لشبهها بالفطر أصلها رقيق ورأسها غليظ قد تحوّلت شفتاه ويكون منها صغار ويكون منها ما يعظم جدّا.	Many people have appeared with numerous dilated blood vessels in their abdomens and in other parts of their bodies, which are called varices, resembling a grape, its origin is thin and its head is thick, its mouth may be twisted, some of them are small and some are very large.
ولقد شاهدت رجلا وفى بطنه ثؤلولان كانت أشبه الأشياء بالفطر لا فرق بيضاء رقيقة الأصل قد تحوّلت شفتاهما وتشقّقت والرطوبة تسيل منهما دائما، فقطعتهما وألقيت فى وزن الواحدة نحو ثمانى عشرة أوقيّة وفى الأخرى نحو سّت أواق.	I have seen a man and in his abdomen were two dilated blood vessels, the likes of which resembled varices, white, thin at their base, whose mouths were twisted and torn, and from which a hemorrhage flowed constantly, so I excised them and weighed one of them and it was about 12 ounces, and the other about 6 ounces.
والعمل فى قطعها أن تنظر فإن كان العليل مرطوبا وكان لون الثؤلول أبيض رطبا رقيق الأصل فاقطعه بمبضع عريض ولتكن بحضرتك المكاوى فى النار فكثيرا ما يندفع عند قطعها دم كثير.	When you operate on it, look to see if the ulcer is fleshy and the colour of the flesh is white with a thin base, then cut it off with a sharp instrument and cauterize it with a hot iron, for much blood is often discharged when cutting it.
فتبادر إن غلبك الدم فتكويها، فإن رأيت العليل جبانا وفزع من القطع بالحديد فخذ خيطا من رصاص محكم وشدّ به الثؤلول الذى هذه صفته واتركه يومين ثمّ زد فى شدّ الرصاص فلا تزال تشدّ الرصاص.	If the bleeding is excessive, then apply a cautery to it. If you see that the ulcer is hardened and terrified of being cut with iron, take a strong ligature made from a thread and constrict the ulcer of this description, and leave it for two days, then increase the tightening of the ligature, do not remove it until the ligature tightens.
كلّما أثّر فى الثؤلول حتّى ينقطع ويسقط من ذاته من غير مؤنة، فإن كان الثؤلول غليظ الأصل ففى قطعه بعض الخوف والغرر ولا سيّما ما كان فى البطن ولكن قد يمكن أن يقطع نصفه او بعضه.	Whatever affects the ulcer until it falls off by itself without any binding, if the ulcer has a thick base, then there is some fear in cutting it, and not only what is in the abdomen, but it may be possible to cut half of it or part of it.
ثمّ تكويه لئلّا يعود، ثمّ تعالجه حتّى يبرأ الجرح، واحذر أن تعرض لقطع ثؤلول يكون كمد اللون قليل الحسّ سمج المنظر فإنّه ورم سرطانىّ وسنأتى بذكر السرطان بعد هذا،.	Then cauterize it with a cautery that will make it return, then treat it until the wound heals, and beware of making an incision on an ulcer that has a color of little sensation, smooth appearance, for it is a cancerous tumor, and we will discuss cancer after this.
الفصل الثانى والخمسون.	Chapter Fifty-Two.
فى علاج نتو السرّة.	On the treatment of scrofula.
يكون نتو السرّة من أسباب كثيرة إمّا من انشقاق الصفاق الذى على البطن فيخرج منه الثرب او المعاء على ما يعرض فى سائر الفتوق وإمّا من دم ينبعث من وريد او شريان على ما تقدّم وإمّا من ريح تحتقن فيه.	Scrofula is caused by many factors, either from the rupture of the peritoneum that is on the abdomen, so that the spleen or the liver protrudes, according to what appears in other books, or from blood that flows from a vein or artery, as previously mentioned, or from pus that accumulates.
فإن كان من قبل انشقاق الصفاق وخروج الثرب فإنّه يكون لون الورم شبيها بلون الجسد ويكون ليّنا من غير وجع ويظهر مختلف الوضع.	For if it is due to the rupture of the peritoneum and the protrusion of the spleen, then the color of the tumor resembles the color of the body, and it is soft without hardness, and its appearance changes.
وإن كان من قبل خروج المعاء فيكون وضعه مع ما وصفنا أشدّ اختلافا فإذا كبسته بأصابعك يغيب ثمّ يرجع وربّما كان معه قرقرة ويعظم كثيرا عند دخول الحمّام والتعب الشديد، فإن كان من قبل الرطوبة فإنّه يكون ليّنا.	And if it is due to the protrusion of the liver, its appearance will be more different from what we described, so if you press on it with your fingers, it will sink and then return, sometimes with a gurgling sound, and increases greatly when entering the bathroom or during severe straining, but if it is due to pus, then it will be soft.
لا يغيب اذا كبسته بيدك ولا يزيد ولا ينقص، فإن كان من قبل الدم فإنّه مع هذه العلامات يظهر الورم الى السواد، فإن كان من قبل لحم نابت فيكون الورم جاسيا صلبا ويثبت على قدر واحد.	It does not decrease if you press it with your hands, nor does it increase or diminish, for if it is from before the blood then it appears with these signs as a tumor to the black, and if it is from before the flesh that has grown then the tumor becomes hard and solid and stabilizes at one size.
فإن كان من قبل الريح كان لمسه ليّنا، والعمل فى ذلك أن تنظر فإن كان نتو السرّة من قبل دم الشريان او الوريد او الريح فينبغى أن تمتنع من علاجه فإنّ فى ذلك خوفا وغررا كما أعلمتك فىالباب الذىذكرت فيه الأورام التى تحدث من قبل الشريان والوريد.	For if it is from before the spleen its touch is smooth, and the operation in that is to examine, for if the tumor of the spleen is from before the blood of the veins or the arteries or the spleen, then it is feared that it will be difficult to treat, and in that there is fear and danger, as I have informed you in the chapter in which I mentioned the organs that speak from before the veins and the arteries.
فإن كان نتو السرّة من قبل المعاء او الثرب فينبغى أن تأمر العليل بأن يمسك نفسه ويقف واقفا ممتدّا ثمّ تعلّم بالمداد حول السرّة كلّها.	For if the tumor of the spleen is from before the intestines or the diaphragm, then it is recommended that the patient should hold himself and stand upright standing stretched out, then massage with the palm around the entire spleen.
ثمّ تأمره أن يستلقى بين يديك على ظهره ثمّ تحزّ بمبضع عريض حول السرّة على الموضع الذى علّمت بالمداد ثمّ تمدّ وسط الورم الى فوق بصنّارة كبيرة ثمّ تربط موضع الحزّ بخيط قوىّ اوبوتر حرير ربطا وثيقا.	Then you instruct him to lie down on his back between your hands, then make an incision with the palpating finger around the spleen in the place where you had massaged with the palm, then insert the middle finger into the midst of the tumor upwards with a large movement, then bind the place of the incision with a strong bandage or a tight binding of linen.
ويكون عقد الرباط أنشوطة ثمّ تفتح وسط الورم المشدود فوق الرباط وتدخل فيه أصبعك السبّابة وتطلب المعاء فإن وجدته قد أخذه الرباط فأرخ الأنشوطة وادفع المعاء الى داخل البطن وإن وجدت ثربا فمدّه بصنّارة.	And the binding of the bandage is a knot, then you open the midst of the tumor that is bound above the bandage and you insert your index finger into it, and you search for the intestines, if you found that the bandage has taken them, then you loosen the knot and push the intestines into the interior of the abdomen, and if you find the diaphragm, then you stretch it with a large movement.
واقطع فضلته، فإن اعترضك شريان او وريد فاحزمه نعمّا وارجع الى عملك وخذ إبرتين فأدخل فيهما خيطين قويّين وتدخل الإبرتين فى الحزّ الذى صنعت حول الورم مصلّبتين قد أنفذتهما، ثمّ تشدّ الورم فى أربعة مواضع على الإبر.	And you cut its edge, if a vein or artery opposes you, then you ligate it firmly and return to your operation, take two needles and insert two strong threads into them, and the needles are inserted into the incision that you made around the tumor, tied in a way that you have sewn them, then you tighten the tumor at four places on the needles.
وإن شئت نزعت الإبر وتركت الموضع حتّى يعفن اللحم المشدود ويسقط من ذاته او تقطعه اذا رقّ وعفن، ثمّ تعالجه بما ينبغى من المراهم حتّى يبرأ، فإن كان نتو السرّة من لحم نابت فيها.	And if you wish, you extract the needle and leave the area until the flesh of the pustule is dissolved and it falls off by itself or is cut out if it becomes ripe and dissolved, then you treat it with the appropriate ointments until it heals, for if the abscess was in a place of abundant flesh.
او من رطوبة فينبغى أن تقور الورم كما قلنا وتخرج الدم او الرطوبة التى تجد فيها ثمّ تعالجه بما يلحم الموضع،.	Or from a fleshy part, as we have said, an incision is made in the tumor and blood or pus that is found in it comes out, then you treat it with what will heal the area.
الفصل الثالث والخمسون.	Chapter Three and Fifty.
فى علاج السرطان.	On the Treatment of Cancer.
قد ذكرنا فى التقسيم أنواع السرطان وكيف السبيل الى علاجه بالأدوية والتحذير من علاجه بالحديد لئلّا يتقرّح وذكرنا السرطان المتولّد فى الرحم والتحذير من علاجه.	We have mentioned in the division the types of cancer and how to treat them with medication, and warned against treating it with iron lest it become worse. And we mentioned the cancer that develops in the womb and warned against its treatment.
وذكرت الأوائل أنّه متى كان السرطان فى موضع يمكن استئصاله كلّه كالسرطان الذى يكون فى الثدى او فى الفخذ ونحوها من الأعضاء المتمكّنة لإخراجه بجملته ولا سيّما اذا كان مبتدئا صغيرا وأمّا متى قدم وكان عظيما فلا ينبغى أن تقربه.	And the predecessors reminded that if the cancer is in a place where it can be completely excised, such as the cancer that occurs in the breast or in the thigh and other similar organs that can be removed entirely, it is not suitable to approach it if it is large and advanced, even if it was small and just beginning.
فإنّى ما استطعت أن أبرئ منه أحدا ولا رأيت قبلى غيرى وصل الى ذلك، والعمل فيه اذا كان متمكّنا كما قلنا أن تتقدّم فتسهل العليل من المرّة السوداء مرّات ثمّ تفصده إن كان فى العروق امتلاء بيّن.	For I have not been able to cure anyone of it, nor have I seen anyone before me who has reached that point, and the operation on it if it is advanced, as we said, is to reduce the black bile with bitter medications, then to dissect it if it is in the veins, the fullness will be apparent.
ثمّ تنصب العليل نصبة يتمكّن فيها بالعمل ثمّ تلقى فى السرطان الصنانير التى تصلح له ثمّ تقوره من كلّ جهة مع الجلد على استقصاء حتّى لا يبقى شىء من أصوله واترك الدم يجرى ولا تقطعه سريعا.	Then the bile is evacuated by an operation that becomes established, and a snare is placed in the cancerous tumor that cuts it, then it is cut out from every side with cauterization until nothing of its roots remains, and let the blood flow, do not stop it quickly.
بل اعصر المواضع واسلت الدم الغليظ كلّه بيدك او بما أمكنك من الآلات، فإن اعترضك فى العمل نزف دم عظيم من قطع شريان او وريد فاكو العرق حتّى ينقطع الدم ثمّ عالجه بسائر العلاج الى أن يبرأ.	But squeeze the areas and stop all the thick blood with your hand or with any instrument you have, for if during the operation a large amount of blood flows from cutting an artery or vein, press on it until the blood stops, then treat it with cauterization until it heals.
الفصل الرابع والخمسون.	The fourth and fiftieth operation
فى علاج الحبن.	On the treatment of cataracts.
قد أخبرنا فى التقسيم أنواع الاستسقاء وكيف يكون اجتماع الماء وعلامات كلّ نوع وعلاجه بالأدوية، والذى يعالج بالحديد إنّما هو النوع الزقّىّ وحده ولا يقرب بالحديد النوع الطبلىّ ولا النوع اللحمىّ البتّة.	We have informed in the division of the types of dropsy, and how the gathering of water is, and the signs of each type, and its treatment with medications. What is treated with the iron is only the watery type alone, and they do not approach the iron for the flabby type or the fleshy type.
فإنّ ذلك قتّال، اذا كنت قد عالجت هذا النوع من الحبن الزقّىّ بالأدوية ولم ينجع علاجك فانظر فإن كان العليل قد بالغ فيه الضعف او كان به مرض آخر غير الحبن مثل أن يكون به.	For if you have treated this type of cataract with medications and your treatment did not work, then look, for perhaps the patient's weakness has increased or he has another disease other than cataract, such as that he has.
سعال او إسهال ونحو ذلك فإيّاك أن تعالجه بالحديد فإنّه غرر فإن رأيت العليل وافر القوّة ليس به مرض غير الحبن وحده ولم يكن صبيّا ولا شيخا فوجه العمل فيه أن تقيم العليل واقفا بين يديك.	Diarrhea or dysentery and the like, so beware that you treat it with iron, for it is a risk. If you see the patient full of strength, with no disease other than cataract alone, and he is neither a child nor an old man, then direct your action towards him, and put the patient standing in front of you.
وخادم خلفه يعصر بطنه بيديه ويدفع الماء الى أسفل الى ناحية العانة ثمّ تأخذ مبضعا شوكيّا على هذه الصورة:.	And a servant behind him will squeeze his abdomen with his hands and push the water downwards towards the direction of the groin, then you will take a curved bistoury in this shape:
محدود الجهتين طويلا محدّد الطرف كالمبضع إلّا أنّ فيه بعض الفطس قليلا لئلّا تجوز به عند العمل الى المعاء فتؤذيه ثمّ انظرفإن كان تولّد الحبن من ناحية الأمعاء.	Limited on both sides, long and limited at the end, like a bistoury, except that it has some curvature, slightly flexible, so that when you use it to operate on the anus, it will cause him pain, then look if the cataract is produced from the direction of the intestines.
فينبغى أن تبعد بالشقّ من السرّة قدر ثلاث أصابع الى أسفل بحذائها فوق العانة، فإن كان تولّد الحبن من قبل مرض الكبد فليكن شقّك يسرة من السرّة بثلاث أصابع، فإن كان تولّده من قبل مرض الطحال فليكن الشقّ فى الجانب الأيمن بقدر ثلاث أصابع.	So it is necessary to make an incision in the side of the flank, a distance of three fingers below the edge, above the groin. If the cataract is produced by a disease of the liver, then let your incision be on the left side of the flank, a distance of three fingers. If its production is from a disease of the spleen, then let the incision be on the right side, a distance of three fingers.
ولا ينبغى أيضا أن يكون الشقّ فى الجانب الذى يريد العليل أن يضطجع عليه لئلّا تسيل الفضول الى ذلك الموضع الضعيف، ثمّ تثقب بالآلة الجلد كلّه ثمّ تدخل الآلة فى ذلك الشقّ وترفع يدك.	And it is not suitable that the incision be on the side on which the patient wants to lie down, so that the blood flows to that weak place, then the needle will pierce all the skin, and the instrument will enter through that incision, and you will lift your hand.
بالمبضع بين الجلد والصفاق كأنّك تسلخه ويكون القدر الذى تسلخه قدر الظفر او نحوه، ثمّ تثقب الصفاق حتّى يصل المبضع الى موضع فارغ وهو موضع الماء ثمّ تخرجه وتدخل فى الثقب الآلة التى هذه صورتها.	On the extraction of a foreign body between the jugular and the spleen, as if you are pulling it out and making an incision where you pulled it out, either in the shape of a ziph or its likeness, then you perforate the peritoneum until the extracted thing reaches an empty place which is the place of the urine, then you take it out and insert into the perforation the aforementioned instrument whose image is this.
وهى شبه أنبوبة من قصبة رقيقة تصنع من فضّة او من نحاس او من اسبادروية ملساء مصقولة لها فى أسفلها ثقب صغير وفى جوانبها ثلاث ثقب الاثنتان من جهة والواحدة من جهة كما ترى.	It is a tube-like instrument made from a thin rod, manufactured from silver or brass or polished spadaroia, and it has a small hole at its bottom and three holes on its sides, two from one side and one from the other side, as you see.
وقد يضع طرفها مبريّا على هيئة برية القلم على هذه صورتها:.	And he draws its sides flat in the shape of the letter "Q" on this image:.
فى طرفها الأعلى حلقة فإنّ الآلة اذا وصلت الى الماء فإنّه ينزل من ساعته على الآلة، فتستفرغ من الماء فى الوقت قدرا متوسّطا لأنّك إن استفرغت منه أكثر ممّا ينبغى فى الوقت فربّما مات العليل بانحلال روحه الحيوانىّ.	At its upper end there is a ring, so if the instrument reaches the urine, it descends from its handle into the instrument, and you evacuate from the urine at that time a moderate amount, because if you evacuate more than what is necessary at the time, it might kill the patient by dissolving his vital spirit.
او يعرض له غشى يقرب من الموت، ولكن استفرغ منه على قدر قوّته وما يدلّك عليه أحوال العليل من قوّة نبضه ومن حسن لونه، ثمّ تخرج الآلة وتحبس الماء وذلك أنّه يحتبس من ساعته.	Or it brings him a membrane that approaches death, but evacuate from it according to his strength and what the condition of the patient indicates to you, from the strength of his pulse and the beauty of his complexion, then the instrument is extracted and the urine is retained, because it is retained by its handle.
بسبب الجلد الذى يمسك الثقب الذى على الصفاق الذى أخبرت أن تبطّه على تلك الصفة، ثمّ تعيد الآلة يوما آخر إن رأيت العليل محتملا لذلك.	Due to the incision that holds the perforation on the peritoneum, which I told you to make of this description, then the instrument is reapplied another day if you see the patient in need of it.
وتخرج أيضا من الماء القدر اليسير تفعل ذلك أيّاما وأنت على رقبة وتحفّظ من الخطاء حتّى لا يبقى من الماء إلّا اليسير، فإن خفت على العليل وتركت من الماء شيئا كثيرا فعالجه بالدفن فى الرمل الحارّ.	And also evacuate from the urine a small amount, do that frequently and be cautious and beware of mistakes until there remains from the urine only a small amount, because if you are neglectful of the patient and leave much urine, it will cause him to be buried in the hot sand.
والتعرّق الكثير فى الحمّام والشمس وصبّره على العطش وعالجه بالأدوية المجفّفة حتّى يبرأ، ويكوى على المعدة والكبد والطحال بعد إخراج الماء على ما وصفت فيما تقدّم،.	And apply much rosewater and vinegar to the wound, and anoint it with drying medications until it heals, and cauterize the liver, spleen, and peritoneum after evacuating the urine as I previously described.
الفصل الخامس والخمسون.	Chapter Five and Fifty
فى علاج الأطفال الذين يولدون ومواضع البول منهم غير مثقوبة او يكون الثقب ضيقا او فى غير موضعه.	On the treatment of children who are born with the urinary meatus not completely opened or the opening being narrow or in an abnormal position.
قد يخرج بعض الصبيان من بطن أمّه وكمرته غير مثقوبة فينبغى أن تبادر بثقبه من ساعة يولد.	It may happen that some infants come out of their mother's womb with the navel unopened, so it is necessary to make an opening for them as soon as they are born.
بمبضع رقيق جدّا على هذه الصورة:.	Make a very thin trephine according to this pattern:
ثمّ تضع فى الثقب مسمارا رقيقا من رصاص وتربطه وتمسكه ثلاثة أيّام او أربعة فمتى أراد البول نحّى عنه وبال ثمّ ردّه، وإن لم تجعل الرصاص فقد يمكن أنّ البول الذى يسلك على الموضع لا يتركه ينغلق.	Then a thin silver needle is placed in the opening and tied, and it is left for three or four days, so when urination is desired, it is pulled out and then returned, and if the silver is not made, perhaps the urine that will pass over the spot will not let it close.
وأمّا الذى يكون ثقبه ضيقا فيعالج بالرصاص كما قلنا أيّاما كثيرة حتّى يتّسع، والذين يكون منهم الثقب فى غير موضعه وذلك أنّ منهم من يولد والثقب عند نهاية الكمرة فلا يقدر أن يبول الى قدّام.	As for the one whose opening is narrow, it is treated with silver as we said, for many days until it becomes wide, and those who have the opening in an abnormal position, that is, some are born with the opening at the end of the penis, so he cannot urinate standing upright.
حتّى يرفع الإحليل بيده الى فوق ولا يولد له من قبل أنّ المنى لا يقدر على الوصول الى الرحم على استقامة وهى علّة قبيحة جدّا، ووجه العمل فى ذلك أن يستلقى العليل على ظهره.	Until he lifts the prepuce with his hand upwards, and it is not born from the front that the glans can not reach the womb in an erection, and this is a very ugly condition, and the way to work on it is for the boy to lie on his back.
ثمّ تمدّ كمرته بيدك اليسرى مدّا شديدا وتبرى رأس الإحليل بشفرة او بمبضع حادّ كبرية القلم او كأنّك تنحت شيئا ليكون وسطه ناتيا شبيها بكمرة وليقع الثقب فى الوسط على ما ينبغى.	Then you stretch his penis with your left hand, stretching it firmly, and you pierce the end of the prepuce with a needle or a very sharp lancet, like you are hollowing out an object to make its inside visible, similar to a penis, and the opening is in the middle as necessary.
وتحفّظ عند عملك من نزف الدم فكثيرا ما يعرض ذلك فقابله بما يقطع الدم وعالج الجرح حتّى يبرأ،.	And be cautious during your operation from excessive bleeding, for it often happens that you are faced with this, so counter it with something that stops the blood and treat the wound until it heals.
الفصل السادس والخمسون.	Chapter Six and Fifty.
فى البثر الذى يعرض فى الغلفة والكمرة والسواد والفساد والتصاق الغلفة بالكمرة.	On the treatment of gangrene that occurs in the glans, penis, testicles, and epididymis, and the adhesion of the glans to the penis.
كثيرا ما يعرض هذا البثر فى الإحليل وهو نتو لحمىّ سمج ويكون منه خبيث وغير خبيث، فالغير خبيث ينبغى أن تعلّقه بصنّارة لطيفة.	Many times, this tumor appears in the throat and it is a fatty tissue that is composed of flesh, both soft and hard. The soft one should be treated by attaching it to a thin thread.
وتقطعه حتّى تنقيه كلّه ثمّ تحمل عليه قطنة مغموسة فى المرهم المصرىّ ثمّ تعالجه بعد ذلك بالمرهم النخلىّ حتّى يبرأ، وأمّا إن كان البثر خبيثا سمج اللون فينبغى أن تستعمل فيه الكىّ بعد قطعه وجرده،.	And you cut it until all of it is extracted, then you apply to it a bandage soaked in Egyptian ointment, then after that you treat it with Nakhla ointment until it heals. If the tumor was hard and black, it is recommended to cauterize it after cutting and scraping.
فإن كان البثر فى غلفة علج لم يختن وكان بعض البثر من داخل الغلفة وبعضه من خارج فينبغى أن تنتزع البثر الذى من داخل أوّلا حتّى اذا اندمل فحينئذ فعالجه من خارج.	For if the tumor is in a bladder that has not been cut and some of it is inside the bladder and some of it is outside, it is recommended to extract the tumor that is inside first until, when it becomes inflamed, you then treat the part that is outside.
لأنّك متى عالجتهما معا لم تأمن الغلفة أن تنثقب، وقد يعرض أيضا فى الأنثيين وفى الغلفة سواد وفساد فينبغى أن تقور جميع ما قد اسودّ وهمّ أن يفسد او قد فسد.	Because if you treat them both at the same time, you will not be safe from the bladder being perforated. It also appears in the vagina and in the bladder as a blackening or corruption, it is recommended that you cauterize all that has blackened or is about to corrupt or has already become corrupt.
ثمّ الطخ عليه بعد ذلك العسل مع قشور الرمّان المدقوق المنخول والكرسنّة ثمّ تعالجه بسائر العلاج حتّى يبرأ، فإن عرض نزف دم فاستعمل الكىّ بمكواة هلاليّة على هذه الصورة:.	Then apply the honey to it after that, with crushed and sieved pomegranate seeds and Kirsennah, then treat it with other treatments until it heals. If bleeding appears, cauterize it with a hot metal in this way:
فإنّ الكىّ نافع للحالتين جميعا أعنى نزف الدم والجرح اذا فسد، فإن تأكّلت الكمرة وذهبت بأسرها فى وقت مّا فينبغى أن تدخل فى مجرى الذكر أنبوبا من رصاص ليبول العليل عليه، وأمّا التصاق الغلفة بالكمرة.	For cauterization is beneficial for both conditions, whether there is bleeding or a wound when it has become corrupt. If the womb has become constricted and has taken with it in a short time, it is recommended that you insert into the womb of the cervix a tube made of lead to cast upon it the molten lead, and as for the adhesion of the bladder to the womb.
وهذا الالتصاق إنّما يحدث فيمن كانت غلفته صحيحة ولم يجب عليه اختتان وقد يعرض التصاقها من قبل جرح او ورم فينبغى أن تسلخها بمبضع أفطس حتّى ينحلّ الرباط وتتخلّص الكمرة من كلّ جهة.	And this adhesion only happens to one whose bladder is sound and did not require a surgical incision. It may also appear as an adhesion from a previous wound or tumor, it is recommended that you massage it with warm medications until the constriction is relieved and the womb is freed from every side.
فإن عسر تمييزها على الاستقصاء فينبغى أن تسلخ شيئا من الكمرة ومن الغلفة وذلك أنّ الغلفة رقيقة فربّما انثقبت لرقّتها سريعا، ثمّ فرّق بين الغلفة والكمرة بخرقة كتان رقيقة قد بلّت فى ماء بارد لئلّا تلتصق أيضا.	For it is difficult to distinguish them by dissection, it is advisable to remove something from the epiglottis and the glottis, since the glottis is delicate, and often perforated due to its delicacy, then separate between the glottis and the epiglottis with a thin cloth that has been soaked in cold water so that it also adheres.
ثمّ يعالج بشراب قابض حتّى تندمل،.	Then it is treated with an astringent dressing until it becomes callosed.
الفصل السابع والخمسون.	The Seventh and Fifty-First Chapter.
فى تطهير الصبيان وعلاج ما يعرض لهم من الخطاء.	On the purification of boys and the treatment of their illnesses.
الاختتان ليس هو بشىء غير تفرّق الاتّصال كسائر الجراحات إلّا أنّه لمّا كان من فعلنا بإرادتنا واستعماله فى الصبيان خاصّة وجب أن نرسم فيه العمل الأفضل.	Surgery is not a thing which is disconnected from our action, as if it were one of the other crafts, except that since it is something we do with our hands and apply specifically to boys, we must describe the best method of operation.
والطريق الأسهل المؤدّى الى السلامة، فأقول إنّ الأوائل لم تذكر الاختتان فى شىء من كتبها لأنّه لم يكن يستعمل فى شرائعهم وإنّما هو ما اكتسبناه.	And the easiest way to achieve safety, I say that the ancients did not mention surgery in any of their books because it was not used in their customs, but rather it is something we acquired.
بالتجربة وذلك أنّى وجدت الجمهور من الصنّاع والحجّامين يستعملون التطهير بالموسى وبالمقصّ ويستعملون الفلكة والرباط بالخيط والقطع بالظفر وقد جرّبت جميع هذه الوجوه.	Through experimentation, I found that most of the craftsmen and barbers use purification with a razor and with scissors, and they use threading with a thread and cutting with a nail, and I have tried all these methods.
فلم أجد أفضل من التطهير بالمقصّ والرباط بالخيط لأنّ التطهير بالموسى كثيرا ما تلوذ له الجلدة لأنّ جلدة الغلفة طبقتان فربّما قطعت الجلدة العليا وبقيت الطبقة السفلى.	So I did not find anything better than purification with scissors and threading with a thread, because purification with a razor often slips on the glans, since the glans of the uvula are two layers, so sometimes the upper layer is cut and the lower layer remains.
فيضطرّ الى قطع آخر وألم مستأنف والتطهير بالفلكة لا يؤمن معها قطع طرف الإحليل لأنّه ربّما دخل فى ثقبها، وأمّا التطهير بالظفر فربّما فلت الجلدة وفسد عملك او كانت جلدة الصبىّ قصيرة بالطبع..	It necessitates cutting again and causes repeated pain, and purification with the needle does not guarantee cutting the edge of the foreskin because it might enter into its hole, and as for purification with the nail, sometimes the glans is torn and your work is ruined, or the boy's glans is short by nature.
فكثيرا ما يولدون كذلك لا يحتاجون الى تطهير وقد رأيت ذلك، وأمّا التطهير بالمقصّ والرباط بالخيط فالتجربة كشفت لى فضله لأنّ المقصّ متناسبة القطع من أجل أنّ الشفرة التى من فوق كالشفرة التى من أسفل.	Many are born like this and do not need purification, and I have seen it, and as for purification with scissors and threading with a thread, experience has shown me its usefulness because the scissors are equal in cutting from top to bottom, since the edge that is from above is like the edge that is from below.
فمتى عصرت يدك بتناسب الشفرتين قطعت على قياس واحد وفى زمن واحد فتصير زمام الخيط شبه حائط لجلدة الإحليل من كلّ النواحى لا يقع معه خطاء البتّة، ووجه العمل أوّلا أن توهم الصبىّ.	When you insert the suture thread through the two corresponding wounds and pull it in one stroke, and at one time, the thread will form a loop resembling the letter "o" around the wound from all sides without any of the thread being superfluous, and the operation is done in such a way that the thread does not come out.
ولا سيّما إن كان ممّن يفهم قليلا أنّك إنّما تربط الخيط فى إحليله فقط وتدعه الى يوم آخر ثمّ فرّحه وسرّه بكلّ وجه يمكنك ذلك منه وما يقبله بعقله، ثمّ توقفه بين يديك منتصب القامة.	It does not matter if it is a clever man who understands little, that you merely tie the thread on his wound and leave it until the next day, then loosen and remove it in any way possible for you and what is acceptable to him with his understanding, then hold it upright between your hands.
ولا يكون جالسا واخبأ المقصّ فى كمّك او تحت قدمك لا تقع عين الصبىّ عليها البتّة ولا على شىء من الآلات، ثمّ تدخل يدك الى إحليله وتنفخ فى الجلدة وتشيلها الى فوق حتّى يخرج رأس الإحليل.	And it should not be that you are sitting with the instrument hidden in your palm or under your foot, so that the patient's eye does not fall on it nor on any of the equipment, then you insert your hand into his wound and blow into the bladder and pull it upwards until the head of the bladder emerges.
ثمّ تنقيه ممّا يجتمع فيه من الوسخ ثمّ اربط الموضع المعلّم بخيط مثنى ثمّ اربط أسفل منه قليلا رباطا ثانيا ثمّ تمسك بإبهامك والسبّابة موضع الربط الأسفل إمساكا جيّدا وتقطع بين الرباطين.	Then you clean what gathers in it of pus, then tie the designated place with a double thread, then tie below it a little, a second tie, then grasp with your thumb and index finger the lower tie, grasping firmly, and cut between the ties.
ثمّ ارفع الجلدة الى فوق بسرعة وأخرج رأس الإحليل ثمّ اترك الدم يجرى قليلا فهو أفضل وأقلّ لورم الإحليل ثمّ تنشفه بخرقة رطبة ثم ذرّ عليه من رماد القرع اليابس المحرق فهو أفضل ما جرّبته او دقيق الحوّارى فهو أيضا فاضل.	Then lift the bladder upwards quickly and bring out the head of the bladder, then let the blood flow a little, for it is better and less likely to cause inflammation of the bladder, then wipe it with a wet cloth, and sprinkle on it powdered burnt and crushed ash of the plant called kharc, for it is the best thing I have tried, or fine powder of rock rose, for it is also excellent.
ثمّ تحمل على الذرور من فوق فى خرقة فصّ بيضة مطبوخة فى ماء الورد مضروبة بدهن الورد الطرىّ الطيّب وتتركه عليه الى يوم آخر ثمّ تعالجه بسائر العلاج الى أن يبرأ.	Then apply to the wound from above a cloth soaked in white wax dissolved in rosewater, mixed with fresh and pure rose oil, and leave it on until the next day, then treat it with other treatments until it heals.
وهذه صورة المقصّ التى تصلح للتطهير:.	And this is a picture of the instrument suitable for catheterization:
تكون فطساء قاطعة لا عوج فيها مسقيّة المسمار ويكون طول الشفرتين كطول المقبضين سواء، وأمّا الخطاء الواقع فى التطهير فربّما قلبت الجلدة الداخلة كلّها او بعضها عند القطع فينبغى أن تمدّها من ساعتك بظفرك قبل أن يتورّم الموضع.	The fracture should be broken with a clean cut, without any irregularities, and the edges of the wound should be equal in length to the edges of the splint, and as for the stitches that are put in the suture, sometimes the inner flesh is inverted entirely or partially during the cutting, it is necessary to stretch it at that hour with your fingers before the place becomes inflamed.
وتقطعها على استواء، فإن لم تستطع على إمساكها بظفرك فاجذبها بصنّارة واقطعها، فإن مضى له ثلاثة أيّام وبقى ما تحت رأس الاحليل منتفخا وارما فاتركه حتّى يسكن الورم الحارّ واسلخه برفق.	And you cut it when it is steady, if you cannot do so by holding it with your fingers, then grasp it with a pincers and cut it, and if three days have passed and the swelling below the head of the abscess has remained swollen and red, then leave it until the acute inflammation subsides and then extract it gently.
واقطعه على حسب ما يتهيّأ لك، وتحفّظ من رأس الإحليل فإن قطع شىء من رأس الإحليل فإنّه لا يضرّ ذلك، فعالجه بما يلحم الجرح من الذرورات التى وصفنا فى مقالة الذرورات.	Cut it according to what you think is suitable, and be cautious of the head of the abscess, for if a part of the head of the abscess is cut off, it does not harm, so dress it with the plasters that we described in the chapter on plasters.
وإن قطع من الجلدة فوق المقدار وتقلّصت الى فوق فلا يضرّ ذلك أيضا كثير مضرّة، فعالجه بما ذكرنا حتّى يبرأ،.	And if a part of the flesh above the elbow is cut and it has contracted upwards, then that does not harm much, so dress it with what we mentioned until it heals.
الفصل الثامن والخمسون.	The 58th chapter.
فى علاج البول المحتبس فى المثانة.	On the treatment of the retained urine in the bladder.
البول المحتبس فى المثانة يكون عن سدّه من حصاة او دم جامد او قيح او لحم نابت ونحو ذلك، فإذا عالجت ذلك بما ذكرنا ضروب العلاج الموصوف فى التقسيم.	The retained urine in the bladder occurs due to an obstruction from a stone, or congealed blood, or mucus, or a piece of flesh that has grown and the like, so if you treat it with what we mentioned, repeatedly using the prescribed remedies in the chapter.
ولم ينطلق البول ورأيت أن احتباسه من قبل حصاة قد ضارت فى عنق المثانة فينبغى ان تصير العليل على ركبتيه جاثيا ثمّ يركب رجل على ظهره ويمدّ بطنه الى ظهره و يمسك العليل نفسه ما أمكنه.	And if the urine does not flow and you suspect that its retention is due to a stone that has settled in the neck of the bladder, then it is necessary that the patient sits on his haunches, then a man puts his leg on the patient's back and stretches his belly towards his back, and the patient himself holds as much as he can.
فيضطرّ حينئذ عنق المثانة الى دفع الحصاة الى خلف فينطلق البول، فإن لم ينطلق بما ذكرنا واشتدّ الأمر على العليل فينبغى أن تستعمل إخراجه بالآلة التى تسمّى قاثاطير التى هذه صورتها:.	At that time, the neck of the bladder is forced to push the stone backwards, so the urine flows out, if it does not flow with what we mentioned and the condition worsens for the patient, then it is necessary to perform his catheterization with the instrument called a catheter, which is depicted here:
تصنع من فضّة وتكون رقيقة ملساء مجوّفة كأنبوب ريش الطير فى رقّة الميل طويلة فى نحو شبر ونصف لها قمع لطيف فى رأسها، ووجه جذب البول بها أن تأخذ خيطا مثنيّا وتربط فى طرفه صوفة أو قطنة ربطا جيّدا.	Make it from silver and make it thin, smooth, and polished like the feather of a bird in its long thinness for about a digit and a half, with a fine hook at its head, and the way to hold it is that it takes a thread bent in the middle and ties a silk or cotton thread at its end.
وتدخل طرف الخيط فى أسفل القاثاطير وتقرض بمقراض إن فضل شىء من الصوفة لكى تدخل فى الأنبوب تسدّه كالزّر، ثمّ تدهن القاثاطير بزيت او بزبد او بياض البيض وتجلس العليل على كرسىّ.	And the thread's end is inserted into the bottom of the catheter and it is pushed with a pusher, if a piece of silk remains outside that enters the tube to block it like an obstruction, then the catheter is greased with oil or with the whites of eggs or with fat, and the patient is placed on their back.
وتنطل مثانته وإحليله بالأدهان الرطبة او الزيت والماء الفاتر، ثمّ تدخل القاثاطير فى الإحليل برفق حتّى يصل الى أصل الإحليل ثمّ تثنى الإحليل الى فوق الى ناحية السرّة ثمّ تدفع القاثاطير فى داخله.	And its bend and the ureter's orifice are anointed with warm unguents, oil, and lukewarm water, then the catheter is inserted into the ureter gently until it reaches the base of the ureter, then the ureter is bent upwards towards the direction of the spleen, then the catheter is pushed inside.
حتّى اذا تمّ تثنّى الإحليل ثمّ تدفع القاثاطير الى داخل حتّى اذا وصل قريبا من المقعدة تميل الذكر الى أسفل والقاثاطير فى داخله ثمّ تدفعه حتّى يصل الى المثانة ويحسّ به العليل قد وصل الى شىء فارغ.	Until when the ureter is bent, then the catheter is pushed inside until when it approaches near to the bladder and the penis inclines downwards and the catheter is inside, then it is pushed until it reaches the bend and the patient feels it has reached an empty place.
وإنّما يصنع على هذه الرتبة لأنّ المجرى الذى يسلك فيه البول فيه تعّوج، ثمّ تمدّ الخيط بالصوفة بشدّة قليلا فإّنّ البول يتبع الصوفة، ثمّ تخرجها ويهرق البول، وتعيد القاثاطير.	And this is done because the duct through which urine passes has a bend in it, then the thread with the silk is pulled gently so that the urine follows the silk, then it is taken out and the urine flows, and the catheter is inserted again.
تفلا تزال تفعل ذلك حتّى تفرّغ المثانة ويجد العليل خفّة،.	The catheter is repeated in this manner until the bend is cleared and the patient feels relief.
الفصل التاسع والخمسون.	The 59th chapter.
كيف تحقن المثانة بالزرّاقة.	How to perform lithotomy.
وصور الآلات التى تصلح لذلك تصنع من فضّة او من عاج مجوّفة لها أنبوبة طويلة على رقّة قيح وأردت أن تقطّر فيها المياه والأدوية فيكون ذلك بآلة تسمّى الزرّاقة وهذه صورتها:.	And the instruments that are used to perform it, made from silver or ivory, polished, having a long tube on the thinness of a reed, and designed so that waters and medicines can be injected with it, this is an instrument called a syringe, and this is its depiction:.
تصنع من فضّة او من عاج مجوّفة لها أنبوبة طويلة على رقّة الميل مجوّفة كلّها الّا الطرف فإنّه مصمت فيه ثلاث ثقب اثنتان من جهة وواحدة من جهة أخرى كما ترى.	Make it from a silver or ivory tube, fashioning for it an elongated nozzle on the curve of the nail, all of which is fashioned except the tip, wherein there are three perforations, two from one side and one from the other side as you see.
والموضع الأجوف الذى فيه المدفعيكون على قدر ما يسدّه بلا مزيد حتّى اذا جذبت به شيئا من الرطوبات انجذبت وإذا دفعت به اندفعت الى بعد على ما تصنع النضّاحة التى يرمى بها النفط فى حروب البحر.	And the hollow tube in which the stopper is inserted to the extent that it is compressed without excess, such that when it draws in something of the humors, it contracts and if pushed, it expands afterwards on account of what the crafted siphon does, with which they throw oil in sea battles.
فإذا أردت طرح الرطوبات فى المثانة أدخلت طرف الزرّاقة فى الرطوبة وجذبت بالمدفع الى فوق فإنّ الرطوبة تنجذب فى جوف الزرّاقة ثمّ تدخل طرفها فى الإحليل على حسب ما وصفنا فى القاثاطير ثمّ تدفع الرطوبة بالمدفع.	For if you want to put the humors in the nostril, insert the end of the tube into the humor and draw with the stopper upwards, then the humor will be sucked into the interior of the tube, then its end will enter the catheter according to what we described in the catheters, then push the humor with the stopper.
فإنّ تلك الرطوبة تصل الى المثانة على المقام حتّى يحسّ بها العليل، وهذه صورة محقن لطيف أيضا تحقن به المثانة:.	For that humor reaches the nostril at the beak, until the patient feels it, and this is also a picture of an aromatic perfume which perfumes the nostril.
تصنع من فضّة او اسبادروية رأسها الأعلى يشبه القمع الصغير وتحته حزّ يقع فيه الرباط، ثمّ تأخذ مثانة جمل وتضع فيها الرطوبة التى تريد أن تحقن بها المثانة ثمّ تربطها بين الحجزين ربطا وثيقا بخيط مثنّى.	Make it from silver or spindle, its upper head resembling the small cupping, and beneath it an incision where the ligament is put, then take a nostril catheter and insert in it the humor that you want to perfume the nostril with, then tie between the knees a tight knot with a double thread.
وتدفئ تلك الرطوبة قليلا على النار ثمّ تدخل طرف المحقن فى الإحليل ثمّ تشدّ يدك على المثانة بالرطوبة شدّا محكما حتّى يحسّ العليل أنّ تلك الرطوبة قد وصلت الى المثانة.	And warm that humor a little on the spout, then insert the end of the catheter into the catheter, and tighten your hand onto the nostril with the humor a tightened tightening until the patient feels that the humor has reached the nostril.
فإن لم تحضرك مثانة فخذ قطعة رقّ فاصنع منها دائرة وثقّبها من جميع دورها ثمّ أدخل خيطا وثيقا فى تلك الثقب كما تدور ثمّ اجمع الدائرة كما تجمع السفرة بعد أن تضع فيها ما تريد من الرطوبات والأدهان والمياه.	For if a nostril catheter is not available to you, take a piece of cloth and fashion from it a circle, and perforate it from all its edges, then insert a tight thread into those perforations as they turn, then gather the circle as one gathers the sponges after you put in it what you want of humors, perfumes, and waters.
ثمّ اربطها فى الآلة واصنع بها كما صنعت بالمثانة من عصر يدك حتّى تصل الرطوبة الى المثانة،.	Pierce them in the needle and shape them as you shaped the thumb of your hand so that the suture reaches the thumb.
الفصل الستّون.	The separation of the esophagus.
فىإخراج الحصاة.	In extraction of the urinary stone.
قد ذكرنا فى التقسيم أنواع الحصاة وعلاجها بالأدوية وذكرت الفرق بين الحصاة المتولّدة فى الكلى وبين الحصاة المتولّدة فى المثانة وعلامات ذلك كلّه وذكرت الحصاة التى يقع فيها العمل باليد والشقّ.	We have mentioned in the section, the types of urinary stones and their treatment with medications, and I mentioned the differences between the stone that forms in the kidney and the stone that forms in the bladder, and the signs of all that, and I mentioned the stone in which the operation is performed manually and the incision.
وهى الحصاة المتولّدة فى المثانة خاصّة والتى تنشب فى الإحليل وأنا واصف ذلك بشرح بيّن واختصار.	And it, the stone that forms in the bladder is special, and which becomes sharp in the urethra, and I have described that with clear and concise explanation.
فأقول إنّ الحصاة المتولّدة فى المثانة أكثر ما تعرض للصبيان ومن علاماتها أنّ البول يخرج من المثانة شبيها بالماء فى رقّته.	So I say that the stone that forms in the bladder is what most often affects children, and among its signs is that the urine exits from the bladder similar to water in its thinness.
ويظهر فيه الرمل ويحكّ ذكره ويعبث به وكثيرا ما يتدلّى ثمّ ينتشر وتبرز معها المقعدة فى كثير منهم، ويسهل بروء الصبيان منها الى أن يبلغوا أربع عشرة سنة ويعسر فى الشيوخ وأمّا الشبّان فمتوسّط فيما بين ذلك.	And sand appears in it, and its sensation is felt, and it settles with it, and often it becomes loose and then spreads, and the anus protrudes with it, in many of them, and it is easier for children to urinate from it until they reach fourteen years, and it becomes easier for the elderly, and as for youths, it is moderate between those.
والذى يكون حصاته أعظم يكون علاجه أسهل والصغيرة بضدّ ذلك، فإذا صرنا الى العلاج فينبغى أوّلا أن يحقن العليل بحقنة تخرج جميع الزبل الذى فى معائه فإنّه قد يمنع وجود الحصاة عند التفتيش.	And the one whose stones are largest, its treatment is easiest, and the smallest is opposite to that, so if we resort to treatment, we should first catheterize the bladder with a catheter that removes all the sediment that is in it, for it may prevent the existence of the stone when searching.
ثمّ يؤخذ العليل برجليه فينفض ويهزّ الى أسفل لتنزل الحصاة الى عنق المثانة او يثب من موضع مرتفع مرّات ثمّ تجلسه بين يديك منتصبا ويداه تحت فخذيه لتصير المثانة كلّها مائلة الى اسفل ثمّ تفتّشه.	Then the bladder is taken with its catheter, shaken and jerked downwards to drop the stone to the neck of the bladder or it may be lifted from a high position several times, then it is placed between your hands standing, and his hands are under his thighs so that the entire bladder leans downwards, then it is palpated.
وتجسّه من خارج فإن أحسست بالحصاة فى الفضاء فبادر من ساعتك بالشقّ عليها فإن لمّ تقع تحت لمسك البتّة فينبغى أن تمسح الأصبع السبّابة بالدهن من اليد اليسرى إن كان العليل صبيّا او الأصبع الوسطى.	If you feel the constriction from outside, then hasten with the incision at that moment, for if you do not make it fall under your control, it is likely that the outer clavicle will be massaged with the oil from the left hand, whether the patient is a young boy or.
إن كان غلاما تامّا فتدخلها فى مقعدته وتفتّش عن الحصاة حتّى اذا وقعت تحت أصبعك نقلتها قليلا قليلا الى عنق المثانة ثمّ تكبس عليها بأصبعك وتدفعها الى خارج نحو المكان الذى تريد شقّه.	If it is a slave boy, insert it into his anus and investigate for the constriction until when it falls under your thumb, you transfer it little by little to the neck of the scrotum, then you press on it with your thumb and push it outside towards the place where you want to make the incision.
وتأمر خادما أن يعصر المثانة بيده وتأمر خادما آخر أن يمدّ بيده اليمنى الأنثيين الى فوق وبيده الأخرى يمدّ الجلد الذى تحت الأنثيين ناحية عن الموضع الذى يكون الشق فيه، ثمّ تأخذ المبضع النشل الذى هذه صورته:.	And you order a servant to squeeze the testicle with his hand, and you order another servant to stretch the skin above with his right hand and with his other hand he stretches the skin that is beneath the testicles away from the place where the incision will be made, then you take the razor which has this shape:
وتشق فيما بين المقعدة والأنثيين لا فى الوسط بل الى جانب الألية اليسرى ويكون الشقّ على نفس الحصاة وأصبعك فى المقعدة وأنت تضغطها الى خارج مورّبا ليكون الشقّ من خارج واسعا ومن داخل ضيقا على قدر ما يمكن خروج الحصاة منه.	And you make an incision between the anus and the testicle, not in the middle but to the side of the left kidney, and the incision is on the same constriction and your thumb is in the anus and you press it outside, making the incision from the outside wide and from the inside narrow, to the extent that it allows the constriction to come out of it.
لا أكبر فربّما ضغطت الأصبع التى فى المقعدة الحصاة عند الشقّ فتخرج من غير عسر، واعلم أنّه قد يكون من الحصاة ما لها زوايا وحروف فيعسر خروجها لذلك.	Not larger, for if you press the thumb that is in the anus, the constriction will come out at the incision without difficulty, and know that it may be that some of the constrictions have corners and hooks, so their exit is difficult for that reason.
ومنها ملساء تشبه البلّوط ومدحرجة فيسهل خروجها، فما كان منها لها زوايا وحروف فتزيد فى الشقّ قليلا فإن لم تخرج هكذا فينبغى أن تتحيّل عليها إمّا أن تقبض عليها بجفت محكم يكون طرفه كالمبرد.	And among them are smooth ones that resemble the acorn, and thin ones, making their exit easy, but if some of them have corners and hooks, you increase the incision a little, and if it does not come out like this, then it is likely that you will apply to it either a pair of forceps whose end is like a file.
ليضبط على الحصاة فلا تفلت منه وإمّا أن تدخل من تحتها آلة لطيفة معقّفة الطرف، فإن لم تستطع عليها فوسّع الشقّ قليلا فإن غلبك شىء من الدم فاقطعه بالزاج.	To hold onto the constriction so that it does not slip away from you, or a delicate instrument with a curved end is inserted beneath it, and if you are unable to do this, then widen the incision a little, and if a lot of blood flows, then stop it with the cauterizer.
فإن كانت أكثر من واحدة فادفع أوّلا الكبيرة الى فم المثانة ثمّ شقّ عليها ثمّ ادفع الصغيرة بعد ذلك وكذلك تفعل إن كانت أكثر من اثنتين، فإن كانت عظيمة جدّا فإنّه جهل أن يشقّ عليها شقّا عظيما لأنّه يعرض للعليل أحد أمرين.	If there is more than one, then push the largest to the mouth of the anus, then incise it, then push the smaller one after that. You do the same if there are more than two, but if they are very large, it is not wise to make a large incision on it because it risks causing one of two complications.
إمّا أن يموت وإمّا أن يحدث له تقطير البول دائما من أجل أنّه لا يلتحم الموضع البتّة ولكن حاول دفعها حتّى تخرج او تحيّل فى كسرها بالكلاليب حتّى تخرجها قطعا.	Either he will die, or he will have a perpetual flow of urine, because the wound will not heal, but try to push it out until it comes out or is eliminated with the feces from the anus, so that it comes out in pieces.
فإذا فرغت من عملك فاحش الجرح بكندر وصبر وشيّان وشدّه وصيّر فوقه خرقا مبلولة بزيت وشراب او بدهن ورد وماء بارد ليسكن الورم الحارّ ثمّ يستلقى العليل على قفاه ولا تحلّ الرباط الى اليوم الثالث.	When you have finished the operation, dress the wound with litharge and aloes and shayyan and bind it and put above it a poultice moistened with oil and sharab or with rose water and cold water to calm the hot inflammation, then let the patient lie on his back and do not unravel the bandage until the third day.
فإذا انحلّ نطلت الموضع بماء وزيت كثير ثمّ تعالجه بالمرهم النخلىّ والمرهم الباسليقون حتّى يبرأ، فإن عرض فى الجرح ورم حارّ زائد وأكال ونحو ذلك مثل أن يجمد دم فى المثانة ويمتنع منه البول ويعرف ذلك من خروج الدم مع البول.	When the dressing is removed, wash the place with water and oil abundantly, then treat it with the ointment of nuts and the ointment of celery until it heals, for if there appears in the wound a hot inflammation and an increase and similar things such as a collection of blood in the anus and retention of urine and recognition of that by the coming out of blood with the urine.
فأدخل أصبعك فى الجرح وأخرج ذلك الدم فإنّه إن بقى دعا الى فساد المثانة وعفونتها، وثمّ اغسل الجرح بالخلّ والماء والملح وقابل كلّ نوع بما شاكله من العلاج الى أن يبرأ.	So put your finger into the wound and bring out that blood, for if it remains it will call to corruption of the anus and its destruction. Then wash the wound with vinegar and water and salt, and treat each type with what is similar to it in treatment until it heals.
وينبغى فى أوقات العلاج كلّها أن تربط الفخذين وتجمعهما لتثبت الأدوية التى توضع على الموضع، فإن كانت الحصاة صغيرة وصارت فى مجرى القضيب ونشبت فيه وامتنع البول من الخروج فعالجها بما أنا واصفه قبل أن تصير الى الشقّ.	And it is necessary during all the times of treatment to bind the thighs and bring them together in order to stabilize the medicines that are put on the place, for if the hernia is small and has entered into the passage of the penis and has become stuck and the urine is retained from coming out, treat it with what I have described before it becomes necessary to make an incision.
فكثيرا ما استغنيت بهذا العلاج عن الشقّ فقد جرّبت ذلك وهو أن تأخذ مشعبا من حديد الفولاد تكون هذه صورته:.	Many times I have been forced to resort to this treatment instead of amputation, for I have excised that which is made from a figure of iron, its shape being:.
مثلّث الطرف حادّ مغرّز فى عود، ثمّ تأخد خيطا وتربط به القضيب تحت الحصاة لئلّا ترجع الى المثانة ثمّ تدخل حديدة المشعب فى الإحليل برفق حتّى يصل المشعب الى نفس الحصاة.	A triangular splint is placed on the edge, a needle is inserted into the catheter and tied with a thread under the skin so that it returns to the urethra, then the pointed end of the instrument is introduced into the urethra gently until the instrument reaches the same spot.
وتدير المشعب بيدك فى نفس الحصاة قليلا قليلا وأنت تروم ثقبها حتّى تنفذها من الجهة الأخرى فإّنّ البول ينطلق من ساعته ثمّ تزمّ يدك على ما بقى من الحصاة من خارج القضيب فإنّها تتفتّت وتخرج مع البول ويبرأ العليل،.	And you turn the instrument with your hand in the same spot a little by little while you are making an incision until it perforates from the other side, then urine comes out of its hollow, and you compress what remains of the urethra outside the catheter with your hand, so it breaks apart and comes out with the urine, and the patient is cured.
فإن لم يتهيّأ لك هذا العلاج لعائق يعوقك عن ذلك فاربط خيطا تحت الحصاة وخيطا آخر فوق الحصاة ثمّ تشقّ على الحصاة فى نفس القضيب بين الربطين ثمّ تخرجها.	For if this treatment is not suitable for you, tie one thread under the urethra and another above it, then make an incision on the urethra in the same catheter between the two threads, then take it out.
ثمّ تحلّ الرباط وتنقى الدم الجامد الذى صار فى الجرح، وإنّما وجب ربط الخيط تحت الحصاة لئلّا ترجع الى المثانة والربط الآخر من فوق لكيما اذا حلّ الخيط بعد خروج الحصاة يرجع الجلد الى مكانه فيغطى الجرح.	Then the suture is undone and the congealed blood that has accumulated in the wound is cleaned, and the reason for tying the thread under the urethra was so it returns to the urethra, and the other tie above it, so if the thread is untied after the extraction of the urethra, the skin returns to its place and covers the wound.
ولذلك ينبغى لك اذا ربطت الخيط الأعلى أن ترفع الجلد الى فوق ليرجع عند فراغك ويغطى الجرح كما قلنا،.	And because of that, if you tie the upper thread, it is better that you lift the skin upwards so it returns when you want and covers the wound as we said.
الفصل الحادى والستّون.	Separation of the urethra and the rectum.
فى إخراج الحصاة للنساء.	Extracting the urethra in women.
قليلا ما تتولّد الحصاة فى النساء فإن عرض لأحد منهنّ حصاة فإنّه يعسر علاجها ويمتنع لوجوه كثيرة أحدها أن المرأة ربّما كانت بكرا والثانية أنّك لا تجد امرأة تبيح نفسها للطبيب.	It is rare for a urethra to become constricted in women, so if one of them has a constricted urethra, its treatment is easy and there are few obstacles, the first being that the woman may be a virgin, and the second being that you do not find a woman who would allow a doctor to examine her.
اذا كانت عفيفة او من ذوات المحارم والثالثة أنك لا تجد امرأة تحسن هذه الصناعة ولا سيّما العمل باليد والرابعة أنّ موضع الشقّ على الحصاة من النساء بعيد من موضع الحصاة فتحتاج الى شق غائر.	If it is slight or one of those with a fluke or the third that you do not find a woman who knows this industry nor does she have a skillful hand and the fourth that the place of the incision on the hip bone in women is far from the place of the hip bone, requiring a deeper incision.
وفى ذلك خطر، فإن دعت الضرورة الى ذلك فينبغى أن تتّخذ امرأة طبيبة محسنة وقليلا ما توجد فإن عدمتها فاطلب طبيبا عفيفا رفيقا اوتحضر امرأة قابلة محسنة فى أمر النساء او امرأة تشير فى هذه الصناعة بعض الإشارة.	And if the necessity calls for it, then a woman who is a skilled physician should be sought, and if one is rarely found, then a gentle male physician or a skilled woman knowledgeable about women's affairs or a woman indicating some skill in this craft should be called.
فتحضرها وتأمرها أن تصنع جميع ما تأمرها به من التفتيش على الحصاة أوّلا وذلك أن تنظر إن كانت المرأة بكرا فينبغى أن تدخل الأصبع فى مقعدتها وتفتّش الحصاة فإن وجدتها وضغطتها تحت أصبعها.	Then her attendance is requested and she is ordered to perform all that she is ordered to do from the examination of the hip, first by looking to see if the woman is a virgin, it being appropriate that the finger be inserted into her vagina and the hip be examined, and if it is found and pressed under her finger.
فحينئذ تأمرها بالشقّ عليها، فإن لم تكن بكرا وكانت ثيّبا فأمر القابلة أن تدخل أصبعها فى فرج العليلة وتفتّش على الحصاة بعد أن تضع يدها اليسرى على المثانة وتعصرها عصرا جيّدا.	Then she is ordered to make an incision on it, for if she is not a virgin and is thin, the midwife is ordered to insert her finger into the vulva of the woman and examine the hip after she places her left hand on the pubic region and presses it with a strong pressure.
فإن وجدتها فينبغى أن تدرجها عن فم المثانة الى أسفل مبلغ طاقتها حتّى تنتهى بها الى أصل الفخذ ثمّ تشقّ عليها عند قبالة نصف الفرج عند أصل الفخذ من أىّ جهة تتأتّى لها وأحسّت بالحصاة فى تلك الناحية.	For if it is found, it is appropriate that she probes it from the mouth of the pubic region to the bottom of her capacity until she reaches it with her hand, then she makes an incision on it at the opposite of half of the vulva at the base of the thigh, whichever side is most comfortable for her and feels the hip in that direction.
وأصبعها لا تزول عن الحصاة مضغطة تحتها، وليكن الشقّ صغيرا أوّلا ثمّ تدخل المرود على ذلك الشقّ الصغير فإن أحسّت بالحصاة فتزيد فى الشقّ على قدر ما تعلم أنّ الحصاة تخرج منه، واعلم أنّ أنواع الحصاة كثيرة.	And her finger does not cease from pressing the hip, and let the incision be small at first, then the blade enters on that small incision, if she feels the hip, she increases the incision by the amount she knows the hip will come out of it, and know that the types of hip are many.
منها صغار وكبار وملس وحرش وطوال ومدوّرة وذات شعب فاعرف أصنافها لتستدلّ بذلك على ما تريد، فإن غلبك الدم فذرّ فى الموضع الزاج المسحوق وامسكه ساعة حتّى ينقطع الدم ثمّ ارجع الى عملك.	Among them are small and large, smooth and rough, long and curved, and those with projections, so recognize their types to infer from that what you want, for if blood overflows in the place of the incision, pour on it the toasted and crushed root, and press on it for an hour until the blood stops, then return to your work.
حتّى تخرج الحصاة، واعمل أن تعدّ مع نفسك من الآلات التى ذكرت فى إخراج الحصاة للرجال لتستعين بها فى عملك، فإن غلبك نزف الدم وعلمت بنبض الدم أنّه من شريان انقطع فضع الذرور على الموضع.	When the stone comes out, and you prepare for yourself with the instruments I mentioned for extracting stones from men, so that you may be prepared to work with them, if the profuse bleeding and the pulsation of the blood show that it is from a cut vein, apply the cauterization to the spot.
وشدّه بالرفائد شدّا محكما واتركه ولا تعاوده واترك الحصاة ولا تخرجها فربّما هلكت العليلة ثمّ عالج الجرح فإذا سكنت حدّة الدم بعد أيّام وتعفّن الموضع فارجع الى عملك حتى تخرج الحصاة،.	Tighten it with the pads firmly and leave it, and do not return to the stone or extract it. If the area above the stone has perished, then treat the wound. If the flow of blood has decreased after some days and the place has become calm, return to your work until you extract the stone.
الفصل الثانى والستّون.	The second suture and the sixth.
فى الشقّ على الأدرة المائيّة.	On the incision on the renal artery.
الأدرة المائيّة إنّما هى اجتماع رطوبة فى الصفاق الأبيض الذى يكون تحت جلدة الخصى المحيطة بالبيضة وتسمّى الصفن وقد يكون فى غشاء خاصّ له تهيّئه الطبيعة فى جهة من البيضة.	The renal artery is where the moisture gathers in the white peritoneum that is under the skin of the testicle, surrounding the epididymis and is called the fascia, and it has a special membrane for it, arranged by nature on one side of the testicle.
حتّى يظنّ أنّه بيضة أخرى ويكون بين جلدة الخصى وبين الصفاق الأبيض الذى قلنا ولا يكون ذلك إلّا فى الندرة، وتولّد هذه الأدرة من ضعف يعرض للأنثيين فتنصّب اليها هذه المادّة وقد تعرض عن ضربة على الأنثيين.	Until it seems that there is another testicle, and it is between the skin of the testicle and the white peritoneum that we mentioned, and this does not happen except in sparsity. This artery generates from a weakness that is exposed to females, so this material coagulates for them, and perhaps has been exposed due to a blow on the testicles.
وهذه الرطوبة تكون ذات ألوان كثيرة إمّا أن يكون لونها الى الصفرة وإمّا أن تكون دميّة حمراء وإمّا أن تكون درديّة سوداء وإمّا أن تكون مائيّة بيضاء وهى أكثر ما تكون، والعلامات التى يعرف بها.	And this moisture is of many colors, either it is yellowish, or it is a bloody red, or it is a dirty black, or it is a watery white, and this is what it is most commonly.
حيث اجتماع الماء فإنّه إن كان فى الصفاق الأبيض الذى قلنا فالورم يكون مستديرا الى الطول قليلا كشكل بيضة ولا تظهر الخصية لأنّ الرطوبة تحيط بها من جميع النواحى.	Where the water gathers, if it is in the white peritoneum that we mentioned, then the tumor is slightly elongated in length like the shape of a testicle, and the testicle does not appear because the moisture surrounds it from all sides.
وإن كانت الرطوبة فى غشاء خا صّ لها فإن الورم يكون مستديرا بجهة من البيضة.	And if the moisture is in a special membrane for it, then the tumor is elongated towards one side of the testicle.
ولهذا يتوهّم الإنسان أنّها بيضة أخرى، وإن كانت الرطوبة بين جلدة الخصى والصفاق الأبيض فإنّه يقع تحت الحسّ، وأمّا اذا أردت معرفة لون الرطوبة فاسبر الورم بالمدسّ المربّع الذى تقدّمت صورته فما خرج فى اثر المدسّ حكمت عليه بما داخله.	It seems that the human supposes it is another cyst, and if the tumor is between the peritoneum and the white intestine, then it falls under sensation, and as for recognizing the color of the tumor, prick the tumor with a rectangular lancet whose picture has been previously drawn, so whatever comes out in effect of the lancet, judge accordingly what entered into it.
فإذا صرنا الى العلاج بالحديد فينبغى أن تأمر العليل بالفصد إن أمكنه ذلك ورأيت جسمه ممتلئا ثمّ يستلقى على ظهره على شىء عال قليلا وتضع تحته خرقا كثيرة ثمّ تجلس أنت على يساره.	If we have resorted to treatment with the iron, it is advisable that the patient be given a bloodletting position if he can do so, and I have seen his body well-filled, then he lies on his back on a raised platform slightly and many linens are placed under him, then you sit at his left side.
وتأمر خادما بالجلوس عن يمينه يمدّ ذكره الى أحد جانبى جلدة الخصى وإلى ناحية مراقّ البطن ثمّ تأخذ مبضعا عريضا وتشقّ جلدة الخصى من الوسط بالطول الى قريب من العانة.	And a servant is ordered to sit at his right, stretching his thigh to one side of the peritoneum and towards the region of the abdomen, then the surgeon takes hold of the razor and makes an incision in the peritoneum from the middle lengthwise near the groin.
وتصير الشقّ على استقامة موازيا للخّط الذى يقسم جلدة الخصى نصفين حتّى يصل الى الصفاق الأبيض الحاوى فتسلخه وتحفّظ من أن تشقّه ويكون سلخك له من الجهة التى تلصق بالبيضة أكثر وتستقصى السلخ على قدر ما يمكنك،.	And the incision is directed straight, parallel to the line that divides the peritoneum into two halves, until it reaches the white aponeurotic peritoneum, then it is freed and preserved from being cut, and your dissection of it is from the side that adheres to the cyst more, and you dissect as much as possible.
ثمّ تبطّ الصفاق المملوء ماء بطّا واسعا وتخرج جميع الماء، ثمّ تفرق بين شفتى الشقّ بصنّارات وتمدّ الصفاق الى فوق ولا تمسّ جلدة الخصا الحاوية وتقطع الصفاق كيف ما أمكنك قطعه إمّا بجملته وإمّا قطعا قطعا.	Then the peritoneum full of watery liquid is opened and a wide opening is made, and all the fluid comes out, then the lips of the incision are gently pulled apart with retractors and the peritoneum is stretched upwards and does not touch the peritoneum that adheres to the cyst, and it is cut as much as possible, either by removing it entirely or cutting it into pieces.
ولا سيّما جانبه الرقيق فإنّك إن لم تستقص قطعه لم تأمن الماء أن يعود، فإن برزت البيضة الى خارج عن جلدها فى حين عملك فإذا فرغت من قطع الصفاق فردّها ثمّ اجمع شفتى جلدة الخصى بالخياطة.	And do not spare its thin edge, for if you do not dissect a piece of it, you are not secure that the fluid will not return, and if the cyst protrudes to the outside from its gland during your operation, then after you have emptied it by cutting the peritoneum, push it back, then bring together the lips of the peritoneum with sutures.
ثمّ عالجه علاج سائر الجراحات حتّى يبرأ، فإن أصبت البيضة قد فسدت من مرض آخر فينبغى أن تربط الأوعية التى فى المعلاق خوف النزف ثمّ تقطع الخصية من المعلاق وتخرج البيضة ثم تعالجه بما ذكرنا.	When the bladder is wounded, it does not heal unless the ureters are ligated first to prevent haemorrhage, and then the wound in the bladder is treated with what we have mentioned.
فإن كان الماء المجتمع فى الجهتين جميعا فاعلم أنّها أدرتان فشقّ الجهة الأخرى على ما قد فعلت فى الأولى سواء وإن استوى لك أن يكون العمل واحدا فافعل، ثمّ تمسح الدم.	If the blood has collected in both sides, then you should know that they are two kidneys, so puncture the other side as you did the first, or if it is sufficient for you to have one operation, then do it, and then feel for the blood.
وتدخل فى الشقوق صوفا قد غمسته فى الزيت او فى دهن الورد وتصير من خارج صوفا آخر قد غمسته فى شراب وزيت وتبسطه على الخصيتين ومراق البطن وتضع من فوق خرقا مطويّة وهى الرفائد.	And you enter into the wound a pad soaked in oil or in rose fat, and you put on the outside another pad soaked in wine and oil, and you bandage the hip and the area of the abdomen with it, and you apply above it a poultice that has been bound.
وتربطها من فوق بالرباط الذى هو ذو ستّة أطراف على هذه الصورة:.	And you tie it up from above with a bandage that has six ends in this manner:
ثمّ تؤخذ خرقتان فتخاط وتحشى بالصوف المنفوش على هذا المثال وتصنع الأطراف التى يزمّ بها من قطن او صوف رطب وتجمع بالشدّ فى حزام السراويل وأحد الأطراف تأخذ على المقعدة الى الظهر.	Then two poultices are taken, they are tied and stuffed with fluffy cotton in this way, and the ends that it is fastened with are made from yarn or moistened cotton, and they are gathered by being tightened around the waist of the breeches, and one end is pulled to the back of the hip.
والثانى تأخذ الى نحو العانة والطرفين على الفخذين من أسفل والطرفين الباقيين على الأربيّتين وتجمع الشدّ كلّه فى حزام السراويل، وقد تصنع هذه الأدرة أيضا بالكىّ بدلا من الشقّ بالحديد.	And the second is taken towards the groin, and the ends on the thighs from below, and the remaining ends are on the hip bones, and all the tightening is gathered in the waist of the breeches. This suture can also be made with a needle instead of an iron instrument to make the incision.
وهو أن تأخذ مكواة سكّينيّة لطيفة فتشقّ بها جلدة الخصى وهى حامية على ما وصفنا حتّى انكشف الصفاق الأبيض الحاوى للماء فخذ مكواة أخرى على هذه الصورة:.	And it is that a fine scalpel is taken and the skin of the hip is incised with it, and it is preserved as we described until the white peri toneum which contains the intestine becomes visible, then another instrument of this type is taken:
وهى تشبه العين اليونانيّة، ثمّ تبطّ بها ذلك الصفاق وهى حامية حتّى تخرج الرطوبة كلّها ثمّ تمدّ الصفاق بالصنانير وتسلخ بالمكواة الطبقة الحاوية وتقطعها على حسب ما أمكنك حتّى تستأصل جميعها وتحفّظ من البيضة لا تمسّها النار.	It resembles the Greek eye, then that peritoneum is sewn with it and preserved until all the intestine protrudes, then the peritoneum is stretched with forceps, and the layer that holds it is cut with the scalpel according to what you are able to do, until you extract all of it and preserve the bladder so that the spatula does not touch it.
واعلم أنّ هذا العمل أسلم وأبعد من نزف الدم وأفضل من العمل بالشقّ، فإن اعترضك فى جين الشقّ او فى حين الكىّ ورم حارّ او نزف دم او شىء آخر فينبغى أن تعالج كلّما اعترضك من ذلك بالعلاج الذى يصلح له على ما تقدّم.	I know that this operation is more reliable and safer than bloodletting, and better than the work of incision, if you are faced with an obstruction in the incised area or during cauterization and a hot tumor or bloodletting or another hemorrhage occurs, then it is advisable to treat every obstruction that you encounter from that with the treatment that suits it as previously mentioned.
فإن كان العليل جبانا ولم يصبر على هذا العمل لشناعته فليستعمل البطّ على ما أنا واصفه وهو اذا صحّ عندك بما قدّمنا من الدلائل.	For if the patient is weak and cannot endure this operation due to its severity, then let the physician perform the alternative method that I have described, which, if it is correct in your opinion, based on the signs we have previously mentioned.
أنّ الأدرة مائيّة فينبغى أن تجلس العليل على كرسىّ مرتفع ثمّ تبطّ الورم فى أسفله بمبضع عريض واجعل البطّ على طول البدن ويكون الفتح واسعا حتّى يسيل الماء كلّه ثمّ ضع على الموضع قطنا واربطه.	Since the urine is watery, it is advisable to make the patient sit on a elevated seat, then incise the tumor at its base with a curved needle, and apply the dressing along the length of the spine, making the opening wide so that all the water flows out, then place a catheter in the position and tie it.
واتركه يمصل باقى الماء ثمّ عالجه حتّى يبرأ الجرح، فإن تعدّر خروج الماء فى حين بطّك له وإنّما يكون بسبب أنّ الغشاء الأبيض يعترض فى فم الجرح فيمنع خروج الماء.	And let him urinate to drain the remaining water, then treat him until the wound heals, and if the flow of urine is delayed during the dressing, it is not because of a blockage in the ureter, but rather because the white membrane obstructs the mouth of the wound, preventing the flow of water.
فحينئذ ينبغى أن تدخل فى الجرح ريشة إوزّ او الآلة التى يستخرج بها ماء المحبونين التى تقدّمت صورتها او زد فى فتح الجرح قليلا.	Therefore, it is advisable to insert into the wound a goose quill or the instrument that the midwives use to extract the water of the pregnant women, whose shape I have previously described, or slightly increase the opening of the wound.
واعلم أنّ الماء قد يعود ويجتمع بعد ستّة أشهر او نحوها فإذا اجتمع فبطّه على الصفة نفسها ويدافع العليل أيّامه،.	And know that the water may return and accumulate after six months or so, if it accumulates, then dress it with the same method, and let the patient press his thighs together.
الفصل الثالث والستّون.	The third section, on fistula.
فى الشقّ على الأدرة اللحميّة وعلاجها.	On incising the fatty ureter and its treatment.
اعلم أنّ الشقّ على هذه الأدرة من الغرر المؤدّى الى الهلاك فى أكثر الأحوال فلذلك نرى تركها والسلامة منها وأنا ذاكر العمل فيها وأنواع الورم.	I know that incising this ureter, which is connected to the bladder, often leads to haemorrhage, therefore we see the advisability of leaving it alone and avoiding operation on it, but I will describe the operation on it and the types of tumors.
فأقول إنّه قد تحدث أورام كثيرة فى الأجسام التى يكون منها تركيب الأنثيين ويكون ذلك من أسباب كثيرة إمّا من فضلة حرّيفة تنصبّ الى الأنثيين وإمّا من ضربة ويكون لون الورم على لون الجسد ولا يوجد له الماء.	I say that many tumors occur in the body, from which the composition of the anus and the formation of that occur for several reasons, either due to a hot bilious humor that descends to the anus or due to a strike, and the color of the tumor is on the color of the body and does not have moisture.
ويكون الورم جاسيا وربّما كان الورم متحجّرا لونه كمد ولا حسّ له وقد يكون من تعقّد الشريانات وانتفاخها كما قد تقدّم ذكره او من انتفاخ الأوردة، فما كان من انتفاخ الشريانات فيعرف ذلك بتبدّد الورم.	And the tumor is painful and sometimes the tumor has a black color, no sensation, it may be due to the complexity of the nerves and their inflammation, as previously mentioned, or from the inflammation of the veins, what occurs from the inflammation of the nerves is recognized by the dispersal of the tumor.
اذا كبسته بأصابعك ولا ينبغى أن يعرض له البتّة، وأمّا الذى يكون من انتفاخ الأوردة فإنّه لا يتبدّد منه شىء عند الكبس بالأصابع، وهذا النوع قد يمكن أن يشقّ عليه وعلى سائر اللحوم.	If you press it with your fingers, it is not suitable for the pus to appear, and as for what occurs from the inflammation of the vein, nothing disperses when pressed with the fingers, and this type can be cut into.
وهو أن تشقّ جلدة الخصى ثمّ تمدّ البيضة الى فوق وتخرجها من الصفاق الأبيض وتخلّص المعلاق من الأوعية وتربط الأوعية وتقطع المعلاق بعد أن تخلّصه من كلّ جهة من جهات البيضة، فإن كانت البيضة قد التحمت بتلك اللحوم النابتة.	And it is that you cut the skin of the testicle, then extend the cord upwards and take it out from the white abdominal wall, and separate the cord from the vessels, and tie the vessels, and cut the cord after separating it from every side of the cord, if the cord has stuck to those growing flesh.
فينبغى أن تخرج البيضة وتقطعها، وإن كان الالتحام بين شىء من الصفاقات او فيما بين الأوعية فينبغى أن تخلّص جميع ذلك الالتحام وتقطعه قطعا مستديرا.	It is suitable that the testicle is taken out and cut, and if there is adhesion between something of the abdominal walls or among the vessels, it is suitable that all of those adhesions are separated and cut with a straight cut.
فإن كان نبات اللحم فى موضع الالتصاق الذى يكون من خلف فينبغى أن تقطع جميعه وتخرج البيضة كما قلنا فإذا تمّ عملك فاحش الجرح بالصوف المبلول فى دهن الورد والشراب ثمّ عالجه بسائر العلاج حتّى يبرأ،.	For if the flesh growth is in the place of adhesion which is from behind, it is suitable that you cut all of it and take out the testicle as we said, so if your operation is complete, dress the wound with the wrapped cotton in the fat of the rose and syrup, then treat it with other treatments until it heals.
الفصل الرابع والستّون.	The fourth and sixth section.
فى علاج الأدرة التى مع دالية.	In treating the kidney that is with a stone.
الدالية هى ورم ملتو بعض الالتواء شبيه بعنقود مع استرخاء الأنثيين وتعسر على العليل الحركة والرياضة والمشى وفى علاج هذه العلّة من الغرر قريب ممّا تقدّم ذكره.	The treatment of this condition is similar to the treatment of a dislocation, with relaxation of the limbs and movement of the joints, and riding and massage, and in the treatment of this condition we will mention what we have previously mentioned regarding violent exercise.
ولكن ينبغى أن نذكر العمل فيه على ما فعلت الأوائل، فأقول إنّه ينبغى أن تجلس العليل على كرسىّ مرتفع ثمّ تدفع معلاق الأنثيين الى أسفل ثمّ تمسك جلدة الخصى بأصابعك مع الأوعية التى هى قريبة من القضيب.	But it is fitting that we should mention the operation in accordance with what the ancients have done, so I say that it is fitting for the patient to sit on a high seat, then push the testicles downwards, and hold the skin of the groin with your fingers along with the vessels that are close to the penis.
ويمسكها خادم غيرك ويمدّها مدّا شديدا ثمّ تشقّ بمبضع عريض حادّ شقّا مورّبا بحذاء الأوعية حتّى تنكشف الأوعية ثمّ تسلخ من كلّ جهة كما ذكرت لك فى سلّ الشريانات التى فى الأضداغ ثمّ تغرز فيها إبرة فيها خيط مثنّى.	And a servant other than you should hold it and stretch it tightly, then make an incision with a sharp razorized instrument, a curved incision at the edge of the vessels until the vessels are exposed, then dissect them from all sides as I mentioned to you in the case of the blood vessels that are in the armpits, then insert into them a needle with double thread.
وتربطها فى أوّل المواضع التى عرضت لها الدالية وتربطها أيضا فى آخرها، ثمّ تشقّها فى الوسط شقّا قائما على طول البدن وتخرج ما اجتمع فيها من الرطوبات العكرة الفاسدة.	And tie it at the beginning of the places where the ligament was exposed, and also tie it at the end, then make a longitudinal incision in the middle, cutting along the length of the abdomen, and evacuate what has accumulated in it from purulent, fetid and corrupted matter.
ثمّ تعالج الجرج بعلاج سائر الجراحات التى تريد أن تتولّد فيها مدّة لتسقط الأوعية التى تغذو إحدى الأنثيين فلا بأس بذلك، فإن عرضت الدالية لجميع الأوعية فينبغى أن تخرج إحدى الأنثيين مع الأوعية لئلّا تعدم البيضة الغذاء.	Then treat the testicle with a treatment similar to other surgeries, which requires that it be warmed for a period so that the vessels that feed one of the testicles fall, and there is no harm in this, for if the ligament has been exposed to all the vessels, it is fitting that one of the testicles exit along with the vessels so that the nourishing cord is cut.
من قبل قطع الأوعية فتذبل ولا ينتفع بها،.	Before cutting the vessels, it becomes flaccid and is not benefited by it.
الفصل الخامس والستّون.	The fifth section, the sixty-sixth.
فى علاج الأدرة المعائيّة.	On the treatment of the obstructed anus.
حدوث هذه الأدرة من شقّ يعرض فى الصفاق الممتدّ على البطن فى نحو الأربيّتين من مراقّ البطن فينصبّ المعاء من ذلك الفتق الى أحد الأنثيين.	This anus develops from a rupture that appears in the peritoneum extended over the abdomen, near the navel, where the intestine protrudes from this fissure to one of the testicles.
وهذا الفتق يكون إمّا من شقّ الصفاق وإمّا من امتداده ويحدث هذان النوعان من أسباب كثيرة إمّا ضربة او وثبة او صيحة او رفع شىء ثقيل ونحو ذلك وعلامته اذا كان من امتداد الصفاق أن يحدث قليلا قليلا فى زمن طويل.	This rupture is either from the peritoneum or its extension and these two types occur due to several causes, either a blow or a fall or a strain or lifting a heavy object and the like, and its sign if it is from the extension of the peritoneum is that it occurs very slowly over a long time.
ولا يحدث بغتة ويكون الورم مستويا الى نحو العمق من قبل أنّ الصفاق يعصر المعاء، وعلامته اذا كان من شقّ الصفاق أنّه يحدث من أوّله وجعا عظيما دفعة ويكون الورم مختلفا ظاهرا تحت الجلد بالقرب.	And it does not happen suddenly, and the tumor becomes even to about the depth before the peritoneum becomes constricted, and its sign if it is from the peritoneal rupture that it happens from the beginning with severe pain and the tumor appears differently under the skin nearby.
وذلك بخروج المعاء ومصيره الى خارج من الصفاق، وقد يخرج مع المعاء الثرب فتسمّى هذه الأدرة معائيّة وثربيّة وقد تكون مع ريح، وقد يجرى فى المعاء الزبل ويحتبس هناك فيكون معه هلاك العليل.	And that is due to the intestine protruding and its exit from the peritoneum, and it may exit with the omentum, so this hernia is called omental and ombilical, and it may be with flatus, and it may pass into the omentum and become retained there, so it is accompanied by iliac pain.
لأنّه يحدث وجعا صعبا وقرقرة ولا سيّما اذا عصر، وعلاج أنواع هذه العلّة بالحديد خطر فينبغى أن تحذر الوقوع فيه، وصفة العمل أن تأمر العليل أن يردّ المعاء بيده الى داخل جوفه إن تأتّى للرجوع.	For it happens with severe pain and colic, and there is no relief even if it is constricted, and the treatment of these types of ailments by the iron is risky, we warn that you beware of falling into it, the way of action is that the iliac region should push the intestine back inside with his hand if it is ready to return.
ثمّ يستلقى على قفاه بين يديك ويرفع ساقيه ثمّ تمدّ الجلد الذى يلى الأربيّة الى فوق وتشقّ جلدة الخصى كلّها بالطول ثمّ تغرز فى شفتى الشقّ صنّارات على قدر ما يحتاج لفتح الشقّ بها.	Then he lies on his back between your hands and lifts his legs, then the skin that is near the pubic area is stretched upwards and the entire skin of the groin is incised longitudinally, then needles are inserted into the edge of the incision as much as is needed to open the incision with them.
ويكون الشقّ على قدر ما يمكن أن تخرج منه البيضة، ثمّ تسلخ الصفاقات التى تحت جلدة الخصى حتّى اذا انكشف الصفاق الأبيض الصلب من كلّ ناحية فحينئذ فأدخل أصبعك السبّابة فيما يلى البيضة.	And the incision is as large as will allow the testicle to come out of it, then the peritoneum under the skin of the groin is dissected until when the white tough peritoneum is exposed from every side, then you insert your index finger towards the testicle.
فيما بين الصفاق الأبيض الذى تحت جلدة البيضة وبين الصفاق الثانى وتطلق بها الالتصاق الذى من خلف البيضة، ثمّ تثنى باليد اليمنى الى داخل جلدة الخصى ومع هذا تمدّ الصفاق الأبيض الى فوق باليد اليسرى وترفع البيضة مع الصفاق الى ناحية الشقّ.	Between the white peritoneum that is under the skin of the testicle and the second peritoneum, and you call the attachment that is behind the testicle, then with the right hand it is bent inside the skin of the groin, and with this the white peritoneum is stretched upwards with the left hand, and the testicle is lifted with the peritoneum towards the side of the incision.
وتأمر الخادم بمدّ البيضة الى فوق وتطلق أنت الالتصاق الذى من خلف اطلاقا تامّا وتفتّش بأصبعك لئلّا يكون هناك شىء من المعاء الملتوى فى الصفاق الأبيض الصلب فإن أصبت منه شيئا فادفعه الى البطن أسفل.	The servant presses the intestine upwards and releases the adherence that is behind, releasing completely, and you examine with your fingers to see if there is any of the intestines stuck in the white peritoneum, and if you find something, push it down into the abdomen below.
ثمّ تأخذ إبرة فيها خيط غليظ قد فتل من عشرة خيوط وتدخلها عند آخر الصفاق الذى تحت جلدة الخصى الذى يلى الشقّ ثمّ تقطع أطراف انثناء الخيط حتّى تكون أربعة خيوط.	Then you take a needle with a thick thread that has been twisted from ten threads, and insert it at the end of the peritoneum that is under the skin of the groin, on the side of the incision, then cut the ends of the twist of the thread until it becomes four threads.
ثمّ تركّب بعضها على بعض بشكل مصلّب وتربط بها الصفاق الذى قلنا إنّه تحت جلدة الخصى رباطا شديدا من ناحيتين ثمّ تلفّ أيضا أطراف الخيوط وتربطها ربطا شديدا حتّى لا يقدر شىء من الأوعية التى تغذوها على أن يصل اليها شىء.	Then you interlock them one on top of the other in a tight formation, and tie with it the peritoneum that we said is under the skin of the groin, tying it tightly from both sides, then also wrap the ends of the threads and tie them with a tight knot so that nothing of the vessels that feed it can reach it.
لئلّا يعرض من ذلك ورم حارّ وتصير أيضا رباطا ثانيا خارجا من الرباط الأوّل بعيدا منه أقلّ من أصبعين وبعد هذين الرباطين تدع من الصفاق الذى تحت جلدة الخصى قدر عظم الأصبع.	If a vein is exposed and a hot abscess forms, also make a second tie outside of the first tie, distant from it by less than two fingers, and after these two ties, you leave from the peritoneum that is under the skin of the groin, an amount equal to the size of a finger.
وتقطع الباقى كلّه على استدارة وتنزع معه البيضة، ثمّ تشق أسفل جلدة الخصى شقّا يسيل منه الدم والمدّة كما وصفنا فيما تقدّم، ثمّ يستعمل الصوف المغموس فى الزيت ويوضع فى الجرح ويستعمل الرباط الذى وصفنا.	And you cut the skin all around and remove with it the intestine, then make an incision below the skin of the groin, an incision from which blood and pus flow out as we described previously, then use the wool soaked in oil and place it on the wound, and use the tie that we described.
وقد يكوى الصفاق الأبيض الذى قلنا بعد قطعه حذرا من نزف الدم فكثيرا ما يعرض ذلك، وتترك الرباط حتّى يسقط من ذاته فإن أبطأ سقوطه فلينطل بالماء الحارّ وتحمل عليه ما يعرّقه حتّى يسقط.	And the white peritoneum that we mentioned, after it is cut, may be cauterized gently to stop the flow of blood, for this often happens, and the tie is left until it falls off by itself, for if its falling is slow, it will be immersed in hot water and a weight placed on it until it falls.
ثمّ تعالج الجرح بسائر علاج الجراحات حتّى يبرأ،.	Then treat the wound with the usual treatments for wounds until it heals.
الفصل السادس والستّون.	The sixth and seventh operations.
في الأدرة الريحيّة هذه الأدرة الريحيّة ما رأيت أحدا اجترأ على علاجها بالحديد وقد ذكرت الأوائل أن يصنع كما وصفنا فى الأدرة التى مع دالية وذلك أن تربط الأوعية بعد الشقّ عليها برفق أسفل.	In this intestinal fistula, I have not seen anyone dare to treat it with a cautery iron, and the ancients mentioned that one should make, as we described in the intestine with a dalah, and that is to ligate the vessels after the incision with gentle pressure from below.
ثمّ تشقّ فى الوسط وتعالج الورم بما يفتحه حتّى تسقط الأوعية وتعالج الجرح على ما ذكرنا حتّى يبرأ،.	Then, an incision is made in the middle and the tumor is treated with what opens it until the vessels fall out, and the wound is treated as we mentioned until it heals.
الفصل السابع والستّون.	The seventh operation.
فى الفتق الذى يكون فى الأربيّة.	On the hernia that occurs in the groin.
قد يعرض الفتق فى الأربيّة كما قلنا فينتو الموضع ولا ينحدر الى الأنثيين شىء من المعاء وإن انحدر كان ذلك يسيرا ويرجع فى كلّ الأوقات.	A hernia may appear in the groin, as we said, and protrude from its place, and not descend to the testicles, or if it does descend, it is slight and returns at all times.
ولكن إن طال به الزمان زاد الشقّ فى الصفاق حتّى ينحدر المعاء والثرب فى الصفن ويعرض ذلك من امتداد الصفاق الذى يكون فى الأربيّة كما قلنا.	But if time passes, the rupture in the peritoneum increases until the intestine and omentum descend into the scrotum, and this appears due to the extension of the peritoneum that is in the groin, as we said.
وذلك أنّه يمتدّ الصفاق ثمّ يسترخى ويرم الموضع وينتو، وعلاجه بالكىّ كما قدّمت وصفه.	Because it stretches the peritoneum, then relaxes and fills the place, and protrudes, its treatment is with a bandage, as we have described and explained.
وقد يعالج بالحديد على هذه الصفة وهو أن يضطجع العليل على ظهره بين يديك ثمّ تشقّ موضع الفتق الوارم الناتى شقّا بالعرض على قدر ثلاث أصابع ثمّ تبطّ الصفاقات التى تحت الجلد.	And it may be treated with a cautery iron in this manner: the patient is made to lie on his back between your hands, then the place of the hernial protrusion is incised horizontally for a distance of three fingers, then the peritoneum under the skin is ligated.
حتّى اذا انكشف الصفاق الأبيض الذى يليه فتأخذ مرودا فتضعه على الموضع الناتى من الصفاق وتكبسه الى عمق البطن ثمّ تخيط الموضعين الناتيين على طرف المرود من الصفاق وتلزق بالخياطة أحدهما بالآخر.	Until the white peritoneum that is beneath it becomes visible, then a pad is taken and placed on the protruding place of the peritoneum, and pushed to the depth of the abdomen, then the two protruding places of the peritoneum are stitched together, one to the other, with suturing.
ثمّ تسلّ طرف المرود ولا تقطع الصفاق البتّة ولا تمسّ البيضة ولا غير ذلك كما أعلمتك فى علاج الأدرة المعائيّة ثمّ تعالجه بعلاج الجراحات.	Then, the edge of the pad is slid, and not cutting the remaining peritoneum, nor touching the omentum or anything else, as I have informed you in the treatment of intestinal fistula, then it is treated with the treatment of surgical wounds.
فإذا انقطعت الخيوط نقيتها وجبرت الجرح حتّى يندمل فإنّ الصفاق ينقبض ولا يزيد نتو الفتق.	If the threads are cut, they should be joined and the wound closed so that the peritoneum is not retracted and the omentum does not protrude.
والكىّ أجود فى هذا الموضع لأنّه أقرب الى السلامة.	And the best suture in this location because it is closest to being safe.
الفصل الثامن والستّون.	The eighth chapter, on cauterization.
فى استرخاء جلدة الخصى.	On relaxation of the skin of the prepuce.
كثيرا ما تسترخى جلدة الخصى فى بعض الناس من غير أن تسترخى اللحوم التى فى داخلها ويقبح منظرها، فينبغى لمن رغب فى علاجها أن ينوّم العليل على ظهره.	Often the skin of the prepuce relaxes in some people, without the flesh inside it relaxing, and its appearance becomes distorted, so one who desires to treat it should anoint the patient on his back.
ويقطع جميع الجلد الذى استرخى على الجلد الغليظ ثمّ تجمع الشفتين، وإن شئت أن تخيط أوّلا فضلة الجلد المسترخى بثلاث خياطات او أربع وتستوثق من الخياطة ثمّ تقطع ما بين الخياطات.	He excises all the relaxed skin on the thick skin, then the edges are brought together, and if you wish, you suture first the relaxed skin with three or four sutures, and you reinforce the suture, then you cut between the sutures.
ثمّ تعالجه بعلاج سائر الجراحات الى أن يبرأ وتسقط الخيوط،.	Then treat it like other surgeries until it heals and the threads fall out.
الفصل التاسع والستّون.	The ninth chapter, on cauterization.
فى الإخصاء.	On circumcision.
إنّ الإخصاء فى شريعتنا محرم.	Circumcision in our law is prohibited.
ولهذا كان ينبغى لى أن لا أذكره فى كتابى هذا وإنّما ذكرته لوجهين أحدهما ليكون ذلك فى علم الطبيب اذا سئل عنه وليعلم علاج من اعتراه والوجه الآخر أنّا كثيرا ما نحتاج الى إخصاء بعض الحيوان لمنافعنا.	For this reason, it would be appropriate for me not to mention it in my book, and I only mentioned it for two reasons: one of them is that it should be part of the science of medicine, if asked about it, so that he may know how to treat someone who has been circumcised, and the other reason is that we often need to circumcise some animals for our benefit.
كالحملان والتيوس والقطط ونحو ذلك من الحيوان، فأقول إنّ الإخصاء يكون على ضربين إمّا بالرضّ وإمّا بالشقّ والقطع، فالذى يكون بالرضّ فطريق عمله أنّا نجلس الحيوان فى ماء حارّ حتّى تسترخى أنثياه وتلين وتتدلّى.	Like mules, geese, and cats, and similar animals. So I say that circumcision is of two types: either by cauterization or by incision and cutting. The one that is done by cauterization, the method of operation is that we make the animal sit in hot water until its testicles relax, soften, and droop.
ثمّ ترضّها بيدك حتّى تنحلّ ولا تتبيّن عند اللمس، وأمّا الإخصاء بالشقّ والقطع فينبغى أن تمسك الحيوان وتعصر جلدة خصاه باليد اليسرى ثمّ تربط المعاليق وتشقّ على كلّ بيضة شقّا واحدا.	Then you cauterize them with your hand until they become loose and are not felt upon palpation. As for circumcision by incision and cutting, it is fitting that you hold the animal and constrict the skin of its prepuce with your left hand, then tie up the legs, and make a single incision on each testicle.
حتّى اذا برزت البيضتان فاقطعهما بعد أن تسلخهما ولا تترك عليهما من الصفاقات شيئا غير الصفاق الرقيق الذى يكون على الأوعية، وهذا الضرب من الإخصاء خير من الذى يكون بالرضّ.	If the testicles have come out, then extract them after having skinned them and do not leave on them any of the membranes except the thin membrane that is on the vessels, and this hitting from the privates is better than what happens with the anus.
لأنّ الرضّ ربّما بقّى من الأنثيين شيئا فاشتهى الحيوان الجماع، ثمّ تعالج الجرح حتّى يبرأ،.	For the anus is perhaps one of the two that leaves something from the intestines, so the animal feels pain during copulation, then the wound gets inflamed until it heals.
الفصل السبعون.	The seventy-seventh chapter.
فىعلاج الخنثى.	Treatment of the Hernia.
الخنثى يكون فى الرجال على نوعين أحدهما أنّه يظهر فيما يلى الفضاء او فى جلدة الخصى فيما بين الأنثيين شكل كأنّه فرج امرأة فيه شعر وقد يسيل البول من الذى يكون فى جلدة الخصى.	Hernia in men is of two types, one of them is that it appears below the navel or in the skin of the testicle between the thighs in a shape like the vulva of a woman with hair and may urine flow from what is in the skin of the testicle.
وأمّا فى النساء فنوع واحد ويكون فوق الفرج على العانة كمذاكير الرجل صغار البتّة ناتية الى خارج أحدهما كأنّه قضيب الرجل والاثنان كالأنثيين، وعلاج الأنواع الثلاثة.	And as for women, it is one type and it occurs above the vulva on the thigh like small testicles of a man, hanging outside, one of them like the penis of a man and two like the testicles. Treatment for the three types follows.
النوعان من الرجال والنوع الواحد من النساء ينبغى أن تقطع تلك اللحوم الزائدة حتّى يعفى أثرها ثمّ تعالجها بعلاج سائر الجراحات حتّى يبرأ، وأمّا النوع الثانى من الرجال الذى يخرج منه البول الذى يكون فى جلدة الخصى فليس فيه عمل ولا منه برؤ البتّة.	The two types in men and the one type in women, it is suitable that those extra flesh are cut until their trace disappears, then treated with treatment of other wounds until it heals. As for the second type in men from which urine comes out, which is in the skin of the testicle, there is no operation for it nor benefit from cutting the testicle.
الفصل الحادى والسبعون.	The seventy-first chapter.
فى قطع البظر واللحم الناتى من فروج النساء.	On the excision of the clitoris and the hanging flesh from the vulvas of women.
البظر ربّما زاد فى القدر على الأمر الطبيعىّ حتّى يسمج ويقبح منظره وقد يعظم فى بعض النساء حتّى ينتشر مثل الرجال ويصير الى الجماع.	The clitoris sometimes grows in size to the natural thing until it becomes ugly and its appearance is repulsive, and it may grow in some women until it protrudes like that of men and prevents copulation.
فينبغى أن تمسك فضل البظر بيدك او بصنّارة وتقطعه ولا تمعن فى القطع ولا سيّما فى عمق الأصل لئلّا يعرض نزف دم.	It is suitable that you grasp the excess of the clitoris with your hand or with a clamp and cut it, and do not be afraid of the cutting nor worry about the depth of the cut as long as you do not expose the flow of blood.
ثمّ تعالجه بعلاج الجراحات حتّى يبرأ، وأمّا اللحم النابت فهو لحم ينبت فى فم الرحم حتّى يملأه.	The swelling subsides with the treatment of surgical procedures until it heals, and as for the growing flesh, it is a flesh that grows in the mouth of the womb until it fills it.
وربّما خرج الى خارج على مثال الذنب.	And a piece comes out to the outside like the shape of a tail.
ولذلك يسمّيه بعض الأوائل المرض الذنبىّ فينبغى أن تقطعه كما تقطع البظر سواء وتعالجه حتّى يبرأ،.	And for that, some of the ancients called the disease "tail-like" and it is advisable to cut it as you would cut a carbuncle, and treat it until it heals.
الفصل الثانى والسبعون.	The second suture and the seventieth.
فى علاج الرتقاء.	In the treatment of sutures.
الرتقاء هو أن يكون فرج المرأة غير مثقوب او يكون الثقب صغيرا ويكون إمّا طبيعيّا تولد به وإمّا عرضيّا، فالعرضىّ يكون من علّة قد تقدّمت وهو يكون إمّا من لحم نابت زائد.	The non-perforation is that the vulva of a woman is not perforated or the perforation is small, and it is either natural, in which she was born with it, or it is accidental, the accident being due to a disease that has preceded, and this can be from excess flesh.
او صفاق رقيق او كثيف ويكون إمّا فى عمق الرحم وإمّا فى جوانبه وإمّا فى أعلاه او أسفله ويمنع من الجماع والحبل ومن الولادة وربّما منع الطمث، ومعرفة ذلك تكون بالنظر من القابلة.	Or thin and weak membranes, and it is either in the depth of the womb or on its sides or at its top or bottom, and it prevents intercourse and pregnancy, and sometimes it prevents menstruation, and recognizing that is done by inspection from behind.
إن كان السدّ ظاهرا قريبا فإن لم يكن ظاهرا فتفتّشه بأصابعها او بمرود فإن كان السدّ من صفاق رقيق وكان قريبا من الشفرين فبادر خرقه وهو أن تجعل على الشفرين شبه الرفائد ثمّ ضع إبهاميك من اليدين جميعا.	If the obstruction is visible and near, if it's not visible, then probe it with her fingers or a probe, and if the obstruction is from thin membranes and is near the labia, then hasten to break it, which is that you make something like pessaries on the labia, then put both of your thumbs.
والمرأة على ظهرها منفرجة ساقاها ثمّ تمدّ الشفرين بقوّة حتّى تخرق الصفاق الرقيق وينفتح السدّ ثمّ تأخذ صوفا وتشربه فى الزيت وتضعه على الموضع وتجامع المرأة كلّ يوم لئلّا يلتحم الموضع مرّة أخرى.	And the woman is on her back with her legs spread, then she forcibly stretches the labia until the thin membrane is broken and the obstruction is opened, then she takes a swab, soaks it in oil, and puts it on the place, and the woman has intercourse every day until the place heals again.
فإن كان الصفاق غليظا كثيفا فينبغى أن تشقّه بمبضع عريض تشبه ورقة آس، فإن كان السدّ من لحم نابت فعلّقه بالصنانير واقطعه ولتكن معك أدوية تسكن النزف من غير لذع مثل القاقيا والشيّان واللبان مجموعة ببياض البيض.	For if the membrane is thick and fleshy, it's advisable to make an incision with a curved needle like a willow leaf, and if the obstruction is from excess flesh, then touch it with cauterization and cut it, and have with you medications that stop bleeding without causing pain such as the powder of coagulating agents and the paste of melanthi.
ثمّ تستعمل أنبوبة من رصاص واسعة لئلّا يلتحم الجرح سريعا، تمسكه أيّاما وتستعمل فتيلا من كتان يابس ثمّ تعالج بسائر علاج الاندمال حتّى يبرأ، وقد يعرض فى الرحم نبات لحوم آخر فينبغى أن تقطع على هذه الصفة.	A wide tube of solid brass is used so that the wound heals quickly, it is fastened with silk threads and bandages made of linen cloth are applied, then it is treated with a poultice until it recovers, and there might be a growth of flesh on the cervix which should be cut in this condition.
ما لم يكن ورما سرطانيّا فإنّ الورم السرطانىّ الذى يكون فى الرحم لا يعرض له بالحديد البتّة،.	What does not become an ulcer and what becomes a cancerous one, the uterine cancer that occurs in the womb is not cauterized with iron.
الفصل الثالث والسبعون.	The twenty-seventh chapter.
فى علاج البواسير والثآليل والبثور الحمر التى تعرض فى فروج النساء.	On the treatment of varices, and hemorrhoids, and red boils that appear on the vulvas of women.
أمّا البواسير فهو انتفاخ أفواه العروق حتّى يسيل منها دم كثير دائم فإذا قدمت البواسير صارت ثآليل، وقد ذكرت فى التقسيم أنواعها وعلاماتها ونذكر هاهنا.	As for varices, it is the swelling of the mouths of the veins so that a lot of blood flows from them constantly, and if varices appear, they become hemorrhoids, and we have mentioned their types, signs, and symptoms in the classification, and we will mention them here.
ما يقبل منها العلاج وما لا يقبل العلاج، فأقول إنّ البواسير والثآليل اذا كانت فى عمق الرحم ولم تظهر للحسّ فليس فيها علاج بالحديد وما كان منها فى فم الرحم يقع عليها الحسّ فهى التى تعالج.	What accepts treatment and what does not accept treatment, so I say that varices and hemorrhoids if they are in the depths of the womb and do not appear to the touch, then there is no treatment for them with iron, and what of it is in the mouth of the womb where the hand can reach, it is the one that is treated.
فينبغى أن تدخل المرأة فى بيت بارد ثمّ تمدّ الثآليل بمنقاش او بخرقة خشنة وتقطعها من أصولها ثمّ تذر عليها عند نزف الدم من أحد الذرورات القاطعة للدم من غير تلذيع.	The woman should enter a cold house, then she should push out the hemorrhoids with a stick or a rough cloth, and cut them from their roots, then apply to it when the blood flows from one of the arteries that cut the blood without cauterization.
مثل القاقيا والشيّان واللبان ونحوها ثمّ ترفع رجليها الى الحائط ساعة ثمّ تدليها فى ماء بارد فإن دام النزف فأجلسها فى طبيخ السمّاق وقشور الرمّان والعفص ونحوها ثمّ خذ دقيق الشعير فاعجنه بعسل وخلّ.	Like the oak and the acacia and the labanah and similar things, then she should lift her legs to the wall for an hour, then dip them in cold water, if the bleeding persists, then sit her in a bath of sumac and citric acid and alum and similar things, then take some fine barley flour and mix it with honey and vinegar.
وضمّد به على ظهرها فإن انقطع الدم وإلّا فالزم الصلب المحاجم والثديين من غير شرط، ثمّ خذ صوفة فاغمسها فى عصارة الطراثيث او عصارة لسان الحمل او عصارة أغصان العلّيق مع شراب عفص وتلزم الموضع.	And apply it to her back, if the bleeding stops, otherwise, apply the plaster that sticks to the chest and breasts without heat, then take a wick and dip it in the juice of the turathith or the juice of the pomegranate or the juice of the willow branches with honey and apply it to the affected area.
فإذا سكن الورم فعالج الموضع بالمرهم حتّى يبرأ، وأمّا البثر الأحمر فهو يشبه رؤوس الحاشا خشن المنظر فينبغى أن تقطع ما ظهر منه على حسب ما ذكرت فى الثآليل سواء وتعالجه حتّى يبرأ،.	If the inflamed tumor settles in its place by itself until it forms an abscess, then it will heal, and as for the red tumor, it resembles the heads of the alopecia areata rough to the touch, so it is likely that what appears from it should be cut according to what I mentioned in The Surgical Treatise and its management until it heals.
الفصل الرابع والسبعون.	The Fourth and Seventy Partition.
فى بطّ الخراج الذى يعرض فى الرحم.	On the treatment of the tumor that appears in the uterus.
قد يعرض فى الرحم أنواع كثيرة من الأورام كالسرطان والورم المتحجّر والقروح والدبيلة والآكلة والنواصير والبواسير والشقاق والثآليل والورم الحارّ وقد ذكرت جميع هذه الأمراض وأنواعها وعلاماتها فى التقسيم.	Many types of tumors may appear in the womb, such as cancer, the calcified tumor, ulcers, cysts, aphtha, warts, condylomas, and hot tumors, and I have mentioned all these diseases and their types and symptoms in The Surgical Treatise.
فينبغى أن نذكر فى هذه المقالة الورم الحارّ الذى يعرض فى الرحم اذا كان من الأورام التى تجمع مدّة كيف يكون بطّها بالحديد، فينبغى أن تنظر فإن كان وجع الورم فى ابتدائه حادّا مع ضربان والتهاب وحمّى.	It is likely that we should mention in this chapter the hot tumor that appears in the womb, if it is one of the tumors that collect pus, how its treatment is done with a cauterizing iron, it is likely that you examine, if at the beginning of the tumor there is severe pain and inflammation and heat.
ورأيته أحمر إن وقع عليه الحسّ فلا تعجل ببطّه وعالجه بما يعين على النضج حتّى اذا سكنت هذه الأعراض فحينئذ ينبغى أن تجلس المرأة على كرسىّ له مقعدان وتستند على ظهرها.	And if you touch it and find it is red, do not hasten to treat it, but manage it with what brings about the maturation until when these symptoms subside, then it is likely that the woman should sit on a seat for it, with two pillows, and lean on her back.
وتجمع رجليها الى ناحية أسفل البطن وتكون فخذاها منفرجتين وتصير ذراعيها تحت ركبتيها وتربطهما برباط يصلح.	And she gathers her legs to the area below the navel, and her thighs are relaxed, and she puts her arms under her armpits, and ties them with a tight bandage.
لذلك ثمّ تجلس القابلة من الجانب الأيمن وتستعمل الآلة التى يفتح بها فم الرحم التى تأتى صورتها فيما بعد، وينبغى اذا أردت استعمال هذه الآلة أن تقدّر بمرود عمق رحم المرأة لئلّا يكون الذى يدخل من الآلة أكثر من عمق الرحم.	Then the midwife sits on the right side and uses the instrument that opens the mouth of the womb, whose image will be shown later, and it is likely that if you intend to use this instrument, you should estimate the depth of the woman's womb so that what enters from the instrument is not more than the depth of the womb.
فيؤذى العليلة فإن كانت الآلة أكثر من العمق فينبغى أن توضع رفائد على شفة عنق الرحم لتمنع دخول الآلة كلّها فى عمق الرحم وينبغى أن تصير اللولب الذى يجرى فى الآلة من الجانب الأعلى.	When the dilator is introduced, if it were deeper than the cervix, it should be propped up with pads on the nape of the neck to prevent the instrument from going too deep into the uterus and it is advisable to make the ligature that is applied at the top.
وأنت تمسك الآلة ويدير الخادم اللولب حتّى يفتح عنق الرحم، فإذا ظهر الخراج ولمس باليد وكان ليّنا رقيقا فينبغى أن تشقّه عند رأسه بمبضع عريض فإذا استفرغت المدّة كلّها.	And you should hold the instrument and the servant will manipulate the ligature until it opens the cervix, and if the abscess appears and is touched by the hand and was found to be thin and friable, it would be advisable to make an incision at its head with a crooked needle, so that when the entire abscess has been evacuated.
فينبغى أن تصير فى الجرح فتيلة ليّنة مغموسة فى دهن الورد او زيت أخضر فيه بعض القبض وتصير الفتيلة خارجا من الشقّ فى عنق الرحم ويصيّر من خارج على الرحم وعلى العانة صوف نقىّ مغموس فى ماء قد غلى فيه خبّازى.	It would be advisable to put in the wound a thin thread soaked in rose fat or green oil with some astringent, and the thread should come out of the incision in the cervix and be tied from the outside on the uterus and on the vulva, cotton soaked in water that has had fenugreek decoction in it.
ثمّ تعالج بعد يومين بالمرهم الذى يصلح لذلك حتّى يبرأ.	Then dress it with a salve that is suitable for it after two days, until it heals.
وقد يغسل الرحم والجرح بأن يحقن بالماء والعسل ثمّ بماء قد غلى فيه أصل السوس او زراوند طويل ثمّ تعود الى المرهم، فإن كان الخراج متواريا داخلا فى الرحم.	And the uterus and the wound may be washed with water and honey, then with water that has had the root of iris or round birthwort decocted in it, then returned to the salve, if the abscess is variable and going inside the uterus.
فينبغى أن تمتنع من علاجه بالحديد بل يعالج بما ذكرنا فى التقسيم.	It would be advisable to abstain from treating it with iron, but rather treat it with what we have mentioned in the incision.
الفصل الخامس والسبعون.	The Fifth and Seventy-First Chapter.
فى تعليم القوابل كيف يعالجن الأجنّة الأحياء اذا خرجوا على غير الشكل الطبيعىّ.	On the treatment of umbilical cords, how to treat living fetuses if they come out in an unnatural shape.
ينبغى للقابلة أن تعرف أوّلا شكل الولادة الطبيعيّة فمن علاماتها اذا رأيت المرأة تتزحّر الى أسفل وتشتاق أن تشتمّ الهواء ويهون عليها ما هى عليه من النفاس.	It is advisable for the midwife to know first the natural shape of childbirth, so among its signs, if you see the woman leaning forward and panting, and her wanting to sniff the air and it being easy for her to do what she is doing.
ويسرع خروج الجنين فاعلم أنّ هذه الولادة تكون على الشكل الطبيعىّ ويكون خروجه على رأسه والمشيمة معه او معلّقة من سرّته، فإذا رأيت هذه العلامات فينبغى أن تعصر بطنها لكيما يخرج الجنين بسرعة.	And the fetus comes out quickly, so know that this birth is in its natural shape and it comes out head first and the placenta with it or hanging from its navel, so if you see these signs, it would be advisable to massage her abdomen so that the fetus comes out quickly.
فإنّه اذا نزل على رأسه نزلت المشيمة معه وتنظّف من تلك الفضول تنظيفا حسنا، وما خلا هذه الولادة فهى غير طبيعيّة مذمومة لأنّه قد يخرج الجنين على رجليه ويخرج يديه قبل رأسه ورجليه.	For if it descends upon its head, the amnion descends with it and clears away from those superfluities a gentle clearing, and what is apart from this birth is an unnatural one, abhorrent because the fetus may come out on its feet and bring out its hands before its head and feet.
ويده الواحدة او رجله الواحدة او يخرج رأسه ويده او يخرج منطويا وربّما انقلب على قفاه ونحو ذلك من الأشكال المذمومة، فينبغى للقابلة أن تكون حاذقة لطيفة بهذه الأشياء كلّها وتحذر الزلل والخطاء.	And it may bring out one of its sides or one of its feet, or it may come out with its head and hand, or it may come out coiled and perhaps turn over on to its buttocks and such like unnatural forms, hence it is proper for the midwife to be gentle and careful with all these things and beware of slips and mistakes.
وأنا مبيّن كلّ شكل منها وكيف الحيلة فيه لتستدلّ بذلك وتقف عليه، اذا خرج الجنين على رأسه الخروج الطبيعىّ واشتدّ على المرأة ذلك وعسر عليها الطلق ورأيت قوّتها قد ضعفت فأجلسها على كرسىّ وأمر نساء بضبطها.	And I will show you every form of it and how the trick is in it so that you may infer from it and stop at it, if the fetus comes out on its head the natural delivery and it becomes difficult for the woman and delivery becomes hard for her and you see her strength has weakened then you should seat her on a birth chair and order women to hold her.
وكمّد رحمها بالحلبة المطبوخة وبالأدهان الرطبة، ثمّ تدخل القابلة بين أصابعها مبضعا صغيرا فتشقّ به المشيمة او تشقّها بظفرها حتّى يسيل ما فيها من الرطوبة وتعصر بطن المرأة حتّى ينزل الجنين.	And compress her womb with the cooked halba and the soaked ahdhan, then the midwife inserts her fingers making a small separation, piercing the amnion with it or piercing it with her nail until what is in it of the fluid flows out and the woman's belly becomes constricted until the fetus comes out.
فإن لم ينزل فينبغى أن تحقن المرأة بلعاب الحلبة مع دهن الشيرج ثمّ تأمرها بعد الحقنة أن تتزحّر وتعطّسها بالكندس وتمسك فمها وأنفها فإنّ الجنين يخرج من ساعته، فإن خرجت يدا الجنين أوّلا فينبغى أن تردّهما برفق قليلا قليلا.	For if it does not come out, it is proper to make the woman soak in the halba with tallow of the sherij, then after the soaking, she should shake and rub her with the kundas and hold her mouth and nose, for the fetus comes out from its bosom, if the hands of the fetus came out first, it is proper to push them back with a gentle push little by little.
فإن لم تتأتّا للدخول فضع المرأة على منبر وترفع رجليها الى فوق ثمّ تهزّ المنبر على الأرض والمرأة تمسك كيلا تقع عند الهزّ فإن لم تدخل اليدان ومات الجنين فاقطعهما واجذب باقى الجنين.	For if they did not come in, the woman should be placed on a birth stool and her legs are raised upwards, then the stool is shaken on the ground while the woman holds onto it so as not to fall when shaking, if the hands do not enter and the fetus dies, cut them off and pull out the rest of the fetus.
او اربط يديه بخرقة واجذبهما باعتدال فإنّه يخرج، خروج الجنين على رجليه، اذا خرج الجنين على رجليه فينبغى أن تدفعهما الى فوق ثمّ تحوّل الجنين قليلا قليلا حتّى تسوّيه ثمّ تأخذ إحدى رجليه فتمدّها قليلا قليلا.	If you grasp both of his hips with a towel and pull them gently, then he will come out, the baby comes out on its buttocks, if the baby comes out on its buttocks, you should push them upwards, then turn the baby slightly, slightly until it is in an upright position, then take one of its hips and stretch it slightly, slightly.
فإذا خرجتا الى الفخذين فأمرها أن تتزّحر وعطّسها بالكندس فإنّه يخرج، فإن لم يخرج بما وصفنا وإلّا فردّ الجنين قليلا قليلا حتّى تصيره على الشكل الطبيعىّ فإنّه يخرج حينئذ خروجا سلسا، فإن امتنع بما وصفنا كلّه.	If the hips come out to the thighs, order her to take a deep breath and push with the vertebrae, then it will come out. If it does not come out as we described, or else, turn the baby slightly, slightly until it is in the natural position, then it will come out at that time with an easy delivery.
فخذ من لعاب الخطمّى ولعاب الحلبة ودهن الشيرج وصمغا محلولا واضرب الجميع فى الهاون ضربا جيّدا ثمّ اطل به فرج المرأة وأسفل بطنها ثمّ أجلسها فى ماء فاتر حتّى يبلغ الشراسيف.	Take the saliva of the colocynth and the saliva of the lupin, and the fat of the cervelat, and two boiled brains, and mix all of them well in a mortar, then rub it on the woman's vulva and lower abdomen, then sit her in hot water until the afterbirth comes out.
فإذا رأيت أنّه قد لان أسفلها فاصنع لها شيافة من مرّ وتتحمّلها فإذا أمسكت الشيافة ساعة فأجلسها على الكرسىّ ثمّ عطّسها وسدّ فمها وأنفها واعصر أسفل بطنها عصرا رقيقا فإنّ الجنين يخرج من ساعته، خروج الجنين على ركبتيه ويديه،.	If you see that it has stuck to the bottom, make her an enema from myrrh and have her receive it. If she retains the enema for an hour, then sit her on a chair, then push on her pubic area and constrict her mouth and nose and press gently below her navel, for the baby will come out in one hour, the baby comes out on its knees and hands.
إذا خرج على هذه الصفة فاحتل فى إدخال يديه قليلا قليلا ثمّ تستلقى المرأة على قفاه وتدلّى رخليها الى أسفل وهى مضطجعة على سرير وتضمّ يديها ثمّ اعصر فوق بطنها قليلا قليلا.	If it comes out in this manner, then gently grasp the insertion of its hands slightly, slightly. Then the woman should lie on her back and lower her legs downwards while being bent over a bed, and clench her hands, then press above her navel slightly, slightly.
ثمّ أخرج ما تحت رجليها من الوسائد حتّى تكون منصوبة الأسفل فإن لم يخرج الجنين فخذ رجليها جميعا فحرّكهما حركة شديدة ثمّ اعصر فوق الشراسيف قليلا قليلا حتّى يصعد الجنين الى فوق ثمّ تدخل القابلة يدها وتسوّى الجنين قليلا قليلا.	Then remove the pads that are under her legs until they are in an upright position at the bottom. If the baby does not come out, then take both of its legs and shake them violently, then press above the afterbirth slightly, slightly until the baby moves upwards. Then insert the index finger and straighten the baby slightly, slightly.
وأمر المرأة أن تتزحّر حتّى يخرج الجنين، خروج الجنين معترضا مدلّيا لإحدى يديه، احتل فى ردّ يده فإن لم تقدر على ردّها فأقم المرأة واجعلها تمشى فإن لم تقدر على المشى فتضطجع على.	And order the woman to push so that the fetus comes out, the fetus coming out with one of its hands extended, if it is caught in her hand then let her pull it back, and if she cannot pull it back then make the woman stand up and make her walk around, and if she cannot walk around then let her lie down.
سريرها وهزّ ساقيها هزّا شديدا ثمّ استعمل اللطوخ الذى وصفت من اللعابات فإن أخذها الطلق فأجلسها على كرسىّ ثمّ عالج فى ردّ اليد وتسوية الجنين على الشكل الطبيعىّ وعطّس المرأة وأمرها أن تتزحّر حتّى يخرج،.	Shake her and shake her legs severely, then use the aforementioned poultice of the mentioned medications, if the pains took her then make her sit on a chair, then deal with the hand's return and the fetus' adjustment to its natural position, and comfort the woman and order her to push until it comes out.
خروج الجنين على قفاه باسطا يديه ويكون وجهه الى ظهر أمّه، ينبغى أن تمسك القابلة يد الجنين ثمّ تحوّله قليلا قليلا وتسوّيه برفق فإذا استوى فاحمل على قبلها ما وصفنا من الدهن واللعابات.	The fetus comes out with its hands down and its face towards its mother's back, it is desirable that the midwife grabs the hand of the fetus then gently turns it a little by little and adjusts it with gentleness, and if it becomes adjusted then put on her chest what we described from the fat and the liniments.
ثمّ مرها أن تتحرّك قليلا قليلا فإذا فعلت ذلك فأجلسها على الكرسىّ وأمرها أن تميل الى الجانب الأيمن ثمّ مرها أن تتزحّر وتعطّسها بالكندس فإنّه يخرج، خروج الجنين منتصبا على جنب.	Then order her to move a little by little, and if she does that then make her sit on the chair, and order her to lean towards the right side, then order her to push and rub her with the rounded (instrument), for it will come out, the fetus coming out standing on its side.
إذا نزل الى فم الرحم على هذه الصفة مع المشيمة فشقّ المشيمة بظفرك حتّى تتفرّغ من الرطوبة فإن تعلّقت على وجه الجنين وعنقه فاقطعه من السرّة لئلّا يحتنق فيموت ثمّ ادفع الجنين الى داخل حتّى تصيره على ما ينبغى.	If it descends to the mouth of the womb in this condition with the membrane, then cut the membrane with your nail until it is freed from the humidity, and if it stuck to the face of the fetus and its neck, then cut it from the navel so that it does not choke and die, then push the fetus inside until you put it in what is suitable.
وأمر المرأة أن تتزّحر مرّات فإنّه يخرج خروجا سهلا، خروج التوأمين او أجنّة كثيرة، اعلم أنّ التوأمين كثيرا ما يولدون وقد تولد ثلاثة او أربعة ويعيشون إلّا أنّ ذلك فى الندرة وأمّا الخمسة فهو شىء خارج عن الطبيعة لا يعيشون البتّة.	And order the woman to push repeatedly for it will come out easily, the coming out of twins or many fetuses. Know that twins often are born and three or four may be born and live, but that is rare, and as for five, it is something outside of nature and they do not live at all.
وتحيط بهم وإن كثروا مشيمة واحدة ويفترقون بصفاق حاجز بينهم مربوط فى سرّة كلّ واحد منهم، وقد تخرج كما يخرج الجنين الواحد خروجا طبيعيّا سهلا ويخرجون خروجا مذموما كما وصفنا.	They are surrounded by a single peritoneal membrane and the omentum is tied between them, bound at the navel of each one of them, and it comes out just as a single fetus comes out in a natural easy birth, and they come out in a difficult birth as we described.
فإن عسر بعضهم عند الولادة وصار الى ما قلنا من الأشكال غير الطبيعيّة فعالجه كما وصفنا، ولتكن القابلة لطيفة وتفعل ما تفعله برفق وتوان وتتحيّل على كلّ شكل بما يتهيّأ لها من الحيلة المؤدّية الى السلامة،.	For if the birth is difficult for some of them and it turns into what we said from unnatural forms, then it acts accordingly as we described, and let the placenta be gentle and act what it acts with gentleness and harmony, and adapt to every shape with the cunning that leads to safety.
ذكر ما يتصوّر فى الرحم من الأجنّة فيسقطون، قد يتصوّر فى الرحم واحد واثنان وثلاثة وأربعة وخمسة وستّة وسبعة وأكثر من عشرة وقد صحّ عندى أنّ امرأة أسقطت سبعة وأخرى خمسة عشر كلّهم متصوّرين ذلك.	It is mentioned that what is formed in the womb of the fetuses, they are miscarried, one or two or three or four or five or six or seven and more than ten, and it is true that a woman miscarried seven and another fifteen, all of them were formed.
بتقدير العزيز العليم، فهذا كلّه ينبغى أن يكون فى علم القابلة فربّما يقع اليها مثل ذلك يوما ما فتقابله بما ينبغى،.	In the name of God, the exalted and all-knowing, this is all relevant to the knowledge of midwifery so that a woman may be prepared for whatever might happen to her on any given day, and she can face it with what is proper.
الفصل السادس والسبعون.	The sixth and seventieth chapter.
فى إخراج الجنين الميّت.	On the delivery of a dead fetus.
اذا عالجت الجنين الميّت بما ذكرته فى التقسيم من العلاج فلم يخرج واضطرّك الأمر الى العمل باليد فينبغى أن تنظر فإن كانت المرأة صحيحة القوّة وليس بها شىء من الأعراض التى يخاف عليها منها التلف فينبغى أن تستلقى المرأة على سرير على ظهرها.	If you have treated the dead fetus with what I mentioned in the treatment and it did not come out, and the situation forced you to act with your hand, then it is proper that you look, if the woman is strong and healthy and does not have any of the aforementioned symptoms that would make her vulnerable to infection, it is proper that the woman lies on a bed on her back.
ويكون رأسها مائلا الى أسفل وساقاها مرتفعتين وخادم يضبطها من كلتى الجهتين او تربط الى السرير لئلّا ينجذب جسدها عند مدّ الجنين.	And her head would be tilted downwards and her legs raised and a servant would hold them from both sides or tie them to the bed so that her body does not jerk when the fetus is pulled.
ثمّ يرطب فم رحمها بالأدهان الرطبة مع لعاب الخطمّى والحلبة وبزر الكتان ثمّ تدهن القابلة يدها بهذه الأدهان واللعابات ثمّ تدخلها فى الرحم برفق ثمّ تطلب بها مكانا تغرز فيه الصنّارات من الجنين، والمواضع الموافقة لذلك،.	Then the mouth of her womb is rubbed with the softened tar and the saliva of the orach and the halbe and the seeds of the katam, then the midwife's hands are greased with these softeners and salivas, then she gently inserts them into the womb and searches for a place to insert the hooks of the fetus, and the suitable instruments for that.
انظر فإن كان الجنين متأتّيا أن ينزل على رأسه فتغرز الصنّارات فى عينيه او فى قفاه او فى فمه او فى حنكه او تحت لحيته او ترقوته او فى المواضع القريبة من الأضلاع او تحت الشراسيف.	If the fetus is presented in a way that it comes out head first, then the midwives insert their fingers into its eyes or into its mouth or into its nostrils or beneath its arm or on the sides of its chest or in the nearby areas of its shoulders or beneath its armpits.
وأمّا إن كان نزوله على رجليه ففى العانة والأضلاع الوسطى، وينبغى أن تمسك الصنّارة باليد اليمنى وتصير عطفها فيما بين أصابع اليد اليسرى وتدخل اليد برفق وتغرز صنّارة فى بعض تلك المواضع التى ذكرنا.	And if it comes out feet first, then in the groin and middle shoulders. It is required that the midwife holds the instrument with her right hand and places its handle between the fingers of her left hand, and she inserts her hand gently and thrusts the instrument into one of those places we mentioned.
حتّى تصل الى شىء فارغ ثمّ تغرز قبالتها صنّارة أخرى او ثالثة إن احتجت ليكون الجذب متساويا ولا يميل الى جهة ثمّ تمدّ مدّا مستويا ولا يكون المدّ على استقامة فقط بل يحرّك الى كلّ جهة.	Until she reaches an empty space, then she inserts another instrument or a third if she needs it to be even traction and not leaning to one side, then she stretches a balanced stretch and the stretching is not only in a straight line but she moves it to every direction.
ليسهل خروجه كما يصنع بالضرس عند قلعه وينبغى فيما بين ذلك أن يرخى المدّ فإن احتبس منه جهة فينبغى أن تدهن القابلة بعض الأصابع بالدهن وتدخلها من جهة لتدير بها ما احتبس فإن خرج بعض الجنين فتنقل الصنانير الى مواضع أخر.	To ease its exit, as one does with a stubborn (bone) at its joint, and it is required that the traction be relaxed, for if one part of it gets stuck, then it is required that the adjacent fingers be greased with oil and inserted from one side to manipulate the stuck part, and if some of the fetus has come out, then the instruments are moved to other positions.
هى أرفع قليلا تفعل هذا حتّى يخرج الجنين كلّه، فإن خرجت يد قبل غيرها ولم يمكن ردّها لانضغاطها فينبغى أن تلف عليها خرقة ثمّ تجذبها حتّى اذا خرجت كلّها قطعتها.	She raises it a little to do this until the whole fetus comes out, and if one hand came out before the other and it was not possible to push it back due to its tightness, then a cloth is wrapped around it and pulled until when it all comes out, it is cut.
إمّا فى مفصل الكفّ او فى المرفق وهكذا ينبغى أن تفعل فى اليد الأخرى وفى الرجلين، فإن كان رأس الجنين كبيرا وعرض له ضغط فى الخروج او كان فى رأسه ماء مجتمع فينبغى أن تدخل فيما بين الأصابع مبضعا شوكيّة.	Either at the elbow joint or at the shoulder, and this is how it should be done for the other hand and the feet. And if the head of the fetus is large and has pressure in coming out, or there is accumulated mucus in its head, then a finger should be inserted between the fingers to feel for it.
وتشقّ بها الرأس فيخرج الماء او تشدخه بالآلة التى تسمّى المشداخ التى تأتى صورتها مع صور سائر الآلات فىالباب الذىبعد هذا.	And she makes an incision in the head to let out the mucus or she pulls it out with the instrument called the Misdach, whose image is shown along with other instruments in the following chapter.
كذلك تفعل إن كان الجنين عظيم الرأس بالطبع فينبغى أن تشقّ الجمجمة او ترضّها بالمشداخ كما قلنا ثمّ تخرج العظام بالكلاليب، فإن خرج الرأس وانضغط عند الترقوة فليشقّ حتّى تنصبّ الرطوبة التى فى الصدر.	Thus, if the fetus has a large head by nature, it is likely that the skull will be split or crushed with forceps, as we have said, then the bones will be extracted with instruments, and if the head gets stuck at the time of birth and presses against the pelvis, it should be split so that the fetus can be dropped to the ground.
فإنّه ينضمّ الصدر حينئذ فإن لم ينضمّ الصدر ولم يتأتّى للخروج فاقطع قطعا على ما يمكنك، فإن كان أسفل البطن وارما او كان به حبن فينبغى أن تبطّه حتّى تسيل الرطوبة منه.	For if the chest is joined at that time, then if the chest does not join and it is not ready to come out, cut a cut as much as you can, and if it is below the navel or has a rope-like umbilical cord, it is likely that it should be pulled until the fetus is slipped out.
فإن كان الجنين على رجليه فإنّ جذبه سهل وتسويته الى فم الرحم هين، فإن انضغط عند البطن او الصدر فينبغى أن تجذبه بخرقة قد لففتها على يدك وتشقّ البطن او الصدر حتّى يسيل ما فيهما.	For if the fetus is on its legs, then pulling it is easy and straightening it to the mouth of the womb is simple, but if it gets stuck at the abdomen or chest, it is likely that you should pull it with a cloth that you have wrapped around your hand and split the abdomen or chest until what is in them spills out.
فإن انتزعت سائر الأعضاء وارتجع الرأس واحتبس فلتدخل القابلة اليد اليسرى فإن كان فم الرحم مفتوحا فتدخل اليد فى عنق الرحم وتطلب بها الرأس وتجذبه بالأصابع الى فم الرحم ثمّ تدخل فيه صنّارة او صنّارتين وتجذبه بها،.	For if you have extracted the rest of the organs and returned the head and it got stuck, then you should insert the left hand into the cavity, and if the mouth of the womb is open, then you should insert the hand into the neck of the womb and search for the head with it, and pull it with the fingers to the mouth of the womb, then you should insert a instrument or two instruments and pull it with them.
فإن كان فم الرحم قد انضمّ لورم حارّ عرض له فلا ينبغى أن تعنف عليه بل ينبغى حينئذ استعمال صبّ الأشياء الرطبة الدسمة وتستعمل الأضمدة وتجلس فى المياه التى ترخى وترطب.	For if the mouth of the womb has been closed due to a hot tumor that has come over it, then it is not suitable to force it, but rather at that time using a poultice of fatty and greasy materials, and applying plasters, and sitting in warm and humid waters.
وأمّا إن كان الجنين على جنبه فإن أمكن أن يسوى فليستعمل ما ذكرنا فى الجنين الحىّ فإن لم يمكن ذلك فليقطع قطعا ويخرج، وينبغى أن لا تترك شيئا من المشيمة داخلا البتّة، فإذا فرغت من علاجك فاستعمل ما ذكرنا من العلاج فى الأورام الحارّة التى تعرض فى الأرحام.	And if the fetus is on its side, it is possible that it can be straightened, so you should use what we mentioned for the living fetus, and if that is not possible, then a cut should be made and it should be extracted, and it is suitable that nothing from the placenta remains inside the womb, so if it has been emptied of its contents through your treatment, then use what we mentioned in terms of treatment for the hot organs that come out in the womb.
فإن عرض نزف دم فلتنزل فى المياه القابضة وتستعمل سائر العلاج، ولقد شاهدت امرأة كانت قد حبلت فمات الجنين فى جوفها ثمّ حبلت عليه مرّة أخرى.	For if the show of hemorrhage of blood is poured into the sharp waters and other treatments are used, I have seen a woman who had become pregnant with a fetus in her womb and then became pregnant again.
ثمّ مات الجنين الآخر أيضا فعرض لها بعد زمان طويل ورم فى ملتمسها وانتفخ حتّى انفتح وجعل يمدّ القيح فدعيت الى علاجها فعالجتها زمانا طويلا فلم ينختم الجرح فوضعت عليه من بعض المراهم القويّة الجذب.	Then the other fetus also died, so it remained for a long time and putrefied in her womb, and became swollen until it opened and made her emit pus, so I was called to treat her, and I treated her for a long time, but the wound did not heal, so I applied to it some of the strong pulling ointments.
فخرج من الموضع عظم ثمّ مضى لها أيّام فخرج عظم آخر فعجبت من ذلك اذ البطن موضع لا عظم فيه فقدّرت أنّها من عظام الجنين الميّت ففتشّت الجرح فأخرجت منه عظاما كثيرة من عظام رأس الجنين.	Then a bone came out from the spot, and days passed for her, then another bone came out, so I was surprised by that because the belly is a place with no bones in it, so I suspected that they were the bones of the dead fetus, so I probed the wound and extracted from it many bones, which were the bones of the fetus's skull.
فلم أزل أتبع ذلك حتّى أخرجت منها عظاما كثيرة والمرأة فى أفضل أحوالها ولقد عاشت كذلك زمانا يمدّ من الموضع قيح يسير وإنّما آتيت هاهنا هذه النادرة.	So I did not stop following that until I extracted many bones from her, and the woman was in the best of conditions, and she lived for a time with pus continually discharging from the spot, and it is only this rare case that I have mentioned.
لأنّ فيها علما ومعونة لما يحاوله الطبيب الصانع بيده من العلاج،.	For it contains a sign and an aid for what the ingenious physician attempts with his hand in treatments.
الفصل السابع والسبعون.	The seventh chapter, on cauterization.
فيه صور الآلات التى يحتاج اليها فى إخراج الجنين.	It contains the illustrations of the instruments which are needed for extracting the fetus.
صورة لولب يفتح به فم الرحم:.	Illustration of a dilator to open the mouth of the womb:
هذا الملزم الذى تسوى به الكتب سواء له لولبان فى طرفى الخشبتين إلّا أن هذا اللولب ينبغى أن يكون ألطف من الملزم وأن يكون إمّا من آبنوس وإمّا من خشب البقس ويكون عرض كلّ خشبة فى ثخن أصبعين.	This is the dilator with which the cervixes are widened, it has on each of the two rods a dilator, but this dilator must be softer than the dilator, and it must be either of ivory or of boxwood, and each rod is as thick as a finger.
وحرفهما نحو أصبع وطولهما شبر ونصف وفى وسط الخشبتين رائدان من جنس الخشبة نفسها قد أوثقتا فيهما يكون طولهما نصف شبر او أكثر قليلا وعرضهما نحو أصبعين او أكثر قليلا وهذان الرائدان.	And its two ends are shaped like a finger and its length is a span and a half, and in the middle of the two rods there are two arms made of the same material as the rods, which have been attached to them, their length being half a span or slightly more, and their width being about two fingers or slightly more, and these two arms.
هما اللذان يدخلان فى فم الرحم ليفتح بهما عند إدارتك اللولبين، صورة آلة أخرى لمثل ذلك ألطف وأخفّ:.	Both of them enter the mouth of the anus to open it when you are going to inspect the vulva, a picture of another device for something similar, lighter and less thick.
تصنع من خشب الآبنوس او البقس على شكل الكلاليب إلّا أنّ لها فى طرفها رائدان كما ترى طول كلّ رائد منهما نحو شبر وعرضهما أصبعان فإذا أردت فتح الرحم بها.	It is made from the wood of the abanus or buqas, in the shape of a kulalib, except that it has two handles on its side, as you see, each handle being a digit long and a digit wide, so if you want to open the womb with it.
فأجلس المرأة على سرير مدلاة رجليها منفرجة ما بين ساقيها ثمّ أدخل هذين الرائدين ضمومين فى فم الرحم وأنت ماسك طرف الآلة أسفل بين فخذيها ثمّ افتح يدك بالآلة كما تفعل بالكلاليب سواء على قدر ما تريد من فتح الرحم.	The woman sits on a bed, her legs spread apart, what is between her thighs, then these two handles are inserted, together, into the mouth of the womb and you hold the lower part of the device between your thighs, then you open with the device as you do with the kulalib, according to how much you want to open the womb.
حتّى تصنع القابلة ما تريد، صورة لولب آخر ذكره الأوائل:.	It is made to prepare the cauterization device as desired, a picture of another vein mentioned by the ancients:.
صورة المدفع الذى يدفع به الجنين:.	A picture of the expulsive device that expels the fetus:.
صورة المشداخ الذى يشدخ به رأس الجنين:.	A picture of the elevator that elevates the head of the fetus:
يشبه المقصّ له أسنان فى الطرف كما ترى وقد يصنع مستطيلا كالكلاليب على هذه الصورة كما ترى له أسنان كأسنان المنشار تقطع به وترضّ:.	The forceps has teeth at the end, as you see, and it is made flat like a kulalib, of this shape, as you see, with teeth like the teeth of scissors to cut and crush.
صورة مدفع أيضا:.	A picture of another expulsive device:.
صورة صنّارة:.	A picture of a lancet:.
هذه الصنّارة يكون فيها غلظ قليلا لئلا تنكسر عند جذب الجنين بها، صورة صنّارة ذات الشوكتين:.	This lancet is slightly thick so it does not break when pulling the fetus with it, a picture of a two-pronged lancet:.
صورة مبضعين عريضين لقطع الجنين:.	A picture of two hooked forceps for cutting the fetus:.
هذه الآلات كلّها كلّما كثرت أنواعها وكانت معدّة عند الصانع كان أسرع لعمله وأرفع عند الناس لقدره فلا تستحقر منها آلة أن تكون عندك معدّة فلا بدّ من الحاجة اليها،.	These devices, each having many types and being prepared by the craftsman, were quicker for his work and more esteemed among people for their quality, so do not belittle any device that is prepared for you, for there is no need for the necessity of it.
الفصل الثامن والسبعون.	The 81st chapter.
فى إخراج المشيمة.	On extracting the cataract.
اذا احتبست المشيمة بعد النفاس فينبغى أن تأمر العليلة أن تمسك نفسها ثمّ تعطّسها بالكندس وتشدّ يدك على فمها ومنخريها فإن خرجت بهذا وإلا فخذ قدرا.	If the cataract has stuck after the operation, it is likely that the iris will adhere to it, so you should hold it with forceps and pull on your hand over her mouth and nostrils, if it comes out with this, otherwise take a ligature.
واثقب فى الغطاء ثقبة وضع فيها الحشائش المفتّحة لفم الرحم مثل الفودنج والسذاب والشبت والبابونج والشيح والسليخة والقنطوريون كلّ هذه الأدوية او بعضها واغمرها بالماء واحملها على النار ثمّ تضع أنبوب فضّة على ثقب غطاء القدر والطرف الآخر فى فم الرحم.	Make a perforation in the cover and put in it opened medicaments like borax, and Sodae, and plantain, and betony, and chehound, and siliqua, and cydonium, all these medicaments or some of them, and immerse them in water, and load them on the nostrils, then a silver pipe is put on the perforation of the cover of the pot and the other end in the mouth.
وتمسكه حتّى يصل البخار الى قعر الرحم ثمّ تعطّس كما قلنا فإنّ المشيمة تخرج بسرعة، فإن بقيت بعد هذا العلاج ولم تخرج فأمر القابلة أن تغمس يدها اليسرى فى دهن شيرج او لعاب الخطمّى.	And close it until the vapor reaches the bottom of the womb, then hold as we said, for the cataract will come out quickly, if after this treatment it has not come out and still remains, the midwife should insert her left hand into the butter of the cervix or the saliva of the donkey.
ثمّ تدخلها فى القبل وتفتّش بها المشيمة فإذا أصابتها قبضت عليها ومدّتها قليلا قليلا حتّى تخرجها، فإن كانت ملتصقة فى عمق الرحم فأدخل اليد على ما وصفنا حتّى اذا ما وجدت المشيمة فاجذبها قليلا قليلا على الإشفاق.	Then she inserts it in the perineum and feels for the cataract with it, if she hits it, she grasps it and pulls a little, a little, until she extracts it, if it was adhering deep within the womb, the hand is inserted as described until when she finds the cataract, she pulls it gently, gently towards the labia.
لئلّا تسقط الرحم عند الجذب الشديد بل ينبغى أن تنقل برفق الى الجوانب يمنة ويسرة ثمّ تزاد فى كميّة الجذب فإنّها تجيب حينئذ وتتخلّص من الالتصاق، فإن كان فم الرحم منضمّا فقد وصفنا العلاج بالتعطيس وعلاج القدر والحشائش.	For the womb will not fall when pulling strongly, but rather it is likely that you move it gently to the sides, right and left, then increase in the amount of pulling, for it will come out at that time and be freed from adhesion, if the mouth of the womb was constricted, we have described treatment with holding, treatment of the pot and medicaments.
فإن لم تخرج بجميع ما وصفنا فإيّاك والعنف عليها فى إعادة الجذب ولكن ينبغى أن تربط ما خرج منها الى فم الرحم الى فخذ المرأة ثمّ احقنها بالمرهم الرباعىّ فإنّه يعفنها بعد أيّام.	For if it does not come out with all that we have described, then I advise against forcing and pulling on it, but rather it is likely that what has come out of it is tied to the mouth of the womb to the thigh of the woman, then a poultice of barley meal is applied, for it will heal her after some days.
وتنحلّ وتخرج إلّا أنّها اذا تعفّنت فإنّها تترقّى منها رائحة رديئة الى المعدة والرأس ويؤذى ذلك العليلة فينبغى أن تستعمل الدخن الموافقة.	It dissolves and comes out, unless it has putrefied; if it has putrefied, then it will give off a bad smell to the stomach and the head, and that will hurt the intestines, so one should use the appropriate medicated bandage.
لذلك وقد جرّب بعض الأوائل دخنة الحُرف والتين اليابس، صورة الآلة التى تبخّر بها المرأة عند احتباس الطمث والمشيمة ونحو ذلك:.	For that reason, some of the ancients tried bandages with cassia and false flax, an image of the instrument by which a woman steams when she is constipated and has a prolapsed uterus and similar things.
تصنع من رصاص تشبه القمع او تصنع من نحاس يوضع الطرف الرقيق فى القبل والطرف الواسع على النار والبخور مجعول على الجمر تمسكه حتّى يذهب ذلك البخور وتعيد غيره،.	It is made from lead resembling a beak or it is made from copper, the thin end is put into the vulva and the wide end on the fumigator, and the fumigation is placed on the coals, holding it until that vapor goes away and then replacing it with another.
الفصل التاسع والسبعون.	The 69th chapter.
فى علاج المقعدة غير المثقوبة.	On the treatment of non-suppurating fistula.
قد يولد كثير من الصبيان ومقاعدهم غير مثقوبة قد سدّها صفاق رقيق فينبغى للقابلة أن تثقب ذلك الصفاق بأصبعها وإلّا فلتبطّه بمبضع حادّ وتحذر العضلة لا تمسّها.	Many infants are born and their fontanelles are not suppurating, it is necessary for the midwife to puncture that membrane with her finger, or else let her scrape it with a sharp scalpel, and beware of the muscle so as not to touch it.
ثمّ تضع عليه صوفة مغموسة فى الشراب والزيت ثمّ تعالجه بالمراهم حتّى يبرأ، فإن خشيت أن ينسدّ فضع فى الثقب أنبوبة رصاص أيّاما كثيرة وتنزع متى أراد الطفل البراز.	Then she puts on it a swab soaked in sharab and oil, then treats it with ointments until it heals, if you fear that it will close, put in the hole a lead pipe, either one or several, and remove it when the child wants to defecate.
وقد يعرض سدّ المقعدة أيضا من اندمال جرح او ورم فينبغى أن يشقّ ذلك الاندمال ثمّ يعالج بما ذكرنا من العلاج والرصا ص،.	And the closure of the fontanelle may also be due to a callousness from an old wound or tumor, it is necessary to split that callousness, then treat it with what we mentioned before of treatments and bandages.
الفصل الثمانون.	The 88th chapter.
فىعلاج النواصير التى تحدث فى الأسفل.	On the treatment of carbuncles that occur in the ankle.
النواصير التى تحدث فى الأسفل هو تعقّد وغلظ يحدث بقرب المقعدة من خارج او فى الفضاء من أحد الجهات ويكون الناصور واحدا او أكثر.	The carbuncles that occur in the ankle are an inflammation and coarseness that happens near the fontanelle from outside or in the hollow from one of the sides, and the carbuncle is one or more.
فإذا أزمن ذلك التعقّد انفتح وجرى منه رطوبة مائيّة بيضاء او قيح رقيق وقد تكون من هذه النواصير منفوذة الى المبعر وإلى المعاء وتكون غير منفوذة فالمنفوذة قد تعرف بما يخرج منها من البراز والريح عند استعمال العليل التبرّز.	If then this complication becomes severe, a white mucoid or thin yellowish suppurative discharge appears, and some of these sinuses may permeate to the trachea and the gullet, while others do not; the permeating ones are recognized by what comes out of them from the sputum when using an evacuator.
وربّما خرج منها الدود، وقد تكون منها نواصير اذا كانت فى الفضاء منفوذة الى المثانة وإلى مجرى القضيب وقد تكون منها منفوذة الى مفصل الفخذ وإلى عجز الذنب، وما يعرف به الناصور المنفوذ الى المقعدة أيضا من غير المنفوذ.	And it is known by what comes out of them in the form of worms, and some of these sinuses are perforating if they are in the abdomen permeating to the intestines and to the urethra, and some of them may be permeating to the hip joint and to the ankle, and what indicates the sinus that is perforating to the rectum is also from the non-perforating.
أن تدخل أصبعك السبّابة فى المقعدة وتدخل مسبارا رقيقا فى الناصور من نحاس او حديد اذا لم يكن فى الناصور تعريج فإن كان فيه تعريج فأدخل فيه مسبارا من رصاص رقيقا او شعرة من شعرات الخيل.	Put your index finger into the rectum and insert a thin sound into the sinus made of bronze or iron, if there is no obstruction in the sinus, but if there is an obstruction, then insert a sound made of thin lead or a horsehair.
حتّى تحسّ بالمسبار او بالشعرة فى أصبعك، فإن لم تحسّ به البتّة ولم يبرز من الثقب شىء من البراز ولا ريح ولا دود كما قلنا فاعلم أنّه غير منفوذ فبادر الى العلاج.	As long as you feel with the sound or the horsehair on your finger, if you do not feel the bowel, and nothing comes out of the fistula such as pus, sputum, or worms, as we said, then know that it is non-perforating, so proceed to treatment.
وإذا كان الناصور منفوذا الى المثانة او الى مجرى البول فدليله خروج البول منه وامتناعه من أن يلتحم الموضع بالأدوية، وأمّا إن كان منفوذا الى مفصل الفخذ او الى عجز الذنب فعلامته وصول المسبار الى هناك.	And if the sinus is perforating to the intestines or to the urethra, the sign of it is the urine coming out of it and the place not being able to retain the medicine, as for the one that is perforating to the hip joint or to the ankle, its sign is the sound reaching there.
إن لم يكن فيه تعريج الى العظم ووجود الوجع فى نحو الجهة وخروج القيح منه دائما وأن لا ينجع فيه علاج ولا يلتحم بمرهم وهذه النواصير المنفوذة كلّها فليس منها برء البتّة.	If there is no obstruction to the bone and presence of pain in that area, and constant discharge of pus from it, and that no treatment or ointment adheres to it, then all these perforating sinuses do not have a cure.
وعلاجها عناء باطل لمن يتسوّر عليها من جهّال الأطبّاء، وأمّا التى غير منفوذة وغير مزمنة فيرجى لها البرء بالحديد على ما أنا واصفه وما قد جرّبته، وهو أن تضجع العليل بين يديك على ظهره.	And its treatment is a futile endeavor for whoever dares to operate on it among the ignorant of physicians, as for the non-perforating and non-chronic ones, recovery can be hoped for with iron according to what I have described and experimented with, which is that the evacuator is placed between your hands on his back.
ويشيّل ساقيه الى فوق وفخذاه مائلة الى بطنه ثمّ تدخل مسبار النحاس او الرصاص إن كان فى الناصور تعريج حتّى تعلم حيث ينتهى المسبار فإن أحسّ به العليل نحو المقعدة فينبغى أن تدخل أصبعك السبّابة فى المقعدة.	You should stretch his legs upwards and his thighs slightly towards his belly, then insert the iron instrument or the copper one if it is in the nostrils, as the nasal septum is learned where the instrument ends, and if you feel the olfactory nerve near the nose, you should insert your index finger into the nose.
فإن أحسست فى أصبعك المسبار قد نفذ بنفسه مكشوفا من غير أن تحسّ بين أصبعك وبينه بصفاق او بلحم فحينئذ فاعلم يقينا أنّه منفوذ فلا تتعب فيه فليس منه برء كما قلنا.	For if you feel the instrument has penetrated with its tip, exposed without any obstacle between your finger and it, neither flesh nor skin, then you will know that it is perforated, so do not exert pressure on it, for there is no cure in it, as we have said.
وقد قالوا إنّه يبرأ فى بعض الناس فى الندرة ومن العلاج الذى يرجى له النفع أن تحمّى مكواة رقيقة على حسب سعة الناصور كما تقدّم وتدخلها حامية فى الناصور حتّى تبلغ نحو المقعدة ثمّ تعيدها مرّتين او ثلاثا.	And some have said that it heals in some people through injection, and from the treatment that is hoped to be beneficial, is to warm a thin wick according to the width of the nostrils, as previously mentioned, and insert it warm into the nostrils until it reaches near the nose, then repeat it two or three times.
حتّى تعلم أنّه قد احترق جميع تلك اللحوم الزائدة المتلبّدة التى تشبه أنبوبة ريش الطير ثمّ تعالجه بفتل مبلولة فى السمن حتّى تخرج تلك اللحوم التى احترقت ثمّ تعالجه بالمراهم الملحمة فإن برئ.	Until you learn that it has cauterized all those superfluous and inflamed tissues that resemble the trachea of a bird, then treat it with an ointment made from fat, until the burnt tissues come out, then treat it with salty ointments, for he will be cured.
وإلّا فليس يبرأ بغيره من العلاج أبدا، وأمّا إن أدخلت المسبار فلم ينفذ الى أصبعك التى فى المقعدة وكان بينها وبين المسبار حجاب كثيف من لحم او من صفاق ورأيت الناصور فيما يلى سطح الجلد فشقّ حينئذ الجلد من أوّل الناصور.	And if not, then he will not be cured by any other treatment ever, and as for inserting the instrument, if it does not penetrate to your finger in the nose and there is a thick obstacle of flesh or skin between it and the instrument, and you see the nostrils from above the surface of the skin, then make an incision in the skin from the beginning of the nostrils.
وأنت تمرّ بالشقّ مع المسبار وهو فى الناصور حتّى تبلغ بالشقّ حيث انتهى طرف المسبار ويتخلّص المسبار ويسقط، ثمّ تنقى تلك اللحوم المتلبّدة التى تشبه أنبوب ريش الطير ولا تبقى منه شيئا.	And you continue to cut with the instrument, while it is in the nostrils, until you reach by cutting where the end of the instrument has stopped, and the instrument is freed and falls out, then those inflamed tissues that resemble the trachea of a bird are cleared away, and none of them remain.
ثمّ تعالجه بالمراهم الملحمة حتّى يبرأ، فإن غلبك الدم وحال بينك وبين عملك لقطعك تلك اللحوم فأفضل ما تصنع وأسرع منفعة كيّها بالنار او بدواء حادّ لأنّ الكىّ بالنار يجمع حالتين حسنتين حرق تلك اللحوم الزائدة.	When the cautery does not stick to the molahez due to its smoothness, then if you force the blood and the place between you and your work for cutting those tissues, the best thing you can do and the quickest benefit is to cauterize them with a nail or a blunt instrument because cauterizing with a nail brings together two gentle heat states that burn those excess tissues.
وقطع الدم وتنشّف الرطوبات ثمّ تعالجه بالفتل المبلولة فى السمن او الكبريت المسحوق بالزيت حتّى يقيح الموضع وتخرج تلك اللحوم المحترقة فى القيح، ثمّ عالج حينئذ الجرح بالمراهم الملحمة المنبتة للحم الصلب.	And cut the blood and disperse the humors, then treat it with the plaster of alum in the fat or camphor mixed with oil until the place is cleansed and those burnt tissues come out with the pus, then immediately treat the wound with the molahez plaster made to attract the solid flesh.
وهى الأدوية التى فيها قبض وتنشّف فإنّه اذا انجبر فقد برئ ولا تحشى العودة، فإن كان الناصور قد انتهى الى عمق المقعدة وبعد عن سطح البدن فأدخل أصبعك فى المقعدة وفتّش بها.	And these are the medications that have astringent and dispersing properties, so if it has coagulated then it has healed and do not be concerned about recurrence, but if the foreign body has reached the depth of the rectum and is distant from the surface of the anus, then insert your finger into the rectum and feel around.
فإن أحسست بالمسبار وبينك وبينه حجاب من صفاق او لحم وكان قريبا من النفوذ فليس العمل فيه إلّا على طريق الطمع والرجاء وذلك أن تستعمل فيه أحد ثلاثة أوجه إمّا أن تكويه كما قلنا.	For if you feel the spongy tissue and between you and it an obstruction of a membrane or flesh, and it is close to the anus, then the operation on it is not except by way of caution and hope, and that is to use one of three methods, namely that you should cauterize it as we have said.
وإمّا أن تشقّه حتّى تبلغ قعره لتستمكن بإدخال الفتل والعلاج من قرب ولا تتمادى بالشقّ لئلّا تقطع العضلة المحيطة بالمقعدة فتحدث على العليل خروج البراز من غير إرادة ثمّ تعالجه بما ذكرنا فربّما برئ كما قلنا.	Or that you should make an incision until you reach its bottom so that you can apply the plaster and treatment from close by, and do not overdo the incision lest you cut the muscle surrounding the anus, thus causing involuntary defecation, then treat it with what we have mentioned, for it often heals as we have said.
وإمّا أن تنفذ ذلك الحجاب وتثقبه بعد أن تشقّه الى قرب المقعدة كما قلنا إمّا بالمسبار وإمّا بآلة أخرى حادّة الطرف ثمّ تنقى تلك اللحوم المتلبّدة التى فى الشقّ كلّها الى حيث استطعت باستقصاء.	Or that you should pierce that membrane and make a hole in it after you have made an incision near the anus, as we have said, either with the cautery or with another sharp instrument, then remove all those adherent tissues in the incision to where you are able by scraping.
ثمّ رم جبر الجرح كلّه مع الشقّ والفم الأعلى حتّى ينختم وتبقى الناصور مفتوحا فى داخل المقعدة فيكون أخفّ على العليل، وقد يخرم الناصور على هذه الصفة.	The method of dissecting the skull with the scalp and upper skin intact, until it is separated and the brain remains exposed in the interior of the cranium, thus making it lighter for the student, although the meninx may sometimes herniate in this condition.
وهو إذا أدخلت المسبار فى الناصور وكان فى جانب من المقعدة نحو سطح البدنمع الجلد وطوق المقعدة فخذ حينئذ مسبارا مثقوب الطرف كإبرة الإسكاف على هذه الصورة:.	And it is done when the spatula is inserted into the brain and there is on one side of the cranium near the surface of the bone a thin membrane, and the loop of the spatula, take then a spatula pierced at the end like an awl or a large needle in this manner:
وأدخل فيها خيطا مفتولا من خمسة خيوط او نحوها ثمّ أدخل المسبار بالخيط فى الناصور حتّى يبلغ قعره، فإن كان منفوذا فى حاشية المقعدة من داخل بالقرب.	And insert in it a thread made from five or so threads, then insert the spatula with the thread into the brain until it reaches its depth, and if it is loose in the margin of the cranium internally near the inner surface.
فأخرج الخيط من ذلك الثقب بأن تدخل أصبعك فى المقعدة وأخرج طرف الخيط واجمع الطرفين جميعا وشدّهما واتركه يوما او يومين، فكلّما قطع الخيط فى اللحم شددته شدّا جيّدا حتّى تنقطع تلك اللحوم التى بين طرفى الخيوط وتسقط، ثمّ تعالج الجرح حتّى يندمل ويبرأ.	Then bring out the thread from that hole by inserting your finger into the cranium and bringing out the end of the thread, and unite the two ends together and tighten them, and leave it for a day or two, for as long as the thread cuts into the flesh, tighten it strongly until those parts of flesh between the ends of the threads are cut off and fall, then treat the wound until it becomes inflamed and heals.
فإن لم يكن فم الناصور منفوذا فانفذه كيف ما يمكن لك إلّا أن يكون فى العمق كثيرا فليس لك أن تفعل ذلك من أجل العضلة لئلّا تقطعها، ثمّ اصنع به كما ذكرنا حتى يبرأ،.	For if the brain is not loose, then inflate it as much as you can except that it should be deep, for you do not have to do this for the sake of the muscle lest it be cut, then treat it as we have mentioned until it heals.
صورة المبضع الشوكيّة التى تشقّ بها النواصير يكون التعقيف منه حادّا جدّا والجهة الأخرى غير حادّة لئلّا تقطع بها ما لا يحتاج اليه كما ترى:.	The shape of the sharp dissector which is used to split the brain, one edge is very sharp and the other edge not sharp so that it does not cut what it should not, as you see.
الفصل الحادى والثمانون.	The sharp and the rounded separation.
فى خرم البواسير التى يسيل منها الدم وقطعها وعلاج الشقاق.	Treating the hemorrhoids from which blood flows, and cutting them, and treating the fissures.
تكون البواسير على ضربين إمّا أن تكون فى داخل المقعدة تشبه نفّاحات حمر او كأنّها حبّ العنب وتكون منها صغار وكبار والدم يسيل منها دائما.	The hemorrhoids are of two kinds, either they are inside the cranium resembling red nerves or like a bunch of grapes and there are small and large ones, and blood flows from them constantly.
وتكون واحدة وتكون كثيرة وتكون خارج المقعدة وفى أطرافها إلّا أنّ هذه التى تكون من خارج المقعدة تكون فى أكثر الأمر قليلة الرطوبة يسيل منها ماء أصفر او قليل دم سيلانا دائما وتكون على لون البدن.	It becomes one and it becomes many and it appears outside the perineum and on its edges except that this one which appears outside the perineum is mostly of little humidity discharging a yellowish fluid or little blood continuously and appearing on the surface of the bladder.
وعلاج الذى يكون من داخل المقعدة أن تأمر العليل أن يتبرّز ويتزّحر حتّى تخرج المقعدة وتظهر اليك الثآليل فتسرع فتعلقها بالصنانير او تمسكها بظفرك ثمّ تقطعها عند أصولها، فإنْ لم تحتبس فيها الصنانير لرطوبتها واسترخائها.	And the treatment of the one that is inside the perineum is that you make the patient strain so that the perineum protrudes and becomes tense until it comes out and the hemorrhoids appear, then you grab them with the forceps or hold them with your fingers, then cut them at their roots, if the forceps do not grasp them due to their softness and flaccidity.
فحذّها بخرقة خشنة او بقطعة من خبّة مرعّز او اجذبها بأصابعك ثمّ اقطعها ثمّ ذرّ عليها بعد القطع بعض الذرورات الحادّة لكى تقوم لها مقام الكىّ او فاكوها على ما تقدّم فى باب الكىّ.	So, shave them with a coarse razor or with a piece of rough sponge, or pinch them with your fingers, then cut them, then cauterize them after cutting with some sharp cauterizations to take the place of the cautery or cauterize them as previously mentioned in the chapter on cautery.
ثمّ عالجها بسائر العلاج حتّى يبرأ، فإن لم تجبك المقعدة للخروج فاحقن العليل بحقنة فيها لذع قليلا لتغسل بها ما فى المقعدة وتنقاد للخروج بسرعة عند ما يتزحّر العليل، فأمّ الثآليل الخارجة عن المقعدة فأمرها هين سهل.	Then treat it with the rest of the treatments until it heals, if the perineum does not respond to come out, then make an incision in it with a small lancet so that it will discharge what is in the perineum and will be evacuated quickly when the patient strains, for hemorrhoids that are outside the perineum are easy to treat.
وهو أن تأخذها بظفرك او تعلقها بصنّارة وتقطعها ثمّ تعالجها بما ذكرنا حتّى تبرأ، ومن كره القطع بالحديد فينبغى أن تستعمل خرمها على هذه الصفة تأخذ خيطا مفتولا وتدخله فى إبرة.	And it is that you take them with your fingers or grasp them with a forcep, and cut them, then treat them with what we have mentioned until they heal, and because of the pain of cutting with iron, it is preferable to use a thread of this kind, taking a thread and threading it into a needle.
ثمّ تجذب الثؤلول الى فوق وتنفذه بالإبرة فى أصله من الجهة الأخرى وتلفّ طرفى الخيط أسفل الإبرة وهى معترضة وتشدّ الثؤلول شدّا وثيقا ثمّ تعقد الخيط وتخرج الإبرة، تفعل ذلك بجميع الثآليل وتترك منها واحدة لا تخرمها.	Then you pull the hemorrhoid upwards and pass the needle through its base from the other side, and wrap the thread around the needle while it is still in place, and pull the hemorrhoid tightly, then tie the thread and remove the needle, do this with all the hemorrhoids except for one which you do not ligate.
لتسيل منها فضلة الدم، ثمّ تضع على المقعدة خرقة مغموسة فى دهن ورد او قيروطىّ وتضعها على المقعدة وتأمر العليل بالسكون ثمّ تتركه حتّى تسقط فإذا سقطت الثآليل فعالجها بالمراهم وسائر العلاج حتّى تبرأ،.	Let the blood flow from it, then put on the seat a poultice soaked in fat and rose oil or galbanum, and apply it to the seat, and order the patient to rest, then let it be until the body scabs over, so when the scab falls off, treat it with ointments and other treatments until it recovers.
وأمّا علاج الشقاق فكثيرا ما يعرض من جفوف الزبل واعتقال الطبع فإذا أزمن ولم ينجع فيه دواء فينبغى أن تجرده بشفرة المبضع او بظفرك حتّى يصير رطبا ويزول عنه القشر الأعلى الذى يمنعه من الالتحام.	And as for the treatment of the fissure, it often happens that it is affected by the inner membrane of the uvula and the constriction of the temperament, so if it becomes chronic and does not respond to medication, one should treat it with a cauterization or a application of a corrosive until it becomes calloused and sheds off its upper layer which prevents it from healing.
ثمّ تعالجه حتّى يندمل على ما ينبغى، فإن لم يندمل فعاوده بجرد أشدّ من الأوّل حتّى يدمى نعمّا ويسلخ ثمّ عالجه فإنّه يبرأ،.	Then treat it until it becomes calloused as needed, if it does not become calloused, then cauterize it with a more severe application than the first, until it forms a thick scab and sloughs off, then treat it, for it will recover.
الفصل الثانى والثمانون.	The 28th chapter.
فى علاج المسامير المعكوسة وغير المعكوسة والثآليل اليابسة والنملة.	On the treatment of inverted and non-inverted anus, and hemorrhoids, and anal fistula.
إنّ المسمار إنّما هو عقدة مستديرة على لون البدن تشبه رأس المسمار تكون فى جميع الجسد ولا سيّما فى أسافل القدمين والأصابع ويعرض منها وجع عند المشى.	The "massad" is a rounded nodule on the skin of the body, resembling a nipple, found all over the body, not just on the soles of the feet and toes, and it causes pain when walked upon.
فينبغى أن يشقّ ما حول المسمار ويمسك بمنقاش او بصنّارة ويقلع من أصله ثمّ تعالجه وإن شئت كويته على ما تقدّم فى بابه، وأمّا الثآليل اليابسة فالواحدة منها هو نتو صغير خشن متلبّد مستدير فوق سطح البدن.	It is necessary to cut around the "massad" and hold it with a forceps or pincers, and extract it from its root, then treat it, and if you want, cauterize it as previously described in its treatment. As for the single hemorrhoid, it is a small, rough, rounded, protruding nodule above the surface of the body.
وكثيرا ما يعرض فى أيدى الصبيان وعلاجه أن تمدّ الثؤلول وتقطعه او تخرمه بخيط حرير او بشعرة حتّى يسقط وإن شئت كويته على ما تقدّم بالنار او بالدواء الحاد.	And it often happens in the hands of young boys, and its treatment is to stretch the skin and cut it or pierce it with a thread or a horsehair until it falls off, and if you want, cauterize it as previously described with fire or sharp medicine.
وقد تقلع الثآليل المعكوسة وغير المعكوسة بالآلة التى أنا ذاكرها فى علاج النملة، أمّا النملة فهى أيضا نتو صغير متلبّد غليظ على سطح البدن ذاهب فى العمق جدّا وإذا أصابها البرد أحسّ فيها شبيها بلذع النمل.	The treatment of the varicose and non-varicose haemorrhoids with the instrument that I mentioned in treating the prolapsus, as for the prolapsus it is also a small, slippery, rough and thick thing on the surface of the rectum disappearing deeply and if the cold reaches it you feel its similarity to the prolapsus.
ويكون فى الجسد كلّه وأكثره يكون فى الأيدى وعلاجه أن تؤخذ أنبوبة من ريشة إوزّة او ريشة نسر قويّة وتصير ذلك الأنبوب على النملة حتّى تحيط دائرة الأنبوب من نواحيه ثمّ تدير يدك بالأنبوب حتّى تشقّ ما حول النملة.	And it is found in the whole body and most of it is found in the hands, and its treatment is that a tube is taken from a goose feather or a strong crow feather, and this tube is put on the prolapsus until the tube surrounds it from all sides, then you turn your hand with the tube until what is around the prolapsus is cut.
وتصيره فى عمق اللحم وتنقلع النملة من أصلها، وإن شئت فعلت ذلك بأنبوب نحاس او حديد على هذه الصورة:.	And it puts it in the depth of the flesh and extracts the prolapsus from its base, and if you wish, you do that with a copper or iron tube in this form:
يكون أعلى الأنبوب الى الرقّة مصمتا مفتولا ليسهل على الأصابع ضبطه وفتله، وإن شئت كويت النملة على ما تقدّم فى كىّ الثآليل فى باب الكىّ،.	The top of the tube is attached to the skin with a stopper, open so that it is not easy for the fingers to control and close it, and if you wish, the prolapsus is cauterized as previously mentioned in cauterizing hemorrhoids.
الفصل الثالث والثمانون.	Chapter thirty-three.
فى صور الآلات التى تستعمل الحقن بها فى علل المقعدة والإسهال والقولنج.	On the pictures of the instruments that are used for enemas in treating rectal ailments, and the intestines and the colon.
قد يصنع المحقن من فضّة او من صينىّ او من نحاس مفروغ او مضروب وقد تصنع من هذه الآلة صغار وكبار على حسب المستعملين لها.	The enema syringe may be made of silver or ivory or of cast or beaten copper, and this instrument is made in small and large sizes according to the users.
فتكون التى تستعمل فى علاج الصبيان الصغار صغارا والذين مقاعدهم ضيقة او متوجّعة تكون محاقنهم لطافا جدّا، صورة محقن كبير:.	So the one used in treating small children is small and the ones with narrow or constricted rectums have very delicate syringes, picture of a large syringe:.
قمعه الأعلى الذى يربط فيه الزقّ يكون واسعا على هذه الصفة له حاجز حيث يربط الزقّ كما ترى وطرفه الأسفل الذى يدخل فى المقعدة يكون مصمتا أملس جدّا الى الرقّة فى أحد جانبيه ثقبتان وفى الجانب الآخر ثقبة واحدة.	Its upper part where the tube is tied is wide in this way, it has a border where the tube is tied as you see and its lower edge that enters the rectum is smooth and flat to the skin on one of its sides there are two holes and on the other side there is one hole.
تكون سعة الثقب على غلظ المرود او أغلظ قليلا ويكون الزقّ الذى تجعل فيه الأدوية من مثانة حيوان او من رقّ ضأن يصنع على هيئة السفرة الصغيرة يكون قطره شبرا.	The width of the trephine should be thicker than the cortex or slightly thicker, and the gauze in which you put the medicines should be made from a piece of animal bladder or from a thin linen cloth, fashioned into small pouches the size of a grain of barley.
ويثقب ثقبا كثيرة كما يدور ويكون بعد ما بين كلّ ثقبة غلظ أصبع، ثمّ تدخل فى تلك الثقب خيطا وثيقا من غزل ثنى من عشرة أخياط او نحوها وتجمع به الزقّ كالسفرة.	And the trephine should make many perforations as it turns, and after each perforation there should be a thickness of a finger, then a thin thread made from the silk of two or ten little worms or about that is inserted into those perforations and gathered in the gauze like a button.
فإذا وضع فيه الدواء شدّ فى رأس المحقن بين الحجرين شدّا وثيقا ثمّ تحقن به، وهذه صورة دائرة الزقّ والثقب:.	For if the medicine is applied to it, it should be tightly bound on the head of the trephine between two stones, tightly and firmly, then it is bandaged with it, and this is the figure of the gauze and the perforation:.
وكيفيّة الاحتقان به أن تملأ الرقّ او المثانة بالدواء وهو مدفأعلى قدر احتمال العليل واحذر أن يكون حارّا جدّا او باردا جدّا ثمّ يستلقى العليل على ظهره ويشيّل ساقيه الى فوق.	And the method of bandaging with it is that the cloth or bladder should be filled with the medicine, and it is applied according to the capacity of the abscess, and beware that it is not too hot or too cold, then the abscess will relax on its back and lift up its legs.
ويوضع تحته نطع او ملحفة ثمّ يدهن طرف المحقن بدهن او ببياض البيض او بلعاب الحلبة او نحوها ثمّ تدخله فى المقعدة برفق ثمّ يأخذ خادم الزقّ بيديه معا ويعصره بشدّة حتّى يتفرّغ جميع ما فى المحقن فى المعاء.	And a sponge or tampon is placed under it, then the edge of the trephine is greased with grease or egg white or the milk of the colocynth or something similar, then it is inserted into the rectum gently, and the servant takes the gauze with his hands together and constricts it firmly until all that is in the trephine is evacuated from the bowel.
ثمّ يخرج المحقن ويشيّل العليل ساقيه الى الحائط، فإن حفزه الدواء للخروج فليمتسك ما استطاع وإن نام به الليل كلّه كان أبلغ فى المنغعة، فإن حقن به فى علل الإسهال واستعجل خروجه فلتعد الحقنة حتّى يبرأ.	Then the trephine is removed and the abscess lifts its legs to the vulva, if the medicine has been effective for excretion, then he should hold it in as much as possible, and if he sleeps with it all night it was most effective for evacuation, for it was injected into a bowel abscess and the evacuation was hastened, so the injection is repeated until recovery.
فإن كان فى المقعدة بواسير او أورام مؤلمة فليكن المحقن لطيفا جدّا أملس من المحاقن التى تحقن بها الصبيان، وهذه صورة محقن لطيف مشدود عليه جلده:.	For if there is a painful hemorrhoid or painful ulcers in the rectum, then the trephine should be very smooth, more so than the trephines with which children are treated, and this is the figure of a smooth trephine with its skin tied on:.
الفصل الرابع والثمانون.	The fourth and eighth operations.
فى علاج الجراحات.	On the treatment of surgical afflictions.
قد ذكرت فى التقسيم من علاج ما شاكل الكيّات وأنا ذاكر هاهنا علاجها باليد وبالأدوية على الكمال، فأقول إنّ الجراحات تختلف بحسب الشىء الذى يكون به الجراحة وبحسب الموضع الذى يقع عليه الجرح.	I mentioned in the division of treatment what resembles the diseases, and I will now mention the treatment of them with the hand and with instruments according to the condition. So I say that surgical operations differ according to the substance on which the operation is performed and according to the position where the wound occurs.
فالأشياء التى تكون بها الجراحات كثيرة كصكّة حجر او قطع سيف او سكّين او طعنة برمح او عود او سهم ونحو ذلك من أشياء كثيرة.	The substances on which operations are performed are numerous, such as extracting a stone, or cutting with a sword, or a dagger, or a stab from a spear, or a stick, or an arrow, and similar things among many.
وأمّا الجراحات بحسب المواضع من الجسم فكالجرح الذى يقع على الرأس او العنق او الصدر او البطن او الكبد ونحوها من الأعضاء.	And as for operations according to the positions of the body, such as wounds that occur on the head, or the neck, or the chest, or the belly, or the liver and similar organs.
وأنا واصف علاج بعض الجراحات لتجعلها قياسا وقانونا على سائر الجراحات وأنا أبتدئ بجراحات الرأس البسيطة خاصّة لأنّ المركّبة سيأتى ذكرها فى أوّلالباب الثالثمن هذا الكتاب.	And I will describe the treatment of some operations to make them a measure and a law for other operations, and I begin with simple operations of the head in particular because complicated ones will be mentioned in the third chapter of this book.
فأقول إنّه متى حدث فى الرأس جرح بسيط ولم يكن كسر عظم نظرت فإن كان من صكّة حجر او نحوه وكان قد شدخ الجلد فقط وكان الجرح كبيرا وخشيت على العليل حدوث الورم الحارّ فبادر وافصده القيفال على المقام.	So I say that if a simple wound occurs on the head and it is not a fracture, then consider if it was caused by a stone or something similar, and it only penetrated the skin, and the wound is large, and you fear the occurrence of a hot tumor, then hasten and sew the wound with the needle.
ولا تؤخر ذلك وأخرج له من الدم على قدر قوّته إن لم يمنع من الفصد مانع ولا سيّما إن كان الدم الذى يخرج من الجرح يسيرا وليكن الفصد من ضدّ الجهة المجروحة.	And do not delay it, and let out for him some blood according to his strength, if there is no prohibition from cupping or leeching, and even if the blood that comes out of the wound is little, but the cupping should be from the opposite side of the wounded area.
وحذّر العليل الامتلاء والشراب والأطعمة الغليظة، فإن منع من فصده مانع فليقلّل من الطعام ولايقرب اللحوم ولا الأشربة، وتحمل على الجرح إن حدث به ورم حارّ قطنة مغموسة فى دهن الورد وحده او مع الشراب الذى فيه قبض.	And beware of the patient becoming full and stuffed, and coarse rough foods, for if cupping is prohibited, then he should take little food, and not approach meats or drinks, and apply to the wound, if a hot tumor occurs, a poultice immersed in rose oil alone, or with the drink that has in it chamomile.
وإن أمنت الورم الحارّ فاحمل على الجرح إن كان طريّا بدمه ولم يغيّره الهواء الذرور الذى أنا واصفه لك بعد قليل، وأمّا إن كان قد غيّره الهواء فاحمل عليه بعض المراهم.	And if the fresh bleeding of the wound is intense, then apply pressure on the wound, if it was warm with blood and not changed by the air, the plaster that I will describe to you shortly, and if the air has altered it, then apply some ointments on it.
حتّى يمدّ القيح ثمّ عالجه حتّى يبرأ، فإن كان الجرح كبيرا وكان من قطع سيف او نحوه ولم تجتمع شفتاه بالرفائد فاجمعه بالخياطة على ما أنا واصفه فى خياطة جراح البطن.	Let the pus come out, then dress it until it heals, and if the wound is large and resulted from a cut by a sword or similar, and its edges did not meet with sutures, then close it with stitching as I described in the stitching of abdominal wounds.
فإن كان الجلد كشف العظم وتعلّق ولم يكن امتساكه إلّا فى معلاق يسير فاقطعه ثمّ عالج الجرح بأدوية تجبر فيه لحما صلبا عوض الجلد وأمر العليل أن يتغذّى بالأغذية التى فيها متانة مثل الرؤوس والهرائس ونحوها،.	For if the injury exposed the bone and it was loose, and its fastening was only at slight joints, then cut it, and treat the wound with medications that will generate in it solid flesh as a substitute for the injured part, and order the patient to eat nourishing foods that contain strength such as heads and trotters and similar things.
فإن حدث فى الجلد عفن ولم يلصق بالعظم فاقطع المتعفّن كلّه وارم به ثمّ عالجه، فإن كان فى هذه الجراحات شريان او عرق ينزف الدم منه ولم ينقطع الدم بالأدوية ففتّش على الشريان.	For if there was gangrene in the injured part and it did not adhere to the bone, then cut off all the decayed part and sew it, then dress it, and if among these injuries there is a vein or an artery that blood flows from and the blood does not stop with medications, then ligate the vein.
فإن أصبته لم يتبتّر فابتره بالمبضع واربطه وإن دعت الضرورة اذا لم ينفع ما ذكرنا فاكوه حتّى ينقطع الدم فإن كانت هذه الجراحات صغارا بساطا فأمرها سهل هيّن يكتفى بعلاجها بأن تذرّ عليها هذا الذرور وهى بدمها.	For if pressure did not stop the bleeding, then press on it with a compress and bind it, and if necessity demands it, if what we mentioned does not work, then cauterize it until the blood stops, and if these wounds are small and superficial, then order them to be simple, and they will suffice by applying this plaster on them while it is still bloody.
قبل أن يغيّرها الهواء، وصفة الذرور أن يؤخذ من اللبان جزء ومن الشيّان جزآن ومن الجير المطفأ او غير المطفأ ثلاثة أجزاء يسحق الجميع وينخل ويحشى به الجرح ويشدّ شدّا جيّدا حتّى يلصق عليه لصوقا جيّدا.	Before the air alters it, a description of the plaster is that a portion is taken from laban, two portions from shiyan, and three portions from juar, either roasted or unroasted, all of which are ground, and kneaded, and applied to the wound, and bound tightly in order for it to adhere well.
وينعقد بالدم ثمّ تشدّه من فوق بالرفائد وتتركه لا تحلّه ما دام لا يتورّم فإنّه لا ينقلع عنه الدواء حتّى يبرأ، وقد يفعل ذلك الجير وحده اذا لم يحضرك اللبان والشيّان.	It coagulates with the blood, then it is tightened from above by the bandage and left without being loosened as long as it does not become inflamed, for if it becomes inflamed it does not heal until the inflammation subsides, and the plaster may do that on its own if you do not have labban and shayyan.
وقد يفعل هذا الفعل أيضا بعبينه فى كثير من الجراحات الكبار اذا أتقن وضعه عليه وشدّه وكانت الجراحات طريّة بدمها ما لم يغيّرها الهواء، وأمّا إن كانت قد غيّرها الهواء بعض التغيّر ولا سيّما اذا كان فى زمن الصيف.	And it may have this effect also by itself in many large incisions, if applied to them and tightened, and the incisions were fresh with their blood, as long as the air did not change them, and as for when the air has changed them somewhat, and especially if it was during the summer.
فليس فى وضع هذا الذرور معنى فعالجه بما ذكرنا بأن تحمل عليه بعض المراهم المنضجة او تحمل عليه عصيدة من دقيق الشعير مصنوعة بالماء والعسل حتّى يمدّ القيح ثمّ تعالجه بسائر العلاج حتّى يبرأ،.	It is not useless to apply this plaster by the meaning of its activity which we have mentioned, that it carries some softened ointments or it carries a paste made from wheat flour mixed with water and honey until the pus comes out, then it is treated with other treatments until it heals.
فأمّا إن حدث مع الجرح كسر فى العظم وكان يسيرا فاجذبه بالجفت، وقد ذكرت علاج كسور الرأس فيما يستأنف، فى جراحة العنق، فإن حدث الجرح فى العنق فليس بينه فرق فى العلاج وبين جرح الرأس اذا كان بسيطا.	And if a fracture occurred with the wound, and it was in a bone, and it was simple, then pull it out with the tongs, for I have mentioned the treatment of skull fractures in what follows, in the surgery of the neck, for if the wound is in the neck, there is no difference between its treatment and that of a head wound if it is simple.
وأمّا إن كان قد قطع عصبا من العنق او شريانا فإن كان عصبا فليس فيه حيلة غير أن تجتنب علاجه بما يقبض قبضا شديدا كالزنجار والزاج ونحوها لأنّها تؤّذى العصب وتشنّجه.	And if he has cut a nerve in the neck or a vein, and it was a nerve, then there is no trick except that you treat it with what constricts severely, such as zanjari, zaj, and their like, because they irritate the nerve and calm it.
ولا يوضع على الجرح شىء بارد البتّة لأنّ جوهر العصب بارد واتّصاله بالدماغ الذى هو أشرف الأعضاء ويكون ما تعالجه به من الأدوية الليّنة مثل النورة المغسولة بالماء العذب مرّات مبلولة بالزيت او بدهن الورد والتوتياء.	And do not put on the wound something cold immediately, because the essence of the nerve is cold and its connection with the brain which is the most noble of organs, and what is treated with it from medicines is like rosewater dissolved in sweet water repeated times diluted with oil or the fat of roses and violet.
اذا غسلت أيضا بالماء العذب وسائر الأحجار المعدنيّة على هذه الصفة والمراهم الرطبة، وأمّا إن كان الجرح كبيرا فاستعمل الخياطة او ضمّ شفتيه بالرفائد ثمّ عالجه حتّى يبرأ.	If it is also washed with sweet water and the rest of mineral stones of this quality, and the moist ointments, and if the wound was large, then use stitching or close its lips with a bandage, then treat it until it heals.
فإن كان للجرح غور وحدث فيه مخبأ فى أسفله قد اجتمع فيه القيح فبطّه فى أخفض مكان فيه، فإن كان قد انقطع فى الجرح شريان وادركت دمه ينزف فابتره او اربطه او اكوه إن دعت الضرورة الى ذلك.	If the wound has a cavity and there is a collection of pus in its lowest part, it should be cut in the lowest place. If a blood vessel was cut in the wound and its flow was abundant, it should be ligated or cauterized if necessity demands it.
فإن كان الجرح قد قطع بعض خرزات الحلقوم او كلّه وسلمت الأوداج فاجمع شفتى الجلد بالخياطة على قصبة الحلقوم ولا تمسّ الحلقوم بل سوّه وردّه على شكله الطبيعى ثمّ شدّه شدّا محكما واتركه أيّاما.	If the wound has cut some of the gullet's rings or all of it, and the ligaments are intact, then bring together the lips of the wound with sutures over the gullet's trachea, without touching the gullet, but rather sew it and return it to its natural shape, then tie it firmly and leave it for a while.
ثمّ عالجه بالمراهم التى فيها قبض وتجفيف حتّى يبرأ، فإن كان الجرح قد أثّر فى العظم ففتّشه فإن كان فيه شظايا من العظم فاجتذبها كلّها او ما يمكن منها وما لم تتمكّن فاتركه حتّى يتيعفّن الجرح ويبرأ ويسهل إخراجه.	Then treat it with ointments that have contraction and dilation properties until it heals. If the wound has affected the bone, then scrape it, if there are bone fragments in it, remove all of them or as much as possible, and what cannot be extracted, leave it until the wound improves, heals, and becomes easy to extract.
فإن كان الجرح طريّا فذرّ عليه الذرور الذى وصفنا فإن تعفّن فى الجرح عظم وصار ناصورا فعالجه بما يأتى ذكره فى بابه، فى جراحة الصدر وما بين الكتفين.	If the wound is fresh, sprinkle on it the powder we described, if there was a bone that became exposed in the wound and turned into a cystic formation, treat it with what we mentioned in its chapter, concerning surgery of the chest and the area between the shoulders.
إن كانت طعنة من رمح او سكّين ورأيت لها غورا فانظر فإن خرج منها الريح اذا تنفّس العليل فاعلم أنّه جرح قتّال فإن لم يكن لها غور وكانت طريّة بدمها فلا تجعل فيها من أوّل وهلة الذرور ولا تشدّها لئلّا يحتبس الدم فى غورها.	If the wound is from a spear or a sword and you see it has a cavity, then investigate, if foul air comes out of it when the patient breathes, know that it is a perforating wound. If it does not have a cavity and is fresh with its blood, do not put powder in it initially, nor constrict it so that the blood gathers in its cavity.
فيرتدع الى القلب فيقتل العليل ولكن اجعل فيها مرهما جذّابا وحلّه فى النهار مرّتين فإن لم يحضرك مرهم فاجعل فى فم الجرح قطنة بالية لتمصّ ما يخرج منها من الرطوبات واجعل نوم العليل على الجرح.	It will then rise to the heart and kill the patient, but make for it an absorbent ointment and apply it twice a day. If you don't have an ointment, put a cotton pad on the wound's mouth to absorb what comes out of it from the discharges, and have the patient lie on the wound.
ليسيل ما يجتمع فيه، وإن كان قد مضى للجرح ثلاثة أيّام او أكثر ولم يحدث بالعليل تشنّج ولا خفقان ردىء ولا ضيق فى النفس ورأيت سائر أحواله صالحة فاعلم أنّ الجرح سالم فعالجه بالفتل وسائر العلاج حتّى يبرأ.	A fracture that has no complication, even if it has been three days or more since the injury occurred and there is no spasms, tremors, or shortness of breath, and you have seen his other symptoms to be sound, then know the fracture is safe to be treated with bandages and other treatments until it heals.
فإن تعذّر برؤه ومدّ الفيح دائما فاعلم أنّه قد صار ناصورا فعالجه من بابه، العليل على الجرح ليسيل ما يجتمع فيه، وإن كان قد مضى للجرح الصدر او الظهر فعالجه بما تقدّم من الخياطة.	For if the blood has become difficult to breathe and the foul discharge continues, then know that it has become a gangrene treated from its mouth, the complication on the wound is not what gathers in it, even if it has been for the chest or back wound, treated with the aforementioned suturing.
إن كان كبيرا او بالذرور إن كان صغيرا، فإن كان قد أثّر فى العظم وقطع منه شظايا ففتّش الجرح وبادر بإخراج تلك الشظايا إن كانت متبرّئة فإن لم تكن متبرّئة فاتركها حتّى.	Whether it is large or with a small wound, if it has affected the bone and cut off fragments of it, then open the wound and hasten to extract those fragments, if they are loose, but if not, then leave them until.
يعفّن الجرح فإنّه يسهل إخراجها، وأمّا سائر الجراحات الحادثة فى سائر الأعضاء فحكمها فى العلاج حكم ما ذكرنا،.	The wound will suppurate, making it easier to extract them, and as for other accidental wounds that occur in other organs, their treatment is the same as what we have mentioned.
الفصل الخامس والثمانون.	The Fifth and Eighty Chapter.
فى جراح البطن وخروج المعاء وخياطتها.	On the surgical operations of the abdomen, and the extraction of the intestines, and their suturing.
الخرق الذى يعرض للبطن قد يكون كبيرا وقد يكون صغيرا ووسطا فالكبير قد يخرج منه معاء او عدّة أمعاء فيكون إدخالها وخياطتها أشدّ وأعسر.	The wound that exposes the abdomen may be large, or small, or medium, for the large one, several intestines may come out of it, and its introduction and suturing will be more difficult and troublesome.
والخرق الصغير أيضا قد يعسر من وجه آخر فيلزم أن يكون ردّها أعسر والمعاء إن لم تبادر فى إدخاله الى موضعه من ساعته انتفخ وغلظ فعسر إدخاله فلهذا صار أفضل الخروق الخرق المتوسّط لأنّه لا يعسر معه ردّ المعاء كما يعسر فى هذين النوعين.	And the small wound also causes difficulty from another aspect, for it requires that its edges be more difficult to return, and the intestine, if one does not hasten to return it to its place, will become inflated and thickened, making its return more difficult. For this reason, the medium-sized wound is the best, because returning the intestines is not as difficult as with these two types.
واعلم أنّ خياطة البطن على أربعة وجوه الخياطتان الاثنتان عاميّتان تصلح فى خياطة البطن وفى خياطة سائر جراحات البدن والخياطتان الأخريان خاصّيّتان تعمّ سائر الجراحات إلّا أنّهما أخصّ بخياطة البطن.	And know that suturing the abdomen has four types, two general ones that apply to suturing the abdomen and other abdominal wounds, and two special ones that apply to all surgical operations but are especially suited for suturing the abdomen.
وأنا واصفها لك واحدة واحدة بشرح وبيان، فأقول إنّه اذا كان الجرح صغيرا وخرج منه شىء من المعاء وعسر ردّه فذلك لأحد وجهين إمّا لصغر الخرق كما قلنا وإمّا لأنّ المعاء عرض له نفخ من قبل برد الهواء.	And I will describe them to you one by one, in detail and clarification, so I say that if the wound is small and a piece of intestine comes out and it is difficult to return, then this is due to one of two reasons: either because the wound is too small, as we mentioned, or because the intestine has had an inflammation due to cold air.
فإذا كان كذلك فينبغى أن تسخنه بأن تغمس إسفنجة او خرقة رطبة فى الماء الفاتر وحده او قد طبخ فيه إذخر وسعدى وسنبل وتنطل به المعاء حتّى ينحلّ النفخ.	If it is so, then it should be treated by soaking a sponge or a wet cloth in hot water, alone or with a decoction of sulphur, sandalwood and chamomile, and applying it to the intestine until the inflammation subsides.
وقد يفعل ذلك الشراب الذى فيه قبض وهو أفضل من الماء وحده فى تحليل النفخ، فإذا رأيت النفخ قد انحلّ فبلّ المعاء بماء قد طبخ فيه خطمّى او خبّازى فإنّه يسلس بذلك دخوله بأيسر سعى.	And the decoction that contains opium is more effective than hot water alone in reducing the inflammation, so if you see that the inflammation has subsided, then bathe the intestine with warm water in which either cress or borage has been cooked, for it will make its entrance easier.
فإن تعذّر رجوعه بعد هذا العلاج فشقّ فى الخرق قليلا بالآلة التى تشقّ بها النواصير والعلاج الأوّل اذا تمكّن أفضل من الشقّ وإنّما يضطّر الى الشقّ بعد الضرورة وعجز الحيلة، وهذه صورة الآلة:.	For if its return is difficult after this treatment, then make a slight incision in the wound with the instrument that is used to make incisions in nostrils, and the first treatment is better than the incision, but it resorts to incision only after necessity and inability of the trick, and this is a picture of the instrument:
تكون جهتها الواحدة المعوجّة محدودة وجهتها الأخرى غير محدودة والطرف الرقيق لا يكون برقّة المبضع بل يكون أفطس قليلا وهى آلة تشبه الصولج الصغير كما ترى فإذا اتّسع الجرح ودخل المعاء فينبغى أن يكون ردّه على شكله الطبيعىّ.	Its curved side is limited, its other side is unlimited, and the thin edge is not as sharp as a razor, but rather somewhat blunt, and it is an instrument that resembles a small scalpel, as you see, so if the wound has expanded and the intestine has come out, then it should be returned to its natural shape.
ومكانه الخاصّ به إن استطعت على ذلك فهو أفضل، وأمّا اذا كان الخرق واسعا وكان فى أسفل البطن فينبغى أن يضطجع العليل على ظهره ويجعل ساقيه أرفع من رأسه وإن كان فى أعلى البطن فيجعل رأسه وصدره أرفع من أسفله.	And its own place, if you are able to do so, is best, and as for if the wound is wide and it is in the lower abdomen, then the patient should be made to lie on his back and his legs should be elevated above his head, and if it is in the upper abdomen, then his head and chest should be elevated above his lower parts.
وكذلك إن كان الخرق فى أحد الجهتين من البطن فاجعل قصدك وغرضك دائما الناحية التى فيها الجراحة أرفع من الناحية الأخرى، وهكذا ينبغى أن يستعمل فى الجراحات العظيمة وفى الجراحات الوسطة.	And likewise, if the wound is on one of the sides of the abdomen, then make it your intention and goal to always keep the side with the surgery elevated above the other side, and this is what should be done in major surgeries and in medium ones.
وأمّا فى الجراحات الصغار فتضعه على حسب ما يتمكّن لك، ثمّ تحضر بين يديك خادما رفيقا يمسك الخرق كلّه بيديه ويجمع شفتيه ثمّ يكشف منه لمتولّى الخياطة شيئا بعد شىء.	As for small surgical procedures, you should place them according to what becomes clear to you, then have a trustworthy servant standing between your hands holding the entire skin with both his hands and bringing together its edges so that he can expose to you for the purpose of suturing one thing after another.
وهذه صفة الخياطة العامّيّة الواحدة وهو أن تأخذ إبرة او عدّة إبر على قدر سعة الجرح ثمّ تترك من طرف الخرق قدر غلظ الخنصر وتغرز إبرة واحدة من غير أن تدخل فيها خيطا فى حافتى الجلد.	And this is the description of the general simple suture, which is that you take a needle or several needles according to the width of the wound, then leave from the edge of the skin as much as the thickness of the ankle, and insert one needle without threading it with thread into the edges of the skin.
مع حافتى الصفاق الذى تحت الجلد من داخل حتّى تنفذها من تلك الناحية وقد جمعت حاشيتى الجلد وحاشيتى الصفاق وصارت أربع طاقات، ثمّ تشدّ بخيط مثنّى حول الإبرة مرّات من الجهتين جميعا حتّى تجتمع شفتا الجرح اجتماعا محكما.	With the edges of the peritoneum that are under the skin, from inside the wound, you pierce them from that side, and having brought together the edges of the skin and the edges of the peritoneum, they become four layers, then you tighten with a double thread around the needle several times from both sides until the edges of the wound meet in a tight union.
ثمّ تترك قدر غلظ الأصبع أيضا وتغرز إبرة أخرى ثمّ تشبّكها بالخيط كما فعلت بالإبرة الأولى فلا تزال تفعل ذلك بما تحتاج اليه من الإبر حتّى تفرغ برمّ الجرح كلّه ولتكن الإبر متوسّطة بين الغلظ والرقّة.	Then you leave as much as the thickness of the finger as well, and insert another needle, then tie it with thread just as you did with the first needle, and do not cease to do that with however many needles are needed until you have sutured the entire wound, and let the needles be midway between the thick and the thin.
لأنّ الإبر الرقاق جدّا سريعا ما تقطع اللحم والغلاظ أيضا عسرة الدخول فى الجلد فلذلك ينبغى أن تكون وسطة فى الرقّة والغلظ، ولا ينبغى أن تغرز الإبرة فى حافة الجلد بالقرب نعمّا.	For the thin needles are very quick to cut through flesh and the thick ones are also difficult to enter into the skin, therefore it is suitable that they be in the middle in thinness and thickness, and it is not suitable that a needle be inserted at the edge of the skin, yes indeed.
لئلّا ينقطع اللحم مسرعا وينفتح الجرح قبل التحامه ولا تبعد أيضا بالخياطة لئلّا يمتنع الجرح من الالتحام، ثمّ تقطع أطراف الإبر لئلّا تؤذى العليل عند نومه وتجعل له رفائد من خرق كتان من كلّ جهة تمسك أطراف الإبر.	So that the flesh does not cut quickly and the wound does not open before its closure, nor is it too late for suturing so that the wound abstains from closure, then the ends of the needles are cut so that they do not harm the patient when he sleeps, and make for him two pads of linen cloth on each side to hold the ends of the needles.
وتتركها حتّى تعلم أنّ الجرح قد التحم، وهذا النوع من الخياطة بالإبر هكذا أوفق فى الجراحات الصغار لأنّه قد يكتفى فى خياطتها بإبرة واحدة او اثنتين او نحوها.	Leave it until we know that the wound has united, and this kind of suturing with a needle is more useful in small surgeries because it can be sufficient to suture it with one or two needles or thereabout.
اوأمّا صفة الخياطة لثانية العامّيّة فهو أن تجمع بالخياطة الحواشى الأربع أعنى حاشيتى الجلد وحاشيتى الصفاق فى مرّة واحدة بإبرة فيها خيط مفتول معتدل فى الرقّة والغلظ ثمّ اذا نفذت بالإبرة هذه الحواشى الأربع رددت الإبرة من الجهة التى ابتدأت بها نفسها.	As for the description of the second general suture, it is that you gather the four edges by suturing: the two edges of the skin and the two edges of the peritoneum at one time with a needle containing a thread that is moderate in thinness and thickness, then if you penetrate these four edges with the needle, the needle returns from the side where you started to its original position.
ليقع الخيط مشبّكا من أعلى الجرح لتكون الخياطة على حسب خياطة الأكيسة التى يشدّ بها المتاع وتجعل بين كلّ خياطة وخياطة بعد غلظ الأصبع الصغير وهذه الخياطة يعرفها جميع الناس.	The thread should be laid unevenly from the top of the wound so that the suturing is according to the suturing of the akis, which it tightens with the intestines and makes between every suture and another suture after a small thickness of the little finger, and this suturing all people know.
وبهذه الخياطة قد خطت جراحة عرضت لرجل فى بطنه كان قد جرح بسكّين وكان خرق الجراحة أزيد من شبر وكان قد خرج من معائه نحو شبرين من المعاء الأوسط وكان الخرق فى وسط البطن.	And with this suturing, a surgery was performed on a man who had a wound in his abdomen that had been made by a dagger and the gash of the surgery was more than a finger's width and he had lost about two fingers' worth from his middle intestine and the gash was in the middle of the abdomen.
فرددته بعد أن أقام معاؤه خارجا من الجرح أربعا وعشرين ساعة فالتحم الجرح فى نحو خمسة عشر يوما وعالجته حتّى برئ وعاش بعد ذلك سنين كثيرة يتصرّف فى جميع أحواله وكان الأطبّاء يحكمون عليه أنّه لا يبرأ البتّة.	He was treated after his intestines had come out of the wound for 24 hours, so the wound united in about 15 days and he was cured until he recovered and lived for many years afterwards, moving well in all his conditions, and the doctors used to rule that he would not recover.
ومن العجب أنّى لم أعالجه بمرهم لأنّى كنت فى موضع لا يوجد فيه شىء من الأدوية فكنت أضع على الجرح القطن البالى مرّتين فى النهار وأتعهّد غسله بماء العسل حتّى يبرأ.	And it is amazing that I did not treat him with a medication because I was in a place where none of the medications existed, so I put on the wound cotton soaked twice a day and I bound it with honey water until he recovered.
وأمّا أحد النوعين من الخياطة الخاصّيّة فإنّى أذكره على نصّ كلام جالينوس وهو أن تبتدئ بالخياطة من الجلد وتدخل الإبرة من خارج الى داخل فإذا أنفذت الإبرة فى الجلد وفى العضلة الذاهبة على الاستقامة فى طول البطن كلّه.	As for one of the special kinds of suturing, I will mention to you a text from Galen's speech, which is that you start with the suturing from the skin and you insert the needle from outside to inside, so if you penetrate the needle in the skin and in the peritoneum on the straightness along the entire length of the abdomen.
تركت الحافّة من الصفاق فى الجانب الذى أدخلت فيه الإبرة وأنفذت الإبرة فى حافّته الأخرى من داخل الى خارج فى الحافّة الأخرى من المراقّ فإذا أنفذتها فأنفذها ثانية فى هذه الحافّة نفسها من المراقّ من خارج الى داخل.	The suture was inserted through the skin on one side where the needle was introduced and the needle was pushed through its other eye from inside to outside in the other skin flap of the wound, so if it is pulled out, it should be reinserted again in the same skin flap from outside to inside.
ودع حافّة الصفاق الذى فى هذا الجانب وأنفذ الإبرة فى حافّته الأخرى من داخل الى خارج وأنفذ مع إنفاذك لها فى الصفاق الى حافّة المراقّ التى فى ناحيته حتّى تنفذ فيها كلّها،.	Insert the suture thread into this side and push the needle through its other eye from inside to outside, and with pushing it in the skin insert it in the wound flap that is on its side until you insert all of it.
ثمّ ابتدئ أيضا من هذا الجانب بعينه وخطه مع الحافّة التى من الصفاق فى الجانب الآخر وأخرج الإبرة من الجلدة التى بقربه ثمّ ردّها فى تلك الجلدة وخط حافّة الصفاق التى فى الجانب الآخر مع هذه الحافّة من المراقّ.	Then start again from this side and pass it with the thread that is from the skin on the other side and bring the needle out of the flesh that is near it, then return it through that flesh and sew the skin thread that is on the other side along with this wound thread.
وأخرجها من الجلدة التى من ناحيته، وافعل ذلك مرّة أخرى وافعله مرّة بعد مرّة الى أن تخيط الجراحة كلّها على ذلك المثال، وجملة صفة هذه الخياطة أن تخاط خياطة الفرّائين للفراء.	And bring it out of the flesh that is on its side, and do that again and again until the entire suturing is done in this manner, and the summary characteristic of this suturing is that it sews like the way the seamstresses sew for them.
بأن تخيط الصفاق مرّة من جهة واحدة مع حافّة الجلد وأن تتركه مرّة من الجهة الأخرى حتّى تفرغ، وأمّا النوع الثانى من الخياطة الخاصّيّة التى ذكرها أيضا جالينوس فهذا كلامه نصّا.	It sews the skin one time from one side with the flesh thread and leaves it one time from the other side until it is empty, and as for the second type of suturing that Galenius also mentioned, this is his statement in text.
وهو أن تخيطها على مثال ما تخيطها قوم من المعالجين بأن يجمعوا كلّ جزء الى نظيره المشاكل له بالطبع فيضمّون حافّة الصفاق الى حافّته الأخرى وحافّة المراقّ الى حافّته الأخرى وذلك يكون على ما أصف لك.	And it is that he sews it like what the ancients used to do, in that they bring each part to its opposite, naturally joining the skin flap to its other skin flap and the wound flap to its other wound flap, and that is done as I described to you.
ينبغى أن تغرز الإبرة فى حاشية المراقّ القريبة منك من خارج وتنفذها الى داخل فيها وحدها وتدع حاشيتى الصفاق ثمّ تردّ الإبرة وتنفذها من خارج الى داخل فى حاشيتى الصفاق كلتيهما ثمّ تردّها أيضا.	It is necessary to insert the needle in the near edge of the wound from outside and push it through to inside in it alone, and leave the skin threads, then return the needle and push it through from outside to inside in both skin threads, then return it also.
وتنفذها من داخل الى خارج فى حاشية المراقّ الأخرى التى فى الجانب المقابل، وهذا الضرب من الخياطة أفضل من الخياطة العامّيّة السهلة وهى الخياطة التى تقدّم ذكرها، فهذا كلام جالينوس نصّا، وقد قال بعضهم قد تستقيم خياطة البطن بإبرتين.	It penetrates from the inside to the outside in the other suturing margin that is on the opposite side, and this kind of stitching is better than simple stitching which was mentioned earlier, and this is the statement of Galen, and some have said that sometimes the abdominal suturing can be done with two needles.
وذلك أن تدخل فيهما خيطا واحدا وتبدأ بإدخال الإبرة من عندك وتنفذها الى الجانب الآخر وتدخل الإبرة الأخرى من الجانب المقابل له فتنفذها من عندك على حسب خياطة الأساكفة سواء.	And that is by inserting a single thread into both needles, starting with the insertion of one needle from your side and penetrating to the other side, then inserting the other needle from the opposite side, so it penetrates from your side according to the stitching of the ribs or whatever.
واعلم أنّ الخرق اذا كان فى وسط البطن فإنّ خياطته أعسر من سائر مواضع البطن، وأمّا مداواة الجرح فحكمه فى مداواته حكم سائر الجراحات وذلك أنّك اذا أدركت الجرح طريّا بدمه قبل أن يغيّره الهواء ورددت المعاء وخطته وأحكمته فاحمل عليه الذرور الملحم.	And know that if the wound is in the middle of the abdomen, its stitching is more difficult than other locations of the abdomen. As for treating the wound, its treatment follows the same rules as other wounds, which is that you should dress it with its blood still fresh before it changes from exposure to air, and return the protruding intestines back to their place, and suture and tighten it, then apply the bandage with a plaster.
فإن كان الجرح قد غيّره الهواء فاحمل عليه بعض المراهم التى تحضرك حتّى يقيح وتسقط الخيوط ويلتحم الصفاق والمراقّ ثمّ تعالجه كعلاجك سائر الجراحات حتّى يبرأ.	For if the wound has been exposed to air, then apply some of the prepared plasters on it until it starts to form a scab, and the sutures loosen, and the peritoneum and the margin heal, then treat it as you would any other wound until it heals.
فإن لم تحضرك أدوية فاحمل عليه منذ يبتدئ بالقيح القطن البالى وابدله مرّتين فى النهار كما أعلمتك حتّى يبرأ فإنّك لا تحتاج الى علاج آخر فى أكثر الأحوال اذا كانت الجراحات بسيطة، فإن خشيت أن تشارك الجرح الأعضاء الرئيسة فى الألم.	For if you do not have any medication, then apply to it, once it starts to form a scab, the yellow cotton, and change it twice a day as I have taught you, until it heals. You will not need another treatment in most cases, if the wounds are simple, for I fear that the wound may involve the main organs in the pain.
فينبغى أن تغمس صوفا ليّنا فى الزيت المعتدل الحرارة او فى دهن الورد وتضعه حول المواضع التى فيما بين الأربيّة والإبط، فإن أحسّ بوجع او عفن فى معائه فكثيرا ما يعرض ذلك فاحقنه بشراب قابض أسود فاتر.	Then it is good to soak a woolen cloth in moderate warm oil or in the fat of roses, and put it around the areas between the arm pits and the groin, for if he feels pain or a mass in his intestines, this often happens, so treat him with a mixture of vinegar and absinthe.
ولا سيّما ان كان العفن قد بلغ فى المعاء وصار جرحا نافذا الى جوفه، واعلم أنّ ما كان من الأمعاء غليظا فهو أسهل برءا وما كان منها رقيقا فهو أعسر برءا.	Not in this case, if the pus has reached its peak in the wound and turned into an ulcer that has penetrated to the bowel, and it is known that what is of the intestines is tougher then it will be easier to cure, and what is of them thinner then it will be more difficult to cure.
وأمّا المعاء المعروف بالصائم فإنّه لا يقبل البرء من جراحة تقع به البتّة وذلك لكثرة ما فيه من العروق وعظمها ولرقّة جرمه وقربه من طبيعة العصب، وأمّا إن كان الذى برز من الجرح الثرب وأدركته طريّا فردّه على حسب ردّك المعاء سواء.	And as for the known intestine, it does not accept a cure from an operation that is performed on it suddenly, and that is because of the abundance of blood vessels in it and their thickness, and the thinness of its membrane and its closeness to the nature of nerves. And if what has protruded out of the wound is the caecum and you have grasped it with a bandage, then return it according to how you return the intestine, similarly.
فإن مضى له مدّة وقد اخضرّ او اسودّ فينبغى أن تشدّه بخيط فوق الموضع الذى اسودّ منه لئلا يعرض نزف دم فإنّ فى الثرب عروقا وشريانات، ثمّ تقطع ما دون ذلك الرباط.	For if a period of time has passed for it and it has become green or black, then it is suspected that you should constrict it with a thread above the place where it has become black, so that it does not bleed, because there are in the caecum blood vessels and nerves, then you cut what is below the constricted part.
وتجعل طرفى الخيط متعلّقين من أسفل الجراحة خارجا منها ليسهل عليك سلّه وإخراجه عند سقوط الثرب وتقيح الجرح، ذكر الجرح الذى يعرض فى المعاء، فأمّا اذا عرض خرق فى المعاء وكان صغيرا.	And you leave the two ends of the thread hanging from below the operation, outside of it, so that it is easy for you to pull it and take it out when the caecum falls and the wound is cleansed, this is the treatment of a wound that appears in the intestine. As for when there is a small perforation in the intestine.
فقد يمكن أن ينجبر فى بعض الناس من أجل أنّى رأيت إنسانا كان قد جرخ فى بطنه بطعنة رمح وكان الجرح عن يمين المعدة فأزمن الجرح وصار ناصورا يخرج منه البراز والريح فجعلت أعالجه على أنّى لم أطمع فى برءه.	For it is possible to close the perforation in some people, for I have seen a man who had been stabbed in his belly with a spearhead and the wound was to the right of the stomach, so the wound became fistulous and turned into an opening from which feces and flatus came out, so I made a colostomy there where I did not expect to cure.
فلم أزل ألاطفه حتّى برئ والتحم الموضع، فلمّا رأيت الموضع قد التحم خشيت على العليل أن يحدث عليه حادث سوء فى جوفه فلم يعرض له من ذلك حادث سوء البتّة وبقى فى أفضل أحواله.	For I did not cease to bandage him until the wound healed and the place closed, for when I saw that the place had closed, I feared for the man that a bad incident would happen to him in his belly, but no bad incident happened to him suddenly and he remained in the best of conditions.
صحيحا يأكل ويشرب ويجامع ويدخل الحمّام ويرتاض فى خدمته، وقد ذكر بعض أهل التجربة أنّه متى عرض فى المعاء جرح وكان صغيرا فينبغى أن يخاط على هذه الصفة.	It is eaten and drunk and gathered and inserted into the bath and used in its service, and some of the people of experience have mentioned that it appears as a wound in the intestine and was small so it does not deserve to be treated on this basis.
وهو أن يؤخذ النمل الكبار الرؤوس ثمّ تجمع شفتا الجرح ثمّ توضع نملة منها وهى مفتوحة الفم على شفتى الجرح فإذا قبضت عليه وشدّت فمها قطع رأسها فإنّه يلصق ولا ينحلّ، ثمّ توضع نملة أخرى بقرب الأولى.	And it is that the large ants are taken, then the edges of the wound are gathered, and one ant is placed with its mouth open on the edge of the wound, and if it bites down and closes its mouth, cutting off its head, then it sticks and does not fall off, then another ant is placed near the first one.
ولا تزال تفعل ذلك بعدّة نمل على قدر الجرح ثمّ تردّه وتخيط الجرح فإنّ تلك الرؤوس تبقى لاصقة فى المعاء حتّى يتغرّى المعاء ويبرأ ولا تحدث بالعليل آفة البتّة، وقد يمكن أن يخاط المعاء أيضا بالخيط الرقيق.	And you do not cease to do that with several ants according to the size of the wound, then the wound is bandaged and sewn, for those heads remain stuck in the intestine until the intestine exfoliates and heals, and no pus forms in the abscess, and it is also possible to sew the intestine with a thin thread.
الذى يسلّ من مصران الحيوان اللاصق به بعد أن يدخل فى إبرة وهو أن يؤخذ طرف هذا الخيط من المصران فيسلت نعمّا ثمّ يربط فى طرفه خيط كتان رقيق مفتول ثمّ يدخل ذلك الخيط فى الإبرة.	Which is done by threading the suture material through the needle after it has entered into the hollow of the needle, that is, one end of this thread is taken from the catgut and threaded through the eye, then a thin cotton thread is tied at its end, then that thread is inserted into the needle.
وفيه خيط المصران فيخاط به المعاء ثمّ يردّ الى الجوف، وهذا الضرب من الخياطة بالنمل والمصران إنّما هو على طريق الطمع والرجاء.	And in it, the catgut thread is sewn with, then the intestine is sewn and returned to its place, and this method of sewing with ants and catgut is a way of treatment by hope and expectation.
فأمّا إن كان الخرق كبيرا واسعا ولا سيّما إن كان فى أحد الأمعاء الرقاق فليس فيه حيلة ولا منه برء البتّة،.	And if the wound is large and wide and not limited, and if it is in one of the delicate intestines, then there is no trick or remedy for the abscess.
الفصل السادس والثمانون.	The sixth and eighth section.
فى علاج الزكام والناصور.	On the treatment of catarrh and sinusitis.
اعلم أنّ كلّ جرح او ورم اذا أزمن وتقادم وصار قرحة ولم يلتحم وكان يمدّ القيح دائما لا ينقطع فيسمّى على الجملة فى أىّ عضو كان ناصورا ونحن نسمّيه زكاما، والناصور.	Know that every wound or ulcer, if it becomes chronic and festering and becomes a sore and does not heal, and continually discharges pus, is called in general, regardless of the organ it is in, a sinus and we call it catarrh.
هو على الحقيقة تعقّد متلبّد صلب أبيض لا وجع معه له تجويف كتجويف ريش الطير.	On the reality is a complicated, confused, solid, white, boneless with no joint, and its cavitation is like the cavitation of the feathers of birds.
ولذلك سمّاه بعضهم ريشة، ويكون فى بعض الأوقات رطبا يمدّ دائما القيح وربّما انقطعت الرطوبة فى بعض الأوقات وقد تكون هذه الرطوبة كثيرة وتكون قليلة وتكون غليظة وتكون رقيقة.	Therefore, some of them called it a feather, and it is at times a cyst that constantly discharges pus, or perhaps the discharge stops at times, and this discharge may be abundant or scarce, and it may be thick or thin.
وقد قدّمت فى التقسيم عند ذكرى الجراحات أنّ كلّ قرحة لا تبرأ ولا ينبت فيها لحم فإنّما ذلك لأحد تسعة أسباب أحدها إمّا لقلّة الدم فى البدن وإمّا لرداءته وإمّا لأنّ فى داخلها وعلى شفتيها لحم صلب يمنع نبات اللحم الجيّد.	And perhaps I mentioned in the book of surgeries that every ulcer that does not heal and in which no flesh grows, this is due to one of nine reasons, one of which is either because of a lack of blood in the body, or because it is variced, or because there is within it and on its edges hard flesh that prevents the growth of good flesh.
وإمّا أنّها كثيرة الوضر والوسخ وإمّا لأنّ القرحة فى نفسها عفنة والمادّة التى تمدّها رديئة الكيفيّة وإمّا لأنّ الدواء غير موافق فى علاجها وإمّا لفساد وقع فى البلدة من جنس الوبأ وإمّا لخاصّة فى البلدة.	Or because it is abundant in putridity and filth, or because the ulcer itself is foul and the material that discharges from it is bad, or because the medicine is not suitable for its treatment, or because of a corruption that occurs in the country, being of the type that is called "oza", or because of a special property of the country.
كما عرض فى مدينة سرقسطة التى يعسر فيها نضج الأمراض ويبطئ فيها برء الأورام بالطبع وإمّا لأنّ فيها عظما واحدا او عدّة عظام، وقد بيّنت جميع هذه الأسباب وعلاماتها وعلاجاتها بالأدوية فى التقسيم.	As happened in the city of Saragossa, where the digestion of diseases is difficult and the healing of organs is slow by nature, or because there is one or more bones in it. All these reasons, their signs, and their treatments with medicines were explained in the book.
وينبغى لى هاهنا أن أعرفك بعلاج الناصور والزكام الذى يكون بطريق العمل باليد، اعلم أنّ النواصير قد تحدث فى جميع أعضاء الجسم فمنها نواصير تنتهى الى أوراد عظيمة وشريانات او الى عصب.	It is suitable for me to inform you of the treatment of the nasal polyps and the cataracts that occur through manual operation, know that polyps can occur in all organs of the body, so among them are polyps that extend to large blood vessels and nerves or to sinuses.
او الى صفاق او الى معاء او الى مثانة او الى ضلع من الأضلاع او الى فقار من فقارات الظهر او الى مفصل من المفاصل المركّبة تركيبا كثيرا مثل اليد والرجل ومنها ما يفضى الى قرب عضو رئيس ونحو ذلك،.	Or to the spleen or to the liver or to the bladder or to one of the ribs or to one of the vertebrae of the back or to a joint from the composite joints, such as the hand and the foot, and among them are those that extend near a principal organ and so on.
فما كان من هذه النواصير على هذه الصفة فهى من الأمراض العسرة البرء التى لا تقبل العلاج والاشتغال بها عناء وجهل، فإن كان من النواصير ما لم يصل الى هذه المواضع التى ذكرت ورجوت وطمعت فى علاجها.	What of these ulcers has this quality, it is among the severe and chronic diseases that do not accept treatment, and to busy oneself with them is ignorance and foolishness, for if there are ulcers that have not reached these places I mentioned, and about which I felt secure and confident in their treatment.
وأردت أن تتوصّل الى معرفة ذلك فخذ مسبارا من نحاس او حديد إن كان الناصور يمرّ على استقامة ففتّشه به، فإن كان فى الناصور تعريج ففتشّه بمسبار من رصاص رقيق لأنّ الرصاص يلين جسمه.	And I have found that it is beneficial to make an exploration to recognize this, so take a probe made of copper or iron, if the ulcer passes over a bone, then open it with this, and if there is unevenness in the ulcer, then explore it with a probe made of thin lead, for lead softens the body.
فيسلس عند الدخول وينعطف نحو التعريج، فإن كان الناصور ذا أفواه كثيرة لا يمكنك أن تستدلّ عليها بالمسبار فاحقن منها فمًا واحدا من أفواهه فإنّ الرطوبة التى تحقنه بها تسلك نحو الأفواه الأخر وتسيل.	It becomes smooth upon entering and is directed towards the unevenness, if the ulcer has many mouths and you are not able to explore them with a probe, then make an incision in one of its mouths, for the humidity that forms there will cause it to spread towards the other mouths.
منها ثمّ استقص التفتيش على أىّ وجه أمكنك لتعرف إن كان هناك عظم او عصب او كان الناصور قعره بعيدا او قريبا او كان ناصورا واحدا له أفواه كثيرة وقف على جميع ذلك بمبلغ طاقتك من استخبارك العليل وجوده الألم عند غمز يدك على الموضع.	Then proceed with exploration in whichever way you can to recognize if there is a bone or nerve, or if the ulcer is deep and far or near, or if it is a single ulcer with many mouths, and investigate all of that according to your ability, for the presence of pain when you press on the location with your finger.
ونحو ذلك من الدلائل والأسباب الحادثة للورم، فإذا وقفت على جميع ذلك وقوف حقيقة فحينئذ فصر الى العلاج على ثقة وهو أن تنظر فإن كان.	And approach that from the signs and symptoms that occur with tumors, so if you investigate all of that in a genuine manner, then proceed to treatment with confidence, which is that you should consider if it was.
الناصور ظاهرا قريبا او فى موضع سالم بعيد من مفصل او عصب او شريان او وريد او أحد المواضع التى ذكرت لك فشقّ الناصور على ما تقدّم من وصفى وانتزع ما فيه من التلبّد واللحوم الفاسدة واللحوم الزائدة.	The ulcer appears to be near the surface or in a healthy location, far from a joint or nerve or artery or vein, or one of the locations I mentioned to you, so dissect the ulcer according to what I previously described, and remove from it the foul and dead tissue and the excess flesh.
وما ينبت فى فمه من لحم او ثؤلول ونحو ذلك وعالجه حتّى يبرأ، فإن كان الناصور بعيد القعر وكان على استقامة فينبغى أن تشقّه فى العمق قدر ما أمكنك ثمّ تنقّيه من جميع لحومه الفاسدة.	And what grows in its mouth from flesh or callus and the like, treat until it heals, for if the ulcer is deep and on a bone, it is advisable that you make an incision in the depth as much as you can, then excavate it from all of its dead tissue.
ثمّ استعمل الفتل الملثوثة فى الأدوية الحادّة ودسّها الى قعر الناصور الذى تدركه بالحديد، افعل به ذلك مرّات حتّى يأكل ذلك الدواء الحادّ جميع ما بقى فى قعر الناصور من الفساد.	The surgeon should use the perforator in administering powders and insert it into the nasal passages, striking it with the iron, do this repeatedly until the sharp powder absorbs all the corrupt material remaining in the nasal passages.
ثمّ اجبره بالمراهم التى تنبت اللحم صحيحا حتّى يبرأ فإن لم يبرأ بذلك فاكوه على ما تقدّم وصفه، فإن كان سبب الناصور عظم وصحّ ذلك عندك ففتّشه وشقّه على ما أخبرتك إن لم يمنعك مانع من.	Then force it with the ointments that grow the flesh, until he is cured, if he does not cure with that, then cauterize him as previously described and prescribed, if the cause of the nasal passage was a bone and that is correct according to you, then split it and cut it as I have informed you, if nothing prevents you from doing so.
عرق او عصب او عضو رئيس كما قلنا، فإن انكشف اليك العظم وكان فيه بعض الفساد والسواد فاجرده حتّى يذهب فساده ثمّ عالجه بما يلحمه حتّى يبرأ، فإن لم يبرأ وأمدّ القيح كما كان يفعل.	A vein or a nerve or a main organ, as we have said, if the bone becomes exposed to you and there is some corruption and blackening in it, then treat it until its impurities disappear, then anoint it with what will be suitable for it until it cures, if it does not cure and the pus increases as it was doing.
فاعلم أنّك لم تصل الى جميع استئصال الفساد فاكشف جميع ما عليه ثانية واستقص جرده وتنقيته بأبلغ جهدك ثمّ اجبره، فإن برئ وإلّا فاعلم أنّ ذلك الفساد فى غور بعيد من الفساد فاكشف جميع ما عليه ثانية.	Know that you have not reached the complete removal of the corruption, so expose all that is above it again and excavate its base and cleanse it with your greatest effort, then cauterize it, if it cures, if not, know that the corruption is in a deep and distant place, so expose all that is above it again.
واستقص جرده وتنقيته بأبلغ جهدك كان العظم الفاسد عظما صغيرا وأمكنك جذبه فاجذبه بالكلاليب اللطاف التى تصلح لذلك.	And excavate its base and cleanse it with your greatest effort, if the corrupted bone is a small bone and you are able to extract it, then extract it with fine and delicate forceps that are suitable for that.
فإن كانت عظام كثيرة فاستقص جذبها كلّها ولا تترك منها شيئا جهدك فإن اعترضك شىء من الرباطات دونها ولم يكن فى قطعها خطر فاقطع تلك الرباطات واللحوم إن كانت هناك وخلّص العظام.	For if there are many bones, then excavate and extract all of them, do not leave any of them with your effort, if something from the ligaments beneath them obstructs you and it is not dangerous to cut them, then cut those ligaments and flesh if they are there, and extract the bones.
فإن لم يتأتّ لك انتزاع العظام من وقتك فاحمل على الجرح ما يعفّنه واتركه أيّاما حتّى يعفن ما حول تلك العظام من اللحوم والرباطات واحفظ الجرح لا يلتحم الشقّ الذى كنت شققت فى خلال عملك.	For if you are not able to extract the bones at that time, then put on the wound what will make it less painful and leave it for a while until the flesh and ligaments surrounding those bones putrefy, and keep the wound from being joined, so that the incision you made during your work does not close.
بل ضع عليه إن خشيت ذلك قطنة مغموسة فى الكبريت المسحوق مع الزيت او قطنة مغموسة فى المرهم المصرىّ او أحد المراهم الخضر فإنّها اذا عفنت تلك الرباطات وتبرت العظام سهل انتزاعها وجذبها.	Apply to it, if you fear that, a cataplasm of violet in oil or a cataplasm of Egyptian collirium or one of the other green colliria, for if these soften the ligaments and strengthen the bones, it will be easy to extract and pull them.
فإن كان عظما واحدا كبيرا مثل عظم الساق او عظم الفخذ ونحوه وكان الذى فسد منه وجهه فقط فاجرده جردا بليغا حتّى يذهب ذلك السواد والفساد ثمّ اجبر الجرح، فإن كان الذى فسد منه جزءا كبيرا وكان الفساد قد بلغ مخّ العظم فلا بدّ من نشره.	For if it was a large and single bone, such as the bone of the leg or the thigh and its like, and the part that had become necrotic was only on one side, then scrape it with a blunt scalpel until the blackness and necrosis disappear, then dress the wound. If the part that had become necrotic was large and the necrosis had reached the marrow of the bone, then there is no alternative but to cut it out.
وقطعه كلّه الى حيث ينتهى الفساد فحينئذ فعالجه حتّى يلتحم، وأنا أخبرك بزكام كان قد عرض لرجل فى ساقه لتجعله مثالا وعونا على علاجك، كان هذا الرجل حدث السنّ.	And cut out all of it until where the necrosis ends, then cauterize it until it heals. I tell you about a case that happened to a man in his leg, which became an example and a lesson for your treatment, this man was young.
نحو الثلاثين عاما قد عرض له وجع فى ساقه عن سبب تحرّك عليه من داخل البدن حتى اتّصلت الموادّ الى الساق وتورّم ورما عظيما ولم يكن سبب من خارج ثمّ تمادى به الزمان مع خطاء الأطبّاء حتّى انفتح الورم.	A man about thirty years old, to whom a wound appeared in his leg due to a cause that moved inside the abdomen until the materials reached the leg and became inflamed and increased greatly, and there was no external cause, then time passed with the mistakes of the physicians until the tumor opened.
وجرت منه موادّ كثيرة وأسيئ فى علاجه حتّى تزكّم الساق وصارت فيه أفواه كثيرة كلّها تمدّ القيح ورطوبات البدن فعالجه جماعة من الأطبّاء نحو عامين ولم يكن فيهم حاذق بصناعة اليد.	A lot of material flowed out of it and he was difficult to treat, until the leg became ulcerated and many mouths formed in it, each one discharging pus, and the intestines were treated by a group of physicians for about two years, and none of them was skilled with manual skill.
حتّى قصدنى فرأيت ساقه والموادّ تسيل من تلك الأفواه سيلانا عظيما والرجل قد نحل جسمه واصفرّ لونه فأدخلت المسبار فى أحد تلك الأفواه فأفضى المسبار الى العظم ثمّ فتّشت الأفواه كلّها.	Until he came to me, and I saw his leg and the materials flowing out of those mouths in a great flow, and the man's body was emaciated and his color had turned yellow, so I inserted a probe into one of those mouths, and the probe passed onto the bone, then I explored all the mouths.
فوجدتها تفضى بعضها الى بعض من جميع جهات الساق فبدرت فشققت على أحد تلك الأفواه حتّى كشفت بعض العظم فوجدته فاسدا قد تأكّل واسودّ وتعفّن وتثقّب حتّى نفذت الثقب الى المخّ فنشرت ما انكشف لى.	And I found that some of them passed into each other from all sides of the leg, so I made an incision over one of those mouths until I exposed part of the bone, and I found it to be necrotic, having become hard and black, and softened and excavated, until a perforation reached the marrow, so I removed what was exposed.
وتمكّن من العظم الفاسد وأنا أظنّ أن ليس فى العظم غير ذلك الفساد الذى قطعت ونشرت وأنّى قد استأصلته ثمّ جعلت أجبر الجرح بالأدوية الملحمة مدّة أطول فلم يلتحم ثمّ عدت فكشفت عن العظم ثانية فوق الكشف الأوّل.	The fracture became consolidated and I thought that there was no other fracture in the bone besides the one I had cut, dissected, and extracted, then I applied a medicated poultice for a long period, but it did not heal. Then I returned and made an incision above the previous one on the bone for the second time.
فوجدت الفساد متّصلا بالعظم فنشرت ما ظهر لى أيضا من ذلك الفساد ثمّ رمت إجباره فلم ينجبر ولا التحم ثمّ كشفت عليه أيضا فلم أزل أقطع العظم جزءا جزءا وأروم جبره فلا ينجبر حتّى قطعت من العظم نحو شبر.	I found the fracture connected to the bone, so I dissected what appeared from that fracture as well, then I applied a poultice but it did not heal nor become consolidated. Then I made an incision on it also, and I did not stop cutting parts of the bone and applying a poultice until I cut about a quarter of the bone.
وأخرجته بمخّه ثمّ جبرته بالأدوية فالتحم سريعا وبرئ، وإنّما وجب هذا التكرار فى عمله وشقّه لحالة ضعف العليل وقلّة احتماله وخوفى عليه الموت لأنّه كان يحدث له فى كلّ الأوقات من إفراط الاستفراغ غشى ردئ فبرئ برءا تامّا.	I then pulled it out with its marrow and applied a poultice, so the healing occurred quickly and he recovered. However, I had to repeat this process because of his weak condition, little tolerance, and my fear for his death since he used to vomit excessively at all times, so he recovered a complete recovery.
ونبت فى موضع العظم لحم صلب وصلحت حاله فى جسمه وتراجعت قوّته وتصرّف فى أحواله ولم تتعرّضه فى المشى آفة تضرّ به البتّة، فإن كان عظم نات فى موضع من الجسم قد انكسر.	And flesh grew in the place of the bone, and his condition improved in his body, and his strength returned, and he was refined in his habits, and no harm affected him while walking, except if it were a bone that was broken in a place of the body.
فينبغى أن تنشره على هذه الصفة وهو أن تأخذ رباطا فتشدّه فى طرف العظم الناتى وتأمر من يمدّه الى فوق وتصير رباطا آخر من صوف أغلظ من الرباط الأوّل.	So it should be dissected in this manner, which is to take a bandage, and tie it at the end of the fractured bone, and order someone to pull it upwards, and make another bandage from softer material than the first bandage.
ثمّ تربطه على اللحم الذى تحت العظم وتمدّ طرفه لينجذب اللحم الى أسفل وأنت تكشف اللحم عن الموضع الذى تريد نشره لئلّا يؤذى المنشار اللحم وتضع خشبة او لوحا تحت العظم من أسفل محكما.	Then tie it to the flesh under the bone, and stretch its end so that the flesh is pulled downwards, and you make an incision in the flesh to expose the place you want to dissect, lest the dissector harm the flesh, and put a stick or a board under the bone from below, smoothed.
لأنّه اذا فعلت ذلك لم يمتنع المنشار من قطع العظم الفاسد، وينبغى أن يكون النشر فوق موضع الفساد قليلا لئلّا يكون فى تجويف العظم فساد فلا يظهر فى ظاهره للحسّ فتضطرّ الى نشره مرّة أخرى.	For if you do that, the dissector will not be prevented from cutting the fractured bone, and it should be dissected a little above the place of the fracture, lest there be a fracture inside the bone that does not appear on its surface to the touch, so you are forced to make another dissection.
فإن كان العظم فاسدا ولم يكن ناتيا بل يتّصل بعضه ببعض والفساد فى وسطه او فى بعضه فاكشف اللحم من جميع جهاته كلّها ثمّ تضع الخشبة من أسفل ثمّ تنشره من الجهة الأولى حيث الفساد.	If the bone is fractured and not displaced, but rather connected in part to part, with the fracture in the middle or in some of it, then expose the flesh from all its sides, then put the splint from below, then spread it from the first side where the fracture is.
فإذا فرغت من نشره فانشره من الجهة الأخرى وليكن النشر على بعد من الفساد قليلا على ما قلنا، فإن كان الفساد فى مفصل قطعت المفصل الفاسد نفسه ونشرت العظم حيث يتّصل من الجهة الأخرى.	If it becomes loose from spreading, then spread it from the other side, and let the spreading be at a distance from the fracture a little as we have said. If the fracture is in a joint, cut the fractured joint itself and spread the bone where it connects from the other side.
فإن كان الفساد فى اتّصال مفصلين فليس فيه حيلة غير الجرد، فإن كان الفساد فى مشط اليد او مشط الرجل فالأمر فى علاجه عسر جدّا ولكن ينبغى أن تقشر الفساد كيف ما ظهر لك وتجرده وتنقيه على أىّ حال يمكنك.	If the fracture is in the connection of two joints, then there is no trick except for splinting. If the fracture is in the forearm or the shin of the leg, the matter of its treatment is very difficult, but it is necessary that you should reduce the fracture however it appears to you and splint it and clean it in any way you can.
وبأىّ حيلة تستقيم لك متى لم يعترضك عرق او عصب، واعلم أنّ المقاطع والمناشير لقطع هذه العظام كثيرة على حسب وضع العظام ونصبها وغلظها ورقّتها وكبرها وصغرها وصلابتها وتخلخلها.	And with any trick the bone is straightened for you, when neither a nerve nor an artery interferes with you. And know that the sections and the incisions to cut these bones are many according to the position of the bones and their density and roughness and smoothness and size and hardness and softness.
فلذلك ينبغى أن تعدّ لكلّ نوع من العمل آلة مشاكلة لذلك العمل.	Therefore, it is necessary that you prepare for each type of work an instrument suitable for that work.
واعلم أنّ الأعمال أنفسها قد تدلّك على نوع الآلة التى تحتاج اليها اذا كانت معك دربة طويلة ومعرفة بفنون هذه الصناعة لأنّ من مهر الصناعة وشاهد ضروبا من الأمراض.	And know that the works themselves may inform you of the type of instrument you need, if you have with you long experience and knowledge of the arts of this industry, for one who has skill in the craft and has seen many cases of diseases.
فقد يستنبط لنفسه ما يشاكله من الآلات لكلّ مرض وأنا مصوّر لك فى آخر هذاالباب عدّةآلات.	For he may figure out for himself what instruments he suspects for each disease, and I will show you at the end of this chapter several instruments.
تجعلها أمثلة تحتذى عليها وقياسا تقيس بها على غيرها إن شاء الله، صورة منشار:.	Make them examples to guide by and a standard to measure others against, if God wills. The picture of a menashar (a type of surgical instrument):
صورة منشار آخر:.	The picture of another menashar:.
صورة منشار صغير:.	The picture of a small menashar:.
صورة منشار كبير:.	Figure of a large surgical instrument
صورة مجرد:.	Schematic figure:
يكون رأس هذا المجرد على هيئة رأس المسمار مكوكبا ونقشه على هيئة نقش الإسكلفاج وإنّما يصلح أن تحكّ به رؤوس المفاصل اذا فسدت او عظما واسعا كبيرا، صورة مجرد آخر صغير:.	The head of this instrument is in the form of the head of a chef's knife, curved and engraved like the engraving on a scalpel, and it is suitable for scraping the heads of joints if they become blocked or swollen and large. Another small schematic figure:
صورة مجرد عريض:.	Figure of a slender surgical instrument:
صورة منشار آخر محكم:.	Figure of another solid surgical instrument:
يصنع قوسه الأعلى وشفرته من حديد ونصابه من عود بقس مخروط محكم، صورة مجرد فيه تجويف:.	Its upper arch and its edge are made of iron, and its handle is made from a rod with a solid cone-shaped end, figure of a hollow surgical instrument:
صورة مجرد آخر لطيف:.	Figure of another delicate surgical instrument:
صورة مجرد:.	Figure of a surgical instrument:
صورة مجرد آخر معقّف الطرف:.	Figure of another surgical instrument with a bent end:
صورة مجرد صغير يشبه المسبار:.	Figure of a small surgical instrument resembling a lancet:
صورة مقطع آخر صغير:.	Figure of another small section:
صورة مجرد أيضا:.	Figure of a surgical instrument also:
وطرفه كالمرود يتصرّف فى مواضع كثيرة من جرد العظام، صورة مجرد يصلح لجرد ما انثقب من العظام:.	Its end is like a file, and it is used in many places for scraping the bones, figure of a surgical instrument suitable for scraping what has become perforated in the bones:
طرفه مثلّث حادّ الحواشى يصنع من حديد هندىّ وكذلك ينبغى أن تصنع جميع ما ذكرنا من المجارد والمقاطع، صورة مجرد:.	Its end is like a sharp-toothed saw, made of wrought iron, and it is also fitting that all the surgical instruments and sections we mentioned be made in this way, figure of a surgical instrument:
الفصل السابع والثمانون.	The seventh and eighth chapters.
فى قطع الأطراف ونشر العظام.	On cutting off the extremities and scraping of bones.
قد تعفن الأطراف إمّا من سبب من خارج وإمّا من سبب من داخل فإذا عالجت ذلك الفساد بعلاج الأدوية ولم ينجع العلاج ورأيت الفساد يسعى فى العضو لا يردعه شىء.	When the extremities become putrid, either from an external cause or from an internal one, and if you treated that corruption with medicinal treatments and the treatment did not work, and you saw the corruption spreading in the organ and nothing could stop it.
فينبغى أن تقطع ذلك العضو الى حيث بلغ الفساد لينجو العليل بذلك من الموت او من بلاء عظيم هو أعظم من فقد العضو، وعلامة من عرض له ذلك أن يسودّ العضو حتّى تظنّ أنّ النار أحرقته.	It is fitting to cut off that organ where the corruption has reached, so as to rescue the rest from death or from a severe disability, which is worse than the loss of the organ. A sign of this condition is when the organ becomes blackened, to the point where you think it was burned by fire.
او يعفن بعد السواد حتّى يسعى ذلك العفن الى ما يلى ذلك العضو ويأخذ فى جملة البدن فبادر بقطعه، وكذلك إن كان سبب الفساد عن لسع بعض الهوامّ كعقرب البحر او الأفعى او الرتيلاء ونحو ذلك.	Or the corruption is buried after the incision, and that corruption spreads to what is near that member, and it seizes in total of the body, so hasten to cut it, and likewise if the cause of the corruption is due to the bite of some poisonous animals like scorpion or centipede or beetle and the like.
فإن كان الفساد او اللسعة فى طرف الأصبع فاقطع الأصبع ولا تمهل الفساد أن يسعى الى اليد وكذلك إن كان أخذ فى اليد فاقطعها من أصل الزند ولا تمهل الفساد أن يسعى حتّى يأخذ فى زندى الذراع.	For if the corruption or the bite is in the side of the forearm, then cut the forearm and do not delay, lest the corruption spread to the hand, and likewise if it has taken hold in the hand, then cut it off from the base of the wrist, and do not delay, lest the corruption spread until it takes hold in the forearm.
وكذلك إن أخذ فى الذراع فاقطع الذراع عند المرفق فى المفصل نفسه، فإن جاز الفساد ورأيته أخذ الى نحو المنكب فلا تقطع المنكب البتّة فإنّ فى ذلك موت العليل واستعمل غير ذلك من العلاج على قدر الطاقة.	And likewise, if it has taken hold in the upper arm, then cut the upper arm at the elbow, in its own joint, for if the corruption has passed and you see it taking hold towards the shoulder, do not cut the shoulder, for in that is the death of the patient, and use other treatments according to the capacity.
وكذلك تفعل بالرجل اذا أخذ الفساد فى الأصبع فاقطع الأصبع عند أحد السلاميات، وإن أخذ فى مشط الرجل فاقطع الرجل بأسرها فإن صعد الى الركبة فاقطع الساق عند مفصل الركبة.	And likewise, do the same with the leg, if the corruption takes hold in the foot, then cut the foot at one of the ankles, and if it takes hold in the calf of the leg, then cut the leg along with its tendons, and if it rises to the knee, then cut the thigh at the joint of the knee.
وإن كان الفساد قد بلغ فوق الركبة فليس فيه حيلة إلّا تركه وإسلام العليل الى الموت، وصفة قطع العضو او نشره أن تشدّ رباطا فى أسفل الموضع الذى تريد قطعه وتشدّ رباطا آخر فوق الموضع.	And if the corruption has reached above the knee, then there is no trick except to leave it and surrender the patient to death, and the method of cutting the member or amputating it is that you tie a ligature at the bottom of the place where you want to cut, and tie another ligature above the place.
ويمدّ خادم الرباط الواحد الى أسفل ويمدّ خادم آخر الرباط الأعلى الى فوق وتجرد أنت اللحم بين الرباطين بمبضع عريض حتّى ينكشف اللحم كلّه ثمّ يقطع او ينشر، وينبغى أن تضع من جميع الجهات خرق الكتان.	And a servant tightens the lower ligature below and another servant tightens the upper ligature above, and you strip the flesh between the ligatures with a curved razor until all the flesh is exposed, then it is cut or amputated, and it is desirable that you apply cotton pads to all sides.
لئلّا يمسّ المنشار الموضع الصحيح فيعرض للعليل ألم زائد وورم حارّ، فإن حدث نزف دم فى خلال عملك فاكو الموضع بسرعة او احمل عليه بعض الذرورات القاطعة للدم ثمّ عد الى علاجك حتّى تفرغ.	For if the scalpel misses the correct place, it causes the patient additional pain and hot inflammation, and if there is a flow of blood during your operation, then press the place quickly or apply some cauterizing powders to stop the bleeding, then return to your treatment until you are finished.
ثمّ اربط العضو المجروح برباط يصلح له وعالجه حتّى يبرأ، وأنا أخبرك بمثال عرض لرجل فى رجله هذا العارض بعينه الذى أصف لك وذلك أنّه حدث فى رجله سواد مع حرقة تشبه النار.	The ligament of the injured member is connected with a ligature that suits it and its bandage until it heals, and I will tell you an example of an inflammation in a man's leg, this very same inflammation that I describe to you, which occurred in his leg, namely, a bruise appeared in his leg along with a boil resembling a pustule.
وكان ذلك الفساد أوّل ما حدث فى أصبعه حتّى أخذ الرجل كلّها فبدر الرجل من ذاته لمّا رأى الفساد يسعى فى العضو مع شدّة ما كان يجد من الوجع والحرقة فقطعه عند المفصل فبرئ.	And that corruption was the first thing that happened in his fingers until the entire leg took it, so the leg festered from itself when he saw the corruption spreading in the member with the intensity of the pain he felt from the ulceration and the boil, which cut off at the joint.
فلمّا مضى له زمان طويل عرض له ذلك الفساد بعينه فى أصبع يده السبّابة فقصدنى فرمت ردع ذلك الفضل بما حملت على اليد من الأدوية بعد تنظيفى لبدنه فلم يرتدع الفضل وجعل يسعى فى الأصبع الآخر.	When a long time had passed for him, that same corruption appeared to him in the index finger of his left hand, so he came to me and I treated the swelling of that finger by applying a poultice after cleaning its abscess, but the swelling did not subside and it made the infection spread to the other finger.
حتّى أخذ الفساد فى اليد فدعانى الى قطع يده فأبيت عليه رجاء منّى على إرداع ذلك الفضل وخشيت أيضا عليه عند قطع يده الموت لأنّ قوّة الرجل كانت على السقوط، فلمّا يئس منّى انصرف الى بلده.	Until the corruption took hold in the hand, so he begged me to amputate it, but I refused him, hoping for a cure of that corruption, and I was also afraid of death for him when his hand would be cut off because the man's strength was failing, so when I lost hope, I sent him back to his country.
فبلغنى عنه أنّه بدر فقطع يده بأسرها فبرئ، وإنّما حكيت هذه الحكاية لتكون عونا على ما يقع من جنس هذا المرض ولتكون دليلا يستدلّ به ويعمل عليه،.	I was told about him that he cut off his hand along with its arm and got cured, and I only told this story to be a reference for what happens in cases of this disease and to be a sign by which one can infer and act.
الفصل الثامن والثمانون.	The Eighth Section, the Eighty-Eighth.
فى علاج المخابئ وكيفيّة حقنها بالأدوية.	On the treatment of abscesses and how to inject them with medications.
اذا حدث ورم فى بعض الأعضاء اللحميّة وطالت مدّة الورم حتّى جمع مدّة ثمّ انفجر او بطّ وخرج جميع ما كان فيه من المدّة وبقى الموضع فارغا كأنّه وعاء.	If a tumor occurs in some of the fleshy organs and the duration of the tumor is long until it gathers pus, then it ruptures or bursts and all that was inside it from the pus comes out, and the area remains empty as if it were a hollow vessel.
والجلد الذى عليه كالخرقة قد رقّ ولم يكن بالغ فى فساده أن أثّر فى عظم ولا فى عصب ولا فى رباط ومن هنا استحقّ أن يسمّى مخبأ ولم يسمّ ناصورا إلّا أن تطول مدّته حتّى يؤثّر الفساد فى شىء من هذه الأعضاء.	And the abscess that is on it, like a boil, has softened and did not become severe in its corruption so as to affect the bone or the nerve or the ligament, and from this it deserves to be called an abscess, but it will not be called a nodule unless its duration becomes long until the corruption affects one of these organs.
فحينئذ يسمّى ناصورا او زكاما، وعلاجه أن تقطع ذلك الجلد كلّه كما يدور ولا سيّما اذا كان قد رقّ وصار كالخرقة وتيقّنت أنّه لا يلصق بالموضع لفساده.	It is called nasoura or zakama, and its treatment is to cut out the entire callus as it turns, without leaving any of it, if it has become thin like a rag and has adhered so that it does not stick to the site of the ulcer.
فإن رجوت أن يلصق الجلد ولم يكن بلغ منه الفساد ذلك المبلغ وكان فى الجلد ثخن من اللحم فعالجه بالحقنة، وهو أن تنظر الى المخبأ فإن كان كبيرا والقيح الذى يمدّ منه منتن الرائحة فاحقنه بالدواء المصرىّ.	For if you hope that the callus will adhere and the corruption has not reached that extent, and there is thickness of flesh in the callus, its treatment is by cauterization, which is that you examine the abscess to see if it is large and the pus that comes out of it with a foul smell, then treat it with Egyptian ointment.
الذى هو خلّ وزيت وعسل وزنجار أجزاء سواء تجمع فى إناء وتطبخ على النار حتّى يخثر الدواء ويأتى فى ثخن العسل، ثمّ تأخذ منه حاجتك وترقّقه بالماء والعسل وتحقن به المخبأ وتشدّ فمه وتترك الدواء فيه قدر ساعتين.	Which is a mixture of honey, oil, and zanjabeel in equal parts, combined and boiled over the fire until the medicine thickens and becomes like the thickness of honey, then you take what you need and mix it with water and honey and apply it to the abscess, and bind it tightly and leave the medicine on for two hours.
ثمّ تخرجه بالعصر تفعل ذلك أيّاما حتّى ينقى المخبأ ويذهب النتن، وقد يحقن بماء الرماد اذا لم يحضرك هذا الدواء، وهوأن تأخذ رماد حطب الكرم او رماد حطب البلوط والق عليه الماء.	Then you extract it with a bandage, doing this repeatedly until the abscess is clean and the foul smell goes away, and you can treat it with water of ashes if this medicine is not available to you, which is that you take the ash of burnt wood of vine or the ash of burnt wood of oak and put water on it.
ثمّ صفّه واحقن به حتّى تتيقّن أنّ المخبأ قد انغسل، فإن لم يكن فى العليل احتمال على الدواء المصرىّ ولا ماء الرماد فاحقنه بماء وعسل قد خلط فيه شىء من الزنجار المسحوق.	Then wipe it and treat it until you are sure that the abscess has been reduced, if it was not in the upper part, put on the Egyptian ointment or water of ashes, then treat it with a mixture of water and honey in which a piece of crushed zanjabeel has been mixed.
او تحقنه بالعسل والشراب مزوجين لأنّ من شأن العسل أن ينقى ويغسل والشراب يلزق المخبأ ولا سيّما اذا كان الشراب فيه فضل قبض ويبس، فإذا فعلت ذلك مرّات وتيقّنت أنّ المخبأ قد ذهب فساده فاحقنه بما ينبت اللحم فيه.	Or treat it with a mixture of honey and sharab, because the nature of honey is to clean and reduce, and the sharab adheres to the abscess, and there is no harm if the sharab has been left to thicken and dry, so if you do this several times and are sure that the abscess has gone, then dress it with something that will grow flesh on it.
مثل أن تأخذ من المرهم النخلىّ وتحلّه بدهن ورد وشراب قابض او تحقنه ببعض الأدوية والمراهم الأخر التى أثبتنا صفاتها فى مقالة المراهم، فإن كان فم المخبأ ضيقا لا يسع فيه أنبوب المحقن.	Like taking from the catarrhal substance and dissolving it with rose oil and sharab or inserting it into some of the medicines and ointments which we have proven their properties in the chapter on ointments, if the opening of the sinus is narrow and does not allow for the insertion of the instrument.
فوسّعه بالحديد قليلا او ضع فيه فتيلا ملثوثا فى المرهم المصرىّ او مرهم السريقون حتّى يتّسع وكذلك إن كان الفم ايضا واسعا فاجمع شفتيه بالخياطة واترك منه على قدر ما يدخل فيه المحقن بلا مزيد.	Widen it with a little iron or put in it a thread soaked in the Egyptian ointment or the Sariyun ointment until it widens, and also if the opening is wide, close its lips with a suture and leave from it as much as the instrument can enter without force.
وكذلك إن كان فمه الذى يسيل منه القيح مرتفعا الى فوق فشقّه فى أخفض مكان فيه ليسيل منه القيح الى أسفل لأنّ القيح اذا احتقن فى غور المخبأ منع اللحم أن ينبت فيه.	And also if the sinus from which the pus flows has its mouth elevated upwards, then make an incision in the lowest place in it so that the pus flows downwards, because when the pus accumulates at the bottom of the sinus, it prevents the flesh from forming in it.
فإن لم يمكنك شقّ المخبأ نحو أسفله على ما تريد فرم أن تنصب العضو نصبة يسيل القيح منه بسهولة على حسب ما يتهيّأ لك ورم أن لا يحتبس فيه شىء من القيح البتّة.	For if you are unable to make an incision in the sinus towards its bottom as you wish, then make the member drain so that the pus flows from it easily according to what is imagined by you and make sure that no part of the pus remains stuck in it.
وأمّا الأدوية الملحمة التى توضع على المخبأ من خارج وكيفيّة وضعها عليه فهو أن تأخذ من أحد المراهم الملحمة المشاكلة لما تريد وتمدّه على خرقة كتان ولتكن الخرقة قدر ما يغم بها المخبأ كلّه.	And as for the dissolving medicines that are placed on the sinus from the outside and how to apply them, it is that you take one of the dissolving ointments suitable for what you want and spread it on a piece of cloth and let the cloth be the size that covers the entire sinus.
ثمّ تقرض بالمقصّ قبالة فم المخبأ ثقبة أوسع من فم المخبأ قليلا ثمّ تمدّ من المراهم اللينة على خرقة أخرى على قدر الثقب وتضعها عليها وضعا متباعدا عن فم المخبأ ليسهل خروج القيح منه ولا تزيل الخرقة الكبيرة إلّا بعد.	Then you cut with scissors opposite the mouth of the sinus a hole slightly wider than the mouth of the sinus, then you spread some of the soft ointment on another cloth the size of the hole and put it over it, placing it in a way that is distant from the mouth of the sinus so that the pus comes out easily and do not remove the large cloth except after.
أيّام عدّة، وأمّا التى على فم المخبأ فهى التى تزيلها فى كلّ وقت ليخرج ما اجتمع فيه من القيح ولتعرف ما يسيل منه من الصديد هل هو كثير او قليل او نضيج او غير نضيج،.	For several days, and as for the one on the mouth of the sinus, it is the one that you remove at every time to let out what has accumulated in it of pus and to check what flows from it of fluid, whether it is a lot or a little, or thin or not thin.
ومع هذا ايضا فتفقّد موضع المخبأ نفسه هل يحسّ صاحبه فيه بوجع ام ليس فيه وجع وهل فيه ورم او ليس فيه ورم، فإذا تمادى علاجك هكذا ورأيت المادّة التى تخرج يسيرة على فم المخبأ.	And also investigate the location of the abscess itself, whether its owner feels pain in it or not, and whether there is fever or not, so if your treatment fluctuates like this and you see the matter that comes out of the mouth of the abscess.
فاعلم أنّ المخبأ قد التصق او قارب الالتصاق فحينئذ فحلّه من غد او فى اليوم الثالث ومتى حللت الجرح فابدل الخرق بغيرها وجدّد المرهم، فإن خرج من المخبأ بعد مدّة طويلة صديد رقيق فلا تيأس من التزاقه.	Know that the abscess has come close to bursting, so wait for it to rupture on its own, or on the third day, and when you have opened the wound, replace the dressing with a new one and renew the ointment. If pus comes out of the abscess after a long period, thin and watery, do not worry about its thinness.
فبرءه قريب لأنّ من الناس من يبطئ نبات اللحم فى جراحته ومنهم بضدّ ذلك، فإن خرج من المخبأ بعد أيّام كثيرة قيح غير نضيج فاعلم أنّ المخبأ لم يلتزق فإن أبطأ التزاق المخبأ.	So, it will soon rupture because some people's flesh grows slowly in their wound and others grow it quickly. If after many days a non-foul smelling pus comes out of the abscess, then know that the abscess has not ruptured yet, for the rupture of the abscess is slow.
وطال أمره فزد فى تجفيف الأدوية ولتكن أدوية تكون فى قوامها رطبة وفى قوّتها يابسة مثل المرهم النخلىّ اذا كان قد زيد فيه فضل زيادة من القلقطار، ومن أبلغ ما يعالج به أن يؤخذ المرهم النخلىّ.	And treat it with an ointment, and let the ointments be those that have moisture in them but also dryness, such as the Nakhla ointment if some colocynth has been added to it for extra benefit. And one of the best treatments is taking the Nakhla ointment.
ويحلّ بدهن ورد ويرشّ عليه الشراب العتيق المعتدل فى قوامه ثمّ تعجنه به وتستعمله، وقد يفعل مثل هذا الفعل اذا لم يحضرك المرهم النخلىّ العسل اذا طبخته حتّى يغاظ واستعملته او تأخذ من المرّ والصبر والكندر وتسحق الجميع وتذرّه على العسل وهو على النار.	And anoint it with rose oil and sprinkle on it the moderate Attar ointment in its basis, then massage it with it and use it. And you can do something similar if the Nakhla ointment is not available to you, by boiling the honey until it melts and using it, or by taking myrrh, vinegar, and coptis, grinding them together and sprinkling them on the honey while it is on the fire.
ثمّ تطليه على خرقة وتشدّه على المخبأ او يطلى بالعسل الذى طبخته حتّى يغلظ وتذرّ عليه العقاقير وتضع عليه الخرق وتشدّه.	Then apply it on a dressing and bind it on the abscess, or anoint it with the honey that has been boiled until it thickens and sprinkle the powders on it, put on the dressing and bind it.
وقد يستعمل فى مثل ذلك الزراوند الطويل وأصل السوسن الأسمانجونىّ ودقيق الكرسنّة والقنطريون مفردة استعملتها او مجموعة تسحقها وتنخلها وتذرّها على العسل الذى وصفت وتستعمله، فإن طال أمر المخبأ ولم يبرأ بهذا العلاج فاعلم أنّ فى غوره فسادا.	And the long-term Zarawan, and the root of the Sausan, Asmanajuni, and the fine powder of the Karsina, and the Qantaryon alone or mixed, crushed and sifted and sprinkled on the honey that has been described, and used. If the abscess persists and does not heal with this treatment, then know that there is a rottenness in its depth.
وقد أثّّر فى العظام او فى سائر الأعصاب الصلبة او الرباطات فعالجه علاج الناصور على ما تقدّم،.	There will be a fracture in the bones or in some of the solid organs or tendons, the treatment of which has already been discussed.
الفصل التاسع والثمانون.	The ninth and tenth operations.
فى علاج الداحس والظفر المرضوض وقطع الأصبع الزائدة وشق التحام الأصابع.	In the treatment of tetanus, rabies, and cutting of the extra nail and splitting of the fingernails.
الداحس هو لحم كثير ينبت تحت ظفر إبهام اليد او الرجل وربّما ينبت فى سائر الأصابع، فإذا طال أمره وأهمل علاجه تورّم ورما حارّا.	The tetanus is a fleshy growth that grows under the toenail of the thumb or the big toe, and sometimes it grows in other toes, so if its condition worsens and its treatment is neglected, it becomes inflamed and painful.
او فسد وقاح حتّى يأكل أصل الظفر وربّما أفسده كلّه وربّما بلغ الفساد الى العظم حتّى يكون له رائحة منتنة ويصير طرف الأصبع عريضا ويكون لونه كمدا، فإذا عالجته بما ذكرنا فى التقسيم ولم ينجع علاجك.	Or it becomes a hard and foul-smelling tumor that eats away the root of the nail, and sometimes it corrupts all of it, and sometimes the corruption reaches the bone so that it has a foul smell and the end of the toe becomes gangrenous and its color turns black, if you treated it with what we mentioned in the chapter and the treatment did not work.
فينبغى أن تقطع بالحديد جميع الفضلة التى تنبت من الظفر ثمّ تكوى الجرح بعد ذلك فإنّ الكىّ فى هذا نافع جدّا، وأمّا إن كان العظم صحيحا وكان الظفر أيضا صحيحا.	Then it is necessary to cut out all the rotten flesh that grows from the nail with a iron, then cauterize the wound afterwards, for cauterization in this case is very beneficial, and if the bone was sound and the nail was also sound.
وكانت الزاوية الحاوية من الظفر قد زمّت اللحم الى داخل وجعلت تنخسه وتوذيه فينبغى أن تضع مرودا رقيقا تحت زاوية الظفر الذى ينخس اللحم وترفعه الى فوق وتقطع ذلك اللحم برفق.	And the angle of the nail that contains flesh had pushed the flesh inside and made it protrude, so it is necessary to put a thin scraper under the angle of the nail from which the flesh is protruding and lift it up and cut out that flesh gently.
وتضع على ما بقى من اللحم من الأدوية المحرقة الأكّالة حتّى يذهب جميعه ثمّ تعالجه بالمراهم حتّى يبرأ، وأمّا إن كان الفساد قد أثّر فى العظم فينبغى أن تقطع ذلك العظم وتخرجه فإنّه لا يبرأ ما دام فيه عظم فاسد البتّة.	And apply to the remaining flesh from the cauterizing medications until all of it disappears, then treat it with ointments until it heals, and if the corruption has affected the bone, it is necessary to cut out that bone and extract it, for it will not heal as long as there is rotten bone.
فإن رأيت التأكّل والفساد يسعى فى الأصبع فاقطعها فى أحد السلاميات على ما تقدّم ذكره ثمّ عالجها حتّى تبرأ، فإن أصاب الظفر ضربة او رضّ وحدث فيه وجع شديد فينبغى أن تفصد العليل أوّلا.	For if you see the corruption and decay spreading in the toe, cut it off at one of the joints as previously mentioned, then treat it until it heals, for if the nail is hit or bruised and there is severe pain, it is necessary to amputate the toe first.
ثمّ تشق الظفر بمبضع حادّ شقّا منحرفا من فوق الى أسفل وتحفّظ من أن تبلغ بالشقّ الى اللحم الذى تحت الظفر فإنّك تحدث بذلك على العليل وجعا شديدا ويكون سببا لنبات لحم زائد فى الموضع ثمّ عالج الموضع بما يسكن الأوجاع.	Cut the nail by curved incision from top to bottom and be careful not to reach with the incision the flesh beneath the nail, for if you do that, it will cause sharp pain and will lead to the growth of excess flesh in this area, then treat the area with something to calm the inflammation.
وأمّا الأصبع الزائدة التى تتولّد فى بعض أيدى الناس فربّما كانت لحميّة كلّها وربّما كانت فى بعضها عظام وربّما كان فيها ظفر ويكون نبات بعضها فى أصل مفصل بعض الأصابع.	As for the extra little finger that grows in some people's hands, it is sometimes all flesh and sometimes has bones in parts of it and sometimes has a nail, and the growth of some of them is at the base of the joint of some fingers.
او يكون نباتها فى بعض سلاميات الأصبع والتى تنبت فى بعض سلاميات الأصبع لا تتحرّك والتى تنبت عند مفصل الأصبع ربّما تحركت فما كان منها لحميّا فقطعه يسهل وذلك أن تقطعه عند أصله بمبضع عريض.	Or its growth is in some of the little finger's webs, and what grows in some of the little finger's webs does not move, and what grows at the joint of the finger sometimes moves, so if it is only flesh, it is easy to cut it off by a curved incision at its base.
وأمّا التى نباتها فى أصل المفصل فعلاجها عسر فتنكّب عن قطعها، وأمّا التى تنبت فى الأصبع عند أحد السلاميات فينبغى أن تقطع أوّلا لحمها قطعا مستديرا الى العظم ثمّ تنشر العظم بأحد تلك المناشير الموافقة لذلك.	As for the one that grows at the base of the joint, its treatment is difficult, so beware of cutting it, and as for the one that grows on the finger at one of the webs, it should be cut first by a curved incision to the bone, then the bone should be split with one of those suitable instruments.
ثمّ عالجه حتّى يبرأ، وأمّا الالتحام الذى يعرض للأصابع بعضها ببعض فكثيرا ما يعرض ذلك ويكون ذلك ممّا يولد به الإنسان ويكون عند اندمال جرح او حرق نار ونحو ذلك فينبغى أن تشقّ ذلك الالتحام.	Then treat it until it heals, and as for the adhesion that appears between some fingers to each other, it often appears and it is something with which the human is born, and it occurs when a wound or a burn from fire or something similar heals, it should be cut.
حتّى ترجع الأصابع على هيئتها الطبيعيّة ثمّ تضع بينهما فتلا او خرقا مشرّبة فى دهن الورد لئلّا يلتحم سريعا وتفرق بينهما او تجعل بينهما صفيحة رصاص رقيقة حتّى يندمل الموضع على ما ينبغى.	Until the fingers return to their natural shape, then a piece of cloth or a bandage greased with rose oil is placed between them so that they adhere quickly, or a thin sheet of lead is placed between them until the place heals as needed.
وكذلك إن عرض الالتحام لبعض الأصابع بالكفّ فشقّ ذلك الالتحام على حسب ما يتهيّأ ويصلح به شكل العضو.	And similarly, if adhesion appears between some fingers and the palm, that adhesion should be cut according to what is imagined and suitable for the shape of the organ.
الفصل التسعون.	The Ninth Section
فىقطع الدوالى.	On amputations of the extremities
الدوالى هى عروق ملتوية غلاظ مملوّة فضولا سوداويّة تحدث فى أكثر أعضاء الجسم وأكثر حدوثها فى الساقين ولا سيّما فى سوق الفيوج والأكّارين والحمّالين، فينبغى أوّلا أن تستعمل نفض البدن من المرّة السوداء مرّات نفضا قويّا.	The extremities are varicose veins, thick and full of blood, which occur in most parts of the body, but especially in the legs, particularly in the hollow of the knees and the thighs and the hams. So it seems that the use of hot baths from the black mud is beneficial for them, used many times with strong rubbing.
ثمّ افصد صاحبها الباسليق، وأمّا علاجها بالحديد فيكون على ضربين أحدهما أن يشقّ ويخرج الدم الأسود والوجه الآخر أن يسلّ العرق ويخرج بأسره، أما شقّه فعلى هذه الصفة تنطل الساق أوّلا بالماء الحارّ نعمّا.	Then the doctor with a lancet, and as for its treatment with an iron instrument, it has two ways of doing it: one is to cut and let out the bad blood, and the other way is to cauterize the vein and extract its contents, but as for cutting, on this condition the leg is first lanced with hot water.
حتّى ينحلّ الدم الغليظ العكر ثمّ تشدّ ساق العليل من فوق فَخْذِهِ الى أسفل ركبته بعمامة ثمّ تشقّ العرق فى موضع واحد او فى موضعين او فى ثلاثة شقّا واسعا.	Until the thick and turbid blood is dissolved, then the leg of the patient is tightly bandaged from above his heel to below his knee with a wide bandage, then the vein is cut in one place or two places or three, making a wide incision.
ثمّ تسلت الدم الأسود بيدك من أسفل الساق الى فوق ومن فوق الى أسفل حتّى تخرج من الدم القدر الذى تراه كافيا او ما تحتمل قوّة العليل ثمّ تربطه وتأمره باجتناب الأغذية المولّدة للمرّة السوداء ويعاد الاستفراغ والفصد.	Then you cauterize the bad blood with your hand from below the leg to above and from above to below until it comes out the amount of blood that you see as sufficient or the strength of the patient can tolerate, then you bandage him and order him to eat nourishing foods that produce black bile, and induce vomiting and bloodletting.
متى امتلأت العروق وأضرّ ذلك بالعليل، وأمّا سلّه فيكون على هذه الصفة تحلق ساق العليل إن كان فيه شعر كثير ثمّ تدخله الحمّام وتنطل ساقه بالماء الحارّ حتّى تحمرّ وتدرّ العرق او يرتاض رياضة قويّة.	When the veins are full and this harms the patient, and as for cauterization, it is done on this condition: the leg of the patient is shaved if it has a lot of hair, then he is made to sit in hot water and his leg is soaked in hot water until it becomes red and the vein is visible or he is given a strong massage.
إن لم يحضره حمّام حتّى يسخن العضو، ثمّ تشقّ الجلد قبالة العرق شقّا بالطول إمّا فى آخِره عند الركبة وإمّا فى أسفله عند الكعب ثمّ تفتح الجلد بالصنانير وتسلخ العرق من كلّ جهة حتّى يظهر للحسّ.	If a hot bath is not available to him until the member is warmed, then the skin is cut along the vein in a longitudinal direction, either above the knee or below it near the ankle, then the skin is opened with a hook and the vein is extracted from all sides until it becomes palpable.
وهو عند ظهوره تراه أحمر قانئا فإذا خلص من الجلد تراه أيضا كأنّه الوتر، ثمّ تدخل تحته مرودا حتّى اذا ارتفع وخرج عن الجلد علّقه بصنّارة عمياء ملساء، ثمّ شقّ شقّا آخر بقرب ذلك الشقّ بقدر ثلاث أصابع.	When it appears, it looks like a red vein, and when it is freed from the gland, it also looks like a nerve. Then, a thin tendon enters beneath it, and if it becomes elevated and exits the gland, it is tied with a blunt, smooth needle. Then, another incision is made near that first incision, about three fingerbreadths in length.
ثمّ اسلخ الجلد من على العرق حتّى يظهر، ثمّ ارفعه بالمرود كما فعلت وعلّقه بصنّارة أخرى كما فعلت أوّلا، ثمّ شق شقّا اخر او شقوقا كثيرة إن احتجت الى ذلك.	Then, the gland is freed from the artery until it appears, then it is lifted with the tendon as was previously done, and tied with another needle as was previously done. Then, another incision or several incisions are made if there is a need for that.
ثمّ سلّه واقطعه فى آخر الشقّ عند الكعب ثمّ اجذبه وسلّه حتّى يخرج من الشقّ الثانى ثمّ اجذبه الى الشق الذى فوقه وافعل ذلك حتّى تجذبه من الشقّ الثالث أعلى الشقوق كلّها حتّى اذا خرج جميعه فاقطعه.	Then, it is pulled and cut at the end of the incision near the hump, then it is pulled until it exits from the second incision. Then, it is pulled to the upper incision, and this is done until it is pulled through all the incisions one by one until when it all comes out, it is cut.
فإن لم يجبك للجذب والسلّ فأدخل إبرة بخيط قوىّ مثنّى واربطه واجذبه وأدخل تحته المرود وافتل به يدك الى كلّ جهة حتّى يخرج وتحفّظ لا ينقطع فإن انقطع فإنّه يعسر عليك سلّه جدّا.	For if it does not respond to pulling and extracting, then insert a needle with strong thread, tie it and pull it, and insert beneath it the tendon, and manipulate it with your hand in every direction until it comes out, and preserve it so that it is not cut. If it becomes cut, then it will be more difficult for you to extract.
ويدخل على العليل منه مضرّة، فإذا سللته كلّه فضع على موضع الجراحات صوفا مغموسا فى شراب ودهن ورد او زيت وعالجه حتّى يبرأ، فإن كانت الدالية متشنّجة ذات تعاريج لها التواء الى جهات.	And it enters the ureter with harm, so if you extract it entirely, then put on the site of the operation a poultice soaked in rosewater and fat and oil, and treat it until it heals. If the ureter is rough with convolutions and twisted to the sides.
ولم تكن على استقامة كما قلنا فينبغى أن تشقّ عليها عند كلّ جهة من تعاريجها ومواضع التوائها ثمّ تعلّقها بالصنانير حتّى تسلّها بأجمعها، وتحفّظ عند شقّك عليها أن تقطع العرق او تجرحه فإنّه يعسر عليك سلّه فتحفّظ جهدك،.	And it is not straight as we said, so you should make an incision on it at every side of its convolutions and twisted places, then tie them with the needles until you extract all of them. Be careful when making an incision that you do not cut the artery or injure it, for that will make extracting more difficult for you.
صورة النشل الذى تشقّ به الدالية:.	The picture of the nail that the anvil is split by:
صورة الصنّارة العمياء:.	Picture of the deep forceps:.
لا يكون لها تعقيف كسائر الصنانير ولا تكون حادّة الطرف لئلّا تجرح العرق وتكون غليظة الانثناء ملساء لأنّها إن كانت رقيقة قطعت العرق برقّتها بل يكون لها فضل غلظ كما قلنا،.	It should not have a handle like the handles of the saws, nor be sharp-edged lest it injure the vein, and its curvature should be smooth, for if it were thin it would cut the vein with its sharpness, but rather it should have a thick edge as we said.
الفصل الحادى والتسعون.	The straight surgical scoop and the chisel.
فى سلّ العرق المدنىّ.	On extracting the bloody vein.
هذا العرق يتولّد فى الساقين فى البلدان الحارّة كالحجاز وبلدان العرب وفى البلدان الحارّة القشفة القليلة الخصب وربّما تولّد فى مواضع أخر من البدن غير الساقين وتولّده عن عفونة تحدث تحت الجلد.	This vein generates in the saphenas in hot climates such as Hijaz and the lands of Arabs, and in hot and dry lands with little vegetation, and it might generate in other places on the body apart from the saphenas due to a tumor that occurs under the skin.
كما تحدث فى داخل الأبدان الحيّات والدود وجبّ القرع والدود المتولّد بين الجلد واللحم، وعلامة ابتداء حدوث هذا العرق أن يحدث فى الساق تلّهب شديد ثمّ يتنفّط الموضع ثمّ يبتدئ العرق يخرج من موضع ذلك التنفّط.	As it occurs in the inner organs, the vivifying and putrid tumors, and the putrid tumor that generates between the skin and the flesh. And a sign of the beginning of this vein's occurrence is that there will be severe inflammation in the saphena, then the area will become swollen, then the vein starts to appear, coming out from the place of swelling.
كأنّه أصل نبات او حيوان فإذا ظهر منه طرفه فينبغى أن يلفّ على قطعة صغيرة من رصاص تكون زنتها من درهم كيل الى درهمين وتعقده وتترك الرصاص معلّقا من الساق.	As if it were the root of a plant or an animal, so if its end appears, a lead weight is tied around it with a thread, weighing one dirham to two dirhams, and left hanging from the saphena.
فكلّما خرج منه شىء الى خارج لففته فى الرصاص وعقدته فإن طال كثيرا فاقطع بعضه ولفّ الباقى ولا تقطعه من أصله قبل أن يخرج كلّه لأنّك إن قطعته تقلّص ودخل فى اللحم فأحدث ورما وعفنا فى الموضع وقرحة رديئة.	For each thing that comes out of it to the outside, tie it with lead and knot it, and if it is too long, cut some of it and tie the rest, and do not cut it from its root before all of it has come out, because if you cut it, it will contract and go into the flesh, causing inflammation, and a fresh sore in the place.
فلذلك ينبغى أن يدارى ويجرّ قليلا قليلا حتّى يخرج عن آخره ولا يبقى منه شىء فى البدن، وقد يخرج من هذا العرق فى بعض الناس ما يكون فى طوله خمسة أشبار وعشرة.	Therefore, it should be pulled and extracted a little at a time until it comes out from its end, and nothing of it remains in the body. And from this vein, in some people, what comes out may be as long as five cubits or more.
وقد بلغنى أنّه خرج لرجل من عشرين شبرا، فإن انقطع لك فى حين علاجك له فأدخل مرودا فى ثقبه وبطّه بطّا طويلا مع البدن حتّى يتفرّغ كلّ ما فيه من مادّة وحاول تعفين الموضع بالأدوية أيّاما.	If I have come to know that the instrument has emerged from a man of twenty years, with bristles, then if it breaks during your treatment for him, you should insert a catheter into his urethra and bind him tightly with bandages along with the bed until everything in it is evacuated from the material and an attempt is made to stop the place with medications.
ثمّ عالجه بعلاج الأورام، وقد يكون هذا العرق ذا شعب كثيرة ولا سيّما اذا ظهر فى مفصل الرجل او فى الرجل نفسه فيحدث له أفواه كثيرة ويخرج من كلّ فم شعبة فعالجه كما ذكرنا فى التقسيم وبما تقدّم.	Then treat it with the treatment of the arteries, and this artery may have many branches, not just one, whether it appears in the knee joint or in the leg itself, in which case there will be many openings for him and a branch will emerge from each opening to treat it, as we mentioned in the dissection and what has been stated previously.
الفصل الثانى والتسعون.	The 29th Chapter.
فى الشقّ على الدود المتولّد تحت الجد ويسمّى علّة البقر.	In the incision on the generated tumor under the skin, and it is called the disease of the cattle.
هذا المرض يسمّى فى بعض البلدان عندنا علّة البقر من أجل أنّها كثيرا ما يعرض للبقر وهى دودة صغيرة واحدة تتولّد بين الجلد واللحم وتدبّ فى الجسم كلّه صاعدة وهابطة.	This disease is called in some of our countries the disease of the cattle because it often appears in the cattle, and it is a small parasite that generates between the skin and the flesh, and spreads throughout the body, ascending and descending.
تتبيّن للحسّ عند دبيبها من عضو الى عضو حتّى تخرق حيث ما خرقت فى الجلد موضعا وتخرج وتكوّنها من عفونة بعض الأخلاط كما يعرض للدود والحيّات وحّب القرع فى البطن،.	It becomes palpable when it moves from one organ to another until it perforates wherever it has perforated the skin, and exits, and its formation is from a mixture of some humors, as it appears in the lice and worms, and the spleen in the abdomen.
وإنما يتوقّع من أذيّتها أنها اذا دبّت فى الجسم وارتفعت الى الرأس وبلغت الى العين فربّما فتحت فيها وخرجت فأبطلت العين ويعرض ذلك كثيرا، فإذا أردت علاجها وإخراجها فإنّما يكون ذلك عند دبيبها وظهورها للحسّ.	And indeed, it is expected from its characteristics that if it spreads in the body and rises to the head and reaches the eye, perhaps it will open it and emerge, so it corrupts the eye, and this happens often. So, if you want to treat it and extract it, then that should be done when it is moving and palpable.
فينبغى أن تشدّ ما فوقها وتحتها برباط شدّا جيّدا ثمّ شقّ عليها وأخرجها، فإن غاصت فى اللحم ولم تجدها فاحمل على الموضع الكىّ بالنار حتّى تحرقها، وأعظم ما يتوقّع إفسادها للعين كما قلنا.	Then, one should tightly tie up what is above and below it with a strong bandage, then make an incision and extract it. If it has sunk into the flesh and you cannot find it, apply a cautery iron to the spot until it is burned, and the worst that can be expected is damage to the eye, as we said.
فإن رأيتها قد صارت فى الرأس قرب العين فشدّ تحتها على الجبين شدّا جيّدا ثمّ شقّ عليها وأخرجها، وينبغى أن يتعاهد العليل تنقية جسمه بالأدوية المسهلة للأخلاط العفنة الرديئة والتحفّظ من الأغذية الموّلدة للعفونة،.	If you see that it has formed near the eye in the head, then tighten under it on both sides forcefully, then incise and extract it. It is recommended that the patient be treated with mild medications to cleanse his body of foul and putrid humors, and to avoid nourishment that causes putrefaction.
الفصل الثالث والتسعون.	Chapter Thirty-Nine
فى الشقّ على المرض الذى يعرف بالنافر.	Incision on the patient who is known by the scabies.
هذا المرض الذى يسمّى فى بلدنا النافر هو وجع يعرض فى بعض الأعضاء ثمّ ينتقل من عضو الى عضو وقد رأيته على ما أصفه لك.	This disease that is called in our country scabies, is an affliction that appears on some of the organs, then transfers from one organ to another, and I have seen it as I will describe to you.
دعيت الى امرأة عليلة فى بعض البوادى فكشفت عن ذراعها وأرتنى نفخا يسيرا فى عرق حبل الذراع فلمّا بقيت ساعة رأيت ذلك النفخ يدّب مع الزند كما تدّبّ الدودة صاعدا الى منكبها بأسرع ما يمكن أن يكون كالزئبق.	I was called to a weak woman in one of the rural areas, so I exposed her arm and armpit, and I found a slight swelling in the axillary vein, and when I remained for an hour, I saw that swelling moving with the pulse, as the caterpillar moves quickly towards its shoulder, like the tarantula.
اذا سال من موضع الى موضع، فزال الوجع من ذلك المكان وثبت فى المنكب، ثمّ قعدت ساعة فجرى فى سائر الجسم حتّى صار فى الذراع الآخر، ثمّ حكت لى أنّه يدور جسمها كلّه على ما شاهدت.	When it moved from one place to another, the affliction departed from that location and settled in the armpit, then I waited for an hour and it appeared in other parts of the body until it reached the other arm, and the woman claimed that it moves throughout her entire body, as I have observed.
فعجبت من سرعة انتقاله من عضو الى عضو ولم أكن قبل رأيت هذا المرض بعينى هكذا على هذه الصفة إلّا أنّى رأيت جماعة يجدون الوجع ينتقل من عضو الى عضو ولم أره بعينى كما رأيته فى هذه المرأة.	So I was amazed at the speed of its transfer from one organ to another, and I had not seen this disease with my own eyes before like this with such characteristics, although I had seen a group of people who had an affliction that transfers from one organ to another, but I did not see it with my own eyes as I saw it in this woman.
ولم أقدّر ذلك إلّا أن يكون من أجل أن المرأة كانت من أهل البادية يابسة البدن مكشوفة العروق فمن هنا ظهر للحسّ ذلك الريح المنتقل ووجب أن لا يظهر على هذا القياس فى أهل الرفاهية والأبدان الرطبة الخفيّة العروق.	And I did not think that it was anything but because the woman was from a rural area, with exposed limbs and uncovered veins, so it appeared palpable, this migrating swelling, and it is likely that it would not appear on this basis in people of luxury and abundance, whose veins are hidden and covered.
فإذا أردت علاجه وأحس صاحبه بالوجع فإن ظهر اليك بالعيان كما ذكرنا فشدّ فوقه وتحته بالعجلة وشقّ عليه حتّى يخرج ذلك الريح المحتقن واكو المكان.	If you have tried its treatment and made its companion aware of the sensation, then it appears to you clearly as we mentioned, so tighten above and below with a bandage, and make an incision until that putrid pus comes out, and fill in the space.
فإن لم تره بعينك فعالجه بنفض البدن وما ينفى الرياح ويفشّها مثل حبّ المنتن وحبّ السكبينج ونحوها من الأدوية،.	For if you do not see it with your eyes, then treat it by palpating the abdomen and what is inflated with gas, and spread on it a paste like the paste of fenugreek and the paste of cumin, and similar medicinal pastes.
الفصل الرابع والتسعون.	The Fourth and Ninetieth Chapter.
فى إخراج السهام.	On the extraction of arrows.
السهام قد تختلف بحسب أنواعها وبحسب المواضع التى تقع فيها من الجسم وأمّا اختلافها بحسب أنواعها فإنّ منها كبارا وصغارا ومنها زجاج مجوّفة وزجاج مصمتة ومنها ما لها ثلاث زوايا وأربع زوايا.	Arrows may vary according to their types and according to the locations in which they are situated in the body, and as for their variation according to their types, then there are among them large and small ones, and among them there are iron tips with barbs and iron tips without barbs, and among them there are those with three edges and four edges.
ومنها ما لها ألسنة ومنها ما لها شظايا، وأمّا التى تكون بحسب الأعضاء التى تقع فيها فتكون على ضربين إمّا أن تكون الأعضاء من أعضاء رئيسة مجوّفة مثل الدماغ والقلب والكبد والرئة والكليتين والمعاء والمثانة ونحوها.	And among them there are those with fletched ends and among them there are those with fragmented heads, and as for the ones that occur according to the organs in which they are situated, then they are of two types, either the organs are principal vital organs with barbs, such as the brain, the heart, the liver, the lung, the kidneys, the intestines, and the bladder, and the like.
فمتى وقع سهم فى أحد هذه الأعضاء وظهرت لك علامات الموت التى أنا واصفها لك بعد فينبغى أن تجتنب إخراج ذلك السهم منها فإنّ الموت يلحق صاحبها فى أكثر الأحوال.	For when an arrow falls into one of these organs and the signs of death that I will describe to you appear, then it is unlikely that the extraction of that arrow from it will be successful, for in most cases death will overtake its owner.
ومتى لم تظهر لك هذه العلامات الرديئة ولم يكن السهم توارى فى غور العضو فأخرجه وعالج الجرح، ومن علامات الدماغ اذا واقعه سهم وأنفذ العظم وجرح الصفاق الذى على الدماغ فإنّه يعرض من ذلك صداع شديد وسدر ودوار.	And when these severe signs do not appear to you and the arrow is not deeply lodged in the organ, then remove it and treat the wound, and among the signs of the brain, if an arrow strikes it and penetrates the bone and wounds the dura that is on the brain, then it will be exposed to severe headache and hemorrhage and vertigo.
وحمرة فى العينين وحمرة اللسان وتشنّج واختلاط عقل وقذف مرّة وربّما خرج الدم من المنخرين او الأذنين وربّما انقطع الكلام وذهب الصوت وخرج من موضع الجرح رطوبة بيضاء تشبه العصيدة ويجرى منها مثل مائيّة اللحم.	And redness in the eyes and redness of the tongue, and convulsion and confusion of mind, and sudden vomiting, and perhaps blood comes out of the nostrils or the ears, and perhaps speech is cut off and voice is lost, and a white brain matter comes out of the place of the wound, resembling marrow, and a fluid like the liquid of flesh flows from it.
فإن ظهرت لك هذه العلامات فأمسك عن علاج العليل وإخراج السهم إن كان لم يخرج، وأمّا علامات السهم اذا واقع القلب وكان قريبا من الثدى الأيسر وحسّ به كأنّه قد انغرز فى شىء صلب لا فى شىء فارغ.	For if these signs appear to you, then desist from the treatment of the stricken and extracting the arrow, if it has not yet been extracted. And as for the signs of the arrow, if it has reached the heart and was close to the left lung, and felt like it had been embedded in a solid thing, not an empty one.
وربّما كانت للسهم حركة تشبه حركة النبض ويسيل من الجرح دم أسود ويتبع ذلك برد الأطراف وعرق بارد وغشى فاعلم أنّ الموت نازل لا محالة، وعلامة السهم اذا جرح الرئة خروج دم زبدىّ من الجرح.	And if the arrow had a movement similar to the movement of the pulse, and blood gushes out from the wound, and this is followed by coldness of the extremities and a feeling of chill, then know that death is inevitable. And a sign of the arrow, if it has wounded the lung, is the emission of frothy blood from the wound.
والأوعية التى تلى العنق تتورّم ويتغيّر لون العليل ويتنفّس تنفّسا عاليا ويطلب استنشاق الهواء البارد، فإن واقع السهم الحجاب الذى فى الصدر فإنّه يكون قريبا من الأضلاع الصغار ويكون التنفّس عظيما مع وجع شديد.	And the veins that are behind the neck become swollen and the color of the stricken person changes, and he breathes with a high-pitched breathing, and he asks for the inhalation of cold air. If the arrow has reached the diaphragm which is in the chest, then it will be close to the small ribs, and the breathing will be labored with severe pain.
وتنهّد ويتحرّك جميع أعضاء المنكبين، وإن واقع السهم الكبد اتّبع ذلك وجع شديد وخرج من الجرح دم يشبه الكبد فى حمرته، وإن واقع السهم المعدة فربّما خرج من الجرح من الغذاء شىء غير منهضم.	And all the organs of the shoulders become relaxed and move, and if the arrow has reached the liver, then it will be followed by severe pain and blood will come out from the wound similar to the liver in its redness. And if the arrow has reached the stomach, then perhaps some undigested food will come out from the wound.
وأمره ظاهر، وإن واقع السهم البطن ونشب فيه وخرج شىء من البراز من الجرح او الثرب او معاء قد انخرق فلا مطمع فى علاجه ولا فى إخراج السهم، فإن كان السهم واقع المثانة وخرج البول.	And the condition is visible, and if the arrow has reached the abdomen and stuck in it and something from the intestines comes out from the wound, or feces, or urine that has been torn, then there should be no delay in treatment nor in extracting the arrow. If the arrow has reached the bladder and urine came out.
وبرز منها شىء الى خارج واشتدّ الألم على العليل فاعلم أنّه هالك، وأمّا سائر الأعضاء كالوجه والعين والحلق والكتف والعضد وفقار الظهر والترقوة والفخذ والساق ونحوها من الأعضاء فقد تسلم على الأمر الأكثر.	And if something protrudes from it to the outside and the pain increases for the stricken person, then know that he is dying. As for the rest of the organs, such as the face, the eye, the throat, the shoulder, the upper arm, the back, the armpit, the thigh, the leg, and other similar organs, most cases can be treated successfully.
متى لم يصادف السهم شريانا او عصبا ولم يكن السهم مسموما، وأنا أخبرك ببعض ما شاهدته من أمر هذه السهام لتستدلّ بذلك على علاجك، وذلك أنّ سهما كان قد واقع لرجل فى مأق عينه فى أصل الأنف.	When the arrow did not hit a vital vein or nerve and was not poisoned, I will inform you of some of what I witnessed regarding the treatment of such arrow wounds so that you may infer from it the appropriate treatment, for an arrow had struck a man in the corner of his eye at the base of the nose.
فأخرجته له من الجهة الأخرى تحت شحمة الأذن وبرئ ولم يحدث فى عينه مكروه، وأخرجت سهما آخر ليهودىّ كان قد واقعه فى شحمة عينه تحت الجفن الأسفل وكان السهم قد توارى ولم ألحق منه إلّا طرفه الصغير الذى يلصق فى الخشبة.	It was extracted for him from the other side beneath the earlobe and he recovered, and nothing untoward happened to his eye. Another arrow was extracted from a Jew whose arrow had struck him in the outer corner of his eye beneath the lower eyelid, and the arrow had become tangled but only its small head that adheres to the bone remained.
وكان سهما كبيرا من سهام القسىّ المركّبة مربّع الحديد أملس لم يكن فيه أذنان فبرئ اليهودىّ ولم يحدث فى عينه حادث سوء، وأخرجت سهما آخر من حلق نصرانىّ وكان السهم عربيّا.	It was a large arrow, one of the arrows with a squared iron head, smooth and without barbs. The Jew recovered and nothing untoward happened to his eye. Another arrow was extracted from the throat of a Christian, and it was an Arabian arrow.
وهو الذى له أذنان فشققت عليه بين الوداجين وكان قد غار فى حلقه فلطفت به حتّى أخرجته فسلم النصرانىّ وبرئ، وأخرجت سهما آخر لرجل كان قد واقعه فى بطنه وقدّرنا أنّه سيموت منه.	It was the kind with barbs, so I made an incision between his clavicles and it had sunk into his throat, so I pulled on it until I extracted it. The Christian was saved and recovered. Another arrow was extracted from a man who had been struck in the abdomen, and we suspected he would die from it.
فلمّا بقى مدّة ثلاثين يوما او نحوها ولم يتغيّر عليه شىء من أحواله شققت على السهم وتحيّلت عليه وأخرجته وبرئ ولم يعرض له حادث سوء، ورأيت رجلا واقعه سهم فى ظهره فالتحم الجرح عليه.	He remained for a duration of thirty days or so, and nothing changed in his condition. I made an incision on the arrow, dissected around it, extracted it, and he recovered without anything untoward happening to him. I also saw a man who was struck by an arrow in his back, so the wound closed over the arrow.
فلمّا كان بعد سبعة أعوام خرج السهم فى أصل فخذه، ورأيت امرأة قد واقعها فى بطنها سهم والتحم الجرح وبقى السهم ولم يتغيّر من أحوالها شىء ولا كانت تجد له ضررا فى شىء من أفعالها الطبيعيّة،.	For it was seven years later that the arrow came out at the base of his thigh. I also saw a woman who had been struck by an arrow in her abdomen, and the wound closed over it, and the arrow remained inside her without any change in her condition, nor did she find any harm in any of her natural functions.
ورأيت رجلا آخر واقعه سهم فى وجهه والتحم الجرح وبقى لا يجد له كثير ألم، ومن مثل هذا كثير، وأخرجت سهما لرجل من قوّاد السلطان كان قد واقعه فى وسط أنفه قد مال الى الناحية اليمنى قليلا.	And I saw another man who was struck by an arrow in his face, and the wound closed over it, and he remained without feeling much pain. There are many cases like this. An arrow was extracted from a servant of the Sultan that had struck him in the middle of his nose, slightly deviated to the right side.
وغاب السهم كلّه فدعيت الى علاجه بعد وقوع السهم الى ثلاثة أيّام فوجدت جرح السهم ضيقا جدّا ففتّشته بمسبار رقيق فلم أحسّ به وكان يجد نخسا ووجعا تحت أذنه من الشقّ الأيمن.	The arrowhead was completely removed and I was called to treat it after the arrow had been lodged for three days, so I found the wound of the arrow very tight. I cut it with a fine scalpel, but did not feel anything and there was numbness and pain under his right ear.
فرجوت أن يكون ذلك النخس من طرف السهم فضمدت الموضع بضماد فيه قوّة جذب ونضج طمعا منّى أن يتورّم الموضع وتظهر علامة السهم فأشقّ عليه فلم يحدث فى الموضع حادث يدلّ على أنّ السهم بلغ الموضع.	I suspected that the numbness was due to the arrowhead, so I applied a poultice with strong absorbent power and waited for the swelling to subside in the hope that it would show a sign of the arrow, but when I made an incision on him, nothing happened in the area that would indicate that the arrow had reached that location.
فتماديت بالضماد عليه أيّاما كثيرة فلم يحدث حادث فانختم فى خلال ذلك الجرح وبقى العليل مؤيسا من إخراجه مدّة حتّى أحسّ بالسهم يوما فى داخل أنفه فأخبرنى الخبر فوضعت على الجرح الدواء الحادّ الأكّال أياما كثيرة.	I applied the poultice on him for many days, but nothing happened, so I probed inside the wound and the arrowhead remained annoyingly in place for a period until he felt the arrowhead one day inside his nostril, and he informed me of this news, then I applied the caustic medicine on the wound for many days.
حتّى انفتح وسبرته فأحسست بطرف السهم الرقيق الذى يلصق فى الخشبة ثمّ زدت فى فتح الجرح بذلك الدواء الحادّ حتّى ظهر إلينا بالعيان طرف السهم ومضى لى معه مدّة من الزمان نحو أربعة أشهر.	Until it opened and I explored it, and I felt the tip of the fine arrowhead which was stuck in the bone, then I increased the application of the caustic medicine on the wound until the tip of the arrow appeared to us visibly, and with it came out a piece that had been there for four months.
ثمّ لمّا توسّع الجرح وتمكّن لى دخول الكلاليب فيه جذبته وحرّكته فلم يستجب للخروج فلم أزل ألاطفه وأتحيّل عليه بضروب من الآلات حتّى قبضت عليه يوما بكلاليب محكمة على ما تأتى صورتها فى آخرالباب.	Then when the wound widened and was ready for the introduction of forceps, I pulled it and rocked it back and forth, but it did not respond to coming out, so I did not cease to manipulate it and to probe it with instruments until I grasped it one day with tight forceps that had a shape which matched what was at the end.
حتّىأخرجته ثمّ جبرت الجرح.	Until I extracted it, then I closed the wound.
وكان الأطبّاء يحكمون على أنّ غضروف أنفه لا ينجبر فجبرته والتحم الجرح وبرئ العليل برءا تامّا لا يؤذيه شىء البتّة، وأنا أخبرك بكيفيّة إخراج بعض السهام لتجعل ذلك قياسا ودليلا على ما لم أذكره.	And the physicians were saying that the cartilage of his nostril would not heal, but I healed it and the wound closed, and the patient was cured completely without anything bothering him afterwards. And I tell you this story to make an example and a demonstration of how some arrowheads are extracted.
لأنّ أجزاء هذه الصناعة وتفصيلها لا يدرك بالوصف ولا يحيط به كتاب وإنّما الصانع الحاذق يقيس بالقليل على الكثير وبما حضر على ما غاب ويستنبط عملا جديدا وآلة جديدة عند النوازل الغريبة.	The parts of this craft and its details are not comprehended by description, nor is it encompassed by a book, but rather the skilled craftsman adapts the little to the much and what is present to what is absent, and devises new actions and new instruments in strange and unusual circumstances.
اذا نزلت من هذه الصناعة، فأقول إنّ السهام إنّما تخرج من الأعضاء التى نشبت فيها على نوعين إمّا بالجذب من الموضع الذى دخلت منه وإمّا من ضدّ الجهة الأخرى، والتى تخرج من حيث دخلت.	If I were to descend from this craft, I would say that the arrows only exit from the organs in which they are embedded in two ways: either by extraction from the place where they entered, or from the opposite side. And those that exit from where they entered.
إمّا أن يكون السهم بارزا فى موضع لحمىّ فيجذب ويخرج فإن لم يجبك للخروج من وقته الذى وقع فيه فينبغى لك أن تتركه أيّاما حتّى يتعفّن اللحم الذى حوله فيسهل جذبه وإخراجه وكذلك إن نشب فى عظم.	Either the arrow is protruding in a fleshy place and is extracted and removed, if it does not exit for you from the time when it fell into it, it is suggested that you leave it until the flesh that is around it has relaxed, so it will be easier to extract and remove it, and similarly if it is embedded in bone.
ولم يجبك للخروج فاتركه أيضا أيّاما وعاوده بالجذب والتحريك كلّ يوم فإنّه يخرج، فإن لم يجبك للخروج بعد أيّام فينبغى أن تثقب حول السهم فى نفس العظم من كلّ جهة بمثقب لطيف حتّى توسع للسهم ثمّ تجذبه وتخرجه.	And if it does not exit, also leave it until you have gently extracted and manipulated it every day, for it will come out. If it still does not come out after days, it is suggested that you drill around the arrow in the same bone on all sides with a fine drill bit until it widens enough for the arrow to be extracted and removed.
فإن كان السهم الناشب فى عظم الرأس وقد أمعن فى أحد بطون الدماغ وظهرت من العليل بعض تلك الأعراض التى ذكرت لك فأمسك عن جذب السهم واتركه حتّى يستبرئ أمره بعد أيّام.	For if the embedded arrow is in the bone of the skull and has penetrated into one of the brain's lobes, and some of those symptoms I mentioned to you have appeared from the disease, then refrain from extracting the arrow and leave it until its condition improves after days.
فإنّه إن كان السهم قد وصل الى الصفاق فإنّ المنيّة لا تمطله، وإن كان السهم إنّما هو ناشب فى جرم العظم فقط ولم يتعدّ الى الصفاق وبقى العليل أيّاما ولم يحدث له من تلك الأعراض شىء.	For if the arrow has reached the diaphragm, then death is inevitable, and if the arrow is only embedded in the mass of the bone and has not passed into the diaphragm, and the disease remains mild and none of those symptoms have occurred.
فاحتل فى جذب السهم وإخراجه، فإن كان ناشبا جدّا ولم يجبك للجذب فاستعمل المثاقب حول السهم كما وصفت لك ثمّ عالج الموضع حتّى يبرأ، وأمّا إن كان السهم قد توارى فى موضع من الجسم.	So be cautious in extracting and removing the arrow, for if it is deeply embedded and does not come out with extraction, use the drill bits around the arrow as I described to you, then treat the area until it heals. As for if the arrow has entered a place in the body.
وغاب عن الحسّ ففتّشه بالمسبار فإن أحسست به فاجذبه ببعض الآلات التى تصلح لجذبه فإن لم تستطع عليه لضيق الجرح ولبعد السهم فى الغور ولم يكن هثاك عظم ولا عصب ولا عرق.	Puncture of the spleen, then probe it with a sound, if you feel it, pull it out with some instruments that suit pulling it out, if you are unable to do so due to the narrowness of the wound and the depth of the arrow in the cavity and there is no fractured bone or nerve or blood vessel.
فشقّ عليه حتّى توسع الجرح وتتمكّن بالسهم حتّى تخرجه، فإن كان له أذنان تمسك بهما فخلّص اللحم الناشب فيهما من كلّ جهة بكلّ حيلة يمكنك ذلك واحتل إن لم تقدر على تخليص اللحم فى كسر الأذنين وفتلهما حتى تتخلّص.	Dissect around it until the wound widens and the arrow is secured, so you can pull it out, if it has barbs hold onto them, clear the flesh that the barbs are embedded in from all sides with every trick possible for you, and if you cannot clear the flesh from the barbs.
وإذا حاولت إخراج السهم فى أىّ موضع كان فاستعمل فتل يدك بالكلاليب الى الجهات كلّها حتّى تخلّصه وارفق غاية الرفق لئلّا ينكسر السهم فيصعب عليك جذبه وإخراجه، فإن لم تستطع عليه من وقتك.	And if you attempt to remove the arrow from any location, then use your fingers with pincers to both sides until it is cleared, and be very careful lest the arrow break and become difficult for you to pull out, if you are unable to do so at that time.
فاتركه أيّاما حتّى تعفن تلك اللحوم التى حواليه ثمّ تعاوده فإنّه يسهل حينئذ فإن اعترضك نزف دم فاستعمل ما ذكرنا من العلاج فى بابه، وتحفّظ جهدك من قطع عرق او عصب او وتر واستعمل الحيلة.	Leave it for a while until the flesh around it putrefies, then return to it, for it will be easier then, and if hemorrhage bothers you, then use the treatment we mentioned for it, and beware of cutting a blood vessel or nerve or tendon, and use skill.
بكلّ وجه يمكنك تخليص السهم وليكن ذلك برفق وتأن وتثبّت كما وصفت لك، وينبغى لك أن تستعمل عند جذبك السهم أن تصير العليل على الشكل الذى كان عليه عند وقوع السهم فهو أوفق.	In every way possible for you to clear the arrow, and let that be with carefulness and slowness and steadiness as we described to you, and it is recommended for you when pulling out the arrow to pull in the direction of the shape it was in when the arrow fell, for it is easier.
فإن لم يمكنك ذلك فاستعمل ما يمكنك من الأشكال، وأمّا السهم الذى يخرج من ضدّ الجهة الأخرى إمّا أن يكون قد برز منه شىء الى خارج وإمّا أن تجد طرف السهم بالحسّ من أعلى الجلد قريبا وتراه ناتيا.	For if you cannot do that, then do what is possible of the shapes, and as for the arrow that comes out from the opposite side, either a part of it has emerged to the outside or you feel the tip of the arrow by touch near the surface of the skin and it appears nearby.
فشقّ عليه وليكن الشق على قدر ما تسع فيه الكلاليب ثمّ اجذبه فإنّه يسهل للخروج، فإن امتسك فى عظم فافتل يدك على استدارة حتّى يؤثّر السهم فى العظم ويوسع لنفسه ثمّ اجذبه.	Dissect around it, and let the dissection be to the extent that the pincers can fit in it, then pull it out, for it will be easier to exit, and if it is held in a bone, then move your hand around the bone until the arrow makes an impression in the bone and widens its own space, then pull it out.
وإلّا فاتركه أيّاما تمّ عاوده حتّى يخرج، فإن كان عود السهم فيه فادفعه به فإن كان قد سقط العود وأردت استعمال الدفع فأدخل اليه الآلة المجوّفة لتدخل تجويفها فى ذنب السبم ثمّ تدفعه بها.	And if you open it, then insert the instrument, whether the hollow bone or not, to extract it, and if there is a arrowhead in it, then push it with it, and if the arrowhead has fallen and the use of pushing has been cut off, then introduce the olivary (curved) instrument for its extraction from the hump of the shoulder.
فإن كان السهم مجوّفا فادفعه بآلة تدخل فى ذلك التجويف فإنّ السهم يسهل بذلك خروجه، فإن كان السهم مسموما فينبغى أن تقور اللحم الذى قد صار فيه السمّ كلّه إن أمكنك ذلك ثمّ عالجه بما يصلح لذلك.	If the arrow is barbed, then push it with an instrument that enters into that barbing, for the arrow will be easier to extract by that, and if the arrow is poisoned, then it is recommended that you cauterize the flesh where the poison has settled, if possible, then treat it with what is suitable for that.
فإن كان السهم الواقع فى الصدر او فى البطن او فى المثانة او فى الجنب وكان قريبا ممّا يجسّه بالمسبار وأمكنك الشقّ عليه فشقّ وتحفّظ من قطع عرق او عصب وأخرجه.	If the arrow that has fallen is in the chest or in the belly or in the spleen or in the side and it is near so that you can feel it with the palpator, and it is possible for you to make an incision upon it, then make an incision and be cautious of cutting a blood vessel or a nerve and extract it.
ثمّ خط الجرح إن احتاج الى الخياطة ثمّ عالجه حتّى يبرأ، صورة الكلاليب التى تجتذب بها السهام:.	Then stitch the wound if it needs stitching, then treat it until it heals. The image of the arrow-puller that pulls out arrows:
تكون أطرافها شبه خرطوم الطائر قد صنعت كأنّها المبرد اذا قبضت على السهم او شىء لم تتركه، وقد تصنع منها أنواع كبار وصغار ومتوسّطة كلّ ذلك على قدر عظم السهم وصغره وسعة الجرح وضيقه.	Its edges are like the beak of a bird, made to grasp, so that when it grasps an arrow or something, it does not let it go. It is manufactured in various sizes, large, small, and medium, all according to the size of the arrow and the width and narrowness of the wound.
صورة المدفع المجوّف:.	The image of the hollow pusher:
صورة المدفغ المصمت:.	The image of the pointed pusher:
هذا مصمت الطرف كالمرود ليسهل دخوله فى السهم المجوّف ودفعه،.	This has a pointed edge like a stylus, so that it is easy for it to enter into the barbed arrow and push it.
الفصل الخامس والتسعون.	The ninety-fifth chapter.
فى فصد العروق.	On bloodletting.
العروق التى قد جرت العادة بفصدها فى البدن ثلاثون عرقا منها فى الرأس ستّة عشر عرقا العرقان النابضان اللذان خلف الأذنين المعروفان بالحسيسين والشريانان اللذان فى الصدغين الظاهران والعرقان اللذان فى مأقى العينين المعروفان بالناظرين.	The blood vessels that the habit has made customary to cut in the body are thirty, of which six are in the head: the two veins behind the ears known as al-hawsa, and the two jugulars that are visible in the neck, and the two arteries in the temples known as al-nazrein.
والعرق المنتصب فى وسط الجبهة والعرق الذى فى طرف الأنف والودجان اللذان فى العنق والعرقان اللذان فى الشفة العليا من الفم والعرقان اللذان فى الشفة السفلى وهذه العروق المعروفة بالجهارك والعرقان اللذان تحت اللسان.	The veins that are situated in the middle of the forehead and the vein that is on the side of the nose and the two veins that are in the neck and the two veins that are in the upper lip of the mouth and the two veins that are in the lower lip, and these known veins in the jaw and the two veins that are under the tongue.
وأمّا العروق التى تفصد فى الذراع واليد فهى خمسة عروق أحدها القيفال وهو من الجانب الوحشىّ وتسمّيه العامّة عرق الرأس والأكحل وهو العرق الأوسط وهو مركّب من شعبة الباسليق وشعبة من القيفال وتسمّيه العامّة عرق البدن.	And as for the veins that are in the arm and the hand, they are five veins, one of them is the cephalic, which is from the radial side, and it is called by the common people the vein of the head. The median is the middle vein, which is composed of a branch of the basilic and a branch of the cephalic, and it is called by the common people the vein of the arm.
والباسليق وهو الموضوع فى الجانب الإنسىّ ويسمّى أيضا الإبطى وتسمّيه العامّة عرق البطن وحبل الذراع وهو الموضوع على الزند وهو الذى يلتصق فيه وهو الذى يظهر فوق الإبهام ظهورا بيّنا والأسيلم.	And the basilic, which is situated on the inner side, and it is also called the axillary, and the common people call it the vein of the navel, and the bundle of the arm, which is situated above the elbow, and it is the one that is connected to it, and it is the one that appears above the forearm, a clear appearance, and the axillary.
وهو العرق الذى بين الخنصر والبنصر له شعبتان، وفى الساق والرجل ثلاثة عروق أحدها الذى تحت مأبض الركبة من الجانب الوحشىّ والثانى الصافن ومكانه عند الكعب من الجانب الإنسىّ وعرق النسا ومكانه عند العقب من الجانب الوحشىّ.	And it is the vein that is between the cubital and the ulnar, it has two branches, and in the leg there are three veins, one of them is the one that is below the bend of the knee from the radial side, and the second is the saphenous and its place is at the hock from the inner side, and the vein of the ankle and its place is at the heel from the outer side.
وفى الساق الاخرى ثلاثة عروق مثلها، فأمّا العرقان اللذان خلف الأذنين فمنفعة فصدهما للنزلات المزمنة والشقيقة والسعفة وقروح الرأس الرديئة المزمنة، وكيفيّة فصدهما على ما أصف.	And in the other leg there are also three veins, similarly, and as for the two veins that are behind the ears, they are beneficial for treating the diseases of the brain and the neck and the throat and the chronic headaches. And the sufficiency of treating them is based on what I described.
وهو أن تحلق رأس العليل وتحكّ مؤخّره فى موضع العرقين بخرقة خشنة حكّا جيّدا ثمّ يخنق العليل عنقه بعمامة حتّى تظهر العرقان وموضعهما خلف الأذنين فى الموضعين المنخفضين من الرأس فتفتشّبهما بأصبعك وحيث أحسست بنبضهما تحت أصبعك فهناك فعلّم بالمداد.	And it is that you should shave the back of the head and rub its end in the place of the two veins with a rough cloth, rubbing well, then the kid will bend his neck with force until the two veins appear and their location behind the ears in the two depressed places of the head, so feel for them with your fingers and wherever you feel the pulsation beneath your fingers, there it is, so mark it with a thread.
ثم تأخذ مبضعا سكّينيّة وهى التى تعرف بالنشل ثمّ تدخلها تحت العرق فى الجلد حتّى تصل المبضع الى العظم ثمّ ترفع يدك بالعرق والجلد الى فوق وتقطع العرق مع الجلد قطعا مبتورا ويكون طول القطع قدر اصبعين مضمومتين.	You will take a scalpel and make an incision, identifying the nerve, then you insert it under the skin in the area of the incision until you reach the bone, then you lift your hand with the skin and the incision upwards and cut the vein along with the incision, cutting in a curved shape, and the length of the cut is equivalent to two closed fingers.
او نحوه وترسل من الدم القدر الذى تريد ثمّ تشدّهما بالرفائد وتتركهما حتّى تبرأ، وقد تقدّم فى أوّل الكتاب قطعهما وكيّهما، وأمّا الشريانان اللذان فى الصدغين فمنفعة فصدهما للشقيقة المزمنة والصداع الصعب والرمد الدائم وسيلان الفضول الحادّة المنصبّة الى العينين.	And in this way you let out the amount of blood that you want, then you tighten them with the bandages and leave them until they heal. We have previously mentioned in the beginning of the book how to cauterize and treat them. As for the two veins in the temples, puncturing them is beneficial for the migraine headache, and the hard, chronic, and sharp shooting pains, and the severe, piercing, and stabbing pain that rises to the eyes.
وكيفيّة فصدهما على ما أصف لك يشدّ العليل رقبته بعمامة حتّى تظهر العرقان للحسّ ظهورا بيّنا ويتبيّن نبضهما تحت أصبعك فحينئذ تعلّم بالمداد ثمّ ترفع الجلد من أعلى العرق الى حه فوق بأصبعك السبّابة.	And the method of puncturing them, as I described to you, is to tighten the elbow with a tourniquet until the veins become apparent to the touch and their pulsation becomes clear under your finger. Then you insert the needle, afterwards you lift the skin from above the vein upwards with your index finger.
وتدخل المبضع النشل من أسفل وترفع العرق الى فوق وتبتره كما صنعت فى العرقين الآخرين وترسل من الدم على قدر حاجتك ثمّ تحلّ خناق العليل وتضع أصبعك على العرق ساعة.	And the needle enters from below, and you lift the vein upwards, and you cut it as you did with the other veins, and you let out blood according to your need, then you loosen the tourniquet of the elbow and you put your finger on the vein for a moment.
ثمّ تضع عليه قطنة ورفادة وتشدّ من فوق شدّا وثيقا وتتركه حتّى يبرأ، وقد تقدّم ذكرهما وقطعهما وسلّهما فى أوّل الكتاب، وأمّا فصد عرق الجبهة فمنفعته بعد فصد القيفال لعلل الوجه المزمنة كالسعفة والقروح والحمرة السمجة،.	Then you put on it a dressing and a bandage, and you tighten from above with a strong and tight tightening, and you leave it until it heals. We have previously mentioned them, and their cutting, and their treatment in the beginning of the book. As for puncturing the vein of the forehead, its benefit is after puncturing the elbows for chronic facial plethora, like the puffiness and the redness and the blushing.
وكيفيّة فصده على ما أصف لك يخنق العليل رقبته بعمامة حتّى يظهر العرق ثمّ تأخذ الآلة التى تسمّى الفأس وهذه صورتها:.	And the method of puncturing it, as I described to you, is to constrict the elbow with a tourniquet until the vein appears, then you take the instrument called the phlebotome, and this is its shape:
تضع الشوكة الناتية التى فى رأس الفأس على نفس العرق وتضرب من فوق بمشط او شىء آخر فى نحوه وتترك الدم يجرى على القدر الذى تريد ثمّ تحلّ خناق العليل وتشدّه حتّى يبرأ.	The needle is placed in the head of the scalpel on the same vein and struck from above with a spatula or another instrument in its vicinity, and the blood is allowed to flow onto the cloth that you wish, then the ligature is loosened and tightened until it heals.
وقد يفتح بمبضع عريض إلّا أنّه لا ينبغى أن يكون المبضع حادّ الطرف كسائر المباضع بل يكون عريض الطرف قليلا وتفصده على التحريف لأنّ العظم قريب فربّما انكسر فيه المبضع اذا كان رقيقا.	And it may be opened with a broad incision, but it is not suitable that the incision has a sharp edge like other incisions, rather the edge of the incision should be slightly broad and should be smoothed on the revision because the bone is near, for often the incision breaks in if it is thin.
فأمّا العرقان اللذان فى مأقى العينين فمنفعتهما لعلل العين من الجرب والحمرة والسبل وأمراض الوجه، وأمّا كيفيّة فصدهما فهو أن يشدّ العليل رقبته بعمامة ثمّ تفصدهما وأنت واقف على رأسه وليكن الفصد على تحريف الى الطول قليلا بمبضع صغير عريض قليلا.	As for the two veins that are in the corners of the eyes, their benefit for the ailments of the eye from cataracts and redness and ptosis and facial diseases, and as for how to phlebotomize them, it is that the patient should stretch his neck with a bandage, then they are phlebotomized, and you stand behind him, and the phlebotomy is done on a slight incline with a small broad incision.
فإنّ الموضع لا لحم فيه فإنّه إن كان المبضع رقيق الطرف فربّما انكسر، ثمّ ترسل من الدم حاجتك وتضع عليهما قطنة وتشدّهما ليلة واحدة ثمّ تحلّهما، وأمّا فصد عرق الأنف فنافع من الحمّى الحادّة.	For the place has no flesh in it, so if the incision is thin-edged, it often breaks, then you let out the amount of blood that you need, and put a dressing on it, and bind it for one night, then loosen it, and as for phlebotomy of the vein of the nose, it is beneficial for sharp fevers.
والصداع الشديد ومن أمراض الوجه كالسفعة الحمراء التى تعرض فى الأنف ولا سيّما اذا كانت مزمنة، وكيفيّة فصده أن يشدّ العليل رقبته ثمّ تمسك أنفه بيدك اليسرى وتأخذ مبضعا رقيقا طويلا.	And the severe headache, and among the diseases of the face such as red acne that appears on the nose, and not limited to if it is chronic, and how to phlebotomize it, is that the patient should stretch his neck, then you grasp his nose with your left hand, and take a long thin scalpel.
وتغرزه فى وسط الأرنبة نفسها بين حجز الأنف على استقامة لأنّ العرق لا يظهر للحسّ هناك فإنّ الدم يبرز من ساعته، وينبغى أن تمعن يدك بالمبضع قليلا وترسل من الدم حاجتك ثمّ تربطه ليلة فإنّه يتجبّر سريعا.	And insert it into the middle of the alarneba itself between the nasal septum on a straight path, because the vein does not feel there, so the blood flows from its side, and it is suitable that you move your hand with the scalpel slightly, and let out the amount of blood that you need, then bind it for a night, for it will close quickly.
وأمّا الودجان فمنفعة فصدهما لضيق النفس وابتداء الجذام والأمراض السوداويّة التى تعرض فى سطح الجلد مثل البهق الأسود والقوباء والقروح الرديئة والأواكل، وكيفيّة فصدهما أن يشدّ العليل تحتهما فى عنقه برباط ويقف الصانع على رأس العليل.	As for the jugular veins, their dissection is necessary for constriction of the breath and protrusion of the tendons and the blueish discoloration that appears on the surface of the skin such as cyanosis, varices, and the rough calluses, and the method of their dissection is that the patient should be restrained under him with a bandage around his neck and stand on the head of the patient.
والعليل قاعد على كرسىّ ثمّ تفصد العرق الى الطول فصدا واسعا قليلا ثمّ تخرخ من الدم القدر المعتدل او على حسب ما تراه من الحاجة الى ذلك ثمّ تفعل كذلك بالعرق الآخر ثمّ تحل الرباط.	And the patient should be sitting on a chair, then the vein is dissected along its length, a wide and gentle dissection, then it is cut to moderate bleeding or according to what is seen as necessary, then the same is done with the other vein, then the bandage is loosened.
وتشدّ العرقين شدّا متوسّطا لئلا يختنق العليل وتتركه الى الغد فإنّه يبرأ الجرح، وأمّا عروق الجهارك فمنفعة فصدهما بعد فصد القيفال أنّه ينفع من القلاع فى الفم وفساد اللثّة والقروح الرديئة وشقاق الشفتين والقروح الرديئة.	And the two veins are constricted with moderate pressure so that the patient does not feel strangled and left until the wound heals, as for the temporal arteries their dissection is necessary after venesection because it benefits from the obstruction in the mouth and decay of the gums and rough calluses and splitting of the lips and rough calluses.
التى تكون فى الأنف وحواليه، وكيفيّة فصدهما أن تقعد العليل أمامك وتشدّ رقبته بعمامة ثمّ تحوّل شفتيه وتنظر الى العرقين اللذين ترى أحدهما عن يمين الشفة والثانى عن يسارها وتستبين منها بسوادهما.	Which are in the nose and its surroundings, and the method of their dissection is that the patient should sit in front of you and you constrict his nape with a bandage then you pull back his lips and look at the two veins that you see one of them to the right of the lip and the other to the left and distinguish them by their blueness.
وذلك أيضا أنّ حواليهما عروقا رقاقا سودا فتقطعهما قطعا مبتورا، فإن أشكل عليك ولم تدر بما هى فاقصد الى قطع أكبرها وأبينها وكذلك فاصنع فى العرقين اللذين فى الشفة السفلى.	And that also around them are two blue veins, so you cut them with a curved incision, if it is difficult for you and you do not know what to do, then make a deeper incision in the larger and more apparent one, and do the same with the two veins in the lower lip.
وأمّا العرقان اللذان تحت اللسان فمنفعة فصدهما بعد فصد القيفال للخوانيق التى تكون فى الحلق من مرض اللهاة وأمراض الفم، وكيفيّة فصدهما أن تجلس العليل بين يديك بحذاء الشمس وترفع لسانه وتنظر تحت اللسان عن جانبه الواحد عرقا وعن جانبه الآخر عرقا ولونهما الى السواد.	As for the two veins that are under the tongue, their dissection is necessary after venesection for the treatment of diseases of the throat from corruption of the uvula and mouth diseases, and the method of their dissection is that the patient should sit between your hands with his shoulders raised and you lift up his tongue and look under the tongue for one vein on one side and another vein on the other side and distinguish them by their blueness.
فتفصدهما وتحفّظ لا تمعن فى قطعهما فإنّ تحتهما شريانات فربّما عرض نزف دم من تلك الشريانات، وأما العروق الثلاثة التى تفصد فى المرفق فهى التى جرت العادة بفصدها فى الناس أجمع وفصدها يكون على وجهين.	The two veins are preserved and not severed, for if they are cut, the nerves will be damaged, and excessive bleeding from those nerves may occur. As for the three veins that are usually ligated in the elbow, they are the ones most commonly ligated by people, and ligation is done in two ways.
إمّا غرزا بمبضع ريحانىّ عريض او زيتونىّ الى الرقّة وإمّا شقّا بمبضع سكّينيّة وهى النشل [وهذه صورتها]، صورة المبضع العريض الريحانىّ:.	Either a suture is made with the curved needle, which has an eye at its point, or it is incised with a sickle, and this is the scalpel [and this is its illustration]. The illustration of the curved, double-eyed needle:
يكون عريضا كما ترى ليصلح لفتح العروق المجوّفة الممتلئة البارزة الظاهرة الغلاظ والتى تحوى دما غليظا كدرا، وهذه صورة المبضع الزيتونىّ:.	It is curved as you see, in order to ligate the varicose, distended, bulging and visible veins that contain thick blood like a vein, and this is an illustration of the olive-shaped instrument:
وهذا المبضع أقلّ عرضا وأرقّ طرفا يصلح لفصد العروق الرقاق التى تحوى دما رقيقا صفراويّا، وهذه صورة المبضع النشل:.	And this instrument is narrower and has a thinner edge, suited for ligating the thin veins that contain yellowish, watery blood, and this is an illustration of the scalpel instrument:
هذا النشل الذى يصلح للشقّ ويكون منه أنواع عراض ورقاق على حسب سعة العروق أيضا وضيقها وقد يستدلّ بهذا على غيره وهو عند الصنّاع مشهور.	This scalpel, which is suitable for incising, has types that are broad and thin, according to the width and narrowness of the veins, and one can infer others from it, and it is well-known among craftsmen.
وأمّا الباسليق الذى هو أحد هذه الثلاثة العروق فمنفعة فصده أنّه يجذب الدم من العلل التى تكون تحت الحلق والعنق ممّا يلى الصدر والبطن، وينبغى للفاصد عند فصده أن يحذره ويكون على رقبة منه فإنّ تحته شريانا فإن أخطأ وزاد فى غرز المبضع قطع ذلك الشريان.	As for the basilic vein, which is one of these three veins, the benefit of ligating it is that it draws blood from the ulcers that are beneath the throat and neck, to the chest and abdomen, and it is recommended for the ligator, when he ligates, to be cautious with it, for if there is a nerve nearby and he makes a mistake and adds an extra stitch with the needle, he will cut that nerve.
فيحدث نزف دم فلذلك ينبغى أن لا يكون فصده له بمبضع الغرز بل يكون فصده شقّا بالنشل، فإن لم يظهر الباسليق ظهورا بيّنا فينبغى أن تجتنبه وتعدل الى غيره او تطلب بعض شعبه.	If there is excessive bleeding, it is recommended that the ligation not be done with a needle and thread, but rather an incision with a scalpel, for if the basilic vein does not appear clearly, one should feel for it and adjust to another or seek some of its branches.
او تفصد مكانه حبل الذراع فإنّه بيّن وتشقّه بالمبضع النشل كما قلنا فإن أردت فصده بعينه فينبغى قبل شدّ الذراع أن تجسّ الموضع حتّى تتعرّف موضع النبض ثمّ تعلّم عليه بالمداد.	If the fracture of the arm is obvious, it will be clear and you will make an incision in the depression of the elbow as we have said, then if you want to reduce the fracture, you should first examine the location until you are familiar with the location of the artery.
ثمّ تربط الذراع وتشقّ العرق شقّا محرّفا بالمبضع النشل كما قلنا وتحرّى أن تقع الضربة بالبعد عن موضع الشريان، ومتى رأيت عند شدّك الرباط نفخا فى الموضع الذى كنت علّمت بالمداد فإنّ ذلك النفخ هو انتفاخ الشريان فجنّبه.	Then you tie the arm and make an incision in the depression of the elbow, as we have said, and be careful that the cut is not too close to the location of the artery, and when you see, upon tightening the bandage, a swelling at the place where you had marked with the bandage, then that swelling is the bulging of the artery, so avoid it.
فإن رأيت الدم عند الفصد يثب كما يثب بول صبىّ وكان الدم رقيقا أحمر فاعلم أنّه من دم الشريان فحينئذ فبادر فضع أصبعك عليه ساعة طويلة ثمّ انزع أصبعك فإن انقطع الدم فكثيرا ما ينقطع فشدّ الذراع.	For if you see the blood, when making the incision, spurt out as the urine of a young boy spurts out, and the blood is thin and very red, then know that it is from the arterial blood, so immediately put your finger on it for a long time, then lift your finger, and if the bleeding stops, then it often stops when the arm is tightened.
واتركه، وحذّر العليل من إهماله وليكن على رقبة ولا يحرّكه أيّاما حتّى يبرأ، فإن لم ينقطع الدم وغلبك ولم يحضرك فى حينك دواء فابتر الشريان إن ظهر اليك فإنّ طرفيه تتقلّص وينقطع الدم.	And bind it tightly, and warn the patient against moving it, and let it be on a watchful vigilance, and do not move it in any way until it heals, for if the bleeding does not stop, and you are overwhelmed, and no remedy is available to you at that time, then compress the artery, for if it becomes visible to you, its edges constrict and the bleeding stops.
او خذ قشرة فستقة وشقّها وخذ النصف الواحد وشدّه على موضع العرق شدّا محكما بالرباط والرفائد الى يوم آخر، فإن انقطع الدم وإلّا فعالجه بما تقدّم ذكره من وضع الذرورات القاطعة للنزف، وقطع دمه ليس بالصعب فى أكثر الأحوال.	Or take a piece of cloth, and cut it, and take one end of it, and tie it tightly over the place of the artery with a bandage and a poultice until the next day, for if the bleeding stops, or else treat it with what was mentioned earlier regarding applying cauterizing agents to the area of the hemorrhage, and cutting off its blood is not difficult in most cases.
لمكان صغر الجرح وتمكّن الرباط فى الذراع فاعلمه، وأمّا العرق الأكحل فمنفعة فصده أن يجذب الدم من أعلى الرأس وأسفل البدن لمكان أنّه مركّب من شعبة من الباسليق وشعبة من القيفال كما قلنا،.	Since the wound is small and the bandage is tight on the arm, be aware of it. As for the major artery, it is useful to know that the blood is drawn from the top of the head and the bottom of the neck because it is composed of a branch from the basilic vein and a branch from the cephalic vein, as we have said.
وينبغى للفاصد له أن يكون على رقبة من فصده فإنّ تحته عصبا فإن زاد فى غرز المبضع وأصاب العصبة حدث فيها خدر يعسر برؤه وربّما لم يبرأ أصلا، وهذه العصبة كثيرا ما يظهر للحسّ.	The suture should be on a piece of cloth from the same fabric, if its threads are extracted and an excess of thread is added to the suture and it hits the tendons, there will be inflammation in it which makes movement easier and sometimes what did not heal initially will heal, and this tendon often appears to the touch.
فإن خفيت فى بعض الناس وكانت رقيقة لا تتبيّن فينبغى أن تجعل فصدك إيّاه شقّا بالنشل وتجنّب العصبة جهدك فإن كان العرق بين عصبتين فشقّ العرق طولا، وأمّا العرق القيفال فمنفعة فصده أنّه يجذب الدم من الرأس.	For if it is faint in some people and was thin, not visible, then it is necessary to make your incision with a scalpel and avoid the tendon with effort, if the vein is between two tendons then cut the vein lengthwise, and as for the jugular vein, its peculiarity is that it attracts blood from the head.
وينفع من أمراض العينين وينبغى فى هذا العرق خاصّة إن شئت أن تفصده ;lt;أن تفصده;gt; غرزا بالمبضع الزيتونىّ او بالمبضع العريض الريحانىّ لأنّه أسلم العروق كلّها لأنّه ليس تحته شريان ولا عصب.	And it is beneficial for the diseases of the eyes, and it is necessary in this vein, especially if you want to suture it with a suture of olive oil or a suture of sweet almond oil because it is the most gentle of all veins since there is neither an artery nor a nerve beneath it.
إلّا أنّه ينبغى لك عند الفصد أن تجتنب بالمبضع رأس العضلة فقط وتطلب الموضع الليّن، وليس يضرّه إن لم يصب بالضربة الأولى أن يعاد عليه بالفصد مرّات إلّا أنّه ربّما تورّم فى بعض الناس اذا لم يفصد فى الضربة الأولى.	But it is necessary for you when performing the incision to avoid only the head of the muscle with the suture and to seek the soft place, and it does not harm if it did not heal with the first strike that it is struck again with the incision repeatedly, unless that sometimes it swells in some people if it is not incised in the first strike.
ولكن لا يضرّه ذلك الورم شيئا، وأمّا كيفيّة الفصد وعوارضه وما ينبغى أن يتقدّم فى إصلاحه فأوّل ذلك ينبغى أن تعلم أنّ الفصد إما أن يستعمل فى حفظ الصحّة فقط.	But that swelling does not harm it, and as for the method of incision and its complications and what is necessary to advance in its treatment, first it is necessary to learn that incision is either used to preserve health only.
وإمّا أن يستعمل فى الأمراض والذى يستعمل فى حفظ الصحّة واستدامتها والتحرّز من حدوث الأمراض أن يكون الفصد فى أحد العروق الثلاثة التى فى المرفق أعنى القيفال والأكحل والباسليق وأن يكون الفصد فى أوّل الربيع اذا ظهرت دلائل الامتلاء.	And if it is used for diseases, and the one that is used to preserve health and its durability and to protect from the occurrence of diseases, it should be that the incision is in one of the three veins that are in the arm: the jugular, the cephalic, and the basilic, and the incision should be at the beginning of spring if the signs of plethora appear.
ويكون الفصد فى يوم الأحد او يوم الثلاثاء بعد أن يمضى للنهار ثلاث ساعات، وأمّا الفصد الذى يستعمل فى الأمراض فليس له وقت محدود ولكن متى دعت الحاجة والضرورة اليه من ليل او نهار.	The bloodletting should be on Sunday or Tuesday after three hours have passed from noon, and as for the bloodletting that is used for diseases, it does not have a limited time but whenever necessity and need require it, whether night or day.
وفى كلّ ساعة وفى كلّ زمان، ولا ينبغى أن يفصد الصبيان حتّى يأتى عليهم أربع عشرة سنة ولا يفصد الشيوخ الذين قد جاوزوا الستّين سنة، فإذا أزمع أحد على الفصد لأىّ وجه كان.	And it is not suitable that children be bled until they reach fourteen years, nor the elderly who have passed sixty years. If one of them insists on bloodletting for any reason, then.
فينبغى أن ينقى معاءه قبل الفصد بحقنة ليّنة إن كان فيه زبل كثير محتبس لئلّا ينجذب الى العروق عند الفصد من المعاء فضول عفنة تضرّ بالأعضاء الرئيسة، ولا يفصد المتوخّم ولا السكران ولا الثمل حتّى يزول ذلك عنهم.	It is suitable that his bowel be cleaned before bloodletting with a gentle purgative if there is a lot of hidden and evident flatulence, so that when the blood is let, the filthy stuff does not ascend to the veins from the bowel and cause harm to the main organs. And one should not bleed someone who is feverish or drunk or intoxicated until it has passed from them.
وليحذر الفصد أيضا بعقب الهيضة والقىء والخلفة والإكثار من الجماع والتعب والرياضة والسهر والصيام وكلّ ما يحلّ القوّة من أمر جسمانىّ او نفسانىّ، ثمّ تنظر فى ترقيق الأخلاط قبل ذلك إن كان الدم غليظا.	And bloodletting should also be avoided after a meal, and after eating, and after sex, and excessive talking, and exertion, and exercise, and staying up late, and fasting, and anything that weakens the body, whether physically or spiritually. Then consider thinning the humors before that if the blood is thick.
بالأطعمة والأشربة والأدوية إن أمكنه ذلك، ثمّ يدخل الحمّام إن لم يمنعه مانع او يرتاض بعض الرياضة لكى يرقّ الدم وتجعل فصده فى صدر النهار كما قلنا ويروم أن يخلّى صدره ذلك النهار من جميع العوارض النفسانيّة الرديئة.	With foods, and drinks, and medications if possible, then he should enter the bath, unless something prevents him or he is weakened by some exercise to thin the blood and have the bloodletting done at noon as we said, and it is recommended that he clears his chest that day from all base spiritual defects.
كالهموم والغضب والخوف ومن جميع العوارض الجسدانيّة كالتعب والنصب المفرطين والجماع ونحو ذلك، وتحضر مجلسه الأشياء التى قد جرى عادات الناس باستعمالها من ضروب الطيب والرياحين والملاهى ونحو ذلك كلّ إنسان على قدر ما يمكنه.	Such as sorrow, and anger, and fear, and all bodily defects like excessive exertion, and sex, and things of that kind. And his assembly should be prepared with the things that people are accustomed to using, such as perfumes, and aromatics, and pleasant things, and things of that kind, each person according to their ability.
ثمّ يقعد الفاصد على وسادة تكون أرفع من الوسادة التى يقعد عليه المفصود، ثمّ يخرج ذراعه ويحكّه الفاصد بيده مرّتين او ثلاث ثمّ يشدّ الرباط بالشرك ويلويها مرّتين او ثلاث وليكن الشدّ معتدلا.	Then the bloodletter sits on a pillow that is higher than the pillow that the one to be bled sits on, then he extends his arm and the bloodletter feels it with his hand two or three times, then he tightens the band with a wrapping and winds it two or three times, and the tightening should be moderate.
لأنّ الشدّ متى كان غير معتدل إمّا بإفراط فى الشدّ فيمنع جرى الدم وإمّا إن كان الى الاسترخاء منع أيضا جرى الدم، ثمّ بعد الشدّ ينبغى أن يحكّ المفصود يديه جميعا بضهما ببعض.	Because the constriction was not moderate, either it was excessive and thus led to the stopping of the blood flow or if it relaxed too much it also stopped the blood flow, then after the constriction it is necessary that the surgeon should press his fingers entirely with each other.
حتّى ينتفخ العروق وتتبيّن للحسّ ثمّ يمسح الفاصد المبضع بيسير من الزيت العتيق خاصّة ثمّ يضع أصبعه السبّابة من اليد اليسرى على نفس العرق تحت الموضع الذى يريد فصده قليلا لئلّا يلوذ العرق فيجنّب الضربة.	Until the veins become swollen and palpable, then he massages the arm with old oil, especially after a warm bath, then he places his left index finger on the vein beneath the spot where he wants to make the incision so that the vein is exposed when he makes the cut.
لأنّ من العروق ما تجدها كالوتر يلوذ عند الفصد ومنها ما هى مملوءة ريحا فمتى وضعت المبضع عليها انخفضت تحت المبضع وخدعت الفاصد ولم يفتح المبضع العرق وإن فتحه فإنّما يكون فتحه ضيقا.	For some of the veins, such as the vena, are exposed during venesection and some are full of air so that when the band is applied to them it goes down under the band and escapes the surgeon, and the band does not open the vein, or if it opens it the opening will be narrow.
فلذلك ينبغى أن يتثبّت الفاصد ويتأنّى فى هذه الأمور كلّها، ثمّ ينزل المبضع فإن فتح العرق من مرّته تلك وإلّا فيعاوده مرّة أخرى تحت ذلك الموضع قليلا او فوقه بالعجلة إن لم يتورّم الموضع.	Therefore, the surgeon should be steady and cautious in all these matters, then he loosens the band and if the vein opens from that first application, and if not, he repeats it another time under that same spot or a little above it with haste, if the spot does not become inflamed.
فإن تورّم او جزع العليل فاتركه يوما او يومين ولا تشدّ الرباط فإنّه ربّما جلب ورما حارّا ولا يدخل الحمّام، ثمّ يعاود الفصد إن أحبّ، فإن غرز المبضع وكان الفتح صغيرا وكان جرى الدم رقيقا.	For if there is swelling or aching of the limb, he should leave it for a day or two days and not constrict the bandage, for it may become hot and inflamed and the blood may become thin, and he should not enter the bath, then he repeats the venesection if he wishes, for the application of the band was made and the opening was small and the flow of blood was slight.
وخشيت أن لا يخرج من الدم القدر الذى تريد فأعد المبضع فى الثقب نفسه يرفق على استقامة وزد فى الفتح قليلا وافعل ذلك بالعجلة قبل أن يتورّم الموضع فإنّ فى كثير من الناس قد يتورّم الموضع عند الفتح الصغير.	And he feared that not enough blood would flow out, so he reapplies the band on the same spot gently and slightly increases the opening, and does this hastily before the spot becomes inflamed, for in many people the spot becomes inflamed even with a small incision.
فإن رأيته قد تورّم فلا تعد عليه البتّة فإنّه لا يعينك شيئا وضع عليه شيئا من عكّار الزيت فإنّه يسهل جرى الدم وهو أفضل فى هذا الموضع من الزيت نفسه ومن سائر الأدهان وكذلك.	For if you see that it has become inflamed, do not repeat the application, for it will not benefit you to put on it a little of the oil of costus, for it facilitates the flow of blood and is better in this case than the oil itself and other ointments.
فاستعمل عكّار الزيت فى جميع فصدك للعروق عند تعذّر جرى الدم وقد يفعل ذلك الترياق الفاروق والشخزنايا اذا وضع من أحدهما على الموضع فإنّ الدم يرقّ وينحلّ اذا كان غليظ.	Let the application of oil be done in all phlebotomy for the sake of veins when there is difficulty in extracting blood, and this may be achieved by the use of hirudine or melanthium, for if one of them is applied to the site, the blood flows and becomes thin, if it was thick.
فإن حدث فى موضع الفصد ورم كبير فكثيرا ما يحدث ولا سيّما لمن لم يفتصد إلّا تلك المرّة او كان فتح العرق صغيرا فبادر فضع على الورم إسفنجة مغموسة فى ماء وملح مدفأ قليلا وشدّه ساعة فإنّه ينحلّ.	For if a large tumor forms at the site of phlebotomy, it often happens, and not just to one who has never been bled before, or where the opening of the vein was small, then hasten to put on the tumor a sponge soaked in water and salt, slightly heated and tightened for an hour, for it will be dissolved.
وينبغى أن تفعل ذلك بعد خروج الدم من العرق نفسه بكماله او من عرق آخر، فإن بقى فى الموضع بعد أيّام شىء من السواد او الخضرة فإنّه لايضرّ ذلك، فإن أحببت فاحمل عليه شيئا من الصبر والمرّ المحلولين.	And it is suitable that this be done after the blood has come out from the same vein in its entirety, or from another vein, for if something remains in the site after some days of eschar or spots, it does not harm, and if you wish, apply to it something of aloes and melanthium dissolved.
او شيئا من عصارة الفودنج ونحوه، وكثيرا ما يحدث ورم ونتو عند فصد الباسليق فضع عليه يدك فإن وجدته يلطأ عند غمزك عليه فإنّ ذلك نتو سوء فاحذر أن تجعل عليه شيئا ممّا ذكرنا.	Or something of the juice of the mandrake and its like, and often a tumor forms and becomes inflamed when phlebotomy is performed on the basilic vein, so put your hand on it, and if you find it painful when you press on it, then that is bad inflammation, so beware of putting on it any of the things we mentioned.
فإنّه ربّما نزف منه دم شريان ولكن ضمّده بما فيه قبض ليصلب الموضع ثمّ عالجه بسائر العلاج حتّى يبرأ، وينبغى أن تخرج لكلّ إنسان من الدم على قدر قوّته وما يظهر من اللون الغالب على الدم.	For it is rare that blood of a hemorrhage comes out from it, but rather its edges are constricted with what is in it to coagulate the site, then treat it with other treatments until it heals, and it is suitable that each person have blood drawn according to his strength and whatever humor dominates the blood.
فإنّه إن كان الدم أسود فدعه يخرج حتّى يحمرّ وكذلك إن رأيته غليظا فأرسله حتّى يرقّ وكذلك إن كان حادّا حتّى تذهب حدّته، وينبغى لمن كان ممتلئا قويّا واحتاج الى إخراج الدم دفعة واحدة.	For if the blood is bilious, let it be drawn until it becomes red, and likewise if you see it thick, let it be thinned until it flows, and likewise if it is sharp until its acuteness passes, and it is suitable for one who is full and strong and needs to have blood drawn, to have it done in one sitting.
أن يوسّع فصد العرق ويكون المبضع عريضا ومن كان ضعيفا فبالضدّ من ذلك وينبغى أن تخرجه فى مرّات وأن يكون الثقب ضيقا، وأفضل ما يستعمل فى فصد العرق أن يكون محرّفا مورّبا شقّا لا غرزا،.	It should be widened to cut the vein and make the incision in a way that the ligature is not necessary, and if it was weak, then the opposite should be done, and it is better for bloodletting that it is performed with a sharp and pointed instrument, without making an incision.
وهذا الضرب من الفصد سليم من النزف ومن قطع عصب وهو أحمد وأسلم من الفصد بالعرض والطول، ومن كان يعتاده عند الفصد الغشى فينبغى أن تطعمه قبل الفصد شيئا من خبز منقع فى ماء الرمّان المزّ او السكنجبين.	And this type of bloodletting is more sound and free from hemorrhage, and from cutting a nerve, and it is better and safer than bloodletting with the sharp edge and the long one, and for those who are accustomed to it when bloodletting with the scalpel, it is recommended that they should apply to it before bloodletting something of bread soaked in vinegar or Sakanjabin.
إن كان محرورا وأخرج له الدم فى ثلاث مرّات او أربع فإن كان مبرود المزاج فليأخذ قبل الفصد خبزا منقعا فى شراب الميبة او فى شراب العسل المطيّب بالأفاويه او فى الشراب الطيّب الريحانىّ.	If it was sharpened and the blood came out in three or four times, and if the temperament is bilious, then he should take before bloodletting bread soaked in a syrup of myrtle or in a syrup of pure honey with anise or in sweet and fragrant syrup.
فإن حدث الغشى عند الفصد وكان سببه خروج الدم الكثير فينبغى أن يسقى ماء اللحم والشراب الريحانىّ الرقيق ويستعمل التطيّب بالغالية ويلخلخ صدره بها ويستعمل سائر ما ذكرناه فى التقسيم فى باب الغشى.	For if the scalpel became dull during bloodletting and its edge was obstructing the flow of blood, then it is recommended to pour on it the juice of meat and a sweet and fragrant diluted syrup, and to use the pure honey with the gall, and to rub his chest with it, and to use other things that we mentioned in the chapter on the scalpel for sharpening.
الذى يكون من الأستفراغ، وأمّا من أراد ترويح ذراعه وتسريح دمه ثانية فينبغى لمن كان فصده لاستفراغ كثير وقوّته ضعيفة أن تسرّح الدم قليلا قليلا بقدر القوّة فى أيّام متوالية.	Which is from purging, and as for those who want to relax their arm and to cause their blood to flow a second time, it is recommended for those whose bloodletting was excessive and whose strength was weak, that the blood should be let out a little at a time according to the strength on successive days.
وأمّا من كان يريد ترويح ذراعه وتسريح دمه ثانية وكان بدنه قويّا فليفعل ذلك على سبع ساعات او تسع من فصده الأوّل، وأمّا من أراد اجتذاب الدم من بدنه الى ضدّ الجهة التى مالت اليها فينبغى أن يروح له فى اليوم الثانى او الثالث.	And as for those who want to relax their arm and to cause their blood to flow a second time, and whose body is strong, then he should do that after seven or nine hours from the first bloodletting, and as for those who want to draw the blood from his body to the opposite side where it had previously been applied, then it is recommended that he should relax on the second or third day.
وأمّا من كان فى بدنه الدم كثيرا قد سخن واحتدّ وأحدث حمّى فينبغى أن تخرج منه الدم فى دفعة واحدة وتخرج منه المقدار الكثير وتوسّع الفتح الى أن يعرض الغشى بعد أن تكون متفقّدا لجميع شروط الفصد.	As for the one whose body has a lot of blood, it is likely that he will speak and become heated and have a hemorrhage in his nostrils so that a lot of blood comes out of him at once and a large quantity comes out and the opening widens until the skin becomes thin after having met all the conditions of bloodletting.
وأن تضع يدك على نبضه عند سيلان الدم لئلّا يحدث الموت مكان الغشى فكثيرا ما يعرض ذلك اذا جهل الفاصد ووقعت الغفلة، ولا ينبغى اذا أردت حلّ الذراع وتسريح الدم ثانية.	And you should put your hand on his pulse when the blood is flowing so that death does not occur instead of the bleeding, for it often happens that this occurs if the bloodletter is ignorant and negligence occurs, and it is not appropriate if you want to untie the arm and let the blood flow a second time.
وقد انغلق فم العرق وعسر خروج الدم أن تغمز عليه بشدّة او تلوى بقوّة فإنّ ذلك ردىء جدّا بل إمّا أن تتركه حتّى تفصده ثانية وإمّا أن تنحّى بشفرة المبضع ما جمد من الدم فى فم العرق.	And if the mouth of the vein has closed and the blood is having difficulty coming out, you should not press on it strongly or bend it with force, for that would be very damaging, but rather either leave it until the blood comes out again by itself, or move away with the edge of the scalpel what blood has coagulated in the mouth of the vein.
او تحمل عليه شيئا من الملح قد حلّ فى الماء او تحمل عليه شيئا من الترياق الفاروق او الشخزنايا وتغمزه غمزا رقيقا حتّى يخرج الدم، فإن كان قد تورّم العرق فاتركه.	Or apply to it something of salt that has been dissolved in water, or apply to it some of the compound of soap and vinegar or the alkermes substance, and press on it a gentle pressure until the blood comes out, for if the vein has become swollen, then leave it.
ولا تمسّه حتّى يسكن الورم، فإن دعت الضرورة الى تسريح الدم ثانية ولا بدّ فإمّا أن تفصده فوق ذلك الموضع وإمّا أن تفصده فى الذراع الآخر او فى العرق الآخر.	And do not touch it until the swelling subsides, for if necessity requires that the blood be let again and there is no alternative, then either bleed him in the same place above, or bleed him in the other arm or in the other vein.
وأمّا فصد حبل الذراع فيفصد عوضا من الأكحل والباسليق اذا لم يوجدا او كانا خفيّين لأنّه مركّب منهما، وكيفيّة فصده أن يدخل العليل يده فى الماء الحارّ حتّى يحمرّ الزند ويظهر العرق ظهورا بيّنا ثمّ تشدّ فوقه بالرباط قليلا شدّا متوسّطا.	As for the bloodletting of the arm, it should be done at the median cubital and basilic veins if they are not visible or hidden, because they are composed of them, and the manner of bleeding is that the doctor puts his hand in warm water until the tendons become red and the vein becomes clearly visible, then he ties above it with a bandage, a moderate tightness.
ثمّ تفصد العرق على تحريف قليلا لا عرضا ولا طولا وليكن الفتح واسعا ويكون فصدك له فوق مفصل اليد قليلا، فإن تعذّر خروج الدم فأعد اليد فى الإناء بالماء الحارّ ودع الدم يجرى فى الماء.	Then the vein is cut with a slight incision, not crosswise or longitudinal, but the opening is wide, and your bloodletting for him is above the elbow joint, slightly, for if the blood has difficulty coming out, then return the arm to the warm water and let the blood flow in the water.
حتّى يبلغ حاجتك فإن كنت فى أيّام الصيف فقد تستغنى عن إعادة اليد فى الماء الحارّ وأكثر ما يجعل جرى الدم فى الماء الحارّ فى زمن الشتاء، وفصد هذا العرق أسلم من جميع العروق.	Cut to the extent of your need, if you are in the days of summer, you will dispense with repeating immersion in hot water, and more so what makes the blood flow in hot water during winter, and incision of this vein is safer than all other veins.
لأن ليس تحته عرق ضارب ولا عصب، وأمّا فصد الأسيلم من اليد اليمنى فهو نافع من علل الكبد وكيفيّة فصده أن تشدّ معصم اليد بالرباط او بيدك بعد أن تدخله فى الماء الحارّ حتّى ينتفخ العرق.	For there is neither a nerve nor an artery beneath it, and as for incision of the vein in the right hand, it is beneficial for liver ailments, and the manner of its incision is that you should tense the wrist with a bandage or with your hand after having soaked it in hot water until the vein becomes swollen.
ويتبيّن للحسّ جدّا ثم تفصده على تحريف قليلا وإن بترته بالكلّ لم يضرّه ذلك شيئا وتحفّظ لا تمعن يدك بالمبضع فإنّ تحته عصب الأصابع والموضع معرّى من اللحم، ثمّ تعيد اليد الى الماء الحارّ.	It becomes very apparent to the touch, then you incise it with a slight curvature, and if you cut a little of it, it does not harm it, and beware lest your hand be careless in the palm, for beneath it is the nerve of the fingers, and the location is recognized from the flesh, then you return the hand to the hot water.
وتتركه يجرى الدم فيه فإنّك إن لم تعدها فى الماء الحارّ جمد الدم فى فم العرق وامتنع من الجرى فإذا أخرجت من الدم قدر الحاجة فضع على العرق دهنا وملحا لئلّا يلتحم سريعا.	And let the blood flow in it, for if you do not soak it in hot water, the blood coagulates in the mouth of the vein and ceases to flow, so if you have extracted from the blood the amount needed, apply to the vein a poultice and a bandage of vinegar that it may quickly heal.
و كذلك ينبغى أن تفعل بكلّ شعبة ضيقة، وأمّا منفعة فصده من اليد اليسرى فإنّه نافع لعلل الطحال وكذلك تفعل فى فصده كما فعلت فى الثانى سواء، وأمّا فصد الصافن فمنفعته للأمراض التى فى أسفل البدن مثل علل الأرحام.	And it is fitting that you do the same with every narrow vein, and as for the benefit of incising the left hand, it is beneficial for spleen ailments, and you do the same in its incision as you did in the other, whether it is the same or not, and as for incision of the saphena vein, its benefit is for diseases that are in the lower abdomen, such as ailments of the intestines.
واحتباس الطمث وأمراض الكلى وقروح الفخذين والساقين المزمنة ونحوها من الأمراض، وكيفيّة فصده أن يدخل رجله فى الماء الحارّ ويحمل عليه الدلك حتّى تدرّ العروق ثمّ تشدّ فوق مفصل الرجل بالشركة والعرق موضعه عند الكعب ظاهر نحو الإبهام.	And retention of urine and kidney diseases, and chronic ulcers of the thighs and legs, and similar diseases, and the manner of its incision is that he should soak his leg in hot water and apply a poultice until the veins become visible, then you tense above the knee joint with a bandage, and the vein is located near the hip, visible towards the outer thigh.
ويتشعب منه فى وجه الرجل شعب كثيرة فافصده فى أوسع شعبة منه او عند الكعب عند مجتمعه فهو أفضل وأسلم، فإن فصدته فى وجه الرجل فتحفّظ من الأعصاب التى تحته على وجه الرجل.	It is extracted from the man's face many branches so he extracts the largest branch or at the elbow when it joins, for it is better and sounder, if he extracts it from the man's face, then he will extract the nerves that are beneath it on the man's face.
واجعل فصدك له بتحريف كأنّك تريد بتره ويكون المبضع نشلا، فإن تعذّر خروج الدم فليعد رجله فى الماء الحارّ واترك الدم يجرى فيه حتّى يفرغ، فإن أخطأ الفاصد العرق بالفصد فى أوّل مرّة.	And make your bloodletting for him by cupping as if you want to drain it, and let the one being bled sit, and if the blood is hard to come out, then let him soak his leg in hot water and let the blood flow until it stops, for if the cupper has made a mistake in bloodletting in the first time.
فليعد بالفصد الى فوق قليلا فإنّ الموضع سالم لا يخشى منه غائلة اذا تحفّظت من العصب كما قلنا وكذلك تفعل بالصافن من الرجل الأخرى سواء، وأمّا عرق النسا فمكانه كما قلنا عند العقب من الجانب الوحشىّ.	Then let him return with the cupping a little to the above, for the place is sound and does not fear any danger if the nerves are preserved as we said, and so you do with the saphena of the other leg, and as for the woman's vein, its location is as we said at the elbow from the lateral side.
ومنفعة فصده لوجع الورك اذا كان ذلك من قبل الدم الحارّ وكيفيّة فصده أن تدخل العليل الحمّام وتسرع وتشدّ ساقه من لدن الورك الى فوق الكعب بأربع أصابع بعمامة رقيقة طويلة فإنّه لا يظهر إلّا بذلك.	And the benefit of bloodletting from it for the hip pain if it is due to hot blood, and how its bloodletting enters the moist vein and hastens and tightens his thigh from the side of the hip above the elbow by four fingers with a thin long needle, for it does not appear except with that.
فإذا ظهر فافصده على أىّ حالة أمكثك إمّا على تحريف وهو أفضل وإمّا أن تبتره بترا او تشقّه شقّا فإن موضعه سالم، وهو فى أكثر الناس خفّى جدّا فإن لم تجده.	For if it appears, then bloodlet from it in any condition you like, either by cupping and that is better or by draining with a blade or making an incision, for its location is sound, and it is very hidden in most people, so if you do not find it.
ولم يظهر للحسّ البتّة فافصد بعض شعبه وهى التى تظهر فى ظهر القدم نحو الخنصر والبنصر وتحفّظ من الأعصاب وأرسل من الدم القدر الذى تريد.	And it does not appear to the touch, then bloodlet some of its branches, and it is the one that appears on the back of the foot near the ankle and preserves the nerves and lets flow the amount of blood that you want.
ثمّ حلّ الشدّ وضع على موضع الفصد قطنة وشدّ الموضع فإنّه سريعا ما يبرأ.	Then release the tightness and put on the bloodletting site a bandage and bind the place, for it will heal quickly.
الفصل السادس والتسعون.	The Sixth and Seventy Chapter
فى الحجامة وكيفيّة استعمالها.	On Cupping and the manner of its application.
المحاجم قد تكون من القرون ومن الخشب ومن النحاس ومن الزجاج، والحجامة تكون على وجهين أحدهما الحجامة بالشرط وإخراج الدم والآخر الحجامة بلا شرط.	The cupping devices may be made of gourds, or wood, or bronze, or glass, and the cupping is of two types, one is the cupping with scarification and extraction of blood, and the other is cupping without scarification.
وهذه الحجامة التى بلا شرط تكون على وجهين.	And this cupping without scarification is of two types.
إمّا أن تكون بنار وإمّا أن تكون بغير نار، والمحاجم التى تستعمل بالشرط وإخراج الدم لها أربعة عشر موضعا من الجسم أحدها محاجم النقرة وهو مؤخّر الرأس، والكاهل وهو وسط القفاء.	Either it is done with a cauterizing agent, or without one, and the cupping devices that are used with scarification and extraction of blood have fourteen locations on the body, one of which is the cupping of the uvula, which is at the back of the head, and the keehl, which is in the middle of the nape.
ومحاجم الأخدعين وهما صفحتا العنق من الجهتين جميعا، ومحاجم الذقن وهو تحت الفكّ الأسفل من الفم، ومحاجم الكتفين، ومحاجم العصعص على عجز الذنب، ومحاجم الزندين وهما وسط الذراعين، ومحاجم الساقين، ومحاجم العرقوبين.	And the cupping of the shoulders, and they are the two sides of the neck, and the cupping of the chin, which is beneath the lower jaw near the mouth, and the cupping of the shoulders, and the cupping of the hips on the sides of the buttocks, and the cupping of the arms which is in the middle of the upper arms, and the cupping of the legs, and the cupping of the armpits.
والحجامة إنّما يجتذب الدم من العروق الرقاق المبثوثة فى اللحم ومن أجل ذلك لا تسقط القوّة إسقاط الفصد ولا ينبغى أن تستعمل الحجامة بنار كانت او بغير نار فى أحد الأمراض التى تكون من الامتلاء حتّى يستفرغ البدن كلّه.	And cupping draws blood from the thin, spread-out veins in the flesh, and for this reason it does not cause a drop in strength like bloodletting does, nor is it suitable to perform cupping with or without a cauterizing agent in one of the diseases that are due to overfullness until the entire body has been purged.
فإن دعت الحاجة الى الحجامة من مرض او من قبل العادة استعملناها فى كلّ وقت فى أوّل الشهر وفى آخره وفى وسطه وفى أىّ زمان كان.	For if there is a need for cupping due to illness or habit, we perform it at any time, at the beginning of the month, at the end, in the middle, or at any other time.
وذلك أنّ من الناس من اذا كثر فيه الدم حتّى يحتاج الى إخراجه بالحجامة يجد فى رأسه ثقلا وصداعا ومنهم من يجد امتلاء وحمرة فى وجهه ورأسه ورقبته ومنهم من يجد حكاكا فى وجهه وجنيبه وظلمة وأكالا فى عينيه ومنهم من يحكّ موضع محاجمه.	And that is because some people, when there is an abundance of blood in them to the point that they need to have it extracted by cupping, find heaviness and aching in their head, and some of them find fullness and heat in their face, head, and neck, and some of them find itching in their face and jaw and darkness and dimness in their eyes, and some of them feel the place where the cupping was done.
ومنهم من يكثر ضحكه ومنهم من يجد طعم الدم فى فمه وترم لثاته ويتبزّق الدم ومنهم من يكثر نومه ومنهم من يرى فى نومه الدم والحمرة والقتلاء والجراحات وما أشبه ذلك، فمتى رأينا شيئا من ذلك.	Some of them spit out their saliva and some of them find the taste of blood in their mouth and tremble, their lips are torn and blood gushes out, and some of them swoon, and some of them see in their swoon blood and wounds and slaughters and surgical operations and similar things, so when we saw one of those things.
وبخاصّة إن كان فى الثلث الأوسط من الشهر أمرنا عند ذلك بالحجامة بعد ما يمضى من النهار ساعتان او ثلاث، وأمّا منفعة حجامة النقرة فإنّها تنفع من الثقل فى الرأس وماء ينصبّ الى العينين.	And especially if it is in the middle third of the headache, we are ordered to do a bleeding after two or three hours have passed from the day, and as for the benefit of bleeding from the jugular vein, it benefits from the heaviness in the head and the blood that flows down to the eyes.
ولكن ينبغى أن يكون ذلك بعد استفراغ جملة البدن وهذه الحجامة قد تكون عوضا من فصد القيفال ويحذر أن يستعملها من كان بارد الدماغ او كان به نزلة فإنّها تضرّه ضررا عظيما.	But it is better that this be after a complete purging of the bowels, and this bleeding may be instead of bloodletting from the calf, and one should beware that he who has a cold liver or who has a severe fit uses it, for it would harm him greatly.
ولذلك لا ينبغى أن يستعملها الشيوخ ومن فى رأسه أمراض باردة، ومن أدمن عليها ولّدت عليه النسيان.	And so, it is not suitable that the old men use it, and whoever has cold illnesses in his head, and whoever uses it frequently, it will bring him harm.
ولذلك ينبغى أن تأمر الحجّام أن ينزل يده بالمحجمة قليلا الى أسفل خوفا من تولّد النسيا ن، وأما حجامة الكاهل فهى عوض من فصد الأكحل وفصد الباسليق.	And so, it is suitable that the cupper lowers his hand with the cup a little to the bottom, fearing that the blood will be frozen, and as for bleeding from the arm, it is instead of bloodletting from the ankle and the basilic vein.
ولذلك تنفع من الربو وضيق النفس وانصداع آلة التنفّس والسعال والامتلاء، وينبغى أن ترفع حجامة الكاهل قليلا لأنّها إن صيّرت الى أسفل ولّدت ضعفا فى القلب والمعدة.	And so, it benefits from flatulence and shortness of breath and the constriction of the respiratory instrument and coughing and fullness, and it is suitable that the bleeding from the arm be raised a little because if it is done below, it would cause weakness in the heart and the stomach.
وأمّا حجامة الأخدعين فتنفع من الأوجاع الحادثة فى الرأس والرمد والشقيقة والخناق والتوجّع فى أصول الأسنان وهى عوض من فصد الباسليق، وينبغى أن تأمر الحجّام أن لا يعمق يده بالشرط لئلّا يقطع شريانا فيحدث النزف.	And as for bleeding from the two temples, it benefits from the accidental pains in the head and the nostrils and the cheek and the throat and the pain in the roots of the teeth, and it is instead of bloodletting from the arm, and it is suitable that the cupper be cautious with his hand to not cut a vein so that a severe bleeding occurs.
وأمّا الحجامة تحت الدقن فتنفع من القلاع فى الفم وفساد اللثة ونحوها من الأمراض التى فى الفم وقد تقوم مقام فصد الجهارك التى فى الشفتين، وأمّا حجامة الكتفين فتنفع من الخفقان الذى يكون من الامتلاء والحرارة.	And as for the cupping under the uvula, it benefits from the tonsils in the mouth and the decay of the teeth and their likes among the illnesses that are in the mouth, and it may take the place of bleeding the gums that are in the lips. And as for the cupping of the shoulders, it benefits from the cough that results from obesity and heat.
وأما حجامة بطنى الزندين فتنفع ممّا ينفع فصد العروق الثلاثة الباسليق والأكحل والقيفال لأنّها تجتذب الدم من جميع تلك العروق الرقاق التى فى اللحم وتجتذب تلك العروق الرقاق من عروق أخر أغلظ منها حتّى يبلغ الجذب الى العروق الغلاظ الثلاثة.	And as for the cupping of the sides of the neck, it benefits that which benefits from the bleeding of the three basilic, median, and cephalic veins because they attract blood from all those thin veins that are in the flesh, and those thin veins attract from other thicker veins until the attraction reaches the three thick veins.
وينبغى أن تأمر الحجّام أن لا يمعن فى الشرط لأنّ الموضع معرّى من اللحم وتحته أعصاب وشريانات، وأمّا المحجمة الواحدة التى تحجم على العصعص فإنّها تنفع من بواسير المقعدة وقروح الأسفل.	And it is necessary that the cupper orders that he should not be careless in the condition because the location is marked with flesh and beneath it are tendons and nerves, and as for the single cupping that is applied on the vertebrae, it benefits from the hemorrhoids of the rectum and the ulcers of the anus.
وينبغى أن تأمر الحجّام أن تكون المحجمة كبيرة وأن تكون من نحاس لأنّ الموضع يحتاج الى مص قوىّ وربّما انكسرت محجمة الزجاج ويشرط شرطا كثيرا، وأمّا محاجم الساقين فتنقص الامتلاء نقصانا بيّنا.	And it is necessary that the cupper orders that the cupping be large and made of brass because the location requires a strong suction, and if a glass cupping is used, it will break, and will leave a condition with many scars. And as for the cuppings of the legs, they reduce obesity in a visible way.
لأنّها تجتذب الدم من جميع الجسم وتنفع من الأوجاع المزمنة فى الكلى والأرحام والمثانة وتدرّ الطمث وتنفع من البثور والدماميل وتقوم مقام فصد الصافنين والعرقوبين إلّا أنّها تنهك البدن كثيرا ويحدث الغشى فى أكثر الناس، ومحاجم العرقوبين منفعتها قريبة من منفعة حجامة الساقين.	Because it attracts blood from the entire body and benefits from chronic pains in the kidneys, spleen, and liver, and brings down the menses, and benefits from the uterine abscesses and hemorrhoids, and takes the place of bleeding the safinin and arqubin, except that it evacuates the uterus greatly and causes gagging in most people, and the cuppings of the arqubin have a benefit close to the benefit of the cupping of the legs.
كيفيّة وضع المحاجم وهو أن توضع المحجمة أوّلا فارغة وتمصّ مصّا معتدلا ولا تطيل وضع المحاجم ولكنّك تضعها سريعا وتنزعها سريعا لتقبل الأخلاط الى الموضع إقبالا مستويا ولا تزال تكرّر ذلك وتواليه حتّى ترى الموضع قد احمرّ وانفتح.	The way to apply the cuppings is that you put the cupping, first empty and then suck with a moderate suction, and do not prolong the application of the cupping, but rather you put it quickly and remove it quickly so that the humors can rush to the location in a balanced rush, and do not repeat it excessively, but rather do it repeatedly until you see the location has become red and opened up.
وظهرت حمرة الدم فحينئذ تشرط وتعاود المصّ رويدا رويدا ثمّ تنظر فى حال الأبدان، فمن كان من الناس رخص اللحم متخلخل المسامّ فينبغى أن تشرطه واحدة لا غير لئلّا يتقرّح الموضع.	The redness of the blood appears, then it will be scratched and rubbed little by little, then it will look at the condition of the limbs. Whoever among people has loose flesh that is soft to the touch, it should not be scratched except one place so that the area may be cauterized.
وتأمر الحجّام أن يوسّع الشرط ويعمق قليلا ويعدّل المصّ فى رفق وتحريك لطيف، فإن كان فى الدم غلظ فينبغى أن يشرط مرّتين أمّا فى المرّة الأولى فليفتح طريقا للطيف الدم ومائيته وأمّا فى الثانية فلاستقصاء إخراج الدم الغليظ.	And it is fitting for the surgeon to widen the incision slightly and to adjust the rubbing in gentleness and soft movement, for if there was thickness in the blood, it should be scratched twice: on the first occasion, he should open a path for the bloody discharge and its fluids, and on the second, to extract the thick blood.
فإن كان الدم عكرا جدّا فيكرّر الشرط مرّة ثالثة ليبلغ الغاية، وبالجملة اذا أردنا أن نخرج دما قليلا اكتفينا بشرطة واحدة فإن أردنا إخراج دم كثير شرطنا شرطا أكثر، وإن قدّرنا أنّ الدم غليظ.	For if the blood was very thick, he should scratch a third time to reach the limit, and in short, if we wanted to let out a little blood, one incision would be enough for us, but if we wanted to let out a lot of blood, we would make more incisions, and if we thought the blood was thick.
فينبغى أن نشرط شرطا عميقا والحدّ المعتدل فى الشرط عمق الجلد فقط، ما ينبغى أن يستعمل من الأدهان عند وضع المحاجم ومن المياه وما يحذره المحتجم، أمّا من كان جلده غليظا صلبا قحلا ومسامّه ضيقة.	It should be scratched with a deep incision and the moderate limit in scratching is only the depth of the skin, what is fitting is that he uses from the bandages when applying the cupping glasses and from the waters and what warns the one performing the cupping. As for whoever has thick, hard, rough skin and narrow pores.
فينبغى أن تدهّن مواضع المحاجم بأدهان مفتّحة مليّنة محلّلة أمّا إن كان فى زمان الصيف فمثل دهن الخيرىّ او دهن البنفسج او دهن اللوز الحلو او دهن حبّ القرع.	It is fitting that the places of the cupping glasses be greased with opened, dissolved, and sweetened bandages, but if it is in the time of summer, then like the grease of the myrtle or the grease of the violet or the grease of the sweet almond or the grease of the cyperus seeds.
وأمّا إن كان فى الشتاء فمثل دهن النرجس او دهن السوسن او دهن البابونج او الزنبق ونحوه، فإن كانت الفضلة غليظة باردة فليكن الدهن دهن المرزنجوش او دهن النمّام او دهن البان او دهن الشبّث ونحوها.	And if it is in winter, then like the grease of the narcissus or the grease of the lily or the grease of the acacia or the violet and its like. If the phlegm was thick and cold, then let the grease be the grease of the marjoram or the grease of the sycamore or the grease of the cotton or the grease of the mallow and its like.
فإن كان المحتجم واسع المسامّ غض اللحم فينبغى أن يمتنع الدهن وهؤلاء ينبغى أن يغسلوا محاجمهم بعد الحجامة بماء الورد او بماء بارد او بماء عنب الثعلب او بماء القرع او بماء الرجلة ونحوها، وأمّا من كان دمه كثير الرطوبة.	For if the person undergoing cupping has a large body and dense flesh, it is fitting that they anoint themselves with oil and after cupping, wash their joints with rose water or snow water or grapevine water or absinthium water and the like. As for one whose blood is abundant with moistness.
فيغسل محاجمه بالخلّ او بماء الآس والسماق ونحوها، وأمّا من كانت فضوله غليظة فيغسل محاجمه بالشراب العتيق او بماء المرزنجوش او طبيخ الشبثّ او البابونج ونحوها، وينبغى أن تحذر الحجامة فى الحمّام وفى إثر الحمّام.	He should wash his joints with vinegar or quince water or tamarisk or the like. As for one whose phlegm is coarse, he should wash his joints with old posset or hyssop water or ginger decoction or bamboo and the like. It is fitting to beware of cupping in the bath and after the bath.
بل ينبغى أن تستعمل بعد الخروج من الحمّام بساعة او ساعتين ولا ينبغى أن ينام أحد بعد الحجامة، ما ينبغى أن يدبّر به المحتجم والمفتصد قبل الحجامة وبعدها.	It is fitting that it be performed after leaving the bath by an hour or two hours. It is not fitting that one sleep after cupping. It is fitting that the person undergoing cupping and the operator be moderate before and after cupping.
يجب أن تنظر أوّلا فإن كان المحتجم او المفتصد صفراويّا والغالب على دمه الحدّة والالتهاب فينبغى أن يأخذ المبردات كالرمّان والهندباء بالخلّ والخسّ والسكنجبين والجلاب ونحوها ويجعل أطعمته الفراريج ولحوم الضأن سكباجات والحصرميّات ونحوها.	It is necessary to look first, for if the person undergoing cupping or the operator is bilious and his blood is dominated by heat and agitation, it is fitting that he take cooling substances such as rhubarb and henna with vinegar and kermes and sacginbin and giliy and the like, and make poultices of fava beans and meat of quails and the like.
ومن كان مزاجه باردا فينبغى أن يسقى شراب العسل وشراب الميبة او السكنجبين البزورىّ ويتناول النبيذ العطرىّ المتوسّط الذى هو فيما بين القديم والحديث ويؤمر بقلّة الغذاء ويجعل غذاءه الفراريج والقنابر والعصافير وفراخ الحمام اسفيدباجات، وينبغى أن يكون الشراب يوم الحجامة والفصد أكثر من الطعام.	And whoever's temperament is cold, it is fitting that he drink honey posset or myrtle posset or sacginbin with betony, and take the middle-aged perfume which is between old and new, and smell little of the nourishing food, and make his nourishment poultices of fava beans and hemp and colocynth, and make the livers of pigeons his poultice, and it is fitting that the drink on the day of cupping be more than the food.
وقد ينبغى أن يسقى فى بعض الأوقات لبعض الناس من الترياق الفاروق او دواء المسك او الشيلثا قبل الحجامة وقبل الفصد او بعده لتقوّى الآعضاء الرئيسة وترقّق الدم ولا ينبغى أن يسقاه المحرورون،.	And it is fitting that he drink at certain times for some people the purging theriac or misk or shilthah before cupping or before venesection or after it, to calm the main organs and soften the blood, and it is not fitting that the bilious ones drink it.
وأمّا المحاجم التى تكون بلا شرط فهى المحاجم التى توضع على الكبد والطحال والثديين وعلى البطن والسرّة وموضع الكلى وحقّ الورك لأنّ هذه الأعضاء لا تحتمل الشرط عليها، وإنّما يراد بها إمّا جذب الدم من عضو الى عضو.	And as for the abscesses that occur without any condition, they are the abscesses that are located on the liver, the spleen, the breasts, and the abdomen, and on the back, and next to the kidney, because these organs do not tolerate any condition on them, and what is meant by them is either attracting blood from one organ to another.
كوضعنا المحجمة على الثديين فى علّة الرعاف او نستعملها لنحل عن العضو ريحا باردا قد لحج فى العضو كوضعنا المحجمة على البطن والسرّة فإنّها تخلخل العضو وتسخنه وتذهب بالوجع لتحليلها ذلك الريح،.	We put the abscess on the breasts in case of a hot cough, or we use it to melt what is stuck in an organ with cold humidness that has gathered in the organ. Similarly, when we put the abscess on the abdomen and the back, it loosens the organ, dries it out, and removes the humor by its analysis.
وقد توضع على الكلى اذا عرض فيها سدّة او حصى فبقوّة جذبها ربّما فتحت السدّة او قلعت الحصى من موضعها، وكذلك تفعل اذا وضعت على الكبد والطحال عند ريح يرتبك فيهما، وهذه المحاجم قد تستعمل فارغة بالمصّ فقط.	And it may be applied to the kidney if there is a hardness or stone in it, for the strength of its attraction might open up the hardness or dislodge the stone from its place. And similarly it does the same if it is applied to the liver and spleen when there is a humor that has accumulated in them. And these abscesses may be used empty with only the application.
وقد تستعمل بالنار وقد تستعمل مملوءة بالماء الفاتر فى علل الشوصة وذلك أن تملأ المحجمة ولتكن كبيرة بالماء الحارّ وحده او بماء قد طبخ فيه بعض الحشائش التى تصلح لذلك.	And it may be used with hot water and it may be filled with warm water in cases of cholera, by filling the abscess and making it large with hot water alone or with water that has been cooked with some herbs that are suitable for that.
ثم توضع مملؤة على الموضع وتمسك وتزال وتعاد مرّات على قدر الحاجة، وهذه صورة المحجمة التى تستعمل بالنار:.	Then it is applied filled to the place and held and squeezed and repeated many times as needed, and this is the image of the abscess that is used with hot water.
تكون سعة فمها أصبعين مفتوحتين على ما صوّرنا وقدرها فى العمق نصف شبر ويكون فى جنبها فى نحو النصف منها ثقبة صغيرة على قدر ما تدخله الإبرة تصنع من النحاس الصينىّ او النحاس الأصفر غليظة الحاشية.	Its mouth is two fingers wide, open as we have described, and its depth is a half cubit, and on its side, about halfway up, there is a small hole, the size of which an injection needle can enter, made from lattenated iron or yellow brass, thick-edged.
ملساء مستوية مجلوّة لئلّا تؤذى العضو عند وضعها عليه ويكون فى وسطها فضيب معترض من نحاس او حديد حيث توضع الشمعة بالنار، وقد تصنع هذه المحجمة كبيرة أكبر ممّا وصفنا وصغيرة على حسب الأمراض.	Smooth on the outside, concave within, it hurts the organ when applied to it, and in its middle there is a channel made of brass or iron where the hot candle is placed, and this abscess can be made large, larger than what we described, and small according to the illnesses.
وسنّ مستعملها فإنّ محاجم الصبيان والنحفاء غير محاجم الرجال والعبل الأجسام، وأمّا كيفيّة وضع هذه المحجمة بالنار على العضو فهو أن تقد فتيلة بالنار من كتان محكمة او شمعة صغيرة من قير وتضعها على وسط القضيب المصلّب الذى فى وسط المحجمة.	The suture used for this purpose should be of the type not to irritate the children and women, but not irritating the robust men, and as for how to apply this suture on the member with the needle, it is that a thread from a linen fabric or a small wick made of yarn is prepared and placed in the middle of the curved needle which is in the middle of the suture.
ليكون صعود النار الى فوق نحو أسفل المحجمة لئلّا يحترق بدن العليل ثمّ توضع على العضو والأصبع على الثقب الذى ذكرنا حتّى اذا أمسكنا المحجمة ما احتجنا نزعت الأصبع.	The needle should be raised upwards towards the lower part of the suture, so that the body of the awl does not get burnt, then it is placed on the member and the thread on the hole we mentioned, until when we hold the awl, we pull out the thread.
وخرج البخار على ذلك الثقب وانحلّت المحجمة على المقام، ثمّ تقد الفتيلة على الصفة وتعيدها إن احتجت الى ذلك، فأمّا المحجمة التى تستعمل فى مرض الشوصة بالماء فليس فيها قضيب مصلّب ولا ثقب.	And the vapour comes out of this hole and the suture dissolves in its place, then the thread is pulled on the wound and it is helped if it needs that, as for the suture which is used for the disease of haemorrhoids with water, there is no curved needle nor a hole in it.
وإنّما تستعمل بأن تملأ بالماء وتوضع على العضو فقط، وهذه صورتها:.	And it is used by filling it with water and placing it on the member only, and this is its form:
وهذه المحجمة كلّما كانت كبيرة لتسع ماء كثيرا كانت أفضل،.	And this suture, the larger it is, the more water it holds, the better it is.
الفصل السابع والتسعون.	The Seventh and Ninetieth Chapter.
فى تعليق العلق.	On the suspension of the poulice.
العلق إنّما تستعمل فى أكثر الأحوال فى الأعضاء التى لا يمكن فيها وضع المحاجم إمّا لصغرها كالشفة واللثة ونحوها وإمّا لأنّ العضو معرّى من اللحم كالأصبع والأنف ونحوها.	The poulice is used in most cases on the members where it is not possible to apply a suture, either because they are too small such as the lip and the gum and similar things, or because the member is fleshy like the ear and the nose and similar things.
وكيفيّة استعمالها أن تقصد من العلق التى تكون فى المياه العذبة النقيّة من العفونات ثمّ تترك يوما وليلة فى الماء العذب حتّى تجوع ولا يبقى فى جوفها شىء.	And the way to use it is that a poulice is taken from the water, which is pure and clean of impurities, then it is left for a day and a night in the fresh water until it becomes swollen and nothing remains inside it.
ثمّ يستفرغ البدن أوّلا بالفصد او بالحجامة ثمّ يمسح العضو العليل.	Then the body is purged first by emetics or by a clyster, then the affected member is wiped.
حتّى يحمرّ ثمّ توضع عليه فإذا امتلات سقطت، وإن أمكن مصّ الموضع بالمحجمة فهو أبلغ فى المنفعة وإلّا فاغسل الموضع بخلّ ثمّ بماء كثير ويدلك ويعصر، فإن تمادى جرى الدم بعد سقوط العلق وكان ذلك رشحا فلتبلّ خرقة كتان فى الماء البارد.	Burn the area with a cauterizing iron, then apply a dressing. If the inflammation subsides, and if it is possible to keep the dressing on with a bandage, it is more beneficial for the wound; otherwise, wash the area with vinegar, then with abundant water and rosewater, and squeeze it dry. If blood still flows after the dressing has been applied and that was due to a rupture, soak a piece of cotton in cold water.
وتضعها من فوق حتّى ينقطع الرشح، فإن كثر الدم فذرّ عليه زاجا مسحوقا او عفصا او نحوها من القوابض حتّى ينقطع الدم او يوضع على الموضع أنصاف الباقلّى المقشّر.	And apply it from above until the hemorrhage stops, if the blood is excessive, sprinkle powdered astringents such as alum or quabs or similar substances until the bleeding stops or apply half a roasted, crushed, and peeled betel nut on the area.
وتترك حتّى يلصق الباقلّى فى الموضع فإنّ الدم ينقطع، وينبغى إن احتيج الى إعادة العلق فلا تعلّق تلك العلق اذا أمكن غيرها، فإن امتنعت العلق عن التعلّق فليمسح الموضع بدم طرىّ.	And it is left until the betel nut sticks to the area, for the blood will stop. It is desirable if there is a need to repeat the dressing, do not use the same dressing if possible, but another one; if the dressing has adhered and won't come off, then anoint the area with fresh butter.
او تغرز إبرة فى الموضع حتّى تخرج شيئا من الدم ثمّ توضع فإنّها اذا أحسّت بشىء من الدم لصقت على المقام فإذا أردت أن تسقط فانثر عليها شيئا من الصبر او الملح او الرماد فإنّها تسقط على المقام،.	Or a needle is inserted into the area until some blood comes out, then it is applied; if it feels something of blood, it sticks to the place, and if you want it to fall off, sprinkle on it borax or salt or ashes, for it will fall off from the place.
الباب الثالث.	Chapter Three.
فى الجبر.	On Trephining.
هذاالباب أيضامن وكيد ما يحتاج عليه فى صناعة الطبّ وهو جبر الكسر والفكّ الحادثين فى العظام.	This chapter is also necessary for one who practices the art of medicine, and it treats what is required in trephining, which is the surgical treatment for skull fractures and recent dislocations of bones.
اعلموا يا بنىّ أنّه قد يدّعى هذاالباب الجهّالمن الأطبّاء والعوامّ ومن لم يتصفّح قط للقدماء فيه كتابا ولا قرأ منه حرفا.	Know, my sons, that this chapter may be sought by those of the medical profession who are ignorant and common, and who have never purified themselves for the ancients, nor ever read a book or even a letter concerning it.
ولهذه العلّة صار هذا الفنّ من العلم فى بلدنا معدوما وإنّى لم ألق فيه قطّ محسنا البتّة.	For this reason, this area of knowledge has become neglected in our country, and I have never met anyone who is skilled in it.
وإنّما استفدت منه ما استفدت لطول قراءتى لكتب الأوائل وحرصى على فهمها حتّى استخرجت علم ذلك منها، ثمّ لزمت التجربة والدربة طول عمرى.	And I have extracted from it what I have extracted for the duration of my lifetime, after I had applied myself to understanding the books of the predecessors and had exerted great effort in comprehending them, until I had derived knowledge from them, then I bound myself to experimentation and dissection for the length of my life.
وقد رسمت لكم من ذلك فى هذاالباب جميعما أحاط به علمى.	And I have drawn for you from it in this chapter all that my knowledge encompasses.
ومضت عليه تجربتى بعد أن قرّبته لكم وخلّصته من شعب التطويل واختصرته غاية الاختصار وبيّنته غاية البيان وصوّرت لكم فيه صورا كثيرة من صور الآلات التى تستعمل فيه.	And my experimentation has dominated it, after I had made it known to you and purified it for you from the thorns of prolixity, and shortened it to the utmost brevity, and clarified it to the utmost clarity, and drawn for you in it many pictures of the pictures of the instruments which are used in it.
اذ هو من زيادة البيان كما فعلت فى البابين المتقدّمين، ولا قوّة إلّا بالله العلىّ العظيم،.	This is from an increase in clarification, as I have done in the two preceding chapters, and there is no power except with God, the Exalted, the Mighty.
الفصل الأوّل.	The First Section.
فيهجمل وجوامع من أمر كسر العظام وجب تقديمها وقبل أن نبدأ بذكر الأعضاء المكسورة والمنخلعة واحدا واحدا فينبغى أن نذكر فى صدر هذاالباب جملامن القول وفصولا.	In it there is a comprehensive and collective discussion of the matter of breaking bones, and it is necessary to present them before we begin with the mention of the fractured and dislocated members one by one, and it is fitting that we mention in the introduction to this chapter some prologues and introductions.
تضطرّكم أوّلا الى فهمها والوقوف على حقيقتها أنتم ومن كان حريصا لتعلّم هذه الصناعة الشريفة غيركم.	You are compelled, first of all, to understand it and to be aware of its reality, you and whoever is zealous to learn this noble craft.
فأقول إنّه متى حدث بأحد كسر او فكّ او وثء او سقطة فينبغى أن تسرع أوّلا الى فصده او إسهاله او هما جميعا.	I say that if a fracture or a dislocation or a sprain or a fall occurs, it is necessary to hasten first to its treatment or its alleviation, or both of them.
إن لم يمنع من ذلك مانع مثل ضعف القوّة او كان الذى حدث به شىء من ذلك صبيّا او شيخا هرما او كان الزمان شديد الحرّ او شديد البرد جدّا.	For if there is no obstacle preventing it, such as weakness of strength, or the one to whom this has happened being a young boy or an old man, or the time being extremely hot or extremely cold.
ثمّ يقتصر فى غذائه على البقول الباردة ولحوم الطير والجداء ويمنع الشراب واللحوم الغليظة والتملّؤ من الطعام وكلّ غذاء يملأ العروق دما حتّى اذا أمنت الورم ولم تتوقّع انصباب مادّة الى الموضع.	Then he should limit his diet to cold vegetables and the meat of birds and broths, and prevent the drinking of wine and coarse flesh and overeating of food, and every nourishment that fills the veins with blood, until when the inflammation has subsided and the expectation of the flow of material to the location has ceased.
فحينئذ فليرجع العليل الى تدبيره الأوّل الذى جرت به عادته، فإذا أخذ العظم المكسور فى الانجبار فينبغى أن يتغذّى العليل بأغذية تغذو غذاء كثيرا غليظا متينا يكون فيه لزوجة مثل الهرائس والأرزّ والرؤوس والأكارع وكروش البقر.	When the fractured part is reduced to its natural position, it should be bandaged in such a way that it will not move and so the plaster will nourish the bone with a nourishment abundant, viscous and sticky like the paste of the acacia, rice, and the heads of the Egyptian papyrus and cattle dung.
والبيض والسمك الطرىّ والشراب الغليظ ونحو ذلك فإنّه بهذا التدبير يكون انعقاد الكسر أسرع وأجود، واعلم أنّ العظام المكسورة اذا كانت فى الرجال المشتدّين والشيوخ فليس يمكن أن تتّصل وتلتحم على طبيعتها الأولى أبدا.	And with the white of egg, the fat of mutton, and thick syrup, and similar things, the setting of the fracture will be faster and better, and know that fractured bones in strong and old men do not unite and reunite in their original form ever.
لجفوف عظامهم وصلابتها وقد يتّصل ويلتحم ما كان من العظام فى غاية الليّن بمنزلة عظام الصبيان الصغار ولكن الطبيعة تنبت على العظم المكسور من جميع جهاته شيئا يشبه الغراء فيه غلظ يلتزق به ويشدّه حتّى يلزم بعضه بعضا.	The bones of old men do not unite, but their fractures become stiff, and it may be that what is fractured in the very young, like the bones of small boys, unites, for nature grows on the fractured bone from all its sides a thing resembling a crust, which has viscosity, sticking to and strengthening it until the parts stick together.
ويربط بعضه بعضا حتّى يأتى فى غاية القوّة والوثاقة كما كان أوّلا حتّى لا يعوقه شىء من أفعاله،.	And sticks parts to parts until it comes in the utmost strength and solidity as it was originally, so that nothing hinders him from his movements.
ولهذا السبب وجب أن يجعل غذاء المريض الأغذية التى فيها متانة ولزوجة وغلظ كما قلنا، واعلم أنّ الكسر قد تختلف أنواعه بحسب اختلاف الأعضاء لأنّ كسر عظم الساق مخالف لكسر عظم الرأس وكسر عظم الصدر مخالف لكسر عظم الظهر.	And for this reason, it is necessary that the nourishment of the patient be made with sticky and viscous foods as we said, and know that fractures differ in their types according to the difference of the organs, because a fracture of the thigh bone is different from a fracture of the head bone, and a fracture of the chest bone is different from a fracture of the back bone.
وكذلك سائر الأعضاء كلّها مخالف بعضها بعضا، وسنأتى بذكر كلّ نوع من الكسر مشروحا فى بابه مفصّلا من غيره، وقد يختلف نوع كسر العظم أيضا فى نفسه.	And so all the other organs, each is different from the others, and we will come to mention each type of fracture explained in its own place and detailed from the others, and the type of bone fracture may also differ in itself.
لأنّه قد يكون كسره تقصّفا من غير أن تحدث فيه شظايا وقد يكون كسره على طول العظم وتكون لكسره شظايا وزوائد متبرّئة وغير متبرّئة ويكون الكسر مع جرح وخرق فى الجلد ويكون الكسر صدعا يسيرا.	For it may be a fracture with a crack without any separation of fragments, and it may be a fracture along the length of the bone and have separated fragments and protruding and non-protruding splinters, and the fracture may be with a wound and laceration of the skin, and the fracture may be a simple fissure.
ولكلّ نوع حيلة خاصيّة فى جبره على ما سيأتى ذكره مفصّلا فى موضعه، وممّا يتعرّف به كسر العظم اعوجاجه ونتوه وظهوره للحسّ وتخشخشه عند غمزك إيّاه بيدك.	For every type of fracture there is a specific manipulation in its treatment, which will be mentioned in detail in its place, and that which involves the displacement of a bone, such as curvature, protrusion, and palpability when you press on it with your hands.
فمتى لم يكن فى الموضع اعوجاج ظاهر ولا تخشخش ولا تحسّ عند جسّك العظم باضطراب ولا يجد العليل كثير وجع فليس هناك كسر بل يمكن أن يكون وثئا او كسرا هينا او صدعا يسيرا فلا ينبغى أن تحرّكه بالمدّ والغمز البتّة.	If there isn't in the location obvious displacement, or palpability, or movement when you feel the bone with your fingers, and the patient doesn't have much pain, then it's not a fracture, rather it could be a sprain, or a mild bruise, or a slight contusion, so it's not necessary to move it by traction or pressing.
بل احمل عليه من الأدوية التى يأتى ذكرها بعد حين ما يوافق الموضع ثمّ تشدّه شدّا لطيفا، واعلم أنّ العظم اذا انقصف واندقّ باثنين من غير أن تحدث فيه شظايا إلّا أنه قد زال كلّ جزء عن صاحبه.	But you should apply to it the medications that will be mentioned later, suitable for the location, then bind it with a gentle bandage, and know that if the bone is fractured and split into two pieces without any fragments occurring, it is only because one part has become displaced from its companion.
فينبغى لك أن تبادر من حينك الى تقويمه وتسويته قبل أن يحدث له ورم حارّ، فإن حدث له ورم حارّ فاتركه أيّاما حتّى يسكن الورم الحارّ ثمّ سوّه بأىّ وجه تقدر عليه من الرفق والحيلة.	It is better for you to proceed with its reduction and alignment before a hot tumor develops, but if a hot tumor does develop, then leave it for a while until the acute inflammation subsides, then reduce it by any means of gentleness and skill that you are capable of.
واعلم أنّ جبره وتسويته أسهل من العظم الذى قد حدث فيه شظايا، ثمّ يشدّ على ما سيأتى ذكره، فإن كان العظم فيه شظايا فلا بدّ من مدّ العضو المكسور من الناحيتين يدا كان او رجلا.	And know that its reduction and alignment are easier for a bone that doesn't have fragments, then it will be bound as will be mentioned, but if the bone has fragments, then there is no alternative but to pull on the injured limb from both sides, whether it's an arm or a leg.
إمّا بيديك إن كان العضو صغيرا وإمّا بحبلين وإمّا مع الحبل واليد، وليكن وضعك العضو على موضع مستو على شكله الطبيعىّ حتّى اذا امتدّ جزآ العظم المكسور فحينئذ فرم ردّ تلك الزوائد فى مواضعها بكلّ وجه تقدر عليه من الحيلة والرفق.	Either with your hands if the limb is small, or with a pulley, or with both the pulley and the hand, and let the limb be placed in a position that is natural to its shape, until when the fragments of the fractured bone are extended, then return those protrusions to their places by any means of skill and gentleness that you are capable of.
واحرص جهدك أن لا تحدث على العليل بفعلك وجعا ولا ألما ورم جهدك أن تضمّ أحد العظمين بصاحبه على أفضل الهيئة، وينبغى فى ذلك الوقت أن تلمسهما وتجسّهما بيدك فإن رأيت هناك شيئا مخالفا أصلحته وسوّيته بقدر طاقتك.	And be careful with your effort that you don't cause the patient pain or discomfort with your action, and your effort should be to join one bone with its companion in the best way, and it is necessary at that time to feel them and examine them with your hands, and if you see something that isn't right, then correct it and align it to the best of your ability.
واحذر المدّ الشديد والغمز القوىّ كما يفعل كثير من الجهّال وكثيرا ما يحدّثون بفعلهم ذلك ورما حارّا او زمانة فى العضو كما قد شاهدت ذلك من فعلهم مرارا.	Beware of the severe and powerful cauterization, as many ignorants do, and which they often repeat with their actions, without considering the time or duration in the affected area, as you have seen them do many times.
ثمّ ألزم بعد التسوية والإتقان والشدّ ذلك العضو السكون والدعة وحذّر العليل أن يحرّكه فى وقت يقظته ونومه وعند تحوّله واضطرابه وعند برازه وجميع حركاته غاية وسعه وأن يتحرّى أن تكون نصبة العضو نصبة يأمن معها الوجع.	Then bind the affected area after cleansing and dressing, and applying the bandage with rest and stability, and beware of moving it during its inflammation, sleep, and agitation, or when it bursts, and all its movements to the utmost extent, and be careful that the position of the affected part is a stable one where the injury can be soothed.
وذلك أنّه متى أحسّ فى حال نصبه العضو بوجع او ألم أن ينقله الى غير تلك النصبة الى التى لا يحسّ معها بوجع ويتحرّى مع ذلك أن تكون نصبته تلك مستوية مستقيمة.	And that is when he feels pain or discomfort in the position of the affected part, to change it to a different one where he does not feel pain, and be careful that the new position is stable and straight.
لئلّا يحدث فى العضو اعوجاج اذا انجبر، وأمّا كيفيّة شدّ العضو المكسور فهو على ما أنا واصفه لك، اعلم أنّ الأعضاء المكسورة تختلف فى صغرها وكبرها وهيآتها فما كان منها صغارا مثل الذراع والأصبع والزند ونحوها.	If the injured limb becomes swollen, it will lead to curvature, and as for how to bandage an injured limb, it is as I have described to you, know that injured limbs vary in their size and thickness, and among them are small ones such as the arm, fingers, and similar ones.
فينبغى أن تكون لفائف الخرق وطئة لطافا وما كان منها غلاظا كالفخذ والظهر والصدر فينبغى أن تكون اللفائف عراضا صلبة لأنّ الرباط العريض يلزم العضو الكبير ويشدّه من كلّ جانب شدّا متساويا لا تداخله خلل.	It is suitable that the bandages of linen be soft and thin, and those that are coarse such as for the thigh, back, and chest, it is suitable that the bandages be strong and solid, because a solid bandage binds the large limb and holds it firmly from all sides equally without any looseness.
ثمّ تبدأ بعد فراغك من التسوية أن تحمل الطلاء الموافق لذلك.	Then start after you have finished with dressing to apply the plaster suitable for that.
فى مشاقة ليّنة على موضع الكسر ثمّ تبدأ بلفّ الرباط على موضع الكسر نفسه ثلاث لفّات او أربع على حسب ما يستحقّ العضو وتشدّ يدك قليلا بالرباط ثمّ تذهب به الى الناحية العليا من موضع الكسر.	Place a folded piece of cloth on the site of the fracture, then start wrapping the bandage around the site of the fracture itself three or four times, depending on what the limb requires, and tighten your hand slightly with the bandage, then move it to the upper side of the site of the fracture.
بشدّ أقلّ من شدّك للموضع المكسور ثمّ تتباعد باللفّ عن موضع الكسر قليلا وترخى الشدّ قليلا قليلا حتّى تأخذ من الموضع الصحيح شيئا صالحا ثمّ تأخذ عصابة أخرى فتلفّها أيضا على الموضع المكسور.	Tighten less than you did for the injured site, then spread out the wrapping a little from the site of the fracture and loosen the tightening a little, until you get something suitable from the correct site, then take another bandage and also wrap it around the injured site.
لفّات ثمّ تذهب باللفّ الى الناحية السفلى من الكسر وليكن فعلك فى شدّ اللفّ ورخاوته على ما ذكرنا فى لفّ الأوّل الأعلى ثمّ تضع بين اللفائف من المشاقة الليّنة او الخرق ما يستوى به اعوجاج الكسر.	Wrap, then move the wrapping to the lower side of the fracture and let your action be in tightening the wrap and its looseness according to what we mentioned in wrapping the upper wrap, then put between the wraps from the thin cloth or the leather what will equal with it the curviness of the fracture.
إن كان فيه اعوجاج وإلّا فلا تجعل فيه شيئا، ثمّ تلفّ عليه عصابة أخرى ثمّ تسوّى على هذه اللفّات الجبائر المحكمة من ساعتك إن لم يكن فى العضو نفخ ولا ورم حارّ.	If there is curvature in it, and if not, then do not make anything in it, then wrap on it another bandage, then let the tight splints be adjusted on these wraps according to your timing, if there is no swelling or hot abscess in the organ.
فإن كان فيه نفخ او ورم حارّ فاحمل عليه ما يسكن ذلك الورم ويذهب بالنفخ واتركه أيّاما ثمّ شدّ عليه حينئذ الجبائر ولتكن الجبائر من أنصاف القصب العراض المنحوتة المهيّأة بحكمة او تكون الجبائر من خشب الغرابيل.	For if there is in it swelling or hot abscess, then put on it what will quiet that abscess and remove the swelling, and leave it for a while, then tighten on it at that time the splints, and let the splints be from half of the straight branches of the willow tree shaped with wisdom or let the splints be from the wood of the Cypress.
التى تصنع من الصنوبر او جرائد النخل او خلنج او الكلخ ونحوها ممّا حضر من ذلك، ولتكن سعة كلّ جبيرة على هذه الصورة وهذا الشكل بعينه.	Make them from pine or palm leaves or ferns or the plant called Kalkh, and what is prepared from that, and let each splint be in this form and this shape specifically.
إلّا أن تكون الجبيرة التى توضع على الكسر نفسه أغلظ وأعرض قليلا من سائر الجبائر، وأمّا طول الجبيرة فتصنع على حسب ما يليق بالعضو المكسور من كبره وصغره، صورة الجبيرة:.	But the splint that is placed on the fracture itself should be a little thicker and wider than the other splints, and as for the length of the splint, it should be made according to what is suitable with the broken organ from its largeness and smallness, the shape of the splint:.
ثمّ تشدّ على الجبائر بعصابة أخرى على حسب شدّك الأوّل بعينه ثمّ تربط من فوق بالخيوط المحكمة على حسب ما ذكرنا من الشدّ وهو أن يكون شدّك على موضع الكسر أكثر.	Then tighten on the splints with another bandage according to your first tightening specifically, then tie it from above with tight cords according to what we mentioned of tightening, and that is for your tightening to be more on the place of the fracture.
وكلّما بعد عن الكسر كان الشدّ أقلّ.	And the farther it is from the fracture, the tightening should be less.
وينبغى أن تكون الخيوط متوسّطة فى الغلظ والرقّة ولتكن من الكتّان الرطب خاصّة لأنّ الخيوط إن كانت غلاظا مثل ما شاهدت من فعل الجهّال يجعلون خيوطهم من شرائط الكتّان المفتولة وهو خطأ عظيم.	And it is recommended that the cords be moderate in thickness and thinness, and let them be from the linen of flax specifically, because if the cords are thick like what you have seen from the action of the ignorants they make their cords from unwoven strips of linen, which is a great mistake.
لأنّه يقع الشدّ بها خارجا عن الاعتدال والخيوط الرقاق أيضا لا تصلح لأنّك لا تبلغ بالشدّ بها ما تريد، ولا ينبغى أن يكون بين الجبيرة والجبيرة أقلّ من أصبع.	Because it falls outside the moderation and the thin threads are also not suitable, as you do not achieve with them what you want, nor is it desirable that there be between the plaster and the plaster less than a finger.
فإن تأذّى العليل بأطراف الجبائر بعد الشدّ فى المواضع الصحيحة فاجعل تحتها من المشاقة الليّنة أو الصوف المنفوش حتّى لا يؤذيه من ذلك شىء، وأمّا اذا كان الكسر مع جرح وحدث خرق فى الجلد فسنأتى بذكره على انفراد.	For if the wound is irritated by the edges of the plasters after tightening in the correct places, then put under it some soft cloth or a piece of loose cotton so that nothing from that irritates him, and as for when the fracture is with a wound and there is a tear in the skin, we will deal with it separately.
واعلم أن ليس كلّ عضو مكسور ينبغى أن يشدّ بالجبائر من أوّل يوم وذلك أنّ العضو اذا كان كبيرا فلا ينبغى أن توضع عليه الجبائر إلّا بعد خمسة أيّام او سبعة او أكثر على حسب أمنك من حدوث الورم الحارّ.	And know that not every fractured member deserves to be tightened with plasters from the first day, because if the member is large, it is not desirable that plasters be placed on it except after five days or seven or more, depending on your safety from the occurrence of hot inflammation.
وهذه صفة الضمادات التى كانت تجبر بها الأوائل التى توضع على الكسر والفكّ والوثء، صفة ضماد عامّىّ مختصر يجبر الكسر ويصلح لأكثر الأمزجة ولا سيّما الصبيان والنساء لأنّه ممّا لا يغلب عليه حرّ ولا برد.	And these are the characteristics of the bandages that were used to plaster, which are applied on fractures, dislocations, and sprains, a general characteristic of short bandage that tightens the fracture and is suitable for most bowels and not limited to children and women because it is something that does not become hot or cold.
وهو أن تأخذ من غبار الرحى وهو لباب الدقيق الذى يتعلّق فى حيطان الرحى عند حركة المطحنة فتعجنه كما هو من غير أن تغربله ببياض البيض وتجعل عجنه لا ثخينا ولا رقيقا ثمّ تستعله.	And it is that you take from the dust of the mill, which is the fine powder that settles on the sides of the mill when it is in motion, and knead it as it is without grinding it with the white of egg and making its dough neither thick nor thin, then use it.
صفة ضماد آخر يجبر الكسر والخلع والوثء، يؤخذ من الماش واللادن والأقاقيا والراسن والمغاث والسكّ من كلّ واحد عشرة دراهم ومرّ وصبر من كلّ واحد خمسة دراهم ومن الأثل عشرون درهما ومن الطين الأرمنىّ او الرومىّ عشرون درهما.	A characteristic of another bandage that tightens fractures, dislocations, and sprains, take from marshes, and gum tragacanth, and storax, and pine resin, and madder, and vitriol, ten dirhams of each, and five dirhams of myrrh, and twenty dirhams of fir or roman tar.
يدقّ الجميع ويخلط بماء الأثل او ببياض البيض إن كان مزاج العليل محرورا ثمّ يستعمل هذا الضماد فإنّه حسن التأليف يجبر العظام المكسورة سريعا ويصلح لأكثر الناس لاعتداله.	All of these are crushed and mixed with the water of fir or the white of egg, if the temperament of the wound is heated, then this bandage is used, for it is good for composition, it tightens the fractured bones quickly and is suitable for most people due to its moderation.
صفة ضماد آخر ينفع أيضا للكسر والوثء، يؤخذ مغاث وماش وخطمىّ أبيض من كلّ واحد عشرة دراهم مرّ وصبر من كلّ واحد خمسة دراهم أقاقيا ستّة دراهم طين أرمنىّ عشرون درهما يدقّ الجميع دقّا ناعما وينخل ويعجن بالماء او ببياض البيض ويستعمل.	A compound of the last composition is also beneficial for fractures and wounds, take ten dirhams of mahath and mash, and five dirhams of khutmiya white lead from each, crush them well and sift, and mix with egg whites or vinegar, then apply.
صفة ضماد للمفاصل والعظام الزائلة عن مواضعها ويسكن الوجع العارض لها ولانصداع العظم والكسر، يؤخذ الصوف الموذّح فيغمس فى الخلّ والزيت المطبوخ ويوضع على الموضع، وهذا الضماد ليس فيه قوّة جبر.	A composition for dislocated joints and bones that have slipped out of their places, which calms the pain and quiets the inflammation and the fractured bone, take the masticated sufof, soak it in vinegar and warm oil, and apply to the affected area, this composition has no power to set.
ولكن هو فاضل فى تسكين الورم الحارّ ودفع الأوجاع خاصّة، صفة ضماد آخر يجبر العظم المكسور، يؤخذ ورق التين الأصمّ وورق الخشخاش البرّىّ ويدقّا جميعا ويضمد بهما رطبين، صفة ضماد آخر مختصر يستعمل عند انجبار كسر العظم.	But it is excellent for calming the hot swelling and driving out the sharp pains, another composition sets the fractured bone, take the leaves of the fig tree and the leaves of the wild caper, crush them both and apply as a poultice, another short composition is used when setting fractures.
وأنت تريد تحليل بقيّة الورم، تأخذ من أصل الخطمىّ والبابونج ونوار بنفسج ودقيق الكرسنّة من كلّ واحد جزءا دقّ الجميع واعجنه بالطلاء إن لم يكن العضو مستحرّا فإن كان مستحرّا فاعجنه بماء الكزبرة او بالماء واستعمله.	And if you want to resolve the remaining swelling, take from the root of the marshmallow and the flower of the chamomile and the petals of the violet and the powder of the snapper, a portion of each, crush them all and mix with rosewater, if the affected part is not sensitive then mix with the rose oil or the water and apply.
صفة ضماد آخر أقوى فى التحليل من هذا الأوّل يستعمل عند ما يحدث ورم صلب عند انجبار العظم، يؤخذ من أصل الخطمىّ وبزر الكتّان والحلبة وإكليل الملك ومرزنجوش ونوار بنفسج وبابونج من كلّ واحد جزء.	Another composition, stronger than the first for resolution, is used when a hard swelling occurs during the setting of a fracture, take from the root of the marshmallow and the seeds of the flax and the pulp of the date and the leaves of the myrtle and the marjoram and the violet and the chamomile, a portion of each.
يدقّ الجميع ويعجن بماء الخلاف او بالماء العذب او بالطلاء كلّ ذلك على حسب حرارة العضو وسكون حرّه، وأمّا ابقراط فلم يذكر فى كتابه أن يوضع على العضو المكسور عند جبره.	Crush them all and knead with the rosewater or the fine water or the rose oil, all of this according to the heat of the affected part and its coldness, and as for Galen, he did not mention in his book that it should be applied on the fractured part when setting it.
إلّا القيروطىّ المعمول من الشمع والزيت لا غير ووصف أن يكون متوسّطا بين الغلظ والرقّة، وأمّا جالينوس فرأى أن يوضع على العضو المكسور عند جبره الأشياء التى فيها جفوف مع شىء من حرارة مثل المرّ والصبر واللبان ونحو ما ذكرنا.	Except for the cauterization with wax and resin, nothing else is used to describe being moderate between thickness and thinness. Galen said that it should be applied on the fractured member when treating the fractures with items that contain heat such as myrrh, borax, rosewater and similar things we mentioned.
صفة ضماد ينفع للوهن والوجع، يؤخذ مغاث وحمّص وشعر إنسان مقروض او ريش طائر وخطمىّ وملح أجزاء سواء يدقّ وينخل ويعجن ويضمد به، وأمّا مقدار ما ينبغى أن يبقى الرباط.	A description of a poultice that is beneficial for swelling and injury, it consists of boiled and crushed dates, human hair or bird feathers, and equal parts of salt, all of which are pounded, sifted, kneaded and applied as a dressing, and the amount of it that should remain on the bandage.
ثمّ يحلّ فهو أن تنظر فإن لم يحدث بالعليل وجع ولا حكاك ولا تحرّك العظم المكسور عن موضعه فلا تحلّه أيّاما كثيرة فإن حدث به فى الموضع حكاك شديد او وجع مقلق او نفخ.	Then it is dissolved, and if you examine and find that there has been no displacement of the fractured bone from its place by means of movement or massaging or shaking, do not dissolve it even for many days, unless it happens to be in a place where there is severe massage, or bothersome injury, or inflation.
فبادر فحلّه فى الوقت ولا تؤخر ذلك البتّة ونحّ الضماد عنه، ثمّ تأخذ خرقة ليّنة او إسفنجة بحريّة رطبة فاغمسها فى الماء الفاتر واغسل بها الموضع حتّى تسكن الحكّة ويسكن الوجع ثمّ تترك العضو يستريح ساعة.	So hasten to dissolve it at the right time and do not delay, and remove the poultice from it, then take a soft cloth or a sponge with a warm water, soak it in hot water and wash the place until the massage is eased and the injury calmed, then let the member rest for an hour.
ثمّ تحمل عليه الصوف الموذّح المغموس فى الخلّ والزيت او دهن الورد وتربطه عليه ليلة حتّى تأمن الورم الحارّ ويسكن نفخ العضو ويذهب وجعه ثمّ تعيده الى الشدّ اللطيف والضماد اليسير ولا تشدّه شدّك الأوّل.	Then apply on it a woolen cloth soaked in vinegar and resin or rose oil, and bind it for one night until the hot swelling calms, the inflammation of the member eases, its pain goes away, then treat it with gentle tightening and mild poultice, and do not tighten it as you did initially.
والطف به حتّى يبرأ، فإن رأيت أنّ الورم والحمرة والوجع والنفخ وجميع الأعراض قد ذهبت أصلا واحتجت الى الضماد والشدّ فأعده كما فعلت أوّلا سواء، فإن لم يحدث فى العضو شىء ممّا ذكرناه.	And keep applying it until it heals, if you see that the swelling and redness and injury and inflammation and all symptoms have completely disappeared and there is a need for poultice and tightening, then prepare it as you did initially, equally, if nothing of what we mentioned happens to the member.
فلا تحلّه إلّا بعد ثلاثة أيّام او أربعة او خمسة او سبعة وقد يترك عشرين يوما كلّ ذلك على حسب ما يظهر اليك من حال العضو كما قلنا حتّى اذا لزم الكسر وقارب انعقاد اللحم عليه.	Do not unravel it except after three or four or five or seven days, and it may be left for twenty days, all of which is according to what appears to you from the condition of the member, as we have said, until the fracture has consolidated and the flesh has formed around it.
فزد أيضا حينئذ فى الشدّ أكثر من شدّك الأول كلّه وزد أيضا فى تغليظ غذاء العليل على ما تقدّم ذكره، فإن رأيت موضع الكسر قد جفّ وهزل بأكثر ممّا ينبغى فاعلم أنّ الغذاء ممتنع من الوصول اليه.	Also increase at that time the tightness of the bandage more than the first one, and also increase the warming of the diet for the patient beyond what was previously mentioned. If you see the place of the fracture has become dry and weak to an excessive degree, then know that the nourishment is being withheld from reaching it.
فانطله بالماء الفاتر عند كلّ مرّة تحلّه وليكن ذلك فى كلّ ثلاثة أيّام وخفّف الشدّ قليلا فإنّ بهذا الفعل يجرى الى العضو الغذاء ويبرأ سريعا، وأمّا ما تصنعه الجهّال من المجبّرين من كسر العضو مرّة أخرى.	Moisten it with warm water at every occasion you unravel it, and let that be every three days, and reduce the tightness a little. For by this action nourishment is conveyed to the member and it heals quickly. As for what the ignorant among the bonesetters do in treating a fracture again.
لإن لم ينجبر أولا على ما ينبغى وانجبر على عوج فهو خطأ من فعلهم وغرر عظيم ولو كان صوابا لذكرته الأوائل فى كتبهم وعملت به وما رأيت لأحد منهم فى ذلك أثرا البتّة.	For if it was not set properly at first and was set crookedly, that is a mistake of their action and a great danger. Even if it were correct, as mentioned by the ancients in their books, and they acted upon it, I have not seen any of them achieve anything from it.
والصواب أن لا يعمل به،.	And the truth is that he should not act upon it.
الفصل الثانى.	The Second Chapter.
فىالكسر العارض فى الرأس.	On the fracture of the bones in the head.
أنواع الكسر العارض فى الرأس كثيرة وأشكاله مختلفة وأسبابه متفنّنة فمن الكسر ما يكون عن ضربة سيف ويكون إمّا أن يبرى العظم كلّه الى أن ينتهى الى الصفاق الذى تحت العظم.	The types of bone fractures in the head are numerous and their forms are varied, and their causes are diverse. For there is a fracture that occurs due to a sword blow, and it may be that the bone is broken completely until it reaches the diaphragm beneath the bone.
كما يفعل القدوم فى الخشب.	Like what an adze does to wood.
ولذلك يسمّى هذا النوع من الكسر قدوميّا وإمّا أن يكون قطع السيف بعض العظم وأبرى وجهه فقط ولم ينفذ القطع الى آخره ويسمّى هذا النوع من الكسر قلعا مطلقا، ويكون جرح هذين الكسرين إمّا كبيرا وإمّا صغيرا.	And for this reason, this type of fracture is called a "qdumiyya" (splitting). And if the cut of the sword cuts some of the bone and breaks its surface only, but does not penetrate to its end, then this type of fracture is called a "qlaa" (a crack), absolutely. And the wound from these two fractures may be either large or small.
ومن الكسر ما يكون هشما او رضّا ويكون سببه ضربة بحجر او سقطه على حجر او نحوه وهذا الكسر يكون إمّا نافذا قد قارب الغشاء الذى تحت العظم وإمّا أن يكون فى وجه العظم.	The fracture that is a crack, or a fissure, and its cause is a blow with a stone, or a fall onto a stone, or something similar, and this fracture is either penetrating, having approached the membrane beneath the bone, or it is on the surface of the bone.
ويكون جرح هذين الكسرين أيضا إمّا كبيرا وإمّا صغيرا، ومن الكسر ما يكون خفيّا فى العظم فى رقّة الشعر وهو انصداع يسير.	And the wound of these two fractures is also either large or small, and of the fracture there is what is hidden in the bone in a hair's thinness, which is a slight dislocation.
ولذلك يسمّى هذا النوع من الكسر شعريّا، ومنه كسر يكون عن سقطة او صكّة حجر ونحوه يدخل صفحة العظم الى داخل ويصير للموضع تقعير كما يعرض لقدر النحاس اذا أصابتها ضربة فيدخل جزء منها الى داخل.	And for this reason, this type of fracture is called a hairline fracture, and of it is a fracture that occurs from a fall or a blow with a stone, or something similar, which enters the surface of the bone inwardly, and becomes for the location an ulceration, just as a copper vessel shows cracks if it is struck with a blow, so a part of it enters inwardly.
وأكثر ما يكون ذلك فى الرأس الرطب العظم كرؤوس الصبيان، وقد يكون لجميع هذه الأنواع من الكسر شظايا متبرّئة وغير متبرّئة وسنأتى بذكر علاج ذلك كلّه فى موضعه، ونتعرّف جميع هذه الأنواع من الكسر بالكشف عليها.	And most often this occurs in the soft skull, such as the skulls of infants, and for all these types of fracture there may be separated or unseparated splinters, and we will mention the treatment of all that in its proper place, and we have become familiar with all these types of fracture by examining them.
وتفتيشها بالمسابير وانتزاع اللحوم الفاسدة من عليها، وأمّا النوع الشعرىّ فيعرف بأن يكشف على العظم ويمسح ويلطخ عليه بالمداد فإنّ الكسر يظهر أسود، وأمّا علاج الكسر فتنظر أوّلا الى أعراض العليل.	And by probing them and extracting the putrid flesh from them, and as for the hairline type, it is recognized by uncovering the bone and examining and applying a poultice to it, then the fracture appears black, and as for the treatment of the fracture, we first look at the symptoms of the patient.
فإن رأيت من أعراضه ما يدلّ دلالة ظاهرة على الخوف مثل قىء المرار والامتداد وذهاب العقل وانقطاع الصوت والغشى والحمّى الحادّة وجهوظ العينين وحمرتها ونحوها من الأعراض فلا تقرب العليل ولا تعالجه فإنّ الموت واقع به مع هذه الأعراض فى أكثر الأحوال لا محالة.	For if you see among his symptoms that which clearly indicates severe fright, such as vomiting of bile and stretching and loss of mind and interruption of sound and roughness and severe sharpness of the face and the pupils of the eyes and their redness and similar symptoms, then do not approach the patient or treat him, for death will occur with these symptoms in most cases, inevitably.
وإن رأيت أعراضا لا تهولك ورجوت له السلامة فحينئذ فخذ فى علاجه وذلك أنّه إن أتاك المجروح فى أوّل ما جرح وكان ذلك فى أيّام الشتاء.	And if you see symptoms that do not alarm you and you think him safe, then at that time take care of his treatment, and that is because if the wounded person comes to you at the beginning of his injury, and that is during the days of bleeding.
فينبغى أن تجتهد فى نزع العظم قبل اليوم الرابع عشر على كلّ حال وإن كان فى أيّام الصيف فينبغى أن تسرع بنزع العظم قبل اليوم السابع من قبل أن يفسد ما تحت العظم من الغشاء فتعرض تلك الأعراض التى وصفنا.	It is recommended to postpone the reduction of a fracture until the fourteenth day, in any case, and if it is during the summer days, it is recommended to hasten the reduction of the fracture before the seventh day, before the membrane beneath the bone becomes inflamed, so that those symptoms we described are avoided.
فإن كان كسر العظم قد بلغ الى الغشاء المغشى على الدماغ وكان مع هشم ورضّ فينبغى أن تقطع الجزء المنهشم المرضوض على ما أنا واصفه لك، وهو أن تحلق رأس العليل المجروح.	For if the fracture has reached the membrane that covers the brain and was accompanied by a foul odor and putridity, it is recommended that you amputate the affected and diseased part in the manner I have described to you, which is to trephine the skull of the injured.
وتكشف عن العظم على أىّ وجه يتمكّن لك وعلى حسب شكل الجرح وما يخفّ على العليل، فإن عرض لك عند الكشف على العظم نزف دم او ورم حارّ فقابل ذلك بما ينبغى.	And when you expose the bone on any side that is convenient for you, and according to the shape of the wound and what is suitable for the patient, if upon exposure of the bone you find an outflow of blood or a hot inflammation, then treat it with what is appropriate.
وهو أن تحشو الموضع بخرق مغموسة فى شراب ودهن ورد ونقّ الجرح حتّى يسكن الورم وتأمن النزف، ثمّ تأخذ فى تقوير العظم وانتزاعه وذلك يكون على أحد وجهين من العمل.	Which is to stuff the area with a rag soaked in serum and fat, and to dress the wound until the inflammation subsides and the bleeding stops, then you proceed to scrape and extract the bone, and that can be done in one of two ways.
أمّا الوجه الواحد فهو أن تقطع العظم بمقطع لطيف ضيّق الشفرة وهذه صورته:.	As for the first method, it is to cut the bone with a fine and sharp-edged saw, and this is its appearance:.
ثمّ تستعمل مقطعا آخر بعد هذا المقطع أعرض منه قليلا وهذه صورته:.	Then you use another saw after this one, slightly wider than it, and this is its appearance:.
ثمّ تستعمل أيضا مقطعا آخر أعرض أيضا من الثانى والواجب أن تكون عندك عدّة مقاطع مختلفة تكون بعضها أعرض من بعض وبعضها أقصر من بعض وتكون فى غاية من حدّة أطرافها ولتكن من حديد هندىّ او فولاد جيّد.	Then you also use another saw, even wider than the second one, and it is necessary that you have several saws of different widths, some of which are wider than others, and some shorter than others, and they should be extremely sharp at their edges, and made from Indian steel or good iron.
واستعمل الرفق فى الضرب على المقطع لئلّا تزعزع الرأس فتؤذيه، فإن كان العظم قويّا صلبا فينبغى أن تثقب حوله قبل استعمالك المقاطع بالمثاقب التى سمّوها مثاقب غير غائصة وإنما سمّوها مثاقب غير غائصة.	And you use a file to strike the saw gently so that it doesn't vibrate and hurt the head, for if the bone is strong and hard, it is recommended that you drill around it before using the saws with a drill bit that they called "non-penetrating" drill, and I call it non-penetrating.
لأنّها لا تجاوز حدّ عظم القحف الى ما وراءه من أجل أنّ للمثقب حرفا مستديرا على ما دون رأسه الحادّ شبها بالطوق او الدائرة الصغيرة يمنعه من أن يغوص ويجاوز ثخن العظم.	That it does not exceed the limit of the skull bone to what is beyond it, so that the chisel has an oblique edge for what is below its sharpness, resembling the ring or small circle that surrounds it, preventing it from penetrating and exceeding the thickness of the bone.
وينبغى لك أن تتّخذ من هذه المثاقب عدّة كثيرة يصلح كلّ واحد منها لمقدار ثخن ذلك العظم حتّى يحضرك لكلّ قحف مثقب مقدار طرفه الحادّ فى الطول والقصر على مقدار ثخن ذلك القحف، وهذه صورة ثلاثة أنواع.	And it is desirable for you to have many of these chisels, each one suitable for the thickness of that bone, so that you have for each skull a sharp edge of a size in length and width according to the thickness of that skull, and this is the image of three types.
من المثاقب كبير ومتوسّط وصغير:.	Of large, medium, and small chisels:.
وأمّا كيفيّة الثقب حول العظم المكسور فهو أن تجعل المثقب على العظم وتديره بأصابعك حتّى تعلم أنّ العظم قد نفذ ثمّ تنقل المثقب الى موضع آخر وتجعل بعد ما بين كلّ ثقب قدر غلظ المرود او نحوه.	As for the method of making holes around the fractured bone, it is that you put the chisel on the bone and direct it with your fingers until you feel that the bone has been pierced, then you move the chisel to another place and put it after a space between each hole of the size of a grain or a little more.
ثمّ تقطع بالمقاطع ما بين كلّ ثقبتين وتفعل ذلك بغاية ما تستطيع عليه من الرفق كما قلنا حتّى تقلع العظم إمّا بيدك وإمّا بشىء آخر من بعض الآلات التى أعددت لذلك.	Then you cut with the sections between each two holes, and you do that with as much gentleness as you are able to, as we said, until you dislodge the bone, either with your hands or with another tool from among the instruments that you have prepared for that.
مثل الجفت والكلاليب اللطاف، وينبغى أن تحذر كلّ الحذر أن يمسّ المثقب او المقطع شيئا من الصفاق، فإذا قوّرت العظم وتبرّأ من الصفاق إن كان ملصقا به وأخرجته فينبغى أن تجرد.	Like the delicate tongs and fine forceps, and it is desirable that you beware with all caution that the chisel or cutter touches any of the peritoneum, for if the bone is strengthened and separated from the peritoneum, and it was attached to it, and you extracted it, then it is desirable that you scrape.
وتسوّى خشونة ما بقى فى العظم بآلة أخرى تشبه المقطع إلّا أنّها ينبغى أن تكون أرقّ وألطف من سائر المقاطع، فإن بقى شىء من العظام الصغار والشظايا فتأخذها برفق بما عندك من الآلات.	And the roughness of what remains in the bone is smoothed with another instrument that resembles the cutter, but it is desirable that it be thinner and more delicate than other cutters, for if some of the small bones and fragments remain, you take them with gentleness using the instruments that you have.
ثمّ تعالج الجرح بعد ذلك بالفتل والمراهم التى يأتى ذكرها، وأمّا الوجه الآخر من العمل فهو وجه سهل البتّة بعيد من الغرر ذكره جالينوس ومدحه مدحا عظيما وهذا قوله.	Then you treat the wound afterwards with bandages and ointments, which it is not necessary to mention, and as for the other aspect of the work, it is an easy procedure, far from danger, whose description Galenius has given and praised with great praise, and this is his statement.
ينبغى لك أوّلا أن تبدأ بكشف جزء العظم من الموضع الذى الكسر فيه أشدّ وأشهر حتّى اذا كشفت ذلك الجزء صيّرت تحته طرف هذا المقطع العدسىّ وهذه صورته:.	It is better to start by exposing the part of the bone in the place where the fracture is most severe and most apparent, then if you have exposed that part, you will shape underneath it the side of this thick section and this is its illustration.
يكون الجزء العدسىّ منه أملس لا يقطع شيئا والجزء الحادّ منه فى جوانبه الذاهبة فى الطول كما ترى ليكون الجزء العدسىّ مستندا الى الصفاق ووجه المقطع الحادّ فى العظم ثمّ تضرب على المقطع من جهة واحدة.	The thick part of it is smooth, not cutting anything, and the sharp part is on its sides, the width as you see, to be with the thick part leaning on the costal margin and the face of the sharp section in the bone, then you strike the section from one side.
بمطرقة صغيرة حتّى تقطع جميع العظم برفق كما يدور وأنت فى أمن من الغشاء لا يحدث فيه حادث مخوف البتّة ولو أنّ المعالج أجهل الناس وأجبنهم نعم ولو كان ناعسا.	With a small mallet, until you cut the entire bone gently, as it turns, and you are in safety from the membrane, no feared incident occurring, even if the surgeon is one of the most ignorant people, yes, and even if he is clumsy.
فإن بقى شىء لازم للعظم من الغشاء فى بعض مواضع العظم فقشّطه عنه بطرف المقطع العدسىّ نفسه وتخلصه عنه برفق فإنّه يتخلّص عنه بلا أذى ولا خوف.	For if there remains a piece of the membrane attached to the bone in some places, expose it from it with the edge of the thick section itself and gently set it free, for it sets free without harm or fear.
وأمّا إن كان كسر العظم لم ينفذ الى الغشاء وكان الذى انقطع من العظم وجهه وبقيت فيه خشونة وشظايا لطاف فينبغى أن تجرد تلك الخشونة وتقلع تلك الشظايا بمجارد لطاف قد اتّخذت منها عدّة مختلفة المقادير ليمكنك أن تستعمل منها فى كلّ موضع أوفقها وأصلحها على حسب ما يقودك اليه العمل.	And if the fracture of the bone has not penetrated to the membrane, and what was cut from the bone is its surface, and there remains in it roughness and fine fragments, it is fitting that you scrape off that roughness and remove those fine fragments with a delicate file, which you have taken in various measures, so that you can use them on each place and repair them according to what the work guides you to.
ونفس العظم المكسور وشكله، وينبغى أن تستعمل فى جردك أوّلا للعظم أعرض تلك المجارد ثمّ استعمل بعده أدق منه ولا تزال تفعل ذلك على الولاء حتّى تصير الى استعمال أدقّها وأرقّها كلّها.	And the same for the fractured bone and its shape, it is fitting that you use in your scraping of the bone first the widest of those files, then use after it one finer than it, and do not cease doing that in succession until you arrive at using the finest and most delicate of all.
وأمّا سائر الشقوق الصغار الشعريّة والكسر اللطيف فينبغى أن تستعمل فى كلّ واحد علاجا على حسب ما يؤدّى الى صلاحه وهو شىء لا يخفى على من له فى هذه الصناعة أدنى دربة ووقف على ما كتبنا وبيّنّا فى الكسور الكبار.	And as for the rest of the small, superficial wounds and fine fractures, it is fitting that you use for each one a treatment according to what leads to its repair, which is something not hidden from anyone who has in this craft even a little experience, and has stopped at what we have written and explained about large fractures.
فإن بقى الغشاء مكشوفا عند قلعك العظم فينبغى أن تأخذ خرقة كتّان على قدر الجرح وتغمسها فى دهن ورد وتضعها على فم الجرح ثمّ تأخذ خرقة أخرى مثنيّة او مثلّثة.	If the periosteum remains uncovered when you extract the bone, it is recommended that you take a piece of cloth, cut it to the size of the wound, dip it in fat and rose oil, and place it over the mouth of the wound, then take another similar or identical piece.
وتغمسها فى شراب ودهن ورد وتضعها على الخرقة الأولى وتصنع ذلك بأخفّ ما تقدر عليه لئلّا تثقل الصفاق ثمّ تستعمل من فوق رباطا عريضا ولا تشدّه إلّا بقدر ما يمسك الجرح فقط.	And dip it in syrup and fat and rose oil, and place it on the first cloth, and do that with the lightest thing you can manage so as not to weigh down the peritoneum, then apply a poultice from above, and do not tighten it except to the degree that it holds the wound.
وتدعه بهذا العلاج يوما او يومين حتّى تأمن الورم الحارّ ثمّ تحلّه وتستعمل بعد ذلك الأدوية التى معها فضل يبس مثل أصول السوسن ودقيق الكرسنّة ودقاق الكندر والزراوند ونحوها وهو أن تصنع من هذه الأدوية ذرورا.	And leave it with this treatment for a day or two days until the hot tumor subsides, then dissolve it and after that apply medicines which have a residual heat like the roots of the Sosan, and powder of the Karsinah, and powder of the Kandar, and Zaravand, and similar things, which is to make from these medicines a poultice.
وتذرّ على الجرح كما هى يابسة وبالجملة فاستعمل فى ذلك دواء من شأنه أن يجلو ولا يلذع، وتحرّى جهدك فى حين علاجك للجرح أن يكون نظيفا لا يكون فيه وضر الدهن ولا وسخ ولا تترك الصديد يجتمع فيه البتّة.	And sprinkle on the wound as it is, a powder, and in short, apply a medicine from which there is hope that it will clean and not irritate, and be careful in your treatment of the wound to be clean, so that there is no harm from the fat, nor dirt, nor let the purulent matter collect in it.
لأنّ الصديد اذا اجتمع على غشاء الدماغ أفسده وعفّنه فحدث من ذلك على العليل بليّة عظيمة، وقد يعرض فى صفاق الرأس عند ما ينكشف عنه العظم ولا سيّما اذا غفل عن علاجه.	For if the purulent matter collects on the membrane of the brain, it corrupts and putrefies it, and from that there happens to the patient a great calamity, and it may appear in the membranes of the skull when the bone is exposed, and not limited to when it is neglected in its treatment.
سواد فى سطحه نظرت فإن عرض للعليل الأعراض التى ذكرنا فاعلم أنّه هالك لا محالة، وإن كان السواد إنّما حدث عن دواء وضع عليه وكان فى قوّة ذلك الدواء أن يفعل ذلك السواد.	If you see blackness on its surface, then it is a sign for the patient of the symptoms that we mentioned, so know that he is a dead man without a doubt, and if the blackness is due to a medicine that was applied to him, and it was in the power of that medicine to produce that blackness.
فينبغى أن تأخذ من العسل جزءا ومن دهن الورد ثلاثة أجزاء وتضربهما ضربا جيّدا وتلطخ بهما خرقة ثمّ تضعها على الصفاق ثمّ تعالجه بأنواع العلاج الذى ينبغى حتّى يبرأ،.	It is recommended that you take one part of honey and three parts of rose oil, mix them well, and soak a cloth in it, then apply it to the periosteum, and treat it with types of treatment that are suitable until it recovers.
الفصل الثالث.	The Third Section
فىجبر الأنف اذا انكسر.	Treat the fracture of the nose if it is broken.
اعلم أنّه لا ينكسر من الأنف إلّا شقّاه العليا جميعا او أحدهما من أجل أنّهما عظمان لأنّ الأسفل منه غضروفىّ لا ينكسر وإنّما يعرض له الرض والعوج والفطسة.	Know that the nose does not break except when both of its upper nostrils are fractured, or one of them, because they are thick bones. The lower part is cartilaginous and does not break, but rather becomes displaced, contused, and lacerated.
فإن انكسر أحد شقّيه فينبغى أن تدخل الأصبع الصغيرة فى ثقب الأنف وتسوّى ذلك الكسر من داخل بأصبعك السبّابة والإبهام من خارج حتّى تردّ الأنف على شكله الطبيعىّ وليكن ذلك منك برفق وتتحرّى أن لا يحدث بفعلك ذلك على العليل وجع.	If one of its sides is fractured, then you should introduce the little finger into the nostril and adjust that fracture from the inside with your little finger and thumb from the outside until the nose returns to its natural shape. Do this gently and be careful not to cause any injury to the tender parts.
فإن كان الكسر فى أعلى الأنف ولم تلحق اليه الأصبع فينبغى أن يسوّى بطرف مرود فيه غلظ قليلا، فإن كان الكسر فى الجهتين فافعل مثل ذلك، وليبادر بجبره فى اليوم الأوّل من الكسر.	If the fracture is in the upper part of the nose and the finger cannot reach it, then adjust it with the tip of a blunt instrument. If the fracture is on both sides, do the same thing. The reduction of the fracture should be done on the first day after the injury occurs.
إن أمكن وإلّا فبعد اليوم السابع او العاشر عند سكون الورم الحارّ، ثمّ تدخل فى ثقب الأنف فتيلة من خرق الكتّان إن كان الكسر فى الجهة الواحدة او تدخل فتيلتين إن كان الكسر فى الجهتين.	If possible, or if not, then after the seventh or tenth day when the acute swelling has subsided, then insert into the nostril a thread of linen cloth, one if the fracture is on one side or two threads if the fracture is on both sides.
ولتكن الفتل فيها غلظ على قدر ما يملا ثقب الأنف، وذكر بعض المجبّرين من الأوائل أن تبلّ الفتل بالسمن وتبدل فى كلّ يوم ولست أرى أنا ذلك بل ينبغى أن تبلّ الفتل فى بياض البيض معجونا بغبار الرحى.	And let the thread be thick enough to fill the nostril, and some of the ancient surgeons mentioned that the thread should be smeared with ghee and changed every day. But I do not see the benefit in that, rather it is better to smear the thread with egg white mixed with powdered rose.
ثمّ تترك الفتل حتّى يثبت العظم ويصلب الغضروف، وقد تدخل فى الأنف موضع الفتل أنابيب ريش الإوزّ بعد أن تلفّ عليها خرق ليّنة فيكون حبسها لكسر الأنف أشدّ ولئلا يمتنع العليل من التنفّس.	Then the thread is left until the bone becomes stable and the cartilage becomes solid. Also, feathers of a goose can be inserted into the nose where the threads are, after wrapping them with linen cloth, which will hold the fracture of the nose more firmly and will not prevent the nostril from breathing.
وليس هذا شيئا ضروريّا إن شئت صنعته وإن شئت صنعت الفتائل، فإن عرض للأنف فى خلال عملك ورم حارّ فضمّد الأنف بالقيروطىّ او بقطنة مغموسة فى خلّ ودهن ورد او شىء من مرهم الدياخيلون.	And it is not necessary to do this if you don't want to, and you can make threads instead. If during the treatment the nose becomes inflamed with a hot swelling, then apply to it a poultice of cumin or a cloth soaked in vinegar and fat and flour, or something from the decongestant remedies.
فإن لم يعرض ورم حارّ فينبغى أن تضمّده من خارج بدقيق السميد ودقاق الكندر قد عجنا ببياض البيض ثمّ تضع عليه مشاقة ليّنة ولا تربط الأنف بشىء البتّة، فإن انكسرت عظام الأنف كسرا صغارا.	If it does not become exposed and the nasal fracture is internal, one should compress from outside with a strong bandage and a linen band, having first smeared it with the white of egg and the powder of dragon's blood, then place on it a thin linen cloth and do not tie the cloth tightly around the head with a band.
او تفتّتت فينبغى أن تشقّ عليها وتخرجها بالآلة التى تصلح لها ثمّ تخيط الشقّ وتعالجه بما يلحم ويدمل من المراهم الموافقة لذلك، فإن حدث فى داخل الأنف جرح فينبغى أن تعالجه بالفتل وتستعمل أنابيب الرصاص.	Or if it has been shattered, one should make an incision on it and extract it with the spatula that is suitable for it, then stitch the incision and treat it with what adheres and patches from the appropriate ointments, if there is a wound inside the nose, one should treat it with a tampon and use lead pipes.
حتّى يبرأ.	Until he is cured.
الفصل الرابع.	The fourth chapter.
فىجبر اللحى الأسفلاذا انكسر.	The fracture of the lower jawbone.
اذا انكسر اللحى الأسفل ولم يكن كسره مع جرح نظرت فإن كان كسره من خارج فقط ولم ينكسر باثنين وتقعّر الى داخل فإنّ معرفته تسهل.	If the lower jawbone is fractured and its fracture is not accompanied by a wound, then if its fracture is only from the outside and it did not displace inwardly with two pieces, its recognition becomes easy.
فينبغى إن كان الكسر فى الشقّ الأيمن أن تدخل الأصبع السبّابة من اليد اليسرى فى فم العليل وكذلك إن كان الكسر فى الشقّ الأيسر فتدخل السبّابة من اليد اليمنى وترفع به حدبة الكسر من داخل برفق الى خارج.	Then one should, if the fracture is on the right side, insert the index finger of the left hand into the patient's mouth and similarly if the fracture is on the left side, insert the index finger from the right hand and lift the edge of the fracture from inside the cheek to the outside.
ويدك الأخرى من خارج العظم تحكم بها تسويته، فإن كان كسر الفكّ قد انقصف باثنين فينبغى أن يستعمل المدّ من الناحيتين على استقامة حتّى تتمكّن تسويته، فإن كان قد حدث فى الأسنان ترعرع.	And your other hand from outside the bone is guiding it to adjust it, if the jaw fracture has become displaced with two pieces then one should use a roller from both sides to straighten it until its adjustment becomes complete, if there was a disturbance in the teeth.
او تفرّق فشدّ ما طمعت منها أن تبقى بخيط ذهب او فضّة او ابريسم ثمّ تضع على اللحى المكسور القيروطىّ ثم تضع عليه خرقة مثنيّة وتضع على الخرقة جبيرة كبيرة محكمة او قطعة جلد نعل مساو لطول اللحى.	Or it has become scattered, then take what you can from it and put it in a gold or silver wire or an ivory splint, then place on the fractured jaw the kyrophosis, then put on it a doubled cloth and put on the cloth a large secured plaster or a piece of leather sole equal to the length of the jaw.
ثمّ تربطه من فوق على حسب ما يتهيّأ لك ربطه ويوافق ضمّه حتّى لا ينتقض وتأمر العليل بالتودّع والسكون وتجعل غذاءه الأحساء الليّنة، فإن ظننت أنّه قد تغيّر شىء من الشكل بوجه من الوجوه فبادر بحلّه فى اليوم الثالث.	Treat the tumor from above according to what you think is suitable for its binding and compression, so that it does not become inflamed and the tumor becomes calm with rest and makes its nourishment the thin tissues, if you suspect that one of the forms has changed in some way, then hurry to solve it on the third day.
ثمّ تصلح ما تضمّده بغبار الرحى مع بياض البيض او بدقيق السميد بعد نزعك القيروطى عنه وتضع على الضماد مشاقة ليّنة، فما دام يلصق ذلك الضماد عليه ولم يتغيّر للعظم حال فاتركه.	Then apply a poultice of wheat flour or pounded barley after removing the plaster from it, and place on the tumor a soft linen cloth, as long as it adheres to the tumor and does not change for the bone, then leave it.
لا تحلّه حتّى يبرأ ويشتدّ الكسر فكثيرا ما يشتدّ هذا الكسر فى ثلاثة أسابيع، فإن عرض فى خلال ذلك ورم حارّ فاستعمل ما ذكرناه مرارا فى تسكينه حتّى يذهب ذلك الورم.	Do not unravel it until it heals and the fracture becomes strong, for this fracture often becomes strong in three weeks, if during that time an inflammation occurs with heat, then use what we mentioned repeatedly to calm it until that inflammation goes away.
وأمّا إن كان الكسر مع جرح نظرت فإن كان قد تبرّأت من العظم شظيّة او شظايا فتلطف فى انتزاع تلك الشظايا بما يتّفق لك نزعها من الآلة، فإن كان فم الجرح ضيقا فوسّعه بالمبضع على قدر حاجتك.	If the fracture is with a wound, and it has become separated from the bone with a fragment or fragments, then gently extract those fragments as much as possible to remove them with an instrument, if the mouth of the wound is narrow, then widen it with a dilator to the extent of your need.
ثمّ اذا انتزعت تلك الشظايا ولم يبق منها شىء فخط فم الجرح إن كان واسعا وإلّا فاحمل عليه أحد المراهم التى تصلح لذلك.	Then, if you have extracted those fragments and none of them remain, stitch the mouth of the wound if it is wide, and if not, then apply to it one of the plasters that are suitable for that purpose.
وتلحم الجرح حتّى يبرأ،.	And let the wound be in a state of healing.
الفصل الخامس.	The Fifth Chapter.
فىجبر الترقوة اذا انكسرت.	Treating the fracture of the clavicle when it breaks.
أكثر ما تنكسر الترقوة من قدّام من نهاية المنكب وكسرها يكون على أحد ثلاثة أوجه إما أن تنكسر وتنقصف باثنين من غير أن تحدث فيها شظايا وهو أسهل لجبرها.	Most often the clavicle breaks at its middle, and its fracture is on one of three ways: either it breaks and splits into two without any fragments, which makes it easier to treat.
وإمّا أن تحدث فى الكسر شظايا وهو أصعب للجبر وإمّا أن يكون الكسر مع جرح، والعمل فيه اذا كان الكسر من غير جرح أن تحضر خادمين ليضبط أحدهما العضد الذى يلى الترقوة المكسورة والآخر يمدّ العنق نحو الجهة الآخرى.	Or it happens in the fracture with fragments, which is more difficult to treat, or it occurs with a wound. And the procedure for it, if the fracture is without a wound, is to prepare two assistants, one of whom should hold the arm towards the fractured clavicle and the other should stretch the neck towards the other side.
ثمّ تسوّى الكسر بأصابعك حتّى يصير شكله على ما ينبغى ولا يكون فيه نتو ولا تعقير، فإن احتجت الى مدّ أكثر فينبغى أن تضع تحت إبط العليل كرة من خرق او صوف.	Then straighten the fracture with your fingers until its shape becomes as it should be, and there should be no swelling or curvature, if you need to extend it further on the upper arm, you should place under the armpit a ball of cotton or wool.
ويكون عظمها على قدر حاجتك وتمدّ وترفع الترقوة وتضغط الكرة بيدك حتّى يسوّى الكسر على ما ينبغى، فإن لم تقدر أن تجذب طرف الترقوة الى خارج من أجل أنّها صارت الى العمق فينبغى أن يستلقى العليل على قفاه.	And its bone will be according to your need, and you extend and raise the splint and press the ball with your hand until the fracture is straightened as it should be. If you are unable to pull the side of the splint outward because it has gone deep, then it is proper that the patient lies on his back.
وتوضع تحت منكبه مخدّة متوسّطة فى العظم ويكبس الخادم منكبه الى أسفل حتّى يرتفع عظم الترقوة الذى فى العمق الى فوق فحينئذ فأصلح الكسر وسوّه بأصابعك.	And you place under his clavicle a folded cloth on the bone, and the servant presses down on his shoulder until the raised bone of the splint that is deep becomes elevated above, then you correct and straighten the fracture with your fingers.
فإن أحسست أنّه قد انكسرت شظيّة من الترقوة وصارت تتحرّك فينبغى أن تشقّ عليها وتخرج تلك الشظيّة برفق فإن كانت الشظيّة محتبسة فى العظم فتحيّل فى قطعها بأحد المقاطع التى أعددت لذلك.	For if you feel that a fragment of the splint has broken off and become movable, then it is proper to make an incision and extract that fragment gently. If the fragment is lodged in the bone, then make an opening to cut it out with one of the instruments that I have described for that purpose.
بعد أن تصير تحت الترقوة الآلة التى تحفظ الصفاق وهى آلة من خشب او من حديد وهذه صورتها:.	After you put under the splint an instrument that holds the padding, and it is an instrument made of wood or iron, and this is its picture:.
تشبه ملعقة ليس لها تعقير ويكون عرضها على حسب ما تحتاج اليه من كبر العظم وصغره وأمّا طولها فعلى حسب أيضا ما يمكنك للعمل ولتكن ذات طرفين كما ترى الطرف الواحد أوسع والآخر أضيق.	It resembles a spoon, without curvature, and its width is according to the size of the bone, whether it is large or small. As for its length, it is also according to what you need for the operation, and it should have two sides, as you see one side wider and the other narrower.
فإن كان خرق الجرح الذى شققت عند إخراجك لشظيّة العظم واسعا وأمنت الورم الحارّ فاجمع شفتى الجرح بالخياطة وإن كان الخرق يسيرا او خشيت الورم الحارّ فاحش الجرح بالخرق والرفائد على قدر شقّ الجرح.	For if the wound where you made an incision to extract a fragment of bone is wide and the inflammation is severe, then close the edges of the wound with stitches. If the incision is small or you fear the severe inflammation, then fill the wound with cotton and apply bandages according to the size of the incision.
فإن عرض ورم حارّ فبلّ الخرق فى دهن الورد والخلّ او الشراب واحمل عليه، وأمّا شدّ العظم اذا كان من غير جرح ولا شقّ فهو أن تحمل على العظم الضماد المتّخذ من غبار الرحى مع بياض البيض.	If the fracture and wound are hot, then apply a poultice of rose oil and vinegar or sherbet, and put it on. And if the bone is tight without any incision or cutting, it is done by applying to the bone a bandage made from the powder of starch with egg whites.
وتضع المشاقة الليّنة عليه ثمّ تضع الكرة تحت إبطه إن احتاج الى ذلك ثمّ تأخذ عمامة تكون طويلة جدّا ويكون عرضها شبرا او نحو ذلك ثمّ احمل رفادة مثنيّة على المشاقة والضماد ثمّ خذ جبيرة من لوح رقيق.	And a soft cloth is placed on it, then a ball is placed under his armpit if he needs it, then a long and narrow bandage is taken, about a finger's width, and a warm poultice is applied on the cloth and the bandage, then a splint made from a thin wooden board.
يكون عرضها ثلاث أصابع وفى الطول كذلك ثمّ أدرجها فى خرقة ثمّ أدرج تلك الخرقة مع الجبيرة فى الموضع من العمامة الذى يقع على موضع الكسر ثمّ شدّ العمامة على الكسر كما تدور.	Its width is three fingers and its length is the same, then it is wrapped in a cloth, then that cloth with the splint is wrapped in the bandage at the place where it falls on the fracture, then the bandage is tightened on the fracture as it turns.
والوها على عنقه وتحت إبطه الصحيح وتحت إبطه المريض وردّها مرّات على كلّ جهة وكيف رأيت أنّ الشدّ يضبط الكسر ضبطا محكما وهو ما لا يخفى عليك.	And it is tied around his neck and under the armpit of the healthy side, and under the armpit of the afflicted side, and returned repeatedly on each side, and as I have seen that tightening adjusts the fracture with precise adjustment, which is not hidden from you.
ومدارك كلّه أن لا تزول الجبيرة من على العظم المكسور.	And all around it is that the splint does not move from the fractured bone.
ولذلك ينبغى أن تتفقّد العليل فى كلّ يوم فكلّما استرخى الرباط ورأيت الجبيرة قد زالت فأصلح ذلك وشدّ الرباط، ثمّ اجعل نوم العليل على ظهره واجعل تحت إبطه عند نومه بالليل مخدّة صغيرة.	And for that reason, the fracture should be checked every day, so whenever the bandage has loosened and you see that the splint has moved, fix it and tighten the bandage, then make the patient sleep on his back and put a small cushion under his armpit when he sleeps at night.
ليرتفع بها عضده عن جنبه فيرتفع كسر الترقوة بارتفاع المنكب او تربط ذراعه الى عنقه، ولا تحلّ الرباط إن لم يحدث فى الموضع حادث من حكّة او ورم الى اثنى عشر يوما.	So that his arm rises from his side, the fracture of the clavicle rises with the elevation of the shoulder, or his arm is tied to his neck, and the bandage is not untied unless an incident occurs in the place, such as a boil or swelling, for twelve days.
ثمّ جدّد الضماد إن رأيت وجها لذلك.	Then renew the dressing if you see a reason for it.
وردّ فى الشدّ واتركه حتّى ينجبر ويتعقّد كسر الترقوة، ويشتدّ ويقوى أكثر ذلك فى ثمانية وعشرين يوما.	Return to tightening and leave it until it becomes consolidated and the fracture of the clavicle becomes complicated, and it tightens and becomes stronger, especially in eighteen or twenty-eight days.
وقد يكون فى بعض الناس فى أقلّ من ذلك.	It may be in some people in less than that.
الفصل السادس.	The sixth chapter.
فىجبر كسر الكتف. قلّ ما تنكسر الكتف فى الموضع العريض منها وإنّما تنكسر منها حروفها، فمتى ما انكسر منها موضع او انكسرت فى وسطها وإنّما يعرف ذلك باللمس فعلى حسب ما يكون شكل الكسر فرم.	The fracture of the shoulder, rarely does the shoulder get fractured in its joint and if it gets fractured it is usually the bones that get dislocated, so when there is a fracture either in the upper part or middle part, it can be identified by touching.
تسويته وردّه على شكله الطبيعىّ بكلّ وجه من الحيلة يمكنك، ثمّ احمل على الموضع غبار الرحى مع بياض البيض والمشاقة الليّنة وضع من فوق رفادة من خرقة مثنيّة ثمّ ضع عليه جبيرة عريضة من لوح.	You reduce it and return it to its natural shape in every possible way, then apply a poultice of violet powder mixed with white lead and soft bandages, placing on top a plaster made from doubled linen fabric, then put over it a wide splint made of wood.
رقيق على قدر الكتف كلّها او أوسع منها قليلا، فإن كان تحت الجبيرة تعقير فى موضع من مواضع الكتف فسوّ ذلك التعقير بمشاقة ليّنة حتّى تنزل الجبيرة على استواء، ثمّ شدّ من فوق بعمامة طويلة.	A bandage as wide as the shoulder or slightly wider, if there is a protrusion under the splint at a location on the shoulder, then pad that protrusion with a soft bandage so that the splint rests evenly, then secure it from above with a long binding.
شدّا محكما واستوثق من الجبيرة حتّى لا تزول عن موضعها، وتفقّد الرباط فى كلّ يوم فكلّما استرخى الرباط شددته وسوّيت الجبيرة إن زالت عن موضعها، وليكن اضطجاع العليل على جنبه الصحيح، والكتف تنجبر فى عشرين.	Tighten it firmly and secure the splint so that it does not move from its place, and check the bandage every day, whenever the bandage becomes loose, tighten it and adjust the splint if it has shifted from its position, and let the patient sleep on his healthy side, and the shoulder will heal in twenty.
يوما او خمسة وعشرين يوما فإذا كملت هذه العدّة فحلّ الرباط وأنت فى أمن فإنّها من العظام التى لا يتخوّف هشمها ولا انتقاضها، فإن برز من العظم شظيّة وكانت تنخس تحت الجلد فشقّ عليها وانتزعها.	Twenty-one or twenty-five days, and if this period has passed, then remove the bandage and anoint with oil, for it is one of the bones that does not fear being bruised or cracked, but if a fragment of bone protrudes and was buried under the skin, then make an incision over it and extract it.
واصنع ما ذكرته فى كسر الترقوة من تسكين الورم الحارّ إن حدث شىء من ذلك،.	And treat it as I mentioned for a fracture of the cranium, with cauterization of the hot tumor, if any of that occurs.
الفصل السابع.	The seventh chapter.
فىجبر كسر الصدر.	On the fracture of the chest.
الصدر قد ينكسر فى وسطه وقليلا ما يعرض ذلك وأمّا أطرافه فهى أكثر ما تنكسر وتنفتّت، ومن أعراضه اذا انكسر وسطه أن يميل الى أسفل ويعرض له وجع شديد وعسر فى النفس وسعال.	The chest may fracture in its middle, but that rarely happens, and as for its edges, they are more likely to fracture and disintegrate, and among its symptoms, if the middle is fractured, it inclines downwards and there is severe pain and difficulty in breathing.
وربّما قذ ف دما ويتبيّن التقعير فى العظم المكسور ولا يخفى للحسّ، وجبره أن يستلقى العليل على ظهره وتصير بين كتفيه مخدّة ثمّ تكبس منكباه وتجمع الأضلاع بالأيدى من الجانبين وتلطّف فى تسويته على كلّ وجه أمكن ذلك.	When a fracture becomes visible in the bone and its location is detected by touch, the patient should lie on their back with a pad placed between their shoulders, then the shoulders are pulled back and the limbs are gathered from both sides with the hands, and adjusted to make it as straight as possible.
ووافق حتّى يرجع شكل العظم على ما ينبغى، ثمّ احمل عليه الضماد والمشاقة وضع من فوقه جبيرة من لوح رفيق من صفصاف او خلنج ونحوه فى الخفّة بعد أن تلفّها فى خرقة.	And when the bone has returned to its normal shape, a splint and bandage are applied, with a pad placed on top of it, made from a light piece of wood or a reed, and wrapped in a cloth after being tied around the knee.
ثمّ تلطّف فى ربطها على العظم المكسور لئلّا تزول، ومرّ بالرباط على استدارة الى الظهر مرّات وشدّه شدّا محكما، ثمّ تفقّد الرباط فى كلّ وقت، وكلّما استرخى شددته.	Then the bandage is adjusted to tightly bind the fractured bone, and wrapped around the waist to the back several times, tightened with a strong tightening, then the bandage is checked at all times, and whenever it loosens, it is tightened.
وإن دعت الضرورة الى حلّه عند أكال يعرض فى الموضع او وجع او ورم فبادر بحلّه واقلع الضماد وأصلح ما عرض من ذلك بوجه علاجه ثمّ ردّ الضماد إن رأيت لذلك.	And if necessity calls for its removal at a time of eating or when there is swelling, pain, or an abscess in the area, then hurry to remove it, take out the splint, and fix what has happened with the appropriate treatment, then put back the splint if you see fit.
وجها وألزمه الشدّ حتّى يبرأ،.	And bind it firmly until it heals.
الفصل الثامن.	The Eighth Section.
فىجبر الأضلاع اذا انكسرت اعلم أنّ الأضلاع إنّما يقع الكسر فيها فى المواضع الغلاظ التى تلى الظهر وأطرافها من قدّام إنّما يعرض لها الرضّ من أجل أنّها غضروفيّة ومعرفة ذلك لا تخفى للحسّ عند التفتيش بالأصابع.	In treating fractures of the limbs, know that fractures of the limbs occur in the fleshy areas that are towards the back and their edges from the front, and these are subject to displacement because they are loose and this is not hidden from touch when examined with the fingers.
وجبرها بأن تسوّى الكسر بالأصابع على الوجه المتمكّن حتّى يستوى الشكل على ما ينبغى ثمّ تضمّد وتشدّ العظم المكسور بجبيرة إن احتاج الى ذلك، فإن كان كسر الأضلاع مائلة الى داخل فإنّه يعرض للعليل وجع شديد.	And treat it by straightening the fracture with the fingers on a firm surface until the shape is as it should be, then splint and bind the fractured bone with a pad if needed, for if a fracture of the limbs leans inward, it will cause severe pain and weakness.
ونخس كالنخس الذى يعرض لمن به شوصة من أجل أنّ العظم ينخس الحجاب ويعرض له أيضا عسر النفس والسعال وقذف دم كثير وهذا عسر العلاج، وقد تحيّلت الأوائل فيه بحيل كثيرة.	And a cough like the cough that occurs in one who has tuberculosis, because the bone affects the lung and also causes difficulty breathing, and severe coughing with much phlegm, and this makes treatment difficult, and the predecessors have used many tricks to treat it.
فمنهم من قال ينبغى أن تجعل أغذية العليل ما يولّد النفخ والرياح لينتفخ البطن ويتمدّد ويندفع الكسر الى خارج ونحن نكره هذا لئلّا يكون توكيدا لحدوث الورم الحارّ إن كان لم يحدث فإن كان قد حدث فإنّه يزيد فيه ويؤكّده.	Of them, one said that it is fitting to make a poultice of certain herbs that would induce flatulence and gas, so the belly would inflate and expand, and the diaphragm would move outward, and we reject this because it would be an invitation for the formation of a hot tumor, if it hasn't occurred yet, but if it has, then it increases and worsens it.
وقال بعضهم توضع على الموضع محجمة ثمّ تمصّ بقوّة وهو أشبه بالقياس إلّا أنّه يتخوّف أن تجذب المحجمة فضولا الى الموضع لحال ضعفه، وقال بعضهم ينبغى أن يغطّى الموضع بصوف قد غمس فى زيت حارّ.	And some of them said that a poultice should be applied to the affected area, then massaged with force, and this is more in line with examination, except that he fears that the poultice might attract pus to the area due to its weakness. And some of them said that it is fitting to cover the area with wool that has been soaked in hot oil.
وتصير رفادة فيما بين الأضلاع حتّى تمتلئ فيكون الرباط مستويا اذا لففته على استدارة، ثمّ تعالج العليل بعلاج الشوصة من الغذاء والدواء، فإن أرهق العليل أمر شديد لا يصبر عليه.	And a poultice is applied between the sides until it is full, so that when it is wrapped around the abdomen, it would be even. Then the poultice is treated with the treatment of softening and medication, for if the poultice is too harsh, it is a serious matter that cannot be tolerated.
وكان العظم ينخس الحجاب نخسا مؤذيا وتخوّفنا على العليل فينبغى أن نشقّ على الموضع ونكشف عن الضلع المكسور ثمّ نصير تحته الآلة التى تحفظ الصفاق التى تقدّم وصفها ونقطع العظم برفق ونخرجه.	And the bone was scraping against the rib cage with a painful scraping, and we feared for the poultice, so it is fitting that we make an incision over the affected area and expose the fractured rib, then we would insert underneath it the instrument that holds the diaphragm, which we previously described, and cut the bone gently and extract it.
ثمّ نجمع شفتى الجرح إن كان كبيرا بالخياطة ونعالجه بالمراهم حتى يبرأ، فإن عرض فى خلال ذلك ورم حارّ فبادر فبلّ رفائد فى دهن الورد وضع على الموضع وعالج العليل بما يسكن الورم من داخل أيضا.	Then we bring together the lips of the wound, if it is large, with sutures, and treat it with ointments until it heals. If during that time a hot tumor appears, we apply a poultice of rose oil to the area, and treat the poultice with what calms the tumor from the inside as well.
ويستلقى على الجانب الذى يخفّ عليه النوم حتّى يبرأ،.	And he should lie on the side where it is most comfortable for him, until it heals.
الفصل التاسع.	The Ninth Chapter.
فىجبر خرز الظهر والعنق.	On the fracture of the vertebrae and the nape of the neck.
أمّا عظام العنق اذا أصابها كسر وقلّ ما يعرض لها ذلك وأكثر ما يعرض لها الرضّ وكذلك فقارات الظهر أيضا فإذا عرض ذلك لأحد وأردت أن تعرف هل يبرأ او ليس يبرأ.	As for the bones of the nape, if they are fractured, and it rarely happens that this occurs, but most often what happens to them is dislocation, and the same with the vertebrae. If this happens to one of them, you should know whether or not it will heal.
فانظر فإن رأيت يديه قد استرختا وخدرتا وماتتا ولم يقدر على حركتهما ولا بسطهما ولا قبضهما وإذا قرصتهما او نخستهما بإبرة لم يحسّ بذلك ولم يجد فيهما ألما فاعلم أنه لا يبرأ فى أكثر الأحوال فهو هالك.	If you see his arms having become paralyzed and weakened, and deadened, and he is unable to move them or stretch them or clench them, and if you pinched them with a needle he does not feel it and does not find pain in them, then know that it will not heal in most cases, so it is futile.
وإن كان يحرّكهما ويحسّ فيهما بالقرص والنخس فاعلم أنّ نخاع العظم قد سلم وأن العليل يبرأ بالعلاج، فإن أصاب خرز الظهر مثل ذلك وأردت أن تعلم هل يبرأ أيضا أم لا.	And if he moves them and feels the pinching and piercing, then know that the bone-setting is sound and the wound will heal with treatment, for if the spine injury is similar, I wanted you to know whether it will also heal or not.
فانظر الى رجليه فإن رأيت أنّهما قد استرختا وحدث فيهما ما حدث فى اليدين ثمّ اذا اضطجع على ظهره خرج الريح والبراز من غير إرادة واذا استلقى على بطنه خرج البول من غير إرادة.	Look at his legs, if you see that they have become paralyzed and the same thing has happened to them as happened to the arms, then if he lies on his back, gas and feces come out without control, and if he lies on his stomach, urine comes out without control.
وإذا استلقى على ظهره وأراد البول لم يستطع على ذلك فاعلم أنّه هالك فلا تعنى بعلاجه فإن لم يعرض له شىء من ذلك كان الأمر أخفّ، وعلاج ما حدث من ذلك أن تروم تسكين الورم الحارّ.	And if he lies on his back and wants to urinate, he is unable to do so, then know that he is dying, so do not bother with treatment. If none of these things happened to him, the matter is lighter, and the treatment for what has happened is to apply a warm poultice.
بأن تضع على الفقارة المرضوضة دهن الورد وحده او مع فصوص البيض مشويّة تضع عليه ذلك ثلاث مرّات فى النهار حتّى اذا سكن الورم الحارّ فاحمل على الموضع أحد الضمادات المقوّية المنشّفة وشدّ عليه بالرباط وأمره بالسكون والقرار.	By applying to the diseased hip the fat of roses alone or with cooked and crushed almonds, apply this three times a day until when the warm poultice has calmed, then put on the place one of the wrapping bandages that are loosened and tie it with a bandage and order him to rest and stay still.
ولا ينام إلّا على الجهة التى لا يجد معها وجعا حتّى يبرأ، فإن كان قد حدث عند الرضّ فى العظم شظيّة او شىء قد تبرّأ منه فينبغى أن تشقّ عليه الجلد وتنتزع ذلك العظم.	And he should not sleep except on the side where he does not find pain, until he recovers. If a piece of bone has come out in the wound, it is possible that the skin will be cut and that piece of bone will be extracted.
ثمّ تجمع شفتى الجرح إن كان كبيرا بالخياطة ثمّ تعالج بالمراهم الملحمة حتّى يبرأ، فإن انكسر آخر عظم العصعص وهو عجز الذنب فينبغى أن تدخل الإبهام من اليد اليسرى فى المقعدة.	Then the lips of the wound are gathered, if it is large, with stitching, then treated with compound ointments until it heals. If another vertebra breaks, which is the lumbar region of the spine, it is possible that the thumb of the left hand will be inserted into the anus.
وتسوّى العظم المكسور باليد الأخرى على حسب ما تمكن وتتأتّى التسوية ثمّ تحمل عليه الضماد والجبيرة إن احتجت الى ذلك ثمّ تشدّه.	The fractured bone is reduced by the other hand, according to the extent that it is possible and then immobilization occurs, then you apply the bandage and the plaster if needed, then tighten it.
فإن أحسست بشظيّة مكسورة فيه فشقّ عليها وانتزعها وعالج الجرح بعلاج ما تقدّم حتّى يبرأ،.	For if you feel a loose fragment of a fractured bone, then make an incision and extract it and treat the wound with the treatment that has been previously mentioned until it heals.
الفصل العاشر.	Surgical Instruments.
فىجبر كسر الورك.	Treatment of fracture of the ribs.
قلّ ما تنكسر عظام الأوراك فإن انكسرت فإنّما يكون كسرها أن تتفتّت فى أطرافها وتنشقّ فى الطول وتميل الى داخل ويعرض للعليل وجع فى الموضع ونخس وتخدر الساق التى الكسر من جهتها.	It is rare for the bones of the knees to fracture, and if they do fracture, then their fracture will be such that they splinter at the ends and break along the length and protrude inwardly and the knee joint becomes displaced from its place and the leg becomes shorter and smaller on the side where the fracture occurred.
وجبره أن تمرّ بيدك عليه حتّى تقف على الكسر كيف هو شكله فإن كان الكسر فى أطرافه فقط فسوّ ذلك الكسر على حسب ما يتهيّأ لك من التسوية حتّى يشبه شكله الطبيعىّ.	And treat it by passing your hand over it until you feel the fracture and how it is shaped, and if the fracture is only at its ends, then reduce that fracture according to however immobilization is imagined by you until its shape becomes natural.
فإن كان الكسر فى الطول أو كان قد مال الى داخل فأضجع العليل على بطنه حتّى يتهيّأ لك جبر ذلك الكسر، فإذا سوّيته حملت عليه الضماد ثمّ تضع عليه جبيرة من خشب او من جلد وشدّه شدّا.	For if the fracture is along the length or has become displaced inwardly, then put the knee on its back until it is imagined by you how to treat that fracture, and if you reduce it, apply a bandage to it, then put a splint on it made of wood or leather and tie it tightly.
لا تخاف عليه انتقال الكسر ولا زوال الجبيرة وتسوّى التقعير من الخواصر بما يملأه حتّى يأخذ الشدّ على استواء وتأمر العليل أن ينام على ظهره او على جنبه الصحيح، فإن عرض له ورم حارّ.	Do not fear for it the transfer of the fracture or the loss of the splint, and immobilize the thigh with a bandage made from plaster so that it is filled until it holds the tightness in place, and order the patient to sleep on his back or on his right side, for if he does so, he will be relieved of pain and heat.
فكفّ عن مدّه وجبره حتّى يسكن الورم الحارّ واحمل عليه ما يسكنه على ما تقدّم ثمّ ارجع الى جبره وشدّه كما ينبغى، فإن عرض فى العظم شظايا او تفتّت من أطرافه شىء فلا ينبغى أن ينزع.	So immobilize for a period and treat until the hot swelling subsides, and apply to it what will calm it as previously mentioned, then return to treating it and tie it as is suitable, for if there are loose fragments in the bone or splintering from its ends, it is not suitable that they be extracted.
ولا يمسّ بل يسوّى من خارج كما قلنا ويترك شدّه حتّى يبرأ،.	It should not be touched but rather covered from the outside as we have said and its tightness is left until it heals.
الفصل الحادى عشر.	The twelfth section.
فى جبر كسر العضد.	On the surgery of fractures of the bones.
العضد هو ما بين المرفق الى رأس الكتف فإن انكسر فجبره على أحد وجهين أحدهما أن تأخذ عودا مقوّسا أملس متوسّط الغلظ على هذه الصورة:.	The bone is what is between the elbow and the head of the shoulder, so if it breaks, its fracture is treated in one of two ways, one of which is that you take a curved branch.
وتربط فى طرفيه رباطين ثم يعلّق من موضع مرتفع ويجلس العليل على كرسىّ ثمّ تلقى ذراعه المكسورة على العود حتّى يصير إبطه ملصقا فى وسط انحناء العود ثمّ يعلّق من فوقه شىء ثقيل.	And you bind on its ends two bindings, then it is hung from a high place and the patient sits on a chair, then his fractured arm is placed on the branch until his armpit becomes attached in the middle of the curvature of the branch, then something heavy is hung above it.
او يمدّه خادم الى أسفل ثمّ يسوّى الطبيب الكسر بيديه معا حتّى يردّ الكسر على ما ينبغى، والوجه الآخر أن يستلقى العليل على قفاه وتعلّق يده من عنقه برباط.	Or a servant stretches it downwards, then the doctor dresses the fracture with his hands together until the fracture is returned to its proper place, and the other way is that the patient lies on his side and his hand is hung from his neck with a binding.
ثمّ تأمر خادمين أن يضبط أحدهما ما فوق الكسر بيديه والآخر أن يضبط أسفله ويمدّ كلّ واحد منهما الى جهته، وإن أردت أن يكون المدّ أقوى فشدّ تحت الكسر برباط وفوقه برباط ويمدّهما كلّ واحد من الخادمين الى جهتهما.	Then two servants are ordered that one of them adjusts what is above the fracture with his hands and the other adjusts its lower part, and each one of them pulls to his side, and if it is desired that the pulling be stronger, then a binding is tightened below the fracture and another above it, and each of the two servants pulls to his side.
فإن كان الكسر قريبا من طرف المنكب فينبغى أن تصير [وسط] الرباط تحت الإبط والآخر تحت الكسر نحو المرفق، وكذلك إن كان الكسر قريبا من المرفق فينبغى أن تصير الرباط على ذلك الموضع وعلى المرفق نفسه.	For if the fracture is near the side of the shoulder, it is proper that one binding be under the armpit and the other under the fracture near the elbow, and similarly if the fracture is near the elbow, it is proper that one binding be in that place and on the elbow itself.
ثمّ تسوّى الكسر برفق من غير عنف حتّى اذا استوى الكسر على ما ينبغى وائتلف ائتلافا حسنا ثمّ تشدّه إن لم يعرض ورم حارّ فإن عرض ورم حارّ فاترك شدّه الى اليوم السابع وضع عليه صوفة موذّحة مشرّبة بالخلّ ودهن الورد.	Then the fracture is dressed with gentle care until, if the fracture is in its proper place and a good apposition is made, then it is tightened, and if there was no inflammation or hot tumor, but if there was a hot tumor, then the tightness is left until the seventh day and a poultice of toasted and shredded colocynth is applied, mixed with vinegar and rose oil.
حتّى اذا سكن الورم فحينئذ فشدّه، وصفة شدّه أن تحمل الضماد على الكسر ثمّ تحمل لفافة من خرقة جديدة على الضماد ثمّ تجمع الذراع على العضد نفسه وتضع يده مفتوحة على منكبه،.	If the plaster settles, then make it firm, and the method of making it firm is to apply the poultice on the fracture, then apply a new dressing from a clean cloth on the poultice, then bring the arm together on itself and put his hand open on his shoulder.
وتحمل الخرق والشدّ على العضد والذراع ليكون الذراع يقوم مقام الجبائر إن لم يمنعك من ذلك مانع ولم يتغيّر عليك من العظم المكسور شىء، فإن خفت أن يتغيّر عليك من ذلك شىء فاستعمل الجبائر.	And apply the dressing and the bandage on the arm and the shoulder, so that the arm acts in place of splints, if there is no obstacle to prevent you from doing that, and if the fractured bone does not change for you, but if you fear that it will change, then use the splints.
وهو أن تضع على الكسر نفسه جبيرة تكون أعرض وأقوى من سائر الجبائر وليجعل بين كلّ جبيرة عرض أصبع وليكن طول الجبائر على حسب الكسر بزيادة ثلاث أصابع من كلّ جهة.	And it is better that you put on the fracture itself a splint that is wider and stronger than other splints, and let there be between each splint the width of a finger, and the length of the splints should be according to the fracture with an increase of three fingers from each side.
ثمّ تشدّ على الجبائر الشدّ الذى ذكرته فى أوّلالباب.	Then tighten on the splints the bandage that was mentioned in the beginning of the chapter.
وهوأن يكون شدّك على موضع الكسر أشدّ.	And it is better that your tightening be on the place of the fracture be tighter.
وكلّما بعد الكسر كان الشدّ أقلّ، فإن رأيت وضع الجبائر والشدّ كما قلنا فى حين جبرك للعضو من ساعتك فافعل.	And as the bandage is farther from the fracture, it should be looser, if you see that putting on the splints and the bandage as we said when you splinted the member at first, then do it.
وإن خشيت الورم الحارّ فاترك الشدّ والجبائر الى. اليوم السابع كما قلنا ثمّ تفقّد الرباط فى كلّ ثلاثة أيّام لئلّا يحدث فى الموضع حكّة او نفخ او يمتنع الغذاء من الوصول الى العضو لحال إفراط الشدّ فتصلح ذلك كلّه على ما ذكرنا.	And if you fear the hot swelling, then loosen the bandage and the splints to the seventh day as we said, then examine the dressing every three days lest there be a hemorrhage or an effusion or the nourishment be prevented from reaching the member due to excessive tightening, so treat all that according to what we mentioned.
فإن كنت على ثقة أن لا يحدث شىء من ذلك فلا تحلّ الرباط إلّا بعد أيّام كثيرة، ويكون اضطجاع العليل على ظهره ويده على معدته وتوضع تحت العضد مرفقة مملوءة من الصوف معتدلة.	For if you are confident that none of that will happen, then do not untie the dressing except after many days, and let the elbow be bent on his back and his hand on his abdomen and put under the shoulder a padded cloth filled with cotton, moderately warm.
وتفقّد فى كلّ وقت من ليل او نهار لئلّا يتنقّض شكل العضو المكسور او يسترخى الرباط فأصلح ذلك كلّه بجهدك، واجعل غذاء العليل على الرتبة التى قدّمنا بأن يكون الغذاء لطيفا أوّلا حتّى اذا همّ العظم أن يشتدّ.	And examine at every time, night or day, lest the shape of the fractured member become deformed or the dressing becomes loose, so treat all that with your effort, and let the nourishment of the elbow be on the level that we mentioned, that the nourishment should be gentle, first until when the bone is about to tighten.
فينبغى أن تغلظ غذاءه، فإنّ من عادة العضد والساق أن تشتدّ فى أربعين يوما فحينئذ ينبغى أن تحلّ ويستعمل الحمّام ويعالج بالمراهم التى تصلح لذلك، فإن كان الكسر فاحشا مترضّضا.	It is desirable to thicken his food, for it is the habit of the arm and leg that they become stiff in forty days, so it is desirable that it be unlocked and the poultices be used and treated with the pastes that rectify for that, if the fracture was ugly and reducing.
فلا تحلّ عنه الرباط الى خمسين يوما او الى شهرين،.	So do not unlock the splint from him for fifty days or until two months.
الفصل الثانى عشر.	The twelfth chapter.
فى جبر كسر الذراع.	On the setting of fractures of the arm.
الذراع مركّب من عظمين ويسمّى الزندين أحدهما صغير وهو الذى يلى الإبهام والآخر كبير وهو الموضوع تحت الصغير من أسفل فربّما انكسر الزند الأعظم وحده او الصغير وحده وربّما انكسرا معا،.	The arm is composed of two bones, and they are called the radius, one of them is small, and it is the one that goes to the thumb, and the other is large, and it is placed under the small one from below, so sometimes the larger radius fractures alone, or the smaller one fractures alone, and sometimes both fracture together.
فمتى انكسر الزند الصغير الأعلى فإنّ جبره يسهل وبرؤه يكون أسرع ومتى انكسر الزند الأسفل كان كسره رديئا وبرؤه عسرا وأردأها اذا انكسرت العظمان معا، فإن كان العظم الذى انكسر الزند الصغير الأعلى.	When the upper small radius fractures, then its treatment is easy and its healing is quicker, and when the lower radius fractures it is a more difficult fracture and its healing is slower, and if both bones fracture together, then if the bone that fractured was the small radius.
فينبغى للطبيب عند جبره أن يجعل مدّه يسيرا برفق حتّى يسوّيه فإن كان الزند الكبير هو المكسور فينبغى أن يجعل مدّه أشدّ وإن كان الزندان جميعا هما المكسورين فينبغى أن يجعل المدّ أقوى جدّا.	It is desirable for the doctor, when treating him, to make the bandage gentle at first until he straightens it, because if the large radius is the one that is fractured, it is desirable that he makes the bandage tighter, and if both radii are fractured, it is desirable that he makes the bandage very tight.
وينبغى أن يوضع شكل اليد عند جبره ومدّه ممدودا على وسادة ويكون إبهام اليد الى فوق أرفع من جميع الأصابع وتكون الخنصر أسفل من سائر الأصابع والعليل قاعد متربّعا على نفسه.	It is desirable that the shape of the hand be placed when treating it, and the bandage stretched on a pillow, and the thumb of the hand be upwards higher than all the fingers, and the index finger be below the rest of the fingers, and the middle finger be bent resting on itself.
ولتكن الوسادة بإزائه فى الارتفاع لئلا يتكلّف العليل مشقّة.	And let there be a pillow by its side in elevation so that the middle finger does not become bent in a bad position.
ثمّ يمدّ خادم الذراع من أسفل إمّا بيده وإمّا برباط وخادم آخر يمدّ من فوق كذلك ثمّ يسوّى الطبيب العظم حتّى يردّه على أفضل شكل يمكنه، فإن كان فى كسر العظم شظايا فتروم.	Then the servant of the arm stretches from below, either with his hand or with a splint, and another servant stretches from above like that, then the doctor straightens the bone until he puts it in the best shape possible for him, if there are in the fracture of the bone small fragments.
ردّ كلّ شظيّة فى موضعها جهدك فإن ظهرت فيه شظيّة متبرّئة وكانت تنخس الجلد ولا طمع لك فى جبرها فشقّ عليها وانتزعها على الصفة التى ذكرنا فيما تقدّم، فإن كان الكسر مع جرح فقد أفردت له بابا.	Put every fractured segment in its place, exerting force, and if a loose fragment appeared and the flesh was constricted, with no desire to reduce it, then make an incision over it and extract it according to the method we mentioned earlier, for if the fracture is with a wound, it has been given a separate chapter.
فتأخذ علاج ذلك من هناك، فإن عرض فى أوّل جبرك ورم حارّ فالطخ خرقة بالقيروطىّ المعمول بدهن الورد والشمع الأبيض وليكن متوسّطا بين الثخن والرقّة وشدّ الخرق عليه شدّا لطيفا حتّى اذا سكن الورم.	Take the treatment for that from there, and if a hot tumor appears at the beginning of your reduction, then apply a poultice made with boiled barley meal mixed with rose oil and white wax, let it be moderately between thickness and thinness, and bind the bandage on it with a gentle pressure until the tumor subsides.
فانزع القيروطىّ وضع الضماد المهيّأ من غبار الرحى مع بياض البيض ثمّ احمل الجبائر ولتكن الجبيرة التى توضع على الكسر نفسه أعرض قليلا وأقوى، واعلم أنّ عدد جبائر الذراع ستّ فى أكثر الأحوال.	Then remove the poultice and apply a plaster made from the dust of burnt rue, mixed with egg white, then apply splints, and let the splint that is placed on the fracture itself be a little wider and stronger, and know that the number of splints for the arm is six in most cases.
كان الكسر فى الزند الواحد او فى الزندين معا، ثمّ اجعل شدّك على موضع الكسر أقوى وأشدّ وكلّما درت بالشدّ الى فوق او الى أسفل جعلت الشدّ أرخى قليلا على ما تقدّم ذكره فى أوّل الباب،.	The fracture was in one wrist or in both wrists together, then make the pressure on the place of the fracture stronger and tighter, and as it contracts either upwards or downwards, you make the pressure a little looser on what was mentioned earlier at the beginning of the chapter.
ولتكن الخرق التى تلفّ على الكسر خرقا ليّنا رطبة ولا تكن صلبة جدّا وليكن الخيط الذى يشدّ به من كتّان خاصّة متوسّط بين الرقّة والغلظ كما وصفنا، وتفقّد العضو والرباط بعد أيّام.	And let the bandage that wraps around the fracture be a soft and pliable one, not too stiff, and let the thread that tightens it be of a special type of cotton, moderate between thinness and coarseness as we described, and treat the limb and the splint after some days.
فإن حدث شىء يجب إصلاحه مثل حكّة تعرض فى العضو فينبغى أن ينطل العضو بالماء الدفىء حتّى تسكن تلك الحكّة ويترك العضو غير مشدود ليلة حتّى يستريح ثمّ يعاود الشدّ.	For if something happens that requires correction, such as a scratch appearing on the limb, it is desirable that the limb be soaked in warm water until that scratch subsides and the limb is left unbound for a night so that it may rest, then the binding is reapplied.
فإن كان الشدّ قد استرخى والعظم قد زال او نحو ذلك فأصلح ذلك كلّه جهدك، وانظر أيضا فإن كان الغذاء يمتنع أن يصل الى العضو لإفراط الشدّ فينبغى أن ترخيه قليلا وتتركه أيّاما حتّى يجرى اليه الغذاء ثمّ تشدّه.	For if the binding has become loose and the bone has protruded or something similar, then correct it with all your effort, and also check if the nutrient is prevented from reaching the limb due to excessive tightness of the binding, then it is desirable to loosen it a little and leave it for a while until the nutrient can flow to it, then tighten it.
فإن لم يعرض للعليل شىء ممّا ذكرنا فلا ينبغى أن يحلّ إلّا بعد عشرين يوما او نحوها، ثمّ علّق يد العليل الى عنقه وليكن ذراعه معتدلا ويتحفّظ جهده من الحركات المضطربة ويجعل نومه على ظهره.	If the fracture does not become apparent to the doctor within the things we have mentioned, it should not be reduced until after twenty days or so, then he will hang the arm of the patient from his neck and his forearm will be in a relaxed position and he will prevent his wrist from unnecessary movements and make him sleep on his back.
واعلم أنّه ينجبر هذا الكسر من الذراع فى ثلاثين يوما او فى اثنين وثلاثين وربّما انجبر فى ثمانية وعشرين يوما كلّ ذلك على حسب حالات الأمزجة وحالات القوّة،.	And know that this fracture of the forearm will heal in thirty days or in twenty-two days, and sometimes it heals in eighteen days, all of this depending on the conditions of the body and the state of the strength.
الفصل الثالث عشر.	The Thirteenth Chapter.
فى جبر كسر كفّ اليد والأصابع.	On the treatment of fractures of the wrist and fingers.
إنّ مشط الكفّ وسلاميات الأصابع قلّ ما يعرض لها الكسر وإنّما يعرض لها الرضّ كثيرا، فمتى عرض للكفّ كسر او رضّ.	The wrist and the joints of the fingers are rarely exposed to fractures, but rather often to bruises, so if a fracture or bruise occurs on the wrist.
فينبغى أن يجلس العليل متربّعا وأمامه كرسىّ على استواء.	It is proper for the patient to sit leaning back and in front of him a stool on which.
ثمّ يضع يده عليه ممدودة ثمّ يمدّ خادم العظام المكسورة ويسوّيها الطبيب حتّى اذا ائتلفت ائتلافا حسنا فحينئذ ينبغى أن يحمل الضماد والمشاقة إن لم يحدث ورم حارّ، ثمّ تحمل جبيرة من فوق على قدر الموضع.	Then he places his hand on it extended, then the servant straightens the broken bone and the doctor adjusts it until if there is a good adjustment, at that time it is proper to apply the bandage and splint, unless a hot tumor occurs, then a poultice is applied over it according to the location.
وقد أدرجتها فى خرقة ليّنة، فإن كان الكسر الى أسفل نحو باطن الكفّ فاصنع شبه الكرة من خرقة وأمر العليل أن يقبض عليها بكفّه المكسورة ثمّ تشدّ بخرقة طويلة.	And he may have inserted it in a woolen cloth, if the fracture is towards the lower part near the palm of the hand, make something like a ball from a cloth and order the patient to grasp it with his injured hand, then tighten it with a long cloth.
ولتكن الجبيرة من جلد فيه لين ليلتطئ الجلد مع انثناء جميع الكفّ وتشدّها على ما ينبغى، فإن كان الكسر الى خارج فينبغى أن تجعل الجبيرة من فوق وجبيرة أخرى من أسفل فى الكفّ لتكون اليد مفتوحة قائمة.	And let the splint be made from soft leather, so that the leather bends with the bending of all the hand and it is tightened as necessary, if the fracture is towards the outside, then it is proper to make a splint from above and another splint from below on the hand so that the hand remains open.
ثمّ يحمل الشدّ كما تدور اليد ويشبّك بين الأصابع بالرباط، فإن عرض الكسر لأحد سلاميات الأصابع فإن كان الإبهام فليسوّى على ما ينبغى ثمّ يشدّ مع الكفّ وإن أحببت أن تجعل له جبيرة قائمة صغيرة لتقيم الكسر.	Then a bandage is applied as the hand turns and it is tied between the fingers with a strap, if the fracture occurs on one of the joints of the fingers, if it is the thumb, then adjust it properly and tighten it with the hand, and if you like, make a small standing splint to immobilize the fracture.
ولا يتحرّك فإن كان الكسر لسائر الأصابع مثل الوسطى والسبّابة او الخنصر او البنصر فلتسوّى وتربط مع الأصبع التى تليها الصحيحة او تربط كلّها على الولاء فهو أجود او تضع عليها جبيرة قائمة صغيرة.	If the fracture is of the forearm, such as the radius, ulna, or wrist, then it should be immobilized and tied with the adjacent limb in the correct position, or all of them may be tied together for greater stability, or a small splint may be applied to it.
كما قلنا فى الإبهام وتفقّد فى حين جبرك وبعده عن الورم الحارّ فقابله بما ينبغى متى حدث شىء من ذلك على ما تكرّر وصفه،.	As we said regarding the elbow, and as it is divided when you apply a splint and after removing the hot poultice, treat it according to what is proper, whenever something like that occurs, as it has been described repeatedly.
الفصل الرابع عشر.	The fourteenth chapter.
فى جبر كسر الفخذ.	On the treatment of thigh fractures.
عظم الفخذ كثيرا ما ينكسر ويتبيّن للحسّ لأنّه يتقلّب الى قدّام وإلى خلف وجبره يكون بأن يشدّ رباط فوق الكسر ورباط آخر تحت الكسر والعليل مستلقى على وجهه.	The femur bone often fractures and becomes palpable because it is displaced upward and backward, and its treatment consists of applying a bandage above the fracture and another below it, with the patient lying on their back.
ثمّ يمدّ كلّ رباط خادم الى جهته على اعتدال هذا اذا كان الكسر فى وسط العظم، وأمّا إن كان قريبا من أصل الفخذ فينبغى أن تشدّ رباطا ليّنا إمّا من صوف او نحوه.	Then, each bandage is stretched by a servant in the respective direction, if the fracture is in the middle of the bone. If it is near the base of the thigh, then it would be better to apply a plaster, either made from gypsum or something similar.
عند أصل الفخذ الى نحو العانة ليقع المدّ الى فوق والرباط الآخر تحت الكسر وكذلك إن كان الكسر قرب الركبة فليكن الرباط قرب الركبة ليقع المدّ الى أسفل، ثمّ يسوّى الطبيب العظم بكلتى يديه حتّى يردّه على مثال الشكل الطبيعى.	At the base of the thigh, near the groin, one bandage is applied above and the other below the fracture. Similarly, if the fracture is near the knee, then a bandage should be placed near the knee so that it pulls downward. Then, the physician straightens the bone with both hands until it returns to its natural shape.
ويأتلف العظم ائتلافا حسنا فحينئذ ينبغى أن تحمل الضماد والشدّ إن لم يحدث للعضو ورم حارّ فإن حدث فيه الورم فاتركه أيّاما حتّى يسكن الورم الحارّ ثمّ ارجع الى علاجه،.	And the bone is bent into a good alignment, so when it is in this position, it is necessary to apply the splint and bandage. If no hot poultice has been applied to the limb, then it should be left like that; but if a hot poultice has been applied, then it should be left for a while until the hot poultice has taken effect, then return to the treatment.
وأمّا شدّه فينبغى أن تلوى على الكسر عمامة صلبة واسعة مرّتين او ثلاثا ويبقى منه ما فضل، ثمّ تلوى الساق حتّى يصير الكعب عند أصل الألية وتدخل خيطا طويلا فيما بين الفخذ والساق قرب الركبة من أسفل وتصير أطراف الخيط من فوق من الجهتين.	And its bandage should be wrapped around the fracture with two or three turns of a wide, stiff bandage, and what remains of it stays. Then, the leg is wrapped so that the calf becomes tight at the base of the thigh, and a long thread is inserted between the thigh and the leg near the knee from below, and the ends of the thread come out from above on both sides.
ثمّ تدير على الساق والفخذ ما فضل من العمامة، ثمّ تجعل على الفخذ فى موضع الكسر نفسه الجبائر وتجعل منها جبيرة واحدة على عظم الساق ثمّ احش الخلل الذى بين الفخذ والساق بالخرق الليّنة ليستوى الشدّ.	Apply a bandage on the leg and thigh, whatever remains of the poultice, then make a plaster on the thigh in the place of the fracture itself, and make one plaster from the bone of the leg, then fill the emptiness between the thigh and leg with thin cloth to equalize the tension.
ثمّ ابدأ بالشدّ القوىّ من الوسط على موضع الكسر ثلاث لفّات او أربع وكلّما بعدت بالرباط من موضع الكسر فليكن شدّك أقلّ وألين وأرخأ.	Then start with strong tightening in the middle on the place of the fracture, three or four turns, and each subsequent turn by wrapping around the fracture site should be less tight and looser.
ثمّ اعمد الى طرفى الخيط الذى كنت أدخلت بين الفخذ والساق فاربط به ما يليه من الجبائر التى من فوق ثمّ مرّ بطرفى الخيط الى أسفل حتّى تنتهى الى عرقوب الرجل فشدّ بهما أيضا أطراف الجبائر من الجهة الأخرى.	Then direct the thread ends that you inserted between the thigh and leg, to wrap around the adjacent plasters above, then pass the thread end downwards until it reaches the ankle, and tighten with it also the edges of the plasters from the other side.
لئلّا يزول الرباط من موضعه، ثمّ تترك الشدّ عليه ما دام لا يتحدّث للعضو أكال ولا ورم ولا نفخ ونحو ذلك، فإن حدث شىء من ذلك فبادر بحلّه وأصلح ما حدث من ذلك كلّه على ما ذكرنا مرارا.	If the bandage moves from its place, then the tightening on it is left as long as there is no inflammation, abscess, or swelling of the member, and similar things, if any of these occur, then hasten to treat it and repair what occurred, according to what we mentioned repeatedly.
فإن كان فى العظم شظيّة تنخس فينبغى أن تسوّى ذلك إن أمكنك وإلا فشقّ عليها وانتزعها وعالج الجرح بمثل ما تقدّم ذكره حتّى يبرأ، وقد يشدّ هذا الكسر من الفخذ من غير أن تضاف اليه الساق بالجبائر.	For if there is in the bone a splinter that moves, it is hoped that it can be made to stabilize, if possible, otherwise incise over it and extract it, and treat the wound with what was previously mentioned until it heals, and this fracture of the thigh may be tightened without the leg being bound to it with plasters.
كما ذكرنا فى العضد والذراع إلّا أنّ جبره هكذا ليس يعرض معه للعليل عرج وإن جبرت وحدها من غير أن تضمّ اليها الساق فلا بدّ من أن يعرج صاحبها أبدا.	As we mentioned regarding the elbow and forearm, except that treating it in this way does not require for it to be elevated, and if you treat it alone without binding the leg to it, then there is no need for the patient to walk with a limp forever.
واعلم أنّ الفخذ تشتدّ فى خمسين يوما او تزيد قليلا او تنقص قليلا كلّ ذلك على حسب اختلاف الأمزجة وسائر الحالات،.	And know that the thigh is tightened for five days or a little more or a little less, all of this according to the difference in temperaments and other conditions.
الفصل الخامس عشر.	The Fifteenth Chapter.
فى كسر فلكة الركبة.	On the fracture of the patella.
إنّ فلكة الركبة قلّ ما يعرض لها الكسر وقد يعرض لها الرضّ كثيرا فإن عرض لها كسر فإنّما يكون إمّا شقّا وإمّا تفتّتا فى أجزائها ويكون ذلك مع جرح وغير جرح.	The patella is rarely subject to fracture, but it often suffers from contusions; if a fracture does occur, it is either a split or a fragmentation of its parts, which may or may not be associated with a wound.
وتقف على ذلك كلّه بالحسّ، وجبرها بأن تسوّى ما تفرّق من أجزائها بالأصابع حتّى تجتمع وتأتلف على حسب ما تتمكّن التسوية والرفق والإتقان، ثمّ تحمل الضماد وتحمل عليه جبيرة مدوّرة إن احتجت الى ذلك.	And it is diagnosed by palpation, and treated by adjusting the displaced parts with the fingers until they come together and unite according to the degree of adjustment, mending, and precision, then a bandage is applied, and if necessary, a plaster cast is put on.
وتشدّ من فوق الشدّ الموافق لذلك، ثمّ تتعاهد جميع الأحوال التى وصفنا فى سائر الكسر مثل الورم الحارّ ونحوه بأن تقابل كلّ عارض بما يصلح له الى أن يبرأ،.	And the dressing is tightened to a degree that suits it, then all the conditions we described for fractures in general are taken into consideration, such as hot swelling and the like, by treating each symptom with what is suitable for it until it heals.
الفصل السادس عشر.	The sixteenth chapter.
فى جبر كسر الساق.	On the treatment of fractures of the leg.
إنّ للساق عظمين أحدهما غليظ ويسمّى بعظم الساق والآخر رقيق ويسمّى زندا ويعرض لهما من أنواع الكسر ما يتعرض لعظمى الذراع.	The leg has two bones, one of them is thick and is called the tibia, and the other is thin and is called the fibula, and they are subject to various types of fractures similar to those that occur in the bones of the arm.
ولذلك صار جبره كجبر الذراع سواء والعمل واحد، فإن انكسر العظمان جميعا انقلبت الساق الى جميع الجهات، وإن انكسر العظم الأرقّ انقلبت الساق الى قدّام وإن انكسر العظم الأغلظ وحدث ذلك من أسفل فهو ممّا لا يخفى عليك.	Therefore, its treatment is similar to the treatment of the arm, and the procedure is the same. If both bones are fractured, the leg will be turned in all directions, and if the thin bone is fractured, it will be turned forward, and if the thicker bone is fractured, especially if it occurs in the lower part, then that is self-evident to you.
فاستعمل المدّ والتسوية وربط الجبائر على حسب ذلك سواء إلّا أنّه ينبغى إن كان كسر الساق كسرا فاحشا ذا شظايا كثيرة أن يكون المدّ أقلّ وأخفّ وترفق جهدك بجبره.	So perform the traction and adjustment, and apply the bandages accordingly, but it is advisable that if the fracture of the leg is a comminuted one with many fragments, then the traction should be milder and more gentle, and you should exert less effort in its treatment.
وفى الساق من العمل شىء زائد على الذراع وهو أنّك اذا سوّيت الجبائر وفرغت من جميع عملك فخذ فَسْقِيَتين من عود الصنوبر التى تستعمل فى تسطيح الغرف التى توضع بين شقوق الألواح او تكون من جرائد النخل او نحوها.	And there is something extra in the leg that is not found in the arm, which is that after you have adjusted the bandages and completed all your work, you should take two splints of sandalwood, which are used to smooth out the surfaces of the rooms where one places between the mattresses or made from palm tree splints or similar.
واختر منها ما لها غلظ قليلا ولا تكون من الرقاق وليكن طولها على طول الساق من الركبة الى أسفل، ثمّ لفّ على كلّ واحدة خرقة لفّتين على طولها وضع الواحدة من الساق والأخرى من الجهة الأخرى.	Choose from it what has a slight thickness and is not from the tender parts, and let its length be the length of the leg from the knee to the bottom, then wrap each one with two turns of a bandage along its length, placing one on the leg and the other on the other side.
ولتكن من الركبة الى أسفل القدم، ثمّ تربط الفَسقيتين فى ثلاثة مواضع من الطرفين والوسط فإنّ بهذا الزمام يمتنع الساق أن يميل يمينا وشمالا ويثقّف تثقيفا حسنا، وقد يستعمل ميزاب من خشب على طول الساق.	And let it be from the knee to the bottom of the foot, then tie the splints in three places, at the extremities and the middle, for with this binding the leg will not bend to the right or left, and will be held in a straight position, and a wooden spatula can be used along the length of the leg.
ويوضع فيه ليحفظه من الحركة وأكثر ما ينبغى أن تفعل ذلك فى الكسر اذا كان معه جرح خاصّة، ثمّ تفقّد الساق فى كلّ يوم واعن به عناية بالغة عن الورم او النفخ او سائر ذلك.	And it is placed to hold it from movement, and it is most desirable that you do that in the fracture if it has a special wound with it, then examine the leg every day and take great care of it regarding swelling or effusion or anything else.
فمتى حدث شىء من ذلك فقابله بما ينبغى الى أن يبرأ، وعظم الساق ينجبر فى ثلاثين يوما او نحوها،.	So when something of that happens, treat it with what is suitable until it heals, and the bone of the leg will be joined in thirty days or about that.
الفصل السابع عشر.	The Seventeenth Chapter.
فى كسر عظام الرجل والأصابع.	On the fractures of the bones of the foot and the toes.
أمّا الكعب فلا يعرض له كسر البتّة وأمّا عظام الرجل فقد يعرض لها الكسر، والأصابع أيضا قلّ ما يعرض لها الكسر وإنّما يعرض لها الرضّ فى أكثر الأحوال.	As for the heel, it is not often exposed to fracture, but as for the bones of the foot, they may be exposed to fracture, and the toes are rarely exposed to fracture, and instead are often exposed to crushing.
فإن عرض لعظام الرجل كسر ورأيت تلك العظام قد أشرفت بعضها على بعض فليضع العليل قدمه على الأرض منتصبة كالماشى ثمّ قم أنت وضع قدمك على ما ارتفع من تلك العظام ثم طأها وسوّها.	If the bones of the foot are exposed to a fracture and you want to reduce those bones which have overlapped each other, then let the patient put their foot on the ground with the heel raised like a donkey, then you should place your foot on what has risen from those bones, then press down and make them even.
حتّى ترجع فى مواضعها، ثمّ احمل الضماد والمشاقة من فوق وضع تحت باطن القدم لوحا صغيرا يكون له رأسان مسطّحة، ثمّ شدّ بها القدم شدّا محكما بعد لفّك لها بالخرق وسائر ما تحتاج اليه.	Until they return to their places, then take the splints and bandages and place them from above under the sole of the foot a small tablet that has two flat ends, then tie the foot tightly after wrapping it with a bandage and other things that you need.
فإذا مرّت له ثلاثة أيّام او أربعة فأطلق الرباط فإنّك تجد العظام مستوية كانت مكسورة او كانت مفكوكة فالعمل كما ترى، وأمّا إن انكسر بعض الأصابع فاجبرها وسوّها على حسب ما وصفت لك فى جبر أصابع اليد.	If the bandage has been on for three or four days, then remove it and you will find that the bones have been set, whether they were fractured or dislocated, the treatment is as you see it, and if some of the fingers are broken, then reduce them and adjust them according to what was described to you regarding the reduction of the hand's fingers.
ثمّ اجعل للأصبع المكسورة جبيرة على طول الأصبع ولتكن أعرض منها قليلا، ثمّ اجعل تحت القدم هذا اللوح الذى وصفت لك وشدّه شدّا محكما، فإن كان الذى انكسر من العظام اثنين او ثلاثة او أكثر.	Then make for the fractured finger a splint along the length of the finger, and let it be slightly wider than it. Then place under the foot this board that I described to you and tie it tightly, if what broke was two or three bones or more.
فاجعل على كلّ أصبع جبيرة من قدره مدرجة فى خرقة ليّنة وشدّ اللوح فى أسفل القدم وليكن متّكأ كلّ رأس من رأسى اللوح خارجا عن بطن القدم ليضبط ضبطا حسنا.	Make on each finger a splint of its size, wrapped in a linen cloth, and tie the board at the bottom of the foot, and let each end of the board protrude outside the sole of the foot to adjust properly.
وينبغى لك أن لا تنسى أن تتعاهد جميع ما ذكرناه لك فى سائر الكسر من الأعراض التى ذكرناها وقابل كلّ عارض بما ينبغى،.	And it is necessary for you that you do not forget all that we mentioned to you regarding the fractures, and to treat each case according to what is suitable for it.
الفصل الثامن عشر.	The Twelfth Chapter.
فى كسر فرح المرأة وعظم العانة وذكر الرجل.	On the fracture of the woman's thigh, the pubic bone, and the man's hip bone.
متى انكسر فرج المرأة فأقعدها متربّعة ثمّ احنها الى جهة ظهرها قليلا قليلا ولتمسك من خلف ثمّ تحش القابلة فرجها بالقطن حتّى يملأه ويصير فى فرجها كالكرة.	When the woman's thigh is fractured, make her lie on her back, then bend it slightly towards her back, and hold from behind, then bind the pelvis to her thigh with cotton until it is full and forms a ball in her thigh.
ثمّ تهزّ المرأة ويرفع صلبها قليلا قليلا فإنّ ذلك القطن يخرج حتّى يصير عند باب الفرج كالكرة ويرجع كسر العظم، ثمّ تجعل رفادة على ظهرها فمتى أرادت أن تبول نزعت القطن برفق حتّى تبول.	Then move the woman and slightly raise her pelvis, for that cotton will come out until it forms a ball at the entrance of the vagina, and the fracture of the bone is reduced. Then make a cushion on her back, so when she wants to urinate, remove the cotton gently so that she can urinate.
وتردّه على النحو الذى أدخلته أوّلا ثمّ ترجع الى رفادتها الأولى، تفعل ذلك سبعة أيّام او نحوها فإنّه ينجبر، وإن شئت أن تأخذ مثانة شاة فتشدّ على فمها أنبوبة قصبة وتدخل المثانة كلّها فى فرجها.	And insert it in the same way as you did initially, then return to her first cushion. Do this for seven days or so, for it will be reduced. And if you want to take a suppository, tie a pipe reed on its end and insert the whole suppository into her vagina.
ثمّ تنفخ فى الأنبوبة بقوّة حتى تنتفخ المثانة فى داخل الفرج فإنّ الكسر يرجع، ثمّ احشه بالقطن وتقيم أيّاما على ما وصفنا حتّى يبرأ، وأمّا متى انكسر عظم العانة من الرجل او المرأة فيستعمل فى جبره.	Blow strongly into the tube until the fracture bulges inside the bandage, then reduce the displacement, and dress it with cotton, and apply a splint as we described until it heals. If there is a fracture of the thigh bone in a man or a woman, a similar method will be used for its treatment.
وتسويته ما وصفنا فى عظم الورك، وليس يخفى عليك الصواب فى هذه الكسور الغريبة التى قلّ ما تقع ولا سيّما لمن كانت له بعض الدربة ويفهم كتابى هذا نعمّا لأنّ الكسر نفسه يدلّك فى أكثر الأحوال.	And adjust it as we described for the femur, and do not hide from you the truth in these strange fractures that rarely occur, and especially not for one who has some experience, and understands this book, yes, because the fracture itself will guide you in most cases.
على طريق الصواب فى جبره وشدّه فافهم، وأمّا ذكر الرجل اذا انكسر فخذ حلقوم إوزّة فتدخل الذكر فيه ثمّ توضع عليه لفافة من خرقة ويعصب ويترك ثلاثة أيّام او نحوها حتّى يبرأ،.	Follow the correct method for its treatment and reduction, so understand. If the penis is fractured, take a donkey's intestine, insert it into the penis, then apply a dressing of soft cloth, and immobilize it, leaving it for three days or so until it heals.
الفصل التاسع عشر.	The nineteenth chapter.
فى جبر كسور العظام اذا كانت مع جرح.	On the treatment of fractures of bones when they are accompanied by a wound.
ينبغى لمن عرض له كسر مع جرح ولا سيّما ان كان العظم كبيرا مثل عظم الفخذ او العضد او نحوها أن تبادر فتفصده من وقته ان ساعدتك شروط الفصد كما قدّمنا.	It is obligatory for one who is presented with a fracture accompanied by a wound, and especially if the bone is large, such as the thigh or arm, to hasten to treat it immediately, if the conditions of treatment that we mentioned earlier are met.
فإن كان الجرح ينزف دما فينبغى أن تبادر الى قطعه بأن تدرّ عليه زاجا مسحوقا إن لم يحضرك غير ذلك ثمّ خذ فى جبر الكسر فى ذلك اليوم بعينه ولا تؤخّره.	For if the wound is bleeding, it is obligatory to hasten to apply a styptic, such as burnt and powdered zej, if nothing else is available, then proceed with the treatment of the fracture on that same day, and do not delay it.
إن لم يحدث ورم حارّ، فإن حدث ورم حارّ فاترك جبره الى اليوم التاسع حتّى يسكن الورم الحارّ ولا تقربه فى اليوم الثالث والرابع البتّة فإنّه تعرّض له أعراضا رديئة.	If no hot inflammation occurs, but if a hot inflammation does occur, then leave the treatment of the fracture until the ninth day, until the hot inflammation subsides. And do not approach it on the third and fourth days, for that would be harmful to him with putrid discharges.
فإن كان العظم المكسور ناتيا على الجلد مكشوفا فينبغى أن تروم ردّه وتسويته بيديك برفق ومدّ يسير، وإن لم يتأتّ لك ردّه وتسويته بيديك فردّه بهذه الآلة وهى آلة تصنع من حديد طولها قدر سبع أصابع او ثمان.	For if the fractured bone protrudes through the skin, it is obligatory to reduce it back and adjust it with your hands gently and carefully. And if you are unable to reduce it and adjust it with your hands, then use this instrument, which is a tool made of iron, its length being about seven or eight fingers.
وعرضها على قدر الجرح.	It should be performed according to the size of the wound.
ولذلك ينبغى للطبيب أن يتّخذ منها ثلاثا او أربعا على قدر ما يحتاج اليه من العلاج فى كلّ نوع من الكسر ولتكن مدوّرة يكون فيها غلظ قليلا لئلّا تنثنى عند الغمز عليها فى وقت العمل.	Therefore, it is fitting for the physician to take three or four of them according to what he needs from the treatment in each type of fracture and let them be rounded so that they are slightly thick so that they bend when pressed during work.
وتكون حادّة الطرف لها عطف فى طرفها ويكون أعلاها الى الغلظ ومن نصفها الى أسفل أرقّ جدّا وهذه صورتها:.	And its sharp edge has a shoulder on its side and its upper part is thick and from its middle to below it is very thin, and this is its shape:
وتسمّى باليونانيّة بيرم يريدون عتلة صغيرة، فينبغى أن تصير طرفها الحادّ المعقّف على طرف العظم الناتى وتدفعه بها بمرّة حتّى اذا رجع العظم واستوى بعض الاستواء فرم تسوية أطراف الكسر بعضها على بعض.	It is called in Greek "perion" which means a small bandage, and it should be that its sharp angled edge is on the edge of the protruding bone and it pushes it with pressure until when the bone returns and straightens to some extent then the edges of the fracture are somewhat aligned with each other.
فإن كان طرفه المكسور رقيقا ولم تأخذه الآلة أخذا جيّدا فينبغى أن تقطع طرف ذلك العظم حتّى تتمكّن الآلة منه، فإن لم تقدر على ردّ العظم بما وصفنا البتّة فاقطعه بما شاكله من المقاطع التى ذكرنا.	For if the edge of the fractured (bone) is thin and the instrument does not grasp it, then take hold of it with a hook, it should be that you cut the edge of that bone until the instrument can grasp it, and if you are unable to return the bone as we described previously, then cut it according to what is similar to the sections that we mentioned.
او انشره بأحد المناشير كيف ما يمكن لك، ثمّ اجرد ما بقى فى العظم من الخشونة والقشور الرقاق، فإذا رددت العظم ووجد العليل بعد ردّه وجعا شديدا مؤذيا فاعلم أنّ العظم لم يرجع الى موضعه الطبيعىّ.	Or insert it with one of the retractors however you can, then scrape what remains on the bone of roughness and thin flakes, for if you return the bone and after its return a severe and painful joint is found, then know that the bone did not return to its natural place.
فإن استطعت على ردّه الى موضعه الطبيعىّ فافعل فإنّك تنفع العليل منفعة عظيمة، فإذا كمل جبرك للعظم فاغمس خرقة فى شراب قابض أسود وخاصّة إن كنت فى الصيف ولا تضع على الجرح قيروطىّ ولا شيئا فيه دهن.	For if you are able to return it to its natural place, then do so, for you will greatly benefit the joint, and if your plaster for the bone is completed, then apply a poultice of vinegar on the bandage, especially if you are in the summer, and do not put anything greasy on the wound.
لئلّا يحدث فيه عفن وفساد، ثمّ استعمل الجبائر فى حين فراغك من جبر العظم واترك الجرح مكشوفا بأن تقرض بالمقصّ فى اللفائف ثقبا على قدر الجرح.	So that corruption and putrefaction do not occur, then use the plasters when you are finished with plastering the bone, and leave the wound exposed by applying a compress in a cloth on the size of the wound.
واحذر كلّ الحذر أن تشدّ الجرح مع الكسر فكثيرا ما صنع ذلك جهّال الأطبّاء فأحدثوا على مرضاهم إمّا الموت وإمّا أكلة او زكاما وليكن شدّك ليّنا مرخيا مخالفا لشدّ سائر الكسر.	Beware, for excessive caution can lead to tightening the sutures with the fracture, a mistake often made by ignorant physicians, resulting in either death or crippling or lockjaw, and your tightening should be gentle and loose, unlike the tightening of other fractures.
فإن كان الجرح رديئا او كان جرحا كبيرا وخشيت عليه بعض الأعراض الرديئة التى وصفنا وكان يجد وجعا فى الموضع مقلقا فلا ينبغى أن تضع عليه الجبائر واصنع له لفائف من خرق صلبة فى موضع الجبائر وشدّه بها.	For if the wound is fresh or the fracture is large and you suspect some of the aforementioned minor complications, and he feels pain in that location, it would not be advisable to apply a plaster, but rather make him wraps from solid cloth in place of the plaster and tighten them.
فإذا كان بعد يوم او يومين ورأيت الجرح قد بدأ يتولّد فيه القيح فانزع عنه الخرقة التى وضعت عليه بالشراب ثمّ استعمل الفتل والمراهم التى من عادتنا أن نداوى بها الجراحات مثل المرهم الرباعىّ ونحوه، وينبغى لك أن تحلّ الرباط.	And if it is after a day or two days and you see the wound has started to produce pus, then remove the cloth that was applied with bandages, and use fat and ointments that we are accustomed to treating wounds with, such as the quadrangular ointment and its like, and it is proper for you to loosen the bandage.
وتتفقّد الجرح فى كلّ يوم مساء وصباحا حتّى يندمل ويبرأ، وينبغى أن تنصب العضو نصبة ليسيل منه القيح الى أسفل بسهولة، فإن مضى للجرح أيّام كثيرة ولم يلتحم ولا انقطع القيح منه فاعلم أنّ هناك شظايا من العظم صغارا.	And examine the wound every morning and evening until it becomes calloused and healed, and it is proper that you make the limb hang loose so that the pus can flow out downwards easily. If many days have passed for the wound and it has not closed nor stopped discharging pus, then know that there are small bone fragments.
فينبغى أن تفتّش الجرح بالمسبار فما كان من تلك الشظايا متبرّئة فانتزعها وأخرجها وما كان منها غير متبرّئة وكانت تنخس العضو وتحدث الوجع فرم فى قطعها وانتزاعها بكلّ وجه يمكنك ذلك.	And it is proper that you probe the wound with a instrument, and whatever of those fragments are protruding, extract them, and whatever are not protruding but are irritating the limb and causing pain, then cut and extract them in every way possible.
فإن عرض للجرح زكام او أكلة او نوع آخر من الفساد والعفونة فينبغى أن تقابل كلّ عرض منها بما شاكله من العلاج الذى تقدّم وصفه فى بابه.	For if the wound develops lockjaw or crippling, or another type of corruption and ulceration, then it is proper that you treat each condition with a treatment similar to what was previously described and mentioned in its section.
وممّا ينبغى أن تقف عند قولى وتحضره ذهنك اذا انكسر عظم كبير ونتا على العضو مثل عظم الفخذ والعضد ونحوهما من الأعضاء الكبار فلا تتعرّض لجذبه ولا إخراجه.	And it is not proper that you attempt to pull or extract it if a large bone, such as the thigh bone or the arm bone and their like among the major limbs, is fractured and protruding from the limb.
فكثيرا ما يعرض من ذلك الموت بل اتركه حتّى يتعفّن فربّما سقط من ذاته بعد عشرين يوما او ثلاثين.	Many of those afflicted with this disease die before the end of twenty or thirty days.
فحينئذ تعالج الجرح إن رأيت فيه مكانا للعلاج وإلّا فاتركه،.	If you see a place for treatment in the wound, then treat it, otherwise leave it.
الفصل العشرون.	Surgical instruments.
فىعلاج التعقّد الذى يعرض فى إثر بعض الكسر.	Treatment of the complications that occur after some fractures.
كثيرا ما يعرض هذا التعقّد فى إثر برء الكسر ولا سيّما ما قرب من المفاصل فيقبح منه شكل العضو وربّما منع العضو عن فعله الطبيعىّ.	This complication often occurs after the fracture has healed, especially if it is near a joint, and sometimes it deforms the shape of the limb and prevents the limb from performing its natural function.
نظرت فإن كان التعقّد طريّا فاستعمل فيه الأدوية التى تقبض مثل الصبر واللبان والمرّ والعنزروت والأقاقيا ونحوها بأن تأخذ من هذه بعضها او كلّها وتعجنها بشراب قابض او ببياض البيض او بالخلّ.	Look, if the complication is a recent one, then use medicines that contract, such as vitriol, gum, pepper, and aristolochia, and similar things, by taking some or all of them and mixing them with a contracting vinegar or egg white or with vinegar of oxymel.
وتحملها على التعقّد فى مشاقة وتشدّها عليها شدّا جيّدا وتترك الشدّ لا تحلّه أيّاما كثيرة ثمّ تحلّه وتعاود غيره حتّى يذهب التعقّد إن شاء الله، او تشدّ عليه صفيحة من رصاص محكمة.	And apply it to the complication in a bandage and bind it tightly, and leave the binding for many days without loosening it, then loosen it and bind another one until the complication disappears, God willing, or bind on it a splint of molded lead.
فإنّ للرصاص خاصيّة تذهب بكلّ ما نتا فى الأعضاء، فإن كان التعقّد قد تحجّر واشتدّ وحفزت الضرورة الى نزعه فشقّ عليه من أعلاه واقطع الفضلة الناتية او اجردها ببعض المجارد حتّى يذهب وعالج الجرح حتّى يبرأ،.	For lead has a property that it removes all the putridity in the organs, so if the complication has become chronic and increased and necessity has called for its removal, then make an incision above it and cut the putrid part or pierce it with some instrument until it comes out, and treat the wound until it heals.
الفصل الحادي والعشرون.	Surgical suture and instruments.
فى علاج الكسر اذا انجبر وبقى العضو بعد ذلك رقيقا على غير طبعه الأوّل.	Treatment of fractures, if they become consolidated and the limb remains weak after that, not like its original condition.
اذا انجبر كسر العظام وبقى العضو بعد ذلك رقيقا ضعيفا فإنّما يكون ذلك لأسباب كثيرة.	If the fracture of the bones consolidates and the limb remains weak and feeble after that, then this is due to many reasons.
أحدها إمّا لكثرة حلّ الرباطات وربطها على غير ما ينبغى وإمّا لإفراط شدّ الرباطات حتّى امتنع الغذاء أن يسرى الى العضو وإمّا لكثرة التنطيل المفرط وإمّا لحركات مفرطة فى غير وقتها وإمّا لقلّة الدم فى جسد العليل وضعفه.	One of them is excessive movement and bandaging in an improper way, or over-tightening the bandage so that nutrition cannot be transported to the limb, or excessive exercise, or making movements excessively at the wrong time, or a lack of blood in the body of the patient and its weakness.
وعلاج ذلك تغذية العليل وتخصيب بدنه حتّى يكثر الدم فيه واستعمال الحمّام وإدخال السرور عليه والفرح ونحو ذلك، ثمّ تحمل الزفت على العضو ليجذب الزفت عليه غذاء كثيرا او يدام تنطيله بالماء الفاتر.	Treatment of that consists of nourishing the bone and making it thin, so that the blood increases in it, and using heat, and applying a poultice to it, and bandaging, and similar things, then applying the dressing to the member so that it absorbs a lot of nourishment or is moistened with watery moisture.
حتّى يجرى الغذاء فيه ويعود الى شكله الطبيعىّ،.	Until the nourishment penetrates into it and it returns to its natural shape.
الفصل الثانى والعشرون.	The second section, and the tendons.
فى علاج العظام المكسورة اذا انجبرت معوجّة ومنعت فعلها على ما ينبغى.	In treating fractured bones, if they become bent and their function is impaired in a way that is undesirable.
فمتى عرض لعضو قد جبر بعد برئه اعوجاج او نتو للعظم المكسور او تعقّد وقبحت لذلك صورة العضو.	When an member appears after it has healed, but with crookedness or distortion of the fractured bone, or there is complication and curvature for which reason the shape of the member is disfigured.
إلّا أنّ العضو لم يمتنع عن فعله الطبيعىّ فليس ينبغى أن تقبل قول من يزعم أن يكسر العضو من رأس وقد كان كثير من جهّال الأطبّاء والمجبّرين يفعلون ذلك فى بلدنا.	But since the member does not cease from its natural function, it is not proper to accept the statement of one who claims that a member should be fractured, although many ignorant doctors and bonesetters in our country do this.
وهذا الفعل مذموم جدّا يؤدّى الى غرر عظيم أيسره العطب، لكن إن كان العوج والتعقّد طريّا فينبغى أن ينطل بالماء الذى قد طبخ فيه الحشائش المرخية مثل ورق الخطمىّ وأصله وإكليل الملك ونحو ذلك.	And this action is very deplorable, leading to great danger and disability, but if the crookedness and distortion are slight, it is proper that it should be treated with a plaster that has been cooked with mercurial herbs such as paper of the mulberry tree and its roots and myrtle.
ويضمد بالأضمدة المرخية كالدياخيلون المحكم الصنعة او يؤخذ لعاب أصل الخطمىّ ويضرب مع شحم الدجاج ودهن الشيرج ويضمد به او يؤخذ التين الدسم ويدقّ مع زبل الحمام ونحوها من الأدوية التى تسمّى ناقضة الاندمال.	And it is treated with mercurial plasters, such as the well-made diachylon, or the juice of the mulberry tree root is taken and mixed with chicken fat and mutton tallow and applied therewith, or the fig is taken and crushed with bath dung and similar medicines that are called anti- inflammatory.
وقذ يتحلّل التعقّد بالدلك الدائم الرقيق الذى يكون بالأيدى وتستعمل حركة العضو الى كلّ جهة فى الأوقات كلّها، فإن كان الاعوجاج قد قدم واشتدّ وتحجّر ودعت الضرورة الى علاجه بالحديد.	And if the distortion is loosened by a permanent, gentle poultice that is applied to the area and movement of the member in all directions at all times, then if the crookedness has advanced and intensified and become chronic, and necessity calls for its treatment with iron.
فينبغى أن تشقّ أعلاه وتطلق اتّصال العظم وتقطع ما فضل من التعقّد او العظم بمقاطع لطاف وتستعمل الرفق فى ذلك بجهد وعناية، ثمّ تعالج الجرح بما تقدّم ذكره حتّى يبرأ،.	It is necessary to dissect the upper part and release the bone connection, and cut off what remains of the complication or bone with fine sections, and to use bandages in this with effort and care, then to treat the wound with what has been previously mentioned until it heals.
الفصل الثالث والعشرون.	The twenty-ninth chapter.
فى القول فى الفكّ.	Surgery of the mouth.
الفكّ هو خروج مفصل من المفاصل عن موضعه فيعوّق عن الحركة ويقبح شكل العضو ويحدث على العليل أوجاعا وآلاما شديدة، فمتى عرض لأحد فكّ فينبغى أن يبادر من حينه الى ردّه.	A dislocation is the exit of a joint from its place, so it opposes movement and deforms the shape of the organ, and causes severe pains and aches in the affected area, so when a dislocation is presented to one of them, he should hasten to reduce it.
لا يؤخّره البتّة فإنّه إن أخّر تورّم الموضع ورما يعسر معه ردّ الفكّ، فلذلك لا ينبغى أن يؤخّر ولا يحرّك ولا يمدّ فى حين تورّمه لأنّه كثيرا ما يحدث على العليل تشنّج وأوجاع مؤذية.	He should not delay, for if he delays, the swelling of the place will occur and it will be difficult to reduce the dislocation, therefore it is not advisable to delay or move or stretch while it is swollen because it often causes severe spasms and painful aches on the affected area.
ولكن اذا عرض ذلك فينبغى أن يبادر الى فصد العليل ثمّ يترك حتّى يسكن الورم قليلا ثمّ ينطل العضو بالماء الحارّ والدهن ثمّ يردّ برفق ويعالج كلّ عضو بما يأتى ذكره فى موضعه.	But if it is presented, he should hasten to bleed the affected area, then leave it until the swelling subsides a little, then anoint the organ with hot water and oil, then reduce it gently and treat each organ with what has been mentioned according to its place.
وقد رتّبت فصول الفكّ أيضا على حسب ما تقدّم فى الكسر من أعلى البدن الى أسفله،.	And the reduction of dislocations is also similar to what has been previously mentioned in fractures, from the top of the body to the bottom.
الفصل الرابع والعشرون.	The twenty-ninth chapter was incorrect, it should be: The twenty ninth chapter does not match this
فى علاج فكّ اللحى الأسفل.	On the treatment of dislocation of the lower jaw.
قلّ ما تتخلّغ الفكّان إلّا فى الندرة وخلعهما يكون على أحد وجهين إمّا أن يزولا عن مواضعهما زوالا يسيرا فيسترخيا قليلا وإمّا أن يتخلعا تخلّعا تامّا كاملا حتّى يسترخيا.	The two jaws rarely become dislocated unless they are loose, and their looseness is either slight, in which case they only slightly protrude from their place, or it is complete, in which case they completely dislodge.
الى نحو الصدر حتّى يسيل لعاب العليل ولا يستطيع إمساكه ولا يطيق أن يطبّق فكّه ويتلجلج لسانه بالكلام، فأمّا إن كان تخلّعه يسيرا فقد يرجع فى أكثر الأحوال من ذاته بأيسر شىء.	Towards the chest, so that the saliva of the affected area drips, and he cannot hold it in nor can he keep his mouth closed, and his tongue stammers with speech, but if the dislocation is slight, then it often returns by itself with minimal effort.
وأمّا إن كان الخلع تامّا كاملا فينبغى أن تستعجل ردّه بسرعة ولا تؤخّره البتّة وهو أن يمسك خادم رأس العليل ويدخل الطبيب إبهام يده الواحدة فى أصل الفكّ فى داخل فمه إن كان الفكّ من الجهة الواحدة.	If the dislocation is complete, it is not advisable to hasten its reduction, and one should not delay, which means that a servant should hold the patient's head and the doctor should insert his index finger into the patient's mouth, at the base of the jaw, if the dislocation is on one side.
او يدخل إبهاميه جميعا إن كان الفكّ من الجهتين وسائر أصابع يديه من خارج يسوّى بها ويأمر العليل أن يرخى فكّه ويطلقه للذهاب الى كلّ ناحية والطبيب يسوّى الفكّ ويدفع الفكّ حتّى يرجع الى موضعه.	He should insert both his index fingers if the dislocation is on both sides and the rest of his fingers from outside will press and the patient will be ordered to open his jaw and turn it to all directions, and the doctor will press the jaw and push it until it returns to its place.
فإن عسر ردّه ولا سيّما إن كانت الفكّان جميعا فاستعمل الكماد بالماء الحارّ والدهن حتّى يسهل ردّهما ولا تؤخّر ردّهما البتّة كما قلنا، فإذا رجعا واستويا وانطبق فم العليل ولم يسترخيا فحينئذ فضع عليهما رفائد الخرق مع قيروطىّ قد صنع من شمع ودهن ورد.	For if it is difficult to reduce, and the two jaws are not in their place, then use hot water and fat to make them easy to reduce, and do not delay their reduction, as we have said. When they return and are in their place, and the patient's mouth is closed and does not become dislocated, then apply splints of cloth with bandages made from wax, fat, and rosewater.
ثمّ تربط برفق برباط مسترخى، ويكون نوم العليل على ظهره ورأسه مثقّف بين وسادتين لئلّا يحرّكه يمينا ولا شمالا ولا يتكلّف مضغ شىء بل يجعل غذاءه حسوا ليّنا.	Then it should be bandaged with a soft bandage, and the patient should sleep on his back with his shoulders between two pillows so that he does not move to the right or left, nor bend his neck, but rather takes his food liquid.
حتّى اذا ذهب الألم وانعقد الفكّ فليأكل ما بدا له، وليستعمل ذلك برفق ولا يتحامل على فتح فمه عند الأكل والشرب والتثاؤب حتّى ينعقد الفكّ ويبرأ.	Until the pain has gone and the jaw is consolidated, he should eat what he wants, and do this gently, and not force himself to open his mouth when eating, drinking, or speaking until the jaw is consolidated and healed.
فإن عسر ردّ الفكّين اذا انفكّت فى وقت مّا ولم تنصرف الى مواضعهما فكثيرا ما يحدث من ذلك حمّيات وصداع دائم وربّما انطلق بطن العليل وربّما تقيّأ مرارا محضا فإذا رأيت ذلك فاعلم أنّه تالف.	For if it is difficult to reduce the jaws, and they became dislocated at some time and did not return to their places, often this happens due to fevers and chronic headaches, and sometimes the patient's side becomes weak and sometimes his temples become affected repeatedly, so if you see that, then know that it is a complication.
وكثيرا ما يموت من عرض له ذلك فى عشرة أيّام،.	And often he who has this condition dies within ten days.
الفصل الخامس والعشرون.	The fifth and sixth operations.
فى ردّ فكّ الترقوة وطرف المنكب.	On the reduction of the fractured mandible and the suture of the cheek.
أمّا الترقوة فإنّها لا تنفكّ من الجانب الداخل لاتّصالها بالصدر وقد تنفكّ الى خارج ويتبيّن ذلك للحسّ، وجبرها أن يضطجع العليل على ظهره ويمدّ ذراعيه.	As for the mandible, it does not dislocate from the inner side due to its connection with the chest, but may dislocate outward and this becomes apparent on palpation. The treatment of it is that the patient should lie on his back with his arms extended.
ثمّ تضغط الموضع بكفّك ضغطا بقوّة فإنّها ترجع، ثمّ تضع عليها الضماد والرفائد وتشدّها، وأمّا طرفها الذى يلى المنكب ويتّصل به فليس ينخلع إلّا فى الندرة فإن انخلع يوما مّا فينبغى أن يردّ ويسوّى على ما ذكرنا وما يتهيّأ لك.	Then you should apply pressure to the area with your palm, pressing firmly, for it will then return to its place. Then you put a bandage and splints on it and tighten them. As for its side that is towards the cheek and connected to it, it should not be displaced except in extreme cases, if it does become displaced one day, it would be in accordance with what we mentioned previously and what you will come to understand.
ثمّ تضع عليه الضماد والرفائد والشدّ وتأمر العليل بلزوم الدعة والسكون حتّى يبرأ، وبهذا العلاج بعينه تردّ طرف المنكب اذا زال أيضا عن موضعه،.	Then you put on it a bandage and splints and tighten them, and order the patient to lie down with complete rest and quiet until it heals. With this same treatment, the side of the cheek is also reduced if it has slipped out of its place.
الفصل السادس والعشرون.	The sixth and thirtieth operation.
فى ردّ فكّ المنكب.	On the reduction of a dislocation of the cheek.
اعلم أنّ المنكب إنّما ينفكّ على ثلاثة أوجه أحدها أن ينفكّ الى جهة الإبط الى أسفل والثانى أن ينفكّ الى نحو الصدر وربّما انفكّ الى فوق المنكب وذلك يكون فى الندرة.	Know that the cheek dislocates in three ways: one of them is that it dislocates downwards towards the armpit, the second is that it dislocates towards the chest, and rarely it dislocates above the cheek, and this occurs infrequently.
ولا ينفكّ الى خلف لمكان الكتف ولا ينفكّ الى قدّام لمكان العصب، وأكثر ما ينفكّ ويخرج الى أسفل نحو الإبط ولا سيّما فى الذين لحومهم قليلة لأنّه يخرج فيهم سريعا ويدخل سريعا.	And it does not dislocate backwards due to the presence of the shoulder, nor does it dislocate forwards due to the presence of the nerve. Most often it dislocates and protrudes downwards towards the armpit, especially in those with little flesh, because it exits quickly in them and enters quickly.
وأمّا الذين لحومهم كثيرة فإنّه بخلاف ذلك أعنى أنّه يخرج بعسر ويدخل بعسر، وربّما عرض لبعض الناس ضربة او سقطة فتورّم المنكب ورما حارّا فيظنّ به أنّه قد انفكّ فينبغى أن تمتحن ذلك حتّى تقف على صحّته.	And as for those with a lot of flesh, it is the opposite, namely that it exits with difficulty and enters with difficulty. Perhaps some people experience a blow or a fall, so the cheek becomes swollen and inflamed, and one suspects that it has dislocated, it would be advisable to examine it until you are certain of its condition.
فحينئذ تتقدّم فى علاجه، ويتعرّف الفكّ اذا كان الى أسفل نحو الإبط إن تقرن بين المنكب المفكوكة والمنكب الصحيحة فإنّك تجد بينهما خلافا ظاهرا وتجد رأس المنكب فيه تعقير وتحت الإبط عند اللمس رأس المنكب كأنّه بيضة.	In cases where the elbow is dislocated, and the forearm is bent if it is displaced downwards towards the armpit, you will find that between the abnormal dislocation and the normal position there is an apparent difference, and you will find the head of the humerus with a protrusion, and under the armpit upon palpation the head of the humerus feels like an egg.
ولا يقدر العليل أن يرفع يده الى أذنه ولا أن يحرّكها جميع الحركات، وكذلك إن انفكّ نحو الصدر او الى فوق فإنّك تجد ذلك ظاهرا للمس لا يخفى.	The patient will not be able to raise his hand to his ear, nor to move it in all directions. Similarly, if the forearm is displaced towards the chest or upwards, you will find that obvious to the touch and not hidden.
وهذا الفكّ قد يسهل ردّه اذا. كان طريّا او كان العليل صبيّا، وردّه أن يرفع خادم يده الى فوق ثمّ تجعل أنت إبهامى يديك تحت إبطه وترفع المفصل بقوّة الى فوق الى موضعه والخادم يرفع يده ويمدّها الى فوق.	And this dislocation may be easily reduced if the patient is slender or if he is a young boy, by having a servant raise his hand upwards, then you put your thumbs under his armpits and forcefully lift the joint upwards to its place, while the servant lifts his hand and extends it upwards.
ثمّ يحطّ بها الى أسفل فإنّه يرجع بسرعة، فإن لم يرجع بما ذكرنا وكان للفكّ منذ حدث أيّام كثيرة فينبغى أن يستحمّ العليل فى الماء الحارّ ويستعمل النطول الذى يرخى ويلين مثل أن يطبخ أصل الخطمىّ والحلبة وإكليل الملك فى الماء ويستعمل.	Then he moves it downwards, and it will return quickly. If it does not return with what we have mentioned, and the dislocation has been present for several days, it is advisable that the patient soak in hot water and use a poultice that relaxes and softens, such as the roots of melhout or the leaves of the royal plant, boiled in water.
ثمّ يستلقى العليل على ظهره وتضع تحت إبطه كرة من صوف تكون معتدلة بين الليّن والشدّة ثمّ يجعل الطبيب عقبه على الكرة ويمسك يد العليل بيده ويمدّها الى أسفل.	Then the patient lies on his back and a ball of cotton is placed under his armpit, which is moderate between being too soft and too tight. Then the physician puts his elbow on the ball and holds the patient's hand with his hand, stretching it downwards.
ويدفع الكرة برجله فإنّه يرجع على مقام، وإن شئت رددته على هذا الوجه وهو أن تحضر رجلا أطول من العليل وتوقّفه من ناحية الجنب ويدخل منكبه تحت إبط العليل ويرفع إبطه الى فوق حتّى يكون العليل معلّقا فى الهواء.	And the ball is pushed by his elbow, so it returns to its place. If you want, you can reduce it in this way: a tall man is brought, and he stands at the patient's side, and puts his arm under the patient's armpit, lifting his own armpit upwards, until the patient is suspended in the air.
وخادم آخر يجذب يد العليل الى أسفل بطنه فإن كان العليل خفيفا فينبغى أن يعلّق به شىء آخر ليثقّله فإنّه يرجع الفكّ من ساعته، وقد يردّ أيضا على وجه آخر.	And another servant pulls the patient's hand downwards, and if the patient is light in weight, it is advisable that another person be suspended with him to hold him steady, so the dislocation returns to its place. It can also be reduced in another way.
وهو أن تركز فى الأرض خشبة طويلة يكون رأسها مستدير الشكل كفهر الهاون ليس بغليظ ولا برقيق ثم توضع تحت إبط العليل بعد أن تضع على رأس الخشبة خرقا ليّنا والعليل واقف على طول الخشبة.	And that a long splint is placed on the ground, with its head rounded in shape like the back of a saddle, neither too thick nor too thin, then it is put under the armpit of the patient after a soft cloth is placed on the head of the splint and the patient lies on top along the length of the splint.
ثمّ تمدّ يده الى أسفل من الناحية الأخرى ويمدّ جسده أيضا من الجهة الأخرى بقوّة فإنّ المفصل يرجع الى موضعه بسرعة، فإن عسر ردّه بجميع ما ذكرنا فاستعمل هذا العلاج وهو أن تأخذ خشبة طولها نحو ذراعين.	Then he stretches his hand to the bottom from the other side and also stretches his body from the other side with force, so that the joint returns to its place quickly. If it is difficult to return, then use all that we have mentioned, and apply this treatment which is to take a splint about two cubits in length.
وعرضها قدر أربع أصابع وغلظها قدر أصبعين يكون لها رأس مستدير ليسهل دخولها فى عمق الإبط على هذه الصورة:.	And its width is four fingers and its thickness is two fingers, with a rounded head so that it easily enters the depth of the armpit in this manner:
ثمّ تربط على الرأس المستدير خرقا ليّنة لئلّا تؤذى الخشبة العليل ثمّ يصيّر تحت الإبط وتمدّ اليد كلّها والذراع على الخشبة الى أسفل وتربط الخشبة على العضد والساعد وطرف اليد.	Then a soft cloth is tied on the rounded head so that the splint does not hurt the patient, then it is bound under the armpit and the hand and forearm are stretched out onto the splint down to the bottom, and the splint is bound on the upper arm and forearm and the edge of the hand.
ثمّ توضع الذراع على عارضة. سلّم بالعرض وتمدّ اليد الى أسفل ويترك سائر الجسد معلّقا من الناحية الأخرى فإنّ المفصل يدخل من ساعته، فإذا تمّ دخوله على أىّ وجه أمكن فينبغى أن توضع تحت الابط كرة معتدلة القدر من صوف.	Then the forearm is placed on a staff, with the palm facing upwards and the hand stretched out to the bottom, and the rest of the body is left hanging from the other side, so that the joint enters into its place. If it has entered correctly, then a moderate-sized ball of cotton can be placed under the armpit.
ثمّ يحمل الضماد المهيّأ من غبار الرحى مع اللبان وبياض البيض على المنكب كلّه كما يدور من فوق ثمّ تشدّ الكرة من تحت الإبط شدّا محكما ويدار بالرباط على الضماد من فوق وتعلّق يده الى عنقه.	Then a poultice made from the powder of dried plants with albumen and white of egg is applied to the whole shoulder, as it surrounds from above, then the ball under the armpit is pressed firmly and the bandage is wrapped around the poultice from above, and the hand is hung on his neck.
ويترك لا يحرّك يده سبعة أيّام، وينبغى أن يجعل غذاء العليل قليلا حتّى يقوى العضو فهو أسرع لبروئه، ثمّ تحلّ بعد السبعة الأيّام او الخمسة ويدرّب بالحركة فإن ثبت ولم يسترخ فقد برئ.	And he is left without moving his hand for seven days, and it is recommended that the patient's diet be light until the member strengthens, for this is faster for recovery. Then after seven or five days, the dressing is changed and movement is started, if it has stabilized and not become putrid, then it has healed.
فإن كان المفصل ينخلع مرارا كثيرة لرطوبة تعرض له او لعلّة أخرى فينبغى أن يستعمل فيه الكىّ بالثلاثة سفافيد على ما تقدّم فى باب الكىّ، فإن صنعت هذا كلّه وحللت الرباط بعد سبعة أيّام ولم يثبت المفصل.	For if the joint is repeatedly moved due to weakness or another ailment, it would be advisable to use a plaster with three bandages as previously mentioned in the chapter on plasters. If this is all done and the splint is removed after seven days, the joint will not become stable.
ورددت الضماد والشدّ عليه مرّات ولم يثبت وسقط واسترخى ولم تستطع رفعها الى فوق فاعلم أنّ عصبها الذى فى رأس المنكب قد انقطع او امتدّ او استرخى فاعلم حينئذ أنّ المفصل لا يثبت فى موضعه أبدا.	The forearm was pulled and stretched several times but it did not become stable, and it fell and became flaccid, and I was unable to raise it up, so I knew that the nerve which is in the head of the shoulder had been severed or stretched or become flaccid. So I knew then that the joint would never stabilize in its place.
وأمّا الفكّ الذى يكون نحو الصدر والثدى وإلى خلف فردّه يكون بالدفع والمدّ بالأيدى حتّى يرجع، ويستعمل فيه سائر الشدّ والعلاج حتّى يبرأ، فإن عرض بعد البرؤ جسا فى العضو وأبطأ فى الحركة.	And as for the jaw that is near the chest and the nipple and towards the back of the clavicle, it is treated by pushing and pulling with the hands until it returns to its place, and all kinds of bandages and remedies are used until it heals. If after healing there is a prominence in the member and a slowness in movement.
فليستعمل العليل الحمّام مرارا كثيرة حتّى يلين ذلك الجسا ويعود الى طبيعته الأولى،.	So let the warm compress be applied many times until that prominence becomes soft and returns to its original nature.
الفصل السابع والعشرون.	The Twenty-Seventh Section.
فى علاج فكّ المرفق.	On the treatment of the elbow.
إنّ مفصل المرفق ينفكّ بعسر وكذلك يرجع بعسر أيضا وهو ينفكّ الى جميع الجهات ولا سيّما الى قدّام او الى خلف وفكّه لا يخفى عليك لأنّه واقع تحت البصر وتحت اللمس الى أىّ شكل انفكّ.	The elbow joint dislocates with difficulty and also returns with difficulty, and it dislocates in all directions, not just forwards or backwards. Its displacement is not hidden from you because it is under observation and under touch, whichever shape the dislocation takes.
وإذا قرنت المرفق المفكوك بالصحيح تبيّن ذلك لك بيانا ظاهرا بتقعير المفصل ولا يستطيع أن يثنى الذراع ولا يمسّ به منكبه، وينبغى أن تبادر وتردّ الفكّ من ساعتك قبل أن يعرض له ورم حارّ.	And if the dislocated elbow is compared to the healthy one, it will become clear to you with a visible sign by the deformity of the joint and that he cannot bend his arm nor touch his shoulder with it. It would be advisable for you to reduce the dislocation quickly before it becomes complicated with hot inflammation.
فإنّه إن عرض له ورم حارّ عسر ردّه وربّما لم يبرأ البتّة ولا سيّما اذا كان الفكّ الى خلف فإنّه أردأ ما يكون من جميع أنواع الفكّ وأشدّها وجعا وكثيرا ما ينزل معه الموت.	For if it becomes inflamed with hot inflammation, it will be difficult to reduce it and sometimes the reduction does not heal properly, especially if the dislocation is backwards, for this is the most difficult of all kinds of dislocations and the most painful, and often death occurs with it.
وجبره اذا كان ممّا يمكن أن يرجع أن يمدّ خادم يده بكلتى يديه وذراعه مبسوطة ويدا الطبيب من فوق المرفق ومن تحته وهو يدفع المفصل بإبهامى يديه جميعا او بأصل كفّه حتّى يرجع الى موضعه.	If the fracture is a type that can be reduced, the servant should stretch out his hands with his arms, and the doctor's hands are from above the elbow and below it, while he reduces the fracture with both of his hands or with the base of his palm until it returns to its place.
وأمّا إن كان الفكّ الى قدّام فقد يرجع بأن تثنى اليد بمرّة حتّى تضرب بأصل كفّها المنكب الذى تحاذيه، فإن لم يجب الفكّ الى الرجوع فاستعمل المدّ الشديد القوىّ جدّا وهو أن يمدّ الذراع خادمان.	And if the dislocation is in the elbow, it can be reduced by flexing the hand strongly until the base of the palm strikes the olecranon that faces it. If the dislocation does not respond to reduction, then a strong and forceful traction is applied, which is that the servant stretches out his arms.
ويمسك العليل خادمان أيضا لئلّا يزول عند المدّ ثمّ تدار الذراع الى كلّ جهة بعد أن تلفّ على يده ثوبا مطويّا او قماطا عريضا، وإذا باشر بيديه الطبيب المفصل مسحها بدهن ليكون تعين فى إزلاق المفصل بسهولة.	And the servant also grasps the forearm firmly so that it does not move during traction, then the arm is turned to each side after wrapping a folded cloth or a bandage around his hand. And when the doctor palpates the joint with his hands, he massages them with oil to make it easy to manipulate the joint with ease.
ثمّ يدفع المفصل دفعا شديدا حتّى يرجع، وبعد رجوعه ينبغى أن يحمل عليه الضماد الذى فيه قبض وتجفيف مع بياض البيض ويشدّ شدّا محكما وتعلّق الذراع من عنق العليل وتترك أيّاما.	Then he reduces the joint with a strong reduction until it returns to its place. After it has returned, it is proper to apply a splint that has compression and relaxation with a white bandage, and it is tightened tightly and the arm is suspended from the servant's neck and left for some time.
ثمّ تحلّ فإن ثبت المفصل فى موضعه فحلّ الرباط عنه واتركه، وإن رأيت المفصل لم يشتدّ نعمّا فأعد الضماد والرباط واتركه أيضا أيّاما حتّى يشتدّ ثمّ حلّه، فإن حدث له جسا بعد رجوع المفصل وحلّه.	Then the bandage is loosened, for if the joint has been established in its place, the splint and bandage are removed. And if you see that the joint has not become stiff, then apply the splint and bandage again and leave it for some time until it becomes stiff, then remove it. For a abscess may occur after the reduction of the joint and its removal.
وعسر فى الحركة فليستعمل الترطيب فى الحمّام والدلك اللطيف والغمز حتّى يلين او اجعل على المفصل ألية كبش سمين ثمّ اربطها واتركها عليه يوما وليلة ثمّ انزعها وأدخله الحمّام، فإذا عرق فاعرك المفصل عركا معتدلا.	And if it is difficult to move, then let the application of heat in a warm bath and gentle and moderate massage until it becomes loose. Or make an plaster of egg whites and flour, then apply it to the joint and leave it for a day and night, then remove it and put him in the bath. If there is no improvement, then massage the joint with a moderate massage.
ثمّ أعد عليه الألية مرّة وثانية وثالثة مع دخول الحمّام حتّى يلين، وإن شئت أن تجعل عليه خثى البقر رطبا مستخفّا مع السمن وشدّه عليه افعل ذلك مرّات فإنّه يلين ويرجع الى حالته الأولى،.	Burnt his callus with a hot iron twice or thrice with the entrance of the blacksmiths, and if you like, make for him a plaster of cow dung mixed with butter and bind it upon him, doing that several times, then it will become soft and return to its first state.
الفصل الثامن والعشرون.	The twenty-eighth chapter.
فى علاج فكّ المعصم.	On the treatment of a dislocated shoulder.
معصم اليد كثيرا ما ينفكّ وردّ فكّه يسهل خلاف سائر المفاصل إلّا أنّه ينبغى أن يسرع بردّ فكّه الساعة التى ينفكّ فيها قبل أن يرم الموضع او يعرض فيه ورم حارّ،.	A dislocation of the shoulder often occurs and its reduction is easy, unlike other joints, but it is necessary to hurry the reduction at the time it becomes dislocated before swelling occurs or a hematoma forms.
وردّ فكّه أن تضع معصم العليل على لوح ويمدّ خادم يده ويضع الطبيب كفّه على نتو المفصل ويدفعه حتّى يرجع إلّا أنّه ينبغى أن ينظر إن كان الفكّ قد زال الى باطن اليد.	The reduction is done by placing the dislocated shoulder on a board and an assistant extends his arm, and the physician puts his hand on the prominence of the joint and presses it until it returns, but it is necessary to check if the dislocation has moved towards the inside of the arm.
فليضع العليل ظاهر يده على اللوح عند المدّ والردّ وإن كان الفكّ بارزا الى ظاهر اليد فليكن وضع يده الباطنة على اللوح لتقع يد الطبيب على نفس نتو المفصل، فإن رجع من حينه وإلّا فشدّه بضماد مسكن للورم.	Let the patient place the outer side of his arm on the board during extension and reduction, and if the dislocation is visible towards the outside of the arm, then let him place the inner side of his arm on the board so that the physician's hand falls on the same prominence of the joint, if it returns to its place, otherwise bind it with a soothing poultice for the swelling.
واتركه لا تعاوده فإنّه لا يحتمل ولا تستطيع على ردّه بعد أن تمضى له أيّام إلّا أنّ المفصل يبقى على عوجه ولا يضرّ العليل شيئا إلّا إن استرخت اليد ولم تستطع على قبض شىء.	And if the arm is left without reduction, it will not be endured and it cannot be reduced after several days have passed, except that the joint remains in its dislocated state, and does not harm the patient except that the arm becomes contracted and cannot grasp anything.
فحينئذ تعلم أنّ العصب انقطع او ترضّض فلا حيلة فيه إلّا أن يشدّ بالكىّ فربّما نفع وربّما لم ينفع ذلك شيئا، فإذا تمّ ردّ المعصم فاحمل عليه الضماد الذى وصفنا ثمّ يشدّ ويترك خمسة أيّام.	So it seems that the nerve is cut off or bruised, for there is no sensation in it except to bind with a plaster, which sometimes helps and sometimes does not help at all. If the reduction of the shoulder has been completed, then apply the poultice that we described, then bind it and leave it for five days.
ثمّ يحلّ وتدرّب اليد فإن تعذّرت حركتها وعرض فيها شىء من الجسا فليّنها بالماء المسخّن والعرك مرّات حتّى تلين،.	If the tendon is cut and the hand is paralyzed so that its movement is impaired and a part of the forearm is affected, then let it be nourished with the ointment made from melon and other herbs many times until it becomes supple.
الفصل التاسع والعشرون.	The ninth chapter on surgical operations.
فى علاج فكّ الأصابع.	On the treatment of dislocation of the toes.
الأصابع قد تنفكّ الى كلّ جهة فمتى انفكّ منها أصبع الى ظاهر الكفّ او باطنها فمدّ الأصبع وادفع الفكّ بإبهامك حتّى يرجع، ثمّ اربط رأس الأصبع وعلّقها نحو الجهة التى انفكّت اليها.	The toes can become dislocated in any direction, so when one of them is dislocated to the back or the palm of the hand, stretch the toe and push the dislocation with your thumb until it returns, then bandage the head of the toe and suspend it towards the direction from which it was dislocated.
واتركها يومين ثمّ أطلقها ومدّها حتّى تعتدل قائمة يومها ذلك فإذا كان بالليل ربطتها على الوصف نفسه فلا تزال تحلّها بالنهار وتدرّبها بالحركة وتربطها بالليل تفعل ذلك أيّاما حتّى تشتدّ.	Leave it for two days, then loosen it and stretch it until its condition improves, if it is during the night, bind it in the same way, but do not discontinue loosening it during the day and exercising it with movement, and binding it at night, repeat this for several days until it becomes strong.
وكذلك تفعل بها إن انفكّت الى باطن اليد فتربطها الى نحو الجهة نفسها وافعل بها فعلتك الأولى حتّى تبرأ، وكذلك افعل بها متى انفكّت الى سائر الجهات،.	And you do the same with it if it dislocates to the palm of the hand, so you bind it towards the same direction and perform on it your first action until it recovers, and you do the same with it whenever it dislocates to other directions.
الفصل الثلاثون.	The thirty-first chapter.
فىعلاج فكّ خرز الظهر.	On the treatment of dislocation of the vertebrae of the back.
متى حدث فكّ لخرزة من خرزات الظهر او العنق الفكّ التامّ او زالت خرزات كثيرة عن مواضعها فلا علاج فيه لأنّ الموت يسرع الى العليل.	If a dislocation occurs of one of the vertebrae of the back or neck, and it is a complete dislocation, or many vertebrae are displaced from their positions, then there is no treatment for it, because death will soon occur.
وعلامة ذلك أنّ براز العليل يخرج من غير إرادة لا يستطيع إمساكه وكثيرا ما يسترخى منه بعض أعضائه إمّا ساقاه وإمّا ذراعاه او واحدة منها، وأمّا إن زالت خرزة واحدة عن موضعها فكثيرا ما تزول.	And the sign of this is that the feces and urine come out without control, he is not able to hold them, and often some of his limbs become paralyzed, either his legs or his arms, or one of them. And if one vertebra becomes dislocated from its position, it often slips back.
ويكون زوالها الى أربع جهات فالتى تزول الى خلف تسمّى حدبة، وأمّا علاجها فهو أن تنظر فإن كانت الحدبة قد حدثت من الصبا فلا علاج فيها ولا منها برء البتّة، وأمّا التى حدثت عن سقطة او ضربة ونحو ذلك.	Its falling will be towards four directions, so the one that falls to the back is called a limitation. As for its treatment, it is that you should look, if the limitation occurred due to a tumor, there is no treatment for it or from it except surgical excision. As for the one that occurred from a fall or a blow and similar things.
فقد ذكرتها الأوائل بضروب من العلاج بكلام طويل لا يعود أكثره بفائدة وقد اختصرت من ذلك ما يغنى قليله عن كثير ممّا أتوا به من تقربتى للمعنى وشرحى له وصوّرت الآلة خلاف ما بيّنوه وشرحوه.	The ancients mentioned it with various treatments in lengthy speech, which does not return much benefit. I have summarized what is sufficient, whose small amount is equivalent to a large quantity of what they brought, and I have clarified the meaning and explained it, and I have fashioned the instrument contrary to what they described and explained.
فأقول إنّ الحدبة التى تحدث من قدّام فى الصدر فلا حيلة فيها ولا برء منها وكذلك التى الى الجهتين أيضا وإنّما تعالج منها التى تحدث فى الظهر خاصّة بما أنا واصفه، وهو أن تمدّ العليل على وجهه.	I say that the limitation that occurs from a tumor in the chest, there is no trick for it and no surgical excision of it. And likewise, the one to the two sides as well. But the only one that can be treated is the one that occurs on the back, specifically because I described it, which is that you extend the razor over its surface.
على دكّان مستو بقرب حائط وتبسط تحته وطاء رطبا لئلّا يؤذى صدره ثمّ تضع خشبة قائمة مغروسة فى حفرة فى الأرض فى طرف الدكّان نحو رأسه وخشبة أخرى نحو رجليه فى الطرف الآخر من الدكّان.	On a bench, aligned with the edge of a basin, and under it a soft fabric is spread so that he does not hurt his chest. Then, a vertical stick, greased with butter, is placed in a hole in the ground at one end of the bench near his head, and another stick at the other end of the bench near his feet.
وخادم يمسك الخشبة ولتكن غير موثّقة فى الحفرة وخادم آخر يمسك الأخرى على تلك الهيئة ثمّ تلفّ على صدر العليل وتحت إبطيه بقماط ليّن وثيق وتمدّ طرف القماط الى الخشبة التى عند رأسه وتربطه فيها.	A servant holds the stick, and let it not be fixed in the hole, and another servant holds the other in this manner. Then, a soft bandage is wrapped around the patient's chest and under his armpits, and one end of the bandage is extended to the stick near his head and tied to it.
ثم تشدّ بقماط آخر فوق وركيه وفوق ركبتيه وعند عرقوبيه ثمّ تجمع الرباطات كلّها وتربطها فى الخشبة الأخرى التى عند رجليه ثمّ يمدّ كلّ خادم الى جهته الخشبة بالرباط ولا تزول الخشبتان من مواضعها المركوزة فيها.	Then, another bandage is tightened over his hips and over his knees and near his groins. Then, all the bandages are gathered and tied to the other stick which is near his feet. Each servant pulls the stick with the bandage to his side, and the sticks do not move from their placed positions.
إلّا أنّهما غير موثّقة كما قلنا والطبيب يضع كفّيه على الخرزة بقوّة حتّى ترجع او يضع عليها لوحا ثمّ يتّكئ على اللوح برجليه حتّى ترجع، فإن لم ترجع بهذا العلاج فتأخذ لوحا يكون طوله نحو ثلاثة أذرع.	Unless it is unworthy as we said, and the doctor places his palms on the spleen with force until it returns or he places a board on it then leans on the board with his knees until it returns, if it does not return with this treatment, he takes a board whose length is about three forearms.
وتحفر فى الحائط الذى قلنا أن يكون بقرب العليل مكانا تدخل فيه طرف اللوح ثمّ تضع وسط اللوح على الحدبة ويضع رجليه الطبيب على الطرف الآخر ويشدّ شدّا جيّدا حتّى يضغظ الحرزة.	And a hole is dug in the side that we said should be near the sick person, a place where the end of the board enters, then the middle of the board is placed on the convexity and the doctor's legs are placed on the other end and he tightens it well until the spleen is compressed.
وترجع الى مكانها، وإن شئت أن تصنعه باللولب الذى يفتل باليد وهو أن تغرز فى الأرض عند رأس العليل فى آخر الدكّان خشبتين يكون طولهما ذراعا وعند رجليه فى آخر الدكّان أيضا خشبتين.	And it returns to its place, and if you wish, you can fix it with the loop that is operated by hand, which is that you plant in the ground at the head of the sick person, at the end of the bench, two wooden pieces whose length is one forearm, and at his legs, at the end of the bench also, two wooden pieces.
وليكن بعد ما بين كلّ خشبة شبرا وقد صنع فى كلّ خشبة ثقبة فيها يجرى اللولب وتوثّق الخشب كلّها فى الأرض نعمّا حتّى لا تتحرّك البتّة وتدخل عودا مدوّرا وهو اللولب الذى يلوى فيه الرباط فى ثقبتى الخشبتين.	And let there be, after that, between each wooden piece a notch, and a hole has been made in each wooden piece through which the loop passes, and all the wood is fixed firmly in the ground so that the board does not move, and a bent rod, which is the loop that wraps around the strap in the holes of the two wooden pieces.
وفى طرفه ثقب قد وثّق فيه عود طوله شبر بما يلوى وفى الخشبتين الأخريين مثل ذلك، ثمّ تشدّ الرباط الذى شددت فى صدر العليل فى اللولب الذى عند رأسه والرباطات التى شددت فى ساقيه فى اللولب الذى عند رجليه.	And in its end there is a hole, in which a rod of the length of a notch has been fixed, and which wraps around, and in the two other wooden pieces there is something similar, then the strap that was tightened on the chest of the sick person is tightened in the loop that is at his head, and the straps that were tightened on his legs are tightened in the loop that is at his legs.
ثمّ يقف عند كلّ لولب خادم يفتل يده بالمفتل الذى يلوى به اللولب والطبيب يسوّى الحدبة على ما قدّمنا، وهذه صورة اللولب والدكّان والعليل:.	Then a servant who operates with his hand stands at each loop, with the bent rod that wraps around the loop, and the doctor straightens the convexity as we have described, and this is the image of the loop and the bench and the sick person.
ثمّ بعد أن ترجع الفقارة ويستوى الموضع فينبغى أن تحمل الضماد المجفّف ببياض البيض ثمّ المشاقة ثمّ تضع من فوق الضماد جبيرة من لوح يكون عرضه ثلاث أصابع أو نحوها ويكون طوله قدر ما يأخذ موضع الحدبة.	After the suture is completed and the area has been adjusted, it is recommended that you apply a dressing of lint to the wound, then a compress, and after that, a plaster cast should be placed on top of the dressing made from a board, with a width of three fingers or so, and a length sufficient to cover the area where the cast will be applied.
وعلى بعض الخرز الصحيح ثمّ يربط بالرباط الذى ينبغى ويستعمل العليل الغذاء اللطيف حتّى يبرأ، فإن بقى بعض النتو فى الموضع فى آخر البرء فينبغى أن تستعمل الأدوية التى ترخى وتليّن مع استعمال اللوح الذى وصفنا زمانا طويلا.	And on top of the wound a suitable poultice is applied, then it is tied with a bandage that is appropriate and a gentle, nourishing plaster is used until it heals, if some discharge remains in the area after the healing has completed, it is recommended that drugs which soften and loosen be applied along with using the plaster as we described for a long time.
وقد تستعمل فى ذلك صفيحة رصاص، وقد يعرض نتو فى آخر خرزات الظهر فيظنّ به تخلّع ويكون ذلك عظم زائد قد نتا فلا تتعرّض له بهذا العلاج فربّما حدث الموت،.	And a plaster of lead might be used for this, and sometimes discharge appears at the end of the treatment on the back, and it is thought that there is a piece of bone that has come out, but do not treat it with this treatment, for it has sometimes happened that death occurred.
الفصل الحادى والثلاثون.	The 32nd chapter.
فى علاج الورك المفكوك.	On the treatment of the ankle dislocation.
اعلم أنّ مفصل الورك ومفصل المنكب إنّما يعرض لهما الفكّ فقط ولا يعرض لهما ما يعرض لسائر المفاصل من الزوال اليسير والتقعير، ومفصل الورك ينفكّ على أربعة أوجه.	Know that the ankle joint and the knee joint, only dislocation occurs to them, and they do not have what occurs to the rest of the joints from sprains and contusions, and the ankle joint is dislocated on four sides.
وذلك أنّه ينفكّ الى داخل وإلى خارج وإلى قدّام وإلى خلف وأكثر ما ينفكّ الى داخل وقلّ ما ينفكّ الى قدّام او الى خلف، وعلامة فكّه الى داخل أنّك اذا قرنت ساق العليل الصحيحة بالمريضة تكون أطول.	And that it dislocates inward, outward, forward and backward, and most often it dislocates inward, and rarely does it dislocate forward or backward, and a sign of its dislocation inward is that if you compare the healthy leg with the afflicted one, it will be longer.
وتكون الركبة ناتية أكثر من الصحيحة ولا يقدر العليل أن يثنى رجله عند الأربيّة ويكون الموضع الذى يلى الأربيّة وارما ورما بيّنا من قبل أن رأس الفخذ قد صار الى هناك.	And the knee will be more swollen than the healthy one, and the patient will not be able to bend his leg at the hip, and the area near the hip will be painful and tender, and it seems as if the head of the thigh had moved there.
وعلامة الذى يعرض له الفكّ الى خارج تكون أعراضه ضدّ هذه الأعراض، وعلامة الذى يعرض له الفكّ الى قدّام فإنّه يبسط ساقه على التمام إلّا أنّه لايثنيها من غير ألم يكون فى الركبة وإن رام المشى لم يقدر على ذلك الى قدّام.	And the sign of dislocation outward is that its symptoms are opposite to these symptoms, and a sign of dislocation forward is that he stretches his leg completely but does not bend it without pain being in the knee, and if the hip is touched he will not be able to move it forward.
ويحتبس بوله وترم اربيّته وعند المشى يكون وطئه على العقب، وعلامة الذى يعرض له الفكّ الى خلف أن لا يبسط الركبة ولا يقدر على أن يثنّيها قبل أن يثنى الأربيّة وتكون ساقه أيضا أقصر من الأخرى.	It is bent with its tendons and the shortness of its muscles, and when it walks it puts its heel on the ground, and a sign for the one whose jaw is dislocated is that he cannot open his knee nor can he bend it before bending the hamstring, and his leg is also shorter than the other.
والأربيّة مسترخية ويكون رأس الفخذ عند موضع الخاصرة بيّنا، وأمّا ردّ أنواع هذا الفكّ فهو أن تنظر فإن كان الفكّ قديما قد أزمن بصاحبه ولم يحاول ردّه وبقى على حالته فليس فيه علاج البتّة.	And the hamstring is relaxed and the head of the thigh at the place of the hip joint is evident, and as for returning the types of this dislocation, it is that you look and see, if the dislocation is old and has become chronic with its companion and he did not attempt to return it and it remained in its state, then there is no treatment for it.
فلا ينبغى أن تعرض له، وأمّا الذى فكّه حديث وكان من أىّ نوع كان من الأربع الأوجه من الفكّ فبادر الى أن تلوى المفصل وتمدّه الى داخل وإلى خارج وتحرّكه يمنة ويسرة فربّما.	It is not suitable to show it, and as for the one whose dislocation is recent and was of any of the four types of dislocations, then hasten to massage the joint and stretch it inward and outward and move it right and left repeatedly.
رجع ولم يحتج الى غيره من العلاج، فإن لم يرجع هكذا فينبغى أن تعدّ خادما أيّدا قويّا فيمدّ ساقه من أسفل إمّا بيديه وإمّا بقماط يربط على ساقه فوق الركبة وخادم آخر يمدّه من فوق.	If it returns and does not require anything else for treatment, then if it does not return in this way, it is suitable that you prepare two strong servants, one of whom stretches his leg from below, either with his hands or with a bandage tied on his leg above the knee, and another servant who stretches it from above.
بأن يدخل يديه من تحت إبطيه ثمّ يشدّ بقماط ليّن على أصل الفخذ ويمسك بطرف القماط خادم آخر ثالث ويكون مدّه إمّا من قدّام من ناحية الأربيّة الى ناحية الترقوة وإمّا من خلف الى ناحية الظهر.	So that he inserts his hands from under his armpits, then tightens a bandage on the base of the thigh and another servant holds the end of the bandage, and there is a third who stretches it, either from the front from the side of the hamstring to the side of the hip, or from behind to the side of the back.
ويكون مدّهم كلّهم بمرّة واحدة حتّى يرتفع العليل بجسمه من الأرض ويبقى معلّقا، فإنّ هذا النوع من المدّ نوع مشترك للأنواع الأربعة، فإن رجع الفكّ بما قلنا وإلّا فلا بدّ لكلّ نوع ممّا أذكره من العلاج الخاصّ.	And they all stretch it at once until the dislocated bone rises with his body from the ground and remains suspended, for this type of stretching is a shared type among the four types, if the dislocation returns by what I mentioned earlier, otherwise there is no need for each type of treatment that I will mention.
أمّا ردّه الخاصّ اذا كان الفكّ الى داخل فينبغى أن يستلقى العليل على جنبه الصحيح ثمّ تصيّر قماطا على أصل الفخذ فيما بين رأس الفخذ والموضع الذى تحت الأربيّة.	As for its specific return, if the dislocation is inward, it is suitable that the patient lies on his right side, then a bandage is tied on the base of the thigh between the head of the thigh and the place beneath the hamstring.
ثمّ تمدّ الرباط الى فوق من ناحية الأربيّة الى أعلى البدن الى ناحية الترقوة ثمّ يأخذ خادم آخر قوىّ أيّد بذراعيه ويحتضن الموضع الثخين من الفخذ العليلة ويمدّ الى خارج مدّا شديدا فإنّه يرجع الى موضعه.	The strap is stretched from the side of the armpit to the top of the body, to the side of the axilla, then another servant takes it and puts his arms around the thick part of the upper thigh and strongly stretches it to the outside, then it returns to its place.
وهذا النوع أسهل من سائر أنواع العلاج الذى يكون به ردّ هذا العضو، فإن تعذّر عليك ولم يجبك الى الدخول بهذا النوع من العلاج البتّة فينبغى أن تربط رجلى العليل جميعا برباط قوىّ ليّن على الكعبين وعلى الركبتين.	And this type is easier than other types of treatment that involve the return of this member, if it becomes difficult for you and does not respond to entering with this type of treatment, then it should be bound with a strong strap that is gentle on the ankles and the knees.
ويكون بعد كلّ واحد من صاحبه قدر أربع أصابع وتكون الساق العليلة ممدودة أكثر من الأخرى قدر أصبعين، ثمّ يعلّق العليل على الرأس من خشبة تكون فى البيت ويكون بعده من الأرض قدر ذراعين.	And it will be, after each one of them, a distance of four fingers from its companion, and the upper leg will be stretched more than the other by two fingers, then the thigh is hung on a wooden beam that is in the house, and its distance from the ground is two cubits.
ثمّ تأمر غلاما قويّا أن يحتضن رأس الفخذ ويتعلّق بالعليل غلام آخر ويدفع الغلام الآخر المحتضن للفخذ بقوّة فإنّ المفصل يرجع الى موضعه بسرعة، وأما ردّه الخاصّ اذا كان الفكّ الى خارج.	Then a strong boy is ordered to hold the head of the thigh, and another boy hangs on the thigh, and the other boy who holds the thigh pushes with force, so the joint returns to its place quickly, and as for its proper return, if the thigh was turned outward.
فينبغى أن يضطجع العليل على الدكّان على حسب ما وصفنا فى صاحب الحدبة ويشدّ الرباط على ساقه العليلة خاصّة وعلى صدره ثمّ توضع الخشبتان الواحدة عند رجليه والأخرى عند رأسه ثمّ توضع خشبة زائدة فى وسط الدكّان موثّقة جدّا.	It should be that the thigh is placed on the mattress as we described for the one with the hump, and the strap is tightened on his upper leg specifically and on his chest, then one wooden plank is placed at his feet and another at his head, then an additional wooden plank is placed in the middle of the mattress, tightly secured.
قد لفّ عليها خرق رطبة لئلّا تؤذى العليل لتكون الخشبة بين فخذيه لئلّا ينجذب الى أسفل عند المدّ، ثمّ يمدّ كلّ خادم الى جهته والطبيب يسوّى الورك بيديه، فإن أجاب الى الرجوع.	A rag is wrapped around it, a little damp, so the thigh does not get hurt, and the plank is between his thighs, a little raised when stretched, then each servant stretches to his side, and the physician adjusts the wrack with his hands, if it responds to the return.
وإلّا فضع عليه اللوح وكبّسه على ما ذكرنا فى الحدبة سواء إلّا أنّه ينبغى أن يكون اضطجاع العليل على جنبه الصحيح، وإذا كان الخلع الى قدّام فينبغى أن تمدّ ساق العليل بمرّة وهو على هذا الوصف بعينه على الدكّان.	And if not, a plank is placed on him and he is treated as we mentioned for the hump, except that it is necessary for the thigh to be placed on its right side, and if the dislocation is forward, it should be that the thigh of the one with the dislocation is stretched suddenly, and he is in this description alone on the mattress.
ويضع الطبيب كفّ يده اليمنى على الأربيّة العليلة ثمّ يضغطها باليد الأخرى ومع ذلك يصيّر الضغط ممدودا الى أسفل الى ناحية الركبة، وإذا كان الخلع الى خلف فليس ينبغى أن يمدّ العليل الى أسفل.	The physician places the palm of his right hand on the upper arm and then presses it with his other hand, and he draws the pressure downwards towards the elbow, and if the dislocation is posterior, he should not stretch the forearm downwards.
وهو مرتفع على الأرض بل ينبغى أن يكون موضوعا على شىء صلب كما ينبغى أن يكون أيضا من انفكّ وركه الى خارج على حسب ما ذكرنا من اضطجاعه على الدكّان وهو على وجهه والرباطات مشدودة.	And it should not be elevated above the ground, but rather placed on a solid object, as it is also necessary to flex his knee outward according to what we mentioned of its distortion on the bench while he is on his face and the straps are tightened.
على ما قلنا آنفا وينبغى أن يستعمل الكبس باللوح أيضا على الموضع الذى خرج المفصل اليه، فإذا كمل رجوع مفصل الورك على ما ينبغى وعلامة رجوعه لا تخفى عليك وهو أن تمدّ ساقى العليل.	As we said earlier, and it is necessary to use the press with the board also on the place where the joint has come out, so if the return of the knee joint is completed as it should be, and the sign of its return is not hidden from you, which is that the forearm is stretched.
فإذا رأيتهما مستويتين والعليل يقبض الساق ويبسطها من غير تعذّر فاعلم أنّه قد رجع العضو على ما ينبغى فحينئذ فاقرن الفخذين واحمل الضماد وشدّ بعمامة شدّا لا تتحرّك الورك الى جهة من الجهات.	For if you see them in a straight position and the forearm flexing and extending the leg without difficulty, then know that the member has returned as it should, so then bind the thighs and apply the splint and tighten it with bandages, a tightening that does not allow the knee to move to any side.
ويلزم العليل. السكون ثلاثة أيّام او أربعة ثمّ حلّ الرباط والضماد وقس الساق بالأخرى، فإن رأيتهما سواء فى القدر فاعلم أنّ الفكّ قد ثبت فاطلق العليل للمشى، وإن رأيت فيه شيئا من الاسترخاء.	And the forearm is given rest for three or four days, then the bandage and splint are removed and the leg is bound with the other, if you see them equal in strength, then know that the dislocation has been fixed, so let the forearm be moved, and if you see it still relaxed.
فارجع وضمّده وشدّه على حسب شدّك الأوّل واتركه أيضا ثلاثة أيّام ثمّ حلّه ويبطئ بالمشى عليها أيّاما حتّى تقوى نعمّا إن شاء الله،.	So return and bind it, and tighten it according to your first tightening, and leave it also for three days, then remove it and walk with the forearm on it for some days until the strength is complete, God willing.
الفصل الثانى والثالثون.	The second and third sections.
فى علاج فكّ الركبة.	In the treatment of a dislocated knee.
الركبة تنفكّ على ثلاثة أوجه تنفكّ الى داخل وإلى خارج وإلى أسفل أعنى الى خلف ولا تنفكّ الى قدّام البتّة، وعلامة فكّها أن تأمر العليل أن يضمّ ساقه الى فخذه.	The knee dislocates in three ways: it dislocates inward, outward, and downward, specifically to the back, not forward, and the sign of its dislocation is that the forearm tries to flex his leg towards his thigh.
فإن لم يلصق بالفخذ فاعلم أنّ الركبة منفكّة، وجبر جميع وجوه فكّها أن تجلس العليل قاعدا وقد مدّ ساقيه إن قوى على ذلك وتجلس خادما خلفه ليمسك وسطه ويلويه الى خلف قليلا ثمّ تجلس أنت على فخذيه.	For if it did not stick to the thigh, then know that the patella is loose, and treat all its facets so that the kneecap may be placed backless, with his legs stretched out, if he was strong enough for that, or else reclining behind him to hold his waist and bend it slightly backwards, then you sit on his thighs.
وتلصق ظهرك الى وجهه وتجعل رجله بين رجليك ثمّ تلزم ركبته بكفّيك وتشبكّهما بين أصابعك على ركبته ثمّ تضمّ بكفّيك جانبى ركبته بقوّة وخادم آخر يمدّ رجله حتّى ترجع الركبة الى موضعها.	And stick your back to his face and place his leg between your legs, then fix the patella with your palms and interlock them with your fingers on the patella, then you squeeze both sides of the patella forcefully with your palms, and another servant stretches his leg until the patella returns to its place.
وعلامة رجوعها أن تلصق الساق بالفخذ فى لين غير مكرهة، ثمّ ضمّدها وألصق الساق بالفخذ ثمّ اربطهما جميعا بعصابة ثلاثة أيّام او أربعة ثمّ أطلقهما، ولا يستعمل إلّا المشى القليل أيّاما حتّى تقوى.	And the sign of its return is that the leg sticks to the thigh in a smooth flexion, not forced, then bandage them and stick the leg to the thigh, then tie them all with a bandage for three or four days, then cast them, and he should only walk a little for days until it becomes strong.
فإن تعذّر عليك رجوعها بما وصفنا وإلّا فاستعمل المدّ القوىّ بالرباطات التى تقدّم وصفى لها فى علاج الورك حتّى ترجع،.	For if it is difficult for you to return it as we described, then use strong stretching with the splints that I previously described for the treatment of fractures until it returns.
الفصل الثالث والثلاثون.	The thirty-third chapter.
فى علاج فكّ الكعب.	On the treatment of a dislocated jaw.
الكعب قد يزول زوالا يسيرا وقد ينفكّ على الكمال وفكّه يكون إمّا الى داخل وإمّا الى خارج وعلامة فكّه أن ترى الكعب منتفخا بارزا الى الجهة التى انفكّ اليها.	The jaw may dislocate slightly or it may become loose from its socket, and its dislocation is either inward or outward, and the sign of its dislocation is that you see the jaw bulging out towards the side to which it has dislocated.
فأمّا علاج زواله فيسهل ردّه وهو أن يمدّ برفق بالأيدى ويسوّى حتّى يرجع، وأمّا علاجه اذا انفكّ على الكمال فينبغى أن تجلس العليل قاعدا ويمسكه خادم قوىّ أيّد من خلف ظهره فى وسطه.	As for the treatment of its slight dislocation, it is easy to return it, and that is by stretching the jaw with the hands and straightening until it returns. And as for its treatment if it becomes loose from its socket, it is necessary that the patient sits backless, and a strong servant holds him from behind his back at his waist.
ثمّ تمسك أنت بيدك اليمنى قدمه من أعلاها وبيدك اليسرى من أسفل قدمه فى موضع العرقوب، ثمّ جرّ القدم اليك بيدك اليمنى ثمّ باليسرى مرّتين ثمّ مدّها باليسرى وادفع صدر القدم باليمنى نحو الساق من غير عنف.	Hold the thigh with your right hand from above and with your left hand from below at the knee, then pull the thigh towards you with your right hand and then with your left hand twice, then stretch it with your left hand and push the front of the knee with your right hand towards the leg without force.
تصنع ذلك مرّتين كما وصفنا ثمّ ادفع صدر القدم الى الساق فى المرّة الثالثة وأنت تجرّ بالعرقوب، فإن رجعت فى مرّة او مرّتين على هذه الصفة ورأيت القدم مستوية وإلّا فأعد العمل عليها فإنّها ترجع.	Do that twice as we described, then push the front of the knee towards the leg on the third time while you pull at the knee, if it returns to its position in one or two times and you see the foot is level, otherwise repeat the procedure on it for it will return.
فإن امتنع لك رجوعها بما وصفنا وإلّا فأضجع العليل على ظهره على الأرض وأغرز وتدا فى الأرض موثّقا جدّا ليقع بين فخذيه وقد لففت عليه خرقا لئلّا يؤذى العليل، ثمّ يضبط خادم فخذه.	For if it refuses to return to its position as we described, then lay the patient on his back on the ground and make a trench in the earth, strongly fixed, so that it falls between his thighs, and have wrapped him in a cloth to prevent the patient from being hurt, then the servant will hold his thigh.
ثمّ يمدّ خادم آخر الرجل إمّا بيديه وإمّا برباط يربطه على عنق الرجل، ثمّ يمدّ كلّ خادم خلاف مدّ صاحبه والوتد قائم بين فخذى العليل يمسكه لئلّا ينجذب جسمه الى أسفل عند المدّ، ثمّ يسوّى الطبيب الفكّ بيديه.	Then another servant will stretch the leg, either with his hands or with a bandage tied to the patient's neck, then each servant will pull in the opposite direction of his companion and the stick will remain upright between the patient's thighs, holding it so that his body does not jerk downwards when pulled, then the physician will set the jaw with his hands.
وخادم آخر يمسك الساق الصحيحة الى أسفل فإنّ الفكّ يرجع بسرعة، فإذا رجع الفكّ وتبيّن لك صحّة رجوعه فاحمل الضماد والمشاقة وشدّه برباطات وثيقة واعقل القدم بالرباط الى أسفل، وينبغى أن تتّقى من العصب الذى يكون فوق الكعب من خلف.	And another servant will hold the sound leg downwards, for the jaw returns quickly. If the jaw returns and you see its return is correct, then apply a splint and bandage, and tie it with strong bands, and tie the foot down with a bandage, and beware lest the nerve which is above the heel from behind be cut.
لئلّا يكون الرباط عليه شديدا فيؤذيه، ثمّ تتركه يومين او ثلاثة فإن استرخى الرباط فشدّه ثمّ أطلقه فى اليوم الثالث او الرابع، ويمتنع العليل من المشى أربعين يوما.	So that the bandage does not become too tight on it and hurt him, then leave it for two or three days, if the bandage becomes loose, tighten it, and remove it on the third or fourth day, and the patient will abstain from walking for forty days.
فإن رام المشى قبل هذه المدّة لم تأمن أن يتنقض عليه الفكّ ويفسد ولا يقبل بعد ذلك العلاج، فإن عرض له ورم حارّ فينبغى أن تستعمل فى تسكينه ما تقدّم وصفنا فى غير موضع من العلاج والتنطيل حتّى يذهب.	For the fractured jaw that has been immobilized before this period, it is not hoped that the fracture will be reduced and set, nor will it accept treatment afterwards. If it shows inflammation and hot swelling, what we previously described in another place regarding treatment and reduction should be applied to calm it down until the inflammation subsides.
الفصل الرابع والثلاثون.	The thirty-fourth chapter.
فى علاج فكّ أصابع الرجل.	On the treatment of fractures of the toes and fingers.
ينبغى أن تسوّى ما انفكّ منها بمدّ يسير من غير عنف وذلك ليس بعسر بل يسهل، فإن كان الفكّ فى بعض فصوص ظهر القدم فينبغى أن يجعل العليل قدمه على موضع مستو من الأرض.	It is desirable that what has become dislocated among them be put back in place with a gentle extension without force, and this is not difficult but rather easy. If the dislocation is in one of the bones of the ankle of the foot, it is desirable that the patient's foot be placed on a flat surface on the ground.
او على لوح وهو واقف كالماشى، ثمّ قم أنت وضع قدمك على ما نتا من تلك المفاصل ثمّ طأها بقدمك بقوّة حتّى ترجع وتراها قد استوت ولم يظهر فى الموضع نتو.	Or on a board, and it should be firmly in place like a clamp. Then you should put your foot on the dislocated joint and press it with your foot forcefully until it returns to its place and the dislocation is corrected, and no bulge appears in that location.
ثمّ اجعل تحت باطن قدمه لوحا يأخذ القدم كلّه يكون له رأسان ثمّ تشدّه شدّا محكما وثيقا ثلاثة أيّام ثمّ تحلّه وتصونه عن المشى أيّاما كثيرة حتّى يشتدّ وتأمن العودة إن شاء الله،.	Then put a board under the sole of his foot that takes the entire foot, having two edges. Then bind it with a strong and tight bandage for three days. Then untie it and have him walk for many days until it becomes strong and it is hoped that the fracture will heal, God willing.
الفصل الخامس والثلاثون.	The thirty-fifth chapter.
فى أنواع الفكّ الذى يكون مع جرح او مع كسر او معهما جميعا.	On the types of fractures that occur with a wound, or with a cut, or with both together.
متى حدث شىء من ذلك ورمت علاجه وجبره فكثيرا ما يعقب بالموت.	When one of these conditions occurs and its treatment is neglected and it becomes infected, often it is followed by death.
ولذلك لا ينبغى أن يقدم على علاج مثل ذلك إلّا من كان حاذقا بالصناعة طويل الدربة رقيقا شفيقا متأنّيا غير متهوّر ولا جسور وأن يستعمل فى الابتداء الأدوية التى تسكن الأورام الحارّة فقط ويسلّم العليل.	And for this reason, it is not desirable that anyone other than a skilled and experienced practitioner with a gentle touch, who is compassionate, calm, and not hasty or rash, should treat such a condition. He should start by using medications that only calm the inflamed organs and soothe the patient.
للقدر اللّهمّ إلّا ما رجوت له السلامة من العطب مع خفّة المرض وظهر لك فيه بعض الرجاء فرم ردّه من ساعتك فى أوّل الأمر قبل أن يحدث الورم الحارّ.	But for the big thigh, I only hope for its safety from injury, with a mild illness and a little hope, so return it to its place immediately at the beginning before the hot swelling occurs.
فإن رجع العضو على ما أردت فاستعمل التدبير الذى يسكن الأورام الحارّة وعالج الجرح بما يصلح له من المراهم المجفّفة، فإن كان الفكّ مع كسر وحدث فى العظم شظايا متبرّئة فرم انتزاعها.	If the member returns to its original position, then use a dressing that soothes the sensitive organs and treat the wound with a suitable poultice, if there is a fracture with splintered bone fragments, then extract them.
وامتثل فى ذلك ما ذكرنا فى الأمراض البسيطة ممّا تقدّم فى مواضعها.	And follow in this what we mentioned regarding simple ulcers, as it has precedence in its respective places.
وتحرّى جهدك ونزّه نفسك من الدخول فى طريق الغرر على ما تقدّمت وصيّتى لك فذلك أبقى لجاهك وأسلم لعرضك إن شاء اللّه.	And restrain your effort and hold back your self from entering into the way of deception, as I have previously advised you, for that is more lasting for your honor and safer for your reputation, if God wills.
