O children, now that I have completed this book for you, which is the last of the science of medicine and from whose completion through its expositions and declarations I have seen that you will reach the end of it, and by means of which, it is to me clear that you will reach it through this treatise, which is a part of the action with the hand, that is surgery.
For the action with the hand is now prohibited in our realm and in our times deprived of it, while greatly threatening the science of medicine; and its practices are obscured and only a few small descriptions remain of them in the books of the ancients, which they have altered and introduced into errors and delusions, closing their minds to it, lengthening their words, and losing the art.
And it has seemed good to me that you animate this through the arrangement of this treatise according to the way of exposition and declaration and abbreviation; and so that it may come with the forms of the instruments of cautery and of the other instruments of the work as they are through addition of declaration, and through preparation of it, which cause is necessary.
But the cause for which no good artist is found with his hand in our time is because the art of medicine is long, and that it requires its practitioner to be exercised beforehand in the science of anatomy, which understands the joints of the members and their forms, and the conjunction and separation of them; and has knowledge of the bones, the nerves, and the veins, and the places of their origin.
And because of this, Hippocrates says that by name it is much, but in work little, and especially in the art of the hand.
But we have already spoken of that in the introduction to this book; for whoever is not knowledgeable of what we have told you of anatomy, it is not vacated that he will not fall into error by which men will die, as I have seen many of those, for some are formed in this science and they throw themselves from it without science or experience.
For I have seen an old and experienced physician open a scrofulous abscess on the neck of a woman, and cut certain arteries in her neck so that much blood flowed, causing the woman to die under his hands.
And I have seen another physician who, after he had extracted a stone from a man that was large, and came to him and drew out that stone with a piece of the bladder, causing that man on the third day to die.
And I have called it to be extracted before, and I saw by the size of the stone and the disposition of the patient that he would die.
And I have seen another physician who took a stipend from a duke of our land for surgery, and he treated a black slave who had a fracture in his thigh; and the physician, through his ignorance, drew out the fracture above the plague with powder and bandages with great tightness, and did not leave the wound to breathe.
And then he closed it according to his wishes, and bound it up, and let it lie for several days and commanded that we not loosen the bandage; and so it went as the thigh and the foot became pustular, and he came to perdition.
And I was called to him, and prepared to loosen the bandage, and tranquility came upon him and he ceased from his pains.
But indeed corruption had been confirmed in the member, so that I could not restrain it, and the corruption did not cease to wander about the member as the patient perished.
And I have seen another physician who opened a cancerous ulcer and it was inflamed after several days, as the malice of it grew great with its lord.
The cause of which is that the cold humor is pure, and it does not come to it with fire at all, but that there be a member which suffers that from everything it becomes hostile.
And because of this, children, it is necessary for you that the action with the hand be divided into two duties: one in operation that is associated with health, and in work in which there is peril in the greatest dispositions.
And I have already touched on that in every place of this book in which occurs operation in which there is error and fear; so that it is necessary for you to keep to that and leave that aside, so that the unlearned do not find a way to speak and to reproach you.
And therefore take your arms with diligence and the protection of God, and your patients with facility and firmness.
And use the best way by the grace of God that they may attain health and laudable success, and lay aside the terrible maladies of difficult cure, and display your arms against what makes you afraid, so that idleness in your faith and in your name does not vanquish you; for more remains to your glory, and beyond all in the realm and in the world to your sanctities.
Gauliah has already said in some of his books: “Do not treat bad maladies poorly, so that bad physicians are not named.”
And I have divided this book according to three chapters.
The division of the book begins, and first of the first part. The first chapter ordered of the head, in the forms of the instruments and of the tools of cauteries, and of what is necessary in the operation.
The division of the second part. The second chapter, of cauterization and puncturing, and of cupping-glasses, and of plasters, and of extraction of thorns and the like; all chapters and ordered of the forms of the instruments.
The third chapter, of restoration and of dislocation, and of cure of torture and of the like; a chapter ordered of the head, in the forms of the instruments.
I will say what the quality of the humors of that cautery and of the pain of it are, and in what condition cautery is prohibited.
Therefore I say that the speech of the quality of the humor of cautery and of the pain of it is long and prolix, and subtle by science, and a secret hidden; and many wise men have spoken greatly of it, and they are disagreed among themselves, and for me a little of their speeches suffices, fearing prolixity.
And therefore I say that cautery confers universally upon every complexional matter, excepting two complexions which are complexional without matter.
In the complexional and dry matter they disagreed; for some said that cautery is beneficial to it, and the others said the contrary of that, that cautery is not convenient in disease which is by quality and dryness, for the nature of fire is quality and dryness, and it is inconvenient that the disease which is complexional and dry with what is cauterized and dry be healed.
And I say the contrary of that, that by cautery there is made humor in every disease which is complexional and dry that you see in men's bodies, for when you compare man's body to the complexions of fire, you moisten man's body.
And I say by that speech that experiment that which I have discovered several times.
But indeed no one should venture upon this topic unless he is experienced and practiced in the chapter of cauterization through subsequent exercise, and has come to know the diversity of human complexions and the disposition of illnesses in their bodies, and the causes of these, and their accidents, and the span of time of these.
But in the other complexions, there is no reason for fear, and especially in the moist and friction-based illnesses, for all doctors have agreed upon these, and are not disagreeing about the use of cauterization in them.
And know, children, that the secret of healing through cauterization with fire and the goodness of it is that fire is simple, the action of which does not spread except to the member which is cauterized, and does not affect another member joined to it, except with minor harm.
But the action of burning medicine spreads to other members that are joined to it, and strongly brings about a difficult-to-heal illness in them, and strongly hurts.
But fire, by its subtlety and the goodness of its substance, does not do that except that it expels what is superfluous; and it has been known to us through experience and through long service of study of the truth of causes. And because of this I am excused from the length of speech; and if it were not that I did not have my free will in this pause, hidden from you a secret with fire, and the quality of its action in bodies and of its expulsion by which illnesses are expelled, demonstrated with philosophical speech, which would be acute for you.
And know, children, that they disagree on the time when cauterization is convenient, and pause the best time of spring.
And I say that cauterization is convenient in all times, so that the harm from the accidental time is submerged by what is drawn out by cauterization; and especially if the cauterization is for pains or necessary pains, strong and violent, which do not endure delay because of what is feared to come from them, a maliciousness that is greater than minor harm.
And therefore do not fear in your hearts, O children, that this is not believed except by the common people and foolish doctors; for with that illness which is healed by cauterization there is not a reason to pause at all times, but they pause at what follows.
And the cause is not as they think, for cauterization is only in place of medicine which alters the complexion and dries out the moistnesses that are the cause by which pains come.
But cauterization is superfluous over medicine because of the willfulness of its strength and power of its action, and the greatness of its lord.
And it is possible for his illness to return at some time of the year, according to the complexion of the patient and the location of his illness, and the power of it, and what is prepared in his body from the accumulation of superfluities within him, and what is received by him in acquisition from foods and likenesses of those causes; unless the illness for which cauterization was administered is a subtle illness in a member with few superfluities and moistnesses, as with a toothache and its likeness, it is possible that this pain will not return to him but rather what happens to him is minor.
And it is a common saying that cauterization is the last remedy of medicine, and it is a true saying, not so that they understand it in it, for they believe that there is no healing that profits from medicine or other cause except cauterization.
And the cause is contrary to that; and the intention that cauterization is the last remedy of medicine is only when we administer methods of healing in some illnesses, and those medicines do not confer, and especially at the end of the cause we administer to them cauterization, and profit from it. And therefore we have that cauterization is the last remedy of medicine, not according to the intention which the common people and foolish doctors understand it.
And the ancients said that cauterization with gold is better than cauterization with iron, and they did not say this except for the equality of gold and the subtlety of its substance.
And they said that the location of cauterization does not matter, when it is not absolutely true, for I have seen and proven that it only matters in some bodies and not in others; but when you do cauterization with fire with gold, it is not declared to you because it is heated according to the amount that you want by the heat of the gold, and because it prepares itself to receive friction; and if you place over it ignition, it melts into the fire some leaves through which the artisan cuts for the occupation of that.
And because of this, cauterization is done with iron more lightly and more closely to correctness of action.
And I have already ordered this chapter on cauterization according to chapters, and I have ordered those of the head among the feet, so that elsewhere you may demand from it what you want.
The first chapter.
This cauterization confers to moisture and coldness the serving accident of which there are two causes; it is a cause of soda and multitude of fluxes, called corissa, from the parts of the ears and from the nose flowing, and multitude of sleeping, and of toothache and of the jaw, and universally of all illnesses that come through frigidity, as with paralysis and apoplexy, and their likeness in those illnesses.
The form of this cauterization is this: first, you command the patient to be evacuated by laxative medicine, the head being washed out, for three or four days, according to the power of the patient and his age and habit.
And then command that he wash his head with soap, and then rest between your knees on a low bench and place his hands over his feet.
And then pause the edge of your palm, and then press upon the edge of his nose between his eyebrows. But indeed, when your middle finger is arrived at that place, mark it with your tent, and then ignite the cauterization olive of which this is the form:
And then place it upon the place marked with your tent, in such a way that it descends, and your hand be cramped little by little, and you revolve it.
And then lift your hand lightly and look at the place; and if you see that there has been discovered some amount of the head, as though the quantity of hair, then lift your hand again, and if it does not return with that iron, with another, if it is cooled off, between while it is seen by you what I have said to you.
And then take a little salt and dissolve that over the place and let it be for three days.
And then place on it wool that is saturated in vinegar and let it be upon it while the scar of the fire is destroyed. And then heal the place with tetramedicament within while it is healed.
And they said that when Roman plaster is opened up, then the greater number of blisters it has, for it is better and more healing.
And they said that some of them that the tendon be cauterized within the bone, and have the cauterization within while some part of the tissue of the bone is burned.
And then it should be cut where it adheres to the bone, and then treated.
And others said that with the cautery they reached the nerve, which presses strongly on the bone, and this is the form of the small alpecat: And they believe that from that place the vapors of the head escape.
And if the wound has been open for a long time, it should be treated and allowed to heal over time.
But I have not seen these two types of cautery at all, except in a few cases due to fear; and I think that leaving it as it is better for health than removing it, because the head is delicate due to the continuity of its veins, as we have testified in other members, and especially when the patient's head is of a frail nature.
And the first type of cautery is safer and better in my opinion; and using it and performing that operation is healthier.
Chapter Two:
Of cauterization of the head.
When in the whole head there is a chronic and long-lasting pain which is prolonged in the patient, and he uses leeches and cupping glasses and caputal poultices and plasters and guaiac wood and similar things, and especially if he has already been cauterized with a cautery which does not help him for any of these causes, then consider that if the patient's head is of strong creation in its nature, and not frail and finds great discomfort, then cauterize it again with another cautery after the first one. Then cauterize it on the crown of his head with a cautery so that the vein is cut. Having cut the vein and discovered it from the bone to the extent that we have mentioned, cauterize it with a cautery at the back of the head in the place which is called the windpipe, — and this is the place where the cupping glass is applied. And hold your hand over it, and do not uncover the bone, because the patient experiences great discomfort from this compared to all other cauteries of the head.
And I say this cautery in its place, because the cautery with which you cauterize the horns of the head and the occipital is a more subtle cautery than that with which the middle of the head is cauterized; and this is how it is done.
Chapter Three:
Of cauterization for non-ancient emigration.
When there is a sudden pain in the front of the head or an aching pain that extends to the eye, evacuate the head with purgatives, and administer the other treatment which I have described in the causes of diseases; and if this does not help, cauterization can be performed in two ways: either with an acute burning medicine or with iron.
But a cautery with a burning medicine is that you take a piece of wool, scorch it and put the ends of it on both sides of the head. Then pierce the location of the pain in the temple with a small lance inserted so that it is under the vein and hidden.
Then tie it tightly with a descent constriction, and leave it there for the space of three hours; then remove the wool and treat the lance-wound, and leave the wound for two or three days, and then apply cold water to the spot until it heals over.
Then treat it with an ointment so that it heals.
And if you wish, do this with some burning medicines which I have written about in the two treatises on burning medicines.
But cauterization with iron is done like this: heat the cautery of which this is the form:
and it is called a closed claw nail, because the head of it is shaped like a claw with some curvature, and in the middle of it there is a small projection.
Then apply it to the location of the pain, and hold your hand — so that the cautery is not burnt — and move the iron little by little with speed.
And if the quantity of it that is burnt by the specifcality of the vein is equal to the thickness of it, and raise your hand so that the artery is not burnt which is underneath, so that there is no flow of blood.
Then wet a cloth in salt water and apply it to the spot, and leave it for three days; then apply cold water to it, and treat it with an ointment so that it heals.
And if you wish, cauterize with the tip of the scalpel according to cautery, and be careful not to cut the artery in this non-ancient emigration.
Chapter Four:
Of cauterization for ancient emigration.
When you are treating emigration with what we have said about the previous cure, and what we have said in the divisions of the diseases, and the cure does not help, and you see that it does not suffice for the disease which is not abated by what we have said about the first cautery with medicine or the cautery with fire, then wherever you ignite the cautery cuttler so that it turns white, press it onto the location of the pain with a line of length equal to the thickness of the tip, or longer; and holding your hand so that the cautery does not burn the artery underneath it.
However, it is necessary for you to be careful about the continuity of the mandible which is damaged due to chewing, and that the joint not be burnt and the nerve underneath it, and that there be no cramp.
And if it is about guarding against the flow of blood from the artery which is abscised, because there is danger in its abscision, and especially to one who does not know what he is doing and is unskilled; and let the operation begin in that place.
And I will come with remembrance of the regime for accidental flow of blood from the artery according to its own way, in your free time.
And if you see that this disease does not suffice to this cautery and the patient's body is tolerable, cauterize it in the middle of the head as we have mentioned, and treat the wound so that it heals.
And if you wish, administer the cautery which we have mentioned in the chapter on contraction of the artery with cautery having two tips, and this cauterization is better and more effective.
Chapter Five:
Of cauterization for pains in the ears.
When there is pain in the ear caused by cold and it is treated with caustic causes and with the other cure which I have mentioned in the division, and the pain is not eased, then ignite the cautery, and this is the one which is called puncta, of which this is the form:
Then pierce it with the cautery and ignite it, and let it be held in the environment of the entire ear as it is rotated, or in the circuit of either side if the pain is in either side. Move around with the cautery from the root of the ear a little at a time so that it touches the spot with effort.
And if the cautery of ten points in the entire ear, and those around it, and then treat the spots so that they heal.
Chapter Six:
Of cauterization for torture.
Torture which is cured and treated with cauterization is nothing but the spices which come through phlegm, according to what we have said in the divisions of the diseases.
Avoid cauterization of the area that is affected by dryness or by a nerve spasm.
When you are treating this type of torture with leeches and bloodletting and poultices, and your treatment is not working, then you must cauterize the patient in three places: first, at the root of the ear; second, a little below his temple; and third, at the junction of two lips.
And apply your cautery opposite to the affected area, because softening will not occur except in the part that is not healing.
And the method of cauterization is that you cauterize it with the cautery on the right side of the upper part of the ear, a little above the corner of the head; and in the temple another one, the length of which should be according to the length of the little finger, and apply your hand with the cautery until half of the quantity of the size of a barleycorn is burned.
And this is the form of the cautery, and it is a tool of the surgeon, the shape of which is described below. But indeed more subtle is that one little bit as you see; and if it has some superficial hardness, cut a little.
And then treat the area with what is described in front of you until it is healed.
Chapter 7
On cauterization for ancient apoplexy.
When apoplexy is ancient and you are treating it with what we have said and your treatment is not working and the patient does not have a fever, then cauterize him with four cauteries: over all the corners of his head; and with cautery on the middle part of his head, as we have said; and with cautery in the neck. And the manner of the cautery is done according to what has been said above.
And he has already been cauterized over the mouth of the stomach; and it is more effective in the rear; and then let it be treated with what comes out.
Chapter 8
On cauterization for obliteration caused by phlegm.
Let the patient be given at the beginning large leeches and purifying pills by the servant.
And then shave the whole head of the patient and apply to his neck the poultice described in the treatise on poultices.
And apply that several times, for that is the manner of cauterization. And do that according to the order of the medicines which we have already said.
And if he heals well from that, then do nothing; but if not, then do to him three cauteries in the rear part of his head, which descend from the highest part of the head towards the lowest part of the neck. And place between each cautery the thickness of a finger, and then treat the cauteries with what comes out.
But if you see improvement and the patient is able to tolerate it, then do to him cauterization in the middle part; but if you see greater improvement, then cauterize him over both corners.
Then treat that until it is healed; and let the cautery be olive-shaped according to the shape described above.
Chapter 9
On cauterization for paralyses and on softening of all the body.
Let the patient's head be purified with leeches and with what we have said; then shave the patient's head and cauterize him with cautery in the middle part of his head, and with cautery on all the corners of his head, and with cautery on the rear part of his neck, and with three cauteries over the spine of the neck.
And if it is necessary in the softening of the body for too much of that and the patients tolerate it, and the disease is strong, then cauterize him with four cauteries on the spine of his back, and lastly with cautery until half a barleycorn has been burned, and lift up your hand. Then treat that until it is healed; and let this be the olive-shaped cautery.
Chapter 10
On cauterization for epilepsy.
Let the epileptic not be cauterized unless his epilepsy is caused by phlegm.
And then let the brain of him be purified at the beginning by the servant with leeches and with the other treatment which we have said in the division when the patient is large and is able to tolerate the excess of the medicines.
And if he is a child who does not tolerate the medicines, then administer poultices and masticables by the servant purifying, before that for several days, with beneficial foods.
And then shave the patient's head; and then cauterize him with one cautery in the middle part of his head according to the previous manner, and with another cautery on the back of his head, and cauterize over each corner of his head. And if the patient is strong and tolerant, then cauterize him with cauteries which we have said, having paralysis and softening of the body over the spine of the neck and over the spine of the back.
And let it be olive-shaped according to what has been said before.
But if the patient is a child, then apply a delicate cautery according to this manner.
Chapter 11
On cauterization for melancholy.
When the causes of melancholy are corrupt and moist humors and phlegm, then cauterize him with the cauteries which we have said in the section on paralysis.
And if the cause of melancholy is excess phlegm going down into melancholy, and the body of the patient is moist, then give him what purifies his brain according to what has preceded in the division.
And then shave the patient's head, and then make a decently made turban of linen and place it around his neck; then apply that on the middle part of his head.
And let him be sixty days old, and let him be held in every part.
And then apply a poultice; and it is more worthy of a young sheep's milk. And heat that on the fire with moderate warmth, which he endures when it is within him. And then apply that on the middle part of his head around the circle, and let him be within until he is relaxed.
And do that with the patient throughout the week once a day, and let him have the other regimen within him until he is healed; or if you want, cauterize him making small points according to his age: this is a special cautery which moistens the brain with equality.
And then apply that cold in a woolen bandage or in linen bandages.
Chapter 12
On cauterization for water descending into the throat.
When it is declared that water enters the throat through the holes which you have seen in the division, then begin and give the patient what purifies his brain; and guard him from all moistness.
And let him sip at a bath in lukewarm water for several days.
And then command that he rinses his head, and cauterize him with cautery in the middle part of his head; and then cauterize him with two cauteries over two temples if the beginning is water in two holes, or from one side if it begins from one hole.
Puncture with cautery all the veins and arteries which are below the barleycorn; and let the cauteries be in that length in the width of the temples.
And beware of blood flow when cauterizing; and if you see blood flowing from him, stop it with whatever medicine is available to you.
And let the wisdom that is in the extraction of arteries and the abstention from those and the cauterization of blood flow come to you.
And sometimes it is cauterized on the neck under the jaw bones with two cauteries recently produced.
Chapter XIII.
Of cauterization of old tears.
When tears of the eyes are old and there is an excess of phlegmatic fluid flowing through the veins and arteries, which are evident in a protruding lump on the head, then cauterize that with the cautery we described in the chapter on preventing water from going into the eyes, and cauterize it also at the middle part of the head, and with two cauteries at the neck under the temples, and with two cauteries at the neck under the jaw bones. And if there is a need for addition, then cauterize that all around the corner of the eye above the upper eyelid with a small cautery.
Chapter XIV.
Of cauterization of bad odor from the nose.
When you have treated him with what we have said in the division and your treatment is not effective, then prepare and give the patient enemas for three nights; then shave his head, and cauterize it with a cautery made of olive oil. Then cauterize that with a cautery made of clove on the two upper eyelids, just below where the hair starts, with two small cauteries.
And beware of the artery so you do not burn it.
And this is how the clove cautery is made:
Chapter XV.
Of cauterization to soften the eyelids of the eyes.
When the eyelid of the eye is softened due to illness or humidity, then cauterize that eyelid with a lunar cautery; and this is how it is made:
And if you are treating the upper eyelids, cauterize them with two small cauteries all around, and let them be elongated from the temples. And the length of each cautery should be according to the size of the eyelid.
And do not press your hand with the cautery too much, but according to how much the third part of the eyelid is attached.
Chapter XVI.
Of cauterization of the eyelid when the hairs are converted into parts inside and close the eye.
When the hairs of the eye are converted into parts inside and close the eye, there are two ways to cauterize them: either with a cautery made of fire or with a burning medicine.
If you cauterize him with fire, command the patient to open his eyes so that the hairs are pulled out with them as they grow and are elongated; and if he closes his eyes, then you strengthen his eyelids with a bandage so that he does not rub his eyes while the hairs grow.
Then as they grow and become elongated, then place the patient's head in your lap, and press on the eyelid of the eye with your finger, with the sign being according to the shape of a dead leaf, and let the sign be near the hairs.
Then place a cotton pad soaked in egg white or in mullein tea on the eye.
Then ignite the cautery, of which this is how it is made:
Then cauterize over the figure you have marked, little by little, in small areas, until all of the surface of the eyelid is burned, which should be like a myrtle leaf, appearing completely healthy.
And the sign of the success of your work is that you see the eyelid of the eye already contracted and the hairs of the eye elevated above the puncture of the eye.
And then raise your hand and let him lie down for three days, and then place a bandage on him until the scab is healed. Then treat that with ointment until it is healed.
But if the hairs return for any reason and the eyelid is softened, then repeat the cauterization on that eye again just as you did at first.
But if the hairs are in the lower eyelid, then cauterize that until it is elevated to its natural place and elongated, and let the hairs not touch the eye.
But the cautery with burning medicine is that you command the patient to open his eyes so that the hairs are pulled out with them as they grow and become elongated, and then let it be made of linen in the shape of a myrtle leaf.
Then take sagewort and live coals, one ounce each. .I. Put them in a mortar and pestle, and mix those ingredients well, and make it into a poultice so that it is not too cold; then spread that on the linen which is made in the shape of a myrtle leaf, and apply that to one eye or both; then let the patient lie down with his head in your lap.
Then hold the poultice over the medicine and press it gently so that the patient feels the biting of the medicine, for the biting is in him like fire.
And when he feels the biting, then let him drink the medicine and wipe it off with his own finger; then when the biting stops, let him rinse the eye with water, and then examine if the eyelid is lifted up as it was washed with fire or with a cut, for then it is well; and if it returns to that which the medicine was applied on the spot where the medicine did not penetrate and is blackened as your operation is healed and the eye is contracted.
Then place a bandage on him until the scab of the swelling is eradicated, and then treat that with ointment of hellebore or another so that it is healed.
It is necessary for you, after your operation, to guard against the eye being damaged by the medicine with great diligence, and if the eyelid after a few days is softened and for some reason the hairs enter the eye, then repeat your medicine on that spot of the eyelid which is softened, and precisely as you did at the beginning, and treat him until it is healed.
And this is the shape of a myrtle leaf.
And know that men' eyes are diverse according to their size and smallness, and therefore according to how your contraction is made.
And not being doubtful about the path of truth to him who is taught in this art.
Chapter XVII.
Of cauterization of a fissure which is in the tear duct of the eye.
When you cure a fissure with what we have said in the divisions of illnesses and your treatment does not work, then know that you cauterize it in this way: command the patient to lie down his head in your lap, and let someone hold his head up by the hair so that it is not rubbed or moved with his head.
Then place a cotton pad soaked in egg white or in mullein tea on the eye of him.
Then ignite the cautery, of which this is how it is made:
Which should be hollow, like a reed or a pen, and from one end is made the cautery.
And if you see that it has penetrated into the other extremity. And if you want to let it out in this way, then do so with a tent.
But the one who is hollowed out is better for your work.
Then press the fistula if it is open and bring out from him pus and dry up that fluid. And if it is not open then open it and extract the fluid from him.
And then place on him the cautery which should be well lit and hold your hand a little below the cautery at the opening of the nose so that your hand does not get burnt or the patient is not disturbed and then place the cautery in the wounds of the nose and corrupt that area.
And so if at the beginning of your cautery it goes into the bone then that is good and if not then repeat the cautery one or two times if necessary; leave it like that for three days, and then place a bandage on that area and wrap it with a drying ointment until it is healed.
But if twelve days have passed and it has not healed then place a corrosive acute medicine on it so that the bone is uncovered and scrape it according to what is convenient in its chapter.
And there is another way of cauterizing a fistula which some first said: enter the site of the fistula and open it and then place in that fissure subtle cement of which its shape is like this: melt an ounce of lead into that, and hold your hand with cement with good retention so that the melted lead does not come to the hole of that; and cover the hole on the patient's nose with cotton or water, because lead adheres to the site of the fistula and heals it with a wonderful cure.
And if the fistula is healed with what we have said about cauterization and treatment then that is good; and if not then it is necessary to administer a nose piercing and reduce the fistula to the cavity of the nose according to what will come in its own place.
Chapter 18.
Of cauterization of the split of the foot.
Many times there are splits in the lips and mostly in the lips of children.
So when you heal those splits with what we have said in the divisions and your treatment is not effective then light the cautery knife in this form as it is described:
And let its cavity be according to the thinness of the blade.
Then place it carefully in those splits so that the cautery reaches the bone of the splits.
And then heal that with wax so that it is healed.
Chapter 19.
Of cauterizing a fistula in the mouth.
When in the root of the uvula or on the palate or in the roots of the teeth there is an apthoe and it starts to fester and it is broken, and it is aged, and there is rust and it becomes a fistula, and you heal that and your treatment is not effective then place the cautery which is received in the fistula; and hold your hand so that the iron reaches the bone of it, and do this one or two times; and heal that with what we have said about healing so that it is healed.
And so if the pus is discharged and it is healed then that is good; and if not then it is necessary to uncover the area and scrape off the rotten bone according to what will come in its chapter.
Chapter 20.
Of cauterization of teeth and of softening of gums.
When the gums are softened by humidity and the teeth are burned and you heal those with medicines and they do not help then place the patient's head in your lap, and light the cautery of which its form will come here, in such a way that you place the tongs over the tooth and enter into it the lit cautery quickly, and hold your hand a little so that the patient feels the heat of the fire at the root of the tooth to be reached.
And then lift your hand and repeat the cautery several times according to what you want.
And then the patient should fill his mouth with salty water and hold it for an hour, and then spit it out, because the burned tooth is firm and the soft gum is tightened and the corrupted humidity is dried up.
Chapter 21.
Of cauterization of toothache.
When toothache is from coldness, or in it there is pain or redness, or the medicine does not help then cauterization in that is according to two ways: either cauterize with cow's dung or cauterize with fire.
Cauterization with dung is that you take the dung of cows and cook it in horse's manure, and then take a stick and wrap it over the end of the tongue, and then dip that in the hot dung and place it on the painful tooth quickly so that it is heated.
And then repeat that several times so that the virtue of the fire reaches the root of the teeth.
And if you want, dip wool or a stick in the dung above mentioned, and place it on the painful tooth, and hold the iron over it so that the iron reaches the cavity of the tooth.
But cauterization with fire is that you attend to the tongs of iron or steel, and there is some thickness in it and the sharpness of the fire does not reach the mouth of the patient.
And then light the cautery of which its form will come, and place it on the tooth and hold your hand so that the cautery is hot; and do this several times because the pain is increased or in that day or in the other day.
And let the patient fill his mouth with good dung and hold it for an hour and then spit it out; and this is the way of cauterization.
And cauterize whatever you see according to what is possible for you.
And this is the way of the tongs:
Chapter 22.
Of cauterizing hernia.
When hernia is from phlegm and cold humors and they are not opened by medicine and you see their digestion slightly then light the cautery of which its form follows, having two ends bent so that smoke comes out of the cautery from the other end, and place that lit on the hernia once, and if it does not come out of it then do this another time so that it reaches the bone of the hernia.
And if the hernia is small then place the cautery according to the quantity of the hernia, and let it rest for three days and place on it a bandage soaked in dung so that what the fire has burned is softened.
And then heal that with ointment and poultices and bandages so that it is healed.
Chapter 23.
Of cauterizing laryngitis and of constriction of voice.
When humidity comes over the larynx and especially when there is coldness of complexions then let the patient be evacuated at the beginning with laxative medicines and then cauterize that from the root of the gullet in the place which is depurged.
And be careful that you do not reach with the cautery to the gullet or do not burn of the membrane of it but a little.
And cauterize that with another cautery at the joint of the neck in his last vertebra. And the cautery of it should be a red-hot iron rod as described previously.
Then treat that with what has already been mentioned so that it may heal.
Chapter 24.
Of cautery for lung diseases and coughing.
When a cough and lung disease are caused by moist humors, and the patient does not have a fever or tuberculosis, and it is an old disease, then cauterize that with two cauteries over the furcula in the places below the collarbones, and with another cautery in the middle of the chest between the two nipples; and let the cauteries be red-hot according to the previous form.
And if you want, let your cautery be pricking with the cautery that is called 'puncta', the form of which precedes in the puncturing of ear pain.
And let there be pricks within those; and then treat that with what has already been mentioned so that it may heal.
And when the cautery has three wounds, for such cautery use one caustic according to this form:
Chapter 25.
Of cautery for tics which are in the head of the helper.
When the head of the assistant is dislocated due to slippery humors and does not return to its place in its usual way, and it is displaced a little bit as it tries to move back, just as we have witnessed, then first reduce the dislocation, and let the patient's head be turned back towards his chest or onto one side; and then lift up the neck which is at the front of the tic where it begins inside the jaw with your left hand if the joint is dislocated there.
And let the cautery have two heads; and this is its form:
And then cauterize the neck so that it penetrates from one side to the other; and then the figure of the cautery will come from two-headed cauteries.
And sometimes it is adjusted according to this account, and that is why there are eight cauteries.
And then put honey on the cautery and let the patient be quiet, and do not disturb him for some time until he is comforted.
And if the dislocation is above and it is tight, then cauterize over the muscle with a red-hot cautery or with pointed cauteries, for the joint is confirmed and the humidity is broken up and the patient is healed.
Chapter 26.
Of cautery of the stomach.
When a person's stomach is filled with humors and movements that disturb the stomach and multiply its contents, and if you continue with your healing practices without success, then let the patient be on his back, with his head reclined and his arms stretched out, and cauterize that with three cauteries: one cautery below the feet according to the amount of a finger using a red-hot cautery, and two cauteries below the ribs so that the figure of a triangular cautery comes; and lengthen these so that they are not adjusted which will cause burning.
And if the depth of the cautery is two-thirds of the thickness of the neck.
And let the figure of the cautery be according to this form, and if you want, cauterize with a large cautery in the middle of the stomach according to this form; and this should be a cautery according to the form of a circle according to this form:
And let the stomach be punctured by that which is scared by this cautery: and when you feel a point on the stomach according to the amount you want with a tent, then cauterize that with a cautery in the points; and then treat that with the healing that has already been mentioned so that it may heal.
Chapter 27.
Of cautery for a sore throat.
When there is pain in the throat due to chafing or humidity or gross windiness so that from its normal complexions it is driven out by excessive egress, and it is healed with what we have said and does not conform, then let the patient be reclined on his back, and feel with a tent three cauteries according to this form and this quantity placed over the throat below the hypochondria where a man lies on his side.
And let the space between each cautery be according to the thickness of a finger, and let the cautery be according to the length of the body straight.
And do not move your hand with the cautery.
And if the amount of what is burned is the amount of the thickness of the neck, and if it is not tight; and if the patient stands on his feet; and if he does not stand, then let him lie down, for he has already stretched out his arms, and raise up his arms.
And it is up to you to cauterize these cauteries with a cautery blade, when you are subtle and prudent in the art.
And be careful not to overdo it in the cauterization, and let the thickness of all the neck be cauterized so that it may go into the intestines, for here the neck is subtle; and know this.
Chapter 28.
Of piercing of an abscess in the throat with a cautery.
When there is an abscess or ulcer in the throat and you want to know whether this abscess is in the flesh of the throat or in its membrane, then if it is in the flesh of the throat, the patient will have a heavy breath and the pain will become acute.
And if it is in the membrane of the throat, there will be great pain and many doctors have tired themselves from treating him.
Therefore let the patient be turned towards his chest; and then feel the location of the abscess with a tent; and then take the cautery which is assembled like a needle, the form of which has been described in the other page. And cauterize it with that cautery until all the neck is burnt, so that it goes into the chest, so that phlegm may come out.
And then treat that for the healing of other abscesses so that it may heal.
And do not use this form of cautery unless that which you have learned in the art of medicine is prolonged, and in whose hand many diseases are known; however, sometimes let it be applied to this operation, but nevertheless, know this, and it is better.
Chapter 29.
Of cautery of pleurisy.
Take the ancient cauteries of the roots of aristology for pleurisy according to this manner which is being made, and that you take from the roots of aristology a long dry root which is found, and let it be of the thickness of a finger.
And then soak it in oil and heat it in the fire, and then cauterize with a cautery in that location which is between the continuation of the furcula and the neck; and with two small cauteries below the guidazes, one declining slightly to the part where the beard is found, and with two cauteries on what is declining between the fifth rib and the breastbone, declining slightly to the parts behind; and with another cautery in the middle of the chest; and with a cautery in that location which is between the two shoulders, and with two cauteries on the sides of the chest, below the cautery which is between the two shoulders.
And you must not burn your hand with the cautery, but it should be in the hollow of the armpit, in action.
And some ancient people said that some of the men who use cauteries of iron similar to a needle, ignite it and place it in the space between the ribs, until they reach the pustule and the healthy flesh is exposed, just as we have said about the pustule of the liver.
But in this piercing with cautery, there is no fear, because the humor soon escapes from the location of the fistula to which there is no cure.
Chapter 30.
Of the cauterization of the mouth.
When you treat the illness of the mouth with what we have said about treatment in division and do not apply your treatment, then cauterize it according to three methods, all of which are correct. The first is that you make three or four cauteries depending on the length of the mouth according to the figure of the cauteries of the liver, the figure of which has preceded.
And the distance between each cautery should be the thickness of a finger or a little more, and the manner of the cautery should be the same as we have said about the cautery of the liver in every way.
And do not burn your hand with the cautery; and let the patient be above you.
And there is another way to cauterize, which is that you ignite the cautery having two garments, the cause of which we have said in the chapter on dislocation of the muscle, and elevate the vein which is in the end of the mouth through which passes the jaw of the left patient.
And let your elevation by which you elevate the vein be according to the length of the body, so that the cauteries are made according to the width of the body.
Then insert the two garments, ignite them, into that space through which you penetrate the vein from the other side.
And then extract the cautery; and thus four cauteries are made.
And if you wish, cauterize with a cautery having three garments.
And then you cure the cautery once it has stopped burning for several days, because it is more beneficial than the other causes preceding in the treatment.
Chapter 31.
Of cauterization of hydrocephalus.
Do not cauterize in hydrocephalus except in the scrotum specifically.
When you treat hydrocephalus with the methods of treatment we have said in division and do not apply your treatment, then cauterize it with four cauteries around the scrotum, and with one cautery over the stomach, and with another cautery over the liver, and with another cautery over the mouth, and with two cauteries between the vertebrae of the back, and with one cautery on the right side of the foot, and with another cautery over the stomach. And the amount of the depth of the cautery should be proportional to the thickness of the vein.
And then let the cautery burn for a long time.
And do not discharge the patient after the cautery with what you have done so that two tendencies are added to him and healing is encouraged by it.
The shape of the cautery with which the belly is cauterized should be clavicle according to what its shape is above, and that with which the back is cauterized should be olive according to what its shape precedes.
Chapter 32.
Of cauterization of feet and thighs.
When the feet are pustules in hydrops and are filled with yellow water, then cauterize the feet over the instep of the foot in the space between the auricular and annular fingers, and elevate your hand by the cautery and do not twist it; and then elevate your hand, and do not return it at all, because the yellow water exudes.
It is the cautery according to this shape: And then make two cauteries over both thighs, and in each thigh let the cautery be made with the end of the cautery blade. And let the cautery be according to the length of the thigh, one below the knee and the other above the knee joint of the thigh; and over each thigh two cauteries.
And let the wound remain open after treatment for a long time so that no water exudes from it.
And then cure with those causes which we have said.
Chapter 33.
Of cauterization of the body of the belly.
When the body of the belly is due to rubbing and humidity so that the digestive and retentive humors are weakened in the stomach and intestines, and is treated with the methods of treatment which we have said and do not apply, and sometimes the patient suffers cautery from the excessive humor, then cauterize it with a large cautery over his stomach according to what has preceded in the cauterization of the stomach, with the cautery of the circle and four cauteries around the scrotum subtly, with a subtle clavicle cautery; and with cautery over the scrotum over aloesis greatly, or with two cauteries.
And if you see excessive humidities and the patient tolerates it, then cauterize it over the penis and over the intestines, and tightly bind two cauteries over the stomach near the groins, for this is a perfect treatment of youth from which there is no error.
Chapter 34.
Of cauterization of ancient hemorrhoids.
When there are in nature ancient hemorrhoids or one of thick humors rubbed or of corrupt humidities, and they are cured with what we have said in division and do not apply your treatment, then cauterize it with three cauteries over the pus below the small vertebrae of the back triangularly, and with a cautery above the navel through two holes.
And if you see that his stomach is rubbed and his food is not digested, and his face is pustular, then cauterize it over the stomach with a large cautery according to what has preceded; and with one cautery over the liver, and with another cautery over his mouth with a clavicle cautery, and let the cautery remain open for some time, and then cure it when it is healed.
Chapter 35.
Of cauterization of athreye near the incision of their scrotum.
When you excise athreye, then ignite the cautery that is assembled like a needle. Then insert it into the athreye that has been excised, and finish your hand when it reaches the opening of the vein from which the blood comes.
And do one or two times, for if they are many, then cauterize each of them according to what we have recounted, and then cure those with what you have applied to them when it is healed.
And if you cauterize with a large cautery over the scrotum, it is better in youth.
Chapter 36.
Of cauterization of fistulas that are made in nature through the parts of his body.
When nature does not obey the work which we have commanded in its place, and the patient is frightened by it, let it be healed by cautery.
Therefore when you see a fistula in nature through, and it is ancient, and corrupt humidities, and then what is pus worthy that it is that you pierce it with a subtle probe, and then know the amount of its depth by the above-mentioned probe.
Then light the cautery that is similar to a ray. And then place that cautery into the fistula according to the amount in which you enter the tent.
And repeat on that the cautery is inserted until those corrupted bodies are burnt once or twice or three times according to the amount of your need.
And beware of the combustion of nerves and veins; or if the fistula goes to the body of the bladder or the body of the intestine, then beware of all those places; and do not do this unless the fistula is in a fleshy place and you think it is not penetrating.
Then heal the place where it is healed.
And if the place is sealed and the matters are cut off from it and remain like that for a long time, then know that it is completely healed.
And if the matters are not removed from it, then know that it is penetrating into its bone or that the bones are corrupted, or it will come from those causes of which memory will return to its place.
Chapter .xxxvii.
Of cauterization of the sinuses.
When in the sinuses there is pain because of friction or because of great windiness, and for that reason the patient's head hurts, then you must cauterize that on the sinuses with a cautery nail from which comes the memory.
And quickly cauterize them again with a small one, so that there will be three cauteries lined up and then they will go away in succession.
Chapter .xxxviii.
Of cauterization of the bladder.
When there is weakness and softening of the bladder due to friction and humidity so that the patient does not retain urine, then cauterize that at the top of the pus below the bladder, where the hairs of the pubic region begin, and cauterize with one cautery on the right side, and with another on the left side.
And let the length of each cautery be according to the amount of the hairs; and cauterize that with a cautery at the bottom of the two, or with two cauteries if necessary.
And let the cautery nail be according to what is being done.
Chapter .xxxix.
Of cauterization of the hernia.
When there is friction and humidity in the hernia, and for that reason impregnation is prohibited, and its tissues are corrupted, and the provocation of them is delayed, and pain comes because of their holding, then you must cauterize the place with three cauteries around the navel, just as we have said in the cauterization of the bladder; and with a cautery on the bottom of the two, or with two cauteries, and let the cautery nail be.
Chapter .xl.
Of cauterization of the dislocation of the elbow.
When mucous humors are infiltrated at the beginning of the elbow and the cause is the movement of its joint, and a sign of it is that the bone is prolonged beyond the other when compared between them. And the place of the dislocation is obstructed in which they are boiled.
Then you must cauterize the patient on the inside of the elbow with a circular cautery that is similar to a ring, because you will have marked it with a tent in the circuit of the beginning just as it is bent, and so that the beginning falls at the center of the circle.
And let the cautery be the same one as before in the cauterization of the stomach.
And if that cautery is not available to you, then cauterize it with three cauteries with an olive-shaped cautery.
And let the cautery be done according to the amount of the thickness of all the cord; and then heal that which is healed.
Chapter .xli.
Of cauterization of the sciatic vein.
When pain comes in the beginning of the elbow and its cause is friction and humidity, and the patient is cured by that which we have said and does not confer, and it is old, then you must laxate the patient from thick humors with suppurative pills or artificial pills or similar; and then cauterize.
And the manner of the cautery in that is according to two manners: or cautery with burning medicines, or cautery with fire.
They go according to two known manners, one of which is that you cauterize it on the inside of the arm with three triangular cauteries according to this form; and make them well into the depth. And let the space between each cautery be the amount of the thickness of the finger, and if the olive-shaped or large cautery.
Sometimes it must be the cautery on the center over the head of the elbow so that there are four cauteries.
And if you want, cauterize with the circle of which is preceded the form in the cauterization of the dislocation of the elbow, and let it be a containing circle and burn the thickness of all the cord.
And this is the manner of cautery in sciatica when pain is adherent to the elbow and it does not extend into the thigh.
But if it extends into the thigh, then cauterize that on the thigh on the place to which the pain goes, and with one cautery over four fingers a little from the muscular part.
And if the cautery is cut, then let the depth of the cautery be according to the amount of the thickness of the cord.
And if the pain goes so that it is extended into the place between the fingers of the feet, then cauterize that where it goes in with cautery by three points or four or more if there are signs from that.
And if the pain goes to the thigh behind the knee of the leg, then cauterize that here with a cut cautery.
And beware in all cauterization that you do not go too far with the cautery so as to burn nerve or large artery, and so that it is upon the patient harm or contradiction.
And so you have seen one of those whom they cauterized on the arm and finished in the cauterization, and the fire was inflated within so that the tumor obtained it by the foot, and it was perforated and corrupted all over the foot. Then strong solution of the belly occurred, and then death followed.
And if the pain is in two places at once, cauterize each one according to this manner.
And the wise said in the cauterization of the elbow that cautery which is this manner: make similar to a ring of iron whose circuit is the length of a palm; and let its orifices be according to the thickness of an almond bone or less by a little.
And within that circle there is another third; and let the space between them be the amount of the hairs of the fingers; and those circles are open at two places; and let the length of those be a hair or two hairs, and do in those margins of iron decently bent into the circles; and this is its form:
Then it is to be heated in the fire so that it becomes red hot and sparks come out of it, and then let it be placed on the inside of the arm, and let the patient fall on his side. And then cauterize that with three cauteries round in one day.
And let him lie like that for three days; then plaster that with a poultice and let the wound be open for drops of days; and then heal that which is healed.
Here is the translation of the first sentence:
Here is the translation of the second sentence:
Here is the translation of the third sentence:
Here is the translation of the fourth sentence:
Here is the translation of the fifth sentence:
Here is the translation of the sixth sentence:
Here is the translation of the seventh sentence:
Here is the translation of the eighth sentence:
Here is the translation of the ninth sentence:
Here is the translation of the tenth sentence: Here is the translation of the eleventh sentence:
Here is the translation of the twelfth sentence:
Here is the translation of the thirteenth sentence:
Here is the translation of the fourteenth sentence:
Here is the translation of the fifteenth sentence:
Here is the translation of the sixteenth sentence:
Here is the translation of the seventeenth sentence:
Here is the translation of the eighteenth sentence:
Here is the translation of the nineteenth sentence:
Here is the translation of the twentieth sentence:
Here is the translation of the twenty-first sentence: Here is the translation of the twenty-second sentence:
Here is the translation of the twenty-third sentence:
Here is the translation of the twenty-fourth sentence:
Here is the translation of the twenty-fifth sentence:
Here is the translation of the twenty-sixth sentence:
Here is the translation of the twenty-seventh sentence:
Here is the translation of the twenty-eighth sentence:
Here is the translation of the twenty-ninth sentence:
Here is the translation of the thirtieth sentence:
Here is the translation of the thirty-first sentence:
Here is the translation of the thirty-second sentence:
Here is the translation of the thirty-third sentence:
Here is the translation of the thirty-fourth sentence:
Here is the translation of the thirty-fifth sentence: Here is the translation of the thirty-sixth sentence:
Here is the translation of the thirty-seventh sentence: Here is the translation of the thirty-eighth sentence:
Here is the translation of the thirty-ninth sentence:
Here is the translation of the fortieth sentence:
Here is the translation of the forty-first sentence:
Of cauterization for gout and joint pain.
When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
And if there is a cure for gout caused by cold humors and the pain remains, then it should be cauterized.
And you should cauterize around the joint of the foot with a cautery tool.
The cautery iron should be made of olive wood, and it should have this shape:
And if it is necessary to make punctures on the surface of the foot, then do so with a pointed cautery iron. And if the pain rises into the testicles or other joints, and it refuses to go away, then cauterize every testicle with three or four cauteries using this olive wood cautery iron.
And if it is necessary to use this cautery iron, then cauterize it and do not press too hard with your hand on the cautery iron beforehand, but simply touch the surface of the skin.
And if the pain rises into the testicles and scrotum, then administer the cautery that we have discussed in its chapter.
And if the pain is only in the hands and it is called sciatica, then make punctures around the circle of the joints where they rotate, puncturing in those two lines.
And if the pain remains in the fingers, then make punctures around the joints of the fingers on each knuckle and at the base of the hand.
And if the pain rises into the hips or muscles, then cauterize each of these parts all around with cautery.
Do not discharge the patient from good treatment and reception of medicines, for if good treatment is performed and phlegm is discharged with this cautery, may God help them heal.
Chapter 45.
Of cauterization for broken bones.
When there is a break in the angles and tears in front of the intestines into the generative organ, and it starts to come out, then you should order the patient to stop eating for his day and to use cooling remedies so that the wound does not come out of his belly.
Then follow the patient's instructions on how to hold his body and command him to keep his air within that is either vomited or the intestines or hernia comes out.
Then return it with your fingers and signal the broken bone by feeling around the knee, signaling the end of which is similar to half a circle at the upper parts of the body.
Then light the cautery iron of which this is the shape:
while it is still red and burning. Then return the intestine or hernia to its cavity, and place your hand over the area to prevent the intestine from coming out.
You have already opened the space between the patient's thighs, placed a cushion under them, another servant on their legs, and another on their chest, holding their hands.
Then place the cautery iron on that signal with your hand holding the cautery iron upright, and put it there until you feel the bone within the joint of the elbow; and repeat with another cautery iron if you have not achieved it in the first application onto the bone.
And be careful with the feeling of the hernia during the time of cauterization, that you do not burn it so that it does not come over the patient and cause death or some great harm.
And know that when you with the cautery do not touch the bone, your operation will not succeed.
And see that the cautery of children be subtle according to their size and measure.
Then treat the place of cauterization for three days with an ointment while the scar of the fire is healing.
Then cure it with other ointments until it is healed.
And let the patient lie on his back for 40 days while the place is sealed and the wound closed.
And see that he is fed according to the length of time of his cure which wounds the belly, and let the hernia not come out through exertion while healing.
And when he wants to get up after 40 days, then administer a decently made bandage and have him for another 40 days.
And let him be restless and full of appetite for food and drink, and of vigorous spirits, for when he uses this remedy of healing entirely it will heal.
And if you desire to cure broken bones in other parts of the belly, and especially at the beginning, then cauterize the break according to its quantity, and it is what is exhausted from the chest like the third part of it; then cure it with what we have said, and it is not closed.
And now, first of all, let the broken bone be cauterized with a triangular cautery according to this shape, then feel it with your hand:
And it is placed a line that extends along the width on the side above the break, and another line above it; and your hand held with a cautery nail, yet the first cautery is easier and better.
Chapter 46.
Of cauterization for torticollis.
When there is pain in any member from a blow or from striking, and the pain persists for a long time and does not respond to any treatment with medicines, then see that you cauterize with a pointed cautery.
And let the cautery be for each member according to its size and smallness, and according to its weakness and heaviness, and according to the location of torticollis and pain in it.
So if he is healed by the first cautery, then it is; and if not, then repeat the cautery on him; for usually of those pains are punctured in a member near to which member he approaches, so that you know them with the cautery where the patient is healed.
Chapter 47.
Of cauterization for leprosy.
The leper some times with cautery for great healing, and by magicking if the leprosy that is made by putrefaction of phlegm and of melancolia.
And so when you want to cauterize it, consider if the leprosy is putrid and as that cured with what we have said in the division and not of them, nor of this, and fear about the patient that the corruption includes all his body and all its complexions, then cauterize him on the head with V cauteries: with one in the middle location of the head, and with the second lower down from him, lift the forehead at the ends of the hair; and both over the horns; and with one behind, over the nape or servitz.
And finally your hand with the cautery press a little into the bone, and from him are displaced the scales, so that the expiration of thick vapors is eased from him; then cauterize over the pustule according to how it is prescribes.
And if the leprosy is already expanded over the patient and appears manifestly, then see that you cauterize him with those cauteries which we have said in the head; and cauterize on the end of the nose, and with two cauteries on the two eyelids, and with two cauteries on the two shoulder blades, and with six cauteries over the shoulder blade, and one great over the shoulder blade near the armpit, and one on the armpit, and with two over the elbows, and one on each elbow, and with two over the hips, and one on each hip, and with two over the thighs, and one over each thigh, and with two over the knees, and one on each knee, and with two over the shins, and one on each shin, and with two over the ankles, and one over each ankle, and with two over the insteps, and one on each instep, and with two over the heels, and one on each heel, and with two over the toes, and one on each toe, and with two over the fingers, and
Be careful of the nerves that are on the heel, lest you burn them.
And sometimes a cautery is applied to the bones of the penis and another to the mouth of the stomach, and another to the intestines.
And know that the more you apply cauteries, the more beneficial and effective they are; and know that the patient does not feel pain from the cautery, just as with the fingers, because his body is already numbed.
And you should make the cauteries large or small according to the parts and joints, according to what is specified by the characteristics of the tools.
Then dress the wound with wheat flour mixed with honey and other healing remedies until it is healed.
Chapter 48.
On cauterization for stupor.
When a limb is paralyzed or asleep and is not healed by medicines, oils, and poultices, then you should cauterize that paralyzed limb with cauteries according to the size of the limb or its smallness.
And let your cautery enter the thickness of the skin a little bit. Then dress that with ointment until it is healed.
And sometimes a stupor is cauterized where the nerves that move the limb and the feet are, and the vertebrae of the back, and see the movement of the nerves that move that limb, and the stupor is eliminated.
But do not presume about this unless you are knowledgeable in the anatomy of the limbs and the emergence of nerves throughout the body.
Chapter 49.
On cauterization for white leprosy.
When white leprosy is old and does not respond to any of the medicinal ointments, then you should cauterize it with a red-hot cautery a little bit according to the thickness of the skin so that the whiteness and color are eliminated, and the color is changed.
Then dress that with wheat flour and lentil flour mixed with rose oil, and with leaves of the wild rosemary plant, and with pigeon blood or guinea fowl blood; let each be a separate portion and all be mixed together, and then have it bound up in a linen cloth and placed over the wound until it is healed.
Chapter 50.
On cauterization for cancer.
When a cancer has begun and you want it to stop, then cauterize it with a circular cautery around its circumference as it is rolling around.
And the wise say that it should be cauterized with the last cautery in the middle of it; but I have not seen this, because I fear that it would cause an ulcer, and I have seen this happen a few times.
And it is much better that it be cauterized around its circumference with a circular cautery, as we have said, or with many cauteries.
Chapter 51.
On cauterization for suppuration.
When suppuration is delayed in ripening, and this is due to excess, or due to the state of the patient who is old and emaciated, or due to time, and you want to hasten the ripening of suppuration; then cauterize around it with many small puncturing cauteries; and then let that hasten its ripening.
But if you want to pierce it with a cautery, then heat the cautery of which this is the shape of it; and then place that in the middle of suppuration so that it penetrates the skin.
And if the cautery is in that place that is lower down, so that the arm is lifted up; and then dress that until it is healed.
Chapter 52.
On cauterization for corrosion.
Corrosion is a decaying that walks through the limb, which corrodes it as fire consumes dry wood.
Therefore if you see corrosion in a place that can be cauterized with fire, then heat small nail-like cauteries, and make them large according to what is appropriate in the place where there is corrosion.
Then cauterize that completely all over so that you eradicate all of the corrosion and do not leave any cause for it to return.
Then let that be bound up for three days, and place your fingers over the cauterized spots with soft pressure so that the scars are all eradicated and all of the corrosion.
Then dress that with ointments that generate flesh.
But if after three days you see that the flesh is not growing and there is still corrosion, then repeat the cautery over that which is rotten in the places of corruption.
And corrosion is sometimes treated with sharp medicine because it is intermediate in the place of cauterization. But nevertheless cauterization with fire is more beneficial.
And I have already spoken of its cure with sharp medicine in the division; and therefore take that when there is an increased tendency from it.
Chapter 53.
On cauterization for warts and similar growths.
Sometimes there are growths below the foot of the patient who is sick, which is called a wart, and it is a large cause, deep, which affects the foot; and cauterization in these is according to two manners: cauterization with fire and cauterization with hot water.
But cauterization with fire is that you ignite the cautery made of iron according to the amount that it contains the wart all over, and let it be of thin margins.
Then place that ignited cautery over the wart, and then move your hand with the cautery around the circumference of the wart so that the cautery reaches the depth of the wart. Let that be bound up for three days until it begins to emit pus from the arm. Then dress that with wild mallows crushed with salt, and place the poultice over that for one night, because that will uproot it from its roots.
Then dress the wound with ointment that generates flesh until it is healed.
And if it does not convert, and sometimes it affects the surface of the body, especially in the hands and feet, then have a cauldron with water that is boiling hot, and pour that over the cautery; and take a quannula made of brass or iron or of stone, and place that over the wart; and let there be a little amount of the hot water that has been poured into the quannula, and hold it with your hand, and move that all around so that you compress it with the quannula from all sides, and press the margin of the quannula into the root of the wart, and pour the hot water into the cauldron through the quannula, and let the patient bear that for an hour, and then remove that because the wart will have been uprooted.
And do this to all of them in turn throughout their bodies.
Then dress those warts whose roots have been eradicated with these ointments that generate flesh.
Chapter 54.
On cauterization for trembling.
When there is trembling due to friction on the nerves or due to fever from a similar cause, or due to another cause that seems like it, then have him cauterized with four cauteries or with v on the vertebrae of the back, between each vertebra with one cautery; and cauterize his feet, and on the chest with cauterization of olives.
And the trembling of him is calmed and hastened by the sickness that causes it.
Chapter 55.
Of cauterization of white wounds on the body.
When in the body there are white spots and pustules that are caused by thick, corrupted material; therefore, at the beginning when they appear, they should be cauterized on top of the fistula with a fine-tipped cautery tool made of mastic tree bark, the end of which is heated; or with a long, sharp needle; or with a lenticular cautery.
And sometimes it is cauterized at the beginning of its emergence according to this manner; and they are not believed to be wounds, but rather a disruption of superfluities caused by these things, and then they heal.
However, it is better that this should be done with an evacuation using phlebotomy.
Chapter 56.
Of the cauterization of a flow of blood caused by an incision of an artery.
Sometimes a flow of blood from an artery that is cut due to a wound, or due to the incision of an abscess or cauterization of a limb, and similar cases, are difficult to stop.
Therefore, when this happens to someone, you must cover the orifice of the artery with your hand and place your finger inside to constrict it, thus stopping the flow of blood from below your finger, and preventing it from coming out again.
Then place over the fire a few large olive-wood coals, as many times as needed, and blow on them so that they ignite.
Then take one of those coals, either small or large depending on the location and severity of the wound, and apply it quickly to the vein that is bleeding profusely after you have constricted it with your finger, cauterizing it until the blood is stanched and the flow restricted.
And if the blood flows from the artery when you release your finger and loosen the cautery, then take another cautery that has been prepared in the fire, and continue doing this repeatedly until the blood is restricted.
And be careful not to burn the nerve that is here, and to cause any other evil for the patient.
And know that when blood flows from an artery, it is not possible to restrict the flow in those except by one of four means: either by cauterization as we have said, or by ligation if it has not been ligated; for when it is ligated the ends of it are burned and the flow restricted, or that it be bound with a ligature or with a ligature by strong constriction, or that remedies which restrict the flow be placed over it; and it is bound with a bandage with decent constriction.
But he who provides decent restriction of it with ligature and constriction with a cloth, or by position of causes burning and similar, does not confer except for the worst.
But if this happens to someone and the doctor is not present nor are remedies, then open with the tip of your finger over the orifice of that vein as we have said before, and apply strong constriction to it until the flow of blood is stopped from the main part of the wound; and over the artery the finger should not be released; and over the artery, rub with water mixed with something very cold until the blood congeals and thickens; and if there is a need for cauterization or medicine.
Of incision and piercing, of punctures and phlebotomy, of wounds and their likes.
We have already said in the first chapter about all illnesses for which fire cauterization and burning remedies are convenient, and the occasions and causes of them, and the instruments necessary for them with the forms of the cauteries; and we have arranged the chapters from the head down to the feet.
And we will proceed in this chapter in that same way, so that the reader may be eased, then on what he has demanded.
And before we begin this, let us remind you that what is in this chapter is for horror and terror as it is in the first chapter of cauterization.
And therefore, let it be with great caution, for in the operation which is in this chapter there are many times evacuation which is by blood, by which life is removed from the sprinkling of the vein or incision upon the abscess or opening of the wound or piercing of the incision or extraction of arrow or incision of stone or their likes. And from all of them are accompanied by fear and trembling, and in their hands is death.
And I warn you that it may not happen to you in which there is treachery; for sometimes it happens because of the ways of men with many illnesses. And of them is he who goes away because of his illness and because of the length of his illness, and because the illness means death.
And of those is he who gives you his word and promise, you hoping for his health; and his illness is harmful.
And therefore do not consent to him who comes to you in this manner; and your caution should be greater than his cunning and your greed; and do not presume any cause on that unless there is certain science which verifies it for you, and from whom laudable success comes.
And use in the cure of all your illnesses for prediction and indication of him who is converted to health; for in him are you helped in the acquisition of fame and memory, praise and glory.
O, sons, may God inspire your understanding and not hide from you direction and protection; for it is in his hand.
And I have ordered this chapter distinguished by chapters according to which it precedes in the chapter of cauteries, of the cure of the head down to the feet, so that it may be eased for you from what you demand and of which you have need.
First chapter.
Of the cure of water which is contained in the head of infants.
Know that this illness many times happens to infants because of childbirth, and when the mother stretches her neck.
And sometimes it is caused by a hidden cause which is not known.
But I have not seen this illness except in infants; and to all of them to whom I have seen it, death has come to them, and thus is my experience with them.
And I have seen an infant whose head was filled with water, and his head was always magnified so that he could not control himself due to the size of his head, but rather that the humidity increased greatly until fire caused death.
And this humidity is either accumulated between the brain and the bone, or is accumulated below the bone on the skull.
For the operation in that if the humidity is between the brain and the bone and the abscess is slight, then you should make an incision in the middle of the head with an incision in the width, and the length of the incision should be two inches so that the humidity can run out; and this is the form of spatum:
And therefore if the humidity is increased and the abscess is greater, then there are two incisions according to this manner:
And if the humidity is below the bone, the sign of it is that you see the seams of the head opened to all parts and the water is pressed when you compress that with your hand to the parts within; and this is not hidden from you. Cut in three places in the middle of the head according to this method:
And then extract all moisture and tightly bandage the incisions with fabric and feathers. On the fifth day, open the bandages and apply wine and oil to the wound; loosen the ligature and treat the wound with tenting and poultices, and bandage the head tightly with equal pressure. Feed the patient dry food with little moisture until the affected member is comforted and healed.
And there is another method of incision which takes into account the size of the abscess and the collection of fluid. Sometimes it is more appropriate to make an incision on the back of the neck, or in front, or on the right side, or on the left; therefore pay attention to where the abscess appears and the fluid collects, and open that up as best you can.
And there is another way to treat an abscess when it is accompanied by a headache: make an incision at the site of pain, and open the abscess to its cavity. Another method for cauterization is as follows:
Second chapter.
When there is a problem in the ears or feet, and it is old, and the treatment with medicines does not work, then the last treatment is to open those two arteries.
And therefore when you want to cut the arteries that run through the head, and then rub the area with a rough cloth so that the arteries appear, and then tightly bandage the neck of the patient with a cloth; and consider where the pulse is beating; and the locations of each one over the areas where the ears are depressed, and they remain hidden in some people.
And then press on the artery with a tent, and cut each one with a sharp instrument through the bone into the head, and open up to the width of the skull.
And if you want, insert the instrument below the artery and cut through it into the cavities above.
And let the length of the incision be two digits long, because when a vein is cut, blood rushes out in pulsating bursts, which jumps out frequently.
But if the artery does not appear at the measurement, then measure from the ear the amount of space of three digits, and press with a tent, and cut through the bone.
And let what comes out of the blood be the quantity of wine of an ounce, and quickly pour in from it more or less, and all that is according to the quantity that appears of the nature of the patient and the collection of the artery.
And consider the wound; therefore if any cause remains on the bone, then cut it out so that an abscess does not form.
And tightly bandage the wound with feathers and strips of linen cloth, and cure it with poultices until it is healed.
Chapter III.
Of extraction of the arteries in the temples.
When to someone happens migraine or catarrh, because of hot and bitter humors and because of qualities in the temples, or violent old disease similar to those, and it is treated with methods of medical cure and that does not work, then we have discovered for such illnesses extraction of the arteries in the temples, or cauterization of those as we have shown.
And the manner of operation and extraction of those is that the patient feels them in his temples; understand the artery as it appears in the temple because it is shown to you by your pulse, and it is hidden except in a few people because of the violence of the pulse.
And if it is hidden from you, then tightly bandage the neck of the patient with some cloth; and rub the area with a rough cloth or moisten the spot with warm water until you see the artery clearly. And then take the instrument, which has this shape: And then pierce the vein with it easily until you reach the artery; and then pour into it onti and extract that to the upper parts, until you pull it out of the vein and discover that beneath it, from all directions.
But if the artery is fine, then wrap it around with the end of the instrument, and cut one part according to the amount by which its ends are stretched and contracted, and no blood will flow out; for if they are not cut, blood will not flow at all.
And let the blood flow out of wine of an ounce, within three hours.
And if the artery is large, then tie it in two places with strong double-fold wool or with cords, and do not cut it off before the consolidation of the wound and let blood flow out.
And cut the superfluity which is between two ligatures; do this in that hour, or another hour.
And if you want, cauterize it with a cautery into the bone with a cautery knife so that its ends are cut off, and stay in place of that work.
And it is better that the patient has fever or is of hot disposition; for cauterization is of those causes which help to drive out fine humors, and therefore it is better in youth.
And therefore let the extraction of the arteries that affect the old wound; and have it bandaged with decently made powders, and let it be cured with dry medicines which make the flesh grow and with poultices until it is healed.
And if while you operate another outbreak of blood occurs from the artery, then tie that blood off, or with cauterization, or cut at the site of the wound, and tightly hold your hand over it so that the blood is restricted. And if none of those causes are present to you, then place your finger over the spot so that the blood is coagulated, and moisten the spot with hot water of strong heat until the ache is relieved, and tightly bandage according to where it hurts most.
And what is best in the extraction of an artery is that you cauterize the vein with this cautery having two prongs; because you have felt the two spots with a tent, and place each one, put out fire, within the bone so that they pierce the vein in two places, so that it is stretched out between its ends, because they are not consolidated at all by this cauterization.
And this is the shape of the cautery:
And let the ache of both prongs be removed. But if it is better to have sharp ache with two prongs; because if they are blunt they will approach each other when rubbed, and not cut the flesh quickly.
Therefore when there is any thickness in them, the heat of the fire is held in them and the flesh is cut more easily.
And this work is better in all work, and moreover easier.
And let the space which is between two prongs be the quantity of the thickness of the finger.
Chapter IV.
Of the cure of acute and sour pains in the bowels.
When they are sour pains, and it is the veins of those which are over the head, and no medicine works in that cure, and sometimes the face of the patient becomes red and feels in his forehead as if it were stung by ants, and his bowels are exhausted, and moisture comes out from inside because his skin is hot; and the ancient cure for those is cauterization.
And you command the patient to shave the hairs on their forehead, and then cut three equal incisions in the forehead according to its length. And if the length of the incision is two digits: let the first incision be equally distant according to the length of the nose in the middle of the forehead, and the second according to the length of a little more than the movement of the eyelids which are in the lacrimal gland, and the third from the other side.
And beware of the incision of the arteries which are on both sides, and lengthen your hand from the continuation of both jaws. And if the space between each incision is the quantity of three digits, adjust it.
And if you have a sponge prepared with dry rags with which to absorb the blood.
Then insert the spatula of two acute ends, of which this is the form of its incision: that is from the part of the temples into the second incision. Excavate with that all the gum which is between two incisions with the chisel which is on top of the bone, and then do the same with the middle incision into the second incision. Then place that spatula and insert it into the first incision again, but this time use another instrument called a cutellar, which is sharp on one side and not sharp on the other.
And place the side of that sharp one against the gum attached to the bone, and the other side against the tooth, and push it in until you reach the middle incision, and cut with it all the vessels which descend from the head to the jaw.
Let the incision continue until it reaches the gum, and then do the same in the middle incision into the other incision.
And when blood has flowed in equal quantity from both sides, squeeze out the places of congealed blood.
Then place in each incision a piece of cotton wool, and place over it powdery paste made with wine vinegar and oil, and bandages so that an ulcer will not form by cauterization.
And on the third day loosen the ligature and administer copious poultices of warm water or tea, and then treat it with basilicon ointment made with rose oil and others so that the wounds heal.
Chapter 5:
Of the treatment of ulcers with cauteries and the jaws which descend from the parts inside the head.
When to someone come cauteries and they continue, and you see the jaw of the patient emaciated little, and the care of them is weakened, and the eyelids are ulcerated and from them hair has fallen, and in the forehead there is acute pain and consequent tension, then know through these accidents that the matters and cauteries do not come except from small vessels which proceed from inside.
And the best cure for these is this: command the patient to shave his forehead, and then cut an incision in the middle of the forehead, a little according to its breadth (and begin with the incision of the left temple into the right temple; and let it be an incision into the bone; and lengthen your hand from the eyelids of the temples which are mauled because of chewing), so that the bone is uncovered.
Absorb all blood with a sponge or dry cloth and then fill between the two lips of the incision with old cotton wool or with poultice. Then bandage it with powdery paste made with wine vinegar and oil so that an ulcer will not form by cauterization.
And when you loosen it and see that the ulcer has already diminished, then know that the bone is rubbed where it begins in the native flesh of the jaw, and then cure it with an astringent regimen which makes the flesh dry, just as if you take two parts of wheat flour and four parts of rosin and mix them, and from this make plaster and administer it to these wounds.
Chapter 6:
Of the treatment of that which cauterizes in the ears.
The cause of cauterization in the ears is one of four things: either mineral stone or something similar to stone, like iron and glass, or it is from plants like chickpeas and beans, or it is volatile like water and wine and their likenesses, or some animal.
And therefore when stone cauterizes in the ear or other similar cause of those causes which do not form a callus in the ear, and hang the ear to the sun, and if you see the stone, then distill into it some cause of oil of violets or sesame, and then administer its extraction, and make it sneeze with snuff, and stop up the nostril from the activity of sneezing. Then place in the circumference of the ear some pieces of cloth or wool, and extend the ear to its parts above, for many times it is perforated with these causes.
And if it is not perforated, then administer its extraction with the instrument called an epicyclic subtile whose form is this:
And if it is perforated with the gesti, well and good; but if not, then administer its extraction with a subtle hook of slight doubling.
And therefore if it is not perforated by that, then make a cannula of bronze and insert the end of the cannula into the hole in the ear and close around the cannula with wax and softened oil so that nothing but the cannula comes out. And then extract it with your own hand with strong traction, for many times it is dragged along with that which we have recounted.
But if it is not perforated in this manner, then take alum or hollow brass prepared with which the ears are pressed with a little quantity, and place that on the end of the jaw, and then wrap around it decently a bandage placed. Then insert that into the hole in the ear with ease, and then dry the ear of moisture.
And therefore if it is not perforated with all the causes which we have recounted, then you cut short that in front so that it does not form an ulcer by cauterization or spasm.
And the manner of cutting it short is that at the beginning you cause to flow in the ear of the vein of the sephasic vein and extract the blood according to the manner of its nature, and then make it sneeze between your hands and turn the ear to its parts above, and finish with a small incision in the root of the ear from the gray matter of it in the place which is pressed by it. And let the incision be in the shape of the moon so that it reaches the stone, and when the stone is found, push it out with appropriate instruments; then close up the incision at that time with speed, and cure it so that it heals.
And if the cause which cauterizes in the ear is one of the gums which grows and inflates, then administer its cure and extraction; but if it does not obey your command, then take a subtle hook according to this form: and administer with that the incision of that gum which is fallen in the ear.
And do not do that when you think that it is already moistened by the vapor of the ear, and place that in many pieces, and then extract those with pins or with a subtle hook, or by incision as we have said before, for the extraction of it is delayed.
But in the water which is entered into the ear when the patient sneezes at the beginning, and fills his own ear with some old cotton wool, and put on that ear in which there is the water, and if by this it is perforated, well and good; but if not, then take thin pieces of stone and lean them according to its length, and heat those in the fire a little, and let the patient insert one of those into the hole of his ear and suck on one of that part and press with another stone over the stone which is inside the ear. Therefore, do not stop until all the water has been drained out.
Therefore, do not stop until all the water has been drained out. And once the water has been drained, you can use paper or linen to place one end in the ear and extend the other end with fire until it is burnt.
And then place another piece of linen and do this as many times until all the water has been drained, and then apply the stone extractor as previously described.
But if a foreign object is stuck in the ear and it's small, use a pair of tweezers to remove it as described earlier for a stone. However, if the cause is something large and lodged deep inside the ear canal, then use forceps or similar tools. The cause of this is usually a bee or something similar that got stuck in the ear.
But if the cause is a worm that has grown inside the ear, and you have treated it as described in the section on distillation without success, then you should examine the ear in sunlight.
And if you see any sign of the worm, then remove it with forceps or a thin, pointed instrument. But if there are no signs of a worm, take a cannula that is narrow at one end and wider at the other, which should look like this: Insert the narrow end into the ear according to how much pain the patient can tolerate. Then, create a strong suction with your mouth and do this several times until all the worms are removed.
But if the patient does not cooperate, then close off one end of the cannula with wax as described earlier. Then, administer distillation remedies that have already been mentioned in the treatment of worms and you will find them in the section on distillation.
And use this instrument to pour your medicinal oils into the ear, which should look like this: Make the spout out of silver or lead, narrow at the bottom and wider on top with a small hole in it.
And then place the oil inside the container so that it stays in the spout as needed. And if you want, take the rod and wrap it with cotton at one end, then pour oil into the cavity of the ear, or sap from herbs, or any of these medicines in the cannula —and insert the rod with the cotton end first and squeeze it with your hand to release the medicine into the cavity of the ear so that the patient can feel the medicine inside.
And what has been put in the ear should already be warmed by fire a little. And be careful that the cause you are treating in the ear is not too warm because ear medicine does not tolerate heat well.
Chapter 7:
On the treatment of ear infections.
Some children are born with a hernia in their belly button that does not heal, and this also happens to some adults, an infection in the middle of the ear drum or from a wound in the outer part of the ear; and this infection sometimes occurs in the membrane of the eardrum, and sometimes in the external parts.
And the one that occurs in the drum, which does not involve the eardrum, is more difficult to heal.
And when you manage to get the eardrum involved, make sure that the patient faces the sun and examine it. And if you see any swelling, open it with a thin spatula, which should look like this:
The end of the spatula should be narrow and one side pointed while the other is not, and it should have two edges that do not cut into the ear drum.
And if the infection is caused by flesh grown in the ear or in the middle of it, then remove it with a thin instrument and cut it off aggressively so that all the flesh is removed.
And if the infection is in the drum of the ear, take a thin rod made of lead and heat it slightly, then insert it into the middle of the ear.
And if you feel any swelling with something that the patient feels easily due to pressure, relieve that pressure easily; and make sure not to irritate the nerves of the ear.
Then place a piece of linen in the ear according to the size of the opening you have made with the Egyptian ointment; and do this for several days until you are sure that the wound has healed; or take some cotton and soak it in vinegar and sprinkle it on the wound, then use this to dress the wound. And if you see that the ear drum is already formed, then remove the old dressing and replace it with new one that you have soaked in rosin oil so that the wound will heal quickly. Then treat the patient until he is healed.
But if there is blood flow, then soak a sponge or piece of linen in cold water and place it over the ear; and use the other treatment that restricts blood flow which is mentioned in the section on distillation.
Chapter 8:
On the treatment of athezil that affects the eyelids.
Athezil that affects the eyelids of the eyes sometimes has a moist appearance, and sometimes it is dry.
Therefore, take them off with tweezers or a pointed instrument, and cut them with the edge of the spatula, then place it over the affected area.
But if there is pain with blood flow, then cauterize them with a small, thin pointed instrument.
And the best cauterization is when you cut them and pull them out several times after removing any cause of their roots; and when they are cauterized by fire, those roots are burnt and do not return.
Chapter 9:
On the treatment of grandeyssa that affects the eyelids of the eyes.
Many times it occurs in the eyelids of the eyes due to some cause that is similar to grandeyssa in its strength and hardness, and because of this, grandeyssa is named.
And it is an accumulation of thick moisture under the eyelid and above it.
And its appearance is that you should examine if the grandeyssa is coming from under the eyelid and is raised in all directions; and the cause of it is coldness.
Then make an incision along the length of it and then scrape it from all sides so that it can drain, and then close it with a needle and cut it off.
And if the wound is large, then you should stitch it and treat it until it is healed.
And if it's small, it won't get worse because the eye will restore it and heal it.
And if the grandeyssa is declining towards the inner sides of the eyelid, then cut off the outer part and pull it; another that you should not cut off the edge of it, and press all around it, and if the eyelid is stretched by incision, then this will not notice any cause.
Then, after the incision, wash the eye with salted water; and treat the wound until it is healed.
Chapter 10.
Of the cure of a ulcer on the eyelid above the eye.
A ulcer is gray in color and is generated in the membranes of the eyelid above, and mostly affects infants, harming their sight and causing tears to them. And they cannot see the brightness of the sun because of this.
And because of this, you will see them wiping their faces all the time, and sleeping on their faces; and if you press the area with your fingers, you will feel swelling within them. And when you wet the eyelids of these people, inflammation and a bulge become apparent in the eye; and when you wet the area, you can feel the bulge within them.
And there is another way of operating on this condition when the patient rests his head in your lap, and you place a cloth over him and make him warm, and then draw a circle around him according to how much space he contains all around, and then place that over the affected area and press with your fingers all around so that the inflammation is drawn into the center of the circle. Then open up the moisture with a spatula by making an incision along the length, but not larger than the incision made in flabotomy.
But in the lower part of the eyelid, be careful not to cut into the tendon all the way through so as not to reach the inflammation, because in most cases the inflammation comes through the incision along the length according to the shape of a white line.
Then remove it with cloths which you have wrapped between your fingers at the edges, and move it around between your right and left hand until it is dispersed.
And be careful not to push into the eye with the spatula, lest you damage the eye while doing this.
But if you do not see inflammation at the beginning of the incision, but see it within the incision, then push a little into the incision with your spatula so that the inflammation comes out; and then remove it as we have said; and then wet the area with water and wine and place bandages over it.
And if any pus is left in the cavity of the incision, then put salt and bread into the incision to soak up that moisture.
Then care for it until it is healed.
But if an ulcer develops at the site of cauterization, then cure that with mild poultices until it is healed.
Chapter 11.
Of ways of treating eye disorders.
When the eyelids of the eyes become swollen due to inflammation caused by the natural hairs growing downward and becoming entangled, this causes eye disorders characterized by excessive tears, inflammation of the eyelids and tissues, which can lead to destruction of the eye, and is treated in four ways: either by cauterization with fire; or with a sharp instrument as described in the chapter on cautery; or by incision and suturing; or by using canes as I will describe.
Now, place the patient's head in your lap; then lift up the eyelid of the eye with your left hand, and if it is lifted, that is good; otherwise, insert a needle into the part where you see pus below the eyelid, and push the needle upwards beyond the margin of the eyelid, close to where the hairs are growing downward, and pull the pus out towards the top of the eyelid, and convert the eyelid with your thumb.
Then open up the part within the eyelid beneath the entangled hairs with a spatula inserted into the tear duct of the upper tear duct; then remove the pus and place small pieces of cotton or cloth below the eyelid, and then bind the eyelid with a bandage, and let it remain as if it were a leaf of myrtle.
But the shape should be according to the amount of swelling of the eyelid, because this varies among people; for some it is necessary that a large amount be removed from the eyelid, according to how much the eyelid is swollen.
Then open up with the spatula along the two lines which you have marked, and begin at the tear duct of the upper tear duct. And if your incision is close to the natural hairs as it should be, then cut off the grosstude.
Then insert the hook in one of the two angles of the pouch, and then scrape away all that which is within; and then pull the two edges together with a suture or with thread made of fine wool, and wipe away the blood, and attach what hangs over the two eyelids by some means, if you want to do so, or else do not cure it.
Then let the suture of the eyelids be for three days or four, and then care for it.
And if you want, remove the bandage after the suturing, and care for it with something that dries and draws together, because the eyelid is raised due to the sealing of the bandage and the collection of fluids; but suturing is better. Therefore, I have told you these ancient remedies.
But it should be done gently on the patient, and it is a good operation, and there is no cause for fear.
There is another way of treating it, and that is to make on the eyelid a figure like a leaf of myrtle, and then lift up the eyelid with three nails separated and gathered together according to this shape:
But if it is not possible to do this, and the nails are not available, then take a needle with thread and insert that into the center of the figure, and push the other end towards the upper tear duct; and then pull on the nails so that they gather together equally, and then with your thumb, lift up your hand with an equal lifting action, and lift up all the pouch over which you have made the mark as we have recommended.
Then pull together the two edges of the bandage with a suture, and care for it until it is healed.
But if an ulcer develops due to your incision or your opening, then treat that ulcer with ointment and something similar, and with bandages.
And if the eyelids are ever inverted due to the entangled hairs, then use what we have said about incision; but suturing in each case is more artificial.
Treating it with canes is done like this: And it is that you lift up the eyelid and split the figure which is within according to what I have described; then with skill, make two canes or two slender sticks whose length is according to the length of the eyelid and whose width is less than the width of a spatula. And you have already split at the ends of some of the parts where you have threads.
Then gather each one with subtlety below what is surplus of the eyelid of the eye, and tie the canes at some parts with strong binding, and let it remain for several days; because the pouch will die and become blackened and fall off due to the tightness.
But if it is delayed, then cut it with scissors, and then care for the bandage until it is healed.
Then when it is solidified, the eyelid will be raised and the hairs will not poke.
And this is the way of making two canes like this: and have the amount of length and width neither more nor less.
Chapter 12.
Of lifting up hairs that poke into the eye with a needle when the hair is hard.
When they are by non-natural hairs, hard and rough and pungent the roots, then the operation on him is that you take a subtle needle and place it in that veil of fine linen and lion, and then that you attach the extremities of it and nuts each in a very subtle way. And let the length of the veils be the quantity of a palm.
And then you lay another subtle veil beneath him quickly, and tie the extremities of that if you wish to.
And then place the patient's head in your lap, and be near the sun so that your work is revealed, for it is a subtle and minute operation.
And then insert the needle at the root of the hair that needs treatment, and make it penetrate the eyelid quickly while extracting it above the natural hair.
And then pull the hair out from above and insert that into the eye, and let there be one or two or three hairs, and not more.
And then pull your hand away so that the hair is withdrawn with the eyelid with the natural hair.
But if it is pulled out and the hair is not extracted, pull out the eyelid at its edges with the veil which you have composed with that, so that in being extracted, the eyelid comes out over the natural hair.
And you wash that with the vision of the eye, for then you will take out the eyelid and the veil, and let them heal each and close the eye for two or three days, until the hair sticks to its place and grows above good flesh.
And if it is longer, then you attach a long hair of the natural hairs, and it is elevated with that, or you insert it so that it is drawn up by some space, and then you elevate that.
Chapter .XIII.
Of the cure of a hunchback which comes on the eyelid above.
When there is hunchback in the eye, and it is contraction of the eyelid when it is contracted on its own, or to the right or left side, by bad consolidation of plague or incision or cautery, and this hunchback, or it is natural or accidental, and it is made by consolidation of plague or incisions or cautery, or by similar to them badly treated.
The way of the operation on him is that you split that consolidation and separate its lips, and place in him in what is between a piece of linen thread, and tie those so that they heal.
And do not think that you use treatment of him from the causes which dry out; for if you do that, hunchback returns worse than at any time there was before.
Use in that of causes which soften as it is fenugreek, and mix with the water in which there are altae and seed of li, or ointment of diaquilon, which shall be liquefied by some of the oils, and submerge in that the piece, and cure with that.
And the treasure of your cure is that you pierce with all skill that is not consolidated according to the form it was at the beginning.
And this operation which we have said is not anything but a rectification of ehalixacrati that does not return the form of the place according to what it was before.
Chapter .XIV.
Of the cure of hunchback which is made in the eyelid below.
This hunchback which is made in the eyelid below, which is named veritably hunchback; and it is of him some natural, other accidental.
But accidental is made by plague or incision or cautery or by others similar.
And the way of the operation on him is that you take a needle in which there is double thread, and put that into the flesh, and make it pass from the tear duct of left to the tear duct of right, so that the thread comes out in both ends of the flesh.
And then stretch the flesh at the edges above with the needle and sew that with the needle, and insert it with ample spatula. And so if the shape of the eyelid returns according to how it should be, it is good; and if not, take the needle and pause that in the split shape, and with that convert the eyelid, and split the two fissures on the sides of the eyelid below.
And let the ends of the two fissures be of two angles of the incision, which you have made so that they meet, and let an angle be made of them when they come together, and a figure be made of them.
And this figure is Greek letter: the land.
And then stop the flesh that by the quantity it is the side of him acute below of him, that binds the eyelid.
And then attach the separated parts and sew those with the thread of wool; and then cure those with what we have said of the medicines softening and of the leeches so that it is healed.
And if hunchback comes through incision or suture or cautery, then you must split with a flat incision over the hairs of the eyelid according to what is preceded. And then separate with the leech between two lips according to what we have said.
In the sum of the speech of the cure of hunchback when it is above or below, that the operation runs on him, according to how it is prepared in the form of hunchback, and that is in form of many different things.
And the wise artisans always prepare skill in every way that is possible for him so that he makes the figure return to the natural form, or close to it, and the patient according to what suits him of the operation and the instruments in the greatest dispositions.
Chapter .XV.
Of the adhesion of the eyelid with the conjunctiva or with the cornea.
When this consolidation happens to many men so that the eyelid is adhered more above with the white of the eye, and it is prohibited from the facility of movement and its natural works, then you must insert the outer edge below the eyelid, and lift it up there, or stretch it out with the finger.
And then you insert the adhesion with a subtle spatula, which is not sharp at the edges, have a little blunt so that the patient is not troubled after the operation, and remove the spatula so that it does not hurt the eye by its acuteness.
And let your incision split that adhesion with facility so that the eyelid returns according to its natural form, and all the adhesion is healed.
And then put in the eye salted water with which you wash it; or distill in it wine dissolved in the water.
And then separate between the eyelid and the eye with a leech of li, and pause over the eye wool soaked in white of egg, and then on the third day use causes consolidating so that it is healed.
Chapter .XVI.
Of incision of nail and of prominence of flesh of the tear ducts.
Know that nail is according to two ways, for it is nervous, and is similar to hard thin ciphac; or it is non-nervous, similar to white humidity congealed, which when the iron touches it, or is forced, takes on a horn, is cut off and the horn is not put in him.
And both species do not begin unless from the major tear duct as it goes little by little covering the sight and forbid light and the movement of eye.
But the way of working in the incision of him is that the patient pauses his head in your lap, and then open his eyes, and lift up the eyelid with your hand, and then collect the nail with horn of little duplication, and stretch it to the edges above. Then take a needle and pierce it with a horsehair or ox hair, or the like, or with strong twine, doubling the end of the needle little by little and thrusting it into the middle of the nail, piercing it with the needle, and binding it with twine; draw it to the upper parts, and with the hair scrape the sides of the nail which close up the pupil. And thus you will follow it with the hair to his back.
And then insert the remainder into the root of the tear duct with a delicate spatula or with small forceps, and cut the flesh of the natural tear duct so that through this incision it does not cause continuous flow of tears.
And sometimes the nail is extended with salt or twine, as we have said, and then it is scraped with a lion's tooth spatula, of which this is its form:
And beware of touching the cornea with the spatula and causing rupture in it, and that the pupil be perforated.
Then throw a little powdered salt or vinegar made from wine into the hole and let it remain until the next day; and then heal that with water that covers it so that it may be cured.
And if the nail is not nervous and you cannot put the needle into it or pierce it with the twine, then this kind of nail is cured by medicines, and is healed thus as the eye, and also made whole in the division.
And if you want to split it, then open the hole of the patient and take a lion' s-tooth spatula, sharpened according to this form: with subtlety. And if you see that it is rarefied and drawn in and the root is affected, then distill from your mouth into the hole vinegar made of wine or with red wine or with powdered salt, and close up the hole until the next day.
And then repeat the operation on it until everything is taken from it; unless that, in contrast, a wound cauterization is in the hole, for then you cut into it and heal the wound at its beginning so that it may be cured.
And then repeat your operation on it with reason until it is cured.
The membrane of the tear duct, if noticed in the hole by great injury, is suspended with twine; and insert that from that one part, and do not finish the incision so that it does not cause flow of tears.
And then distill into the tear duct red wine and vinegar made of wine until it is cured.
Chapter 17.
Of incision of aulacero and of what has been born from flesh pressed into the hole.
Sometimes in the holes of the eye there is born red flesh, and it is superimposed so that it covers the pupil, or it approaches or draws near upon the eyelids and strongly compresses the eyelids to the parts outside and is attached to the bulbar conjunctiva.
And the operation in him is that the patient places his head on your lap; and then open the holes of him and collect all that flesh with convenient tongs for that, and you do that with a forceps or basket; and then split the flesh at the beginning so that everything is finished by the incision, and beware of the hole that you do not scorch it through your operation.
And your incision is with which you pierce those or with the spatula which we have recommended in the incision of the nail, or with small forceps with which it is gathered ash-gray according to its form: see this chapter.
Therefore when your incision is finished and all that flesh is drawn out, then fill the hole with powdered salt, or distill into it red powder and something like the medicines that are caustic, and place over the hole outside a bandage made of egg white so that it is secured from cauterization.
And if for some cause aulacero occurs and there is danger of cauterization wound, and you fear cauterization wound, then cut the hole and heal that wound with what makes that wound, and then repeat on it the operation until it is cured, and similarly do in the flesh that presses into the hole which causes this kind.
But indeed you should prevent all cure of the hole by natural or accidental way, working with iron, and not put your hand in any of these operations until you see that this member has suffered that operation.
Chapter 18.
Of collection of ash-gray in the hole.
Ash-gray veins are red which are tested upon the hole and forbid its operation, and they draw out the hole over a period of days.
Therefore it is necessary at the beginning that you consider if the hole in which ash-gray is strong and in it there is not another illness other than ash-gray, then you collect that ash-gray.
And it is that you command the patient to place his head on your lap, and then suspend those veins with one or two tongs according to your prudence; and let that tong be of subtle doubling according to this form:
or two tongs gradually in one body according to this form:
And then let those veins be collected with subtle forceps, with subtlety, and wipe the blood hour by hour, until you see that those veins are drawn out of the hole and are rolled up.
And beware of scorching the hole with the tip of the spatula; and if your operation is in the middle before the sun, and be steady in your operation that you do not pierce except those veins.
And when you have finished, then you distill into the hole red wine or vinegar so that with its sharpness it corrode what has been drawn out of the ash-gray.
But if it is not possible for you to collect it all in that hour, then you plaster it all with what makes his pain go away, and let him for several days until his pain is eased and it is secured from cauterization wound.
And then repeat on it in the same way that the hand was healed.
And this is the form of the forceps:
Chapter 19.
Of reduction of hernia to the nose.
When you cure arisati by cauterization or with acute medicine burning according to what is preceded by its description and it is not cured, then there is no fire in him except that you split over the wound because of the maturity of it, and draw out all the humidity which is in him and the pus until its bone is uncovered.
And therefore when the bone is uncovered and you see in it corruption or blackness, then scrape it with a tool of which this is the form:
And it is named from rough head, and let its tip be iron, and let the head be round so that it scrapes the which is frayed by piercing with file or sharpened with a pointed file (so that it is in the following form).
And place that over the corroded location of the bone, and then roll that between your fingers, and compress your hand little by little until you know that the corruption is scraped.
And let that be done several times, and then restore the location with astringent and styptic causes.
Therefore if the location is consolidated and good flesh has grown on it and the body of the wound has separated and there is no discharge or accident in it, then you know that it is cured.
But if not, then there is no fire in it except to reduce the crack to the form of the nose, and according to this way: let you scrape according to bone with iron or with acute medicine, and when the bone is uncovered, then take tinder according to this form:
Let the end of his foot be triangularized, and let the shin of the foot be pulled out straight as well.
And then place that [the needle] on the bone, and let it be near to the tear; and lengthen your hand a little from the elbow, and then revolve your hand with the thread inside, so that it penetrates all of the bone, and that the patient feels the pain through as you draw out the breath through his mouth.
Then, restore the site with astringent medicines that dry up just like you have healed it.
And when the meat and the site has become hardened, then the matter that was flowing from the orifices returns to the nose, therefore here is where the pus is on the patient.
Chapter 20:
On reducing the prominence of the elbow.
When the elbow protrudes in its entirety and does not occur with harm nor decrease in movement, then open up the patient, and then what follows is that you make a cautery on the neck by the scarification and sucking by good suction; and then place liniment on the elbow which is made of pitch, aloe, honey, and myrrh, and then tighten the bandage over the elbow with soft powder.
And the way of making the powders is to take dry woolen rags and double each rag into four folds; and make with that.
And then place those one on top of another according to the quantity of which it has the elbow necessity. And then tighten over that with a hard cloth by strong compression; and repeat the suction by sucking without scarification; and then remove the suction and let the elbow be tight during the day and night.
But if in between the ligament has become soft, then let it be very tight.
And then remove the bandage during the day and night as we have said.
And if you see that the elbow has been reduced, good, and if not, then repeat the bandage with the powders and compression and the suction until it is healed.
Chapter 21:
On the incision of the prominence of the venous tunica.
When a disruption occurs in the venous tunica and it is prominent and protrudes out from the eyelids like a grain of sand, and its shape resembles that of man by it, and you want to operate on it, then the operation on him is as we have mentioned: you insert the needle into the vein at the part below in the part above, and then insert the other needle in which there is a thread doubled at the part of the tear, and make that penetrate and let the first needle be according to its disposition; and then incise the site of the double vein and lift up with it the part of the tunica by the circuit of the needle and tighten it.
And then remove the needle and place over the elbow wool infused in egg white and let it be until the thread falls down with the vein.
And then cure the elbow with that which comforts it until the wound is healed.
And sometimes gather from all parts with a circle of cloth around the elbow by the prominent eminence greatly, and then it is perforated by the spatula sutilly so that the white humidity flows and the elbow descends and in the meantime.
And then tighten until it is healed.
Chapter 22:
On the cure of a hawk.
This illness which is called Alconati is not anything other than a boil which is adjusted in the elbow similar to water and is not that.
But the way of operating on it is that you make the patient sit upright and straight, and then take the head in your hands from two parts and hold him so that you see the boil coming out to the parts below, and then let it be dried up and not descend, and the light is obscured, and the patient sees the causes as he would.
And if it does not go down, know that it is water.
But if it is not prepared for the descending of the boil by what we have said, then make the patient sit between your hands and then take a spatula sutilly and fen over that on the covering of the eyeball a little from the continuation of the conjunctiva with the tunica cornea in the corona (in the eye socket) so that the boil is pushed out.
And then when it is pushed out, then you distill into the elbow water tail in which you have mixed honey or water in which you have boiled fenugreek and honey.
And then let it be cured with the other causes until it is healed.
Chapter 23:
On the cure of water descending from the elbow.
We have already said about the species of water in division and which one convenes to pierce with a needle according to the health.
Then make him sit between your hands over a chair and tie up his elbow tightly.
And then place near to the eyelid of his elbow your left hand, if the elbow in which there is the water is the left one; or with your right hand, if it is the right one.
And then take up the needle, if it is the left one; or with your other hand, if it is the right one.
And then place the end of the needle near to the crown by the thickness of the membrane in the white of the eye on the side of the lesser tear, and pierce the needle with force and revolve your hand with that.
And then penetrate into the white of the eye and feel that the needle has already come to the visible cause.
And let it be the distance of the path of the needle to the front by the measure of the space which is from the pupil in to the end of the blackness, and it is the crown of the eye; for you will see with that the pupil through the vision of the eye by the clarity of the tunica cornea.
And then place the needle into the site in which there is the water, and then you draw it down a little and another, and therefore if the water descends at once, then see the patient on whose eye he breaks his vision at once, and the needle in the elbow.
And then rest a little; therefore if the water has been drawn out, then you draw that other one before the needle is withdrawn.
And then when it is dried up and has not descended, then you withdraw the needle with ease, and revolve your hand a little by little, and then dissolve in the water a little of clear salt of gemma and wash the inside of the elbow; and then place outside the elbow a bandage or stop or wool infused in rose oil and egg white over that the elbow.
But us and those who are of our time to place over it combed with egg white.
And if it does not yield to you the needle at the instrument of the eye by its hardness — for it is the bone of which the elbow is hard —, then let it be that you take the spatula which is called alberid of which this is the shape:
And then pierce with that the conjunction, and do not finish your hand at the thrust, and it is not if you make passage to the needle subtle site.
And then insert the needle as we have said.
And when you have finished your work, let the patient be prepared for a descending sleep made in which he sleeps on his side in a dark room, and there is prohibited of all movements.
And place him in nature so that it is cooled his nature, and not turn his head to the right or left in any way.
And let the ligature remain in place for the third day according to its position.
And then untie it in that dark spot and expose the sore sight, and let him see some causes, and then return the ligature on the seventh day.
And don't do this during the time of cure or immediately after the infusion. You have to ensure that it's removed so that the water can easily pass through with great force and vigilance.
But if an abscess occurs, then untie the wound before the seventh day, and rectify that with something that reduces the abscess.
Then you open his eyes and place on his face a poultice that he should be treated with for several days, existing in the dark spot.
And then let him walk gradually and converse about his causes.
And know that in some cases it is not excused for the disciple of vision to see some things, and then you should be careful about the operation.
And it has come to us from some of those who are in the Artach , and some say that fire is made in the Ayrac by a perforated Magdaam through which water is sucked.
But I haven't seen it done in our land, nor have I read about it in any of the ancient books; and it's possible that this is new.
And these are the forms of the spices with which one should work on those who ignore them:
And they are made of iron or steel properly, and their ends are shaped with this triangular subtlety, the acute end just like that is the shape.
Chapter .XXIV.
Of the cure of a wound in the nose.
When in the nose there are various meats growing tightly attached to which is some cause that is assembled with the sting of a fly, or of a polyp, and this malady is called polypus because it resembles that fly represented. And from it is cancerous meat, lumpy, of dusky colour; and from it is that is not leonine meat of dusky colour.
Therefore in that which is in these leonine meats not fraudulent or cancerous, let the patient hold his hand over the sun, and open his nose, and prick with a needle the tip of his finger into those meats. And then extract that to the parts of the foramen, and burn what you have understood from those with a pointed needle in the one part into which you know that all the meat is removed; if something remains in him of the cause of which the abscission is possible, then you treat it with one of the subtle instruments with ease so that nothing remains in him. But if it bleeds or an abscess occurs, then you give to him something that he should drink; or if it is of the malignant abscesses, then you cut and cauterize that so that blood is shed and all the cavities are removed.
And then let him drink in the nose after the incision wine or water or wine. But if the nose is open and from it there proceeds moisture into the palate, then know that it has healed.
But if the moisture does not penetrate as you know, then you know that inside him is meat gone bad in the pustules of the nose to which no abscission has come.
Therefore let you put bile in it to which there is some thickness, and in him make words with words, and place between each nut the quantity of the said or less, and turn the patient and place one end of the bile in the nose with the ray or with another cause that is possible to him.
And when he has done this, let him breathe in his odour to the channels of the nose, and it should come out over his throat, for troops of sights appear to those who do this action, and it is a slight cause to him that wants to do it.
And then place the two ends of the bile, one end that goes out over the nose and the other that goes in, and administer a cut of meat with the words that are in the bile, and do this so that you know that the meats already are in the words of the bile.
And then extract the bile, and put in the nose after the abstraction of blood a cold poultice, and do this for three days or more so that the gum corrode all that which remains of the meats.
And then at the end of the cause, put in the nose a lead cannula for several days until it has healed.
But if you see that it needs more cure, use that.
And this is the form of the instrument for cleansing the nose, from which oils and medicines are distilled into the nose:
And do this with silver or iron, which should be like a small open lamp, just like a little pot, and the meat similarly.
And if you want, make a closed cannula like a reed, and the cannula of the instrument for cleansing the nose is flat and uncovered; to which there should be a handle at its end with which you hold it when you pour into it oil or that which you want of the sucks and of the causes sucking.
Chapter .XXV.
Of the holes in the ends of the nose.
Many times it happens that a hole is made in the ends of the nose, and it is swollen and swollen for several days until something is seen in it.
And for this let you insert that into the beginning of his appearance, and treat all that entirely. And then place over the spot a cautery or burning medicine which is in the location.
But if its opening is delayed until it has become swollen, then consider whether it is suppurated, hard, of dusky colour and of little feeling, then do not touch it with iron because this is a suppurative abscess; for many times it happens that he who inserts this abscess into that from which there was.
And if the abscess is leonine and not of dusky colour, and its opening is possible in all that, then empty the patient and insert that without fear, and treat the spot with what comes out and bind it closely so that it has healed.
Chapter .XXVI.
Of the sewing of the nose and of the lips and of the ears when the continuity is dissolved by pus or by like.
Know that when there is a solution of continuity in one of these cartilages, there are few who confer in that operation but some men.
Therefore let you, when for any cause of those, consider whether it is pus fresh with your blood, and then join the two lips of the pus with a suture, and then treat that so that it has healed.
And if the lips of solution of continuity are already separated and each is healed, then let you cut each of its visible cords in which there appears blood. And then join the two lips with a suture and strengthen those, and over them powder blood of dragon's blood and cut up into three parts, and place over the powder a piece of emplaster diafinicon or of another one of the emploasters that consolidate, and let him lie so for two days or for three, and then release him and change the emplaster and let him lie so that the wounds are closed by themselves, and then treat with ointment so that it has healed.
But the method of suturing is that you add the solution of continuity or needles as we have recommended in the suturing of the abdomen, or add the solution of continuity with gallbladder as you and made known.
Chapter XXVII.
Of the extraction of those causes that come between the two lips in parts inside.
Many times therefore many men in the parts inside their lips have some apoplectic ulcers hard resembling fat of worms, and some are smaller and some are larger.
Therefore you should turn the lips inside out and cut each of those hard places all around, then make an incision in the swollen part where the blood is constricted, then wash it with a pleasant wine and cure the place with something that causes constriction until it heals.
Chapter XXVIII.
Of incision of the flesh tight in the gums.
Frequently there is a growth of flesh tight to the gum which the ancients call albus, therefore if you suspend that with tweezers or something you have, and cut it at its root, letting the pus or blood run out.
Then place on the incised part some other astringent or caustic powder.
And if that flesh returns, then cut it again secondly and cauterize it, for by cauterizing it will not return.
Chapter XXIX.
Of reason of teeth with iron.
When in the surface of the teeth of the inside parts and of the hole and between the gums are tight rough scars, hard, and some times they are black and they are made yellow or green inside, through which comes corruption to the gum, and the teeth are made hard.
And therefore you should make the patient open his mouth and place his head in your lap, then press the teeth where those scars appear, and remove them as if they were sand so that no cause remains within, doing this the blackness and yellowing and others are cured until they are healed.
And if this is what is at the beginning of the cause, it is good; but if not, then you repeat the remedy on those every other day and on the second and third until it comes to the final state which you want.
And know that teeth have many needs of various remedies of diverse forms and of many figures according to your operation. And therefore the razor with which the tooth is cut from the inside part is different from the razor with which it is cut between the teeth according to other forms; and you ought to prepare these razors as you will see immediately:
Chapter XXX.
Of uprooting of teeth.
That you cure the tooth of its pain with every art and delay in total uprooting of it, for there is no cause that surpasses the growth of it when it is uprooted, for it is a sublime substance which is an obstacle to its uprooting.
But if the patient is forced to have that tooth uprooted, you must be certain which is the painful tooth, for many times the pain deceives the patient and seems to be in a healthy tooth, and you uproot it and yet the pain does not cease until the diseased tooth is uprooted, for we have seen this by operation of the gums.
Therefore when you are certain which is the painful tooth, and know well, then cut around the circuit of the tooth with a spatulate instrument in which there is some virtue, until it is dissolved from the gum all around, then pull it with your fingers or with subtle forceps little by little until you draw it out.
And therefore grab it strongly with strong tongs or hold it well between your fingers so that you do not harm it, and draw the tooth according to rectitude in manner that you do not break it, nor give great pain to the patient.
And therefore if it is not loose, then take one of those instruments and place it underneath it all around with facility and exert force on removing it in the same way as before.
But if the tooth is split or rotten, then take a piece of cloth and fill that split and tighten it with a wire at its extreme with a subtle ray so that it is not broken in the time of your constriction on it with tongs.
And take care to cut around the circuit of all parts of the gum and guard your strength so that you do not break it and tear a part from it, then return on the patient for the malice that he may be major that the first pain of him.
And take care that you do not do as some ignorant barbers do in their audacity on the uprooting of them, not administering what we have recommended; for often they bring great diseases upon men which are difficult to be tied, and their roots are all wrinkled, or some of those, or that you draw it out with some bones from the jaw as we have sometimes witnessed.
And therefore let the uprooting of it be washed in the mouth with warm wine or vinegar with salt.
And if then blood flows from there, as it often does, take some quantity of alder and sprinkle on the wound, and if that alder does not help, cauterize.
The form of the tongs and forceps subtle with which the tooth is drawn at the beginning should be of long length, with short and thick handle, so that they are not bent when you operate with them.
And they should be of such thickness of handle that when you strain on them they are not bent, they are short lengths.
And they are made of iron of India descendingly made of straight lengths, and in the ends of those there are teeth of which some enter into others and strain by strong constriction, and sometimes the ends of those are the form of a duck's beak which is hooked, it is bent, and are of strong constriction.
Chapter XXXI.
Of uprooting of teeth and extraction of the bones from the jaw.
When you need to uproot a tooth which is tied, then take some cause, then place on the spot a poultice with wool for one or two days until the place is softened; and then insert a hook or tongs in the ends of which are joined together like a beak of a duck called ciconia, or bent, the form of the forceps:
The ends of them are made inside like a lime or file.
And if it does not obey your command with these forceps or tongs, then cut around the root and remove all the flesh and insert the instrument which is called atali, which is a small lever of which the form is this:
And it is of short length thick, and not bent so that it is not tied.
Therefore if by this the root is loose, it is good; but if not, help yourself with these other instruments of which these are the forms: the form of the first instrument is triangular length in which there is some thickness: the form of the second instrument is circular length in which there is some thickness;
The form of the second instrument is that it is triangular and more subtle end.
And now you are helped with this instrument having two ramps of which this is the form, then the following: And other instruments which will be used for tooth extraction; because it is made with this instrument that resembles an onion in size, and this is its form:
With a bent or curved triangular end, which should be somewhat thick and not sharp enough to break.
And other tools that are used for tooth extraction are similar to the other instruments.
But the wise and subtle artisans in the art find for themselves matters according to what the operation and various illnesses indicate to them; because there are illnesses that the ancients did not name nor use specific instruments for due to their various forms.
But if the jawbone or other bones in the mouth are broken, or if there is pain, then it should be treated on the spot with what is convenient from the instruments and forceps that we have described for tooth extraction, and use the gesture whose form is as follows:
And let there be some thickness to it little by little, and let it be pressed or held in the mouth so that it does not escape or move until the bone is completely healed; then restore the area with appropriate medicines for this purpose.
But if there is a small wound in the bone, then scrape away that wound and its darkness, and cure it until it is healed.
Chapter XXXII.
Of the treatment of teeth that stick out above the others.
When teeth stick out and do not follow their natural course, especially in women and particularly in old people, you should consider this: if the tooth does not touch another tooth and is not possible to file or draw it back, then you must cut that tooth; but if it is attached to another tooth, then you must insert this instrument into it, whose form is as follows; it is similar to a pig's snout, and it should be made of Indian iron with an acute end.
And you must make the incision through which you will insert it into that tooth for several days according to the hardness of the tooth, and so that none of the other teeth are damaged.
And if the prominent tooth is exposed to abrasion, then file it with an Indian iron file whose form is as follows:
And let it all be made of Indian iron and its edges sharp; and let there be small pointed tips on it like files with which needles are made, with which the tooth is filed little by little over several days with ease, so that no other teeth are damaged or hurt. Then smooth it at the end, and scrape it with a razor.
And if it is a tooth whose one side is broken and hurts the tongue, then you must file that until its harshness is smoothed and flattened, so that the tongue is not hurt nor speech impeded.
Chapter XXXIII.
Of restoring damaged teeth with gold or silver foil.
When a concussion and removal occur to teeth due to impact or falling, and the patient is unable to spit it out, and you have treated it with astringent medicines but your treatment has not worked, then so that they do not fall out, they must be strengthened with gold foil rather than silver, for silver turns green and hurts after a few days, but gold never changes.
And the foil should be so thin and thick according to the amount that can fit between the teeth; and the way to make the filling is to take the foil and place twice as much between two healthy teeth, then let it grow with two twists of the foil between two damaged teeth, or if one or more, until the tissue reaches the healthy tooth from the other side. Then repeat the filling on the side where you started, and strengthen your work with ease and wisdom so that it is not damaged.
And let your binding be such that it holds the foil so that it does not escape through the roots of the teeth.
And then cut off the excess foil with tweezers or tongs, and place those in every part with gestures, and fold them and conceal them between the healthy tooth and the damaged tooth so that they do not hurt the tongue. And then let it be so tight like Roman armor.
But if it is loose or torn, strengthen that or those with another foil in the same way at all times.
And this is the form of teeth and the figure of the filling of two healthy and two damaged teeth, thus with their edges tied together:
And when one or two teeth are pushed back into their sockets and grow again as we have described, and become damaged again.
And it does not do this except by a skilled and wise artisan.
And sometimes it is apt to use some cause of cow bones, and it is made in the form of a tooth, and placed in the place where the tooth fails, and strengthened as we have said, and remains and serves with that for a long time.
Chapter XXXIV.
Of the incision of the membrane which appears on the tongue and prohibits speech.
This membrane which appears below the tongue sometimes happens naturally or accidentally due to a wound that has already healed.
And the operation on it is to open the patient's mouth, and let his tongue hang down; then lift up his tongue and insert that nerve membrane according to its breadth so that the tongue is loosened from its binding.
But if there is any hardness or knotting in it, and this occurs due to the hardening of a wound, then you must pour on an ointment and cut that through its breadth so that you have cut the membrane and the knot is dissolved.
And be careful that there is not a crack in the flesh of the lip and you cut through to the artery and blood flows out.
Then wash the wound with vinegar or warm water, or water mixed with vinegar; then let the tongue hang down, so that it is not hardened again in any other way.
But if blood flows out, then apply powdered vitriol to the spot; but if the blood stops, then cauterize the spot with a hot cautery that suits this purpose. Then let this be cured by the other causes so that it is healed.
Chapter XXXV.
Of the extraction of a ranula below the tongue.
Sometimes an aposteme occurs below the tongue, resembling a small onion that prevents the tongue from its natural movement; and when it is swollen, it fills the mouth.
And the operation on it is to open the patient's mouth wide in front of you and consider the aposteme.
And if you see it with a dark or black color, hard, to which the patient does not react, then do not touch it for it is rotten.
And if it is white and moist, then put on an ointment and insert the needle into it, and cut through all its parts; and if blood flows out when you operate, then let a poultice be applied to it afterwards with powdered vitriol so that the blood is stopped.
Then return to your work so that you may have treated it with praise beforehand, and let it be washed with warm vinegar and salt; and cure it with the other cure for this purpose until it is healed.
Chapter XXXVI.
Of the extraction of an aposteme of two ears and of that which occurs in the gum, and of other apostemes.
When there is a growth in the throat that resembles a lump, it is made up of glands that are clustered together and protrude outward, and are called tonsils. If you treat them with what we have said in the previous section and they do not heal, then consider whether the abscess is hard, dark-colored, and has little feeling; if so, do not touch it with iron.
And if it is red in color and the root is thick, then do not touch it with iron due to the flow of blood; instead, let that part mature, and either you should cut it out or it will burst on its own.
And if it is white in color, soft, and the root is slender, then that is what should be cut out.
And the operation on him is to consider, before your operation, whether the abscess has already cauterized completely or has diminished in any way; and then have the patient lie down facing the sun, with his head towards you, and open his mouth, and the servant press down on his tongue with a noble instrument of which this is the form:
And it should be made of silver or bronze, and be slender like a needle.
So when you press with this instrument onto the tongue and the abscess is revealed to you, then grab it with your forceps and pull it outward as far as you can. Another method is that you pull on one of the membranes, then pierce it with an instrument of which this is the form:
Another method is that you pull on one of the membranes, then pierce it with an instrument of which this is the form: It is similar to forceps, but the ends of it are bent so that the holes at each end face inwards towards each other, very pointed and sharp; this should be made of iron and well-tempered.
But if this instrument is not available to you, then pierce it with a spatula of which this is the form of it: And it should be sharp on one side but blunt on the other side.
And after you have pierced one gland, pierce the other according to this method of piercing, and then close up the patient's throat with a cloth soaked in water.
But if there is a flow of blood, treat it with water that has been cooked with the rind of pomegranate or myrtle leaves and similar things that restrict the flow of blood; then cure it until it heals.
And sometimes there are other abscesses in the throat besides those two tonsils; pierce these according to what I have said about the piercing of two glands equally.
I once treated a woman for an abscess that had formed in her throat; this abscess was dark in color, had little feeling, and had closed up her throat; the woman was breathing with difficulty, prohibited from eating or drinking water, and had come close to death if she had lived one more day or two.
And the abscess had grown so much that it had pushed out two bumps for a distance of two fingers.
So I cut it open with a pair of forceps and pulled it out; and it came out from him in great quantity; then I pierced the other side where I understood the other tract was, and I bound up his mouth, compressed his tongue, and placed the instrument in that abscess.
And then I cut away a great part of it; only a little blood flowed from him. So her throat was completely closed up; she began to drink water at once and then ate food; therefore I did not cease piercing that abscess many times for a long time, and there arose an abscess in the place of that one, which I pierced when it had become prolonged.
So I bled and cauterized her throat, therefore she began to vomit; and then I walked around in bewilderment and did not know what God had done to me.
Chapter .xxxvii.
On piercing of the uvula when it is abscessed.
When catarrh descends into the uvula and it is abscessed and long, then it is called perpendicular; and if in the lower part it is thick and round, then it is called a boil.
But if it is cured with what we have said in the division and does not respond to your treatment, and you see that the abscess cauterized is already thin and is round; and if it is along the length of it and is bloody, dark-colored or black, and has no feeling, then beware of piercing it, for there is danger in that.
And when you see it according to the way I have said of its whiteness and length, make the patient lie down and press his tongue with an instrument of which we have described the form; then place the forceps in the new one, pull it downward and pierce it with either of the two instruments of which we spoke about piercing two glands.
And beware of piercing it except where it is attached to the natural part by a little addition; for if you pierce it more, you will break its speech.
And after the piercing, use what we have recommended in the piercing of two glands, and cure it until it is healed.
But if the patient is frightened by the piercing of his throat, beware of using anything on him that causes fear; and the manner of cauterizing him is not with hot water, but you should lay the patient's head in your lap, then press his tongue with the instrument we have said, and then take the water we spoke about in the chapter on cauterization, and apply it with a live coal, and pour that not thick or thin, and with that fill the concavity of the instrument of which we said this is the form:
Let the end of it be concaved in which the medicine will rest just like the cup of a spoon; then place the instrument with the medicine on the uvula, and let the patient lie on his side so that drool or spit from the mouth of him due to the medicine, so that nothing goes down into his throat and thaws it.
And then hold your hand over the medicine, and express it upon the uvula every half hour until you see it become blackened and subdued by the biting of the medicine.
And if you want, take a cotton swab and wrap it around the end of the rod; then dip the rod in the medicine and insert the rod with the cotton into a tube so that the cotton adheres to the tube, and do this as many times until you achieve what you want from cauterizing the uvula; then let it be until it dries up and falls off after three or four days.
And if you see that the medicine needs to be repeated, repeat it; then after cauterizing cleanse around the uvula with a wet rod that has been dipped in vinegar, and clean what is in the circle of it from the medicine with something that is in the circle of it, and let it be washed with water rubbed, and let it be treated outside with an ointment, and let the gums be treated inside until it is healed.
And this kind of treatment is more safe than piercing and bleeding and less dangerous.
Sometimes the uvula is cured by something that is thinner than cauterizing and piercing, for it is cured by sub-smoking in this way: take calamus, hyssop, orris root, rue, Arabic thistles, camomile, bruised and similar to those of the herbs, and mix all these ingredients into one wave, then dip them in wine; let the wave be made with decent wine, and let there be in the middle of the wave a tube, over which is placed an instrument made of iron according to this way; let it be made of silver or of iron.
And the extremity is inserted into the patient's mouth until the steam reaches the uvula above the glottis, until the uvula becomes very foggy.
And then repeat the process several times until it is dry, and beware that you do not perform this treatment at the beginning of the swelling of an ulcer, for it would be too tight on the ulcer, and you should not do this, but rather reveal the ulcer to him cauterize it.
But if you do not have this instrument available, then take a cane and attach a woolen ball to its end, so that the patient's mouth is comfortable, for the heat of the fire prohibits the steam from burning the mouth.
And this treatment is good for health.
Chapter 38.
On the extraction of thorns and of that which adheres in the throat, and on other causes.
Many times foreign objects become attached to the glottis or a thorn from the foot or some other cause.
So you must extract what is visible from among them by pushing the tongue with an instrument in front of it, so that you can see what is in the throat.
And what is hidden in the throat and cannot be seen, you must cause the patient to vomit before the food has digested in the stomach; for often the cause which afflicts the glottis is dislodged by vomiting; or let the patient swallow a piece of napkin or lettuce leaf or a bit of dry bread; or take a piece of dried sponge and rub it with vinegar, and then let the patient swallow it, for when it reaches the place where the thorns are located, they will be dislodged. Or take an eel and rub it with vinegar, and have the patient swallow it while it is still moving, or take a pork and when you put it in, move it around to dislodge it.
But if they are not dislodged by the causes which we have mentioned, then use an instrument of lead in this form:
And it should be larger than a little finger, and at its end there should be a concavity which you insert into the patient's throat with ease.
And hold the patient'’s head up, and beware of touching his throat bone, lest it hurt him or dislodge the thorn with your hand, or that the doctor with his hand.
But if the patient inserts it himself, because of his knowledge of the location of the cause, and pinches downward, then pull your hand with the instrument upward, as much as he is prepared to bear until it is dislodged.
Chapter 39.
On the extraction of blood which is attached to the glottis.
When the blood is medicated as we have said in the division of the cure with medicines and do not confer, then consider in the glottis of the patient at the top, for you must press his tongue with an instrument which we have recommended to you.
So if you see the blood, extract it with a small needle or a thin and sharp one gently.
And if you are not able to extract it with that, then take a hollow cane and insert it into the glottis of the patient, and place in the concavity of the cane an iron heated, and do this as many times (until the blood is dead and comes out of the glottis) and abstain from giving water to the patient all day.
And then take a cloth full of water and wring it out in his mouth, and wash the mouth with it; and let no other cause and maw enter there an hour at another time with your hand, for as soon as the blood feels the water, it will come out.
But if it is not dislodged with what we have recommended, then suffocate the patient with cumin or asafoetida by means of the instrument which we have recommended in the suffocation of the uvula.
Do this, as I will tell you.
And there is another way of operating in the suffocation of it, which is that you take an ash bowl in which are burning coals and the bowl is covered with a cloth, and in the middle of the cloth is a hole, and place the end of the instrument in that hole; then blow upon the fire from below to produce smoke; and let the patient place his mouth on the end of the cane, and close his mouth so that the suffocation does not escape until you know that the suffocation has reached the blood, for the blood will then fall.
And if it does not fall, then repeat the suffocation many times, and let the patient abstain from drinking, and eat salty causes and alums, and do not drink water, and thus necessarily the blood must be dislodged by this regimen.
And this is the form of the instrument with which blood is extracted from the glottis when it is seen; and it is like tweezers except that there is no curve in it: which is placed in the glottis, and its end is like a beaver's beak, which is narrow, in which is squeezed with lime, so that when some cause is pressed, it does not slip.
Chapter 40.
In which is the sum of the word in regard to ulcers and their sections.
Ulcers are many kinds of diseases, of various types, according to their memory, each one in this book.
And they differ in their penetration and sections by two ways, of which the one is by the kind of ulcers in themselves; and by that which comes from humidity.
And the second way is according to the places in which they occur in the body, for an ulcer that accidentally occurs on the head is different from that which occurs on the buttocks; and an ulcer in a fleshy place is different from that which occurs at a joint; and each one of them is cured by operation.
And there are also some ulcers which are not punctured but rather a maturation of the pus in them or completion.
And other ulcers which are incised when they are cruciate and not matured according to their completion, or which are near the joints, for an ulcer when it is near a joint, its matter is prolonged within that circuit, and the ligaments or nerves of that joint are greatly corrupted by it, so there is contraction of that member; or it is near a principal member, and if you delay its penetration until it is matured, the member becomes sore; or it is near the buttocks, then penetrate it that it may not fester; or when it is made in the terminal part, it should not be punctured when there is no completion, but it must be near the buttocks so that its matter does not spread to the parts of the buttocks, and a fistula is made, or that it is made in the terminal part which is not healed. But when you know the time of the penetration of the ulcer and also when it is matured.
And know that it is matured when the pain subsides and the fever ceases, and also when there is a decrease in heat and pulse, and the sharpness of the head of the ulcer, and other signs.
And because you should know when there is penetration in that pus at the bottom of the ulcer and pus comes from the cure of the eminence.
And penetration must be made along the length of the flesh or the body, if the ulcers are in the parts of the hands or feet and on the joints, on the cords of the nerves, on the tendons; and, finally, in all places where there is no reflection; for in those where it is reflected, use penetration according to that member.
But when the pustule is in a fleshy part, then it is better to make the incision in such a way that digestion is confirmed according to the proper course; because if you pierce it in front of this, the body of the pus of it and of the matter is prolonged, and much of the lips of it are hardened and the depth of it.
But some pustules are pierced according to the width of the flesh or body, or according to that from which the member needs.
And when you administer a small incision, in large pustules make a large and wide incision, or many dry incisions according to the variety of the size of the pustules.
And others are of the pustules in which the cord is hollow and cut, when it is made so that the bread and the wound is in a term that is already, as well as that which happens in trops of dubelec and of buboes.
And of those that are cut with a three-sided section; and of those in which it is cut as the shape of a leaf of myrtle, as well as the pustules of the armpits.
And of them are those in which a round section and a moon-like section are administered, and similar to them.
But that which is not head as their pustules are superficial, you pierce that with a superficial incision, or flat only.
And when the pustule is large and has collected much healthy matter, you pierce that and do not hesitate to extract all the pus at that time; having extracted a part of it, then close the pustule again on the next day, and then extract a larger part, and do this repeatedly according to the degree that it is discharged.
And especially if the patient is of cold temperament, or a woman in labor, or a small child, or an old person in decline, because the animal spirit is often resolved by the discharge of matter, and quickly dies, and you operate on them.
Therefore keep this chapter with great caution, and when you pierce those pustules, cleanse the wounds and consider that if the wound of the pustule is small, or it is a flat section, then you administer the one or the other in the usual way; and if the pustule is large, and the fissures of the incision are many, then place wool in each crack so that they come together.
And if in the pustule a part of the cord is cut or you have hollowed it out around the circuit, then fill it with old wool or thread made from linen cloth, as when you treat wounds or roots, without moisture; and close that on the third day; and then process that and cure it with what you would usually do for wounds so that it heals.
But if bleeding occurs in the hour of your operation, then you administer water rubbed with vinegar and wine mixed in which you soak a linen cloth, and place that over the site of the bleeding several times.
But if the bleeding persists, then you administer medicine and treatment, and powders which I have recommended in other places of this book and of division.
But if it is in the winter season, and the site of the pustule is a place of many nerves, then you soak powders in wine and hot oil, and place those on the sites.
And if it is in the summer, and the sites are fleshy, then you place powders soaked in water and oil or wine and oil, and do this every third day, as we have said; and then open the pustule and cleanse it and administer in its treatment whatever is appropriate for it so that it heals.
And this is what is necessary to know about the cure of pustules universally, but according to the way of distinction I have already said of each pustule in which manner is the way of its cure by particular chapters.
Chapter 41.
Of the section of pustules which come in the cord of the head.
In the cord of the head there are small pustules, and they are of the species of nodes which contain membranes that are made to them; and the species of them are many.
And of them are pimples, and of those there are which contain moisture similar to lime. And of those there are which contain moisture similar to dust, and resembling them; and of those there are which are scaly, hard.
And in the section of all of them, and in the extraction of those there is no fear, as when you extract those it does not contradict the artery.
And the operation in the section of those is that you express those with an instrument the form of which see below, knowing that it contains.
Because if what is contained is moisture, then you split that with an incision according to length by superficial incision according to this form:
And you begin the incision from line B to line G. So when the moisture is discharged, then you scrape that by which it contains that moisture, and you do not let any cause of all remain there, because repeated incisions return if anything remains there.
And then you soak the wound in Egyptian ointment, if available, and if not, in water and salt; and fill that with it and leave it overnight, because by that you erode all of what remains of that film.
And then you repeat on that wound with Egyptian ointment again and again if necessary, until you are confident that there remains no cause of that film; then cure the wound with ointment so that it heals.
And if pustule contains a fatty node, then you split that according to this form: with an incision having the shape of a cross, and cut between two lips of the incision and scrape that completely apart from every part, and use your strength in extracting the membrane which contains that.
But if the artery opposes you, then do what I have told you primarily.
And similarly do in the pustule that is scaly and in its cure as we have said; and an incision on scaly pustule is pus, because it is of little blood and little moisture.
And sometimes some of these pustules are in the head in some people who do not have moisture; and the cause is that they strike upon a pustule on the head of an old woman and stop up the pustule as if with a stone, harsh, white, which could not be pierced, and if anyone hit it, it bled.
But in other accidental pustules on the head is not this chapter, but like the pustules that come to children's heads and cause the roots of their ears, but the section of these are superficial incisions.
And make the incision of those from the lowest part of them so that the body of the matter is driven out to the lowest parts.
And then cure those with whatever is appropriate for its cure.
Chapter 42.
Of the section of scrofulas which occur in the neck.
Many times these pustules occur in the neck and armpits and armpits and other parts of the body; and sometimes they occur in other parts of the body.
And those which occur in the neck, and some are engendered between them, and every scrofula of these is within its own membrane, and so as in the nodes and pustules of the head, as we have recommended.
And the types of these scrofula are varied, some are stony in nature, others contain moisture, and others are malignant and resistant to treatment.
Therefore, when you see one in good condition for cutting, whose appearance is similar to the color of copper, and is smooth all around, and not attached to the nerve of the neck, or to the veins or arteries, and is not deep, you should incise it superficially from above downward along the line from G to B. Then excise it completely all around, and stretch it open with forceps, or with hooked instruments if necessary, as we have said before about abscesses on the head. Extract it little by little.
And it is important to be cautious not to cut into a vein or nerve.
And use a spatulum that is not too sharp, so as not to hurt your hand when you make the incision, or to disturb the patient; and cut only what is necessary to be cut, for if you cut into a vein or artery and are forced to stop the operation, then apply the plaster of quicklime, or other powders which stop the flow of blood, and close up the wound. Then let that which causes the pain of the abscess remain inside, and when the severity of the abscess is lessened and it starts to suppurate, When the blood is clotted.
Therefore, return to your operation until you have finished it.
And then ask with your finger if there is any cause for the other small scrofula; therefore cut into them and clean them out.
And if there is a large vein at the root of the scrofula, then you must not cut into that scrofula from its root. But before, fold a piece of cloth firmly and place it over the scrofula so that it falls down by itself without doing any harm.
Then fill the wound with old cotton which you have already soaked in Egyptian ointment, and treat it.
And if you excise the scrofula completely, then you must bring together the two lips of the wound and stitch them immediately so that no superfluity remains.
But if you see that there is superfluity because of the size of the scrofula, then you must understand how to cut into its root, and excise it and administer a stitch and that which is said.
And for those scrofula that contain moisture, pierce it with a superficial incision where you see the location of its maturation, and open an incision so that the pus drains out from deep in the body, as we have said.
And then administer an incision, apply calcium with ointment and similar to those, so that it corrodes what is caused by the corruption. And when you see the wound already cleansed, then treat it with generative ointment until it is healed.
Chapter .XLI.
Of the section of the pilon of the wound of an accident in the jaw.
The ancients describe this section in the pilon, and I have not seen any man in our land who has done that.
And this is the inscription of their speech.
But in men who have squintness, the extraction of the pilon should be avoided, so that there is no benefit by which all the veins and the greater nerves of the patient are here.
But for those who have cold abscesses in the mouth or jaw or both ears, when the disease is not in the skull, they must use the section of the pilon to avoid destruction which is caused by piercing.
Therefore, when we want this, we cut the pilon beneath three circles of the circles of the pilon, or four with small incisions in terms of width at that which is between two circles due to quantity; and the incision should be in the brain, not in the cartilage, and this location is convenient for incision because it is deprived of flesh and its blood vessels are thin.
And if the doctor is fearful, then he should stretch the jaw with forceps and cut through the soft palate so that it reaches the pharynx; but avoid the blood vessels if you see any cause for them.
And then cut the palate according to what we have recommended; and it is signified by the incision of the pharynx by the flame which is from that which has exited by that which is broken and by the piercing of the voice.
And let the wound remain open for some time.
Therefore, when the hour is reduced in which piercing is feared, bring together the two lips of the soft palate of the wound and sew that only to the cartilage.
And then administer medicines that cause flesh to grow so that it is healed.
And Albucasis said that the sum of his speech which we have recommended, exposition is not but that vessels which some of these abscesses have oppressed the jaw of the patient and the patient has died, and his throat was choked, and some go to cut the epiglottis so that the patient breathes through the wound in the soft palate because of any respiration, and he is saved from death.
And therefore he commanded to leave the wound open until the malevolence of the disease is consumed; and its malevolence lasts for three days; and then he commands the wound to be closed and treated so that it is healed.
And what I have seen from my masters is that a servant pressed a pillow and made an incision in her jaw and pierced one part of the trachea of the lung, and she was called to its treatment, and found the blood which had exited from the wound dripping.
Therefore he confessed that she had not cut a vein or artery, and the wind exited from the wound, and he treated it so that fire was healed.
And he did not listen to the servant unless she spoke in the voice, and then after some days she returned to the treatment of her dispositions.
Now he says that in the section of the pilon there is no fear.
Chapter .XLV.
Of section on an abscess which occurs in the jaw from outside, and it is called a hernia of the jaw.
This hernia of the jaw is a great abscess according to the color of the body, and it occurs in women.
And it occurs in two ways; for it is either natural or accidental.
And the natural one is not easy to cure.
And the accidental occurs in two ways; one is similar to grassy knots, and the other way is similar to an abscess which is caused by a knotted artery, and that one is feared. And do not make a presumption about it unless with a hot iron unless in the spot from which it exits. And you probe it and examine it with the finger, and if you open it like a grassy knot and it is not suspended by any of the veins, then cut it as the knots, and excise that from where the skin and bursiclam; and unless, scrape all its substance, and then treat the location with what that which covers it of the cure so that it is healed.
Chapter .XLV.
Of section of the kinds of knots.
Of knots, there are many kinds of spices and I have already said all of them in the division.
And you note that I count the difference between a knot and an exitus with doubt.
Thus I say that the exit is a hotness and fever and violent pains within which is sedated the boiling of the superfluity; and it is completed putrefaction which then ceases the fever, pain, and heat.
But if there is no heat nor fever nor pain, then it is proper for the lion to eat from his own sack.
And it is according to the color of the body, and its beginning is like a head and it is made thus with a vacuum, whether larger or smaller, and they are according to two species, either they are fat and contain moisture, and the colors of the moisture are mottled, according to what I said in the division.
Therefore, when you come to the cure of node, that you probe and inquire into it at the beginning with an instrument which is called a probe, according to what will come to its form in the chapter which is near this.
And it is the manner of inquiry of pustules and of all nodes, and it is that you take this instrument and insert it into the most moist place which you find in the pustule, and you move your fingers with it little by little while you know that the instrument has penetrated the membrane.
Then finish your hand according to the measure of the size of the pustule, and then withdraw the probe and consider what has been expelled in its trail.
And if the moisture is running out, of whatever color it may be, then you shall incise it superficially according to what I have said in the other pustules.
And if from the trail of the probe you do not get moisture, then know that it is fat.
And dry over it with an incision having the form of a cross according to this form: Thus as you have been taught, and suspend it with pins, and excise the membrane from all parts with ease, and preserve the skin or sack if you can over that, and extract that pus from the node.
But if it is broken during the operation, then it is not possible to extract that pus, and many times there remains some of it in there, and then you shall withdraw that little by little so that no part of it remains behind.
For if any of it remains behind, a little or a lot, the node will return according to the greater part.
And if you see that any small part remains behind, then complete the wound with some acute corrosive powders and strengthen it, and place over it which is where the pustule was cauterized, and cure that according to another cure until it is healed.
And if it is a great node, then you shall stitch the two lips of it together and cure that with what incarnates.
But if a pulsatil vein comes to it contrarily, or not-pulsatil, then you shall cut and fill the place of gash which is vetriol, and let that rest for two days or three until the boil of blood ceases, and then return to incising what was broken of the node.
Chapter .XLVI.
Of the forms of the instruments necessary in incision and piercing.
Those are the forms of the probes, and they are of three species, and some are great, and some are smaller, and some are little.
The form of the great probe is this:
The form of the little probe is this:
Let them be made of iron, of fullude, of ends which are pointed decently, so that the instrument pierces through the pustules.
And these are the forms of the experients, and they are named albered, and one of those is called berid.
And they are of three species, for some are great, lesser and little.
The form of the great experiment, its form is:
The form of the lesser experiment, its form is:
The form of the little experiment, its form is:
It is fitting that they be for pustules and exituses and fistulas and tumors for it is among those that are of the bones and of other causes.
And they are made round, large, and sharp, with which the membranes are sewn together, and they are made of lemon copper, or of iron, or of silver, and the best are when they are made of lemon copper.
And they are made the experients of black lead, which are accounted to open up the fistulas in the cavity of which their reflections are reflected by their elevation with those reflections.
And they are of three species, for some are long, and some are lesser, and some are short, according to the quantity of the width of the fistula and of its narrowness.
The form of the great experiment of lead is:
The form of the lesser experiment of lead is:
The form of the little experiment of lead is:
The forms of the pins are of many species, for some are simple, which have only one curvature, and they are of three species: great, little, and lesser.
And their bodies are hooked, and they are of three species.
And some of them have two curvatures, and they are of three species.
And some of them have three curvatures, and they are of three species.
And all those are necessary in their place.
The form of the simple little hook is:
The form of the great hook having two curvatures is: The form of the lesser hook having two curvatures is: The form of the little hook having two curvatures is:
The form of the great hook having three curvatures is:
The form of the lesser hook having three curvatures is:
And these are the forms of the scalpels with which they are dried and cut into the nodes and pustules, and they are of three species, for some is great, lesser, and little.
The form of the great scalpel is:
The form of the lesser scalpel is:
The form of the little scalpel is:
The extremities of those with which the incision is made are sharp and the other extremities are not-sharp, and they are not stopped in such a manner, but is done gently upon the incision of vein or nerve, and by that the patient is healed and finds tranquility through the cooling which cools the excoriation of the pustule.
And these are the forms of poultices, and they are of three species: great, lesser, and little, thus with wool.
Let them be made of wool and they shall be similar to felt with which is made alcohol.
And it is in the extremity pointed with spathon and in that they pierce the teeth and gums, when you wish, thus as well.
The forms of spathons which are made to be placed between the teeth and ought not to pierce pustules, and they do not hurt the patients, and they are of three species: great, lesser, and little. And these are the forms of those:
The forms of wounds through which blood flow is cut off are of three kinds: great, moderate and small.
They are made of citron wood, round with some length and they are slender.
And whoever makes these kinds of cupping glasses, they must be big, moderate and small, in order that through them blood flow is cut off quickly when necessary, and at other times if medicine is not available.
Yet you must not use these to cut off blood flow in all parts of the body, but only in fleshy areas, like on the insides of the ankles and thighs, and on the inside of the upper arms, nipples, abdomen and armpits, and similar fleshy hollows.
And sometimes these instruments are made small, resembling slices of grapes, according to this form; through which blood is cut off when a flebotomy is done, or an incision in a vein or artery.
And sometimes they are made round according to this form:
Chapter 47.
About the care of men's breasts which are like women's.
Sometimes men's breasts become enlarged due to sleepiness and they start to feel soft, and their breasts become swollen and resemble women's breasts, and they become proud.
And if you observe this, when you cut into them use a lunar incision according to this form, from the line of B to the line of G, and remove all the swelling completely, and fill the wound with a medicated ointment, and sew together the two lips of the wound and cure it until it is healed.
But if the breast sags towards the sides and becomes soft due to its size like a woman's, then it should be cut into two parts along its length with two incisions resembling lunar figures, each containing the other according to the end of one line containing the other, so that the major line contains the minor line according to this form from B to G. And remove the cord which is between the two lips of the wound and the fat, and administer what we have said about the suturing and powders that are necessary in the cure until it is healed.
And if you do not complete the incision of this which one must be cut into due to restlessness and blood flow, then fill the wound with a cotton bandage dipped in corrosive ointment and leave it so that it corrode what is rotten from the swelling and cure it until it is healed.
Chapter 48.
About puncturing abscesses which come under the nipples.
These abscesses which come under the nipples are of the species of scrofula, hard, and they contain a sac full of fluid.
And some of them contain humidity; and those which contain humidity should be cut into with a lunar incision according to this figure: from the line of G to the line of B. And when all that is in the abscess has been discharged, then fill it on the next day with a poultice made of old cheese.
And the wound should be washed and cured with an appropriate ointment until it is healed.
And if the abscess of the species of lumps and scrofula is, then you should split it as we have said in the section on scrofula with a fork.
But if the wound extends so that it causes purulent discharge, then administer cauterization on it as we have said before.
Chapter 49.
About incisions of abscesses that occur through an artery or vein.
When an artery is ruptured and the cord which is on it is consolidated, then many times there occurs an abscess: and through what ways inflammation and abscess occur through an artery or vein: for when an abscess occurs through an artery, it extends far into the depths of the body; and when you poke the abscess with your fingers, you feel a stridor in it.
And what occurs through a vein is round to the surface of the body.
And an incision on this abscess is dangerous, and especially in those that are under the armpits, in the groin, in the neck, and in many parts of the body; and it is very serious, therefore its cure with a cautery should be avoided, and what occurs at the extremities or on the head should be avoided.
But over what occurs through them due to inflammation of the hole of the artery, split it in the cord with a long incision; and open the incision with forceps and release the artery and remove it from the tunics until it is uncovered.
And put an awl over it and make it penetrate into the other side, and tighten the artery with a double thread in two places, — which causes you to pull it out by its ends through two arteries which are in the temples.
And punch the place which is between two ligaments with a spatula so that all the blood in it flows out and the abscess is dissolved.
And administer cure to where pus is generated within so that the ligaments fall, and cure it with appropriate ointments until it is healed.
And if it is an abscess due to an incision of a vein, then you must hold with your hand what is possible for the abscess on the cord, and insert the awl under the place which you held with your hand, and make it penetrate; and tie the apostema with a double thread so that you pull it out from the other side, and ligate the apostema with a strong thread according to what we have said about the ligament of two parts with two extremities of the thread.
But if you are afraid to pull out the thread, then insert the needle under all the apostema according to the incision of the needle first, and tighten your threads in four places.
Then dry the abscess in its middle part where it has risen so that when it is dried you cut off the superfluity of the cord and remove what is bound to it.
And put powder over it which you have dipped in wine and oil, and administer the cure that is made with poultices and ointments until it is healed.
Chapter 50 about the abscess which occurs due to torsion of nerves.
Just as abscesses occur in arteries and veins, and similarly abscesses occur in nerves when they occur due to excessive work or occur due to similar reasons.
And it occurs mostly in the places of the limbs or the neck, or any place where the joints are bent.
And it is a serious abscess, and it resembles the color of the rest of the body, and in its major parts are dispositions of pain and when it is pressed with force, the patient feels a kind of stupor.
And it is not an abscess which extends into the depths of the body, and therefore it is under the cord and it is bent in every direction and does not go forwards or backwards.
Therefore those which are at the joints should not be cauterized with a hot iron, because they cause great contraction when heated.
But what occurs in the head or forehead, split the cord with a spatula. But if it is small, then cut off that pus with forceps and open it at its roots.
If it is large, then suspend it with a hook, and scrape it, and stop the bleeding; and stitch the wound, and let it heal from within.
Chapter 51:
Chapter 51: Of a section of an ulcer which happens in the jaw that happens in the belly.
Some men are found to have bumps on their bellies and other parts of their bodies, which are called warts due to their similarity to mushrooms. The root of these warts is subtle, but the top is thick; sometimes their lips are affected, and they can be small or grow very large.
I have seen one such person, and in his belly were two growths resembling mushrooms, and there was no difference between them - they were both white and had a fine root.
And the lips of these warts were inverted and split, and moisture flowed from them all the time.
Therefore, I cut those, and found inside one of them, in a foot, 15 inches deep. And the other, six inches.
And the operation on their incision is that you should consider if the patient is humid and the color of the growth is white and humid with a subtle root; then you should cut it open with a wide spatula, and let it burn in the fire until it cauterizes - for often the section of it expels a lot of blood. And if it bleeds, cauterize it.
And if you see the patient is fearful and anxious, be careful not to cut with iron; instead, take a new lead seal, and tightly press it against the growth, in the manner we have described. Then leave it for two days.
Then, tighten the lead wire firmly around it; thus, you should keep tightening the lead wire until it is very firm, until it falls off by itself.
But if the growth has a thick root, then in its incision there is a cause for fear and terror, especially when it is in the belly.
But it is possible that you cut only half of it, and then cauterize it so that it does not return.
Then, treat it so that the wound heals.
And be careful not to cut a growth that is of dusky color, with little feeling, and which has a soft texture, for that is an abscess.
And I remembered the case of a man who came to me.
Chapter 52:
Chapter 52: On the cure of a hernia at the navel.
A hernia at the navel is caused by many things: or by fissures in the diaphragm which is above the belly, and its membranes or intestines depending on where they are; or from blood flowing out of a vein or artery as mentioned earlier; or from a constricted bowel in it.
But if it is because of a fissure in the diaphragm and an elevation of its membrane, then the color of the hernia is similar to the color of the body; and there is little pain, and it appears in different places. And if it is due to the hernia of an intestine, then its situation is as we have described, with more intense diversity, and when you press it with your fingers, it hides, and then returns; and it becomes strong in itself, and grows a lot because of the entrance of food and violent work.
But if it is because of moisture, then it is soft and does not hide when you press it with your hand, nor is it bound together, nor is it dry.
And if it is because of blood, then with these signs the hernia declines to blackness.
But if it is because of dry flesh, then it is a heavy hernia, large and hard, and it is formed according to a quantity.
But if it is because of a bowel, then its touch is soft.
And the operation on it is that you should consider if the hernia at the navel is because of blood from an artery or a vein, or due to a bowel; then know that you must be prohibited from curing it, for in that there is fear and terror as we taught you in the chapter where we spoke about hernias from an artery and a vein.
And if the hernia at the navel is because of an intestine or its membrane, then command the patient to hold his breath and stand straight; then press with your finger around the whole navel, and command him to stand opposite you with his chest against your chest, and surround it with a wide spatula around the place which you pressed with your finger; then extend the hernia to the sides above it with a large hook, and tie it in the circuit with strong thread or with lead wire in the decent way.
Then cut open the middle of the abscess that extends over the ligament and insert the said needle into that area, and if you have not tied it or guarded it by the ligament, then you extract the intestines and push them back into the parts within the abdomen.
And if you have tied the cloth, then take it by its end; and cut off its excess.
But if it is opposite your artery or vein, then surround that spot and return to your operation; and take two needles and place in those two strong threads and insert two needles into the circuit which you have made around the abscess in the form of a cross, making them penetrate; and then tighten the abscess into four parts over the needles.
And if you wish, remove the needles and leave the spot open so that the stretched flesh can fall back down by itself; or cut off what is thinned out and let it heal, and then cure that with something that covers the wounds so that it heals.
And if the protuberance of the navel is a little flesh in there or because of moisture, then you should hollow out the abscess as we have said and draw out the blood or moisture which you find in there, and then cure that with something that covers it and consolidates the area.
Chapter 53:
Of the curing of a hernia.
We have already said, in the division, about the kind of hernia and in what way its cure is with medicines, and that it is cut off in there by iron so that it is not ulcerated; and we have said that a hernia is engendered in the mother and the precaution for its cure.
And the ancients said that sometimes a hernia is in a place where its removal is possible, just as of a hernia which is in the breasts or in the thigh and similarly located in other parts of the body to extract all of that, and especially when it is starting out small.
But when it is ancient and large, do not approach it, for I have never seen one of those heal nor have I heard of one coming to that.
And the operation on it when it is located as we have said, is that you precede and leave the patient and purge them of black bile sometimes, and then you open that up if a clear swelling is found.
Then prepare the patient with a preparation in which it is located by operation, and then pierce into the wound with nails which cover that; and then hollow out from all parts with a good cutting saw to make sure that no cause of its roots remains. And let the blood flow out, and do not close that up quickly, and squeeze out the places and wipe off the thick blood with your hand or with an instrument by which it is possible for you of the instruments.
But if it causes an obstruction of thick blood from a vein or artery, then cauterize that spot so that the flow of blood is stopped, and then cure that with the other cure so that it heals.
Chapter 54:
Of the cure for hydropsy.
We have already recommended, in the division, about the kinds of hydropsy from water, and the signs of each kind, about its cure with medicines.
And that which is cured by iron is nothing but the kind of althitas alone, and it is not approached by iron with the kind of tympany or with the kind of hyposarca, for that is deadly.
And when you have treated this kind of hydropsy tympany with medicines and it does not bring about your medicine, then consider, for if the patient has already achieved debility, or is with another illness, another hydropsy, just as if it is in them coughing or with a chest and similarly to those, then beware that you do not treat them with iron, for fear is over that.
But if you see the patient bloated with strength, and in them there is no other illness but hydropsy alone, and they are not an infant or old, then the way of the operation on it is that you raise the patient between your hands, and then you press their belly with your hand, filling up the water to the area below the navel, and then take a sharp spatula according to this form:
Let it be of two sharp parts long, with a pointed extremity like a spatula; but let there be in it some short brevity little by little, so that in the operation with that you do not pass into the intestine, and let you lead that.
And then consider if the generation of hydropsy is from parts of the intestines, for then beware that you lengthen from the navel by the quantity of three fingers to the areas below, in the right side of it over the navel.
But if the generation of hydropsy is from illness of the liver, then your section should be left of the navel by three fingers.
And if its generation is from the spleen, then your section should be in the right.
And beware that your section is over the side on which the patient wants to lie so that the excess does not run to that spot.
And then pierce with the instrument all the way through, and insert into that section, and lift your hand with the spatula between the navel and the stomach, and you draw out that; and if it is the quantity of a fingernail or a little more.
And then pierce the navel so that the spatula reaches to the desired place, and it is a location of water. And then extract that and insert an instrument of which this is the form: and it is like a tube of subtle silver; it is made of silver or brass or lion’s leather, and at the bottom end of it there is a small hole, and in its sides are two holes: one from one side and one from the other side; and its extremity is split according to the manner of a feather, just like this:
And at the top end of it is a ring, for when the instrument reaches to the water, then that immediately draws up over the instrument, and then evacuates the water in the momentary quantity, for if you evacuate from that more than does not cover in the moment, it causes the patient to die by resolution of their animal spirit, or happens to them five-fold which is near death.
But evacuate from that according to the quantity of the strength of it and according to what mean to you the dispositions of the patient’s pulse and of its goodness.
And then extracted the instrument and tied up the water which causes is that as soon as it is drawn up by the navel, and recommended to you that you pierce that according to that manner.
And then return the instrument on the next day if they can tolerate that, and extract a little water, and do that for several days with fear, and beware of mistake so that it does not run out of water except for a little.
But if you fear for the patient and let out of the water a great quantity, then cure that with burial in dry sand, and move it to a bath, and to the sun until long time; and cure that with medicines drying so that it heals.
And cauterize over the stomach, and the liver and the spleen and also the extraction of water, according to what I have recounted in that which is preceded.
Chapter 55:
Of the cure for children who are born with places of urine not perforated.
Some children are born from the womb of their mother, and the head of the umbilical cord is not pierced (or it is pulled out or is not in its proper place).
So when the umbilical cord is cut, pierce it immediately with a sharp knife according to this form.
Then put in the wound a small lead nail and tie it, and keep it for three days or four.
And when he wants to urinate, he is squeezed and urinates; and then return it.
And if you do not put the lead, it is possible that the urine which goes on the spot, will not harm this clot.
But he of whom the umbilical cord is pulled out tightly, let him be treated with a lead nail as we have said for several days until it is enlarged.
But those in whom the umbilical cord is not in its place, they are sick, and this is why: because he who is born and the umbilical cord is drawn out from the end of the penis because he cannot urinate from the parts inside, while he lifts up his penis with his hand to the parts above; and it is not generation because the sperm cannot reach the mother according to rectitude, and it is a great illness.
And the manner of the operation in him is that the patient be laid on his back, and you extend the head of his penis with your left hand by a violent traction, and insert the end of the umbilical cord into the foreskin with a sharp knife, just as it is incised with a feather, or you scratch some part so that the membrane of him comes like the head of the penis, and that the umbilical cord falls in its proper place according to what each person has.
And beware in your operation of bloodletting, because many times this happens there; and apply to him something that stops the blood, and heal the wound until it is healed.
Chapter .lvi.
Of albitter which happens in the foreskin on the head of the penis, and of corruption and blackness and adhesion of the foreskin of the head of the penis.
Many times this albitter happens in the penis and is an eminence of flesh that is sick.
And one is malignant and the other is not malignant.
Non-malignant, let him be hung up with a subtle thread and cut it off so that the whole thing comes out; and then apply to that cut submerging in Egyptian ointment; and then heal it with fine ointment until it is healed.
And if the albitter is malignant, of a bad color, then let him receive cautery at its incision and its root.
But if the albitter is in the foreskin of the head of the penis and not circumcised, and one part of the albitter is inside the foreskin and the other part is outside, then let him cut off the albitter that is inside at the beginning so that it is consolidated; and then heal that hole, because when you heal that foreskin, it is not certain that it will not be torn.
And it has been seen that this happens in the genitals and in the foreskin blackness and corruption, therefore let him cut away everything that is already blackened and wants to become corrupted or what is already corrupted; and then apply on that a line with honey, which is pounded with bran of pomegranate and crushed and sifted.
And then heal it with the other cure until it is healed.
But if there is bloodletting, then administer lunar cautery according to this form:
because the cautery of juice is for two dispositions together, that is for bloodletting and for the wound when it is corrupted.
And if the head of the penis is corroded and is destroyed all at once, then let him insert into the meat of the foreskin a lead cannula so that the patient urinates through it.
In the adhesion of the foreskin with the head of the penis (and this adhesion does not happen except in him of whom the foreskin is not circumcised; and when adhesion happens by wound or by blister) let him scrape with a blunt knife so that the ligament is dissolved and the head of the penis is liberated from all parts.
And if it is difficult to pull off those closely, then let him scrape with a sharp knife the cause of the head of the penis and the foreskin; and this is why the foreskin, when it is thin, easily pierces through its thinness quickly.
And then separate between the foreskin and the head of the penis with a subtle thread, which is already moistened in the water wiped so that they do not adhere another wound.
And then let it be healed with white vitriol until it is consolidated.
Chapter .lvii.
Of the cleansing of children and of the cure of that which happens to those who are circumcised.
Circumcision is not a cure of continence like the other wounds: but rather since it comes from our operation and from our will, and its root is properly in children, it is necessary that we assign to it better operation and way more the longer route is lost to health.
Therefore I say that the ancients did not prescribe circumcision in any of their books, because they do not use it in their laws, and it is not except that we have acquired by experience, which cause is that I have observed the greater part of the artisans and barbers using circumcision and cleansing with a knife and torches; and they use ligament with wax and incision with the nail.
And I have already prohibited all these manners and not found better cleansing with tweezers, with ligament with wax that in cleansing with the nail, because many times the cord of the foreskin on two tunics, and the loose tunic is pulled from above, and it is very easily forced to another incision and pain is secured. And in the cleansing which is done by the apothecaries, and it is with the finger, of which the surgeons use, the incision of the extremity of the virile member is not secured, because it very easily goes into the groove of it.
But in the operation with the nail, it very often damages iron and corrupts your operation. And the child’s cord is short by nature, and many times it happens in such a way that it does not need cleansing, and I have seen this.
But of the cleansing which is done with tweezers and ligament with wax, its goodness, I have discovered through experience, because the tweezers are of proportional incision, therefore that the acuteness which is above is also like the acuteness which is below; and then when you put your hand so that they are proportioned two acutenesses, and insert according to a comparison in one time; and compression of the wax is made with a figure containing the cord of the penis all around, with which no error of all can be caught.
And the manner of the first operation is that you make the child be very still if it is one of those who understand a little, and you do not do but that you tie the wax on the penis only so much, and that you leave it within another day.
And then let him cheer up in all that way which is possible for you to receive his intelligence. And then have the patient lie between your knees, and let him be carefully positioned, not falling asleep; and hide the forceps in your hand or under your foot, so that the child does not see them nor any of the other instruments.
And then put your hand into the vagina and blow into the cervix, and draw it in so that the head of the cervix comes out, and then cleanse it of what is accumulated there from filth.
The shape of the forceps for cleansing, this is their shape:
The ends should be blunt and the other sharp, so that the ram of the claw does not come out, and the length of both points should be equal to the length of two handles joined together.
But the mistake in cleansing is that sometimes the cervix goes in completely, or it breaks away from the incision.
Therefore, you should push it out with your finger before the apostemation of that place and insert it according to equality.
And if you cannot hold it with your finger, then pull it out with a needle and insert the needle.
But if three days have passed and the apostemation under the cervix has not gone down, then you should put something into it so that the apostemation is cauterized, and cut that with ease, and insert it according to how it was prepared for you.
And beware of the head of the cervix, because it will not bear that.
And therefore heal that with what the plague is consolidated by powders of which we have spoken in the treatise on powders.
And if it has been cut too much and obeys what is above, that does not matter to him.
But heal that with what we have said so that it may be healed.
Chapter .lviii.
Of the healing of urine retained in the bladder.
Retention of urine in the bladder is caused by obstruction caused by a stone or congealed blood, or by inflammation or ulceration, and resembles those we have spoken of in the division of urinary diseases.
And if it is not dissolved with what we have said and the cause is made vehement on the patient, then administer extraction of him with an instrument which is called a syringe, of which this is the shape: It should be of silver and be made hollow like a reed pen with a quill of goose feather made hollow in likeness to a long reed about a palm and a half in length, to which there should be a tube made hollow at its end.
And the manner of the ejection of urine through it is that you take the thread doubled and wet in the end of it with wool or cotton with good wetting; and insert the ends of the thread into the end of the syringe, and with forceps if any superfluous cause from the wool, but insert it into the tube with vehemence. And then fill the syringe with water and oil.
And let the patient lie on his back, and insert the bladder and cervix of him with oiled water, olive oil, and oils.
Then insert the syringe with ease so that it reaches the root of the cervix; then double the cervix above at the part of the foreskin; and press the syringe into it; and press it in until it reaches the bladder, and let the patient be bent so that the cause is empty, and do not make an incision according to this order, but go through tortuosity.
And then extend the thread with wool little by little, for the urine will suck the wool.
Then extract it and cause urine by healing, and use the syringe, do not cease doing this until the bladder is evacuated and the patient is relieved.
Chapter .lix.
Of the quality of clysterization of the bladder with camphor and with similar instruments which are appropriate for that.
When there happens in the bladder ulceration or apostemation, or congealed blood in it, or constriction of the ureter, and you want to distill water and medicines into it, then have the instrument called a camphor bag made, and this is its shape:
But in the end of it there should be a hole, so that it is closed. And in it have three holes: two on one side, thus alternately.
At the beginning there is a hollow place in which is put what is to be inserted, and it should have an amount that pushes that, its addition, so that when any cause is pulled from the humidities, it is pulled, and when it is expelled, with that it is pushed, and when it is expelled far, according to how the clampcedra is used with which naphtha is smeared on the sea-shells.
Therefore, when you want to inject moisture into the bladder, insert the end of clampcedra into the moisture, and pull with that what is pushed on the parts above, for the moisture is pulled in the hollow of the clampcedra.
Then insert the end of the clampcedra into the cervix as we have prescribed in the syringe; and press the moisture with what you press it, for that moisture will pervade the bladder immediately, and the patient will feel that at once.
The shape of the subtle clyster by which the bladder is clysterized, and it is this shape:
And it should be made of silver or lead, whose head, moreover, should be similar to a small feather, and under it there is a tube within the hollow.
Then take the bladder of a goat and put in it the moisture which you want to clysterize in the bladder, then tie that between two with strong ligature with doubled thread, and heat that moisture over the fire.
Then insert the end of the clyster into the cervix.
And then press your hand on the bladder with pressure descending so that the patient feels that that moisture has already pervaded the bladder.
But if you do not have a bladder at hand, then take a piece of parchments and make of that a circle; and pierce that in all its rotundity; and then insert strong thread into those holes, thus as it revolves, and then put the circle as it is put together, because when you put in that what you want of moisture, oil and water.
And then you insert that into the instrument and do with it as you did with the bladder, and express with your hand until moisture reaches the bladder.
Chapter 60.
On the extraction of stones.
We have already spoken in the division of stones about their kinds and the cure of them by medicines, as well as the difference between stones formed in the kidneys and those formed in the bladder, and their signs.
And we have spoken about that kind of stone which requires operation by hand, and incision.
And the stone formed in the bladder itself is that which is lodged in the bladder.
And I will briefly narrate that with a clear exposition.
I say that stones formed in the bladder most often occur in children. And their signs are that the urine that leaves the bladder is like water in its thinness, and it appears in that sand; and the patient feels burning when he urinates, and often has difficulty urinating; and with this there may be blood in his urine.
And it is difficult to cure this in the old, but easier in children who have reached the age of 12. But it is milder for them because they are younger.
And if the stone is larger, its cure is more difficult; and if smaller, the contrary.
Therefore, when we come to the cure of this, we should first cleanse the patient with a clyster that opens up the entire passage which is in his bowels; for sometimes that opening prevents the expulsion of the stone after examination.
And then let the patient be laid on his back and made to groan and strain in order that the stone may descend into the bottom of the bladder, or jump up from its place sometimes.
And then let him make an effort with his arms and legs while he is lying on his back, so that the whole bladder may be made to decline towards its lower parts.
And then let him make an effort to urinate.
Therefore, if you feel the stone in that space, then you should cut it at once.
And if it does not come out at all by your touch, then let the patient smear oil on his left index finger or middle finger if he is a child, or the tip of the little finger if he is an adult, and insert that in his anus. And so let him expel the stone by pushing it with his finger. And gradually push that into the neck of the bladder.
And then press on it with your finger, and expel it out through the place where you made the incision.
And command the assistant to press the bladder with his hand; and command another assistant to extend the testicles upwards with his right hand, and with his other hand to press on the scrotum beneath the testicles, in the part where the incision is made.
And then insert the spatulum so that its narrow end enters first; this is how it should be done: and cut into the space between the anus and testicles, not in the rectum, in front of the left testicle; and let the incision be over the stone and the incision on the finger be in the anus, and let the incision be transverse, so that the opening is wide and the wound narrow according to the size of the stone that can be expelled from it without any compression, for fear of the finger being crushed in the wound.
And know that there is some stone whose angles and edges make its emission difficult for that reason.
And that is like a grape in shape, and it is round, and it is easier to expel from it.
Therefore, if it is the kind whose angles and edges are sharp, insert it into the incision.
And if it is not easily expelled, then let you push on that or tighten it with a decent grip, the end of which should be like a file by which to tighten around the stone, and not slip off it; or insert below it a slender instrument with a curved end.
But if you cannot move it, then let you enlarge the wound a little, and if you see blood flowing, stop it with burnt vinegar.
But if there are more than one stone, then at the beginning push your finger to the mouth of the bladder, and then insert it over them; and then push in a little bit there; and do likewise if there are more than two.
And if the stone is very large, then it is folly to insert that with a great incision, for there are two causes why this happens: either because the patient dies or he develops continuous urination because the wound is not completely healed.
But let the assistant expel it when it is expelled, or insert it into the fracture with forceps so that he can extract it in pieces.
Therefore, when you have finished your operation, then fill the wound with cotton wool and dragon's blood, and tighten it. And place a cloth soaked in oil and wine, or rose-oil and water, over it so that the wound may be cleaned by cauterisation.
And then let him lie on his back, and not loosen the bandage until the third day.
And when he has loosened it, wash the wound with water and oil, and then cure that with ointment of diafenicon and ointment of diabasilon until it is healed.
But if the wound becomes hot and ulcerated, and it seems as though the blood has congealed in the bladder, and there is no urination (and that is called by the egress of blood with urine), then insert your finger into the wound and extract that blood, for if it remains, it will provoke corruption of the bladder and putrefaction.
And then wash the wound with sharp wine, water and salt, and apply to it all manner of remedies, by which means he will be cured until he is healed.
And let him lie on his back during all the cure, and you apply both testicles and adjust the medicines which are laid upon the wound.
And if the stone is small and lodged in the urethra, and there is no urination, then cure that by what means you can insert it before the incision is made, for there are many remedies which have been proved to be effective against this; and indeed you can use an iron punch covered with velvet, of which this is the form:
triangular in shape, pointed, made on a stick.
And then take a punch and insert it into the urethra below the stone so that it does not return to the bladder.
And then insert the iron into the urethra, piercing with ease until the punch reaches the stone. And turn the punch with your hand around that small stone little by little, and pierce it from both sides so that you can penetrate it from the other side; for the urine is then absorbed.
And then press your hand over the opening so that it is tight around where the stone was before the urethra was pierced, for that is cramped, and there is no egress of urine, and the patient is healed.
But if this cure is not prepared for any reason which prohibits it, then insert an iron below the stone, and another iron above it. And then you light a fire on the stone in that groin between two ligatures. Then take out that object. Then untie the ligament and clean the clotted blood which is caused by the plague.
And the ligament of the bladder is not necessary except to prevent it from returning to the vesica, and the other ligament above except that when the bladder is untied the cord returns to its place and cures the plague.
And for this reason when you tie the bladder above, you must lift the cord to the parts above so that it returns to its proper state and cures the plague as we have said.
Chapter 61.
On the extraction of stones from women.
Stones in women are seldom generated.
But if you see a stone in one of them, then its cure is difficult and prohibited by many methods.
One of these is that the woman is very young.
And the second is that you do not find a woman who knows how to examine her if she is chaste or is one of those married women.
The third is that you cannot find a woman skilled in this art, especially for the operation with your hand.
And the fourth is that the site of the incision for a stone in women is distant from the site of the stone, so it requires a deep incision and there is fear in that.
But if necessity compels you to do this, then know that you must take a female doctor who is very skilled, and she is seldom found.
But if you lack that, then seek a skilled doctor and subtle or present a female midwife skilled in the affairs of women or a woman who in this art has made progress in the art.
So do that presentation and command her to do everything you order her to do from the inquiry about the stone at the beginning; the cause is that she examine whether the woman is a virgin then know that she puts her finger in the anus of her and feels for the stone.
So if she finds it, hold that under her finger and then command her to insert it into that.
But if she is not a virgin, then command the midwife to insert her finger into the vulva and feel for the stone, since she places her left hand over the bladder, and grip that with good pressure.
So if she finds it, then know that gradually pull that from the orifice of the bladder to the parts below with the top of her finger which came through that to the root of the groin.
Then insert into that the tip of the finger from the vulva over the root of the groin from whatever part it is stopped at and grasp the stone in that part, and the finger of her not be pushed back by the stone holding it there.
And the incision should be small at first; then insert the needle into that incision and if she feels the stone, then make a second incision according to the amount she knows the stone will be pushed out of that.
And know that the kinds of stones are many: for some of them are small and large and lean and rough, and long and round having horns.
So you know how many species there are of it therefore you signify above what you want.
And if you see bleeding, apply verdigris crushed and wet that for an hour while the blood is clotted, then return to your operation when the stone has been pushed out.
And prepare with you the instruments which you use in the extraction of stones in men so that you are aided by those in your operation.
And if you see bleeding and know that the discharge of blood is from the artery which is cut, then you place powder on the site and tighten that with a ligature, and do not touch that; let go of the stone and do not extract it for the woman will surely die. Then cure the plague.
So when the sharpness of the bleeding has ceased, and the site is healing, then you return to your operation when the stone has been pushed out.
Chapter 62.
On incision for hernia acute.
Hernia aiguo is nothing but an accumulation of moisture in the white membrane which is below the diaphragm containing the intestines and is called the sac.
And sometimes it is in the proper membrane which nature has prepared in the part of the sac while it is another sac; and it is the diaphragm between the white membrane which we have said, and that is nothing but fat.
And the generation of this hernia is from weakness which occurs to the intestines, for to those is poured out that matter, and sometimes occurs by blow made upon the intestines.
And that moisture has many colors for the color of it inclines to yellow or blood-red or red or is black and sludgy, and that is what is most.
And the marks by which it is known that this accumulation of water is in the white membrane which we have said, then the pustule is round declining a little to length thus with figure of sac and appears the intestine for the moisture contains all parts.
And if the moisture is in the proper membrane then the pustule is round with part of the sac and for that man estimates that it is another sac.
And if the moisture is between the diaphragm of the intestines and the white membrane then cut below the center.
And when you want to know the color of the moisture then you try the color of the moisture in the pustule with a needle of which the point is preceded; and according to what comes out on the tip of the needle judge about what there is inside it.
So when we come to the cure of it with fire then know that we command the patient to be bled if that is possible for you, and see the body of him full.
Then let it be resupine over his back on any cause a little higher, and place below him pieces of linen.
Then sit on the left side of him and command the midwife to follow on his right side and she extend her finger to one of two sides to the diaphragm of the intestines and at the part of the navel of the belly.
Then take a flat knife and cut the diaphragm of the intestines of the middle location for the length inside near the anus.
And let the incision be made according to right-angle equally distant from the line which should pass through the hair of the intestines, so that it comes to the white membrane including it.
Excise that and observe, and beware lest you not insert it; and your incision with which you excise it by part cuticle which is suspended at the sac more and scrutinize with your incision according to the amount possible for you.
Then pierce the sac full of water with wide perforation, and extract all the water.
Then separate between two lips of the incision with pincers and extend the sac to the parts above; and do not touch the diaphragm of the intestines containing it and insert the sac in that way which is possible for you. Then insert that with its totality or in pieces and especially its sides slender for if you do not scrutinize the incision of it strictly there is not assurance that the water will not return.
But if the hernia protrudes through the opening in his abdomen during your operation, then when you have finished the incision of the scrotum, return it inside and sew the two lips of the abdominal wall of the scrotum with a stitch, and treat it as you would any other wound until it heals.
And if you find the hernia腐ed by another disease, then cut the vessels which are under the suspensory ligament, remove the hernia, and treat it with what we have said.
But if the hernia is divided into two parts, then you should know that there are two hernias; therefore, operate on that part in the same way as you did on the other; and if it seems to you that it is one operation, then perform it.
And you should wipe away the blood, and enter into the incisions wool soaked in oil or in rose oil; and put outside another wool which you have soaked in wine and oil, and spread it over both testicles and the scrotum; and place on top folded cloths and powders, and tie those with a ligature which is according to this form:
and let there be two pieces of cloth and they are filled with wool dyed red according to this semblance; and the ends with which it is pressed are made of string or of wet wool, and they are tied tightly in the waistband of the underpants, and one end goes from the back between the two, and the second goes to the front part of the scrotum, and two ends on each side go below and the other two on the sides, and all fastening is tightened in the waistband of the underpants.
And sometimes this hernia is treated artificially with cautery instead of an incision with iron; and you should take a sharp cutting cautery and insert it into the scrotum of the testicles, and ignite it according to what we have recommended until the white sac containing the hernia is exposed, and then you should use cautery according to this form: and it is like the Greek letter alpha.
And you should pierce with that cautery, and ignite it until all moisture is driven out.
And you should extend the scrotum with tongs, and cut it with tongs, and cauterize with a sharp cautery ignited; and insert it according to what is possible for you until you have removed everything; and beware of the hernia that the fire does not touch it.
And know that this operation is more safe and more distant from bleeding, and better than an operation with an incision.
But if you see an abscess formed in the hour of incision or in the hour of cautery, or bleeding, then you should treat whatever inconvenience there is for you with treatment which suits it according to what has been said.
But if the patient is fearful and does not await the second operation because of its horribleness, then you should perform piercing according to what I have recommended; and it is when it is certified that you must, by what we have said about the significators, know that the hernia is aqueous.
Then you should have the patient lie on his back on a high bed, and pierce the abscess in its lowest part with a broad spatula, and make the piercing according to the length of the body.
And the opening should be large enough for all the water to flow out.
And you should place string and tie it there, and leave it, so that the remainder of the water flows out. And you should treat it until the wound is healed.
But if there is an inconvenience in the emission of the hernia in that hour when you pierce it: and this is not done except because the white membrane in the opening of the wound causes inconvenience and prohibits the emission of the hernia, then you should put into the wound a needle or instrument with which the hernia is extracted from the hydrocele, the form of which is preceded; or place under pressure on the hernia a small ball.
And know that the hernia returns, and is held back for several months or years; and when it is accumulated, then it should be pierced according to that same manual method, for thus will the patient pass his days.
Chapter .lxxxiii.
Of incision on a fleshy hernia and its treatment.
Know that in the incision on this hernia, there is usually great fear of death in those with the most disposition; for I have seen the dismissal of it and being saved by that better.
And I am remembering the operation on that one and the species of the abscesses.
Therefore, I say that abscesses arise in the bodies of which the testicles are composed and it is done for many causes: or by acute acute superfluity, which is secreted to the testicles, or by piercing.
And the color of the abscess is according to the color of the body, and there is no pain in it, and it is a heavy abscess.
And very often it is an abscess calcified, of which the color is dark, and there is no sensation in it.
And sometimes it is done by a node of the membranes, and by inflammation of those from which there has already been perceived a memory of it, or by inflammation of the veins.
But that which is by inflammation of membranes is known by the dispersion of the abscess when you compress it with your fingers; and it should not be touched.
But that which is done by inflammation of a vein is not dispersed at all for any cause because of compression with the fingers.
And it is possible that on this species there should be incision and on the other meats; and you should insert the scrotum of the testicles, and extend the hernia to its parts above, and extract it from the white sac, and ligature the testicles, and insert them into the sac after you have extracted it from all parts of the hernia.
Therefore, if the hernia is already consolidated in those meats, then you should extract the hernia and insert it.
And if there is adhesion for any cause of the scrotum, or between that which is between the sacs, then you should loosen all that adhesion and insert it by a round incision.
But if there is raw flesh in the place of the adhesion which is behind, then you should insert all that is of it and extract the hernia as we have said.
Therefore, when your operation is complete, then fill the wound with wool soaked in rose oil and wine; and treat it with the other treatment until it is healed.
Chapter .xciv.
Of the treatment of hernia which is of veins.
Veins is an abscess wrapped in any wrapper similar to a swelling with softening of the testicles, and there is difficult exercise and walking on the patient.
And in the treatment of this disease, it is by fear for that from which is preceded memory.
However, let us examine its operation according to those which are first.
And I say that you should have the patient lie on his back on a high bed; and tighten the testicles to their lowest parts with cords; and you should tie the scrotum of the testicles to its lowest part with cords according to what has been proven in the rod; and hold those other servants which you have, and extend them with violent extension.
And you should insert with a broad spatula through an incision transversely in the right of the sacs until they are exposed.
And then you should remove all hair from the affected area, as we have said before regarding hair removal using archery tools, which are in the temples.
Then you should insert a double-headed needle into those places where there are veins, and tie one end of the thread to the front of the affected area, and the other end to the back of it. Then you should cut into them in the middle, according to the length of the body, and extract what is accumulated from the fetid and putrid humors.
And then you should treat the wound with a cure for other wounds in which you want pus to be generated, so that the vessels which have become black from one of two things may fall away, which is not harmful.
But if the veins are affected everywhere, then you should either extract the testicles or tie off the vessels connected to them, so that they are deprived of all nourishment through the cutting of the vessels, and that they wither away, or else that they are tied off so that there is no benefit to them.
Chapter 65:
On the treatment of intestinal hernia.
The cause of this hernia is due to an opening that occurs in the diaphragm extending over the belly, from which some intestines protrude through that opening.
And this rupture is either of the diaphragm or due to an incision there, and these two types occur for various reasons: due to a blow, or from jumping, or from shouting, or from lifting something heavy, or from similar activities.
And the sign of this, when it is due to an extension of the diaphragm, is that it occurs gradually over a long time, and not suddenly, and there is swelling underneath the skin due to the diaphragm compressing the intestine.
And the sign of this type is that it causes intense pain right away; and there is a diverse appearance of swelling below the navel, and this is due to the protrusion of the intestine, and the body is pushed out at the edges of the diaphragm.
And sometimes the intestine slips out with its covering, and this type of hernia is called intestinal hernia with a sac.
And sometimes it occurs due to hernia with a sac, and sometimes there is a tear in the intestine, and it gets stuck there, and this causes great harm to the patient, and sometimes it causes intense pain especially when it is pressed upon.
And in treating this illness with iron, there is fear involved because it is easy to damage the intestines.
And the method of performing this operation is that you command the patient to draw in his intestines with his hand into their cavity if he obeys your instructions, and then have him lie on his side between your hands, and lift his legs up.
And then you should tighten the skin that covers the testicles at the top, and cut all around the testicles with your knife; and then insert two hooks into the incision to pull it open according to what you command them to do.
And if the incision is as large as it needs to be so that nothing of that which has slipped out is left behind, then you should close it up.
And then you should remove the skin that covers the diaphragm under which the testicles are located, and reveal the white and firm diaphragm underneath in each area.
Then you should put your finger into what holds the testicle, in what is between the white diaphragm and the diaphragm below, and between the diaphragm according to its location, and release it from the adhesion that is in the back part of the abdomen.
And then you should hold the skin of the testicles at their openings, and extend the white diaphragm with your left hand, and lift up the abdomen with the diaphragm to the side of the incision; and command the assistant to extend the abdomen inwards while you release the adhesion that is behind it with a complete solution.
And close with your fingers so that there is no cause for the intestine to be wrapped in the white and firm diaphragm. But if you find any cause for it, then you should push it back into the abdomen.
And then cut at the end below the scrotum through a section from which blood and pus will flow, as we have recommended in what we have said.
And then administer wool soaked in oil, and place it on the wound; and administer the bandage which we have recommended (and sometimes the scrotum is cauterized white, which we have said close to the cut of it they fear the flow of blood, because many times these occur) and leave the bandage so that by itself it falls.
But if the falling of it is delayed, then let water and lye be heated, and place it on that area so that it falls according to what we have said.
And then cure the wound with another cure for wounds so that it heals.
Chapter 66.
Of a wind hernia.
In this hernia I have not seen anyone who has been burned on the cure of it with iron.
And the first said that it is made thus as we have recommended in the hernia that is with wine; which is that you tie the vessels close to the section on it with ease of it; and then dry in the middle place around the abscess with that which opened it, while the vessels fall.
And cure the wound as we have said so that it is healed.
Chapter 67.
Of the rupture that is made in the intestines.
Sometimes this rupture in the intestines as we have said, and they project the place.
And do not give any cause to the bowels by the bowels; and if they give, it is little; and return in all hours.
But if the time with that is prolonged, it is a fissure in the scrotum so that the intestine descends into the scrotum; and this happens because of the extension of the scrotum which is in the intestines as we have said, the cause of which is that the scrotum is extended, and then it becomes soft, and the place is an abscess and projects.
And the cure for it is with cautery as it is preceded by the narrative of it.
And sometimes it is cured with iron in this way: and let the patient lean over on his back between their hands, and then dry the place of the rupture of the abscesses that project with a cut according to its width according to the quantity of three fingers.
And then strengthen the white scrotum which is below so that it is uncovered.
And then take the band and place it over the prominent place of the scrotum, and press it on the abdomen.
And then sew the two prominent places on the end of the band of the scrotum, and adjust one of those to the other with the stitch.
And then cut the end of the band, and do not cut into the scrotum at all, nor extend the hole, nor cause anything else so that you have knowledge in the cure for intestinal hernia.
And then cure it with the cure for wounds, and as you insert the threads, cleanse that and restore the wound so that it is consolidated; because the scrotum is contracted and the eminence of the rupture is not adjusted.
And cautery is better in this place because it is closer to health.
Chapter 68.
Of softening of the scrotum of the testicles.
Many times the scrotum of the testicles in some men is softened because the flesh that is between there is softened, and it is weakened by the guard of it.
Then it is necessary for the one who is asked in the cure of it to let the patient lie on his back, and heat all the scrotum which is softened over the natural scrotum; and then sew two lips with a stitch.
And if you want, cut in the beginning the superfluity of the softened scrotum with three or four cuts and with a firm stitch.
And then insert between the stitches; and then cure by the cure for the other wounds so that it is healed and the threads fall.
Chapter 69.
Of castration.
Know that castration in our law is excommunicated, but by cause it has been read to me that I remember it in this book; and it is not necessary to remember it except for two ways, of which the first is so that it is in the science of the doctor when it is questioned about it, who knows the cure of it when it happens; and the other way is that we many times have need of castration of other beasts because of our young ones for them, as of horses, and of oxen, and of pigs, and of those similar to the beasts.
And so I say that castration is done in two ways: or by tearing, or by cutting at an incision.
But in that which is done by tearing, the way of the operation is that we let the beast swim in water so that its genitals are softened and they hang. And then take those with your hand so that they are resolute and do not appear beneath the touch.
But in castration done by incision and cut, take hold of the scrotum of its testicles with your left hand.
And then ligate the suspensory ligament, and insert on each hole with one cut so that two holes are processed.
And then insert those pus which you will have scooped out. And do not let any cause happen on them of the scrotum, except for the subtle scrotum which is over the veins.
And this way of castration is better which is done by tearing because tearing leaves no cause to the testicles so that the beast desires copulation.
And then cure the wound so that it is healed.
Chapter 70.
Of the cure for hermaphrodites.
Hermaphrodites in men are according to two ways: the one is when or appears in that which has the space between the scrotum of the testicles, in that one which is between two testicles figure a clitoris of woman in which there are hairs.
And sometimes from that urine in the scrotum of the testicles.
But in women it is one species: and it is that the clitoris of the woman over the foreskin is thus like two testicles of man a little bit of all are joined at the entrance of the vagina thus with the foreskin of man and two testicles.
And the cure is of three species: of two of men and one species of women. And it is that take hold of those flesh tightened so that the pressure of that escapes, and then cure those with the cure for the other wounds.
And in the second species of men of which urine is in the scrotum of the testicles, there is no cure nor operation on it.
Chapter 71.
Of a swelling and prominent flesh by cause of women.
A strong swelling is tightened over natural causes so that it is stressed and is done the guard of it; and sometimes it is magnified in some women as much so that it spreads also in men and it pierces during intercourse.
Then you should have the superfluity of linen with your hand or with ointment and insert it.
And do not finish the insertion, especially at the root of the nail, so that there is no flow of blood.
Then treat that with a cure for the wounds until it is healed.
A hernia is a swelling that arises in the groin of the mother and fills up that space; and when it is pushed out of its cavity it resembles a tail (and because of this some doctors call this "tailed malady"). Therefore we should insert into it as we would into a wound, and treat it until it is healed.
Chapter 72:
Of the treatment of elephantiasis.
Elephantiasis is when the vagina of a woman is not perforated, or the opening is small. And it can be natural or accidental.
Accidental is due to a previous illness, and this happens when the flesh is very tight or there is an issue with the bones or they are narrow.
And it can happen in the groin of a woman, or in her ribs, or in the upper or lower abdomen, and it is prohibited from coitus and pregnancy, and menstruation is very much prohibited.
And its knowledge is gained through observation by the midwife, if the pregnancy is obvious, then it's clear; but if it is not obvious, then you should feel for it with your fingers or with a rod.
But if the pregnancy is due to a narrow canal and it is close to both labia, then you should cut into it and rupture it.
And it is where you place powder on both labia, and then you place your fingers between the lips in order to push.
And the woman should be on her back, with her legs extended and spread wide open, then you should also spread both labia widely with force so that the narrow canal is broken and the pregnancy is opened up.
And then take wool and soak it in oil and place it on the wound, and keep it moist for a day so that the incision does not close up.
But if the canal is wide and thick, then you should insert it with a broad spatula or a blade of myrrh.
But if the pregnancy is due to a hernia, then suspend it with ointment and insert that.
And you should have the medicines that stop the flow of blood without biting, like astringent medicines, and dragon's blood, and incense, adjusted with egg white.
And then administer a broad bandage of lead so that the wound is not loosely closed.
And hold it for several days and administer cool water.
Then it should be treated with the other cure of consolidation until it is healed.
And sometimes there are accidents in the mother's childbirth of other flesh, and then you should insert it according to this method. But if it is due to scurvy, then there should be no contradiction with iron in any way.
Chapter 73:
Of the cure for hemorrhoids, and of tail and red buttock that happens in the vagina of women.
Hemorrhoids are an appearance of small veins openings from which blood flows continually from them; and when they are ancient hemorrhoids, they are made like this.
And I have already said in the division of those and their signs, and to say thus those that receive cure and those that do not receive cure.
Therefore I say that hemorrhoids and these when they are in the groin of a woman and do not appear in sentiment, then in those there should be no cure with iron.
But those which are in the opening of the vagina above the one on which there is sentiment, these are the ones that are cured.
And you should put the woman in a warm bath and then spread those with tweezers or with rough cloth, and insert them with the nails.
And then sprinkle on them one of the powders that cause the flow of blood without biting, like cassia and similar to those.
And then let her feet be covered for an hour, and then place that in cool water.
And if the flow of blood persists, then make for her a decoction of hemp and of onion peels and of pomegranates and of similar things.
And then take flour of bran and cook that with honey and sour wine and make a poultice with it over his back.
And if the blood is dried up, then that is good; but if not, make it adhere with two ventouses, and to the breasts without scarification.
And then take wool and soak it with juice of mallows or with juice of holly or with juice of alder with red wine, and make the poultice adhere to the wound; and then cure the wound with unguent until it is healed.
And cure that until it is healed.
Chapter 74:
Of accidental piercing of the vagina.
Many kinds of hemorrhoids happen in the vagina, like scurvy and hemorrhoids with teeth and ulcerous and suppurative and erpetromas and fistulas that are bloody and raging, and other hemorrhoids. And I have already said these illnesses and their kinds and their signs, and their cures in the division.
And you should know in this treatise of hemorrhoid cauterization which appears in the vagina when it is of the kind that comes from hemorrhoids that cause pain, and if you wish to know in what way its operation is done with iron.
Therefore you should consider if the pain of the hemorrhoid in its beginning is acute with percussion and phlegm and fever, and it throbbs and if there is sentiment over it, then do not cauterize it, and cure that with what helps on the maturing until the acuity of the accidents cease.
And then you should make the woman lie on her back with two pillows that she leans on two pillows; and recline on her back and adjust her feet to the part below the belly, and let her thighs be spread out, and place her arms below her elbows, and hold each one with a cloth convenient.
And then the midwife should follow the right side and administer the instrument by which the opening of the vagina is opened, the shape of which will come in those causes that we will do next.
And when you wish to administer this instrument that you place the nail on the groin of the woman's vagina, and that which of the instrument goes into the vagina is not more than the groin of the vagina and leads the nail. But if the instrument is larger than the groin of the vagina, then you should place powder on the texture of the groin of the vagina so that there is a prohibition against the insertion of any instrument in the groin of the vagina.
And you should place the needle that goes in the instrument of the side above it and that the minister holds the instrument and rotates the needle until it is opened the vagina.
And when the incision appears and it is touched by hand and is cold and moist, then you should dry that with a broad spatula.
And when the pus has been drained, then you should apply a poultice soaked in rose oil or green oil with some astringent to the wound; and place a bandage over the incision, pressing on the vein of the arm.
And place wool soaked in water with crushed mallows outside the arm and over the elbow.
Then it will be healed within two days with ointment that should be applied until it is healed.
And sometimes the arm and wound are washed with water and honey, and then with water in which is soaked rue or long pepper, and then return to the ointment.
And if the wound is deep in the arm that has been cut, then you should not use iron in its treatment but rather use what we have said in the division above.
Chapter 75:
To teach midwives how to treat living fetuses when they appear in an unnatural shape or form.
It is necessary for the midwife to know the appearance of a natural childbirth in the beginning, and when you see the woman expressing pain in her lower abdomen and desiring to breathe in air, and upon this she is moved by what is above her, and the fetus exits with its head, and the second one comes out above or is suspended from the umbilical cord.
When you see these signs, then the belly should be compressed so that the fetus exits gently; when it exits with its head, the second one comes out, and it is cleaned of those superfluities by good cleaning.
But that which is different from this childbirth is not natural and not laudable; when the fetus exits on its feet and the body exits before the head and the feet, and one of its hands, or at the foot, or exits its head and hand, or at the belly, and quickly turns onto his neck, and resembles these non-laudable forms.
And it is necessary for the midwife to be wise and subtle in all these causes, and guard against error and deception.
And they will show all the forms of these, and which element is in those so that it can be known by what it is and what has happened to it.
When the fetus exits with its head from natural labor, and it is violent upon the woman and a difficult birth for her, and she sees the child's strength already weakened, then do that cutting, or if the women hold the child, and evaporate its moisture with fenugreek powder and warm oils.
Then the midwife should insert a small spatular knife between its lips and open with that the second one, or dry it up with her fingernail to remove moisture. And press the woman's belly so that she gives birth.
But if it does not exit, then the woman should be cleansed with a poultice of bran and a poultice of fenugreek with honey.
And after that cleansing, command the midwife to compress and cause that sneezing with conditioning; and hold the mouth of the child and its nose for an hour, because the child will be forced out immediately.
And if both of the child's hands are forced out at the beginning, then you should reduce those with gentle compression little by little. But if it does not obey the instrument, then place the woman on a bed and lift its feet up, and lean the bed towards the earth; and the woman should be held so she does not fall from the leaning.
And if the hands are not turned in and the fetus is dead, then insert those and pull out the fetus's limb or tie the body to the hand with a cloth and pull that with equality, because that will be forced out.
When the fetus exits on its feet, then you should push those up and turn the fetus gently, and grab one of its feet and extend those gently little by little.
But when it exits into the thighs, then you command that he be expressed, and do that sneezing with conditioning, because it will exit if God wills it.
And if it is not exited with what we have recommended, then return the fetus gently to its natural form; because it will exit immediately with gentle exit.
And if it is prohibited by everything we have recommended, then take of mixture of alder and dissolved gum, and pound all in the mortar with good pounding, and line with that the womb of the woman, from the bottom of her belly to her chest. And then do that cutting in tepid water so that it reaches its diaphragm.
And when you see the lower parts of him softened, then do to him smoke of myrtle and place that below him. And when you have done the smoke for one hour, then make him sneeze on a bed and cause that sneezing and open his mouth, and lift from that, and press the lower part of her belly gently, because the fetus will exit immediately.
Exit of the fetus hanging down from one of its hands. It should be pulled into reduction by the hand, but if it cannot be reduced, then lift the woman and make her bend.
And if she cannot bend, then make her lie down on the sheet and strike her thighs with violent compression, and then administer to her remedies which moisten and are recommended from mucilages.
And when labor comes, then make her sneeze on the bed and study the reduction of the hand, and turn the fetus to its natural form, and make the woman sneeze and command that he be pressed onto himself so that it exits.
Exit of the fetus on its neck with its arms and chest expanded and its belly towards the mother's back. And let the midwife hold the fetus's hand and then turn that gently little by little, and that it has ease.
And when he is out and turned, then place what we have recommended of oil and poultices over his navel.
And then command him to hold his mother's hand little by little, and when that is done, make her sneeze on the bed and command that he be leaned over onto his right side, and then command that he be compressed; and do that sneezing with conditioning. The prepared fetus exits the side.
When you see the mother giving birth in this way, consider and then insert your finger inside so that the moisture is evacuated.
And if the fetus is suspended above its face and neck, then insert that of the umbilical cord, so that it is not retained and delayed.
Then cover the fetus in its parts as you put that which covers it, and command the woman to squeeze herself a few times, and she will force it out with an easier birth if God so wills.
The exit of twins or multiple fetuses. Know that twins are often born many times, and sometimes three or four, but this is strange and rare; but their causes come from nature, and not alive.
And know that there are those, although they are multiplied, one is a twin, and they are separated by the head, distinguishing them between the ligament in the umbilical cord of each of them. And sometimes they are forced out as if it were one fetus with an easy natural birth, and sometimes their exit is non-natural as we have described.
And if they are difficult to give birth and reach what we have said about the non-natural shapes, then you must treat them as we have recounted.
And if the midwife does what she does with ease and subtlety, and with delay, and is ingenious according to all shapes as it is prepared for her by bringing health.
Recollection of that which is formed in the womb from embryos and abortions.
Some women have one, two, three, four, five, six, seven, and sometimes even ten fetuses, and I have indeed seen a woman who aborted six fetuses all formed, the cause of which was discovered by the wise physicians through measurement.
And all of that cover what it is in the science of the midwife how strong she goes to that small thing resembling that, and then pause if at that.
Chapter .LXXVI.
On the extraction of the fetus when it is dead.
When you treat the dead fetus with what we have said in the division of medicine and is not forced out, and you are forced to use incision with your hand, then consider if the woman is of healthy nature and has none of the accidents by which she is feared to lose.
Then the woman should be laid on her back, and his head inclined downward and his thighs raised.
And the minister held that of two parts or be bound in the bed so that his body does not extend due to the extraction of the fetus.
Then you moisten the mouth of the mother of it with oils moistened and with mucilage of alder and fenugreek and of linseed.
And the midwife moistens her hand with those oils and mucilage, and then inserts her hand with ease in the mother, and then surrounds her hand at the place where the nails are in the fetus.
And convenient places in that: then you consider if the fetus is prepared to descend over his head, and then you put the nails in his holes, or in his neck, or in his mouth, or in his palate, or under his beard, or in the furcula of him, or in the close places of his sides, or under his armpits.
But if the descent is over his feet, then in the ankle, or in the middle of his back.
And have the nail with your right hand, and pause the bend of it in that place which is between the fingers of the left hand, and insert the hand with ease and put the nail in some of those places which we have said, until he comes to the desired cause.
And then pause and put in the opposition of it another nail, or the third if necessary, so that it is equal attraction, and not extension according to its rectitude only.
But be bent in every part, so that the exit of it is drawn out as it is done for the extraction of a tooth.
And in that between them that the extension is softened; and if any part of it is retained, then the midwife anoints her fingers with oil and inserts that remedy and turns it around that which is retained.
Therefore if the part of the fetus is forced out, then the nails are shifted to another place where there is need; and do that until all the fetus is forced out.
But if the hand is forced out in front of the other, and it is not possible to return that by the bend of it, then have a cloth wrapped around it; and then extract it so that all of it is forced out, and insert that or in the joint of the hand or in the elbow.
And do the same to the other hand and feet.
But if the head of the fetus is large, or there is constriction on it in its exit, or water in his head is tight, then insert between his fingers spongy sponge and split the head and extract the water, or uncover that with an instrument which is called “file”, the shape of which will come with the shapes of other instruments in the chapter which is next to this.
And similarly do if the fetus is of a large head by nature: and then insert that with alum, or take it with forceps as we have said; and then extract the bones with forceps.
And if the head is forced out and constricted by the furcula, then it is split so that the moisture which is in the feet is discharged.
But if it is not complicated nor obstructed in exit, then you insert the head as much as possible to you.
And if the bottom of the belly is swollen or dripping in it, then perforate that so that the moisture in it runs out.
But if the fetus is above its feet, then the attraction of it is easier and the direction of it to the mouth of the mother is easier.
But if it is constricted by the belly and feet, then you extract that with a cloth which you have wrapped around your hand, and split the belly and feet so that what is in them runs out.
But if the other members stand and turn the head, then the midwife inserts her left hand; but if the mouth of the mother is open, then insert the hand into the prenon of air, and surround it with that the head, and draw that with its fingers into the mouth of the mother, and then insert into him one nail, or two nails, and draw him with those.
And if the mouth of the mother is constricted by an ulcer that comes to u, then let it not be pressed upon him; before, however, administer effusion of humid, fatty causes. And apply plasters; and follow the patient in waters that soften and moisten.
And if the fetus is on his side, then if possible, it is twisted: and let what we have said in the living fetus be administered.
And if that is not possible, then let it be inserted into vessels, and extracted.
And whoever does not leave out any cause inside the armpit.
And when you have completed your operation, then administer what we have said about the treatment in boils that come from the greater humors.
And if bleeding occurs, then let it flow into astringent waters and administer the other treatment.
And I have seen a woman whose belly was pregnant with a dead fetus, and on that fire another living one was carried, and then another fire with the dead one. It happened that after a long time an abscess formed in his arm; and it swelled up that a fire opened, and it began to emit pus.
And I was called to cure him, and I treated him for a long time, but the plague did not heal.
Then I placed on him some strong-吸引 bandages, and a bone came out of him, and after a few days another one came out; and I was very wondered how in the belly there were bones.
And then I thought they were the bones of the dead fetus.
Then I opened the wound and extracted many bones from him; the woman remained in the same condition, and she walked around like that for a long time, with a little limp.
And I did not think anything strange about it, but that in this there is science and assistance to what the doctor skill with his hand for curing administers.
Of the forms of the instruments which are necessary to extract the fetus.
Form of an incision through which the mother is opened:
This is the form of a ligature in which the intestines are tied, to that tying there are two virtues at both extremes of two threads. But let this virtue be more subtle than the ligature, and let it be made of cotton or linen cloth.
And the breadth of each strip is two fingers and the edges of both are one finger, and the length of each is a palm and a half; and in the middle part of the two strips there are two attachments of that linen cloth, the lengths of which are half a palm each, and the widths of each are two fingers, or a little more.
And these two attachments are interwoven in the mouth of the mother so that it is opened by them when you twist the two prescribed threads.
Other form similar to that more subtle and lighter:
It is made of linen cloth or cotton according to the likeness of a forceps. But at the end of it there are two attachments just like fingers, and the length of those attachments is about a palm, and the breadth of each is two fingers.
And when you want to open the mother with them, then let the woman be on her back with her feet hanging down, opening that which is between her thighs. And open your hand with the instrument just as you do with tongs, according to the amount that you want of the opening of the mother's mouth in which the midwife makes it as you want.
The form of incision which the antiques said:
Form of an incision by which the fetus is impelled:
Form of an incision by which the large head is cut
And it is like forceps in which there are teeth at the end just like fingers, and some times it is made long like forceps just like fingers, and its teeth are like those of a key with which it is cut and split. Form of a small incision:
Form of an unction having a spine:
Form of an unction having two spines:
Form of a spatula having two ends by which the head is cut:
Form of two spatulas broad:
All those instruments are exercised, and when they are more easy for the artist and more due to the men because of their quantity.
And it does not matter that you do not have those instruments, for there is no excuse for the need of them.
Of extraction of the second child.
When the second child is retained because of the childbirth, then let you command the midwife to retain her milk, and then make her vomit with an emetic, and press your hand over her mouth and over her nose, and if she expels it by that means, well.
And if not, then take a wool cloth and pierce it in the blanket, and place over that herbs which heat the mouth of the mother, like salt and rue and anise and camomile and Arabic scilla and cassia ligneous and sandalwood. All those herbs or some of them are to be immersed in water on the cloth, and place that over the fire.
And then place a hollow reed in the mouth of the mother, and hold that there while the evaporation comes to the cavity of the mother.
And then make her vomit as we have said, and the second child will be expelled with velocity.
But if this cure is applied and the child has not been expelled, then command the midwife to immerse her left hand in sesame oil or in an infusion of marjoram, and then insert it into the vagina and press with that the second child, and when she has found the second child, pull it out little by little according to the rectum so that the mother does not suffer from too violent an extraction. First let it be moved to the right and left sides with ease.
And if the mouth of the mother is closed, we have already recommended the cure by an emetic and by the application of the cloth with herbs.
But if it is not expelled with all the causes we have recommended, then be assured that what comes out of her mouth lies at the crotch of the woman, and then christen her with unguent and tetramedication; for she will then be broken up within a few days and dissolved and expelled.
But when it is raised bad odor to the head and stomach, and that upsets the midwife; then let potions and convenient remedies be administered to that.
But some of the Ancients have been tried with sublimation of netherwort and of dry figs.
Form of an instrument by which the woman is sublimated because of retention of menstrua and of the second child:
It is made of wood or of brass.
And the subtle end be placed in the vagina and the broad end over the fire, and the sublimation be placed over the coals of the fire.
And hold that there while it is consumed by that sublimation and repeat another.
Of cure of the anus of the child not perforated.
Children with narrow and swollen anuses, whose orifices are not perforated, and they have been pressed subtle and swollen. Then let the midwife pierce it with her finger; but if not, pierce it with an awl and guard that it does not touch the clitoris.
And then place wool soaked in wine and oil over it; and let that wound heal while covered.
But if you fear that it will become infected, then insert a cannula for several days and remove it when the infant wants to defecate.
And then it happens that the anus becomes blocked by the hardening of a ulcer or abscess; therefore when that hardening is cut into, it should be treated as we have said regarding the treatment and the lead.
Regarding the treatment of fistula's that originate from there:
The fistula's that originate near the beginning, discharge pus which is thin and watery and originate near the anus or in the space between the buttocks.
And there is one or several fistula's.
And when that hardening becomes old and discharges thin white or yellowish pus, then some of these fistula's penetrate.
And these are known by what exits from them through the exit and by the flatulence: and sometimes the patient passes gas through it, and usually it is pus that exits from there.
And from these fistula's some sometimes penetrate into the bladder and into the urethra: and there are some that penetrate into the joint of the hip and into the root of the tailbone.
And how you know a fistula has penetrated into the anus and not penetrated is that you put your finger inside the anus, and you insert a thin piece of ram or iron into the fistula when it is not painful.
But if in that one there is pain, then insert into it a thin piece of lead or horse hair while you feel the piece or the hair with your finger.
And if you do not feel anything at all or there is no sign of digestion nor flatulence nor gas, then know that it has not penetrated, and then go to the treatment.
And when the fistula has penetrated into the bladder or urethra, then it is indicated by the exit of urine and a prohibition of it to that place until the wound is healed.
But if it has penetrated into the joint of the hip or into the bone and there is pain in the circle around it, then the sign of it is that you put a ram's horn into it if in the bone there is no pain, and there is pain in the circle of the joint: and from it pus exits all the time; and medicine does not help it nor is it healed with ointment.
And in all these penetrating fistula' there is no cure, and the treatment of them is the labor and vanity of foolish doctors who do not understand it.
But in the one that is not penetrating and does not become old, healing with iron is expected according to what you have been told, and what has already happened and been tried.
And let the patient lie on his side with his upper body elevated and his legs bent upwards under him, with his buttocks inclined towards his stomach, then insert a piece of lead or ram's horn into the fistula until you know the location where the horn enters.
And if he feels pain in his neck, then insert your finger into his neck.
And if you feel with your finger the horn already inserted through it pushing forward and there is something between your finger and the fistula, then know certainly that it has penetrated: therefore do not work on that one, for there is no healing in it as we have said.
But however some say that it is healed in some people.
And the medicine by which there is hope of healing in him is that you apply cauterization gently according to the size of the fistula, as it is preceded, and insert that fire into the fistula until it reaches around his neck: and then repeat that two or three times until you know that all those fistula' which are like a feather of bird have been burned out.
Then heal that one with hot water wrapped in cloth until all those meats which are burned out, and then heal that one with medicines that generate meat and consolidate, and if it is healed, well: but if not, then it will not be healed in any time by another treatment.
And if the horn enters and does not penetrate into your finger which is in the anus, and between that and the horn there is a space of meat or burning, then let the fistula appear at where it breaks through the surface of the skin: then dry up the skin from where the fistula starts, and you dry them up with the horn, and let it be in the fistula until the incision reaches the place where the tip of the horn entered, and by the horn is freed and cut.
Then cleanse those fistula' which are like a reed of bird and do not drain from them any cause.
But if blood flows from it between you and your instrument when you press those meats, then the root that is and the pus of the wound is cauterized with fire or with sharp medicine, for cauterization with fire dries up two good humors: it is a drying up of those meats which are pressed, and an abscission of blood from the heat of the humors.
Then heal that one with hot water wrapped in cloth or with raw cotton until the place is healed over with hard, generating meat which consolidates.
And it has medicines in which there is constriction and drying up: when then it is restored, it is healed and you should not fear an infection.
But if the fistula has penetrated into the foreskin of the anus and is elongated from it over the surface of the body, then insert your finger into the anus and examine it.
And then if you feel the horn and between you and it there is burning or meat, and it is close to penetration, then there is not an operation in him unless by way of confidence and hope.
The which cause is to administer in him one of three ways: either that you cauterize it as we have said; or that you dry up that one until you can restore the cavity so that it is possible for you to insert the bandages and the treatment nearby; or that you do not process anything by incision so that you do not pierce the skin containing the neck, and that you approach over the patient exit of the digestion with his will; and then heal that one as we have said for it very much heals; or that you elongate that velvet and open that pus which is close to the anus, as we have said, or by horn or another instrument of acute tip, and then cleanse those fistula' which are in the incision where you can with pressure; and then strive to make the restoration of all the wound with incision, and if the orifice above is not consolidated, and the fistula breaks open in the part of the anus, and pus exits from it through the patient. And sometimes the fistula is finished in this way: it is when you insert the horn into the fistula, and it is at the side of the anus around the surface of the body with the skin, then take the horn of perforated tip, which is as a needle prepares the ears according to this shape.
and then insert into it a needle wrapped in thread or around them: and then insert the horn into the fistula until you can restore its cavity.
But if it has penetrated into the margin of the anus close to the inside, then you extract the needle from that incision so that you insert your finger in the anus: and extract the tip of the needle and adjust both tips together, and press them both, and let it be for one or two days, and when you insert the needle into the meat, press it until those meats are pressed which are between both tips of the needle and they close.
Then heal the wound until it is consolidated and healed.
But if the opening of the fistula is not penetrating, then make it penetrate in whatever way you have prepared, unless there is motion in the leg, because it is not for you to do that so that you do not damage the nerve; and then heal the one inside until it is healed.
The shape of the spatulate tool with which the fistula is split: its curved part is very acute and the other part is not acute, so that you do not damage what is not necessary, as well as the times.
On the sewing of hemorrhoids in which blood flows in the incision of those.
Hemorrhoids are of two types, because either they are between the buttocks like charcoal, or they are like grass fat. And some of them are small and large, and blood flows from them at all times, and they are one, and are found, and outside the anus, and on its edges.
However, those that are outside the anus are according to the months of little humidity, of which citrine water or a little blood flows with a continuous body, and they are according to the color of the body.
And the cure of that which is inside the anus is that you command the patient to sit and to be expressed until the anus dries and the hemorrhoids appear to you. Then you cut and suspend with nails or what you have those with your finger, and then cut those to their roots.
But if the nails are not held in those due to their moisture and softening of them, then take those with rough cloth or twine or a piece of wool, and extract those with your fingers, and then cut those and spread some powdered powders on them near the incision so that they are like cauterization; or cauterize those according to what is preceded in the chapter of cauterizing. And then heal those with the other cure until they are healed.
And if the anus does not obey defecation, then christen the patient with a small bite of cinder, and he is washed with that water that is in the anus and he obeys defecation more easily when he is expressed.
But if the hemorrhoids are outside the anus, then the cause of them is less, and it is that you take those with your finger or that you take those with a nail, and you cut those, and then heal those with what we have said until they are healed.
And whoever experiences an incision, believe that you administer a cure for them according to this way: take wax wrapped and insert it into the needle and then extract the hemorrhoids from their ends above, and let the needle penetrate with the other end of the wax, and wrap the two ends of the wax in the part below the needle, and tighten the hemorrhoid with a strong string, and heat the wax and extract the needle.
And do this to all of them, and leave one and not cook it, so that the excess blood flows from it.
And then place on the anus a cloth soaked in rose oil or in ceratum, and place that over the anus and command the patient to rest. And then let it stay until it cools; and when it is cold, heal those with ointment or with another cure until they are healed.
And if they are old and not helped by that medicine, then you should cut those with the point of a spatulate tool or with your finger until they become wet and let the escorsa above be host, which prevents those from being consolidated; and then heal those until they are consolidated.
Then you obstinate those with a more violent incision than the first so that there is no blood and they are excoriated; and then heal those until they are healed.
Know that syphilis is a key, and it is not unless the round spot according to the color of the body resembles the head of a nail, and it is done throughout the body and especially in the lower parts below the feet and at the ends of the fingers, and because of this you should feel pain.
And then let it be cut what is in the circle of the key, and let it be held with forceps or nails, and let it be eradicated from its root; and then heal that.
And if you want, cauterize the second as it is preceded in your chapter.
But a wart is a small rough round fistula on the surface of the body, and many times it comes to children's hands.
And its cure is that you stretch and cut that, or that you narrow it with wax or thread until it cools. And if you want, cauterize that as we have said with fire or with acute medicine.
But an ant is a small furrowed or fistulated wart on the surface of the body, and when the friction hurts it is like a bite of an ant, and it is made around the body.
And its cure is that you take a needle of goose feather or hawk's feather, and let it be strong, and place that over the wart so that it contains the circle of the needle from its ends; and then rotate your hand with the needle so that you cut what is in the circuit of the wart, and place that on the leg of the body, and eradicate the wart from its root.
And if you want, do that with needle of ram or iron according to this form:
Let the end above the needle be drawn to thinness, dull (so it is not perforated), wrapped so that over the finger the appearance of it is wiped and the revolution of that.
And if you want to cauterize the wart according to what is said before in the cautery of syphilis in the chapter of cauteries.
Of the form of instruments that are administered to give cauterization.
Sometimes cauterization is done with silver or brass or molten ram or beaten; and sometimes it is done with those small instruments according to those which are administered, because that which is administered in the cure of small children is small; and that of those whose anuses are raw or painful, their cauteries are small.
The form of a large and few cauterization:
The head of the needle above which the pouch is tied be broad according to this way; and let it be distinguished where the pouch is tied like that many times.
And the end below it, which is inserted into the anus, be dull  (so it is not open), pushing to thinness; and on one side of it there are two incisions, and on the other side an incision, and let the width of the incision according to the thickness of the veins and more thick a small.
And let the pouch in which the medicines of animal bladder or wool skin are paused, and let its root be a palm.
And let it be perforated with small incisions as it is rolled; and if the space between the incisions is the thickness of the finger.
And then insert into those incisions strong hard wax of raw wax, or wind those; and tighten the pouch with that; and when it is paused on him, let the pouch be tight in the head of the cauterization between two distinguished by a strong constriction, and then cauterize each incision: But the quality of cauterizing with that is that you fill the pouch with medicine, which is warmed according to the quantity of the tolerance of the patient; and beware that it is not too hot nor too cold.
And then the patient should be laid on their back, and their legs elevated, with a pillow placed underneath them, and a servant holding their legs, and another their chest, with their hands. And then the end of the cautery should be anointed with oil, or white wine, or a poultice of fenugreek, or similar; and then it should be inserted into the anus with ease, and the minister should squeeze the bag, expressing its contents with force until everything in the bowel is evacuated; and then the bowel should be extracted, and the patient should raise their legs to the wall.
And if the medicine causes him to vomit, let him vomit as much as he can; and if he sleeps with it for the whole night, it is better for his healing.
But if you cleanse him in stomach illnesses of vomiting and the discharge of his bowels, then you should repeat the cautery until he is healed.
And if there are hemorrhoids or painful abscesses in the anus, then let the bowel be very thin and soft, with bowels from which children are born.
Healing of Wounds:
You have already said in the division of the healing of wounds what was fitting for the book, and I say thus the healing of those with hand and medicine according to need.
Therefore I say that wounds are various according to what caused the wound and according to the location on which the wound occurred.
And the causes by which many wounds are made are thus with stone, or incision of sword or knife, or impact of lance, or staff, or arrow, or similar to these from many causes.
But the wounds that are in the locations of the body are thus with wound that falls upon the head, or neck, or foot, or belly, or throat, and similar to those in the limbs.
And I will discuss the healing of some wounds so that you may apply that reasoning and rule to other wounds.
And I will begin with simple wounds of the head, for the memory of the composite wounds will come at the beginning of the third chapter.
Therefore I say that when a simple wound to the head occurs and there is no fracture, then consider: if it was from impact of stone or similar, and the vein has just been severed and there is a large wound and you fear an abscess will occur, then cut and tie the cephalic vein at once, and do not delay this; and draw out blood according to the amount of the injury's strength unless some cause prohibits phlebotomy, especially if the blood flowing from the wound is little.
And let the phlebotomy be on the opposite side of the wounded part; and keep the patient from replete and wine and heavy foods.
But if some cause prohibits from the diminishment, then let it be lessened from the food and not approach meat or wine.
And place upon the wound, if it happens to him an abscess, a poultice steeped in warm oil or wine in which is mixed stiptic powder.
But if it is secure from abscess, then place upon the wound, if it is fresh with its own blood and the air has not changed that powder which I will soon describe.
And if the air has already changed that one, then place upon it some ointment until it is healed.
But if the wound is large or is from incision of sword and similar, and its lips are not closed by stitches, then close those with stitches according to how I will describe about their stitches.
But if the wound is uncovered of bone and pen, and there is no retention of it but a small suspension, then insert that one and properly heal the wound with medicines and restore the meat by command to the patient that he abstain from foods in which are coarseness: heads and formen skin and similar to them, until it is healed.
And if you find in the bone putrefaction and it does not adhere to the bone, then insert all that is rotten and throw it out, and properly heal that one.
But if in these wounds there is an artery or vein from which blood can flow and it is not severed by medicines, then you inquire about the artery, and if you find that one unsevered, then you insert into it with spatulum, or ligature that one; and if necessity demands that we not do as we have said, then cauterize until the blood is severed.
And if these wounds are simple and small, then the cause of them is leeching; therefore you powder over those this powder, for it will harden before the air changes those.
And the manner of the powder is this: take oil of unshorn ram, dragon's blood, and not-extinguished ash; be all pounded and sifted, and let the wound be filled with it, and be constricted by good compression until it adheres to that, and be coagulated by its own blood.
And then bind that one above with lint and let it be bound, and do not loose it while it is like this unless an abscess occurs, for the medicine will not heal until it is healed.
And sometimes use only cautery when you do not have unshorn ram and dragon's blood at hand.
And do this operation of binding in large wounds when it seems that it should be placed upon those and are tight, and are fresh with their own blood, which the air has not altered.
And if the air has altered them, and especially when it is in summer time, then there is no intent to the position of this powder, but then heal those with what we have said, therefore you place upon those some ointments digested, or that you place upon those plasters made from flour of wheat with water and honey until they are soft; and then heal them with the other healing within they are healed.
But if it happens that the wound is fracture of bone, and it is small, then you extract that with forceps.
And I will tell the healing of fractures of the head in what is piercer.
Of wounds of the neck:
But if the wound occurs in the neck, then there is no difference in medicine, and it is among the wounds of the head when it is simple.
But if the nerve of the neck is cut or artery, then if it is nerve, there is not in it artifice except that it be avoided healing of it with anything that makes vehement stiffness, therefore as cinchona and zeki that is vetiver oil and similar to them because they harm nerves and against that. And do not place upon the wound any cause of all heat, for the substance of nerves is heat and its continuation is in the brain, which is the source of all members.
And if that which is healed by medicines cooling, therefore as it is washed with warm water, some vinegar infused in oil or not, and thucine when it is washed with warm water and the other stones minaret according to this manner, and ointments humid.
But if the wound is large, then administer stitches, or narrow its lips, and then heal that one with lint until it is healed.
But if the wound has depth or occurs to it the low pus broken, then pierce that one in its location but not deep-punched.
But if in the wound an artery has already been cut and blood flow is achieved, then either ligature or cauterization of it should be performed, depending on what your need requires.
But if the ribs of the throat or all of them have been cut and the veins of the neck have been preserved, then you should stitch the edges of the wound over the throat with a needle and not touch it; instead, you should pull that area gently back into its natural shape and tie it tightly with a decent bandage; and you should treat that area with a poultice until it is healed.
But if the wound has caused a fracture in the bone, then you should probe it and extract any bone fragments that you can; and what you cannot remove, let it be lanced so that the wound may be cleaned out, separated from the bone, and the pus drained away.
And if the wound is fresh, then dust it with the powder that has been recommended to you. But if a fistula has formed in the wound, then treat it with what will be mentioned later in its own chapter.
If it is a spear or halberd wound and you see the depth of it, then consider whether there is any wind coming from the patient; then know that the wound is fatal.
And if it is not deep and the wound is fresh with its blood, then you should put on a powder at the first hour and not compress it so that the blood is not held back in its depth but returns to the heart and the patient is relieved; rather, apply an attracting poultice and loosen it twice a day.
And if the poultice is not available to you, then put into the wound a piece of old cloth so that it draws out what is in there; and have the patient sleep on his back with his legs raised so that what is inside can flow out.
But if three days or more have passed and the patient does not experience spasms or a bad tremor of the heart or a tightness in the chest, and you see other good dispositions, then know that the wound is healed; and then treat it with hot water and the other remedies until it is completely healed.
But if its healing is delayed and the wound has been open for a long time, then know that a fistula has formed; treat it therefore according to its own chapter.
And if the wound is from a spear or halberd, and it is simple on the surface of the foot or leg, then treat it with what precedes the sewing closed, if it is large, or with powder, if it is small.
But if it has caused a fracture in the bone and only fragments remain inside, then you should turn the wound over to extract those fragments, if they are separated. But if they are not separated, then let them be lanced so that their extraction is eased.
And for other accidental wounds in the other limbs, the treatment is what we have already said.
Of wounds to the abdomen:
The disposition that occurs in the abdomen is either large or small or middling.
And a small disruption is made difficult in another way: and you will find that reducing them is more difficult if you do not close off the intrusion of them into their location immediately, for when they are opened up, they are swollen so that it is difficult to put them back inside.
And therefore the best disruption is middling, for in that one the reduction of the intestines is not difficult, and so it is with the two other kinds mentioned before.
And know that the sewing closed of the abdomen is according to four methods; however, two sutures are common that apply also to sutures of the other wounds of the body.
And two others are specific to abdomen wounds, but they are more proper in sewing closed the abdomen.
And I will recount to you each one with its explanation.
Therefore I say that when the wound is small and some cause of the intestines comes out through it, and its reduction is made difficult in one of two ways: either because of the smallness of the disruption as we have said, or because the intestines are given inflammation by the coldness of the air.
And therefore when that is so, then you should warm it by immersing a sponge or cloth moistened in warm water alone, or you could mix in squill, and cypress, and spikenard, and myrrh with the water and apply it to the intestines until the inflammation is resolved.
And sometimes it does this in the wine in which there is stypticity, and it is better for resolving inflammation than just water.
And therefore when you see the inflammation is resolved, then you should moisten the intestines with water in which there are mixed alder and mallow, for by this means the intrusion of it is eased for little cause.
But if the intestines are not drawn back by this treatment, then you should cut the disruption a little with an instrument by which the ulcers have been cut.
And the first treatment is best when it is not cut and there is no need to dry it out immediately nor any shortage of food.
Of the instrument, know its shape:
The one part of it is curved and acute, and the other part not acute, and its tip is not blunt but sharp; before, it is obtuse a little.
And therefore when the wound is enlarged and there are intestines coming out of it, then you should have its reduction according to the natural shape of it in its proper location, if that is possible, for that is best.
But when the disruption is wide and it is in the lower part of the abdomen, then you should have the patient lie on his back with his legs raised higher than his head; and if it is in the upper part, then let him lie on his back with his head and feet higher than his middle parts.
And likewise if the disruption is in one of the two parts of the abdomen, then pay attention and consider always that the part in which there is the wound be higher than the other.
And therefore you should do this with large wounds and middling wounds.
And for small wounds, do what is prepared for you; and indeed the ministering of it should be between your fingers, which hold the wound with its own hand and adjust its edges, and indeed uncover from it to that which will sew it shut, so that any cause for sewing is removed.
And this is the common way of sewing: you take a needle and thread according to the length of the wound's size; then let go of the end of the disruption with your thumb, and draw in the thread one, so that you do not put the thread through both ends of the wound, by the fingers, within which hold the wound with its own hand; and you have joined together the two ends of the codon by the two ends of the ciphac, and so you have made four stitches.
And now take a strong thread and double it around the needle, and tie some knots at both ends, and then bring the two lips of the wound together with a decent tie; and leave the thickness of the finger, and insert another needle there, and tie that also with thread in the same way as you did with the first needle; and keep doing this if it is necessary with needles until you have completed the whole length of the wound.
And let the needles be neither too large nor too small, for thin needles easily penetrate the flesh; and thick ones are difficult to insert in the wound, and therefore let them be smaller in thickness but larger in length.
And let the needle not be placed at both ends of the wound nearby, so that the flesh is not cut too much and the wound opens before it has healed.
And they must not be prolonged with a stitch so that the wound is not prohibited from healing.
And now insert the ends of the needles so that they do not bother the patient when he sleeps; and place over the stitch powdered herbs spread out on both sides, which will hold the ends of the needles in place; and leave them there until you know that the wound has healed.
And this method of stitching with needles is most convenient for small wounds, as it only requires one or two needles to be stitched around them.
But the second stitch is done as follows: you must stitch the four ends, of the wound and two ends of the head in one go, with a needle which has thread wrapped around it, both thin and thick.
And then when you have penetrated all four ends with the needle, return the needle to the point from which you started, so that the thread is pulled back towards the wound, so that the stitch is like a stitch of cloth, and the cloths are tightened.
And leave between each stitch the width of a little finger.
And this is the stitch for men.
And with this stitch I healed a wound that a man had received on his belly, and it was a stab wound of more than one palm in length, and the rupture was of half a palm on the right side of the belly, and the disruption was in the middle of the limb; and then I returned him after the intestine had been outside for 24 hours.
And the wound was healed within 15 days or so, and he recovered, and then he left after a few months, and is doing well in his health.
And other doctors had judged that he would not heal; but by miracle he was healed, for I did not cure him with ointment, as it was a place where ointment could not be applied or any medicine put on, but I placed over the wound a cotton pad twice a day and washed it often with honey water until he was healed.
But I will tell you of two kinds of stitches proper according to the account of the Word.
And you must start by stitching the wound closed from the outside in.
And therefore as the needle penetrates the wound and into that part from outside to inside, leave the end of the head in the part from which you started; and then let the other end of the head penetrate from the inside out at the other end of the limb.
And when you have done that penetration, then let the other end of the head penetrate another time in that meteyssa extremity of the limb from the outside to the inside; and leave the end of the head that is on this side, and let the needle penetrate at the other end of the limb from the inside out.
And let that penetration by which you are making the head penetrate in the extremity of the limb in which it is, penetrate all the way through.
And then start from this side and stitch that with the end that is of the head on the other side, and withdraw the needle from the wound which it has penetrated, and then return it to that wound and stitch the extremity of the limb that is on the other side with that extremity of the limb; and withdraw that from the wound which it has penetrated.
And do this once and then again, and do this once more so that you sew up all that which is outside according to that example.
And the sum of this method of stitching is that you sew with a stitch of skin, so that you stitch the head one time from the end of the wound, and leave it in there until you have completed it on the other side.
But the second proper stitch which I teach is called Gualia's stitch, and it is of a limed kind that is recommended for one who is ill, so you sew it according to similarity in which all parts are joined together conveniently by nature; and the end of one is applied to the end of another, and this is done according to how you see fit.
Let the needle be placed in the end of the limb from which you start towards the outside, and let it penetrate to the inside in the sole, and leave two ends of the head; and then turn the needle around and let it penetrate from the outside to the inside at two ends of the limb.
And then turn those around, and let some of them penetrate from the inside to the outside at two ends of the limb on the opposite side.
And this method of stitching is better than common stitching, and it is the stitch by which previous memory is recalled.
This is Gualia's limed kind.
And they say also that stomach stitching is straightened with two needles, so you insert in these a thread, and start from where you are towards the other side according to sewing of those whose hearts are joined together equally.
And know that when a rupture is in the middle of the belly, then the stitching of it is more difficult than of other parts of the belly.
But the game of medicine of wound is judgment of other wounds.
The cause of which is when you know the wound to be recent with blood before air alters it, and reduce the intestine and stitch it up and dress it decently, then pause over that incarnative powder.
And if air has already altered the wound, then pause over that some ointments which are to you within so they make hard stone and draw in the threads, and be stitched up head and limb; and then cure it thus as is the cure of other wounds until it is healed.
But if you do not have the medicines, then pause over that at once, for when it begins to discharge pus, wash it well and change that twice a day, as you teach him, until it is healed, for you must not indulge in other medicine in different conditions when wounds are simple.
But if you fear that the wound communicates with the principal limbs, then submerge lion wool in oil of tempered quality, or in rosin oil, and pause that over the parts which are between the angles and under the sockets.
And if you feel pain or putrefaction in your intestines, when it is many times thus, let it be cauterized with black styptic vinegar, and especially so if the rottenness is from the intestine and has made an exit penetrating into the cavity of it.
And know that the one that is in the large intestine is more difficult to heal than the one in the small intestines.
And it is difficult to heal because the intestine called "gland" does not receive healing from any plague that enters it, and this is due to the great multitude of veins that are in it, and because of its magnitude, and because of the subtlety of its body, and because of its proximity to the nature of nerves.
But if that which proceeds from the plague is the membrane, and you find it recently affected, reduce it according to your expertise, by which you reduce the intestines equally.
But if it has passed into space and is already black or green, then you should apply gall to the place where it has turned black, so that blood comes out in a flow, for there are veins and arteries in the membrane.
Then cut into that which is the other side of the membrane and attach two ends of the gall to the area below where the plague came out, so that on you is lessened the attraction of it due to the cutting of the membrane and emission of the root of the plague.
Remembrance of plagues when they occur in the intestine.
When a disruption occurs in the intestine and it is small, then it is possible that it can be restored in some people, for I saw one who had been plagued in his belly by lancing and the plague was of the right side of the stomach, and the plague was ancient and made a fistula, and he was made to drink and belch.
Then I followed the healing of him, and it was believed that he would not be healed, but I continued to sutilize that within which healed and the place is consolidated.
And I saw the place already consolidated, so I went upon the patient that he got over the evil in his belly; and no one got sick from that evil accident and he resumed eating and drinking, and also entered into bath and was exercised in his wits.
And some experienced ones already said that when a plague occurs in the intestine and it is small, then it should be bound according to this manner: and it is that you take gum from great pods; and then adjust the two lips of the plague and place one of those gums which have an open mouth over the two lips of the plague; therefore when you put that on and press its mouth, cut off the pod of it, for it adheres and is not dissolved.
And then place another gum near the first one, and do not cease to do this with gums one after another according to the quantity of the whole plague.
And then reduce it and bind the plague; and let those pods remain attached in the intestine until the intestine is healed; and do not harm the patient.
And it is possible that the intestine be bound with a subtle thread which is made from the intestine of an animal annexed to it, for it is more in needle; and it is that you take the end of these intestinal threads, and it is well stripped, and then bind the end of it with a thread of it, wrapped, and then insert that thread in needles and sew up with it the disruption.
And this manner of sewing with gum is not but according to way of confidence and hope.
But if the plague is great and broad, especially if it is in one of the small intestines, for then there is not but subtilization, and not healing of it altogether.
Of healing of ulcer and fistula.
Know that all plague and apostema when it becomes old and turns into an ulcer, and is not consolidated and has a root all the time and is not cut off, then in any member it is, universally it is named fistula, and we call it azucem.
And fistula according to truth is knotted flesh, hard, white with which there is no pain and at which it is hollowed out as it is hollowed out from a tooth; and because of this it is named some nodules, that is pain.
And it is in some people moist, which has a root; and strongly the moisture is cut off in some hours. And sometimes this moisture is moved, and it is little, and it is thick, and it is subtle.
And I have already shown all those causes, and the signs of them, and their healing with medicines in the division.
And so that I make you know the healing of fistula which is made by way of operation with hand.
And know that fistula occurs in all parts of the body; for some of them reach the great veins and arteries, or the nerves, or the brain, or the intestine, or the bladder, or one of the ribs, or to any of the vertebrae of the back, or to any of the joints composed by composition as of the hand and the foot; and those are which give proximity to the principal member and their likes.
And so that one of those fistulas which are according to this manner is of diseases of difficult healing, and does not receive curing, and occupation with it is work and ignorance.
And if there is any of the fistulas whose depth does not reach those places which I said, and you hope for and trust in its healing, and you want to come into knowledge of it, then take a probe of iron or steel, and if the fistula goes according to rightness, and you examine that with it.
But if the fistula is tortuous, then investigate that with a probe of subtle lead, for lead by the lightness of its body is drawn away and curved according to the tortuousness.
And if the fistula has terrible movements, it is not possible for you to signify about it with probe.
Then christen the hole by its holes, for the moisture by which you christen that comes from the other holes and flows from them.
And then inquire carefully, according to what manner it is possible for you to know if here there are bones or nerves, and it is the hollow of the fistula distant or near, or it is a fistula to which its holes are moved and this over all by the sum of your strength, by your inquiry with hand on the place, and its likes according to the signs and causes accidental to the apostema.
And when you have stood upon all those causes with true state, then go to the healing according to confidence: and it is that you consider then if it is an apparent fistula near or in a place saline, distant from joint, or of nerve, or of artery, or of vein, or one of the places which I said to you and told.
Then dry the fistula as mentioned earlier in the narrative, remove anything in that opening and from decayed flesh, and cure what is born of the orifice of the flesh, the skin, and similar, until it is healed.
But if the fistula is of great depth and according to right reasoning, then you must insert that into the orifice as far as you can, then cleanse it of all its decayed flesh; and apply hot metals wrapped in sharp medicines, and insert those into the cavity of the fistula which you have grasped with forceps.
And do that a few times until the sharp medicine corrodes all that is rotten in the cavity of the fistula.
Then restore it with ointments which produce healthy flesh until it is healed.
But if it is not healed by that, then cauterize it as we have recommended.
But if the cause of fistula is bone and you are certain of that, then examine it and dry it according to what we have said, unless you forbid any cause of vein or nerve or main member as we have said.
But if the bone is exposed and there is decay and darkness in it, then cut away that decay until all of it is removed; then cure that with what will cause flesh to grow over it until it is healed.
And if it is not healed and there are still bruises as before, then know that you have not achieved the complete eradication of the decay; then uncover it again and perform the reason for it and the cleansing of it with great care a second time, and restore it.
And so if it is healed, that is good; but if not, then know that the decay is in the great depth of the body which you have not achieved, and so with that you should only let it be.
And if the decayed bone is small or you are able to pull it out, then pull it out with thin forceps which are suitable for that.
And if there are many bones, then perform the extraction of all of them, and of none of them let any cause remain with your strength.
But if you are hindered by any cause of moisture, and there is no fear or mistake in their insertion, then insert those limbs or flesh if they are here, and free the bones.
But if you are not prepared to remove the bones from that moment, then place over the wound something which will fester the wound, and leave it so that nothing is around those bones of flesh and limbs, and guard the wound so that it is not consolidated, and the section which you have cut in your operation is constrained.
Habbants, if you fear, place over it a poultice drenched in oil, or a poultice drenched in Egyptian ointment, or one of the green ointments; for when those flesh poultices puss, and the bones are separated from the incision, and that attraction is alleviated.
But if it is a large bone like the bone of leg or thigh or similar to those, and what is decayed is only its surface, then cut away that with a razor only behind so that the darkness and decay are removed, and then restore the wound.
But if what is decayed in it is a large portion, and the decay has already reached the medulla of the bone, then it is a necessary cause to close that and to cut all around where the decay has come, then cure that so that it is consolidated.
And I count on you to lean over a man's thigh so that you pause that as example and helper over your operation.
A young man of about 30 years had pain in his thigh, and from the parts within the jaw it spread to the substance within the body where the substance was pervaded to the jaw, and it was matter of pustule with great pustule, and there was no extrinsic cause to him.
And then the time was prolonged with that due to the error of the doctors until the pustule became open, and many matters came out of it, and its cure was properly paused until the leg became fistulous, and there were in it many orifices which all poured pus and the moistures of the body.
And then he was cured by many doctors for about two years, and there was not found any skill in them but in the art where I was called.
And I saw his leg and the matters flowing from it from those orifices to great extent; and indeed that man's body was all emaciated and his colour was yellowish.
And then I inserted the tent into one of those orifices and it reached the bone.
Then I probed all the orifices and found out that they came from all parts of the leg.
And then I cut and entered into one of those orifices until I discovered a part of the bone, and found it decayed, and it was already earthy and decayed and blackened; and a part of the leg had been decayed where it had penetrated within the membrane.
And then I tied that which was revealed to me and prepared from the exposed bone.
And I saw that it was not in the bone but that decay which I had cut and tied off, and I had already cut away at it.
Then I paused the restoration of the wound with consolidative medicine for a long time, yet it was not consolidated.
And then I iterated and discovered again on the bone secondarily over the first discovery, and found continued decay in the bone.
And I tied that which appeared to me of that decay, and then I saw it was necessary to perform the cure of it and its restoration, yet it was not restored.
And then I discovered on it another time and did not cease to insert the bone little by little particularly and to probe the restoration of it, yet it was not restored until I had cut around a palm of it, and that extracted with its medulla, and then I restored it with medicines, and it was lightly consolidated and healed.
And it was not necessary to iterate the operation on him and the section on him except for the disposition of his fainting and the weakness of his toleration of death, because he became faint at all hours from the superfluity of evacuation, a bad syncope.
And so he is healed with whole healing, and there is nothing in the place of hard bone; and his disposition is good within his body, and his strength returned to him, and he conversed in his dispositions, and did not make him contrary in walking nor harm in any cause.
But if the eminent bone is in place in the body already removed, then you must dry it according to this manner: and take a string and tighten that at the extremity of that eminent bone, and command someone who extends it from there; then pause that string of wool rather thick of the first string; and then lie that on the flesh that is below the bone, and extend the extremity of it so that you draw the flesh to the parts below, and you discover the flesh over the place where you want to cut so that the saw does not cut the flesh.
And pause over the bone properly, for when you do that there is not prohibited the saw which does not cut the decayed flesh.
And let the sawing be over the decayed place little by little, for if it is in the cavity of the bone and does not appear in its appearance to feeling, and force it to be sawn again another time.
If the bone is rotten and not prominent, before it is one piece joined with the other, and the corruption is in a small place or in part of it, then you discover the flesh of all parts; and then pause the fust, and then saw that of the first part where the corruption is, so that it is continuous with the sawing of the other part.
And let the sawing be according to the location of the corruption, a little, according to what we have said.
And if the corruption is in the joint, cut into that corrupted joint and saw the bone where it continues to the other part.
And if the corruption is in the continuation of two joints, then it is not rational but absurd.
And if the corruption is in the palm of the hand or the foot, it is very difficult; however, one should inquire into the corruption and see how it appears to you, and open it according to each disposition that is possible for you, and with any absurdity be rectified by you when it does not contradict a vein or nerve.
And know that the cutting instruments and saws for cutting these bones are very different according to the situation of the bones, their preparation, thickness, subtlety, magnitude, smallness, hardness, and rarity; therefore, one should prepare every kind of instrument convenient for that operation.
And know that this operation signifies to you about the kind of instrument for which you are in need; when with you is great study and length and knowledge of the ways of this art, and testimony of ways of illnesses, because then you already have by your physicians that which is convenient to the instruments of all illnesses.
And I have shown to you at the end of this chapter the number of instruments with which you will proceed with simples, with which you will proceed to your prohibition, which you will experience on the others. Shape of saw:
Shape of another saw:
Shape of another large saw:
Shape of a razor: Let the head of this razor be according to the shape of the head of a starfish, and its points according to the shape of the points of an almond.
And it does not behoove but that with this are rubbed the heads of the joints when they are corrupted, or is a large mouth wide open.
Shape of smaller razors:
Shape of side razors:
Shape of another saw decently made: let it be made an arc from the most superior part and the acuity of it of steel, and the member of it of boy's dagger decently made. Its shape is:
Shape of a razor in which it has a concavity:
Shape of another subtle razor:
Shape of another razor with a curved extremity:
Shape of a small razor like a tent:
Shape of another smaller incisor:
Shape of another incisor; this one is like a saw, and its extremity is like a saw, and it is exhibited in many places in the rationale of bones:
Shape of a saw which is convenient for the rationale of that which is pierced by bones:
And its extremity is triangular and of acute extremity.
And it is made of steel of India, and similarly, all the causes that we have said of saws and of incisers and of saws.
Of extreme cutting edges and of the locking of bones.
The extremities can be pushed or for an intrinsic cause or for an extrinsic cause, or when you have medicated that corruption with treatment of those medicines and the treatment does not confer, or see the corruption go beyond the member which you do not perceive any cause, then one should insert that member into that in which the corruption is, so that the patient escapes through death or evilness, which is a greater defect of the member.
And the sign of that to which it happens is that the member is made black as if fire had burned it, or it swells close to the blackness as the burning goes into that member which seizes all the body; and then cut off that.
And similarly, if the cause of the corruption is impact of some poisonous causes like scorpion venom or from a sea-scorpion or from a viper or from similar ones.
And if the corruption or impact is in the extremity of the finger, then you cut off the finger and do not give space to the corruption so that it goes into the hand.
And similarly, if it happens to the hand, then you cut off that from the joint of the elbow, and do not give space to the corruption so that it goes into the elbow joint of the arm.
And if you do not want to, then cut off the arm in the junction of the shoulder.
And if the corruption passes on and turns around the shoulder, then in that is the death of the patient; and to add another cause besides this for treatment is a quantity of vertue.
And similarly, if corruption happens on the foot, then you cut off that into one of the toes.
And if it seizes in the sole of the foot, then you cut off all the foot. But if it goes into the toe, then you cut off the toe at the junction of the toe.
And if the corruption is already come upon the toe, then in it there is not remedy but dismissal, and let the patient go to death.
And the way of cutting off the member or of sawing it is that you press the ligament in the part most below where you want to cut off, and press another ligament on top of the place; and extend the minister one ligament to the parts below, and extend the other minister over it; and you separate the flesh which is between two ligaments, then let it be cut off or sawed.
And one should be stopped with a ligature of the vessels on all sides so that it does not touch the place, and that it comes to the patient injured constricted and suppurating and cauterized.
But if blood flows from the wound, then you should cauterize the site, or place some powder on it that restricts the flow of blood; and then return to your treatment until it is complete.
Then bind the affected limb with a bandage in a suitable way, and treat it until it is healed.
And I remember to you that one man had a blackness on his foot, this incident that I and you recounted, which happened to him by burning that was like fire.
And this corruption first occurred in his toe, extending throughout the foot.
And then that man prepared some remedies for himself as the treatment went to the limb with the strength of it, and he was overcome by pain and burning, and he applied that foot up to the joint, and it healed.
For a long time, that man had that corruptive condition in his finger on his hand.
And then he came to me, and so I punctured that surplus with what I put on his hand of the medicines, and then purified his body; and the surplus was not absorbed but began to go to another finger as it started in the hand.
And he asked me to cut his hand, and I did not want to do that hoping for the absorption of that surplus, but fearing death from the cutting of the hand, for the power of the illness was towards destruction.
And since he despaired from me, he returned to his land and reached me that this man prepared and cut off his entire hand, and he healed.
And I have not added this account except that it may be an aid about what happens from this illness, and that it is a sign by which it is known and according to which it operates.
About the treatment of hemorrhoids and the quality of the enema with medicines.
When an abscess occurs in some fleshy parts and the space of the abscess is prolonged as it collects pus, and then it is broken and punctured, and the pus is discharged from it, and it remains empty like a vessel, and the codicle that is on top of it dries up with a thin membrane, and there has not been reached to a deeper corruption, nor has it impressed on bone or nerve or ligament, it is called sinus, and is not named fistula.
But if the space is prolonged as corruption impregnates in some part, then it is called a fistula and not sinus.
And its treatment is that you cut off the entire codicle as it is rolled up, and especially when it is thin and done with a cloth, and cauterize so that it does not adhere to the place by its corruption.
But if you expect the codicle to adhere and that corruption has not reached its consequences, and in the codicle there is space, then you treat it with an enema.
And it is considered as a sinus, and if it is large, and the breath that comes from it is fetid, then enema that with an Egyptian medicine which is of oil and sour wine and thinnest honey received in parts, and are put into a vessel, and are cut over the fire until the medicine becomes hot and reaches the consistency of honey.
And then you take from it what is necessary and dissolve it with water and honey; and enema that sinus with that, and plug the opening of it, and let the medicine stay in there for the quantity of two hours.
And then pull that out with caution; and do that for so many days until the sinus is purified and the shame is healed.
And sometimes it is enema with ash water when you do not have that medicine; and take ashes from a vine, and put on it water; and then pour that and enema that sinus with it until you are convinced that the sinus has stopped.
And if the patient has no tolerance for the Egyptian medicine or ash water, then enema that with water and honey mixed with thin thinnest honey, and enema that sinus with wine and honey mixed, because of the property of honey is that it purifies and washes, and the wine makes the sinus adhere, and especially when in the wine there is surplus of astringency and dryness.
And when you do that several times and you are convinced that the sinus has healed, then enema that with what makes the flesh in it grow.
And take some thin dye and dissolve that with roasted oil and astringent wine, or enema that with some medicines and other dyes that I have written in the treatment of dyes.
And if the opening of the sinus is narrow that the cannula of the enema is not received, then you enlarge it with a small iron little by little, and put in there calcium wrapped in Egyptian ointment or in basilikon ointment until it is enlarged.
And similarly if the opening is large, then you gather its lips with a suture and take off from it the quantity in which between the enemas there is an addition.
And if the opening of it from which the breath runs is elevated to its parts above, then dry that in the hollow place from which the breath runs in so that the flesh engendered in there is dried, for when the breath is constricted in the depth of the sinus the flesh is engendered in there.
And if it is not possible for you to dry the sinus within the bone pus base according to how you want, then it is forced that you prepare the limb with a preparation by which the breath runs softly according to what appears to you and that there is not retained in there any cause of the breath.
But that which is over the opening of the sinus, which heals in a whole hour because it dries that which is closed in there of the breath. And so that you know if that which runs from it is motion or a little, or is digested or not digested.
And with that consider the place of that sinus if in it the patient feels pain or not, and if there is an abscess in it.
And when your treatment is prolonged in that manner and you see the matter which is shed over the opening of the sinus already adheres or the adhesion is increased, then loosen it on the third day, and when you loosen the bandage change the ointment.
But if a subtle pus flows from the sinus, then do not despair of its adhesion because it heals, for some people in which there is late generation of flesh in their wounds and others in which is done the contrary of that.
And if the breath is not digested after several days from the sinus do not know that it does not adhere; and if the adhesion of the sinus is delayed and is prolonged cause, then adjust it in desiccation of the medicines, and if the medicines are moist in their substance and in their strength are dry like a thin dye when the surplus of addition of zegi is adjusted in it.
And the last part of the body that is cured is where you should apply a thin ointment dissolved in rose oil, and on top of it apply old wine equal to its substance, and then comfort him with that and use it.
And in that action, when there is no strength, use a thin ointment, honey when it is cut and made thick, and use it; or take myrrh and aloe and incense, and mix them all together and pulverize them over the fire, and then line it on a cloth and place it over the navel; and line the honey that you have cut and made thick with it, and pulverize it over the cloth.
And sometimes you should give him a long and thin aristology of celestial lily (which is the celestial lily) and farina of err and centaurea, and use those simples or adjust them, crush them and sift them over the honey that I have mentioned; and use it.
And if the navel is prolonged and not healed by this treatment, then you will know that the corruption is in his bowels, and he does an inquiry into the bones or other hard members or to the tissues; then you should treat it with a fistular cure as mentioned above.
Of treatment of paronychia and nail abrasion and digit addition and section.
Panaritis is an abscess that develops under the nail of the finger of the hand or foot, and it rarely affects other fingers, and when it is prolonged and its treatment is neglected, there is an abscess of pus, or it becomes corrupt and erode the matrix of the nail, and it strongly affects the entire nail, and the corruption strongly penetrates into the bone within which it has a fetid odor, and the end of the finger becomes rotten, and its color turns brown.
And if you have that which we mentioned in the division and do not find relief from your treatment, then know that you must cut away all the excess that has accumulated under the nail, and then cauterize the wound with hot iron, for cautery is beneficial in such cases.
But if the bone is intact and the nail is healthy, and the edges of the nail are pushing against each other and starting to pierce it, then you should apply a thin thread under the nail's edge that is piercing the flesh, and lift it up and insert that flesh with ease, and place on top of it something caustic that has been dissolved within until everything is cauterized; and then treat it with an ointment until it is healed.
But if the corruption has already penetrated into the bone, then you must cut out that bone and extract it, for it will not be healed as long as the corrupt bone remains within it.
And if the rottenness and corruption have gone into the finger, then you should cut it off at one of its joints according to where it is affected most, and then treat it until it is healed.
But if there is a blow or abrasion to the nail, and because of that there is severe pain, then you should at the beginning let the patient's blood flow, and then cut off the nail with a sharp spatulum with a transverse incision above it, and be careful not to let the incision penetrate into the flesh below the nail, for you will cause great pain to the patient, and also cause an excess of flesh to grow in that place; and then treat that place until the pain subsides.
But a finger that is born to some men is very fleshy, and in it there are few bones, or its nail is very thin.
And some of them are born at the root of a joint, or their origin is from some joints of the fingers. But that which is born at some joints of the finger is not painful, and that which is born at the joints is usually very painful.
And of those that are born fleshy, their section is easier, and you should cut it off at its root with a broad spatula.
But of that which is born at the root of a joint, its treatment is difficult; and therefore be careful about its incision.
But in that which is born at the joints of the finger, you should cut off at the beginning the flesh of it with a round incision into the bone, and then saw with one of those convenient saws for it, and then treat it until it is healed.
But consolidation which happens to the fingers many times, or because of the nature of the person who is born that way, or because of consolidation of a wound, or because of burning with fire, or because of similar things; therefore you should dry up that consolidation until the fingers return to their natural form.
And then place between them cloths dipped in rose oil so that they are not consolidated too quickly, and separate those fingers or place a thin lead plate between them until they are consolidated as desired.
And similarly if consolidation happens in some fingers with the palm, then you should dry up that consolidation according to its preparation and convenience to the figure of the member.
Of cuts from injuries, these are varicose veins.
Varicose veins are caused by varicose veins, and they are thick wrapped veins full of melancholic humors that come in the members of the body, and their greatest occurrence is in the feet, and especially in the feet of travellers, laborers, and carriers.
Therefore you should administer a purgation of the body from black bile several times with strong expulsion, and then let the patient bleed from the basilic vein.
But their treatment by iron is according to two methods: one is that it is cut and the black blood is drawn out, and the other method is that the vein is elevated and all of it is extracted.
Its section is according to this method: at the beginning soak the foot in warm water until the gross blood is dissolved, which is feculent from the foot, and then tighten the foot of the patient at the part above the pus-filled sore of the leg with a bandage, and then dry up the vein in one, or two, or three places with a broad incision, and then elevate the black blood with the palm of the hand from the part below the foot until you have extracted as much as you wish, and as much as the strength of the patient can bear.
And then bind that up, and order him to abstain from black bile-generating foods.
And repeat the treatment by bloodletting whenever the veins are full, and notice the patient's condition.
But their elevation is according to this method: you warm the foot of the patient, if it is swollen with petechiae, and then place him in a bath and soak his foot in warm water until it becomes relaxed and the veins are dilated; or he must exercise himself strongly, if there is no bath available, until the member is warmed.
And then dry up the vein in the right side of the leg by incision in the thigh or in the back of it above the ankle, or in the base of the foot.
And then open the vein with nails and scratch the vein in every part where it appears to the sense, and it is required that you notice if that turns dark.
And therefore when you open and scratch the vein, you will see that it is white underneath.
And then you place under that a thread so that it is elevated and bled from the vein, and stop that with lion's tooth.
And then cut another section, approximately three digits in size, and then strip away the skin of the area above the vein where it appears.
And then elevate that section and incision it in the back, and then extract that section and elevate it where it is exited by the second section, and then extract it from above the section.
And do that as you extract it from the highest section or highest of all sections, where it is exited; and then incision it there.
And if you don't see it to extract and elevate, then insert a strong curved needle with a thread through that section, and ligature it and extract it, or insert under there the needle and turn your hand around everywhere where it is stuck. And be careful that it is not cut; for if it is broken, it will be difficult to elevate that part and it has come over the patient through that wound.
And when you have completely extracted it, then place on the site of the plague wool soaked in wine and rose oil, and cure that part as it is healed.
And if the vein is contracted with torsion and there is no straightness as we have said, then you must split that part of the torsion and suspension of it, and elevate it with pincers as much as you can.
And be careful that you don't incision the vein and plague it, for it will be difficult to elevate it; use your judgement in that matter.
The form of incision with which the vein is dried:
It is not acute with pincers nor has an acute extremity so that it doesn't plague the vein; and it is of great flexibility like a lion, for if it was subtle, it would incision the vein by its subtlety; it has superficial thickness in it as we have said.
On extraction of the vein of the leg.
This vein is generated in the legs in southern lands like Al-Ategi in the land of Arabs and in the southern and arid lands of little tenderness and in which there is no grass nor openings.
And very rarely it is generated in other parts of the body other than the legs.
And its gestation is of putrefaction that comes from below the vein like poison within the body of serpents and worms and snails and worms generating between the vein and the flesh.
And the sign of the advent of it is of this vein that happens in the leg a vehement inflammation; and then the site is blistered; and then the vein exits the site of that blister which resembles the root of a plant.
And when the end appears, then you should wrap around it a piece of lead weighing as much as a drachma, and tie that and leave the lead hanging from the leg.
And as many times as you see some cause to the parts deflating, wrap that in lead and hold it. And if the part is prolonged, then you incision a part of it and wrap the remainder; and don't incision that which is exited as it is exited, for if you incision it, it will contract and enter into the flesh and cause an abscess and pus in the site and a bad ulcer.
So that it is drawn out smoothly and is extracted little by little as it is exited from the end of it and does not wind back in the body for any cause.
And from this vein it exits in some men who are in its length of five palms and ten, and I have seen one that exits twenty palms.
And if it is incised in the hour of its medicine, then insert the needle into its hollow and pierce it with a long hole through the body so that it evacuates everything that is in the matter, and administer putrefaction of the site for several days with medicines; and then cure that for the cure of abscesses.
And this vein sometimes has branchy motions, and mostly when it appears at the junction of the leg or in the leg, and to it come motionless orifices, and it exits from each orifice a ram.
And then cure that as we have said in division and with what is above.
On the generation of worms under the skin and it is called bovine disease.
This disease is named in some land because of the cow's disease since it sometimes affects oxen and there is a worm which is born between the vein and the flesh, and goes throughout the body pushing and penetrating, and is shown by its movement from part to part as it ruptures the vein and exits out.
And its generation is through putrefaction of some humors like worms and serpents and earthworms and tapeworms in the belly.
And it is feared for its malice, for when it goes in the body and is elevated to the head, and it has reached the brain, then it pierces in it and destroys the brain, and from there it sometimes moves around.
And therefore when you want to cure it and extract it, then it is not done unless through its movement and appearance, and then you must draw what is above it and what is below it with ligation and strong constriction, and then incision it and extract that.
And if it is buried in the flesh and you don't touch it, then you place cautery with fire on the site where it dwells, and the greatest cause that is feared is corruption of it as we have said.
And if you see it pervening to the head near the brain, then draw on the forehead with a strong constriction, and then incision it and extract that; and let the patient use purification of his body with evacuant medicines, and guard against food generating putrefaction.
On the generation of disease in children.
This disease is named in our land as children, and it is a pain that comes to some parts, and then it is transferred from part to part.
And you have already seen that according to what you will tell me. He was called to a woman patient in a village, and he discovered her arm and saw a small inflammation in the vein of the arm, and when it was rubbed for an hour, that inflammation rose like silver when it moved from place to place.
And then it went to the pain of that site and became stuck in the muscle, and then it stayed there for an hour.
And then it went to the other body as it pervened to the other arm.
And then he showed me that it was revolving through all his body as I saw; and there was great marvel at its change of speed from part to part. And I had already seen that before in my own eyes according to that manner, but I have seen motions that transfer the pain from part to part. But I did not see that in arms as in the woman.
And I did not think that it was that because the woman was old, of frail body and veins uncovered, and in her appeared that movement changed.
And it is necessary that it does not appear according to this retro-cure in those who are delicate and with bodies of veins pressed together.
And when you want to treat the patient and he feels that pain, then it is not for you to appear in front of him as we have said, then you strengthen him on that and gently press him there where that windiness is blocked, and cauterize the spot.
But if you do not see it with your own eyes, then cure him by evacuating the body and expelling windiness, and treat those ulcers with stinking pills, and pills of serapium, and similar things.
On the extraction of arrows:
Arrows are diverse according to their species and according to the parts of the body they affect: for their diversity is that some have large points, and small, and concave, and blunt, and solid; and among them there are those with three angles, and those with tongues, and those which are stars.
And the signs of the soul are when an arrow strikes it, and pierces the bone, and exits through the hole which is above the brain, for then there occurs violent vomiting, and scotomata, and vertigo, and burning in the eyes, and inflammation and burning of the tongue, and spasms and confusion of the mind and vomiting of bile, and the voice becomes very hoarse and destroyed, and there is a discharge of white moisture from the wound site, and his eyes look like water.
And so if you observe these signs, then refrain from treating the wound and extracting the arrow unless it has exited.
But the signs of the arrow when it strikes the heart are that it is near the left nipple, and feels as though it were lodged in a hard substance, and is not a soft cause; and the movement of the arrow is very similar to the movement of the pulse, and black blood flows from the wound, and there is chilliness of the extremities, and sweat, and fainting; and so know that death descends quickly.
And the signs when the arrow has wounded the lung are sputum of bloody foam from the wound, and the vessels near the neck are swollen, and the color of the patient changes, and he exhales a great spirit with breath, and asks for fresh air to breathe.
And if the arrow strikes the diaphragm which is in the chest, then the pain is near the small ribs, and there is made a great wound with violent pain and with sighing, and not all of the limbs of the muscles are paralyzed.
And if the arrow strikes the stomach, then quickly see in the wound some undigested food.
And if the arrow strikes the abdomen and is lodged in it, see some rent in the wound, or the membrane, or intestine which is torn, and there is no hope for a cure of him through extracting the arrow.
And if the arrow strikes the bladder and urine exits from it, and some cause processes outward from there to the parts outside, and there is great pain upon the patient, then know that it is mortal.
But the other limbs such as the face, neck, jaw, shoulders, back, ribs, breastbone, thigh, and their likes of the limbs are saved according to the most prominent dispositions when the arrow does not strike a vein or artery and is not a venomous arrow.
And I will recount to you what I have seen of the nature of these arrows so that you may know about your treatment.
The cause is that in a man who had an arrow stuck in the tear duct of his eye, when I extracted it from him through the other side of his nostril, and removed the grays of his eyebrow, he was healed and no harm befell him.
And I extracted another arrow from a Jew which had struck him in the grays of his eye, below the eyelid, and the arrow was already concealed and he did not manage to get it except for a small tip with which it adhered to his staff, and it was a great arrow of the sharp arrows of the Turks, with a lion ferrule on which there were no eyebrows.
And the Jew was healed, and no harm befell his eye.
And I extracted another arrow from a Christian which had struck him in the jaw, and it was an Arabic arrow, and it was that to which there were eyebrows; and then I inserted it between two fingers, and it was already submerged in his jaw; and then I made it smaller with that, and then extracted it, and the Christian was healed.
And I extracted another arrow from a man which had struck him in the belly, and I thought he would die from it; and so when thirty days had passed and there was not changed upon him any cause of his dispositions, I inserted into the arrow and moved it about, and he was healed and no harm befell him.
And I saw a man in whom an arrow had struck the back of his thigh and the wound had healed over him, and after close to seven years, the arrow exited through the root of his thigh.
And I saw a woman in whom an arrow had struck her belly and the wound had healed over her, and she was not changed in her dispositions, and the woman did not suffer harm in any of her natural functions.
And I saw another man in whom an arrow had struck his face and the wound had healed over him, and the arrow was broken but he did not feel any pain, and similar signs occurred with these.
And I extracted the arrow of the prince of the king's son who had struck him in the bridge of his nose and it had exited through the right side, and the entire arrow was concealed.
And I was called to treat him when the arrow had entered three days prior.
And then I found the wound of the arrow tight, and then I probed it with a subtle probe, and he did not feel that; but he felt a sting below his right eyebrow, and then I sensed that the sting was from the tip of the arrow.
And I applied the spot with ointment in which there is an atractive and digestive virtue, confident that the spot would appear to me as the location of the arrow, so that it exits over it.
And there did not occur in the spot any significant accident that the arrow had struck that spot; and I continued with the ointment over him for several days, and no accident occurred; and the wound healed up in between, and he recovered from the extraction of him after a space of several days until one day he felt the arrow within his nose and showed it to me.
And then I applied to the wound sharp and corrosive medicine for several days until pus opened, and with a probe I probed that, and found the tip of the arrow which adhered to the staff.
And then I applied in the perception of the wound with that sharp medicine until it appeared to me visibly the tip of the arrow, and passed over time with that for the space of four months.
And when the wound has become very inflamed, and it is possible for me to insert forceps into it, and I have cleaned it out, and there is no obstruction preventing its extraction, then I do not cease to manipulate it with clever techniques until, on a particular day, I extract it with specially made forceps, as will be described in the final section of this chapter; and I then repair that wound.
And some doctors believe that the cartilage of the nose cannot be restored, but I have restored it and consolidated the wound; and the patient was completely healed and suffered no ill effects.
And I will now describe the quality of the extraction of certain arrows so that you may understand the rule and significance of what I have not described, for the parts of this art and the definitions of those terms are not covered in this book.
And the skilled surgeon compares a few things about motion, and what is present to what is absent; and he discovers new operations and new instruments through the descent of foreign causes into the art when they occur.
And so I say that arrows are not extracted from the members in which they are lodged, except according to two methods: either by attraction of the place where they enter, or by the opposite of the other part.
And that which is lodged in a fleshy place and is drawn out and extracted is an arrow.
And if it does not obey the extraction in the hour in which it is cut, then you must leave it for a few days until the flesh around it has healed and the attraction and exit of the arrow have been alleviated.
And similarly, if it is lodged in bone and does not obey your extraction, then leave it for a few days and repeat the attraction and motion of it every day until it is extracted.
And if it does not obey your extraction for several days, then you must pierce the circumference of the arrow in that bone with a very fine instrument until the space around the arrow is enlarged and you can then extract it.
But if the arrow is lodged deeply in the body and is hidden from sight, then you must probe it with a probe, and if you feel it, then draw it out with some instruments suitable for attracting it.
And if you cannot reach it because of the constriction of the wound and because of the length of the weapon, and there is no bone or nerve or vein in the way, then pierce the wound until it is enlarged and the arrow can be extracted.
And if there are nails holding it in place, then you must loosen the flesh in which it is lodged completely all around with whatever skill you can; and manipulate it until you can free the flesh from the fracture of the nails and their twisting until it obeys.
And when you administer the extraction of the arrow in whatever place it is, then use with twisting of your hand and forceps on all sides until it obeys; and manipulate with great subtlety so that the arrow is not broken and so that its extraction is not made difficult for you.
And if you cannot extract it in one day, then leave it for a few days until the parts around it have healed, and then repeat the process when it has been alleviated. But if you experience contrary bleeding, then administer what we have said about healing in its chapter.
And guard your skill from cutting into a vein or nerve, or tendon, and manipulate it in every way possible to extract the arrow; and do this with ease and tranquility, and slowness and firmness, just as I have recommended to you and as you have recommended to yourself.
And therefore you should contract the arrow so that the patient is in accordance with the figure according to which the position of the arrow is in him, for it is more beneficial. But if this is not possible for you, then you must administer what is possible for you according to the figures.
But the arrows which are extracted by the opposite of the other part, or which have already entered into some part from outside, or cause hollowness in the extremity of the arrow due to sensitivity of the part above the joint nearest it, then you cut it; and the section should be according to the amount by which the forceps grasp it; and then draw it out, for it is made easier to extract.
But if it is retained in the bone, then you twist with contrary motion until the arrow is impressed into the bone, and widen the hole by yourself, and then extract it.
And if not, leave it for a few days and then repeat the process until it is extracted.
And if the shaft of the arrow is in that, then you push it out with him.
But if the shaft is broken and you want to administer impact, then you insert it into the arrow so that its concave part enters the concavity of the arrow and then push it out with him.
But if the arrow is concave, then you push it out with a strong instrument inserted into it, for the arrow is alleviated by that.
And if the arrow is poisoned, then you must hollow out all the flesh in which the venom is, if it is possible for you to do so, and then heal that with whatever is appropriate.
And if the arrow hits in the foot, or in the belly, or in the bladder, or in the side, and is near enough for you to touch it with your probe, and it is possible for you to cut it, then cut it and guard against cutting into a vein or nerve; and extract that, and then sew up the wound if it bleeds, and heal that until it is healed.
Form of forceps with which arrows are drawn out:
Their ends should be like the beak of an owl that they grip the arrow so that it does not let go.
And they should be made in different shapes, large and small, according to the amount of the size of the arrow and its weakness, and according to the width of the wound and its constriction.
like this with a twist so that the instrument of it is alleviated in the concave arrow and is pushed by that.
Of puncturing the veins.
The veins of fleubotomy, from which blood usually flows. of which there are in the head .xvi., there are two pulsating veins which are near the ears, some say; two herbs that appear on both temples; and two veins that are in two lacrimal of two hulls that are called aspicientz; and the vein prepared in the middle part of the forehead, and the vein that is at the end of the nose; and two guidegi that are on the neck; and two veins that are above the lip; and two veins that are below the lip; and — these are the veins that are called algelic —; and there are two veins that are below the tongue. But the veins that are bled in the arms are .v.; four of those are cephalic, and is due to the wild side; and the people call  “the vein of the head”, and is deaf, and is a middle vein, and is composed of one branch of the basilica, and of another ram of the cephalica; and they name that one the people  “vein of all the body”, and basilica is the vein which is paused on the domestic side, and is named  “citillar”, and they call that one the common people  “vein of the belly”; and funis of the arm, and is paused over the focil, and is that one in which it is bled, and is that one that appears above the poutz by manifest appearance; and salvatella, and is the vein that is between the said auricular and the smallest said, and are in him two ramps.
And in the foot and the leg are three veins; one of those is that which is below the curvature of the jaw of the wild side; and the second is sophena, and its place is below the leg of the domestic side; and the sciatic vein, and its place is below the leg of the wild side; and in the leg are other veins similar to those.
The juice of the veins that are near the ears is to ancient cataracts and emigrant and ulcerations of the head bad ancient.
And the quality of bleeding those is according to what you account to you: it is that is shaved the head of the patient, and is rubbed the head of the patient in the occipital in the place of both veins with a drape ample with good friction; tighten the patient his neck with a bandage between which appear the two and their places are near the ears in two places deposed of the head; and seek that one with your finger, and if you feel the pulse of those with your finger, here is sign with attempt.
Take you the lance cutellar, and it is that which is incident, and take you that one below the vein in the codena between which the bleeding came to the bone. And take up your hand with the vein and the codena to the parts above and insert the vein with incident incision. And let the length of the incision the quantity of two fingers adjusted or around that; and make to exit the blood as much as you want.
And tighten with powder and layssa that one between which is healed.
And he has preceded in the beginning of the book the incision of those and their cauterization.
But of the two veins arteries that are in the temples the juice of the phlebotomy is to ancient emigration and wickedness and obstinate ophthalmia and body of acute superfluities poured out in the hulls.
And the quality of bleeding those is according to what you account to you: constrict the patient his neck motion between which appear the two veins to the feeling by manifest appearance and let be demonstrated the pulse of them below your finger; and then you sign with attempt.
And take you up the codena above the vein to the parts above with your finger indic, and insert the bleeding incident below, and elevate the vein above; and insert that one as well as you have done in the two other veins; and make to exit the blood according to the quantity of your necessity.
And take off the constriction of the patient, and pause your finger on the vein for one hour, and then pause on that one cloth and powder and tighten that one above with strong constriction, and layssa that one between which is healed.
And he has preceded the recollection of them, and of those the incision, and the attraction in the beginning of the book.
And then the juice of phlebotomy of the vein of the forehead is proper the phlebotomy of the cephalic to the ancient maladies of the face and to emigration and heat and ulcerations suppurative.
And the quality of phlebotomy of him is according to what you account to you; it is that the patient tightens his neck with a bandage between which appears the vein; and take you the instrument which is named fossori, of which this is the form:
Pause the point eminent which is at the head of the fossori on that vein and peck it in him with a needle or with another cause in the manner of lu, and let exit the blood according to the quantity that you want; and then take off the perforation of the patient and tighten that one between which is healed.
And some times it is opened with phlebotomy lat, however not believe that the phlebotomy is of acute extremity as well as the other phlebotomies, before it is of lateral extremity, and phlebotomize that one according to the transverse, because the bone is near and strong he would break in him the phlebotomy when it is subtle.
But the juice of the two veins that are in the lacrimal of two hulls for scabies of the hulls for heat and weeping in the hulls, and to the maladies of the face.
And the quality of phlebotomy is that the patient tightens his neck with a bandage, and take you those, and you be standing over the head of him.
And let the phlebotomy be done according to the transverse to length a little with phlebotomies few, because in the place there is no meat; and if the phlebotomy is subtle, strong its extremity is broken.
And take you exit of the blood as much as it is necessary to you, and pause on those cloth, and tighten those one night, and then take off those.
But the phlebotomy of the vein of the nose is conferred to acute fever and to violent heat, and to the maladies of the face and emigration and heat that happens in the face, and especially when it is ancient.
And the quality of phlebotomy of him is that the patient tightens his neck and take you his nose with your left hand, and take you the phlebotomy subtle long and insert that one in the middle place of the head of the nose according to rectitude, because the vein does not appear to the feeling here, and because the blood begins to flow at once.
Believe that you finish your hand with the phlebotomy little by little and make to exit of the blood according to your necessity; and then tie that one for a night, because that one is restored more easily.
But the juice of phlebotomy of the two guideg is to constriction of ale and to commencement of leprosy and to many maladies and inpetige and bad suppurative ulcers as well as herpotromeno.
And the quality of phlebotomy of those is that the patient constricts each one in his neck with ligament; and set the artifexs over the head of the patient, and let the patient be seated on a chair.
And take you phlebotomize the vein to length with phlebotomy ample little by little; and then exit of blood according to tempered quantity or according to that which sees of necessity that is in that; and then do likewise on the other vein.
Then release the ligament and tighten the two veins with a ligature to prevent the patient from being suffocated, and allow them to breathe until the wound is healed.
And the benefit of phlebotomy in the veins, it will treat small sores and pustules in the mouth, and corruption of the gums, and bad ulcers and fissures, and bad ulcers that are in the nose and around his head.
And the quality of phlebotomy of those is that you make the patient lie down before you, and tighten his neck with a bandage, and lift up his lips and watch out for two veins, from which the one is on the right side of the lip and the second is on the left; and their demonstration is by the blackness of each of both of them, and this more so because in the circuit of these there are small black veins; and then cut each through cutting.
But if doubt exists under you, and you do not know which is of those, then you understand to incision of the largest of those, and of the most manifest of them.
And make the illusion of the two veins that are in the lips above.
But of two veins that are below the tongue, the benefit is properly phlebotomy of the cephalica to suffocations that are in the throat, to diseases of the uvula, and to diseases of the mouth.
And the quality of phlebotomizing those is that you follow the patient between your fingers in front of the sun, and raise his tongue, and watch below the tongue, from one side of him vein and the other side vein, and the color of each is declining to blackness.
And then phlebotomize each; and beware that you do not finish your hand in phlebotomizing those, for below those are arteries.
And the veins that are phlebotomized in the head are those in which blood usually flows in all men, and the phlebotomy of them is done according to two manners, or they put in leech mirtilat or olive oil declining in subtlety; or they cut with a fleubotomy blade, and it appeals if without smell, and this is its form:
Be the side of him thus with vehemence, and it is fitting to open the concave veins full proceeding apparent thick, and to those that contain thick blood tortured.
And this phlebotomy is of lesser width and of more subtle extremity, and it is fitting to phlebotomy of subtle veins that contain subtle blood citrusy.
But the benefit of phlebotomy of the basilic vein which is one of three veins: for when you extract blood from diseases that are below the throat and neck, and that affect the feet and belly.
And it is fitting to the phlebotomist, when phlebotomizing that, that he guards well and is above-fear in that, for below him there is an artery, and if he errs and hits in the puncturing of the phlebotomy, cut into that artery and let flow blood, so that he not phlebotomize that with pungent phlebotomies, unless it be cutting with without-smell.
And if the basilic does not appear by apparent manifestation, then you must leave that and change to the other, or seek some branch of it; or phlebotomy in the end of the arm, for that is manifest; and cut into it with without-smell phlebotomy just as we have said.
But if you want the phlebotomy of it meteyssa, then you must hit before the tightness of the arm that touch the place between which you know the location of the pulse, and then press upon him with your palm; and lift the arm and cut into the vein with concave section with without-smell phlebotomy just as we have said; and beware that you do not hit the place by some space from the location of the artery.
And when you feel, as you tighten the ligament, swelling in the place that you have pressed with your palm, then that swelling is swelling of the artery, and therefore avoid it.
And if you see the blood flow in the phlebotomy as with brightness of an infant, and the blood is subtle red, then know that it is of artery blood; and then you pinch and pause your finger over that for long space; and then push your finger, and if the blood is cut off, how many times it is cut off, then you tighten the arm and leave that.
And watch over the patient of the youth of him, and be above-fear of him and not abuse him for some days until he is healed.
But if the blood is not cut off, and you see that you do not have medicine at hand, then you cut into the artery, if it appears to you; for the extremity of him is contracted, and the blood is cut off; or take a knife of fistic, and open that, and take one half and tighten that over the place of the vein with tightness descending with ligament and with powder within another day.
And then if the blood is cut off, well it is; and if not, then heal that with that from which it came to the memory of the place of the powders cut off flow of blood.
And the cutting off of his blood is difficult in many dispositions by the small place of the wound and the possibility of the tightness of the arm.
But of the dark vein the phlebotomy is benefit that extracts blood from the superior part of the head and from the inferior part of the body; for it is composed of branch of the basilic and of the cephalica, just as we have said.
And beware for the phlebotomist that he be above-fear in the phlebotomy of him, for below it is a nerve; and then if he hits in the puncturing of the phlebotomy and strikes the nerve, stupor will occur to him, and difficult healing of him, and often not healed at all, and this nerve many times appears to feeling; and if it is hidden in some men and is subtle and not manifested, then you must pause the phlebotomy with that by which you phlebotomize with section of without-smell, and avoid the nerve with your strength.
And if the vein is between two nerves, then cut into the vein in its length.
The benefit of phlebotomy of the cephalica vein is that it attracts blood from the head and treats diseases of the ears.
And beware in this properly, if you want that you phlebotomize with leech mirtilat or olive oil; for it is the safest of all veins, for there is not below it artery nor nerve.
But however it is placed in some men, when it is not phlebotomized in the first impact, but do not note in return to that apostema.
The first of them is that one must know that phlebotomy is not administered except for the preservation of health and for the hope of life and the prevention of diseases, and that phlebotomy be performed on one of the veins that are in the head, namely: cephalica, fusca, and basilica; and that phlebotomy be performed at the beginning of spring, after breakfast in spring and autumn, and in winter near the time of eating, when there are signs of fullness.
And phlebotomy should be performed on the third day or the first after three hours have passed from that day.
But phlebotomy that is administered, more than anything it should be done when it is convenient and necessary, at night or during the day, at any time and at all times.
And a child should not be phlebotomized until he is twelve years old, and a pregnant woman should not be phlebotomized except from the fourth month to the seventh, and the elderly should not be phlebotomized when they have already passed sixty years of age.
And when someone wants to be phlebotomized for any reason, one should cleanse their bowels before the phlebotomy with a lion's cloak, if there is retained fecal matter in them, so that the veins do not push out the excesses in the phlebotomy of the bowels, which are purified, and that they do not harm the principal members.
And phlebotomy should not be performed on patients with sacred nausea and vomiting, nor on those who have been cured of a disease or of drunkenness, unless there is no hope for their recovery, nor on the sick of dropsy, but phlebotomy should be avoided when colic pain and vomiting occur, and also when there is pain in the bowels, and when there is an increase in urine, or fever, or when there is a lot of coughing or work, or because of excessive eating or waking at night, or for any reason that weakens the body or the animal.
And before that, one should carefully consider the withdrawal of humors from him if his blood is thick, by means of foods and drinks, and by medicines if it is possible for him.
And enter a bath if any cause does not prohibit it, or exercise in some way so that the blood is thinned out.
And let him receive phlebotomy on his feet at around the third hour of the day, as we have said.
And it is necessary that his feet be protected on that day from all accidental evils of animals, namely: constriction, anger, fear, and from all corporal accidents, namely: excess work and unnecessary pain, cough and their likenesses.
And at his bath, let the causes be present in the use of which men usually sweat with aromaticity and odor, and with balms and their likenesses according to the amount of possibility.
And let the phlebotomist follow on a cushion that is placed above the cushion of the one who is to be phlebotomized.
And then let him draw his arm and let the phlebotomist wash it with his hand two or three times; and then tighten the bandage and wrap it around twice.
And the bandage should be moderate, because if it is too tight or too loose, it prohibits the flow of blood; or if it is too tight, it prohibits the blood from flowing out.
And before the bandage, let the one who is to be phlebotomized rub his hands together so that the veins are swollen and made apparent to the senses.
And let the phlebotomist smear his needle with a little of that old oil properly; and then let him place the end of his needle on that vein, under the spot from which he wants to perform the phlebotomy, so that the vein goes away a little, and the compression is stopped because from those veins which are constricted like a string, blood will escape when the phlebotomy is performed; and from those which are swollen with windiness, when the phlebotomy is placed on it, it is contracted by the phlebotomist.
And therefore, let the phlebotomist be firm and solicitous in all these causes.
And then let him pause the phlebotomy, but if the vein is broken in one go, then well; and if not, you repeat that again under that spot a little, or over it with compression, if the spot is not pustular.
And if the spot is pustular, or the sick person becomes frightened, then leave it for one day or two and do not tighten the bandage, because quickly it will draw out the pustule, nor should he enter a bath.
And let him repeat the phlebotomy if it is needed.
And if the appearance is small and the blood flows subtly, and you fear that it does not draw out the quantity that you want, then you repeat the phlebotomy on that vein according to its straightness and adjust it a little in the appearance, because the spot is pustular in most people due to little appearance.
But if he is pustular already, then do not repeat on it, because it does not benefit you in any way; and pause over that spot some part of the oil of rose, because it attracts the blood. And this is better for that spot than other oils.
And likewise administer oil in all phlebotomies where the phlebotomist prohibits the flow of blood, and they do it with tyriaca and alfordoc when it is paused on that spot from one of those, because the blood is thinned out and is agitated when it is thick.
And if a large pustule is engendered in the spot of the phlebotomy, because many times it happens, and especially to one who has not been bloodlet, except that go-around, or in the appearance of the vein little, and then you cut it, and pause over the spot sponge infused with water and salt, a little scorched, and tighten that for an hour, because it is dissolved.
And let him do this especially for the letting of blood from that vein with a compliment of him or of another vein.
And if it turns black or green in the spot for several days, do not be alarmed; and if you want to, pause over that spot some cause of aloe and myrrh dissolved, or some cause of juice of mallows or of chalcanum or its likeness.
And many times it happens that pustules and protuberances are engendered by phlebotomy of the basilic vein.
And therefore let your hand be over it, and if you then tighten softness under it, then that protuberance is wicked and bad; and therefore take care to pause over that spot some cause of what we have said, because blood flows from the artery strongly.
And make a poultice with that in which it is tightened, so that the spot is hardened, and then cure that with another cure as it is healed.
And let them draw out blood from all men according to the quantity of their strength and according to the color prevailing over the blood.
For if the blood is black, then you let it out until it is ropy; and likewise if you see it thick, then you let it out until it is thinned out; and likewise if it is sharp, until its keenness is lost.
And let him whose blood is full and strong and who has need of drawing out blood in one go be amplified the phlebotomy of the vein and the needle be long.
And in that which is swollen, let the contrary be done to it, and that which draws it out in many foldings, and that the bandage be tight.
And the best method of phlebotomy for a vein is a cross-section, not a puncture.
And this method of phlebotomy spares blood flow and nerve injury, and is more admirable and safer than phlebotomy according to width and length.
And to whom it is accustomed to follow fainting after phlebotomy, and that you cure him before the phlebotomy with a little bread infused in wine of pomegranates or of oxymel simply warmed; and extract out of him some blood in three or four foldings.
And if it is a fainting of complexional nature, then take before the phlebotomy bread infused in myrrh syrup or in aromatic honey syrup with spices such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger and like, or in aromatic syrup and very odorous.
And if fainting occurs following phlebotomy and the cause is excessive blood loss, then let him take to drink water of meat and odorous syrup very subtly; and use aromatherapy with aloes, and let him apply it to his feet with that.
And use the other causes which we have said in the division in the chapter on fainting through evacuation.
And whoever wishes to open his arm and dissolve his blood secondarily, let him do to him of whom the phlebotomy is for great evacuation, and whose nature is cold, that he evacuates blood little by little, according to the quantity of the nature in consecutive days.
But whoever wishes to open his arm and drain his blood secondarily, and his body is strong, then let him do so seven or nine hours after the first phlebotomy.
But whoever wishes to drain the blood of his body contrarywise to the part to which he inclines, let him be opened on the second or third day.
But a body in which much blood has already been warmed and is acute and causes fever, let him have his blood drawn in one folding and let a great quantity be taken from him and the appetite increased until fainting occurs, for you will have preserved all the conditions of phlebotomy; and place your hand over his pulse on the side of the body's blood, so that death does not occur instead of fainting, for many times this happens when the phlebotomist is ignorant and negligent.
And do not press with force and bend it extended slightly when you wish to open the arm and evacuate blood secondarily, when the orifice of the vein is already closed and the flow of blood difficult; for this is very bad.
Have the phlebotomy site before it is phlebotomized again; or remain there with the acuteness of the phlebotomy which coagulates the blood in the orifice of the vein; or place on it tyriaca of alfarach, or of sagzenea, and compress it lightly until the blood has exited.
And if the vein is inflamed, then leave that and do not touch it until the inflammation has subsided.
And if necessity compels you to evacuate blood secondarily and there is no excuse, then bleed him at that site or on the other arm in another vein.
And the vein called “the strings of the arm” is phlebotomized instead of the basilic or cephalic when they are not found or are hidden, for it is composed of those.
And the quality of the phlebotomy is that the patient immerses his hand in warm water until the vein swells and appears evidently.
And then let it be tightened there with a ligature with a small string; and phlebotomy according to the small cross, not lengthwise nor according to the length.
And let the appetite be ample and let your phlebotomy of it on the joint of the hand be a little.
And if the flow of blood is prohibited, then you repeat the hand in warm water and let the blood run in the water until you have accomplished your need.
But if you are in the days of summer, then you are excused from the repetition of the hand in warm water, and the body of the blood is placed in warm water in the time of winter.
And the phlebotomy of this vein is more safe than of all other veins, for beneath it there is no pulsatile vein nor nerve.
And the phlebotomy of the back of the right hand is pertaining to the maladies of the liver.
And the quality of the phlebotomy is that you tighten the hand with a string or your hand, for you have placed it in warm water until the vein is swollen and it is clearly demonstrated; and phlebotomize it crosswise; and if you insert there at all it will not harm that.
And beware that you do not finish the phlebotomy of your hand, for beneath are the nerves of the fingers stripped of flesh.
And then repeat the hand in warm water and let the blood run in it, for if you do not repeat that in warm water, the blood will coagulate in the orifice of the vein and flow is prohibited.
And when the blood is extracted according to the quantity of need, then you place on the vein oil and salt, so that it is not consolidated clottedly; and similarly let you do in every limb tightly.
But the advantage of the phlebotomy of that of the left hand is that it is pertaining to the maladies of the spleen.
And do similarly in the phlebotomy of him just as you have done in the other.
And the advantage of the cephalic vein of the phlebotomy is to maladies which are below the body, just as those of the mother, and to retention of menstrua, and to maladies of the knees and ulcers of thighs and similar to the maladies.
And the quality of the phlebotomy is that the patient immerses his foot in warm water and rubs it until the veins appear; and he places on the joint of the foot a bandage; and the site of the vein let him note by pushing down with the finger, and from there let it branch out in the fascia of the foot many ramps.
And therefore phlebotomize the most ample ram or below the ankle bone, for it is better and more safe.
And if you phlebotomize that in the fascia of the foot, then beware of the nerves which are below it on the fascia of the foot, and place your phlebotomy with the one with which you phlebotomize crosswise, as though you wished to pierce it.
And let the phlebotomies be mild.
But if the flow of blood is prohibited, then you repeat his foot in warm water and let the blood run in it until he is evacuated.
And if the phlebotomizer erred in the first folding, then repeat with the phlebotomy on his few fingers, for the site is safe; and do not fear him malicious, but beware of the nerves just as we have said.
And similarly do to the cephalic of the other foot similarly.
And from the sciatic vein, the site just as we have said is below the ankle bone of the hind leg.
And the advantage of the phlebotomy of it is to ache of hip when it is by cold blood.
And the quality of the phlebotomy is that the patient enters a bath, and quickly and tightly ties his head on the side of the broad neck above the ankle above four fingers in one long, subtle bandage, for it does not appear except by this.
And then when it appears, you phlebotomize that according to each ability that is within your power and according to the crossover, and that is better; or pierce it with an incision or cut it with a section, for its location is salty.
And it is in most men hidden; and if you pierce that and it does not appear at all to the senses, then phlebotomize a branch of it, and that is what appears on the back of the foot opposite the ring and little fingers.
And beware of the nerves, and let the blood flow in the quantity you want.
Then loosen the tightness and place a bandage on the site of the phlebotomy and tighten the area, for it is quickly healed.
Of ventilation and of the qualities of using them.
Vents are from horns or ram's horn or glass.
And ventilation is done according to two methods: one of them is with a scarification and extraction of blood, and the other is ventilation without scarification.
And this ventilation that is without scarification is according to two methods, for either it is with fire or without fire.
And the vents that are administered with scarification and extraction of blood are fourteen parts of the body, of which one in which vents are paused is alnocrati, and it is the back part of the head; and the middle part of two parts of the neck together; and vents from the chin below the jawbone and below the mouth; and vents from two spatulas; and vents from alloster, and that is on the end of the tail; and vents from two little fingers, and they are of two arms; and vents from two shanks; and vents from two thighs.
And ventilation does not extract blood but from the small veins scattered in the flesh, and for this it does not have virtue through them, just as cauterization is through phlebotomy; nor is it believed that ventilation should be done with fire or without fire in any disease caused by repletion within when the whole body is evacuated.
But if necessity prompts ventilation for disease or for continued, we administer that at the beginning of the month and at its end, and in the middle of it and at any time.
And therefore when any of those causes occur, and especially if it is in the third or middle of the month, then we command ventilation to be done after two or three hours have passed during the day.
And the benefit of ventilation of the nape is that when it happens to cause heaviness in the head and to that which is sunk into the eyes; but beware that this is not a complete evacuation of the whole body.
And this vent is in the place of phlebotomy of the cephalic vein.
And it is not advisable to use it when there is a complex fracture or when there is a hernia, for it does great harm to that.
And for this reason it is not advisable for the elderly and in the heads of those whose diseases are cold.
But when that is continued over him it causes oblivion; and for this reason you should command the ventilator to pause his hand with the cupping glass on the upper parts, fearing the generation of oblivion.
But ventilation of alkehel is in the place of phlebotomy of the dark vein and the basilic; and for this it causes asthma, and constriction of the throat and hoarseness, and coughing, and repletion.
But it should be applied to the alkehel cupping glass a little, for if it is paused below, it generates weakness in the body and in the stomach.
And ventilation of alhagdahan causes accidental pains in the head and to ophthalmia, and emisary, and pre-fever, and toothaches; and it is in the place of phlebotomy of the basilic.
And beware that you command the ventilator not to press his hand with scarification so that he does not pierce the artery and cause an outburst of blood.
And ventilation below the chin causes colic in the mouth, and corruption of the gums, and resembling to them their diseases that are in the mouth, and they stand in the place of phlebotomy of alieric which is in the two lips.
But the ventilation that is done on the two spatulas causes headache, which is caused by repletion of heat.
And the ventilation of the two ends inside the fingers causes benefit of phlebotomy of three veins, namely the basilic, dark and cephalic, for it draws blood from all those small veins in the flesh, and those small veins from the other larger veins within which it comes to the attraction to the three veins.
And command the ventilator that he does not pierce too deeply in scarification, for the place is stripped of flesh, and below it are nerves and arteries.
And it is one cupping glass with which it is cupped above the hips and causes hemorrhoids of the anus and ulcers further below.
And beware that you command the ventilator that it is a large cupping glass, and that it is of ram's horn, for the location indigests strong section; and strongly draw its own deeply pierced cupping glasses subtle and be scarified with scarification.
But cupping glasses of the legs are lessened due to manifest weakness, for they draw blood from all the body, and cause old pains in the knees and the mother, and the bladder; and they provoke menstruation, and cause hemorrhoids and ademil; and they stand in the place of phlebotomy of two sophens, and alahorcoben, and of two shanks.
However, they weaken all the body and cause syncope in many men.
And of the cupping glasses alahorcoben their benefit is added to the benefit of the cupping glasses of two legs.
And the quality of the position of the cupping glasses is that you pause the cupping glass at the beginning and suck through a warm tube, and do not prolong the position of the cupping glasses, but pause them briefly, and let the humors come to the site by intuition equally. And do not cease to repeat that and continue until he sees the site already red and swollen and that the heat of the blood appears.
And then you scarify and iterate the suction little by little, and then consider the disposition of the body.
For a man who has thin skin, beware that you scarify him once and not more, so that the location is not ulcerated.
And command the wind instrument player to amplify the scarification and take a few breaths, and temper the suction with ease.
And if the vein is enlarged, then you should scarify in two places, for in the first place is opened the way of subtlety into the blood and moisture of it. But in the second to the scrutiny acquired from the extraction of the thick blood.
And if the blood is very foul, then scarification should be made in the third place so that the dross may be removed.
And lastly, when we want to extract blood little by little or a small amount, one scarification is enough for us.
And if we want to extract a lot of blood, then we scarify with many scarifications; and if we know that the blood is thick, then we should scarify deeply.
And the term of scarification in which there is only the depth of the skin.
And if the person has thick, tough, dark skin, and their pores are tight, then the places on which the cups are to be placed should be anointed gently, widely, and liberally; in summer, with oil of aloe, or oil of violets, or oil of crushed almonds, or oil from the inside of a walnut shell; and in winter, with oil of nutmeg, or oil of lilies, or camomile oil, or blood, and similar things.
And if the superfluity is thick and foul, then the oil should be of marigold, or of sage, or of aloe, or of aniseed, and similar things.
But if the person has wide pores of tender flesh, then oil should be prohibited; instead, the places on which the cups are to be placed should be washed with water or warm salt water, or with walnut water, or with water from boiling herbs, and similar things.
And if the blood is of great moisture, wash their cups with sour wine, or with water of myrtle and sumac, and similar things to those.
And for the person whose superfluities are thick, wash their cups with old wine, or with water of wormwood, which is marjoram, or of boiled aniseed, or of camomile, and similar things to those.
And so that the cupping treatment is kept before bathing; have them take a bath shortly after the treatment for one or two hours, and let them sleep after the cupping.
What shall be done when it is necessary to evacuate wind from a patient before cupping?
Consider the following: if the person to be bled and cupped is choleric with hot blood and inflammation, then take cold remedies, such as parsley leaves, and endives in sour wine, and leeks, and sesame, and julep, and similar things.
And feed them also with poultry, and meats of young birds, and seasoned dishes with vinegar, and similar things to those.
And for the person whose complexion is foul, have them drink honey water with alum, or honey water of sesame seeds, and sumac, and very fragrant wine between white and red; and let him be commanded to drink little and eat little, and give him poultry and cabbage and pigeons and small birds and colombier.
And so that on the day of cupping and phlebotomy, let his drink be greater than his food.
And let them be given to drink at certain times to some people theriac of alfarab, or medicines of musk, which is muscadine, or alcelita before cupping or phlebotomy, so that the principal members are comforted and the blood subtilized; and let them not take those hot drinks.
But the cups that are after scarification should be placed over the liver, and over the melse and podagra, and over the umbilical, in the places of the joints, and the pixid of the elbow, for these members do not suffer scarification upon themselves.
And it is not desired for those except for bloodletting from the member, just as they pause the cup over the mammary gland in milk flux of blood from the blood of the breasts; and they use that to dissolve thick viscousness of the member, just as they pause over the belly and the umbilical; for that thins out the member and pierces it and releases the pain when it resolves the cupping.
And already it is paused over the testes when they occur in their swelling or pain, for by virtue of strong attraction their scrotum swells and eliminates the pain from its place.
And similarly it does when it is paused over the liver and the spleen in those who have a hernia.
And these cups are administered empty with suction only; and some times they are administered with fire.
And some times they are administered full of tepid water in the diseases of the spleen.
And this is why the cup should be filled and have a large opening; it is water alone or water in which herbs are steeped according to what is convenient.
Form of cup administered with fire: let the size of the orifice be two fingers, according to how we have formed it; and the quantity of the flame be the length of a palm; and be in the width of it, in the place that is in the circuit, the size of it, the hole be small according to the quantity that goes into it an needle.
Let it be made of ram horn or citron wood, of thick margins, of lion, of ox hoofs and terses so that it does not sting the member when it is in its position over it.
And let there be a transverse groove at the mouth of it, made of horn or of iron, where the candle with the fire is paused.
And already this cup be much larger than that which we have recommended; and the small one less according to the diseases and the condition of him who uses it.
And the cups of children and emaciated people are smaller than those of young and stout people.
And the quality of placing this cup with fire upon the member is that it extends the heat with a decent fire of wood in front of a small candle of wax, and pause that upon the mouth of the transverse groove at the middle place of the cup, so that the fire be lit around the lower part so that the patient's body is not burned.
And then let it be paused over the member of the patient, and the finger be over the hole that we have said, during which when we hold the cups and do not see the finger and let the steam go over that hole, the cup is immediately dissolved.
And prop it heats the fire according to its way, and repeat that if it does not work out.
But in cupping that is administered in the disease of pleurisy, with water, in which there is no transverse groove nor hole, and it is not administered unless it is filled with water, and it is paused over the member only.
And this is how it is: And this cup when it is larger, all the better, so that it can receive great quantity of water.
Chapter xcvii.
Bloodletting is not administered in small members but in the members in which it is not possible to place cups due to the smallness of those, such as the finger and the gum and similar things to them; or in a member stripped of flesh, such as the toe and similar things to them.
And the quality of using those that you have found leeches in the dark waters of clean blood.
Then let them be left for the day and night in dark water until they become hungry, and no cause remains in the belly of those; and then the body should be evacuated at the beginning with phlebotomy and with enemas; and then the parts of the patient are to be rubbed until they turn red; and then they are to be placed on him.
And when they are full and deflated.
And if it is possible to suck the place with a ventouse, it is better for healing.
And if not, then wash the place with wine vinegar and then with warm water; and it should be rubbed and expressed.
And if the body of the blood is prolonged by the action of the leeches and it is sweating, then you dip a cloth in cool water and place it on top so that the sweating is absorbed.
And if the blood is profuse, then powdered vitriol, or eggs and similar things from the class of astringents are sprinkled on it until the blood is staunched; or cooked fava beans are placed on the spot and left until the beans adhere to the spot, and the blood is staunched.
And if necessary, the repetition of leeches, when possible to change them.
And if the leeches are prohibited from being suspended, then the place is to be rubbed with fresh blood or a needle is left in the places where it draws blood; and then they are to be placed, for those when feeling any blood at all drawn.
And when you want them to stop, sprinkle a little aloe vera, or salt, or ash on them, and they will stop right away.
Thus begins the prologue of the third part: of restoration. This chapter is many times necessary in the art of medicine; it is a restoration of fracture and of accidental dislocation in the bones.
Oh son, know that boast of this chapter the foolish doctors and the vulgar and those who have not for some time regarded the books of the Ancients nor read any letter of them.
And for this reason the method of the scientists in our land is private; and I have not been obliged to do anything at all about it; and I have not used that which teaches, except through length of reading the books of the Ancients and studying on the understanding of those, so that I might extract the science from them.
And I have added to it experiment and study in the length of my life.
And I have described in this chapter all that contains my science and about which my experience has passed; because I have abreviated it to you others and freed you from occupation of elongation; and I have abbreviated it in the end of abbreviation; and demonstrated it in the end of demonstration; and formed it in many forms of the instruments that are administered in it, as is done for addition of demonstration, so I have done in two preceding chapters.
First chapter.
Summary and collections from being fractures of the bones, from which whose premise is necessary, before we begin to remind of the members fractured and diverse if any. Therefore, we take in the prologue of this chapter the summaries of speech; and the chapters at understanding which in the beginning is forced the artificers and to station on the truth of those; so you are and those who are prompt that know or learn this noble art from you.
And therefore I say that when accidents happen to anyone fracture or dislocation or twist or hernia, then you must first be careful with phlebotomy or washing it, or any poultice, if no cause prohibits, so as debility of strength, or is the one to which happened effant, or old in decrepitude, or is time of violent heat, or of violent rub.
And then it should be content in food of herbs fresh and of meats of birds and of crabs; and prohibited thick meats and to fill up with foods and all food that fills the veins with blood, so that you ensure safety from apostema cauterization, and if you do not fear effusion of matter to the member.
And then return the patient to his first regimen with which he used to be accustomed.
And therefore when the broken bone begins to be restored, then let the patient be fed with nourishing foods of mot and thick and heavy foods in which is stickiness, so as foods made of wheat cooked with water, and rice, and peas, and fish, and bellies of cows, and eggs, and fresh meat, and wine gross and similar to those, and with this regimen coagulation of fracture is done more quickly and better.
And know that the broken bones when they are in the elderly and in the weak, it is not possible that they be continued and be consolidated according to their nature by the drying of their members.
But nature adjusts and connects on the broken bone of all part any cause similar to glue in which is thickness that adheres and strengthens together, so as fire at the beginning, so that no cause prohibits that from its works.
And for this reason it is necessary that you stop the foods of the patient, foods in which are heaviness and stickiness and thickness, so as we have said.
And know that the species of fracture are diverse according to the diversity of members, for fracture of the bone of the leg is diverse from the fracture of the bone of the head; and the fracture of the bone of the foot is different from the fracture of the bone of the toe; and similarly all other members are diverse among them.
And I will come to remind of every species of fracture, expounded in its distinct chapter from another.
Much diversity of fracture in itself. And the species of fracture of the bone are diverse in their meteyssas; for there is made fracture arched another that happen in it stars; and some times fracture is made according to the length of the bone: and they are fractures of the satagia and asthels and additional proceeding and non-proceeding, so as it is made in the pen when it is prepared to write, and fracture am plaga and disruption in the head, and fracture fissure little.
And every species has pain or torment proper in its restoration according to what will come reminder of it distinct in its places.
Much sign of fracture of the bone. And for that is known fracture of the bone: its tortuosity and of that eminence and appearance of it to feeling, and so of it when you compress it with your hand.
And therefore when there is not in the place tortuosity apparent nor is it made due to your touch when you touch the bone with agitation and the patient does not suffer great pain, then it is not here fracture.
It is possible that there be tortuosity or small fissure, then do not you sting it with your hand and compress it with agitation and the patient does not suffer great pain, then hold over it of the medicines of which you remind him about it moment which suits the place; and then be tight by subtle restriction.
And you should know that the place where it is arched and not split into two or anything else that does not happen in it is called a satagie, as is the entire part of his body, then you must begin to rectify it with cautery.
And if it happens to be cauterized, then let it be for a few days until the abscesses cease; and then heal it afterwards in whatever way you can, according to its nature and severity.
And you should know that the restoration and piercing of it is easier than the bone in which this satagie occurs.
And then strengthen it according to how it will heal.
But if the satagia is in the bone, then it is necessary to extend that broken member into two parts, whether it be the arm or leg; or with your hand if the member is small; or with two cords or one cord and the hand.
And your position should be the one in which you place that member's joint according to its natural shape, while the parts are extended from the broken member; then you must pierce and return those attachments with skill and in any way possible for them.
And beware according to your strength that you do not cause pain or injury to the patient through your operation; and with skill, according to your ability, apply the one bone to its companion according to their best forms.
And you should touch it with your hand in that hour profitably, and if you see any other cause, rectify it and heal it according to the quantity of your skill.
And avoid violent extension and compression, as many foolish doctors often cause an abscess cauterized by their operation, or caused contraction in the member, as we have seen it happen through their operations many times.
And the quality of the stricture of the broken member is that you consider it; because you should know that broken members are differentiated in their smallness and in their greatness and in the shape of them.
And of those which are small like the arm and finger and elbow and similar to them, then let their envelope be very thin cloth.
But those which are large like the thigh or leg, then let their envelope be hard and folded, because the folded band connects the large member and strengthens it all around with equal stricture, so that no stain enters it.
Then you should begin, and your evacuation of equity, pause the convenient bandage over that fracture with three or four envelopes according to how the member deserves it; and strengthen your hand a little with the bandage.
And then go to it at the highest part of that fracture location, and strengthen more so that you do not focus your stricture with which you have strengthened the fracture location. And then lengthen it a little with the envelope at the fracture location, and loosen the stricture a little bit by bit as you take from the location a great part.
And then take another bandage and wrap that other part over the broken location, and then go to the bandages at the lowest part of the fracture; and your operation in the stricture of the envelope and in loosening it shall be according to what we have said above about the first envelope.
And then pause between the envelopes of wadding or cloth with which it is healed the tortuosity of the fracture, if there is tortuosity in it; and if not, then do not pause for any cause.
And then pause over it another bandage, and then heal the decently-made stars over these envelopes immediately, if there is no inflammation or abscess cauterized at that location, and then pause over it whatever heals the abscess and stops the inflammation; and let it be for a few days; and then strengthen over it the stars.
And the stars should be of the thickness of a cane that is straight and well-formed, or they can be of wood, or of strips of palm tree, and their width should be according to this shape and figure:
However, the star that is paused over that fracture should be thicker and a little bit more folded than the other stars, and the length of the star according to how long the member is in greatness and smallness; and then strengthen over it another bandage according to your first stricture; and then pierce over it with decent needle according to what we have said about stricture, and let the stricture be according to the location of the fracture, and as long as it is drawn away from the fracture, the stricture is diminished.
And let the threads be medium in thickness and sottlety, and they should be of fine linen; and if the threads are thick, as I have seen through the operation of some foolish doctors who fasten their threads with cords, and it is a great error when the stricture is not equal.
And thin threads are not convenient, because you will not achieve by stricture with them what you want, and there must be room for a finger between the stars.
And if the patient is hurt by the ends of the stars then strengthen it with wadding or cloth below so that it does not hurt him.
Sometimes the fracture is with swelling and occurs disruption in the tendon, and I have come to rectification in it in the head according to its singularity.
And you should know that not every broken member is tightened with stars on the first day; the cause of this is because the member, when it is large, you should not pause over it stars unless after a few days or seven or more, according to your security about the occurrence of an abscess cauterized.
And this is the manner of the plasterers by which the Ancients restored, they were paused over fracture and dislocation and twisting.
Way of plaster as a remedy for the restoration of fracture, convenient to many complexities and especially to women and children, because it is that which does not come heat or friction: and take from flour powder, and it is the core of the flour that comes out with the movement of the mill in the walls of the mill.
And it is used as it is, but you sift it with white egg and pause the composition of it not thick nor sottile; and then use that.
Another method of a restorative poultice for broken bones and dislocation and twisting: take assafetida, ladanum, acacia, enula, and myrrh, which is ground from wild pomegranate seeds, of all these ingredients take one drachma each; of mirra and aloe take five drachmas each; of aloes take twenty drachmas; mix them together and add to it either water or egg white if the patient's body is cold; and then use this poultice, for it has a good composition and quickly restores broken bones, and makes many men well.
Another method of a poultice that makes well broken bones and twisting: take myrrh and met with white poplar, both weighing ten drachmas; mirra and aloe, five drachmas each; acacia, six drachmas; and armenian bole, twenty drachmas.
All of these ingredients are to be ground in a mortar and pestle, sifted, and made into a poultice with either water or egg white and then applied.
Method of poultice for joints and bones separated from their sockets, and for cuts and fractures: take soft wool and soak it in warm vinegar and oil and then apply it to the affected area.
Add to this poultice verjuice for restoration, and add yellow wax to close and draw out pain effectively.
Another method of poultice that restores broken bones: take leaves of the wild fig and leaves of wild poppies; pound them all together and make a poultice from them.
Method of poultice that promotes restoration, and resolves the swelling from fractures: take ground leaves of mallows, chamomile flowers and violet flowers, flour of ermine, of all these ingredients one part each; have them all pounded and made into a poultice with vinegar if the member is not wounded.
But if it is wounded, then treat that spot with water of coriander soaked in wine or with water and his own urine.
Another stronger method of poultice that effectively resolves swelling: take ground leaves of mallows and its seeds, balsam, mallow, majorana, violet flowers, chamomile flowers, all in equal parts; have them all pounded and made into a poultice with water of sage or warm water or wine, all depending on the quality of the member and the color of its pulse.
But Hypocras does not dry in its own juice unless it is applied to the wounded member for its restoration, nor should a plaster of wax and oil be placed over it, but rather a cerot made from wax and oil; nor should it be allowed to become too thick or too thin.
But Gualia says that plasters should be placed over the broken member for its restoration and the causes of drying due to hotness are also small like myrrh, onions and their likes according to those causes we have recounted.
Method of poultice that treats injury and pain: take ground mustard seeds, sesames, human hair or bird feathers, mallow and salt in equal parts; have them all pounded and sifted and made into a poultice.
But the amount according to the extension of the ligature and its proximity, you consider if there is not pain nor swelling nor that the bone is broken nor has come out of its socket, then you do not have to remove it for several days. And if there is violent pain or swelling or inflammation in the spot, then you cut it off or remove that in the hour and stop the poultice from it.
And take linen and sponge the sea lion in warm water, and with that wash the spot until the swelling and pain are ceased; then let the member rest for an hour; then apply to it soft wool soaked in warm vinegar and oil or rose oil, and let it lie over it all night so that the swelling of the hernia is secured, and the pain of it calmed.
And then repeat that subtle binding and small poultice, and do not tighten by your first constriction but subtly with it until it is healed.
And if you see that the hernia and the redness and the pain and the swelling and all its accidents are already calmed, and you have ceased from poultice and binding, then you repeat that in the same way as you have done at first equally.
And if there does not occur to the member any of those causes we have said, then do not remove it but rather three or four or five or seven days; and some times all that is left for twenty days according to how you appear by the dislocation of the member, as we have said, until the fracture adheres and comes close to the coagulation of the flesh over it.
And then tighten the binding a little more than your first binding and in the thickening of the swelling of the member according to how it is preceded in its memory.
But if you see the spot of the fracture dry and withered but not closed, then know that nourishment is prohibited from coming to it; and so soak that in warm water entirely for three days; and loosen the binding a little, and by this operation the member receives nourishment and is healed gently.
But that which the foolish restorers of the broken member do is another way when it is not restored at first, as it is closed and twisted, is error according to their operation and great fear, and if it were straightened then the ancients in their joints would have been opened by them.
And I have not seen any of them do that, because it is more reasonable that it does not do that.
Chapter according to: Of fractures when they occur in the head.
The species of fractures are various, and their figures diverse, and their causes distinct; for some fractures are made by the impact of a spear, and the impact stands all the bones inside the skull, the skull being beneath the bones as it were in a staff, and because of that this species of fracture is named impaction; or the spear pierces through some part of the bone and pierces the flesh around it without breaking into the brainpan, and because of this this species of fracture is called levation absolute.
And the width of these two fractures may be great or small, and they are caused by compression or impact; and the cause of them is impact with a staff or stone, and to their likes.
And this fracture may be penetrating which approaches the membrane beneath the bone or is in the face of the bone, and the width of these two fractures may be great or small.
And of fracture is that it is broken in the bone, in the sottlety of hair small, and because of this this species of fracture is named capillary fracture.
And fracture is that which is made either by impact or by stone and to their likes, which makes some lamina of the bone enter into the spaces between the teeth, and is made in the concave place as it happens to the teeth when they receive impact and is broken into the spaces between the teeth.
And most often this happens in the bodies of flat bones as in the heads of infants.
And so all these species of fractures are set, as nails separated. And I will come to remember all that in its place.
And you know all these species of fracture by detection on those and by inquiry into them with probes and examination of the corrupted flesh that is over them.
And capillary fracture is known by that which is uncovered over the bone, and wiped clean, and lined over it with the probe, for the fracture appears black.
But in the cure of fracture consider at first the accidents of the body, and then if you see by the accidents that signify by manifest indication on fear, as it happens in cholera, and extension, and loss of understanding, and abdominal pain, and redness of them, and their likes to their major dispositions, although you do not heal.
And if you see that accidents are not happening, then you can begin the cure.
The reason for this is that if the patient has come to you in the beginning as it is in the days of winter, then you should study the bone before the 14th day according to all dispositions.
And if it is in the days of summer, then you should cover the bone before the seventh day, so that what is below the bone becomes rotten by the skin, and so that the accidents that we have counted happen.
And if the fracture has already reached the skin, and is in small pieces and crushed, then you should insert the crushed and ground-up part, according to what I will tell you.
And you should cut off the head of the infected patient and uncover it over the bone according to custom and manner for you to make possible according to the shape of the plague, and so that it is lighter on the patient.
And if you see that there is a detection of the bone, flow of blood or pustule cauterized, then you should stop it with what is appropriate, and you should cover the area with cloth soaked in wine and rose oil, and make the plague rest until the pustule is soothed, and be sure to stop the flow of blood; then you may begin on the circuit of the bone and in its removal.
And this should be according to one of two manners of operation.
And the one manner is that you insert the bone with a very narrow incision knife, and this is its shape: And you should also administer another incision knife this one a little bit wider than the other; and this is its shape:
And you should also administer the incision knife that is wider than the second one.
And you should have many incision knives of different widths; some are wider than others, and some are shorter than others and are in the shape of acute angles, and are made of iron or steel.
And use them with ease in striking the incision knife so that it does not strike the head and cause damage to it.
And if the bone is strong and hard, then you should drill into its circuit before you administer the incision knives with drills, which are called non-deep drills.
And they are not named like this but because these drills do not stop the end of the bone from that which is appropriate to it, so that when the drill is round-tipped or edged on its end below the sharp head resembling an edge or a small circle, it prohibits being submerged and passing through the thickness of the bone.
And it is convenient that you take great numbers of these drills, each of which is convenient for the thickness of every bone, so that it is present in all parts of the skull whose end is acute, and the quantity in length and brevity is according to the quantity of thickness of this part.
And this is the shape of three kinds of drills: The quality of drilling in the circuit of the broken bone is that you stop the drill on the bone and turn it with your fingers so that you know that the bone has been penetrated; then change the drill to another place, and pause what is between every crack the quantity of the thickness of the ray or environment.
And you should insert with incision knives what is between each crack of the bone, and make that as subtle as possible at the end of lightness, just as we have said, so that you radiate the bone, or by your hand, or by any other instrument which you will have prepared for this, just as tweezers and fine forceps.
And you should keep with great care so that the incision knife does not touch any part of the brain.
And when you have drilled around the bone and it is separated from the brain if it continues with it, then you should extract that, then cut and gnaw at it in its roughness with another instrument similar to an incision knife but however, it should be thicker and more subtle than the other incision knives.
And if any small bones and splinters fall out, then you should pick those up with ease with whatever is convenient for you from the instruments; then you cure the plague with poultices and bandages which we have mentioned.
And the other manner of operation is lighter and more distant from fear, which Gualia says and praises greatly; and this is its speech: It is necessary for you at the beginning to begin uncovering the part of the bone at the site where the fracture is most violent and most manifest, so that when you have uncovered that part and stopped it below with the end of this incision knife, which is long and gentle, and whose shape is as follows [image description]:
And the lenticular part is round and does not insert any cause, and the acute part is from it in two sides forward in length, just as a lever; so that the lenticular part is fitted to the brain with its sharp edge incident on the bone.
And you should percute on the incision knife of one side with a small mallet so that you insert all the bone with ease just as it is turned, and you be sure that the skin does not happen to him in any way which you fear in any manner, and if the patient was the most foolish of all men and the most ignorant of them; certainly, and if he was sleeping.
Then if it gives any cause annexed to the bone of the skin in some parts of bone, insert that from it with the end of the lenticular incision knife, and deliver that from it with ease because it is delivered from it without harm and fear.
And if the fracture of the bone does not penetrate into the skin, and what is severed or is left of the bone is its edge, and fall out in it roughness and splinters, then you should cut that roughness and gnaw at those splinters with subtle razors which you have prepared their number, of different quantities so that it is convenient for you to administer them in every place the most appropriate of them and the most direct of them according to what you are led by your operation on that broken bone and its shape.
And you should administer in your reason with which you cut the bone at the beginning by the widest of those razors, and then use it also by the most subtle of them, and do not cease to do this according to continuity until you come to administering the thickest and most subtle of all of them.
But in each of the other small capillary fractures and subtle fracture, you should administer cure according to what you are led by rectification of it.
And it is a cause that is not damped on all of which have studied in that art. And I stand on what we wrote, we have shown in great fractures.
And if the skin is stretched when you radiate the bone, then you should take cloth according to the quantity of the plague, and soak it in rose oil, and pause that over the orifice of the plague; then take another cloth folded or doubled, and soak it in wine and rose oil and pause that over the first cloth and do this as gently as possible so that you do not harm the brain; then administer on that a bandage wide, and do not tighten it except by the quantity that the plague has, only.
And let this treatment continue for one or two days until you are sure that the ulcer is cauterized; and then remove it and administer medicines to reduce the swelling, such as flaxseed poultices and linseed meal, and powder of onions and pepper, and similar remedies.
And it is that you make these medicines into a powder that can be sprinkled over the wound, as they are dried; and generally, administer to him all medicine of the nature that cleanses and does not bite.
And be careful according to your ability that the wound in its healing is clean; and do not allow any dirt or other thing on it; nor let virulence accumulate on it; for when it is applied to the membrane of the brain, it corrupts and damages it, and malicious evil occurs upon the patient.
And it happens in the skull, when its bone is cleaned and mainly when the treatment of it is suppressed, and there is blackness on its surface; therefore consider that if these accidents occur to the patient as we have said, know that they are harmful without a doubt.
And if blackness does not occur except from the medicine that is applied on top of it, and it is due to that medicine which causes that darkness, then take honey in a portion and rose oil in portions .iii.. And with those lines, a cloth, and then apply it to the skull; and then heal that with the spices of healing that are appropriate so that he is cured.
Chapter .iii.
Of the restoration of the nose when it is broken.
Know that the nose is not broken except in two parts only, some of which are more prominent than others; because in it there are two bones, for the part below is cartilage, and it is not broken, and nothing happens to it except crookedness, tortuosity, and sinusitis.
But if one of the two parts of it is broken, then you must insert your little finger into his nose, and close that fracture within with your index finger, and with your thumb outside, so that the nose returns according to its natural shape. And it must be done by you for ease; and beware of causing pain to the patient due to that operation.
And if the fracture is in the most prominent part of the nose, and the finger cannot reach it, then let it be made equal by the end of the bone in which it is small in thickness.
And if the fracture is in two parts, then you must do as follows:
And be careful to restore it on the first day of the fracture, if possible; and if not, then after the seventh or tenth day, according to the rest of the ulcer.
And then insert into the end of the nose a plug of linen cloth if it is one fracture, or two plugs if there are two fractures; and let the thickness of the plug be as much as the amount that fills the crack in the nose.
And some of the ancient restorers say that the plugs should be dipped in honey, and changed every day; but I have not seen it; they say let the plug be dipped in honey comfit with powdered mulberry; and then let it remain so that the bone is firmed and the cartilage becomes hardened.
And sometimes let a plug be inserted into the nose instead of a caliper, made of goose feather wrapped in linen cloth; and it is that when the fracture of the nose is more violent and that the patient is not prohibited from breathing.
And this cause is not necessary for you; and if you want, do it, and if you want, make calipers.
And if another ulcer occurs, plaster the nose with cerot or cotton saturated in white vinegar and rose oil, or with diaquilon.
But if an ulcer does not occur, then let you plaster that outside with sesamum flour and pepper powdered with honey; and then apply a plug of linen cloth on it, and do not bind the nose with anything for any reason.
But if the bones of the nose are broken with a small fracture or are comminuted, then split them and extract those with instruments that are appropriate for them; and then sew the cut, and heal it with what flesh-grows and hardens, and with plasters as is convenient.
And if a ulcer occurs inside the nose, then let you heal that with plugs and administer lead tubes so that it is completely healed.
Chapter .iv.
Of the restoration of the jaw when it is broken.
When the jaw is broken and its fracture does not have an ulcer, look to see if the fracture is only outside, and is not broken into two and bent inwards at the ends; then its comprehension is difficult.
And therefore, if the fracture is on the right side, let you insert your left index finger into the mouth of the patient; and similarly, if the fracture is on the left jaw, then insert your right index finger; and move it with ease at the ends outside, by your other hand from the part outside of the bone; thus equalize that.
And if the fracture of the jaw is already separated into two parts, then let you administer extension of both parts according to rightness so that its equality is possible.
And if teeth occur with disruption, then strengthen those of which you expect that they will be broken by thread of gold or silver, or of silk; and then plaster the broken jaw with cerot, and then place upon it a double cloth, or a large plug decently made, or a weight of only one piece at the length of the jaw; and then tie that on top as you are equipped with its equipment, and as is appropriate for its application, so that it is not destroyed.
And command the patient to keep rest and tranquility, and provide him with food that is soft and not sharp.
And if you estimate that it is already altered in some way, then let you cut and loosen it on the third day; and then rectify what has been altered on it, and plaster it with pepper powder, with honey, or with sesamum flour, after you have removed its cerot, and place upon it wool cloth.
And then after that, when this plaster and adjustment on it is made, and the position of the bone is not altered, let it be left, that is not removed until it is healed and the fracture is strengthened; for often this fracture is healed in three weeks.
And if another ulcer occurs, then administer what we have said several times in the treatment of it so that it is healed, and let the ulcer be licked by that.
And if the fracture has an ulcer, then consider whether it is a broken piece of bone or a splinter, then you must subtilize those splinters with what is appropriate for that in the removal of them.
And if the hole of the ulcer is narrow, then you must widen it by phlebotomy according to the amount of your necessity.
And then after you have extracted those splinters, and if they do not continue to ooze, then let you sew the hole of the ulcer if it is wide; and if not, place upon that one of the plasters which is appropriate for that, so that it is healed.
Chapter .v.
Of the restoration of the collar bone when it is broken.
Many times the furcula of the breastbone is broken in front of the muscle, and that fracture is made in one of three ways.
Because it is either broken, separated, or separated in two parts other than the joints; and it is easier to restore it; or it happens that there are injuries to the joints, and it is difficult to restore it; or that the fracture is a plague.
And the operation on that, when the fracture is the plague, is that you have two ministers present, so that one has the assistant and follows the broken furcula, and the other extends the neck towards that part.
Then fix the fracture with the threads within so that it is made according to its shape and there is neither prominence nor concavity.
And if it needs more extension, then you have to put under the patient's chin a sponge or woolen ball, and the size of it according to the amount of your need; and extend and elevate the furcula and tighten the sponge with your hand within so that you fix the fracture according to its shape.
And if you cannot pull the end of the furcula to the outside parts because it is reached by the prenon, then you have to make the patient recline on his neck, and put under the muscle a cushion half in size.
And the ministers press the muscle from the outside parts under so that the bone of the furcula is elevated which is in the prenon above, and then you straighten the fracture and fix it with the threads.
But if you feel injuries of the furcula and bleeding, then you have to cut on that and pull out those injuries with ease.
And if it is retained in the bone, then you devise an incision of it with one of the saws which you have prepared for that, after you have put under the furcula the instrument that serves as a vise; and this instrument is of wood or iron and this is its shape:
And it is similar to a spoon whose concavity is like this; and its breadth is according to what you need from it, according to the size of the bone or the thickness of it.
But its length is according to what is possible for you in the operation; that it has two ends like this, and one end is wide and the other narrow.
And if the incision of the plague which you have cut when you have pulled out the injury of the bone is wide, and there is a risk of an abscess, then you join the two lips of the plague with a suture.
And if the disruption is little, or you fear an abscess, then you fill the wound with cloths and powders according to the quantity of the incision of the wound.
And if there is an abscess, then you soak a cloth in warm wine and oil and place it over that.
And all that it is not bleeding over the broken bone; and so you have to see the patient every day, that when the binding is softened or you see the stake is already bleeding, then you straighten that and strengthen the binding.
And then place the pillow of the patient under his neck, and place under his chin from below the pillow in the night a little cushion; so that with that is elevated the support of it of the side of that, and therefore is elevated the fracture of the furcula to elevation of the muscle; or be the arm of it tied to its neck.
And do not untie the binding unless there is sufficient healing or abscess within twelve days.
And then renew the plaster if you have seen its face to that, and tighten in the compression and restore that and leave it until it is restored and the fracture of the furcula is coagulated.
And it is strengthened and comforted according to the month in twenty-eight days, and some times in some men is done in less time of that.
Chapter .VI.
Of restoration of fracture of the shoulder.
The spatula is broken in its lateral place and not broken from it except its margins.
And therefore when it is broken in its place — and it is broken in the middle of it — and it is not connected except by contact, then according to the figure of the fracture you make the preparation of it and reduce that according to the natural figure in all manner of engine which is to you possible.
And then place on the place powder of wheat with egg white and piece of linen; and then place doubled cloth; and then place over it stake bent of thin table according to the quantity of the spatula all or more little.
But if under the stake is concavity in some of the places of the spatula, then you fix that concavity with piece of linen, and then position the stake according to equality.
And then strengthen above with a long bandage with decent compression and with firmness of the stake so that it is not bleeding from its place.
And consider the binding every day; and all times that it is softened, bind another time and tighten it and adjust the stake if it is bleeding from its place.
And watch over the patient on his side.
And the spatula is restored in twenty days or in .XXV.
And therefore when it is completed that number, then you dissolve the binding, and so you know assuredly that that is of the bones of which the beginning is not feared nor their dissolution.
And if process of the place of the bone weighs and put under it the thread, then you cut on it, and support it, and do according to what we have said in the fracture of the furcula of fear of abscess if it happens here.
Chapter .VII.
Of restoration of fracture of the foot.
The feet sometimes are broken in their middle and that usually inside; but the ends of it most often that they are not healed and crushed.
And of the accidents of it when it is broken in its middle it declines to the parts inside and there happens to it great pain, and difficulty in walking, and coughs, and fever, and vomits blood; and it is declared in the cavity in the broken bone and it does not hide from feeling.
And its restoration is that the patient reclines on his back, and place between the shoulders of it a cushion; and then press the muscles of it, and adjust the ribs of it with the hands of two cost, and subtilize in the operation of it and in the adjustment according to all manner which is to you possible and that convenes to that, so that return the figure of the bone according as it is said.
And then place a plaster and a bandage on the patient, and place a thin board made of poplar or willow, or something similar in shape, on top of it; and then wrap that in a cloth; and gently tie that to the broken bone with a thin string; and bind that tightly around the back several times, and tighten it decently; and consider the binding at all times, and when it is loosened, tighten it.
And if the need arises to remove the bandage because of any redness or inflammation, or pain, or abscess that occurs in the area, then you should cut and loosen it, and remove the plaster, and correct what has occurred through the manner of its treatment; and then return the plaster, once the face has healed; and adjust the binding so that it heals.
Chapter VIII.
Of the restoration of broken bones.
Know that fractures of the ribs occur only in large places that follow the back; and of their ends, in front, they do not occur to those except through what is cartilaginous. And its knowledge is not concealed from the feeling due to the inquiry of it with the fingers.
And the restoration should be in such a way that it joins the fracture with the fingers according to the possible manner, as long as it is swallowed according to how it covers, and then plaster and tighten the broken bone with a bandage, if needed for that.
And if the fracture of the ribs is declining to the inside parts, then it occurs in the patient violent pain and piercing, as well as piercing that occurs in him who has pleurisy, and due to that which puts the membrane on the bone; and it occurs in him difficulty of breathing, and coughing, and vomiting blood; and this one is of difficult cure.
And already the antibiotics are born in that with many ingredients.
And of them I say: that you place poultices on the patient who engenders inflammation and swelling, so that the belly is inflated and extended, and the fracture is pushed to the outside parts.
But let us first eat that so that it is not a lesser cause to generate an abscess with cautery, if it does not occur; and if it already occurs, then let it help with that.
And some of them say that a poultice should be placed above and that it should suck strongly; and it is like reasoning, but nevertheless it is feared that the poultice throws the superfluities to the place due to weakness.
And some of them say: that the place should be covered with wool that has already been submerged in hot oil, and that there are placed powders between the ribs so that it is filled, and that the binding is tied as you wrap that according to roundness; and let the patient be treated for pleurisy with poultice and medicine.
And if it causes violent constriction in the patient who does not suffer, and the bone pushes the membrane with piercing pain, then fear for the patient, and let there be cut on the spot, discovered of the broken rib, and then place over that instrument that conserves the cipack, the remembrance of which is preceded, and that we pierce the bone with ease, and extract it.
And then let us sew together the two lips of the wound, if it is large, with a stitch, and heal that with plasters as long as it is healed.
And if an abscess occurs inside, then cut and put powders in rose oil and place it over the spot, and let the patient be treated for that with what covers the inside of the abscess.
And let him lie on his side over which he sleeps, as long as he is healed.
Chapter IX.
Of the restoration of the fracture of the spine of the back and of the neck.
Sometimes it is a fracture in the bones of the neck, and sometimes it affects them with attrition, and similarly in the vertebrae of the back. And when it occurs in someone and you want to know whether he will be healed or not, then consider that if his fingers are already softened and stupified and dead and cannot move them nor extend them nor tighten them, and when you pinch them with your fingers or pierce them with a needle and do not feel pain in them, then know that it is not healed, and in the same of dispositions it is mortal.
And if they move and feel constriction in them with the fingers and piercing, then know that the joint of the bone is saved, and that the patient will heal with treatment.
And if you see the vertebrae of the neck like that and want to know whether it will be healed or not, then consider his feet.
Then if you see that they are already softened and that occurs in them what occurred in the fingers, and then when he lies on his back, he has windiness and ejaculation against his will, and sometimes he lies on his back and wants to urinate but cannot, then know that it is mortal, and therefore you should not treat him.
But if none of those occur, the cause is better and less distant.
And the treatment of him is that you persevere in the application of the poultice with cautery which you place over the atrissat vertebra, with oil of rose alone, or with seeds of wild onions; place it on that some times a day as long as the abscess cautery is sedated.
And then place one of the comforting and exciting plasters, and tighten that with a bandage; and command the patient to use rest and tranquility, and not to sleep on the side that causes him pain as long as he is healed.
And if it occurs due to the attrition of the bone or any other cause that is already separated from him, then cut above the tendon and let them tie up that bone; and then sew together the two lips of the wound with a stitch if it is large; and then heal that with some embrocation of the gums, as long as it is healed.
But if it is broken the end of the bone of the shoulder blade, and it is the end of the coat, then let you insert the tip of the left hand into the hole, and join the broken bone with the other hand according to what is possible by second apposition; and then place a plaster and splint over that, if needed for them, and then tighten that.
And if you feel broken splinters in him, then open that and tie up that bone, and heal the wound with the treatment that has been preceded as long as it is healed.
Chapter X.
Of the restoration of the shoulder.
The bones of the shoulders often become broken, and if they are broken, then the fracture of them is only a separation in their ends and they are inserted into the length and decline to the inside parts; and it occurs in the patient violent pain in the spot and piercing, and the shoulder is stupified when it is broken.
And its restoration is that you extend your hand over that as long as it is over the fracture, which is the figure of it.
And if the fracture is only in its end, then you join that according to what appears to you by second apposition as long as it is assembled into its natural figure.
But if the fracture is in the length or what already declines to the inside parts, then let the patient lie on his belly as long as you prepare for its restoration of that fracture. And therefore when you have joined that, place a plaster over it, and then place over that a splint of wood or of tendon, and tighten that by which you do not fear piercing of fracture nor removal of the splint.
And fill the cavity with what fills it according to its capacity, and instruct the patient to sleep on his back or on his side.
But if an abscess occurs, then cease from the extension of it and its restoration until the abscess is suppurated, and place upon it that which dries it according to what has been preceded; and return to the restoration of it, and tighten it thus with a bandage.
And if there occur in the bones cracks or they are crushed, then you treat them.
Chapter 11.
On the restoration of a fracture of the elbow.
The elbow is that which is between the cuff and the head of the shoulder.
And if it is fractured, then its restoration is in one of two ways, one of which is that you take a plaster of moderate thickness according to this form:
And there should be tied at both ends two ligaments, and it should be suspended from the elevated place.
And let the patient follow on a chair; and then bend out his fractured arm over the beam until it reaches the tip of it in the middle of which is attached the curve of the beam.
And let it be suspended over some heavy object, or the assistant extend the arm to its limits; and then let the doctor and his assistants press the fracture with their hands, until the fracture returns as it should.
And the other way is that the patient be reclined on his neck and suspend his arm by a band from around his neck; and then instruct two ministers, one of whom has what is above the fracture with his hands, and the other has what is below him; each of them extending to his limit.
And if you want the extension to be stronger, then tighten with a band over the fracture and another over that, and each of the two ministers extend to their limits.
And therefore if the fracture is near the end of the bone, then it must be placed half of the band over the tip and the other below the fracture under the elbow.
And similarly if the fracture is near the elbow, then it must be placed over that location and over the elbow.
Gently apply it without pain and then when it is well applied, tighten it if an abscess does not occur.
But if an abscess occurs, then let the constriction cease within seven days, and place over it fine wool soaked in wine and rose oil until the abscess drains, and then tighten it.
And the way to tighten it is that you place plaster over the fracture and then place a wrapping of new cloth over the plaster; and then bend the arm over that elbow, and place your open hand over his bicep.
And place the cloth and tighten it over the elbow so that the arm is in a stellate position, unless prohibited by some cause of the fractured bone.
And then use splints.
And it is that you place over the fracture that splint which is wider and stronger than the other splints; and place between each splint the width of a finger, and let the length of the splints be according to the fracture with an addition of three fingers in total.
And then tighten over the splints with that constriction which has been stated at the beginning of this chapter.
And it is that your constriction over the site of the fracture be tighter. And when the fracture is more elongated, then the constriction is less.
And therefore if you see the position of the splints and the constriction as we have said in the time in which you restore the limb to its setting, then do it.
And if you fear an abscess, then let the constriction and splints cease on the seventh day as we have said.
And then consider the band in all parts for three days so that no abscess occurs at the site or inflammation; or it is prohibited for food to come to the limb due to disposition of excess constriction; and then rectify all that as we have said.
But if you are sure that it does not occur due to that, then do not remove the bandage except after three days or more.
And let the patient sleep on his back, and let his arms be over his stomach.
And place over the elbow a poultice of wool soaked in water, and consider throughout the night or day that it is not looser nor softer, or that the band is柔軟ized; then rectify all with your skill.
And place the patient's food according to the order which we have given before, so that it is subtle at the beginning until it is started to be tightened; and then let it be thicker for him.
The habit of the elbow and his arm is that they are tight for forty days; and then let them be looser and a bath be administered to him and he be anointed with ointments which rectify it.
And if the fracture is healed, then you do not remove from that the band and splints until ten days or two months.
Chapter 12.
On the restoration of a fracture of the arm.
An arm is made up of two bones which are called two bones; one of which is small, and it is that which pushes the finger, and the other is large and is that which is placed below the small one, from the part more below.
And usually it is only fractured the larger bone, or the smaller, and rarely are they both fractured together.
And when the small bone is fractured from above, then its restoration is easier, and its healing is easier.
And when it is fractured below, then the fracture of it is bad, and its healing is difficult.
Worse than that is when both bones are fractured together.
Therefore if the bone which is fractured is the small one from above, then it is convenient for the doctor, in order to restore it, that he apply a slight extension with ease so that it is soaked.
But if the large bone is that which is fractured, then it must be applied a stronger extension.
And if both bones are fractured together, then it must be applied the strongest extension.
And let the figure of the hand be placed in order to restore it and the extension of it be extended over a pillow, and the wrist of the hand to the parts above, more out than all the others fingers, and the little finger be more down than the others fingers, and the patient be recumbent on a raised pillow.
And let one pillow be before him in his height or sideways from him so that the patient does not struggle too much.
And then let the assistant extend the arm from the part more below with his hand or with a band, and another assistant extend over it similarly.
And then let the doctor soak the bone so that it is reduced according to the best figure which he can.
And if in the forming of the bone there are bumps, then thoroughly reduce all pressure on it with your skill.
And if it appears in him separated that it pierces the tendon and you do not have hope in its healing, then stop it and treat it according to the way which we have said over it.
But if the fracture is with pus, I have already done in that chapter singular, and therefore take the cure of it.
And if an abscess occurs at the beginning of your restoration, then you should line a cloth with ceratum made from rose oil and white wax, making it medium between thin and thick, and tightly wind the cloth around that abscess until it subsides; then remove the ceratum and apply a plaster prepared from flour with egg white, and then apply leaves; let the leaf which is applied over that fracture be more moist and stronger.
And know that the number of leaves on the arm varies according to different dispositions, or whether the fracture is in one or two places together.
Then apply your ligature over the site of the fracture more strongly and more aggressively, and as the ligature loosens at the ends above the fracture or at the lower ends of him, loosen the ligature a little bit according to his memory in the beginning of the chapter.
And the cloths that are wrapped around the fracture should be soft and moistened, and not hard or rough, and the thread with which it is tied should be medium between thin and thick, as we have recommended.
And consider the member and its ligament for a few days. And if there is any cause why rectification is necessary, as you find out about the member, then you should bathe the member with warm water until that discomfort ceases.
And let the member not be constricted while resting, and then return the ligature.
And if the ligature is already loosened and the bone is already healed and like those, then rectify all that with your skill.
And consider more if the nourishment is prohibited from coming to the member due to excess ligature, then loosen that a little and let it be for a few days until that nourishment runs to that, and then tighten that.
But if there is no cause in the patient of those which we have said, then it should not be loosened for about 20 days or so.
And then the patient's hand should be suspended by his skill of agitated movement, and let him sleep on his back.
And know that this fracture is restored in 30 days or around 32 days, or rather it is restored in 28 days, and all that is according to the disposition of the complexities and dispositions of skill.
Chapter 13.
Of the restoration of fracture of the thumb and fingers.
Know that in the thumb of the hand and the nails of the fingers where there is fracture, and not happening to them but many times repeatedly.
And when fracture or sprain happens to the hand, then let the patient follow lying down and in front of him lie facing according to equality, and then put his hand over that extended.
And then the minister extends the broken bones and the doctor greases those until they are smooth with good cohesion.
And then let him apply plaster and lint if there is no abscess; and then apply leaf above according to the quantity of the site, and you have already wrapped that in cloth.
But if the cut is in the parts within the belly of the palm, then make a bandage of cloth, and command the patient to tighten that with his palm cut; then let it be tightened with long cloth.
And let the leaf of meat with cloth be on the part where the meat is lifted, so that the meat is applied to the palm; and tighten that according to how it should be.
But if the fracture is in the parts outside, then let him apply above leaf and another leaf of the lower part on the palm, so that the hand is opened and straight; and then apply the ligature, as the hand is rolled up to the wrist between the fingers with ligatures.
And if there is fracture in any of the nails of the fingers, then if it is the thumb, let it be greased according to how it should be and then let it be tightened with the palm; and if you want, apply to him small straight astound so that the fracture is elevated and not bruised.
But if the fracture is in the other fingers, as well as in that of the middle, or the pointer, or the ring, or the small finger, then let it be greased and tied with the finger to which he belongs; or they are all tied according to continuation, and that is better; or apply to him small leaf over that, as we have said in the thumb.
And consider in your restoration, and then that, the disposition of abscess is opposed – by your operation – to what happens when there is any cause of those, according to how it is repeated his narrative.
Chapter 14.
Of the restoration of fracture of the bone of the thigh.
The bone of the thigh many times is broken and is declared to feeling according to how it is converted to the front party and to the most upper.
And the restoration of it is done in that the ligature is tightened over the fracture and another ligature below the fracture, and the patient lies on his belly and face down.
And then the minister extends all the ligature to its part according to quality when the fracture is in the middle location of the bone.
But if it is near the root of the thigh, then let the ligature be near the hollow to the part of the pencil, so that the extension box in them, and the other ligature below the fracture.
And likewise if the break is near the hollow, then let the ligature be made near the hollow, and let the extension be to the lower parts.
And then the doctor greases the bone with both his hands within so that he reduces it according to the natural resemblance and the bone is joined by good junction; then let him apply plaster and ligature if there is no abscess in the member. But if there happens to him abscess, then you leave that for a few days until the abscess is subsided, and then return to your cure.
The ligature of it is done thus: cover over the fracture with a hard bandage and fold that two or three times, and loosen from him superfluous; then wrap the thigh so that it comes to the ankle and the root of the thigh.
And insert long wire between the thigh and the leg near the hollow to the lower parts, and let the ends of the wire come from the most upper party of the two parts, and then roll over the thigh and the leg that which superfluous of the bandage.
And then apply to the thigh in the site of that fracture splints, and apply one of those a leaf over the bone of the leg.
And then fill the emptiness between the thigh and the leg with soft cloths so that the ligature is coagulated.
And then begin with strong ligature of the middle over the site of the fracture with three or four wrappings, and as you find yourself more with ligature of the site of the fracture, let your ligature be less and lighter and moister.
And then extend to two ends of the wire to the lower parts so that it comes to the ankle of the foot, and tighten both ends of the leaf from the other part so that the ligature is not loosened from its place.
And then loosen the ligature over that, when there happens to the member corrosion nor abscess nor inflammation and likeness to those; and if there is any cause of those, then know you with loosening from him, and rectify all that happens to him altogether, as we have said many times.
But if there is pain in the bone and it becomes infected, then you must have it lanced as much as possible; if not, cut over it and let it drain, and heal with that which has been preceded by remembrance until it is healed.
And sometimes this fracture of the thigh is made strong by means of splints, as we have said in the case of the arm and the shoulder.
But in the restoration of it in such a way, let not the patient have any limp; and if it is restored alone, then let that one to which the other leg is applied have a limp; it is necessary for this to happen temporarily.
And know that the thigh is made strong in 40 days or a few months or a few years; and all of this is according to the diversity of the complications and other dispositions.
Chapter .xv.
Of the restoration of a broken patella.
Know that the patella breaks easily, but it happens to it many times straining.
But if fracture happens to it, then it is nothing more than a split or crack in its parts; and this is with pain or without pain, and over it all is the skin or the membrane, and on top of that is the flesh or the membrane, and on top of that is the skin.
And the restoration of it is such that what is broken in its parts is lanced with the fingers until it is joined and aggregated according to what is possible by means of cautery and ease and fabrication.
Then apply ointment and place over it a round splint, if it is needed by that; and strengthen it with a tight bandage to what is appropriate.
And consider all the dispositions which we have recommended in the other fractures, as well as pustules and sores and what opposes everything that happens to it by means of that with which it is convenient for it until it is healed.
Chapter .xvi.
Of the restoration of a broken thigh.
Know that in the thigh there are two bones of which one is thick and is called by the name of the thigh; and the other is thin and is called the fibula.
And happens to each of the kinds of fracture what happens to both bones of the arm, and for this the restoration of it is done in the same way as the restoration of the arm lanced, and the operation on it is one and the same.
And if both bones are split apart, then the thigh is broken into all parts.
And if the thinner bone is split, then the thigh is broken towards the front.
And if the thicker bone is split, then it is caused by those things which are not made by you.
Then administer extension and cautery and ligation of the splinters according to that lancing.
But nevertheless, if the fracture of the thigh is flat having many splinters, then let the extension be less and more distant, and drive out by your virtue.
And in the thigh is some cause of operation on the arm, and it is when you lance the splinters and complete all your operation; then take weights made of wood which are paused from below by means of strings which are paused in soles, and make them a covering of white palm leaves; fasten those of which there is small thickness, and let it not be of the fingers, and let the length of those be according to the length of the thigh, and of the knee to the most bottom.
Then wrap over each drape in two coverings according to the length of it; and pause one over the part of the thigh on one side and the other on the other side, and let them be of the knee to the bottom-most place of the leg.
Then tie the two splints in three places at both ends and the middle; by means of this restriction the thigh is prohibited from bending at the right and left parts, and it stands in good position.
And a brace of wood has been administered according to the length of the thigh; and let it be paused on it so that it conserves that from movement.
And more often let you do this in fracture, and when there is pus properly.
And consider in each day the thigh and study it by means of later study; and let you guard it from pustules and sores or other like causes; and when any of those happens to it, then apply to it that which is appropriate until it is healed.
Chapter .xvii.
Of the fracture of the heel and of the bones of the leg and of the toes.
To the heel does not happen fracture altogether; but to the bones of the leg happens fracture sometimes; and to the toes of the leg happens fracture scarcely, and only happens to them a sprain in the months of disposition.
And if to the bones of the leg there is fracture and those bones are raised upon themselves between them, then let the patient raise his leg on the ground prepared in this way.
Then pause one foot over that which is raised by those bones, and press them and lance them until they turn in the joints.
Then apply ointment and stop it over that, and pause underneath the belly of the leg a small table to which are two pegs placed.
Then strengthen that by means of the leg with extension downward because you have wrapped it in drapes and other like causes.
And when three or four days have passed, then loosen the bandage; for you will find the bones lanced, or split, or dislocated, and the operation on them is likewise.
But if some toes are split, then restore those, and lance them in the same way as you do in the restoration of the fingers of the hand. Then pause over the split toe splint according to the length of the toe, and let it be more inclined from that; then underneath the leg pause this table which you have considered, and strengthen that by means of extension decent.
But if that which is split of the bones there are two or three or more, then pause over each toe splint according to its quantity wrapped in linen cloth; and strengthen the table at the bottom-most part of the leg, and let it stand on one of the pegs of the table by means of a hole in the belly of the leg so that it has good retention.
And it is convenient for you that you not forget that you not consider all the causes which we have told you in the other fractures of the accidents which we have said; and apply to every accident that which is appropriate.
Chapter 18.
Of the fracture of the neck of the femur, and of the bone of the penis and of the virgin's clitoris.
When the neck of the femur is broken, then make that woman lie on her side, and tilt her towards the direction of the back a little, and let her be held from behind.
And the midwife fills the crotch with cotton, and let there be made in the neck just like a spear; and let the woman be shaken, and raise her back little by little, because everything that has been forgotten is inside when it is in front of the neck like a spear and the broken bone returns.
And then stop powdering her back, and when he wants to urinate, loosen the crotch with ease and let him urinate, and reduce it and return in the same way as you treated it at first, and let him return to his first powder.
And do this for seven days or so, because that is restored.
And if you want, take a lamb's bladder and stretch a candle over the wound; and insert the whole bladder into his neck, and then puff air through the candle so that the bladder is inflated inside the neck, because the fracture will return.
And let it be filled with cotton and stay for a few days as we have recommended, until it is healed.
And when the bone of the penis or clitoris is broken, then administer in its restoration and piercing what we have recommended for the hip bone.
And what is straight is not hidden in these nearby fractures and that little happens, especially to him who has some study and understanding of this my book; because that fracture means for you in the greatest dispositions a direct path in its restoration and in its stricture, so understand well.
But in the virgin's clitoris when it is broken, take a goose egg and put the clitoris into it; and then place over it a cloth wrap, and let it be wrapped, and let it be left for three days or so, and let it be healed.
Chapter 19.
Of the restoration of fractured bones when they are swollen.
It is convenient for him to whom the fracture occurs with swelling, and especially if the bone is large like that of the thigh or of the buttock, or similar to it, that you treat and flebotomize him immediately if the conditions of flebotomia testify so as we have said above.
And if the swelling flows blood, then know that you treat its retention in the same way as you powder it with powdered zinc, unless another cause is present.
And then begin to restore the fracture on that very day, and do not prolong it, if apostema does not occur.
But if the apostema becomes cauterized, then let you leave off its restoration until the ninth day, while the apostema subsides, and do not approach it on the third day and the fourth of all, because you will cause malignant accidents.
But if the fractured bone is prominent above the uncovered tendon, then know that you must pierce it to reduce and smooth it with your hands with ease and with little extension.
But if extension is not prepared for you and the equation of it with your hands, then you reduce it with your hands with this instrument; and this instrument is made of iron, the length of which is seven or eight digits and the width of which is according to the amount of swelling; and it is necessary for the doctor to take these three or four according to the amount that he requires in the cure in every kind of fracture.
And it is rounded and has a little thickness so that it is not bent by the pressure upon it during the hour of the operation.
And its upper part has an acute end which is beveled at the edges; and its underside is inclined, and it is thicker in the middle and inclines towards the ends.
And this is its form:
And approach the instrument to the swelling so that you place its acute end over the fractured bone with ease. And it is named in Greek "labre volentz atelarem", so it is a little palette.
So that its acute end be placed elevated over the prominent end of the bone.
And press it in a wayward manner so that the bone returns, and let it be smoothed with some equation.
And therefore press you to smooth the ends of the fracture between them, and if the end of the broken bone is thin, and do not take that instrument by good approximation, then know that you must insert the end of that bone so that the instrument has power over it.
But if you cannot reduce the bone at all in the way we have recommended, then insert it with what is convenient for it from the incisers which we have mentioned; or saw it with one of the saws in whatever manner is possible for you.
And then rub that which is rough and has small scars.
And when the bone is reduced and moreover the reduction causes the patient intense pain, then know that the bone has not returned to its natural place; and therefore do what you confer with the patient great benefit.
When you have completed the restoration which you do to the bone, then immerse cloth in black astringent wine, and properly if it is in summer, and do not place cerot or any other cause over the swelling so that no putrefaction and corruption occur in it.
And then administer stelas in the hour of your completion of the restoration of the bone, and leave the swelling uncovered so that you may insert the wound with tweezers and use bandages according to the amount of swelling.
And guard yourself with all caution so that you do not strain the swelling with the fracture, because many times they have done this the foolish doctors and caused over their patients death or a malignant corrosion or putrefaction, and it is so harmful. And if your stricture is loose, soft, different from the stricture of other fractures.
And if the swelling is great or is bad, and you fear over it some harmful accidents which we have recommended, and there is pain in the place, then know that you must not pause over it astelas, but do to that an envelope of hard cloths instead of astelas and tighten it with those.
And when a day or two has passed since the swelling began and there is engorgement in it, then you must place over it the cloth with which you covered it with wine, and then administer hot waters, with which usually doctors medicine swellings, thus with tetrafarmacon and similarly.
And it seems to you that you loosen the ligature and consider the swelling at dawn and evening until it is consolidated and closed up, and know that the member be prepared in such a way that the putrefaction flows from it to the ends with ease.
If the swelling passes several days and is not consolidated or is not abscinded from it the engorgement, then know that here you are at risk of the small pains for which you must treat the swelling with tenting. And of those small pains which are separated and extracted, those from which the member is not separated and they cause pain, pierce them according to what you can.
And if it happens that the plague becomes swollen or bright red, then it is stinging nettle, or another species of corruption and putrefaction, then you must apply to each one of them what suits them from the cure, of which the narrative precedes in their own chapter.
And in which you must stand firm with your speech and make your request: when the leg is broken, it protrudes over the limb just like the bone of the thigh and the helper, and similar to those of the large limbs, and do not assume attraction from it, nor extraction of it for many times death happens through that; have the patient lie on his side so that he can rest, for often he will fall on his own after about 20 or 30 days. And then cure the plague if you have seen it, and if not leave it alone.
Chapter .20.
Of the cure for nodules that happen on the path of a fracture.
Many times this nodule happens on the path of healing from a fracture, and most often it is near the joints, and by it the shape of the limb is distorted; and very soon the limb is prohibited from its natural operation.
Therefore consider if the nodule is recent and administer to it medicines that have astringent properties like aloe, and thistle, and marjoram, and acacia, and similar to these; so that you take from those some or all of them, and mix those with white wine, or sour wine, or sweet wine, and apply that to the nodule on a piece of cloth, and constrict that around it with a good constriction.
And let the constriction stay on for many days so that it does not come undone for several days; and then loosen it and repeat another, while the nodule is being softened; or press a sheet of lead gently on top, because lead has the property of softening anything swollen in the limbs.
But if the nodule is already converted into stone and it is tight and necessitates being cut open, then split that through its uppermost part, and excise the excess and prominent part, or pierce that with some sharp instrument so that it is softened; and cure that which has been cut.
Chapter .21.
Of the restoration of a fracture when it is restored and then the limb becomes weak and frail not according to its nature.
When a bone fracture is restored, and then the limb becomes weak and frail, that is not done except for many causes: of which one cause is the abundance of soluation of the ligament and of the binding of it done not according to how it should be; or by excess of constriction of the ligaments so that nourishment is prohibited from running to the limb; or by abundance of superfluous embrocations; or by superfluous movement not at the right time; or by lack of blood in the body of the patient and by its debility.
And the cure for that is to make the patient eat and to make his heart tender so that blood is multiplied in him; and administer a bath; and apply oil and lettuce over it.
And then apply poultice over the limb so that the poultice brings many nutrients to it, or continue embrocation of it with warm water so that nourishment runs and returns to its natural figure.
Chapter .22.
Of the cure of broken bones when they are restored crookedly and prohibited from their operation of what is right.
When it happens to the restored limb the healing of crookedness and eminence at the broken bone and nodule, and it is fed up with the form of the limb, but the limb is not prohibited from its natural operation, then do not take the word of the one who examines that limb as though it is newly broken.
But there are already many foolish doctors and restoratives who have done that in our land; and this operation is very blameworthy presenting great fear, the sign of which is deadly.
But if the claudication and nodule are recent, then let them be embrocated with warm water in which soft herbs are steeped, like fennel and thistle roots, and marjoram, and similar to these; and let an ointment be made from a mild emulsion just like dill oil; or let it be plied with mallow juice and let it be bound up with linen, or with cotton, or with silk; or let it be bound with fat figures, and bound with dove's droppings, and similar to these of the medicines that are named consolida
And some times it is dissolved by frequent gentle friction with the hands that are moistened, and let motion of the limb be administered in every direction at all hours.
But if the crookedness has gone forward and is made strong and converted into stone and necessitates being cured with iron, then let the pus on top be dried up and the continuation of the bone be dissolved, and that which excesses of nodule of those doctors with the bone with thin saws, and let facility be administered in that with sollicitude and study.
Chapter .23.
Of speech in dislocation.
Dislocation is dislocation of one of the joints of its place so that it is prohibited from motion, and the figure of the limb is distorted, and it brings upon the patient great pains and injuries.
Therefore when dislocation happens, then let it be reduced immediately, and not delay that reduction, for if it is delayed the joint is apostoamated and very soon with that dislocation is made difficult to reduce.
And for that reason let it not be struck nor stretched in the hour of apostoamatio, because many times it brings on spasms and pains to the patient.
But when that happens, then let you pay attention to the apostoamatio of the patient, and then let it be left alone so that the apostoamatio rests; and then let the limb be embrocated with warm water and oil, and then let it be reduced gently.
And let every limb be cured by that of which the memory will come in its place.
And now we have ordered the chapters of dislocation according to how it is preceded in fracture, from the uppermost part of the body down to the lowermost part.
Chapter .24.
Of the cure for dislocation of the lower jaw.
So dislocated are the two jaws if not tight; and the dislocation of both is done according to one of two ways: they are pulled from their places by small movement, and are softened a little; or they are dislocated by entire dislocation and completed, so that they are softened at the joint where saliva runs from the patient's mouth and he cannot hold it closed, and his tongue is wrapped in his speech.
But when its dislocation is small, then in the major dispositions it returns by itself for no reason.
But if the dislocation is entire and completed, then let the reduction of it be administered gently, and not be delayed at all.
And let the minister hold the patient's head, and let the doctor insert his one hand's finger into the root of the dislocation of the jaw inside the mouth, if the dislocation is on one side; or let him insert both hands simultaneously if the dislocation is on two sides, and the other fingers of his hands be outside holding them; and command the patient to stop clenching his jaws and open those at every part; and the doctor grip the jaw and press it so that it returns to its place.
And if the reduction is difficult, especially if both mandibles are dislocated, then administer an evaporator with water and oil until both are reduced and do not delay the reduction of both at all, as we have said.
And when they are returned and bitten, and the mouth of the patient is closed and not relieved, then place a powder of cloth with cerot over them, made of wax and rosin oil; and then let it be bound gently with soft ligatures.
Let the patient lie on his back, and let his head be held between two people so that he does not move to the right or left; and do not force him to chew anything for any reason; while his food should be minced lion meat, until the pains are reduced and the mandibles are swollen, then let him eat what he wants.
And this should be administered gently, and do not work on the opening of the mouth after eating and drinking and resting, until the mandible is swollen and healed.
And if the reduction of both mandibles is difficult when they are dislocated at any time and are not returned to their places, then many times afterward there occur feverish heat and constant vomiting, and very soon the patient's belly is inflated, and very soon he vomits pure bile.
And when you see this, then know that it is deadly; and many times the person who experiences this in seven days will die.
Chapter 25.
On the reduction of dislocation of the furcula and the extremity of the muscle.
The furcula is not dislocated within the chest by its connection to the feet; and sometimes it is dislocated outward at the end, and this is evident in sensation.
And its restoration is that the patient lies on his back and extends his arms. Then press the area with your palm with a strong grip, for it will return.
Then place on it plaster and powder and strengthen that.
But the extremity of that which is joined to the collarbone and continued from it is not dislocated in any way; therefore, know that it should be reduced and bitten according to what we have said and according to what your appliances are.
Then place on it plaster and powder and binding, and command the patient to adhere to tranquillity and rest until he is healed.
And with this method of treatment, the extremity of the muscle is reduced when it is separated from its place.
Chapter 26.
On the reduction of dislocation of the muscle.
Know that the muscle is dislocated only in three ways, of which one is that it is dislocated at the top of the joint at the lower end.
And the second is that it is dislocated at the top of the muscle, and this occurs rarely; and it is not dislocated at the sides behind the shoulder; and it is not dislocated at the front by the nerves.
And most commonly it is dislocated and protrudes outward at the lower end below the joint, especially in those whose flesh is thin; but in those who have much flesh, it is protruded outward with difficulty.
And very soon happens to some people by blow or fall, and the muscle of it is apoplectic with apoplexy, and it is bitten by that which has already been dislocated.
Therefore, know this while you are above him, and then proceed with the cure of it.
And the dislocation of it is known when it is at the lower end below the joint; for you distinguish between the dislocated muscle and the intact muscle, for you observe among them a manifest difference; and you observe in the head of the muscle concavity and below the joint from the touch of the head of the muscle as if an egg, and to the patient you cannot reduce his hand to his ear, nor can he move it by any movements.
If it is dislocated above or below, and you then observe manifest touch, and it is not disguised.
And this dislocation is reduced easily when it is fresh and the patient is young.
And its reduction is that the minister raises the hand of him above; and then place your fingers below the joint of it, and raise the joint with strength above to its place, and the minister raises the hand of him, and extend it above; and then place it below so that it returns easily.
But if it does not return by what we have said and so that the dislocation occurred, after many days, then know that the patient should be bathed in warm water and be administered a poultice to soften and loosen it as though his neck were frozen with frost, and fenugreek, and honey in water, and be administered.
Then the patient should lie on his back and place his hand below the joint of it and wait in elevation and compression, and then the doctor places his foot on the ground, and lifts the head of the muscle with strength, and pulls the hand of the patient so that it is not bitten at the lower end, and another minister holds the head of the patient, which is not bitten at the lower end, for that returns to its place.
And if you wish, reduce it according to this manner: and there should be present a man who is longer than the patient, and he stands on that side, and inserts his muscle below the joint of the patient and lifts the joint of him above so that the patient is suspended in air, and another minister pulls the hand of the patient from the lower end of his belly. But if the patient is young, then know that it should be suspended with him for another cause, for its weight, for the dislocation returns at once.
And it is reduced similarly according to another manner: and there should be placed on the ground a pole long whose top is round in shape, like mortar, which is not thick nor fine, and then it should be placed below the patient; after he has been laid over the top of the pole, and the patient stands according to the length of the pole, and then his hand is extended from the lower end of the other part; and his body is extended on the other part with strength, for the joint returns to its place quickly.
And if it is difficult to reduce it by all the causes that we have said, then use this cure: and take a pole whose quantity is in the length of two cubits, and its breadth is four digits, and its thickness is separated according to this form:
Then on the round head are tied lions' clothes so that the pole does not bite the patient.
Then it is placed below the joint of the patient, and its hand or arm is extended over the pole to the lower end, and the pole is tied over the helper and the arm and the extremity of the hand.
Then the arm is placed over a rung of a ladder according to its breadth, and the hand is extended from the lower end, and his body is suspended on the other part, for the joint returns at once.
And when the instrument of it is completed according to each manner that is possible for you, and then know that you place below the joint a sponge of wool of equal quantity; and then place plaster prepared from powdered earth with rose oil over all the muscle, as it is rolled above, and then bind it from the lower end with binding decently; and the binding should be rolled over the plaster, and its hand be joined to his neck, and let him lie, and his hand not be bitten for seven days.
And that which is to be stopped, the food of the patient little, while the member is comforted, for it is more quickly healed.
And then the food should be given more frequently or water and exercise should be taken; and if it is stopped and not softened, then it is healed.
But if the joint is dislocated many times by humidity that happens to it or for another cause, then in that case a cautery should be applied with three pricks, as is said before in the chapter of cauteries.
And if all this is done and after seven days the ligament is not attached and the joint is not healed, and the plaster and compression are removed from it several times, and it is not healed, and he cannot raise that arm to the parts above, then know that his nerves which are at the head of the muscle, are cut or stretched or softened, and know that the joint will never be attached in its place.
Of the dislocation which is made of the foot and the breast or the parts behind, the reduction is made by impulse and extension with the hands, while it returns.
And the other compression should be administered on that one as it is healed.
And if the healing happens with difficulty in that member and there is delay in its movement, then the patient should take a bath several times until that difficulty is relieved and it returns to its first nature.
Chapter .XXVII.
Of healing of dislocation of the collarbone.
Know that the joint of the collarbone is dislocated with difficulty and returns likewise with difficulty; and it is dislocated to all sides, and most to the front side, and its dislocation is not hidden from you because when you adjust the dislocated collarbone with your hand, that is made manifest to you, for the joint is hollow and the arm cannot be bent, nor can it be touched with that one's own muscle.
And that which is dislocated to the sides and you reduce the dislocation as soon as it comes to an abscess, for if it comes to an abscess, its reduction is difficult, and often it is not healed at all; and especially when it is to the back side, for it is the worst of all kinds of dislocations, and of greater pain, and many times death ensues from it.
And its restoration, when it is possible to reduce it, is that the hand of the patient be stretched with two hands, and the arm of the patient be expanded, and the hands of the doctor are on the collarbone and under it, and he presses the joint with the tips of his fingers or with the root of his palm until it returns to its place.
But if the dislocation is to the front side, then it returns as he bends his hand with his hand, while he strikes the collarbone with the root of his palm.
And if the dislocation does not obey reduction, then administer violent extension and great motion.
And it is that two ministers extend the arm, and they hold that joint in such a way that it is not moved because of the extension.
And then the arm is to be rolled all around, as it is wrapped with folded cloth over the hand of the patient, or ligament.
And when the doctor touches the joint with his hand, he anoints that with some oil in order that it be made smooth with facility; and then he presses the joint with violent impulse until it returns.
And then its reduction should be stopped over that plaster in which it is stiffened and dried with egg white, and it is stretched with descending compression, and the arm is suspended from the neck, and is left for several days.
And then it is released; and if the joint is formed in its place, then you release the ligament of it and leave that.
And if you see the joint is not stronger, then you repeat the plaster and the ligament, and leave that for several days until it is stretched out; and then release that.
But if it happens to it difficulty with the reduction of the joint and its disposition is in movement, then administer humection in a bath and subtle friction, and compression, until it is relieved; or pause over the joint all-healed, as it is a poultice of soft fat; and then release that, and leave it for the day and night. And then release that one, and put that in a bath; and when he rises, then you rub the joint with tempered friction, and then repeat over that all-healed, as it is a liniment of oil, once a day, and the second, and the third. Corruption has already occurred to the brain due to the heat of the bath while it was wet.
And if you want, pause over that split of wet and hot cow's udder over it; and do that several times, for that is wet and returns to its disposition.
Chapter .XXVIII.
Of healing of dislocation of the ulna, which is of the joint that is between the arm and the hand.
The hand sometimes is dislocated, and the reduction of its dislocation is easier, and the contrary is of the other joints, but however if there is swiftness in the reduction of it in the hour in which it is dislocated, before that the place becomes an abscess or an abscess occurs in it.
And the reduction of its dislocation is that you stop the joint of the hand of the patient on a table and the minister extends the hand of that one, and the doctor stops his hand or his palm over the prominence of the joint, and he presses that until it returns to its place.
But however if it is considered that the palm is already struck to the belly of the hand, then the patient stops his two hands on a table because of extension and reduction; and if the dislocation is before the two of the hand, then let the position of the hand of that be intriniceamment over the table, so that the hand of the doctor boxes over that prominence of the joint.
And then if it returns at once, good; and if not, then strengthen that with plaster yielding the abscess and leave that; and do not repeat that, for if you do, you will not endure nor be able to reduce it further than you pass over it days.
But however the joint is bent according to its tortuousness; and if the patient feels no cause but that the hand is softened and cannot be strengthened by any cause, then know that the nerves are cut or torn, and then there is no power in it except that it is tightened with cautery close to the break of it and strongly indeed that confers any cause.
Then when the ulna is returned, then stop over it that plaster which we have recommended, and let it be left and tightened for five days; and then release that and let the hand of him be exercised.
But if its movement is hindered and some difficulty occurs in it, then loosen that with lukewarm water and with friction several times, until it is relieved.
Chapter .XXIX.
Of the healing of dislocation of the phalanges.
Sometimes the phalanges are dislocated all the way around.
And when any phalanx of those is dislocated to the back of the palm or to its belly, then stop the phalanx and push the dislocation of it with your fingers, until it returns.
And support the head of the finger, suspend that which is dislocated on both sides, and leave it for two days.
And then extend the dislocated part and straighten it on the same day.
And when night comes, take that second part according to the narrative, and do not cease from loosening it during the day, and exercise with movement, and do so for several days until it is stretched out straight.
And do the same if it is dislocated in the belly of the hand; take that part and do to it your first operation, until it is healed.
And likewise do for the other dislocated parts.
Chapter 30
Of the cure of dislocation of the vertebrae of the back.
When a complete dislocation occurs to any of the vertebrae of the back or neck, and they are completely torn from their sockets, then in that case there is no cure, for death seizes the patient.
And the sign of this is that the ejection of the patient is outside of his will, and he cannot retain it; and many times some members of him are made soft, or two legs of him, or two arms of him, or one of those; or a vertebra is torn from its socket, for many times the removal of these is made to four parts.
Therefore it is torn from the back parts and is named dislocation.
But the cure for this is that you should consider if the dislocation occurred due to fragility, because in that case there is no cure and there is no healing at all.
But for that which comes from falling or hitting or similarly to those, the Ancients have already spoken of the methods of cure with a prolix speech, of which the most returns by profit; but I and briefly from that of which the few excuse the excess of it, by my proximity to my own intention and exposition, by which I have here exposed and formed from diverse instruments, by which I will show and space out that.
And of those there is no cure except for that which occurs specifically to the back with what I will now count.
And that the patient be extended on his face close to a wall, and be extended under him instrument wet so that he is not tied at the feet.
And then a straight stick be placed, fixt in the earth at the end of the bed around the head of him, and another stick in a line that extends his feet in the other extremity of the bed.
And the minister hold the stick, and it should not be fixed in a hole; and another minister hold the other second in that form.
And then wrap around the head of the patient and let the teeth of the lion clip under him; and extend the end of the clip to the stick which is supposed to be the head of him, and take that on him; and then tighten all the clips and take those on the other stick which is supposed to be the feet of him.
And then each minister extend the clip to the end of the stick, and let them not be torn from the two sticks and the clips of their sockets in which they are fixt, but on the contrary do not be fixed as I have said.
And the doctor place his palms on the vertebra with strength within until he returns, or that he be placed over it a table, and then that he adjust his feet over the table within until he returns.
But if he does not return by this form, then take a table of which the breadth or length is in line with three cubits, and dig in the wall from which we have said that it is proper to the patient a place in which to put between the end of the table. And then place the middle of the table on the vertebra, and the doctor place his feet over the other end, and tighten be within until the vertebra is bound and returns to its socket.
And if you wish, open with a turn which is wound around the hand; and that you fix to the earth under the head of the patient at the end of the bed two sticks, the length of which is one cubit, and fix the head of him in the end of the bed winding two sticks; and let the length be between each stick one palm, and now it is made in each stick a hole in which to run torn, and each be set firm in earth so that it is not torn.
And let there be a round stick in which is the turn, and let it be wound around the two holes of the two sticks.
And at the end of it is a hole in which is formed the stick, the length of which is one palm with that which is wound around; and likewise in the other two sticks.
And then tighten the clips which you have tightened in the feet of the patient in the hole which is supposed to be the head of him, and the clips which you have tightened in his thighs in the turn which is supposed to be the feet of him.
And then each turn and stand a minister who twists the turn with his hand, and the doctor bends the vertebra according to what we have said.
And then when the vertebra is returned and the socket bent, then cover that you stop exciccatum plaster with oil, and then stop; and then pause over the plaster a board of which the breadth is three digits or around those, and the length of it is quantity that takes the place of the dislocation, and over the part of the vertebra.
And then let him be tied by the clip which we have said, and use the patient of subtle nourishment within until he is healed.
And if any swelling remains in the socket at the end of the healing, then cover that they be administered medicines that moisten and loosen by administration of the board for a long time, which we have recounted; and now is administered in that socket sheet of lead.
And sometimes swelling occurs in the back of the neck, and it is caused by dislocation; and it is that bone which now swells so that it does not cover that be made projection on him with this medicine, for he will surely cause death to you.
Chapter 31
Of the cure of a dislocated hip.
Know that the joint of the hip and the joint of the muscle do not end only dislocation, and does not occur to those that occurs to other joints of small removal and concavity.
And the joint of the hip is dislocated according to four ways, for it is dislocated to the parties within, or to the parties without, or to the parties before, or to the parties behind.
And most commonly it is dislocated to the parties within, and seldom to the parties before or to the parties behind.
And the sign of its dislocation to the parties within is that when you bend the hip of the patient who has healed with the patient, it is longer and the joint is more prominent than that which has healed; and the patient cannot bend his foot because of the stretching, and it is the socket that the stretching has made apotemized from apothema cauterized, so that the head of the hip has been drawn here.
The sign of that person to whom dislocation happens is that the parts are pushed out, it is that the accidents of him are contrary to this accident.
The sign of that person to whom dislocation happens in front is that he expands his chest according to the compliment, but above all does not bend that part which is painful, and if he tries to go forward and cannot, and his urine is retained, and his testicles are swollen, and he must walk on tiptoe.
The sign of that person to whom dislocation happens behind is that he does not expand the bottom, or cannot bend that part which bends the testicles, and his chest is shorter than the other, and the testicles are softened, and the head of the thigh is drawn towards that place.
But the reduction of this dislocation is that you consider, according to time, if the dislocation is old and ancient, and has been long established with you, administering its reduction and remaining according to its disposition, then it will not be completely cured; and therefore no compression should be used upon it.
But with the person who has the recent dislocation, and it is one of the four kinds of dislocations, then you should return to that which returns the joint and extend it to the parts within and without, and alternately to the right and left, for it quickly returns and does not require any other cure.
But if it does not return in this manner, then you should prepare to extend the chest of him from the lower part, or with his own hands, or with a bandage which is tied above the chest; and another extends the hand of that one above the navel, so that he inserts his hands under the nipples of him; and another tightens with a bandage the root of the thigh, and holds the other end of the bandage.
And if you see that the dislocation is on the chest from the end of the chest, then you should cauterize that which is under the nipple of the breast; and it should be made to extend with a bandage of twisted wool from the cautery on the chest from the end of the bandage.
And it should be the extension of all those in one direction, so that the patient is elevated by his body from the earth and he remains hanging.
And this species of extension is common to all four.
And therefore if the dislocation returns with what we have said, it will be good; and if not, then it is necessary in all species of that which I say about its own cure.
In its own reduction, when it is dislocated, and the dislocation is to the inner parts, then the patient should be laid on his back; and you should place the bandages over the root of the thigh in that place which is between the head of the thigh and the navel; and you should extend the bandage above the navel to the highest part of the breast.
And another minister should strongly take his arms and hold the large place of the patient's thigh, and extend it to the outer parts through violent extension, for that returns in its own place.
And this species is of the quickest cure by which that member is reduced, compared to the other species.
But if it is excused from you and does not obey the entrance with this species of cure at all, then it should be bound by both feet of the patient together with strong bandages, quickly, above on both heels and above on both soles.
And the length of each of his parts should be the quantity of four digits, and the chest of the patient should be extended more than the other by the quantity of two digits.
And the patient should be suspended over the top of the post, and it should be in the middle; and its length from the earth should be the quantity of two arms.
And command a strong young man to lessen the head of the thigh, and another young man should be suspended by the patient, and the other young man lessening the thigh with strength should push, for the joint returns to its place with speed.
But in the own reduction, when it is dislocated to the outer part, then the patient should lie on his back according to that which we have recommended in having gout; and the bandage should be tightened over the thigh of the patient properly and over his feet.
And two posts should be placed, one at his feet and the other at his head; and two posts adjusted to the middle of the mat which is placed over that upon which the patient is not damaged by the post being between his thighs, so that the extension to the lower parts is not drawn back.
And each minister should extend to his own part, and the doctor with his hand should draw out the reduction according to the art.
And when the dislocation is to the front parts, then the chest should be extended slightly, and according to this measurement narration over mat; and the doctor places the palm of his right hand on the patient's navel, and another presses that with his other hand, and with that pressure he extends that to the lower parts to the navel.
If the dislocation is in the parts behind, then it is not necessary that the patient be extended to the lower parts and elevated above the ground; rather, let him be laid on a hard surface, just as if the joint is dislocated to the outside parts, according to what we have said about the placement of the patient on two surfaces. And he should be on his back with his limbs extended, as we have said before.
And let there be applied a compression with a board over the place where the joint is located.
Now that the reduction is complete, and if you see the sign of it, then you shall extend two limbs on each side of the patient; and when you see those parts become equal, and the patient's limb externalized and expanded for some excuse, then know that the member according to which he is returned. Then adjust both thighs and apply plaster and bind with a bandage so that no joint is injured in any part. And let the patient remain at rest for three or four days.
Then loosen the bandage and plaster, and compare one limb to the other.
Now, if you see those parts equal in appearance, then know that the dislocation is already closed, and then let the patient go.
And if you see any cause for softening, then return and plaster that, and externalize it according to your first stretching, and let him remain in three days.
Then loosen that, and let him delay walking on any leg for some days, until he is comforted.
Chapter .xxxii.
Of the cure of dislocation of the jaw.
The jaw is dislocated in three ways: it is dislocated to the outside parts, and to the inner parts, and to the lower parts most to the back parts; but not to the front parts.
And the sign of its dislocation is that you command the patient to apply his limb to his thigh; then know that the jaw is dislocated.
And the restoration of all its ways is that you make the patient bend his head straight down, so that he extends his limb if he can on that; adhere your two hands to his face, and let him put his foot between your feet; then let someone else adhere his jaw with their palms, and let them hold those between their fingers over his jaw with strength, and another servant extend his foot while the jaw returns to its place.
And the sign of its reduction is that his limb adheres to the thigh with an easy non-laborious elevation.
Then plaster that and let the limb adhere to the thigh, and then tie those together with a bandage for three or four days, and then loosen them.
And do not use the patient of walking for some days, until he is healed and comforted.
But if the reduction of it to you is excused, then administer strong extension with bands of which in the cure of the hip previous narration was made.
Chapter .xxxiii.
Of the cure of the dislocation of the ankle.
The ankle sometimes is dislocated by small removal, and sometimes it is dislocated according to accomplishment; and its dislocation is made either to the inner parts or to the outer parts.
And the sign of its dislocation is that you see the ankle swollen proceeding to the part to which it is dislocated.
But the cure of its removal is by easy reduction, and it should be extended with ease with hands and equalized while returning.
But in its cure when it is dislocated according to accomplishment, let the patient bend his head straight down, and let there be one servant strong and valiant from the back part of that in the middle location of him.
Then you with your right hand hold the foot from the highest part, and with your left hand from the lowest part of the foot in the location of the ankle.
Then pull the foot to you with your right hand, and then with the left hand twice, and then extend with the left; and press the instep of the foot with the right towards the limb without labor.
And do that twice according to what we have counted.
Then press the instep of the foot to the limb the third time, and you are at the ankle.
Then if it returns in one time or two according to this manner, and if you see the foot equalized, it is good; but if not, then repeat the operation on him, for it will return.
But if to you is prohibited the reduction of it with that which we have commanded, then let the patient lie on his back on the ground, and stretch a rope tightly on the ground beneath him, and let there be a cushion between his thighs, and you have wrapped a cloth over him so that he does not kick.
Then the servant of him shall hold his thighs, and then another servant extend the foot with their hands or with band that lies on the neck of the foot; and then each servant shall extend against extension of his fellow, and the rope be extended between the thighs of the patient holding that so that the body of him is not drawn to the lower parts because of his extension.
Then the doctor equalizes the dislocation with their hands, and another servant shall hold the healthy thigh to the lower parts, for the dislocation returns with ease.
Then when the dislocation returns and you are made aware of the health of its reduction, then apply plaster and externalize that with strong bands, and bind the foot to the limb.
And if you fear or beware of the nerves which are behind on the ankle, so that the band over it is not violent and that does not lead him strongly.
Then let him remain for two days or three; and if the band is softened, externalize that.
Then loosen that on the third day or the fourth, and prohibit the patient of walking for 40 days. But if he is forced to walk before that space, there is no security that the dislocation is not dissolved and ruined, and then that he does not receive cure.
And if there happens to him pustule cautery, then let you administer in the healing of him that which in which our narration preceded, in another place of cure and of brooding, until it is healed.
Chapter .xxxiiii.
Of the cure of dislocation of the toes of the feet.
Let that which is dislocated be equalized with little extension without labor; and that which is difficult, then it is easier.
But if the dislocation is in some knuckles of the neck of the foot, then let the patient bend his foot on even ground or on a table, and be standing as if he was walking.
Then you stand on your feet, and put your foot on that which comes from the joints, and then press that with your foot with strength while it returns, and see that equalized and not prominent in the location.
Then rest the belly of his foot on a table that takes all his foot, at which are two caps, and then externalize that with decent and firm stretching for three days; then loosen that and let him rest from walking for many days, until he is stretched out and healed.
Chapter .xxxv.
Of the species of dislocation that are done by plague or fracture or by any wound.
When you encounter one of those causes, and you persevere in the cure of it and in the restoration of the patient, many times death occurs.
And for that reason one should not be hasty in the treatment of the patient, but rather he who is wise in the art, with great compassion and pity, being tardy, not rash or presumptuous; and one must use in the beginning medicines that produce suppuration only slightly, and let the patient go to divine judgement, unless it be to him from whom one hopes salvation from destruction, for the alleviation of the illness, and in which some hope appears. And therefore try at once to make the reduction of it at the beginning of the cause, before an abscess occurs.
And therefore if the limb returns as we desire, then administer treatment that will produce an abscess and cure the wound with those among the drying ointments that are appropriate for it.
And if the dislocation is due to a fracture and it happens that in the bones there are separated pieces, then you persevere in their setting, and do in that case what we have said in the simple illnesses of that which precedes in the places of those.
And guard and avoid according to your ability that of the instrument in the ways of fear as you have been instructed by my preaching; for what is better for you, you owe to your Creator, and more permanent for your glory, and healthier for your true body those in your time. Thus end the words of Albucasim perfectly, of which may God be blessed. Amen.
