O, son, I present to you this book, which is the last of medical science, in order to complete it as far as possible; for its explanations and declarations, I consider that I have completed it to you with this treatise, which begins with a description of surgery.
Since surgery is laid down in our region and at our time completely deprived; so much so that the science of it, and its indications, are left out; and only a few small descriptions remain in the books of the Ancients, who mistook them and put them into such error and confusion as to render their intentions and forces ineffective and their art useless.
And I consider that I have brought life to that in the order of this treatise in that second way of exposition and declaration and abbreviation; and because it comes with the forms of surgical instruments of cauterization and other instruments by addition of the statement, and for preparation thereof, which is necessary cause.
The cause why a good surgeon does not practice his art in our time is that the science of medicine is long; and because he does not find himself in front of anatomy which joins and separates its parts; and has knowledge of the growth of bones, nerves, and ligaments, their names, and the shape of each; and knows the pulsating and quiet veins, and the places of sensation from them.
And therefore I say that I put a name to it which is a man; less in the work small, and more so in the art of surgery.
But we have already said in the introduction of this book; for one who does not know that I have spoken to him about anatomy, it is not clear that he will not fall into error whereby men will die; so many are there of those in this science and those who are drawn from that science and put themselves into that art, which they know little about.
Since I saw a doctor leave the head of a woman with a large abscess and cut some arteries in her neck that flowed with much blood, causing the woman to die among those who were operating on her.
And I saw another doctor who thought that he had passed urine in his body, which was large, and went to him and cut it with a thread from the bladder, so that this man died on the third day.
And I called out to him to extract that, and I saw that because of the size of the urine and the state of the patient, it was clear that he would die.
And I saw another doctor who was paid a fee from our land for surgery; and he was looking to break the hernia of that man with his hands, and prepared the doctor in his ignorance, breaking it on the skin with powdery and steel tools, and did not allow the skin to move.
Then he did it according to his desires and prayed, and ordered us to cut the ligamentos; and thus, for the sake of a few days, the hernia and the foot were cut, and came to ruin.
And I was called to do it; so we took off the ligament and found complete peace and relief from their pain.
But nevertheless the corruption was confirmed in the limb, so I could not hold back that pain; and I kept walking with that corruption in the limb until the patient died.
And I saw another doctor who had pierced a cancerous abscess and it became an ulcer after some days; so the evil of it spread to its lordship.
This is because the cold cauterization is pure of melancholic humor; but it does not cover that it should reach all parts, but rather which is affected by that all.
And therefore, my children, it is necessary that the operation be divided into two operations: one of which is carried out in order to save life, and another in which it is endangered.
And I have already placed in this book where it is necessary to put on the second operation, which is error and fear; so that you must put on those books, and let them not prevent you from speaking and making your faces pleasant.
And therefore take your weapons with perseverance and protection of God; and may your diseases be lightened and your difficulties be overcome.
And use the best way through God's grace to bring about salvation and praise worthy successions; and leave behind you terrible diseases of difficult healing, and keep your weapons from here so that it does not cause you fear in your faith and your name is not avoided: for more remains in your glory, and more on the mount and less after your saints.
Guala has already said in some of his moral teachings: "Do not drink a bad medicine, for a bad doctor will not help you."
And I have divided this book into three chapters.
Begin the division of the book, and first of the first part. The first chapter arranged by chapters under the feet, in the forms of instruments and tools of cauterization, and from this necessary to be in surgery.
The division of the second part. The second chapter, of cutting and piercing, and of suctioning, and of extracting arrows and resembling them, completely divided and arranged according to the forms of instruments.
The third chapter, of restoration and relocation, and of treatment by twisting and resembling them; a chapter arranged by chapters under the feet, and in the forms of instruments.
I will tell you about the quality of those cauterizations and the reasons for their prohibition.
I will say that the speech of the quality of cauterization and its reason is long and complex, and subtle by science, and hidden for those who know it; and I do not speak much of their sentences, because they are too long for me; and from them a little of their speeches is enough for me.
I will say that cauterization includes all universal combinations; those two exceptions which are made of the same material.
In the combination of dry and dead matter, they disagree; for some say that cauterization is beneficial to that, and others say the opposite, that cauterization is not effective in dry and dead matter; because the nature of fire is quality and dryness, and it is not suitable that the disease of the dry and dead should be healed.
And he who says that which is contrary to this, that by cauterization there is made youthfulness in all malady of the body and dried up that comes into the limbs of men, for when you compare the limbs of man with the humidity of him at the composition of fire, you find his limbs frigid.
And I say by the word of that, which I experience already some times and have discovered it.
But however I do not cover that which comes upon it that which already is stripped and exercised in the chapter of cauterization by latter exercise, and has known the difference of the constitution of men and the disposition of sickness in them, and causes of those, and accidents of their, and space of time of those.
But in other constitutions, there is no fear on you, and more in the frigid and moist sicknesses, for already all doctors are agreed upon those, and not disagreed in the youthfulness by cauterization in them.
And know you, children, that of the secret of cure by cauterization with fire and of the goodness of it, is that the fire is simple, the action of which does not come to another member except to the one which is cauterized, and does not harm the other member with the fire applied except with little damage.
But the action of the burning medicine comes to that in the limbs which it removes, and strongly causes the pain to come into the sick limb which has a difficult cure, and strongly causes it to come out.
But the fire, by its simplicity and goodness, does not harm but rather makes it run off; and we have known it by experience and long service in studying this art on the truth of causes, and by this I am excused from the length of speech and if it were not that I could not read your face freely to you hidden about the fire, and quality of operation of it in the limbs and its expulsion through which it expels the diseases, with philosophical demonstration, which would be clear in your minds.
And know you, children, that they disagree about the time when it is convenient to make cauterization and pause the best moment in spring.
And I say that cauterization is convenient at any time, so that the harm by the accident of time is submerged in the youthfulness of it which is drawn up by the cauterization, and more if the cauterization is for pains or necessary pains, strongly and painfully, which do not suffer delay because they are feared by those who bring evil, which is greater than small damage entering through time.
And thus I do not give advice in your cases, or children, here it is not considered but the common people and foolish doctors; therefore, to that sickness which is healed by cauterization is convenient at any time, and pause the consequence.
And the cause is not given so that they care for it by fire, for cauterization is not but a place of medicine which alters the constitution and dries up the humors which are the cause from which come pains.
But however cauterization is superfluous on the medicine by volition of its value and goodness of its operation and greatness of its lord.
And it is possible that the sickness return at any time of the day, according to the constitution of the sick person and the place of his illness, and the goodness of it; and that which has been prepared in its limbs by the addition of the superfluous in them, and that which has come into it in its acquisition with food and resemblance to those causes; but if the sickness be subtle in a limb with few superfluities and humors, then cauterization for pain resembling that, possibly will not return in it that pain, but will make it small.
And a vulgar word is that cauterization is the last remedy of medicine, and it is a risky speech, not to say that I understand it in it, for I believe that it is not a cure which profits by medicine or by any other cause; but by cauterization.
And the cause is contrary to that; and I say that cauterization is the last remedy of medicine only when we administer the methods of cure in some illnesses, and those medicines do not confer upon it, but at the end of the cause give cauterization, and profit from it. And here I say that cauterization is the last remedy of medicine, not according to the word which I understand from the common people and foolish doctors.
And say the fools that cauterization with gold is better than cauterization with iron, and do not say it but by the equality of gold and its simplicity.
And they say that the place of cauterization does not burn, if it is not absolutely good, for I have seen it burn and turn black what was on it, but cauterization with iron makes it burn; and I say to you, if you cauterize with fire and gold, it is not revealed to you, because it is done according to the quantity which you want for the roughness of the gold, and because it prepares itself to receive the pain; and if you apply it on it without taking care, it burns the gold by the fire, and if you cut a piece out of it with a sharp tool, the gold will be revealed by the fire, and the craftsman is burned by it.
And for this, cauterization with iron should be done carefully and properly to make the operation right.
And I have ordered this chapter about cauterization according to the other chapters, and I have placed those within the subjects, so that the one who asks it finds what he wants of it.
The first chapter.
This cauterization confers upon humidity and cold two accident causes; so is it a cause of soda and many fluxes of blood to the head from the hair, and of flowing from the ears, and of sleeping much, and of toothache and gumache, and generally in all illnesses that come by coldness, as well as in paralysis, and of the body being stiff and slow to move.
The form of this cauterization is this: first, order the sick person to vomit up by vomiting medicine the head, for three or four nights, according to whether you demand the goodness of the sickness and its age and custom.
And then order him to shave his head, and then he shall sit between your legs on a bench, and place his hands upon the soles of his feet.
And then pause the pressure of your palm upon the base of the nose between his ears. But however, when the patient says that this place is found, mark it by touch, and then apply the olive oil cauterization of which this form is:
And then place him upon the spot with touch, so that it sinks in little by little, and you turn him round.
And then lift your hand lightly and look at the spot, and if you see some quantity of the head come out, as well as the quantity of blood, then raise your hand to that place, and if it is not burned by fire, move it away from that place, so that it may be seen if there is any bone in it which I have told you about.
And then take a little salt and dissolve it upon the spot, and leave it there for three days.
And then place him in the bed wrapped in a blanket, and leave that spot inside which has been destroyed by fire. Then treat the wound with a fourfold bitter tonic until it heals.
And it is said that when the Roman plague broke out, there was so much honey in the air that it improved and prolonged life.
And they say that it is necessary to cauterize the bone within the nose, and to keep the cautery in contact with some part of the bone's surface.
Then cut off what adheres to the bone, and then treat it.
And they say that the cauterized part should touch the last bone, firmly pressing it within until it hurts; and this is how you treat small wounds. And they believe that vapors are expelled from the head by breathing through the mouth.
And the plague should be allowed to run its course for a long time, and then treated when it has hardened.
Perhaps I do not see these two types of cauterization in detail, but according to me, they are better suited for some people; since the head is a type of member that is separated from the body by a solution of continuity, and primarily when the patient's head has fallen off naturally as we have testified in other members, and more so when the head of the patient is of a natural fall.
And the first type of cauterization is better saved and suits me more; and from that one, I will make the decision about salvation.
Second.
Of the head cauterization.
When the patient' head causes chronic and long-lasting pain that prolongs, and uses of scatters and purges and ointments and plasters and oils and salves, and more so if it has been cauterized with a cautery that is not used again for some reason; then consider that if the head is of strong creation in its nature; and is not a minor thing or a big mistake, then cauterize it with another cautery, leaving that one alone. Then cauterize that on the hairline of his head with a cautery within that the bone is broken. Then cut off the bone and uncover it from the quantity that we have counted, and cauterize that with a cautery at the back of the head in the place which is called vesica, -- and this is the place where wind is blown out. And I will rejoice in it if you do not uncover the bone, because the patient by water has great pain that is different from the pain of all the other head cauterizations.
And I will direct this cauterization in its place, because although that cautery with which you cauterize the hairline of the head and the occiput is subtler cauterization than that with which you cauterized the top of the head; this is the correct way to do it.
Third.
Of the cauterization of the emigrant's non-ancient.
When pain occurs at the back of the head or in the foot is hard, or there is an internal ache in the nose, then the head should be treated by medicine, and another treatment should be administered to it, which I have described in the various treatments for the bad; and if it is not improved, then treat it with two methods: either with a sharp cauterization and a burning medicine, or with iron.
Perhaps the treatment with a sharp cauterization and a burning medicine is not as effective as you take a dolose of alcohol, and pour it on both ends of the nose; and with both methods, treat it in two places: at the tip and the sides. Then cut the place that causes pain in the temple with a needle from within that it is hidden from view; and keep the bone uncovered.
Then tighten it on the patient with a strong constriction, and keep it like that for three hours; then take the alcohol and dip the cotton wool in the solution, and place it over the affected area under the skin; and leave it there for two or three days, and then treat it by applying the alcohol to the wound.
Then treat that with an ointment within that it is healed.
And if you wish to know, here are some of the medicines that I have written in the two treatment of burning medicines.
Perhaps the treatment with iron as described above is not as effective; and this is the way to do it:
And it is called a keyhole, because the head has this shape like a key and in its middle there is a small indentation; and at its centre is a little depression.
Then place your hand on the area that hurts, and hold it so that the iron does not touch the skin; and turn the small piece of iron little by little with speed.
And if the amount of iron that is absorbed through the skin by the bone's surface is thus most, and raise your hand so that the artery is not absorbed which remains, to prevent a flow of blood from it.
Then dip the cotton wool in salt water and place it on the affected area, and leave it for three days; then dip the cotton wool in the ointment little by little and treat it within that it is healed.
And if you see this, then treat the end of the knife according to the second treatment; and be careful not to cut into any artery in this emigrant' non-ancient.
Fourth.
Of the cauterization of an ancient emigrant.
When you treat the emigrant with the water that we have described in the previous treatment and in the various treatments for the bad, and if that treatment does not work, and many times because of the badness that it does not work to the water that we have mentioned above regarding the first cauterization with medicine or the second cauterization with fire; then treat the end of the knife according to the fourth treatment: ignite the cauterization knife within that it whiteness, as it indicates over the area that hurts, on the line of length from which most of it is affected, or that one; and then leave your hand for a moment and tighten it by applying heat.
However, you should be careful not to damage the continuity of the jaw, which is very important for chewing; and that the tongue does not dry up and that its nerves do not absorb; and that it does not contract a spasm.
And if you are careful about the flow of blood from the artery during the operation because it is dangerous and primarily because you do not know how to stop the bleeding in case it starts; then leave the operation at its beginning.
And I will come back to your mind of the regiment of the flow of blood from the artery according to its way, in its place of freedom.
And if this bad treatment does not work for that cauterization and many times the patient can tolerate it; then treat that in its middle part according to what we have mentioned above, and heal the plague within.
And if you wish to know, administer the treatment that we have mentioned in the second part of the treatment of heat according to two tools; and it is better treatment for this.
Fifth.
Of the treatment for the pain of ears.
When there is pain in the ear due to scratching and it has not been treated with the other treatment that we have mentioned in the division; then treat it with fire, and this is the way in which you should do it:
Then turn the ear toward the fire and keep it in that position; and if the pain is due to one side of the ear, or to both sides, then treat each side separately by turning the ear toward the fire and keeping it in that position. As you move the cauterization towards the ear very slowly, so that you do not hurt the area around it,
And if the cauterization makes points all over the ear, and then cleans those areas, and then returns to where it was to cure the wounds.
Chapter VI.
On cauterization of torture.
Torture that is cured and the cauterization is not anything other than the spices that come by blood, according to what we have said in the divisions of the malvases.
Avoid cauterization with the spice that comes from dryness or spasm of the nerve.
When you treat this kind of torture, let the ear be cut and rinsed and dried, and if you do not cure it with one cauterization, then do three: first cut the ear, second a little in the temple, and third join the two lips.
And pause the small cauterization on the opposite side of the torturous part, because softening comes only in the part that appears to be healthy.
And the form of the cauterization is that you cauterize it with the cauterization on the right side of the ear, a little higher up on the lobe, and in the temple, whose length should be according to the length of the said pulse, and pause your hand so that the quantity of the spice of the wound is burned.
This is the form of the cauterization, and it is especially for the knife, the shape of which is before the table. However, it is more prudent that a little should be added with a little vinegar; and when you cauterize, do so in such a way that no superfluous grease remains.
Then return to the area that has been cut with water until it is cured.
Chapter VII.
On cauterization of ancient apoplexy.
When the apoplexy is ancient and you treat it with water as we have said, and do not confer your medicine, and the patient does not have a fever, then cauterize that four times: over all the lobes of his head; also at the base of the skull, as we have said; and on the tongue. And the way to perform the cauterization is done according to what has been said before.
And it is now cauterized over the mouth of the stomach; and there is more to follow; then return to be cured with water that has been cut.
Chapter VIII.
On cauterization of obligation performed by flame.
Then give the patient in the beginning very large rubs and small pills, speaking with a loud voice.
Then return to the top of the patient's head, and place your hand on his throat in order to see better with a lit candle.
Then pause for a few moments, because that is the way to perform cauterization. Then pour water according to that measure that I have already said.
And if it is good for the health, then do so; otherwise, make three cauterizations on the back of the head, which are to be separated from each other according to the length of the pulse from the top of the head down to the bottom. Then pause between each cauterization the thickness of the said measure, and return to be cured with water that has been prepared.
However, if the patient is drinking water, then make the cauterization in the middle; and if you see more addition, then cauterize it above the two lobes.
Then return to be cured wherever it is needed; and let the cauterization be like olive oil according to the shape that has been given.
Chapter IX.
On cauterization of paralysis and softening of the whole body.
Then treat the head with a rub and with water as we have said; then return to the top of the patient' s head, and make the cauterization in the middle; also at the base of the skull, and three cauterizations on the vertebrae of the neck.
And if it is necessary in the softening of the body or the patient is very ill and the softening is great, then cauterize that four times on the vertebrae of the two sides; also, immediately make a cauterization that burns off part of the wound, and hold your hand over it. Then return to be cured wherever it is needed, and let the cauterization be like olive oil.
Chapter X.
On cauterization for epilepsy.
The epilepsy is not cauterized; that which causes epilepsy comes from the blood.
Then, if you rub the head of the patient at the beginning with a strong rub and give him another cure that we have said when the patient is very ill, then return to cauterize: on the top of the head, on the base of the skull; and on the entire scalp and behind.
And if it is a child who does not suffer medicine, then administer with a strong rub and speak with a loud voice in front of water every day, with a good diet.
Then return to the top of the patient' s head, and make the cauterization in the middle according to the previous method, and on the other side; also, at each lobe of his head, then cauterize the base of the skull. And if the patient is very strong and ill, then cauterize that which I have said, having a paralysis and softening of the body over the vertebrae of the neck and the vertebrae of the two sides.
Then let the cauterization be like olive oil according to what has been said before.
However, if the patient is a child, then pause with a very small cauterization according to this method.
Chapter XI.
On cauterization for melancholy.
When the causes of melancholy are corrupt and moist corrupted fire, then cauterize that which we have said in the presence of paralysis.
And if the cause of melancholy is excessive grief that declines into melancholy, and the patient' s body is moist, then give him to drink water that softens the brain according to the water that has preceded in the division.
Then return to the top of the patient' s head, and make a small fire that is kindled gently; then pause that fire in the middle of the head.
The patient should be fifty years old, and he should be kept in bed for an entire night.
Then pause with a liniment; and it is now worthy of being dressed with lamb's wool. Then increase the fire slowly by heat that is moderate, because he should feel pain when it is half hot. And place him in his own spot at the top of the circle, and let him go so that he is not warmed up.
And make the patient lie down every week, one regiment at a time until they are healed; or if you prefer, cauterize that area with small points according to what is necessary for him, but having your hand on a cautery in this way: This kind of cautery moistens the brain evenly.
Then place that spot that has been bathed in the color or the shades of blue.
Chapter XII.
Of the Descending Cauterization with Water in the Body.
When you have described the beginning of water in the body through the channels that I have mentioned in the division, then begin to give him drinking water that softens his head, and keep that from all humidity.
Then make a bath of salt for several days.
Then order him to rub his head, and cauterize that area with a cautery in the middle of the head; then cauterize that area with two cauteries on two temples if it is the beginning of water in two veins, or one cautery if it is the beginning of water in one vein.
Cut with a cautery all the veins and arterioles that are left untied; and let the cauterization be at that height in length on the temples.
Keep away from any flow of blood when cauterizing; and if there is a flow of blood from him, stop it with some medicine, which I will give you if it is necessary.
And come with the solution that is made from arterioles and free from those and careful to avoid any flow of blood.
And sometimes he is cauterized in the neck with two ossicles that are produced by two cauteries that move apart.
Chapter XIII.
Of the Cauterization of Ancient Tears.
When the tears of the eyes are old and flowing freely through the veins and arterioles that go to the middle of the head, and it is seen that they are a superfluitatum of fluid flecked, then cauterize that area with a cautery that we have mentioned in the chapter on the beginning of water settling in the veins, and cauterize that area with a cautery in the middle of the head, and two cauteries on the temples, and two cauteries in the neck between two bones. And if you have an addition, then cauterize that area in the whole length of the cheekbone over the outer edge of the eyebrow with a small cautery.
Chapter XIV.
Of the Cauterization of a Nasal Odor.
When you have described the medicine that we mentioned in the division and it does not benefit you, then prepare him with drinks of the three kinds for three nights; and cut his hair, and cauterize that area with a middle cautery and an olive cautery. Then cauterize that area with a nail cautery on the two temples, between the hair, with a small point.
Keep away from the arterioles so that they do not burn.
And this is the form of the nail cautery.
Chapter XV.
Of Cauterization to Soften the Palpes of the Eyes.
When the eyelid of the eye is softened by illness or humidity, then cauterize that eyelid with a cautery that has this lunar shape; and this is the form of it:
And if you, then cauterize that above the two eyelids a small point with two cauteries in the entire length, and let them be elongated from the temples. Let the length of each cautery be according to the quantity of the eyelid.
Do not press too hard on your hand with the cauterization, more according to the quantity that a third of the eyelid is adhurstied.
Chapter XVI.
Of the Cauterization of the eyelid of the eye when the hairs are converted to the inside and turn the eyelid inside out.
When the hairs of the eyelid are converted to the inside in such a way that they can be turned out, cauterize it in two ways, either with fire or with burning medicine.
If it is a cauterization with fire, order the patient to stand in front of him who has the hairs converted and cut them with those that are ordinary, keeping them extended and turned out; and if he turns his eyelids inside out, then cover them with a cloth so that they are not hurt by the heat.
Then if they are cut and turned out, place the patient's head in the third position, and take his hand over the eyelids of the eyes with a thong, keeping them closed; and this is the beginning of the thong's sign, close to the hairs.
Then place the thong in the ear wax or in a mucilage of flies on the patient's head.
Then light the cauterization with this form:
Then cauterize the figure that has been drawn, little by little, with visible dots, keeping the surface of the cloth burned as it is with a mint leaf, completely.
This is a sign of health for the work that you are doing, for you to see the eyelids of the eye already contracted and the hairs of the eyelid elevated due to the puncturing of the eyelid.
Then raise your hand and place it on the wound for three days, and then put the thong in its cavity, keeping it clean. Then treat that with ointment, so that it is healed.
And if it returns due to the hairs causing a loss of sight and the eyelid is softened again, then do another cauterization on that whole area with sharp points first.
And if the hairs are in the eyelid, then cauterize that area so that it is raised to its natural position and turned out, and that the hairs do not poke into the patient' head.
And if the cauterization is with burning medicine, this is what you order the patient to do: let him cut his hair so that it is extended and turned out, and make a thong of cloth in the shape of a mint leaf.
Then take a sharp knife and a lively nail. .. ii., Then mix those two together well, and make a paste of it so that it is not dried out; then spread that paste on the cloth in such a way that it has the shape of a mint leaf, and place that over one ear, and place the patient' head in the third position.
Then put that medicine into his mouth and press it gently with your hand so that the patient feels the heat of the medicine, for the taste of the heat is in his mouth.
Then, when the patient perceives that the medicine tastes good, then let him spit it out and place the thong on his neck; when the heat or burning sensation has passed, then wash that patient' s head with water; and then consider whether the eyelid has been raised in such a way that it is washed naturally due to the heat or the incision, for it is well done; and if not, then return to the medicine on the location where it has not been used, and do not damage your operation by returning to the medicine, and raise the eyelid again.
Then place the thong on its edge, keeping it clean, so that the cloth is not damaged due to the adhesive; and then treat that with a different ointment, or with another medicine that heals.
And if it is necessary that you, your operation must keep your vigilant diligence so that in the wound does not fall re of the medicine, and if the eyelid is softened some days later and for any cause hair is put on the wound, then repeat your medicine about that place that the eyelid is softened, and properly as so to have done at the beginning, and approaching turn the inside that it is cured.
And this is the form of the mold of myrrh.
And you know that the wounds of men are differentiated according to their size and age, so according to that your compression is done.
And do not be afraid of the way of recipe to that which is studied in this art.
Chapter XVII.
Of cauterization of a fistula that is on the lacrimal of the wound.
When you cure the fistula with the water that we have said in the divisions of the malady and do not confer your cure, then cover that you cauterize that according to this way: order the patient that he keeps his head on his chest, and has his head some minister between his thighs in such a way that it is not moved or agitated.
Then place a cotton wisp drenched in alcohol on the patient's wound, or in a paste of woolen yarn.
And then ignite the cauterization of which this is the form:
which is made from a cane or a branch of a tree, from one end to another, so that the cauterization is done.
And if you see, let it penetrate within the other end. And if you want to do so, then do so with care.
However, that which is made from wood is better for the work.
And then squeeze the fistula if it is open, and draw out of it and dries up that. And if it is not open, then open that and draw out the pus of it.
And then place over it the cauterization that is well ignited, and do so on the side of the nose at its root, so that your hand or the patient does not hurt, and the cauterization is placed in the greases of the wound and corrode that.
And therefore if at the beginning of the nose's cauterization blood enters into the bone, it is good; and if not, then repeat the cauterization one or two times, if necessary, and leave that there for three days, and then place over that cotton with vinegar dried up until it is cured.
However, if it has passed eleven days and it is not cured, then place over it an acute corrosive medicine within that the bone is discovered and is scraped according to what you will in the patient' next chapter.
And another way of cauterizing a fistula that some first said: go to the place of the fistula and then pierce it and place in that crack very small of which is the form of it: And pour into that the quantity of one drop of molten lead; and do so on your hand with good retention, and do not let the lead reach the patient' wound so that it does not penetrate the wound's place; and then place over the patient' wound cotton drenched in alcohol or water, because lead adheres to the place of the fistula and cures it by a wonderful cure.
And if the fistula is cured by the water that we have said for cauterization and cure, it is good; and if not, then it is necessary to administer three times a day and reduce the fistula to the nose' root according to what will come in its place.
Chapter XVIII.
Of cauterization of the fracture of the nose.
Moles that appear as cracks in the lips, and mostly in the lips of children.
So if you cure those cracks with the water that we have said in the divisions and do not confer your cure, then ignite a small knife according to this form so as it does not hurt:
Be its cavity according to the subtility of a blade.
Then place that carefully within those cracks so that the cauterization reaches the root of the cracks.
And then heal that with care until it is cured.
Chapter XIX.
Of cauterization of a fistula in the mouth.
When in the root of the uvula or on the palate or in the roots of the teeth there is an abscess that bursts, and then it is broken and then it is hard, and then it is cured and forms a fistula, and do not confer your cure, then cover that you ignite cauterization according to the quantity that is received in the fistula, and then place that ignited knife on the root of the fistula, and do so on the last part of it; and then heal that with water that we have said for cure until it is cured.
And therefore if the cure is separated and is cured, it is good; and if not, then it is necessary to discover the place and host the bone according to what will come in its chapter.
Chapter XX.
Of cauterization of teeth and softening of the veins.
When the veins are softened by moisture and the teeth are swollen, then heal those with medicines and do not confer your cure, then place the head of the patient on his chest, and then ignite the cauterization the form that will be thus, so that you pause the cotton over the tooth and enter into that the ignited cauterization quickly, and then your hand a little within the patient to feel the heat of the fire reaching the root of the tooth.
And then take your hand away, and then repeat the cauterization several times according to what you want.
And then the patient spits salt water into his mouth and keeps it for an hour, and then suck that out, because the swollen tooth is closed and the softened gum is tight and the corrosive moisture is dried up.
Chapter XXI.
Of cauterization of toothache.
When toothache is by cold or it is by worm, or you do not confer the cure with medicine, then cauterize that according to these two ways: or cauterize on the edge of a cow's udder, or cauterize by fire.
Cauterization by the edge of a cow' udder is that you take a piece of cow' s hide and cut it into a shape, and then put that under a iron, and then put cotton around the end of the wound, and then ignite that quickly on the wound that hurts until it is softened.
And then repeat that cotton several times within that the power of the fire reaches the root of the teeth.
And if you see, dip a wool or cotton into the edge' oil, and then place that on the wound, and place that ignited iron within that the iron reaches the root of the tooth' cavity.
However, the cauterization by fire is that you take care of the wool or iron, and be in the middle of it a little thickness and the power of the fire does not reach the patient' mouth.
And then ignite the cauterization according to its form, and place that on the tooth, and do so on your hand until the cauterization is softened; and then repeat that several times because the pain returns or in that day or the other day.
And then, by the power of that cauterization, the patient spits his mouth out with care and keeps it for an hour and then sucks that out, and this is the form of the cauterization.
And cauterize it as much as you can according to what is possible for you.
This is the form of the cannula:
Chapter .xxii.
On the cauterization of ekstrophy.
When ekstrophy is of pus and cold humors and does not respond to medicines, and you see the digestion of those somewhat, then do cauterization in the following way: having two open ends, so that fire can reach the apex of the apoplexy, then place a flame on that pustule once, and another if it is necessary to do so, until it enters the apex of the apoplexy.
And if the apoplexy is small, then do cauterization according to the quantity of the apoplexy, and leave it for three days, and pause a flame on the area for as long as it takes until it is healed up where the fire has burned it.
Then clean it well and dress it with ointment and gauze, so that it may heal.
Chapter.xxiii.
On the cauterization of ringworm of the beard and on constriction of the larynx.
When moisture comes on the throat of the lung, and especially when that is cold in composition, then at the beginning make the patient empty with laxative medicines, and then cauterize it as much as possible at the root of the beard in the affected area.
And be careful not to reach the cauterization to the larynx, nor to burn with fire the cord of it, but only a little bit.
Then cauterize it again on another cauterization at the junction of the collarbone in the last vertebra of it. And this cauterization should be done with a pointed instrument, following the above method.
Then clean it well with ointment and gauze, so that it may heal.
Chapter.xxiv.
On the cauterization of lung disease and coughing.
When coughing and lung disease is caused by cold humors, and there is no fever or consumption, but it is old disease, then do two cauterizations on the furcula in the affected areas between the ribs and the spine; and another cauterization in the middle of the foot between two bones; and do a pointed cauterization according to the preceding method.
And if you want, it is called the cauterization with points, the form of which you precede in the point of pain in the ears.
And let them be made in pairs on those; and clean it well with ointment, according to what has preceded, within that is healed.
And now the cauterization is done with three flames, because there are three types of cauterization: according to this form, you can make three cauterizations:
Chapter.xxv.
On the cauterization of tickling that is the top of the larynx.
When the top of the larynx is dislocated by lubricating moisture and does not return to its place in the usual way, then reduce it first at the joint that is dislocated on the inside, and if necessary raise the cord that is usually placed on the outside; and bring the cord up, which is usually placed on the inside of the larynx, towards the back of the throat, with the fingers of your right hand.
Then light two flames, and this is the form of it:
And then cauterize the cord within that penetrates that one to the other, and you will see the figure of cauterization here with two heads.
In some cases, it is adjusted according to this count, and for that reason are these the cauterizations.
Then place it over the cauterization point with the tip of your finger, and then let it adhere to the peace quietly, and that member is not stimulated by any means until it feels comfortable.
If the dislocation is on the inside of the joint and it is firm, then cauterize over the muscle with a pointed instrument or a point-shaped cauterization; because the joint has been confirmed to be stable, and the moisture is moistening, and the disease is healed.
Chapter.xxvi.
On the cauterization of the stomach.
When the stomach comes in with cold and motley moisture within it that is extracted from its composition, and if you continue the methods of treatment and do not confer with them, then at the beginning, it is said that the disease is on the inside of the navel, and bring your hands up to the navel, and extend them and their cheeks, and then make three cauterizations: one cauterization leave the foot out by the quantity of a finger, and two cauterizations leave the ribs on either side of the cauterization, within that comes the triangle figure of cauterization; and extend between those that are not adjusted to each other, so they will make punctures.
And if the depth of the cauterization is according to the quantity of the two thirds of the thickness of the cord.
And this is the figure of cauterization according to this form. And if you want, cauterize with a large cauterization in the middle of the stomach according to this form; and this form be a circular cauterization according to this form:
And be cauterized the stomach punctually according to that cauterization that frightens you: and it is because you feel pain on the stomach according to what quantity you want, then do so with a point; and clean it well with the preceding treatment, within that is healed.
Chapter.xxvii.
On the cauterization of the fractured femur.
When it is painful in the femur by cold or moisture or great wind within that is extracted from its normal composition, and if you do not confer with it, then at the beginning, it is said that the disease is on the back of the femur, and bring your hands up to the back of the femur, and feel a test according to this quantity: and this is the form of it; and this amount be placed over the femur on either side of the joint, and this form be a test on the inside of the thigh.
And this is the space between each cauterization according to the quantity of the finger, and this cauterization be according to the length of the right arm.
And do not move your hand at all.
And if the amount of water that is added is equal to the amount of the bulk of the corpse, and it has not been adjusted; and if the patient stands on his feet; and if he does not stand, then lay them down, for he has already opened his space, and raise their arms.
And you can cauterize these cauterizes with a knife cautery, since it is in your subtlety and prudence in the art.
And keep in mind that you should not process too much in the cauterization, and let the bulk of all the corpse be attached so that it is attached to the entire body and reaches within the intestines, since the bulk here is subtle; and know water.
Chapter .XXVIII.
Of piercing the abscess with a sharp instrument before cauterizing it.
When such an abscess is excited or inflamed and you want to know if that abscess is in the flesh of the foot or in the skin of it, then know that if it is in the flesh of the foot, the patient will feel great pain.
And if it is in the skin of the foot, then the pain is acute and often, and your feet already feel tired from treating it.
Since the patient is facing upward on his back; and approach the site of the abscess to touch it; and ignite the cautery which has been shaped like a knife, as it was previously described on the other page. And cauterize from the outside and inside, so that all the bulk is cooked, so that it reaches the navel, so that it burns and heals.
Then heal those by treating other abscesses, so that they are healed.
And do not say that of this form of cauterization is used but that which is extended in the art of medicine, and on whose feet many bad cases have been known; however, I have experienced some of them being too hasty in this operation, but I prefer to leave it alone, and it is better.
Chapter.XXIX.
Of cauterization of splinters.
They said that the small cautery of the splinter of arnica must be rubbed on this way to make it effective, and it is this one that you should take from a splinter of long arnica, and it is of the thickness of your finger.
Then submerge that in oil and burn it at the fire, and cauterize with a small cautery in that place which is between the continuation of the rib cage up to the collarbone; and two small cauterizes from one side to the other, leaving a little bit down on the beard, and two cauterizes between the fifth rib and the navel, declining a little bit towards the back, then another cautery in that place which is on the top of the foot, and another above the stomach, and three cauterizes from behind the back; and one cautery in that place which is between the two sides of the foot, leaving a small amount down to the sole of the foot.
And do not say that you should move your hand with the cautery, but rather in the manifest form of the body's illness.
And already they have said that such a thing is for the men who use iron-like cauterizes to ignite it and place it in that place which is between the ribs, so that they reach those who have such an abscess and are healed, as we have said in the foot's abscess.
But in this piercing with a sharp instrument there is no fear, since it often happens that the abscess passes through the skin and is not healed.
Chapter.XXX.
Of the cauterization of the hernia.
When you treat the hernia's illness with water as we have said in the division of the body and do not confer your treatment, then cauterize it according to three ways, all of which are effective, that is, that you make three or four small cauterizes according to the length of the hernia according to the figure of the cauterizes on the foot, whose figure has preceded.
And between each cautery be of the thickness of a finger or a little more, and the way to make the cauterize is the same as that which we have said in the foot' cauterize, reciprocly.
And do not move your hand with the cautery; and the patient be facing upwards on his back.
And another way to cauterize is that you ignite the cautery with two fingers, causing it to be said in the chapter of dislocation of the muscle, and bring the bulk which is on the patient's left side up towards his back without moving the patient.
And your elevation is according to which you lift the bulk according to the length of the body, so that the cauterizes are made according to the thickness of the body.
Then approach the two edges with a sharp instrument, ignite it, and enter it into that place from which the bulk of the other side penetrates.
Then remove the cautery; and there are four effective cauterizes.
And if you want, cauterize with a sharp instrument that has three edges.
Then heal the cauterize before it has been burned by many travels during the day, since it is more effective than other causes preceding in the treatment.
Chapter.XXXI.
Of cauterization of the droop.
Do not cauterize in droop, but rather in a proper way.
When you treat the droop by the methods of treatment which we have said in the division and do not confer your treatment, then know that this is how you cauterize in a proper way: make four cauterizes around the umbilical cord, one cautery on the stomach, another on the foot, another on the hernia, and another between the two sides of the navel, and one on the top of the foot, and another above the stomach. And the quantity of the depth of the cautery should be appropriate to the bulk of the hernia.
Then leave the cauterize open so that it does not get burned for a long time.
And you do not remove the treatment of the cauterize by water so that it is added to the two sentences, and it is stirred in the water with the help of healing.
The form of the cauterize that is cauterized on the stomach is square according to which it has been previously cauterized, and this is the one with which it is cauterized on the two sides, it is olive-shaped according to which it has been previously cauterized.
Chapter.XXXII.
Of cauterization of the feet and the legs.
When the feet are inflamed with droop and full of clear water, then cauterize the top of the foot between the auricular and the ring finger, and raise your hand up, and do not return it all down, since the clear water drains off.
This is the form of the cauterize: And then make two small cauterizes on each leg, and a small cauterize at the end of the knife-shaped cauterize. And be the length of the leg: and I leave the top and the other bottom at your mid-leg location; and two cauterizes on each leg.
Then leave the wound open for a long time to prevent any water draining from it.
And treat those causes which we have spoken of.
Chapter .xxxiii.
Of cauterizing abdominal wounds.
When an abdominal wound is caused by heat and moisture that destroys the virtue of digestion and retention, which are in the stomach and intestines, and is treated with a strong cauterizer, then apply a large cauterizer to the abdomen according to what preceded in the cauterization of the stomach, at the circle, and four cauterizers on the subtle circuit of the bile, at the subtile clavicle; and at the cauterizing over the alcatin on broad lozenges, or two cauterizers.
And if the abundant moisture is endured by the patient, then cauterize it over the pentil and intestines, and strongly with two cauterizers on the stomach and next to the hernia, for this is a perfect cure for health of which there is no other.
Chapter  .xxxiv.
Of cauterizing ancient hemorrhoids.
When there are ancient hemorrhoids or a mass of thick humors or corrupt moisture, and they are treated with water that we have mentioned in the division and not used their own cure, then cauterize it with three cauterizers on the pus-filled spine of the two small ones, and over the ombelicus cut with two cuts.
And if you suspect that the stomach is swollen and the food is not digested, and the face is sometimes flushed, then cauterize it on the stomach with a large cauterizer according to what preceded; and with one cauterizer on the thigh, and with another cauterizer on his tongue, a subtile clavicle, and let the cauterization stand for some time, and cure the abdomen that is to be healed.
Chapter .xxxv.
Of cauterizing atheys close to the absence of their members.
When you cut off an athay, then ignite the cauterizer that is assembled at your will. Then place the lithe in the athay that you have cut off, and bring your own hand close to the opening of the vein from which the blood flows, so that the cauterizer reaches it.
And make it one or two, because if the steps are many, then cauterize each of them according to what we have mentioned, and cure those with water that you give to their own members within so that they are healed.
And if you cauterize with a large cauterizer over the alcatin, it is more beneficial for health.
Chapter  .xxxvi.
Of cauterizing fistulas that are formed in the division of the members of the patient.
When nature does not obey the work that we have recommended in its place, the patient is terrified by water, heal it with cauterization.
So, when a fistula forms in the division of the patient, and it is ancient, corrode health from it and corrupt moisture, and then water that is worthy to be tried first, and remove the quantity of its depth with the front mentioned attempt.
Then bring the lithe-like cauterizer. And then place that lithe-like cauterizer in this fistula, and according to the quantity in which it intermixes with the attempt.
And repeat on that lithe the cauterization within so that the corrupted members are burned twice or three times, according to the quantity of your need.
And beware of burning the nerves and veins; or, if the fistula goes to the core of the bladder or the core of the intestine, then beware of all those places; and do not pass water unless the fistula is in a fleshy place and you think that it does not penetrate.
And then cure the place within so that it is healed.
And if the place is sealed and if the matters are cut off from it, and it remains unhealed for a long time, then know that it is completely healed.
And if the matters are not from it, then know that it is penetrating or in the root of it, and it flows from those causes from which there will be a recollection in its place.
Chapter   .xxxvii.
Of cauterizing the nostrils.
When there is pain in the nostrils due to heat or a strong wind, and because of this the nose of the patient is closed up, then cauterize that over the nostrils with a large cauterizer on each nostril, through which a recollection will occur.
And strongly with a small cauterizer on the second nostril, so that three small cauterizers will be applied, and then more behind for health.
Chapter  .xxxviii.
Of cauterizing the bladder.
When there is a swelling and softening in the bladder due to heat and moisture so that the patient does not retain urine, then cauterize it at the opening of the bladder with three cauterizers, starting from the spine of the right side, and then move on to the left side.
And make the length of each cauterizer according to the quantity of the blood; and cauterize it with a cauterizer in the lower part of the two, or with two cauterizers if necessary.
And make a subtile cauterizer according to what is done.
Chapter   .xxix.
Of cauterizing the mouth.
When there is heat and moisture in the mouth, and because of this the breathing is obstructed, and the menstruations are corrupted, and the inducement of their own breathing is delayed, and there is pain as they come into contact with their own breath, then cauterize that place with three cauterizers on the circuit of the ombelicus, according to what we have mentioned in the cauterization of the bladder; and with a cauterizer in the lower part of the two sides, or with two cauterizers, and make the cauterizing subtile.
Chapter   .x.
Of cauterizing the loss of speech.
When moist air is dispersed to the opening of speech, and there are causes of its own location, and the collection of it is prolonged on the other when compared between them. And the place of loss of speech is attracted in it which is worth to be tried.
And then cauterize the patient on the opening of speech with a lithe-like cauterizer, because you will have tried in the circuit of the opening as it is rolled up, and so that the opening falls into its own place.
And make a lithe-like cauterizer with which to precede in the cauterization of the stomach.
And if this lithe is not suitable for you, then cauterize it with three large cauterizers.
And make the cauterization according to the quantity of the bitterness of the whole thing, and then cure that place within so that it is healed.
Chapter    .xli.
Of cauterizing the sciatic vein.
When there is pain in the opening of speech, and it is caused by heat and moisture, then cure the patient with water that we have mentioned without using their own medicine, and when the water is old, then know that it is an ancient disease, and then know that you are lacking in humors; and then apply a large cauterizer.
And the way of cauterizing that is according to two ways: either cauterize with burning medicines, or cauterize with fire.
Here comes the first sentence to translate. Do not add any comments, like "here is the translation", just reply with the guessed translation and nothing else: And be the space which is between each cautery the quantity of the thickness of this thing, and if the cauterize olive or great.
May some needles be made on the head of the patient to prevent them from bleeding; and four cauterizes.
And if you want, cauterize the circle in which it is surrounded the form in the cauterization of the dislocation of the ankle, that is a circle continent and burn the smoothness of all the chain.
This is the way of cauterizing in ciatiqua when pain adheres to the ankle and not extended within the crotch.
But if it is extended within the crotch, then cauterize that with two cauterizes on the crotch at the place in which you turn the patient who is the pain; and one cauterize over the shin bone for four little ones a few minutes the part cervix.
And if the cauterize is a knife, and be the depth of the cauterize according to the quantity of the smoothness of the chain.
And if the patient is turned that the pain is extended within the place proper, then cauterize that here you turn with a cauterize for three points or four or more if it is necessary of this.
And if the patient is turned that the pain is in the crotch, then cauterize that here with a cauterize-knife.
And take care in all cauterization that you do not end up with the cauterize as it burns nerves or great arcery, and so by water to you is over the patient badly or contraccin.
And you have already seen one of those which cauterized on the shin bone and ended up in the cauterization, and the bed fire inflated within that the tumor has achieved the foot, and fire pierced and corrupted all the foot. Then a great solution of stomach occurred, and death by water.
And if the pain is in two parts together, then cauterize each according to this way.
And said the wise some in the cauterization of ankle, from this is the way: make similar a circle of iron whose circuit is the most part of a palm; and be deves their orifices according to the thickness of a finger or half a thumb.
And inside that circle be another third; and be the space between them the quantity of the nut of the foot; and may those circles open from two parts; and may be the length of those cays a nut or two, and make in those margins of iron decently apparelled in the circles; and this is the form.
Then be lit in the fire within that it gets red-hot and sparks, and place it on the part of the ankle, the patient turned on his back. And therefore cauterize that with three triangulaze cauterizes in one line.
Then leave that for three days; then apply the plaster that is wet with vinegar to it, and leave the wound open for seven days; and then heal that within the water is cured.
said Al-Bakhi: O son, of this kind of cauterize we have used little for the terror of the regard of him, and because by water have found few those which look over him.
But some good cauterizes to him who suffered them, and turn that place to him.
May cauterize with medicines that you have made two circles with iron ring-shaped hole through which should be the lever of the door of iron; and be the length of the parts in the thickness of their are two nuts or three nuts.
And if the space which is between each one is the quantity of the thickness of this thing; and are open from above and from below, and may contain themselves between them according to this form:
Then place it on the part of the ankle, the patient turned on his back. and hold your hand over the part of the ankle; and take some water tail and put it between two circles, and its quality be lit with small fire little by little, and do that for the quantity of one hour, and bear with him the pain of mouth and the rustling of him - because that rustle then as if by fire - until it stops the pain.
Then raise your hand from the instrument and wash the water tail of all the ankle with fresh water.
Then leave that for three days and place it on the plaster within that is the darkness of the rustling renewed, then leave it water by seven days, and run him with the water is cured; this one is after a cure in the night.
Then heal that within the water is cured.
And if the pain is extended within the crotch or chest, then make him a statue that holds water according to what was made in the ankle.
And this is the way of tail water, and I have written that in the treatise of the correction of medicines. Take the alkaline and of a kind not yet known of both parts one, and tri-fold them and place it on a new wave through which the part leaves is pierced with a small hole, according to the quantity that enters in it.
Then place above that the source of the new wave wrapped up, and take it on the alkali and the caustic of fresh water which takes those by a nut, and then put it in the tieua hand by good compression, and leave that the new wave sent out from him the water is sharp on the part left on the wrapped-up wave.
Then adjust all that water, and place it on another caustic alive and other alkali renewed, because that one then a strong fire sharpens, which is administered in drops of medicine and cauterization of the other members, because operation makes fire.
And so from medicines some by which is cauterized wide, as then it sharpens and heals it quickly and causes am sabo in the morning.
And Gualia told of a man of the arts the operation and the cure by which he is healed of the pain of the ankle and sciatica, and he said that there is no need for another cure, because it is cured with one gaze then as it is strong that he put that tieue in bath and eysic already known about him.
And it is that be of certari green, and if not be vert, then be a figue recent; and a hand be tri-fold with a little gray and placed on the ankle in which is the pain, or in the crotch, or chest, and leave it open.
Then leave that for the quantity of three hours or for the quantity that man is a hundred steps from the pain of rustling.
Then place that in bath and then when his heart has been heated, introduce that into the water because the pain stops and is healed.
And you know that there is no need for any medicine of cauterize with these medicines but to remove the contents of the body.
May Ja Escorides also say that when the goat's wound is cauterized with oil, then he will be well; and if be a cauterize with this way: take wool and dip it in old oil, and place it between the toes of the foot and between the teeth.
And take a piece of dry sheep's intestine, and inflame it with fire so that it becomes charcoal; then put it on the wool and leave it there until it hardens. And repeat this several times, and do not stop until the heat of the bite penetrates into the joint and the pain ceases.
This method of cauterization is called cautery of cows.
Chapter .xii.
On the cauterization for pain relief.
Some pains in the legs have two causes: either by entrapment or by impact, or by excessive evacuation (diarrhea), and similar causes; due to the infusion of dry or rubbed-in matter, and moist substances.
And cauterization should only be used in this one specific case, which is caused by the infusion of dry or rubbed-in matter.
Therefore, when the leg is swollen, make pills that are similar to its shape and size, which have been made in two places where the pain is; because there will be more tolerance in one line than in another, so that cauterization or more, according to the quantity, should not exceed the swelling.
And make a cauterization with a pointed instrument.
And if you wish, cauterize with three or four cautery tools, point-wise or medially, according to this form:
Chapter .xiii.
On cauterization at the beginning of baldness.
The above text states: "For this type of baldness in small children, and to prevent the beginning of it in children by paying attention to their diet, and by not allowing them to stay too long in the sun."
And pay attention to the last spine of the leg and the bones that are beginning to stick out from under it.
And when you see this, and if you want to prevent it, then cauterize it with a circular instrument, as shown in the diagram. in such a way that the cauterization covers the entire spine from top to bottom.
And if you wish, perform cauterization in two or three lines around the spine with a pointed instrument. The points should be close to each other.
Then clean the area where cauterization has been performed with water, as mentioned before.
However, be aware that cauterization should not be administered for baldness due to nerve spasms.
Chapter .xliv.
On cauterization for gout and joint pain.
When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
Therefore, if gout is caused by rubbing, and if the pains do not improve with rest, then repeat the cauterization.
This is because you cauterize the excessive evacuation in the circuit of the joint of the foot with pointed cautery.
And make an olive-shaped cauterization, as shown in this diagram:
And if it is necessary to make points on the surface of the foot, then do so with a pointed cautery. If the pains spread to the heels or other joints, and if they become intense, then repeat the cauterization on each heel with three or four cautery tools using the olive-shaped technique described earlier.
If you find that the number of cauterizations is not sufficient, then perform the aforementioned cauterization and do not apply pressure to your hand during the procedure.
If the pains spread to the heel and the joint, then administer the cauterization described in the previous chapter.
If the pains are in both feet, and it is called sugar, then pierce in the circuit of the fire as shown, piercing from one side to the other, and make two lines.
If the pains remain in the feet, then pierce in the circuit of the fire on each foot and on the heel bone.
If the pains spread to the sides of the feet or the calves, then cauterize each muscle and tendon on both sides.
And do not evacuate the patient without proper preparation and reception of medicines, for if it is done well, fire will be evacuated with this cauterization and healing will occur, God helps.
Chapter .xlv.
On cauterization for fractures.
When there is a fracture in the ankles and the bowstrings are loosened in front of the tendon, and if it begins to break - which you should order - then the patient should rest for a while, and he should use soothing means so that the gap does not open in his belly.
Then keep the patient between your two legs, and order him to lie down so that he does not feel any pain or see any tendon or bowstring.
Then return to the patient's feet and try to break the bone at the end of the foot, which is similar in shape to a circle, with the split running through the middle.
Then perform the cauterization described in this diagram, which shows the shape:
And return to the patient's feet, which are warm and have a red color. Then return the intestine or hernia to its cavity, and place your hand over the area to prevent the intestine from coming out.
You have already opened the space between the patient's thighs, placed a cushion under them, another servant on their legs, and another on their chest, holding their hands.
Then place the cautery on that mark with your hand on top of the cautery, straight, and if you can reach the bones of the finger inside the joint of the foot, do so with the point; and again look with another instrument if you have not succeeded in the first one inside the bone.
And observe wisely the movement of the intestine during the cauterization, that you do not burn that intestine so that on the patient's leg there is no death or other great evil.
And know that when you don't reach the bone with the cauterization, do not continue your operation.
And know that the childs cauterization is subtle according to its age and size.
Then clean the place of the cauterization for three days at most before it heals over.
Then heal those same as others with cold humors that have healed.
And the patient should be covered with a blanket over their legs for 10 days at most so that the place and wound are sealed.
And know that you should not give food to the patient according to the length of their recovery time; the intestine should not come out before the effort of healing it.
And after 10 days, if they can walk properly and comfortably, let them go; but if not, keep them for another 10 days.
And follow a strict regime of exercise and food and drink; and be diligent in this whole therapy so that it will heal completely.
And direct the healing of the ruptures in other parts of the abdomen, and begin it, and want them to stop, then cauterize the rupture with a pointed cautery according to the quantity of the patient; and let that which has come out with the third part of the patient be cured as well; and know that it is not done.
And some say that the first rupture should be cauterized with a triangular cautery according to this shape, because it is marked by a line:
And pause the line that goes down from the edge in the middle above the rupture, and another line on top of it; and leave your hand with a nail-like instrument, but the first cauterization is lighter and better.
Chapter 46
Of Cauterization for Wounds.
When the pain persists in the limbs by encrustation or percussion, and it does not respond to medication, know that you should cauterize with a pointed cautery.
And the cauterization of each member according to its size and age, and the virtue and development of it, and the location of the torments and pain in it.
So if he is healed by the first cauterization, it is good; otherwise, repeat it on him; because usually such pains are caused by punctures in a member adjacent to that part, so that you will be able to heal those with cauterization where the intestine is healed.
Chapter 47
Of Cauterization for Leprosy.
Leprosy that has been seen to be healed by cauterization is a great remedy, and sparingly if the disease of leprosy is caused by the decay of flame and melancholy.
And if you want to cauterize that leprosy, consider whether it is caused by the decay of flame and melancholy; and if it is cured with water as we have said in the division and do not change, neither this nor that concerns you, and fear for the patient's whole body and all his limbs that corruption encompasses them; then cauterize that on the head according to the middle place of the head, and on the second one from behind, leaving the forehead at the end of the hair; and both behind the ears; and one behind the neck.
And last, place your hand over the cauterization for a little while so that it does not stick to the bone too much, and if the scabs are moved, so that the exhale of thick vapors is relieved from it; and cauterize on its own according to what is necessary.
And if leprosy has spread over the patient's whole body and manifestly so, then know that you should cauterize that on the head as we have said; and on the tip of the nose, and on the two scabs, and on the two nostrils, and on the two holes of the ear, and on the two spondyls of the neck, and on one above the throat, and on one below it, and on the two shoulders, and on the two arms, and on the two palms of the hand, and on the two legs, and on the two feet, and on the tips of the toes; and know that you should cauterize all these joints of his body and his feet, and on the heels of his feet, and on the fists of his hands.
And keep in mind those nerves that are over the bone which you do not burn.
Some are cauterized with a cautery on the bones of the finger and another on the mouth of the stomach, and one above the anus.
And know that the more you adjust cauterizations, the more it is healed and improved; and know that the patient does not feel pain during cauterization, because his limbs are already numb.
And know that the cauterizations are few or many according to the limbs and joints, depending on what came before with the instruments.
Then clean the cauterization with flour that is damp and also with the other cure, as long as it heals.
Chapter 48
Of Cauterization for Stupor.
When a member is stiffened or fallen asleep and is not healed with medicine, oils, and plasters; then you should cauterize that stiffened member according to the size of the limb or its age.
And this small cauterization enters into the essence of the contract slightly. Then clean that with soap, as long as it heals.
Some are cauterized with stupor that extends to the limbs and to the spine; and the nerves that move that limb are also cauterized, and the stupor is repeated.
More should not be done on it, but what is known in anatomy of limbs and exit of nerves throughout the whole body moving.
Chapter 59
Of Cauterization for Scabrous Lesions That Are Morphea.
When the scabs are old and do not respond to any medicine; then you should cauterize those with a small cautery according to the quantity of the contract within it so that the whiteness and color of it change, and the color of it is changed.
Then clean those with flour and lentils, and olive oil colored red, and leaves of yarrow, or a mixture of chamomile; and know that you should pour this over the place, and leave it for a while so that it heals; and if there is any scar left, then wash it off with water.
Chapter 60
Of Cauterization for Cranky Lesions.
When the canker is beginning and you want to make it a crusty wound, then cauterize that with a circular cautery in the middle of the wound and turn it over; and know that if there are any sores or openings in the skin, they should first be cleaned with oil.
And the wise ones said that it should be cauterized with a last cautery in my place; but I don't see this, for I am afraid it is ulcerated, and I have already seen some scabs there.
And it should be put to cauterize in the circuit of him to circle so also we have said, or at most cauterize.
Chapter.li.
On Cauterization for Ablations.
When an ablation is delayed in maturity, and this happens due to the excess fluid gathering, or because of the age of the animal, since it is old and feeble of spirit, or because of time, and you want to speed up the maturation process for ables; then cauterize in the circuit of him at most small points; and leave those alone as they will mature quickly.
But if you want the piercing of him with cauterization, then this is the form of him that you should ignite; and leave that in my place where it penetrates the ablation.
And if the cauterization is placed in that place that has been left, so that the whole body of the arm is relieved; and leave that to be healed.
Chapter.lii.
On Cauterization for Corrosion.
Corrodent is ambulant corruption in the member, which corrodes that also as if it were eating dry wood with fire.
Therefore if you ignite cauterization in that place where it suffers from fire, then you should ignite small points of cauterization first, and large ones according to what is convenient in that place where it is corrosive.
And leave cauterize that completely from the beginning to heal all corrosion and not remain any cause of him.
And leave that for three days, and place a damp cloth three times a day mixed with oil on the cauterized places so that the scars are completely healed and all corrosion is eradicated.
And leave that to be healed with moistened meat.
But if after three days' time the meat is born healthy in which there is no corruption, then it is good; but if not, then repeat the cauterization on that place where it is rotted.
Corrodent is treated with some herbs by acute medicine, for that is half a place of cauterization. But nevertheless cauterization by fire is a lighter cure.
And I have already said the cure of him by acute medicine in the division, and now take that when you have need of it.
Chapter.liiii.
On Cauterization for Claws and Other Similars.
Some scabs develop in the feet that are called claws, and this is a great cause of trouble, cutting off the foot; and cauterize them according to two methods, if by fire, and if by cold water.
But cauterization by fire is that you ignite the cauterization of the claw-like appearance as if a bird were flying, which is made of iron according to the quantity that it contains the claw from all parts, and is of fine grain.
And leave that ignited over the claw, and turn your hand away from the cauterization in the circuit of the claw so that the cauterization reaches the depth of the claw. Leave that for three days within which it begins to sizzle the arm. And leave that plastered with dried herbs, three times a day, because that will eradicate its roots.
And leave that place to be healed with meat-generating ointment within which it is healed.
If it does not convert into a claw, and some scabs happen on the surface of the body, mostly on the hands and feet, then know that you treat them with water, and this is because you take a small quantity of oil or iron or bird's feather, and pour a little amount of cold water on it, and cover the claw; and get the water out of your hand, and turn your hand over the water, and squeeze your hand, so that the water falls back onto the edge of the claw; and wait for the patient an hour to taste the water from the edge of the claw because the claw with its roots will erode.
And thus treat those that are in pain due to corruption in all parts of the body.
And leave that pus that the roots of claws are eradicated by the water of the ointments with which meat is generated.
Chapter.liiii.
On Cauterization for Tremors.
When a tremor is caused by friction in the nerves or by fever of frictive cause, or by similar cause, then know that you treat it with four cauterizations or five on the spine of two, between each spine a cauterization; and one cauterization on the feet, and another on the stomach, and another with olive oil.
And that tremor of his will be relieved, and the speed of its healing will increase.
Chapter.lv.
On Cauterization for Accidental Wounds in the Body.
When in the body there are accidental wounds, and pustules open that are made of gross corrupted matter; then, at first sight when it appears, treat it so that it is cauterized on all sides of the fistula with a fine cauterizing instrument, the end of which is extended by fire; or with a long-cut razor; or with a slow cauterization.
And some scabs are cauterized at the beginning of their discharge according to this method; and they are not crusted, and the excess is removed by them, and they are healed from those.
But nevertheless, know that water should be forced out with bloodletting.
Chapter lvi.
On Cauterization for Accident Bloodletting by Cut of Artery.
Too much blood flows from an artery that is cut through the wound of the plague which it was not before, or because of the incision of ables or cauterization of a member, and thus it happens, and it is difficult to recover.
Then, if too much blood flows, then you stop it with your hand at the orifice of the artery, and leave that placed over that place where it happens; and do not let the blood go down from the hole where it came out, and do not allow it to go back.
And leave the fire cauterizations a few small ones and many, by numbers, and exhale over them within which they are ignited.
And take from those a small one or a large one according to the place and the wound in which the artery is broken, and put it into the vein quickly before you can recover your hand, and treat that within which it has been cauterized so that it closes and heals.
And if the blood is driven out of the orifice of the artery when you release your hand and exhale the cauterization, then take another cauterization by preparing those that were in fire, and now do not allow it to go back.
And guard yourself from burning the nerve here, and let it flow onto another evil.
And know that when blood flows from an artery, then it is not possible to stop the blood, and much more so when the artery is large, if not by four ways: or cauterize as it is said has been done, or extract when it is not extracted, because when it is extracted the extremities of him are burned, and the blood is stopped, and the blood is stopped, or that it be tied with a ligature by a strong tension, or that they are placed on medicines from which their virtue is to stop the blood; and they are tied with a pulvinar with a binding.
May the one who performs surgery be modest and strict in his dressing and position for burning and similar causes, he will not achieve anything except torture.
But if here there is no doctor and there is no medicine, then let the wound be cleaned with a sharp tool according to what I have said above, and understand it very well that the wound should not be torn apart from its natural healing process, and on the scar it should not be burned; and if necessary, cauterize or apply medication.
Of incisions, puncture wounds, bloodletting, plagues, and their similarities.
We have already said in the first chapter all illness where surgery by fire is appropriate and medication that burns, and the occasions and causes of it, and the tools that are necessary with their shapes of the cauterization; and I have ordered the chapters of the superior part of the head within the feet.
And I will proceed in this chapter in this manner for those who want it, so that it may be eased; then on it that they have asked, let them seek relief.
In front of me, before I begin here, fear, and know that this is for the sake of those who are afraid; it is in the first chapter about cauterization.
And for those who are afraid, they should be very careful, because in the operation described in this chapter there are many ways to lose your life: either by spraying the vein or incision on the abscess or opening of the infection or plague or extraction of an arrow or incision of pain and their similarities. And from all of these, accompany fear and trembling, and in addition to them, death is imminent.
And I warn you that it may fall on you, because some of these ways are due to the actions of evil men that cause diseases in a moment. And of them is some that goes astray from his own disease and it will be easily overcome; and this because of the suddenness of this disease that finds its cause, and because of the length of this disease, and because of the fear by which death is caused.
And these are those who cause you harm and trouble, wait for that medicine, and their disease is destructive.
And do not consent that this man should come to you in this way; and your caution should be greater than your haste and your greed; and do not presuppose any cause about him unless it is certain knowledge that verifies him as dangerous to you, and to whom the successful result is praiseworthy.
And use in the treatment of all your diseases by prediction and indication of it to the one who brings salvation, because in him you are helped in acquiring fame and memory, praise and glory.
Or children, God in you inspires understanding and does not entrust direction and protection to you, because it is in him.
And I have ordered this chapter differently according to the chapters that precede it in the chapter of cauterization, of the cure of the head within the feet, so that it may be eased here for you by what you ask of it and from which you needed relief.
First Chapter.
Of the treatment of water that is contained in the head of children.
Know that this disease appears in children when their heads are light.
And some appear due to a hidden cause that is not known.
May I not see this disease in children; and all those whom I have seen die, and for that reason I have observed it in them.
And I have seen a child whose head was filled with water, and his head remained high until it burst because of the size of his head, and more than the humidity increased within it until the fire of death.
Or this moisture or is added between the nose and the skull, or is added above the skull over the face.
Because the operation in that case is if the moisture is between the nose and the skull and the abscess is scarce, then you should cut on the top of the head with a wedge in the shape of a letter V, and let this width run down as long as the humidity runs; and this is the form of the stye:
And if this moisture is increased, and the abscess is larger, then here are two wounds according to this way:
And if the moisture is above the skull, the sign is that you should open the mouth of the head completely and squeeze the water when you press it with your hand from inside; and do not let it go to your face. Then cut in the middle of the head according to this way:
And remove all the moisture from it; and strengthen the fissures with linen and plasters; and pour oil over it from above on the fifth day, and strengthen the head with equal parts of powder; and feed the patient with dry food of little moisture until the member is comfortable and heals.
And it is another way of incision, which you consider appropriate for the size of the abscess and the accumulation of water: some appear in the back of the head or on the sides or left; and therefore be careful with the incision where the abscess appears and the retraction of water, and cut as much as possible.
And observe that you do not cut the artery and give fluid flow from blood and pain in the disease by this flow of water.
Second Chapter.
When it comes to the catarrh or the air passages in the foot, and it is old, and you have not treated it with medicines, then the last cure for this disease is incision of those two arteries.
And therefore, when you want to incision those that the disease grinds the head, and cut the area with sharp linen threads so that it does not break out again; and consider how the vein is pulsated; and the places of each on the places that are close to the ears, and in some people they are hidden.
And consider cutting each with the stye and cutting each according to a wedge that reaches up from the skull, and it is for the length of the head.
And if you want, insert the stye between the artery and cut it with the incision above the junction.
And the length of the incision should be two fingers wide, because when any vein is incised, the pulse will be fast and irregular, which might burst it if done frequently.
May the stye not be felt; then measure from the ear the amount of space for three fingers, and consider cutting it; and go into the bone.
And here you will find the quantity of water that is one inch: and strengthen it with a strong food of more than half, and this is the second quantity that appears from the virtue of the disease and the retraction of the artery.
And consider the plague, and if there is any cause of a stye, then cut it so that it does not give a pimple.
And then strengthen the pulse with plums and drape it in a cloth, and then treat that with ointment until it is cured.
Chapter III.
On the Extraction of Arrows That Are Embedded in the Body.
When an old or catarrhal fever attacks the body due to herbal infusions and the quality of the air in the temple, or when it is violent and similar to those, and is treated with medical cures, and does not yield, then we have undertaken to deal with these ailments by extracting arrows from the body, or by cauterization of those, as we have shown.
And the manner of the operation and extraction of those is that the patient should shave the hair from the place where they are; and understand this, because it is hidden unless shown by the pulse, and is only evident in a few men by their velocity.
And if it is hidden from you, then strengthen the pulse of the patient with some cloth; and then rub the place with a rough cloth or evaporate the place with water until the arrow appears manifestly. Then take this spit, whose form is as follows: And then take the spike with ease until you reach the arrow; and then put it in the joint and extract that from the spike, discovering that of the tunics which are left there, completely.
Perhaps if the artery is thin, then wrap that with the end of the spike, and then cut off a portion of it according to the amount by which the ends of it are lengthened and contract, and there will be no flow of blood, because if they are not cut off, all the blood would flow.
Then remove the flesh from the joint. Within three.
If the arrow is large, then cover it with two pieces of twine or rope of linen, and do not let it touch the pus in front of the consolidation of the pulse, lest there be a flow of blood.
Then cut off the superfluity which is between two plasters; and let it be at that hour or at another hour.
And if you wish, cauterize that with cauterizing iron within the bone by a cutting weapon, so that the ends of it are incised, and set in place that work of the joint.
And the best work is either if the patient has fever or if it is a complex of burning; because cauterization helps to end the humors, and therefore it is better in healing.
Then remove the arrows that hurt the place of the old cot, and let them rest on a fine dust, and then treat with dry medicines so that the flesh heals and the blood stops, until it is cured.
And if while you are operating another is caused to flow blood from the arrow, then stop that flow of blood, or with cauterization, or by covering the place of the cot, and strengthen your hand so that it does not stop the blood. And if for some reason that is not presented to you, then pause the work on the place until the blood stops, and dip it in very cold water until the pain returns, and strengthen it according to what has been said.
And the place where pus is extracted from an arrow is that you cauterize the vein with this cauterizing weapon, having set two cotter pins, because you have marked the two places with thread, and pause every so often, lighting it, until it reaches the bone and cuts the vein in two places, so that blood can be lengthened between the ends of it, because it is not consolidated by this cauterization.
This is the form of the cauterizing weapon:
The acute ends of the two pins. However, if they are small acute ends, two pins are better, because if they are sharp with two pins it will be appropriate to cut the flesh quickly, and do not cut it with one.
Therefore, in those where there is some thickness, the heat of the fire should be held in them, and the flesh is cut easily.
This work is better than any work, and the pus is lighter.
Is the space between two pins the quantity of the thickness of the thread.
Chapter IV.
On the Treatment of Acid Tears and Whealing in the Eyes.
When acid tears are caused, and the course of those veins that run over the forehead defores, and does not yield to any cure with medicine, and often the face of the patient becomes red and wrinkled because of the acidity of the tears, and the eyelids are scratched by their sharpness, let them undergo this operation, and do not delay in treating those with space between the eyelids, and let them not be too large, because the eyelids might touch each other.
And it is that you command the patient to shave the hair from his forehead, and then cut three slits in the forehead evenly spaced according to the length of his brow. And if the length of the slit falls two fingers: the first slit is evenly distant from the tip of the nose to the middle of the forehead, and the second slit is according to the length of a finger's width from the first, and the third from the other side.
And guard against the incision of arrows that are in two places, and strengthen your hand from the continuation of both jaws. And if the space between each incision is three fingers' width.
And if you have a roll of sponge or dry cloth, which you use to extract the blood.
Then take two sharp extremities of the spit, whose form is as follows: is to the incision between the temple and the second incision. Then extract all the cartilage between two incisions, which is above the bone, and then extract the middle portion of it before making the second incision. Then take this spit and enter it into the first incision or another instrument called a knife, taking from one side and not taking from the other.
Then pause the latz of that meat just next to the cartilage, and then cut away from the bone, and let them fall by the way they reach the middle slit, and cut off all vessels that descend from the head to the eyes.
However, if the incision is continued until it reaches the cartilage, and then extract it from the middle slit until the other slit.
Then, when blood flows from a certain quantity of the incision, squeeze the places where the blood is clotted.
Then pause in each slit a small cotter pin, and pause on those fine dusts which are wetted with wine and oil and vinegar, and do not let them cause a fever.
Then on the third day remove that joint and administer a great infusion of cold water, and then treat it with oil of rose and other oils within that the sweats are healed.
Chapter V.
On the Treatment of Tears by Catarrh, and to the eyes that descend from the openings inside the head.
When an old or catarrhal fever attacks the body and often the eyes of the patient become very swollen and red, and the eyelids are sore and blistered, and there is a sharp pain in the forehead due to the opening of small veins inside the head. Then know that these accidents often come from the catarrh, which does not come from the nose but from the openings inside the head.
Here is the translation of the text:
Here is the translation of the text: And then apply dusts infested with vinegar and oil that they do not develop a puss clot without cautery.
And when the water has evaporated and the puss has decreased, then cover that area with a paste that does not irritate the flesh; then prepare a paste made of two parts of flour and four parts of colophony and mix it well, and administer this paste to these areas on the native skin.
Chapter VI.
On the Treatment of Water that Comes out in the Ears.
All causes of water coming out in the ears are of four kinds: either it is mineral, resembling a mineral, as iron and lead; or plant-related, resembling celery or beans; or fluid-like, resembling water and vinegar; or caused by an animal.
And so when mineral water comes out in the ear or a similar cause to those causes mentioned above does not correspond with ear discharge, and you raise the ear to the sun, and if the water comes out again, then distil that water from violet oil or vinegar, and administer the extract to him, and make him sneeze with a stimulus, and put the sneezes in a vessel near the arrival of the sneeze. And then place some pieces of cloth or wool around the ear, and extend the ear towards the sun, because motley-colored ears are usually caused by these causes.
And if it is not caused, then administer the extract to him with the instrument called subtle epiciarious, whose form is this:
If it is caused by the gesture, it is good; otherwise, administer the extract to him with a handful of subtle double-cooked rice.
And so if it is not caused by water, then make a tube of aram (a flexible material); insert the end of the tube into the canal of the ear and seal its environment with wax and soft oil so that it does not leak through the tube but remains inside. And then extract it with a strong suction, because three colored ears are usually caused by water that we have mentioned.
May be if it is not caused by this method, then take a handful of aluminum foil or old cloth, and place a small amount on the tip of the ear, and wrap it gently around. And then insert that into the canal of the ear with ease, and dry out the ear of its moisture.
And so if it is not caused by all the causes that we have mentioned, then you must cut off what has developed before it develops into a puss clot or spasm.
And the way to cut that off is this: that you command the patient from the phallic vein and extract it by the virtue of water, and then make a crack between your fingers at the root of the ear, and turn the ear towards the sun. And if the water goes into that crack, and when it is stuck, stop it with an appropriate tool; and then seal the crack tightly, and cure that within which it may be healed.
And if the cause of pain in the ear is one of the greases that grow and inflate, then administer the cure and extract it; but if it does not obey you and continues to increase, then take a handful of subtle tea according to this form: And administer to him the absolution of that grease that has fallen into the ear.
Do not pass water when you think that ear has already been moistened by the vapor of the ear; and then hold it in small balls, and extract those out with the ones or with subtle gesture, or by absolution as we have said above, for it is relieved by extracting it.
May be in the water that enters into the ear, it is good to use a stimulus at the beginning, and fill his own ear with a small amount of salt, and beat it over that ear; and if by water it has been caused, it is good; otherwise, then take two small peasy beans, and burn them slightly, and those beans in fire, and put one on the tip of the ear that has the pain, and another on the other ear, and make him jump a little with a slight blow on the back. Then do not pass water until all the water has been discharged.
Then do not pass water until all the water has been discharged. And when the water is discharged, then you take paper or a piece of cloth, and put it in the ear with your fingers. And then place one end of it in the ear and extend the other end towards the fire until it burns, so that there is no more smoke from it.
And then put another piece of cloth and make water run through it as many times as necessary until all the water is discharged, and insert that tube with the water-removing instrument.
May be if the cause of water enters into that ear, if it is a small thing, then put it in his mouth and remove it, cure that with what we have said above; but if it is a large thing causing pain to the head, then administer the extract with a gesture and with a hand, and this cause is lighter than all other causes of water that come out in the ear.
May be if the cause of water comes out in the ear, when you cure that with water we have mentioned above and in the distillation treatment, and do not remember your cure, then cover that ear to the sun.
And so if any of these causes of worms appear, then extract it with a tube or a thin cloth; but if no cause appears, then take a narrow and long tube whose form is this: And then insert the small end into the ear according to the quantity that it suffers pain, and extract it with a strong suction, and make water run as drops within, so that all the worms are discharged.
And if you do not obey what I have said above about feeling the ear, then you cover it with wax as we mentioned; and then administer distillation to those who have already been distilled in the treatment of worms, and extract water in the distillation treatment.
And this is how you pour the medicinal oils into the ear with this instrument, whose form is this: Make it long and thin, in a shape of silver or brass, and make a small crack at the top.
And so that is what you use to fill it with oil that needs to be filled here: And if you want, then take the ray and wrap it gently around the end; pour oil into the cavity of the ear, or juice from any herb, or water that you want of these medicines in the tube  and that is inside the ear , and then place the ray on top with a slight compression, so that the oil is expelled into the cavity of the ear where it feels the pain, and the patient feels the oil inside.
And so that it is enfused in the ear, it is already cut with fire a little. And watch that the cause that you will distill in the ear is not too dry, because medicines for the ear do not tolerate it.
Chapter .vii.
Of the treatment of ear aching.
Some women who are pregnant may have perforations in their ears, and this can sometimes lead to infection in the ear due to a plug of wax or flesh in that area; and this type of infection sometimes occurs in men, especially at the tip of the tray of the ear, which does not allow for drainage, and in some cases it occurs on the outside.
And that which happens in the tray of them, which does not allow for drainage, is in most difficult conditions of healing.
And in that where you can get drainage, cover the ear of the patient with oil and look at it. And if there is any discharge, open it with a sharp point, which is the way to do it:
If the tip of them is small in length, in which one side is sharp and the other is not; and the blade is of two edges so that it does not hurt the ear.
And if the infection is caused by hidden flesh in the ear or in the meat of them; then you should cut it with a sharp knife and cut it quickly until all the flesh is removed.
And if the infection is in the tray of the ear; then take a sharp blade and scorch it slightly, and put that into the meat of the ear.
And if you have any discharge with water that the patient may be able to hear with ease, apply pressure to it with ease; and watch out so as not to damage the nerves of the ear.
And place a strip of the second quantity of the tray in which you have wrapped yourself in Egyptian ointment on the ear; and let it sit for a few days until you are sure that the infection is consolidated, or take some and spread it on thorns and spray it on the skin; and if the ear has already been pus-filled, then watch what you do, and change the poultice with another that you will wrap in ointment made to be oiled with rosewater, so that the pus can come out; and promptly treat it so that it is healed.
If there is any pain, then dip a sponge or cloth in water and put it on the ear, and use the other treatment that you will squeeze with pressure the flow of pain; which is spoken about in the book of distillation.
Chapter .viii.
Of the treatment of aching eyelids.
And those that are caused by cold in the eyelids; some of them are dry and some of them are wet.
And if you have any that are dry or slimy, and cut them with a sharp blade on the sides of their hairs; and place them over the affected areas with thorns.
If there is any pain that comes from the veins, then you should cauterize those with fire in a small dish.
And the best way to do it is with a sharp blade and when those return at any time there is still a cause of their hairs; and when they are burned, those hairs are destroyed and do not come back again.
Chapter  .ix.
Treatment of aching eyelids in men.
Some cases of aching eyelids in men are caused by something that is gathered in the area that makes it stronger and more durable, and thus becomes larger; which is called "gout".
It is the accumulation of thick moisture on the eyelid below and above.
Then the treatment of it is that you should consider if the swelling is caused by something in the eye itself, which makes it greater and more painful; and the cause of it is not known.
Then cut it from the front with a sharp blade and scrape it completely from all sides; then take a sharp point and scrape that which is caused by it; and if it does not stop, return to scrape it again.
And if the swelling is great, then you should join it with a suture; and treat it until it is healed.
And if it is little, do not worry about that area because the blood of the eye restores it and heals it.
And if the swelling is declining towards the inside of the eyelid; then let it fall and suspend the swelling with a point; otherwise, you will cut it again; and if the eyelid falls by cutting it, do not try to stop it from falling.
Then wash the eye with salty water; and treat the area with water that heals until it is healed.
Chapter .x.
Of the treatment of aching eyelids in men.
It is caused by something that is generated in the eyelids above, and it mostly affects children, and its treatment consists of wiping out what has been formed with water; and they cannot see clearly because their tears run down because of the pain.
And so if you keep your eyes on the faces of others all the time, and on the faces of others while they sleep; and if the eyebrows are wet with tears, which are covered by a swelling, and the presence of what seems to be a small lump appears in the eye; and when you touch the area with your finger, you feel something hard; and if you press it lightly, you can feel something below that; then you should know that it is on the eyelid above.
And there is no way to operate it when the patient puts his head on the tray; and place a strip of linen on it, and let it sit for a little while; then place that which comes out of the eye onto the area with your fingers, so that it hardens slightly; and then press the area gently so that it does not break; then place the circle on the eye that contains arnica from all sides; and then put the strip back over the eye, and close it up in the middle of the circle, and open it again after a little while so that the moisture hardens slightly; and then close it again.
And if the eyelid is closed, then cut it completely from all sides; for in most cases you will find arnica by cutting a small opening; because in some cases arnica comes out with the way it is formed, and this can be done with a sharp blade.
Then remove that which has been formed from the eye with a sharp blade, cutting it at the front and back; and then cut it on the sides and roll it between your thumb and index finger until it is completely removed.
And watch out so that you do not put pressure on the area, so that the blade does not go into the eye and cut it; and if you want to use a sharp object, be careful not to put any pressure on the area.
If you do not find arnica at the beginning of the crack, then instead of pressing it, put a little water on it and then cut it with a sharp blade; and if you want to use a sharp object, be careful not to put any pressure on the area; and then remove that which has been formed by cutting it from the front and back, and rolling it between your fingers.
And if they grind salt and put it on the area; then cut a little from the front and back, and roll it between your fingers until the moisture comes out of it.
And so treat whatever is inside that needs to be healed.
Or if blood comes out in the area, then treat whatever is inside that has become bloated and needs to be healed.
Chapter .
Of methods of treating the body.
When the eyelids of the body are torn by the natural adjustment and are aged, then treat them to the fire and cause tears and moisture on the eyelids and membrane within, which is the cause of destruction of the eye, called the burning of the eye, and treat in four ways: either with a hot cautery; or with sharp medicine according to what was said in the chapter of cauterization; or it is made by cutting and sewing; or with canes according to what it sees.
And so place the top of the patient's head in your left hand; then turn the eyelid of the eye toward you, and if it turns, good; and if not, insert a needle into that part from which the hair grows at the edge of the eyelid, and make the needle enter at that point -- close to the edge of the eyelid where there are no hairs -- close to the hairs, and pull the thread back through the eyelid, and turn that back toward the eye.
Then turn inside the edge of the eyelid toward the hair that is adjusted with a pointed needle that pierces the lacrimal major within the lacrimal minor; then pull out the thread and leave it hanging on the edge of the eyelid with a small knot or cloth, and so turn the eyelid toward you with a touch, and let it be like this with the shape of an owl.
But if it is that the shape is according to the amount of swelling of the eyelid, because there are different people, for those whose eyelids are swollen in a large amount, according to which they are swollen, then treat them differently.
Then turn on the two lines that you have drawn, and begin from the lacrimal major within the lacrimal minor. And if your hairline is close to the natural hair, then treat it like this with the shape of an owl.
Then place the needle in one of the corners of the eye, and scrape it all out, and adjust the two lips together with a thin thread or hair, and wipe off the blood, and let whatever is superfluous on the eyebrows adhere to them for several reasons that may cause trouble, if you want to do so, and if not, do not.
Then leave the thread attached inside for three or four days, and then treat whatever is inside it.
And if you want to, then leave the swelling unsewn, and treat whatever is dry and contracted, because the eyelid becomes red due to the seal of the swelling and the accumulation of it; but unsewing is better. And so say that the ancient remedies of taxes are.
But if it is a sore place on the body, then it is an operation of good and not fear.
And there is another way of applying it, and that is to turn the eyelid toward you in this shape, and then raise the eyelid with three separate and gathered needles according to this form:
If this is not possible there, take a needle with thread, and insert that into the middle of the figure, and another needle according to prop the lacrimal major, and the second prop the lacrimal minor, and adjust the two needles between them with equality, and then lift up your hand with an upward movement, and raise all the eye above which is turned on this, and so treat it.
Then adjust the two lips of the swelling together with a suture, and treat whatever is inside that needs to be healed.
If this happens again with your incision or cut, then treat it with cerates and similar things, and anoint.
And in some cases the hair of the eyelid changes when you use it for incision, so then treat it with a needle; but the suture is more artificial.
The treatment with canes is according to this form: is that you turn the eyelid and separate the shape according to what I have said; then make two canes or two thin needles, whose length is according to the length of the eyelid and whose width is smaller than the width of the line. And you have already cut at the ends of some parts, where you have the threads.
Then add each one to what is superfluous on the eyelid of the eye with a slight thickness, and tighten the canes of each part together, and leave that for several days, because the eyelid will die and rot if it is tightened too much.
And if there is a delay, then break off the thread with tweezers, and then treat whatever is inside that needs to be healed.
Then when it is set in stone, the eyelid is raised and the hair does not stick out.
And this is the form of two canes that you will make according to this form: the amount of its length and width neither more nor less.
Chapter .
Of raising hair that is painful on the body with a needle when the hair is stiff.
When the hair is not natural and stiff and sharp on the body, then the operation in it is that you take a very thin needle and place it in the hair at the edge of the skin, and so adjust the ends of it and do not touch any part of it with your hand in a gentle way. Let the length of the thread be according to the amount of a palm.
Then put another very thin needle on it in a moment, and trim the ends of that thread if you want to.
Then place the head of the patient in your left hand, and so place it near to the sun, that your work is seen, because it is a delicate operation and small.
Then insert the needle into the root of the hair adjusted with a need for extraction, and let it penetrate quickly into the eyelid before you pull out that natural hair.
Then pull out the hair from inside and insert it in a little hole, and let the hair be one, two, or three, and not more.
Then take your hand away from that place where the hair was extracted with a hole in the eyelid with the natural hair.
If the hair is extracted with a hole and not taken out, then take it out by cutting the ends together with a needle that you have made for that purpose, within which the hair was taken out with a hole on top of the eyelid with natural hair.
Then let that hair be cut by vision of the eye, because then you will take it out with a needle, and each one will close its wound, and leave those closed for two or three days, so that the hair remains attached to its place and grows on top of that.
If the hair is too long, then adjust a very long hair of the natural hair, and so raise it up to that, or what you leave within that is extended, and then raise that.
Chapter 13.
Of the treatment of a certain problem that is seen in the eyelid above.
When the problem is seen in the eye, and it is contracted by the eyelid that is contracted within itself, or to the right or left side by poor consolidation of the swelling, or by section or cauterization, and so treat it with consolidation of the swelling, or by section or cauterization, or by similar things to its malady.
Here is the translation of the text:
Do not use the cure of the patient from these causes that dry out, for if you do so, you will return with poison that is worse than nothing and will not help at all;
Use the cure of fenugrec for those causes that soften, and dip it in water where there are ashes and salt from it, or prepare aquilex oil, which is liquefied by some of the oils, and immerse the pad in it, and apply it with that.
And the treasure of your cure is that you pierce all those parts that are not consolidated according to the form that they were at the beginning.
And this operation which we have mentioned is nothing but a correction of the poison that does not return the form of the place according to what it was before.
Chapter XIV.
Of the cure of poison that is made in the eyelid.
This poison, which is made in the eyelid, which is called with reason poison; and it is of two kinds, either natural or accidental.
The accidental is made by plague or by a wound or by cautery or by other similar causes.
And the way of performing this operation is that you take a needle that makes a double thread, and insert it into the flesh, and let it pass from the lacrimal bone on the left side within the lacrimal bone on the right, so that the thread reaches the two extremities of the flesh.
Then return the flesh to its place with the needle and cut it with the blade widely. And if the figure of the eyelid returns as it was before, it is well; and if not, take the thread and pause it in the divided figure, and at that turn the eyelid, and make the two folds on the edge of the eyelid below.
The extremities of the two folds should be at two angles with the incision, which you have made so that they meet, and may form a figure with them.
And this figure is a Greek letter: Lambda.
Then return the flesh to its place with the amount that is the width of it taken from below the eyelid, so that it closes the eyelid.
Then adjust the separated parts and sew them together with a thread of wool; and then cure those with water that we have mentioned to be mollifying and to be made inside so that they are healed.
And if the poison enters by a wound or a suture or cauterization, then it is customarily said that you open a flat wound on the hair of the eyelid according to what precedes. Then separate the crease between the two lips according to what we have mentioned.
In the summary of the speech of the cure of poison when it is dried up or wet, that it run in this operation according to how it is prepared in the form of poison, and that it is in a form of drops.
And the master of the art prepares all the time poison in any way possible so that it returns the figure to the natural form, or similar to it, and the patient according to what is convenient for the operation and the instruments in the best dispositions.
Chapter XV.
Of the attachment of the eyelid to the conjunctiva or the cornea.
When this consolidation happens in men of age who is solid the eyelid above the flesh of the eye, and is forbidden by the ease of movement and its natural works, then it is customarily said that you insert the tip of the needle into the edge of the eyelid, and raise it up, or extend it with a thread.
Then you cut the attachment with a sharp blade, which is not on the edge of the incision, keeping out a little so that the patient is not disturbed by the operation, and leaving the blade that does not damage the flesh according to its sharpness.
And be your incision that easily removes that attachment so that it is returned the eyelid according to its natural form, and all the attachment is healed.
Then you put in the flesh salty water that you wash it with; or distill it in the water of Zuni by dissolving it in water.
Then separate between the eyelid and the flesh with a crease, and place on the flesh wool infused with album of wine, and then third day use causes of consolidation so that it is healed.
Chapter XVI.
Of incision in the eyelid and prominence of flesh of the lacrimal bones.
Know that the eyelid is according to two ways, because it either is nervous, and is similar to hard cyphers subtile; or is not-nervous, similar to frozen white humidity, which when it touches a thread, or is forced to take a knot, is separated and the thread does not remain in it.
And both of them do not start from the lacrimal bone major that goes little by little until it covers the eye, and prohibits the light and the movement of flesh.
And the way of working in the incision is that the patient pauses his head on the table, and opens the eyelids, and raises the eyelid to your hand, and collects the eyelid with a few drops of thread and double it, and extend those from the eyelids. Then take a needle and insert it into that hair of the eyelid or of the cow or of the water, or of similar things, or of faithful leather, or double the extremity of the needle little by little and leave that in the middle of the eyelid, and pierce it with the needle, and tie the eyelid by that thread; and extend those from the eyelids, and cut off that hair at the edge of the eyelid that covers the pupil. And then you keep that hair within the back of it.
Then you cut the hair in the root of the lacrimal with a sharp blade or with small scissors, and let the flesh of the natural lacrimal fall so that by cutting it does not produce continuous flowing of tears.
And sometimes the eyelid is extended with solid oil or with leather, as we have mentioned, and then it is separated with a sharp blade of the form of it:
And keep in mind that you do not touch the corneal membrane with the blade and that the hole is made in the rupture, and the pupil is punctured.
Then the incision produces in the flesh a little salt taste or of pepper that does not hurt, and leaves it within the other day; and then you cure that with water that covers so that it is healed.
And if the eyelid is not nervous and you cannot put in it the needle, or does not remain attached to it, then this special kind of eyelid is cured with medicine, and is healed in this way by eye and prescribed in the division.
And if you want to separate that eyelid, then you open the patient's eye and take a blade sharp according to this form: with subtlety. And if the hair of that eyelid is rarefied and is attached to it, then you distill it from your oil in the water of pepper or of salt, and dry it within the other day.
And repeat this operation until you have fully removed the whole of it from him, or else the opposite will happen to you: let cautery be applied to the wound because, when you leave it, it will start to suppurate and will not heal at the beginning.
And repeat your operation on that with reason until it is healed.
The importance of the lacrimal gland, if it does not cause great damage to him, should be suspended with a knife; and cut off one side of it, and do not finish cutting it so that it does not bleed.
And distill in the lacrimal chief oil and make it into an ointment until it is healed.
Chapter XVII.
Of the incision of someone who has a sore on his leg.
Some veins in the eyelids of a person are born flesh that covers the pupil, or come closer together above the eyelid or move towards the eyebrows and press them together at the top; and is joined to the flesh with a rope-like thread.
May the operation on him be such that the patient does not move his head: and open those veins with a knife or a forceps; and cut off the flesh at the beginning until it is all finished with the scissors, and keep the leg still after you have done so; and do not hurt that person in any way during your operation.
And be your incision the one that you cut those or with a spatulum which we have mentioned in the incision of the hand, or with small forceps which are gathered together according to the shape of it: proceed as is appropriate for this chapter.
Therefore, when your incision is finished and all that flesh has been removed, then fill the leg with salt powder, or distill in it a red powder resembling that of the corrosive medicines, and place it over the leg, or cover it with a poultice, within which let it be secured by cautery so that it does not suppurate.
And if there is any cause of the sore being infected, and you are afraid of suppuration, then leave that leg alone and heal that suppuration with water, which will remove it, and repeat your operation on that until it is healed, and make an incision in the flesh that forms on the leg of this kind.
But in the meantime, keep yourself away from any cure of the leg by natural or accidental means, and work with iron, and do not put your hand on any of these operations until you see that the member is suitable for such an operation.
Chapter XVII.
Of the Incision of the Leg.
There are some veins that run over the leg and prevent you from performing surgery on it; and if they break out, they cause a sore.
Therefore it is necessary at the beginning that you consider whether the leg in which there is a sore is strong and does not have any other disease than the sore itself; then collect that sore.
And tell the patient to keep his head still, and suspend those veins with a knife or with two; and let that knife be doubled in length according to this form:
or two knives, graduating them in a way according to this form:
And let those veins be collected with sutures, carefully, and abstain from washing that sore for an hour or two, until those veins have been removed from the leg and are bleeding.
And keep the leg away from the sun's heat; and if your operation is in the morning before the sun rises, and be firm in your operation so that you do not cut into any of those veins.
And when you have finished, then distill in the leg chief oil or green oil so that it may be cut with acute corrosive water which has been removed from the sore.
But if you cannot collect all of it in that hour, then distill as much as you can; and leave it alone for a few days, until the pain has subsided, and is secured against suppuration by cautery.
And repeat this operation on him in the same way again until he is healed.
This is the shape of the forceps:
Chapter XIX.
Of Reduction of Nasal Congestion.
When you treat congestion with cautery or with acute medicinal means according to the preceding narration and it is not healed, then do not cut into it but rather extract all the moisture that is in it and the powder which is within it until it is uncovered the bone.
And then, when the bone is exposed and covered with corrosion or blackness, then cut it with this instrument whose form is as follows:
It is called a sharp cap, and made of iron, and shaped like this, which is done with a point of a file or with a point of a soft metal made by a point of a lime (shaped like this: [a triangular shape]).
And place that above the infected part of the bone, and turn it from side to side, and press your hand little by little until you know that that corruption is smooth.
The water should be made hot sometimes, and restore the place with dry andstringent means.
Then if the place is consolidated and has good flesh hidden in it, and the bones of the sine are separated and it is not renewed and does not suppurate and does not happen to it again during the ten days, then you will know that it is healed.
Except that you should not cut into it again but rather reduce the fracture to the shape of the nose, and according to this method: and if you discover another bone with iron or acute medicine, and after uncovering the bone, then cut it according to this form:
The extremity of the iron triangle, and the base of it should be first weakened within the edge in such a way:
And repeat this operation on the bone, and place that above the lacrimal; and extend your hand a little of the leg, and turn your hand from side to side until it penetrates the whole bone, and then feel the patient's pulse as you turn your hand:
Then restore that place with drystringent medicines, scraping it sometimes: and if you are not satisfied, then add some more.
Then if the flesh does not endure at that place, then the matter which stops up the passage returns to the nose, and after it has been made hot, then water should be poured on the patient' nose.
Chapter XX.
Of Reduction of the Emphasis of the Leg.
When the leg swells to its full extent and does not decrease or increase, then loosen the patient' hand, and then repeat this operation, and then apply air to the throat as a sacrifice and sucking for good sucking; and place a plaster on the leg with a little powder of acacia, and tighten it:
The manner of the powder is that you take sheets of lion' skin, and each sheet be doubled into four; and make those pieces of powder.
And place those together according to the quantity which the leg requires. And tighten those together with a strong tie; and repeat the air as a sacrifice; and then stop the air, leaving it alone for a day or two, and then wash the leg.
But if in the meantime the ligament becomes soft, then keep it strict.
And now bring back the limb close to the day and night as we have said before.
And if the hernia has already been reduced, then so it is, and otherwise, repeat the poultice with the dust, contraction, and vacuums within until it is healed.
Chapter .xxi.
About the incision of the eminence of the tunic.
When there is an eruption in the tunic of the eye, and the eminence is raised and the palpebras are removed in this way as with a grain of raspings, and the shape of a man is formed by it, and you want to cut it, then do the operation as we have said before that you enter the needle into the root of the eyelid on the side of the lacrimal, and let it go in; and then make the needle penetrate and leave the first one according to its disposition; and then cut the place of the double string and bring back the eyelid by the circuit of the needle, and strengthen that.
And now remove the needle and place it on the hernia with wool infused with milk of lead and let it remain that way until it is healed.
And now cure the hernia by applying the ointment as we have said before so that the plague is healed.
And in some cases all the parts of the hernia are gathered together by a circle of cloth around the hernia, and it is pierced with a fine needle that enters into the hernia proper, and runs the serous pus, and falls down the hernia and goes in.
And now strengthen it until it is healed.
Chapter 22.
About the treatment of eye injuries.
This evil which is called alconati is nothing more than a disease that is gathered in the hernia resembling falling water and not that one.
The way to work with it is that you place the hernia under the blade and set it in two places and do not allow it to come down; let the light be held back and the hernia be examined as above.
If it does not go down, you know that it is water.
But if the preparation for the descent of the hernia with milk that we have said before is not done, then make the hernia under the blade between your hands and take a fine needle and pierce it on that part next to the conjunctiva in the cornea in the crown (in the place where it is visible), so that the hernia comes out.
So if it is taken out then you pour on the hernia milk mixed with honey or water in which you have already prepared fenugrec and honey.
And now be cured of other causes until it is healed.
Chapter 23.
Of the treatment of falling water from the hernia.
We have already mentioned the spices of the water in the division and what is suitable to pierce with the needle, then according to the health.
Then it will be seen that you make the hernia under the blade on a board and tie the hernia to one side with a string, keeping it firm.
And then place it near the eyelid of the hernia on your left side if the water is in the left hernia; or to your right side if the water is in the right hernia.
And then to your right side take the water, if the hernia is on the left; or to your left side if the hernia is on the right.
And then place the edge of the water near the crown by the thickness of the blade in the album of the hernia on the side of the lacrimal, and then pour the water with virtue and twist it around your body at that point.
And then pour the water into the album of the hernia and feel that the water has already reached the cause in the eye.
And then the measurement of the path of the water to the hernia is the same as the measurement of the space from the pupil to the end of the iris, and that is the crown of the hernia; because you will see with the eye through the clarity of the corneal layer.
And then place the water in that place where it is needed; and then put another needle in a different place and then if the water falls after a while, then you will see with it soon afterwards.
And then wait a little; if the water goes down, then you stop for a while before pouring out that other one before the hernia comes out.
And then when it is stopped and not going down, you pour out almagda with ease, and turn it around a little at a time, and dissolve in the water some clear salt of the gem and wash the hernia from within; and then pause outside the hernia by a thread or stop or wool infused with rosin and milk of lead and bind it to the hernia.
But we will not go back to those times when they paused over it with a knife.
And if you do not obey your almagda to the instrument of the hernia for its hardness, because it is some of those people whose hernia is hard; there are two ways that can be done: one way is to cut it with a knife; and another is to rub it with oil.
And therefore, pierce that joint, and do not lift your hand away from the wound, and you will not miss a small spot in the palm of your hand.
Then put on the salve as I have said.
And you should pay a compliment to the work, be prepared for the patient's sleep by making it comfortable on his back in a dark room, and prohibit any movement.
Then remove from him the liquid so that it is dry, and do not touch his head to the right or left.
And put on the ligature according to its disposition within the third day.
Then remove it from that dark room and examine the wound carefully, then return the ligature within a day. vii.
And do not cover that you should not pour water in the hour of the cure or so often apply the infusion. While covering, do not move water away from you because water does not move well and quickly by sight.
However, if a fever occurs, then cover up after the seventh day, and correct that joint with water so that the fever subsides.
Then wash him and place his face upward so that the wind reaches him from above for a few days, he is in the dark room.
And put on the garment with care and speak about its causes.
And you know that in a closed room one cannot excuse oneself from seeing someone, and then you will be daring about the operation.
And we have already heard from some of those who are in the Art of Healing, and some said that fire is made in Air by piercing it with a needle and letting water out.
However, in our country, there was no perfect water, and water is not found in any of the ancient books; it may be new.
These are the forms of the medicines by which they work on those who do not know them:
They are made from iron or steel themselves, and these sharp tips form this triangular shape, and the sharp tip is like this in form.
Chapter .XXIV.
Of the cure for meat in the nose.
When in the nose various kinds of meat are embedded that have a cause put together by the movement of the feet or by pollen, and this disease is called polyps because it resembles that of a bee stung. And from him is the cancerous meat, the lung, of black color; and from him is the lion's meat, not of black color.
Then in those lion meats that are not fraudulent or cancerous, cover up the patient' side and place it under the sun, and open the navel of him, and pierce the navel with a needle. Then remove it from the sides, and cut off with a sharp knife that has been taken from one of the parts, within which you know all the meat has been eaten; if there is any possibility that he will lose his life because of some cause, then you should cut him off easily from him. Then if a fever occurs after the cure or so often apply the infusion, then cover him up with water; or if it is from malicious pustules, then put on and cauterize that part within which has been cut off completely and all the cavities have been filled.
Then remove with a sharp knife in the nose near the edge of the vein and water or vinegar. Then if the nose bleeds and you see moisture inside the palate, then know that it is already healed.
Then if the moisture does not penetrate further because it is covered up, then know that within him is no meat in the upper nostrils to which absession has not been achieved.
Then cover up tightly the flesh that has any thickness, and taste it with the tongue, and place between each nut the amount of the said water or juice, and put on the meat and insert an end of the flesh into the nose by the hair or by another cause that is possible.
And then water will be made to taste, and its odor will reach the nostrils through which it penetrates into the channels of the nose, and be thrown over his scalp, because ten children seem to have this cause at school, and it is a good reason for doing so.
Then place the two extremities of the flesh, one that comes out on the nose and the other that is wrapped in the nose, and place the needle in the meat between the nuts, and make it cut off within which you know that the meat has already been eaten by the nuts.
Then remove the flesh, and place in the nose near the edge of the vein a little piece, and make it cut off within three days or more within which it is inflamed all over the meat.
Then at the end of the cause, place in the nose a tube of lead for drainage during the day within which it is healed.
Then if you are familiar with the cure that has been described, use that.
And this is the form of the device for cleaning the nose maker that distilled oils and medicines are distilled in the nose:
Make it of silver or steel, which looks like a small open lantern, so that the meat resembles.
If you want, make a closed tube like this with a cane, and the tube of the cleaning device should be flat, open; which is to hold it by its tail, so that you hold it when you pour oil or water that you want from the sucks and from the causes of disease.
Chapter.XXV.
Of the nose nasals at the ends.
Is there a visible lump in the ends of the nose, and it is large and swollen within a few days when it looks at him.
And so that you cover up that part in the beginning of its appearance, and leave all that part. Then place over the spot or cauterize or apply a burning medicine that is at the spot.
Then if the incision is delayed within which it is swollen, then consider whether it is lapping, hard, of black color and poor feeling; then do not touch that part with iron because it is an ape-like fever for that part over which the great evil has fallen.
Then if the fever is from the lion' touch and it is not of black color, then consider whether incision can be made on all that part, then evacuate the patient and incise that part with great care, and cure the spot with water that has been described and dried within which it is healed.
Chapter.XXVI.
Of the nose surgery and of the lips and the ears when continuity is broken by plague or similar.
You know that when a solution of continuity occurs in one of these joints, it does not confer much on the operation unless in some people.
Then, when that cause occurs in those people, then consider whether it is a fresh plague with the scalp's edge, and then adjust the two lips of the plague to suture, and then cure that part within which it is healed.
And if the lips of the wound have already separated and each is healed, then cover that you do not separate any part of its apparent cord without leaving a scar. And then adjust the two lips with sutures and strengthen them, and over them spray dragon's blood and trimester, and over the powder place a piece of fine plaster or another of the consolidative plasters, and leave it lying for two days or three, then remove it and replace the plaster and leave it lying until the wounds are healed, and then heal it with ointment within that it be healed.
May the manner of the suture is that you add the solution of continuity or with needles as we have described in the suture of the belly, or add the solution of Continuity with plaster as well as to the above, and let it know.
Chapter .XXVII.
Of the extraction of those causes that come in the two lips inside the separations.
Moles that are seen inside the separations of their lips sometimes are hard and resemble warts, and some of them are small and some are large.
And then cover that you turn the lips and close each one of those hard things entirely, and then clean the place with trimester within that the blood be strangled, and then wash it with vinegar and cure the place with water that is astringent, until it is healed.
Chapter .XXVIII.
Of the incision of the flesh adjusted in the gums.
Great of moles that are seen on the gum's meat adjusted that the small ones appeal to white, so then you suspend that one by a string or have it in your foci and cut that one from its root, and leave the blood run or the blood.
And then place over the area trimeter or other dry powders or astringent.
And if that meat returns, then cut it again secondarily, and cauterize it, since the cauterization will not return.
Chapter  .XXXIX .
Due to teeth being sharp.
When, in the surface of teeth in separations inside and between the gums are sharp edges, leeching, and some moles are black and are formed citrines or green within that the gum comes by water corruption, and some teeth are leeching.
And so then that you file it carefully with a sharp tool between your teeth and place the top of it on the tongue, and chisel the teeth where those edges appear like sand within that they do not cause any other cause, and that is caused by the blackness and the citrinity and the others as if they had been whittled out.
So if it is the last one that is in those of the beginning of the root, it is not; and then, you repeat the root on those to the other day and the second and the third one until it comes to the last statement that you want.
And know that teeth have need of different shapes and figures according to how they are prepared for your surgery. And so, since the root with which the tooth is cut from the inside has another shape than the root with which it is cut between teeth according to other shapes, and these root shapes are always prepared as if you will see them soon enough:
Chapter  .XXX.
Of the extraction of teeth: with the general procedure that we have described as to how to extract the root of each tooth in the body, and if the operations are easy, and if any others are necessary, and if they are soft or hard, and if they are straight or curved, and if they are small or large, and if they are from one member to another.
Then that you heal the tooth from its pain immediately and wait for a long time before carrying out the complete extraction of it, since there is no reason to substitute the substance of it when it is extracted, because it is a sublime substance within that it is excusable in the extraction of it.
And the extraction of teeth should be done with a careful procedure and with onza or any other way that is necessary, and it should be maintained by the patient a healthy diet and a lot of liquor, when convenient, for the solution of the patient's pain.
Then you must make sure which is the painful tooth, and that you know it well, then that you scarify in the circuit of the tooth with the spatula in which there is any virtue, within that it is dissolved from the gum completely, and then cut it at the beginning little by little until that concavesquas.
And then, to keep him well-fed and strong, give him plenty of good food or drink, and place the head of the patient between his knees so that he can't move them, and hold the tooth in his hand according to its position so that it doesn't break or cause him more pain.
And if it isn't broken yet, then take one of those instruments and remove it easily from the patient with a gentle effort so that it doesn't break at the beginning.
But if the tooth is broken or worn down, then cover it with a thin strip of cloth and hold it gently at the end with a sharp instrument so that it doesn' t break in the hour of your contraction on it; hold it like this while you work on it.
And then, cut carefully at the edge of all parts of the gums and keep your strength so that you don' t break it or cause a further split in it, and return to the patient because the pain is less than that of the first time.
And be careful that you don' t cause bleeding during the extraction as careless barbers do at the end of their ignorance and audacity about eradicating it; for, with such bleeding, great harm is done to those who suffer from it, all of their roots may be pulled out, or some of them, or the tooth may be extracted with some bones from the jaw thus:
And then, after washing the patient's mouth with water and salt, or a strong vinegar,
And if there is blood coming out of the tooth, like what you see with a bleeding tooth, then cut a little piece of flesh and apply it to the wound, and if that doesn' t stop it, then cauterize it.
The shape of the forceps and tweezers should be long, thin, small-handed, and thick so that they don' t bend when you work with them.
And it should be like this, sometimes with a thick handle so that when you first use them they don' t bend, short ends.
And they should be made of iron from India, with short ends, and some of the ends of those should fit into others and tighten together firmly by their very shape, like a bird's beak, which is sharp, and some of them are the shape of a bird's beak; that is how they should be made.
Chapter .xxxi.
Of the extraction of teeth and the breaking of bones from the mandible that has been broken.
When you need to extract a tooth that has been broken, then return to the site with a poultice for a day or two until it softens; and then apply a poultice or cloth at both ends of what is broken, like the beak of a bird, called ciconia or gauntlet, and make the forceps in the form:
The ends of it should be made smooth with lime or alfaga.
And if you don' t obey the instructions with these forceps or tweezers, then return to the root and cut away all the flesh and apply the instrument which has this name, that is a small plectrum, whose shape is as follows:
It should have a thick end, short and not sharp so that it isn' t broken.
So it is good if the root is broken by water, and otherwise, help yourself with these other instruments which are of this shape: the first instrument should be triangular in shape at its ends, and some thickness should be present:
The shape of the second instrument should be like this: triangular, but with a thinner end.
And then you are helped by these instruments, having two ramps whose shape is as follows: the ramp of the forceps should be longer than the other one. And with other instruments which will help to shave the teeth; for this instrument is useful in making an incision in one place, and that is its shape:
of a triangular end that is bent or short, and some thickness should be present, and it shouldn' t be broken.
And you should know that the dental instruments are similar to those used for other purposes.
But the skilled and subtle artisans in this art, working on themselves as well as others according to their needs, will find that they have the same instruments that they use for other purposes; for it is because of these various ailments that small instruments were not invented or used by them, because of the various shapes.
If the bone of the mandible or any other bone in the mouth is broken, then clean it well at the site with water that is convenient to you with the instruments and forceps we have mentioned in the extraction of tooth roots; help yourself with gestures whose shape is as follows:
It should be of some small thickness to small thickness, and it should be tied or wrapped around the mouth so that it doesn' t slip or move until all the bone is broken; then restore the site with appropriate medicine according to water.
But if there is a small hole in the bone, then cut out that part of the bone and its blackness, and clean it well inside so that it heals.
Chapter.xxxii.
Of the treatment of prominent teeth next to others.
When the teeth are prominent next to their natural courses, and especially when they are in female mouths, and especially in old women; so return that tooth to its place: but if it isn' t joined to any other tooth, then cut it out with this instrument whose shape is as follows: it is similar to a pig' s ear, and made of iron from India with an acute end.
And that is your incision through which you cut the tooth in two days because of the hardness of the tooth, and not to injure any other teeth.
And if the prominent tooth is difficult to cut with a file, then sharpen it with a file of iron from India, whose shape is as follows:
It should be all of iron from India and the edge sharp; and it should have a few points like needles made with it, by which the tooth is gradually cut in two days with ease, so that no other teeth are injured or cut. Then smooth out that edge, and cut it with a very sharp razor.
And if it is a tooth the edge of which is broken and the language of that part is stuck or caught, then return to the site where the sharpness of that fragment is held back and smoothed out so that the tongue doesn' t get caught or the word isn' t corrupted.
Chapter.xxxiii.
Of restoring broken teeth with gold or silver fillings.
When the teeth are injured by impact or from a fall, and don' t break easily when you try to remove them with medicine, then return to those that can be fixed with gold fillings, not silver; for silver changes color quickly and can't be used for those that need to be fixed with gold fillings, unless you want them to rust after some days, but gold never changes.
It should be of such thinness and thickness according to how much it can fit between teeth; and the shape of the filling is that you take twice as much gold between two sound teeth, and then cut it into two pieces of similar shapes, or if one is larger than the other, or one or both are uneven, so that when they are placed between the teeth they form a complete filling. And then go back to the beginning of the incision you started with, and tighten your hand with ease and wisdom so that it is not too tight.
And make your stitch with which you tighten the thread of the teeth that do not unravel.
Then cut off the excess of the thread with pincers or tweezers and add it to somewhere, and hide it between the healthy tooth and the damaged one, so that it does not cause injury to the tongue. Then let this stitch stay tight with a thread.
If it comes loose or ruptures, tighten that one or those with another thread throughout the whole time.
This is how the teeth are arranged and the figure of the correction of two healthy teeth and two damaged ones, linked like this:
And when one tooth or two come back to their original position, and are renewed like this with a hole, and remain in place.
And it is not until the good artisan and wise master does this.
And some are appropriate for a cause of the bones of the cow, and they are done like this with the form of a tooth, and placed in the place where the tooth fails, and tightened like that when I have said it, and remain and are served by that for a long time.
Chapter.xxxiv.
Of the incision of the thread that runs through the tongue, and prohibits licking.
This thread which is left of the tongue sometimes or is natural to that man, or happens by accident and happens because of a plague that has already set in.
And the operation on it is that you work on the patient's mouth, and raise his tongue, and then cut off that nervous thread according to its width so that the tongue does not tear.
If there is any hardness or inflammation in that part, and it has stood for the consolidation of the plague, then you cut off one thread and cut off that part according to its width so that you do not cut off the thread and the inflammation is removed.
And keep it so that there is no crack in the bone of the meat, and you cut off here as a bar and bring forth the flow of blood.
And then wash the wound of the incision with clean water or with vinegar, or with fresh water by rubbing it; and then return the tongue to its place in all cases so that it is not consolidated again.
If there is a flow of blood, place a piece of vinegar on the wound; if the blood flows because it is hot, then cauterize that place with caustic iron that is mixed with water. Then treat that one with the other causes so that it is healed.
Chapter.xxxv.
Of the extraction of a runa from the tongue.
Sometimes it happens that the tongue is swollen like a small hernia, prohibiting the tongue from its normal operation; and strong is increased so that it fills the mouth.
And the operation on it is that you make a small incision in front of the sun, and consider the swelling.
And if you turn your attention to a color or black, hard one, at which the patient does not respond, then do not touch that part where it is harsh.
And if it is inclined to whiteness, indicating moisture, then you put ointment on it, and cut off that part with a fine knife, and cut off the whole incision; and if blood flows in the hour of your operation, then you pause, dressed with three pieces of vinegar, so is vinegar, within that it is stopped.
Then continue with your work so that you have not betrayed it with generosity, within that it is washed with clean water and salt; and treat this one with the other cure with water so that it is healed.
Chapter.xxxvi.
Of the extraction of two ears and that one which is nothing in the belly, and of the other swelling.
When the swelling has gone away in the belly, then it is a gland that has been gathered there, which happens sometimes before, and are two ears, which, when you treat them with water as I have said in the division, and if they do not heal, then consider whether the swelling is hard, of white color, of little feeling, then do not touch that part with iron.
And if it is a red swelling and the hair is thick, then do not touch that part with iron because of the flow of blood; but leave it there so that it may mature, and then take it out, or cut it off by itself.
And if it is a white swelling, and the root is subtle, then that part is to be cut off.
And the operation on it is that you consider it before your operation, if it has already stopped the swelling of its part, or has decreased by a little amount; and then put the patient in front of the sun, and place his head in the middle of the table, and open his mouth, and serve themselves between their hands from the language of the patient with a sharp instrument which has this form:
It is made of silver or brass, and is subtle with the knife.
So you press it with that thread on the tongue and show it to yourself the swelling, and put oil on it, and hold it in place with a pin, and pull it out at the ends as much as you can. And another water that has no cause of the garments, and then cut off that one with the instrument which has this form:
And another water that has no cause of the garments, and then cut off that one with the instrument which has this form: And it is put together with tweezers, but the ends of them are sharp, so that the opening of each one is in the edge of the other, very pointed, which is made of iron tempered and tempered.
If this instrument is not with you, then cut off that one with a knife, which has this form: It is sharp on one side and not sharp on the other.
And then, after having cut one edge, cut the other according to this method of incision, and then the incision of the patient is washed with fresh water by rubbing it.
If there is a flow of blood, wash the water with a decoction of sloe or of mirabella and apply it to that part which has caused the blood, within that the blood flow is stopped, and then treat that one within that it is healed.
Sometimes two ears are found in the belly, and those are cut off according to what I have said in the incision of two edges together.
And I have already treated a woman with an swelling that was born in her belly, which swelling tended to white color, of little feeling, which had already closed the belly of the woman, and she breathed straight, and she had forbidden her food and drink, and she was near death if she did not drink some water in two or three days.
And the swelling has already grown so much that it has pushed out two breasts, and they have come out through two openings.
Then I have already had a fit of laughter and I fell down with one of my hands, and I threw that one, and there was a great deal of it, and then I cut off that hand with the other one, and then I put my hand into his mouth, and I pressed his tongue, and then I put my hand on his tongue, and I closed his mouth.
Then I cut off a great part of it, and there was little blood from it. So absolutely the cause of that woman's fever, and soon it began to drink water, and approached food, so I did not stop slicing off those spots of meat for a long time, and they were replaced with spots of that one, which was sliced until it was extended.
So you cut off and cauterized that woman's fever, and then added something else; and I walked around and didn't know what to do with that man who was next to her.
Chapter .xxxvii.
On incision of the hyle when it is apopleptic.
When the hyle is apopleptic and long, then it is called transverse; and if it is thick and round at its border, then it is called a bub.
But when it is cured with water which we have said in the division, and do not confide your cure, and sometimes that apoplex is already stayed there and is thin, then you should know that you cut off those that are agreguadas round; and if it is long, and is blood, of dark or black color, and does not go down to him a hundred times, then you should know that you cut off his hyle, for there is fear about the patient'
And when you see that second way which I have said of its whiteness and length, that you make a point of the hyle and press the tongue of him with an instrument with which it processes its form and keeps the onions in the new one, and pulls those down and cuts them off with one of two instruments which are called incisers.
And if you do not cut off that part except with water which is adjusted over the natural term of its addition, for if you cut off him more, you will tear his speech apart.
And then make the incision, use with water which we have described in the incision of two members, and heal that part within so it is healed.
But if the hyle is terrified by his incision, then use with water in cauterizing him is only to stop the flow of blood, and the way of cauterization on him is only with sharp water, and it is because you pause the top of the hyle on his leg, and then press the tongue of him with an instrument which we have said, and then take from the water which we have described in the chapter of cauterization, and make it come alive, and do not allow that part to be thick or small, and then fill its cavity with the instrument whose shape is mentioned:
The extramiteit of him should be filled in its cavity in which medicine is placed with the cavity of a spoon, and put the instrument on the uvula, and the disease grumbles over his throat so that saliva or mucus comes out from his mouth by the intrinsic medicine, so that it does not go down from that for any reason about his throat, and it will stop him.
And then hold your hand over the medicine, and press that on the uvula for a space of half an hour within which it goes dark and is numb by the biting of the medicine.
And if you want, take hold of it and wrap that over the extremities of the hyle, and dip the crotch in the medicine, and put the hyle into a tube so that the crotch adheres to that tube, and make it come out as many times as you get out what you want from the cauterization of the uvula, and let that be because it will dry up and fall after three or four days.
And if you want to repeat the medicine, repeat that, and then the cauterization is washed in the circuit of the uvula with crotch wrapped up in border, and it is made clean by him with water which rubs, and it is washed inside with embalmings within which it is healed.
This type of cure is more secure than incision and less feared.
Some are cured by the uvula with water which is more subtle than cauterization and incision, for it is healed by sub-fumigatio in this way: take steam, hyssop, oregano, rugosa, sicative arabic, chamomile, bread and similar to those of the herbs, and adjust all of these causes, or some of them, in a pan, and dip them in vinegar, and boil; and the pan is well-luted with water in an appropriate way, and a hook of silver or iron is put over the trauch; it is made from silver or iron.
And the extremities are inserted into the mouth of the patient within which the steam goes to the uvula over the quantity, within which the uvula is dark.
And then repeat over that spots which are dark, and keep in mind that you do not make this cure at the coming of apoplexies, for it would adjust too much in the apoplexy, and do not make water, but rather the declaration of the apoplexy of him caut.
But if you do not have this instrument with you, then take a cane and form on the extremities of him a hook of leather, so that the mouth of the patient is closed, for the hook of the skin prohibits the steam to burn the mouth.
This cure is good for health.
Chapter .xxviii.
Of extraction of thorns and of water which adheres to the throat and of other causes.
Spots on the throat or thorn of pay or any other cause.
And then you take water which appears from that, and the eye sees it, for you press the tongue with an instrument in front of the sun, so that to you is declared water that is in the throat.
And water which does not appear to you in the throat, then make the patient vomit before that food is digested in the stomach, for it brings the cause of the throat by vomiting; or that he swallows a fish of nap or of lettuce or a piece of bread dry; or take one of a sponge of sea-dry lion, and bite that strongly with teeth, and then make the patient swallow it, for if you extract it to the place in which thorns are extracted, then you vomit. And then take a snake and bite it with teeth, and let it be inside the table and extracted; or take a weasel and bite it with teeth, and let it be outside the table and extracted.
But if you do not throw those causes which we have said, then use of an iron instrument according to this way:
And it is thicker than a little one, and in the extremities of him is hollow which you put in its throat with ease.
And make the patient raise his head up, and keep in mind that you do not touch the bone of the throat, for it will go to him with pain on what he puts his nose or spine or because he makes a noise with it, or because it is made by him with his hand.
But I say that the patient's position is better, as it can determine the location of the cause and prevent it from getting worse by turning it inwards and pulling at its hand with the instrument held in your hand, all this according to the quantity prepared for him until it is ready to be used.
Chapter .XXXIX.
On the extraction of blood from an ankle joint attached to the knee.
When blood is extracted from an ankle joint attached to the knee, consider first the patient's right leg, because you have confused the language of the instrument I told you about.
Then if you want to extract blood, do so with a small and gentle motion carefully.
And if it is not possible for you to extract it in that way, then take a hollow tube and insert it into the knee joint, and put an igniting iron into it, burning it as many times as necessary (until the blood comes out of the knee joint) and keeping the patient away from water all day.
Then take a full bottle of water and insert the mouth into it, and wash the mouth with it; and do not drink anything from it for an hour or two afterwards, because the blood will come out after feeling the water.
But if it is not ready to be used with the water I told you about, then smoke the patient with frankincense or assa-fetida using the instrument I told you about in the process of smoking the throat.
Make water, and do it quickly.
This is another way of operating with smoke, that you take a jar filled with burning charcoal and covered with a cloth, and place the end of the instrument in it; then remove the smoke-making device; and put the patient's mouth at the end of the tube, and close their mouth so that the smoke does not escape until you know that the smoke is reaching the blood, because the blood will come out quickly.
And if it doesn't work, then repeat the smoke process more times, and keep the patient away from water, eat salty foods and drinks, and don't drink water, and so on, as necessary, that is, when following this regime, it does not work.
This is the shape of the instrument used to extract blood from a knee joint when seen; and it is similar to scissors times three, except that it has no curves: then place it on the knee joint, and the end of it is similar to a sycamore bird's beak, which is sharp, so that when you press any part of it, it doesn't let go.
Chapter.XL.
In which is the sum of the speech in the preparation of emetics and in section of them.
The emetics are made from different ways, according to the memory of the person who prepares them, and each one in this book.
And they are so various in piercing and sectioning them by two ways, one is for the specific emetics in themselves; and by the other, which is to press them with humidity.
And the second way is according to the locations in which they occur in the body, because the emetic that occurs in the head is different from the one that occurs in the buttocks; and the emetic that occurs in the flesh is different from the one that occurs in a joint; and each one is a game for operation.
And some emetics are those which are not pierced but rather are the result of a slow development of the disease in them, or their completion.
And other emetics are those which are not pierced but rather are the result of a slow development of the disease in them, or their completion; so that, when they occur near a joint, they cause a spasm in that joint, because the essence of it is prolonged until it reaches a circuit, and it strengthens the ligaments or nerves of that joint, causing a contraction of that limb; or it occurs near a main member, and if you delay its piercing, it will not be mature for the main member; or it occurs near the buttocks, so pierce it which does not mature, so that it cannot reach the end of it, and it is elongated towards the openings at the back of the buttocks, causing a fistula, or that it appears on the skin without healing. But you should know the time to pierce the emetic, and then it is when it is mature.
And you should know that it is mature when the pain is reduced, when the fever has ended, and when the pulse slows down and the head of the emetic becomes sharp, and the other symptoms.
And since you know the time to pierce it, cut it in the place that is further from the emetic and further away from the cure of the eminence.
And the piercing should be done at a time when the meat or the body is long, if the emetics occur in the openings of the limbs, and in the places of the ligaments, of the nerves, of the joints; and, lastly, everywhere where it is engulled, for in those that are reflected, use the piercing according to the member.
But when the emetic is in a fleshy place, then wait until it has been digested completely according to its completion, as I have said; for if you pierce it before it is fully digested, it will prolong the member of the body with a sharp pain and a strong ardor, and it will be difficult to close the lips of it.
And some emetics should be pierced according to the location of the flesh or the body, considering necessity, or according to which member is digested.
And if you administer a small piercing, and in the large emetics a large piercing and cut them according to the diversity of their size.
And others are emetic that should be pierced where the cord is cut and it is torn, when it happens so that it has already been torn, like those that occur in the eyes or in the ears.
And those that are not cut in section have three sides; and of those that are cut with a figure of an oak leaf, and of the emetics of the joints.
And they are those in which round section is administered, and similar to them.
But that which does not have a head should be pierced with a superficial piercing, so that you pierce it with a superficial piercing or flat one only.
And when the emetic is large and has collected some matter, then pierce it and do not cover it so that you extract all of it at once; cut a part of it off, and the next day cut off another part, and cut off water with it according to the quantity prepared for him until it is ready to be used.
And more specifically if the patient is of a virile nature, or a female, or a small child, or an old man in decrepitude; because the animal spirit moves quickly to leave the disease, and it strongly hurts the patient, and you open them up.
Keep this chapter carefully and consider carefully how you administer the water to the patient; if the plague of the emetic is small, or it is a flat section, then you administer water through one hole, and if the emetic is large, and the holes made by piercing are numerous, then wait for the two to come together.
E si in the apoplexy is cut away a part of the cord or has concaved that in the circuit, then cover that you compress it with a cotton wool or a thread made of cloth of li, thus as when you have baked loaves or razes, your humidity; and strengthen this within the third day; and proceed with that and cure them that cover them within that it is healed.
Or if there is a flow of blood at the time of your operation, then you administer cold water and vinegar and wrap a cloth of li around them, and place that over the area of the flow of the blood with visible drops.
Or if the flow of blood persists, then cover that you administer the remedy and powders which I have recommended in many places of this our book and division.
Or if it is in winter time, and the place of the apoplexy is a place of many nerves, then cover that you put powders in wine and oil cautery, and place those over the areas.
Or if it is in summer, and the areas are carnose, then cover that you place powders immersed in water and oil or wine and oil, and all of this is frayed within that it is the third day, thus as I have said, and then, when you have removed the apoplexy and washed that, and administer to them the remedy that convenes to them within that it is healed.
And so is the water that is necessary of the knowledge of the cure of apoplexies universally, more according to the way of distinction I have said of every apoplexy in what way it is a way of the cure of them by chapters separately.
Chapter xli.
Of section of apoplexies that come in the cord of the head.
In the small cord of the head there are apoplexies, and those of the species of nodes that contain tunics that are to their fact; and the species of them are drops.
And those are little drops, and those are that contain humidity resembling lemon. And those are that contain humidity resembling milk, and resembling to them; and those are that are lapidary, hard.
And in the section of all, and in the extraction of those without fear, you should make the extension of those without causing pain to the fire.
And the operation in section of them is that you spray them with an instrument the form which you place appropriately now, which is called entremes, within that you know that it contains.
If the water that it contains is humidity, then you divide that with a section according to its length by a section superficial according to this form:
And you begin in the section of the line of B within the line of G. Since the humidity is eliminated, then you scrape that by what it contains that humidity, and do not leave of that any cause of all, for ten visible returns, if it remains of that any cause.
And you submerge that cotton in egg yolk, if it is present, and if not, in water and salt; and you fill that with blood and leave that within another day, since with water you can cut all that is covered by that film.
And you repeat that cotton in egg yolk secondarily and thirdly if it does not please you with it, within that you are confident that there was no cause of that film; then cure the blood with egg yolk within that it is healed.
Or if apoplexy contains fatty nodules, then you incise that according to this form: as a shape of croze, and you get that between two lips of the section and you scrape that completely, and you exercise your virtue in the extraction of the tunic that it contains.
Or if your fire makes pain to you, then do not cut that.
And you make semblant cutting in the apoplexy lapidary of the section and of the cure according to what I have said to you; and a section over apoplexy lapidary is lighter, since it is little blood and little humidity.
And some times those apoplexies are of the same sex as those that are in the head of an old woman and turn back that apoplexy now with deafness, sharp, white, which cannot be cut, and if it is hit by another, it will trouble that.
Or in other apoplexies that have happened to the heads of children and those that come out of the ears are razes of the auricles, then the section of all these is a section superficial.
And you put off the perforation of those from the base that it is healed, within that it is relieved the wound with the base to the wounds with the bases.
And then cure them with water that convenes to them in the cure of them.
Chapter xii.
Of section of scrofulas that happen in the neck.
These apoplexies appear in the collar and in the shoulders and in the arms, and some appear in other parts of the body.
And those that happen in the neck, and those are generated among themselves, and all scrofula of them has its own tunic, and as in the nodules and apoplexies of the head, we have described it.
The species of these scrofula are drops, since some of them are lapidary, and those that contain humidity, and the evil ones that do not submit to the cure.
Then in that you have good will in the Treatment, of which the color of the water that is manifested is proper to the color of the cord, and it is pleasing to all, and it does not annex itself to the nerves of the neck, or to the veins, or to the fire, and it is not thick, then you incise that with a section superficial from the base that is in contact with the base to the base, and you scrape that completely, and you extend two lipas of the cord with oncis, or with sharp razors if you need them, as we have said in the apoplexies of the head, and you extract that little by little.
And it is more careful not to be incised a vein or nerve.
And it is more careful not to be cut a vein or nerve. And if you cut the blood that does not affect your hand during the operation, or if it bothers the patient, and you leave that blood, then stop the pain of the apoplexy, and softens that blood, and begins to rot. When the blood is cut off.
Then returns to your operation within that you complete it.
And then you ask with the good advice if there is a cause of other little scrofula, then incise those and clean those.
Or if it is in the raze of the great vein of scrofula, then you do not cut that scrofula of its raze. Then stop that blood from flowing by doubling it firmly and leaving that within that it falls on itself without hurting anyone.
And then fill the cup with cotton that you have already submerged in egg yolk, and then cure that blood.
Or if you cut that scrofula completely, then cover the two lips of the cup and pour it out until there is none left.
If it appears that there is too much fat on the patients neck and his skin hangs loosely over it, then you should know how to cut off the excess skin and then administer stitches and oil as described.
And that of the scrofula which contains moisture, pierce it at a shallow depth here where you see the pus come out of the patients body, and make another piercing from that pus to the skin as described above.
Then administer the piercings, as well as ointment and poultice, so that it corroded what is rotten. And when you see the plague has been cleansed, then heal it with ointment of fresh flesh so that it is healed.
Chapter LII.
On the section about removing the pilot of the abscess accidentally with a hole.
They said that this treatment for the pilonidal abscess was common, and there was no one in our land who had ever done it.
And this is the inscription of the sermon of those.
If the patient has a tendency to have an abscess, then the extraction of the pilonidal abscess should be done carefully with water, because all the veins and most of the flesh of the patient are here.
If the patient has abscesses in the mouth or in the ears, or both, and the plague is not in the teeth, then you should know how to avoid the section of the pilonidal abscess so that loss does not occur due to deep piercing.
Then when you want to pierce it, let us inscribe the pilonidal abscess between three circles of the epilotic ring, or four at a small distance from its width, so that the section is in the cartilage, not in the bone, and this place is suitable for the section, because it is deprived of flesh, and the instruments for cutting are easily available.
And if the patient is thin, then his scrotum should be extended with a thong, and cut into it so that it reaches the channel, but avoid the instruments for cutting if there are any concerns.
And then cut it according to what we have said; and it is shown above the section of the channel by the flame, which is of that eye that comes out with blood, and because of the loss of blood.
Then leave the plague open for a while.
So that at the hour when the piercing is painful, add two lips to the scrotum of the plague, and pierce it through the cartilage.
Then administer medicines that promote the healing of the flesh so that it is healed.
And Albucasius said that the summary of the sermon we have described is an exposure which does not require further explanation: that some of these abscesses had already opened up the scrotum of the patient, and the patient was close to death, and his bowels were cut, and some wanted to pierce the epiglottis so that the patient could breathe through that place for a while in order to save him from death.
And I command that the plague be left open so that the evil of the plague is consumed; and this evil is for three days; and then I command to do thus with the plague, and heal it so that it is healed.
And I have seen this with my own eyes for my benefit: a servant held a knife and cut it into the scrotum of the patient near the canal of the lung, and I was called to his rescue; and when I heard the noise of the dying man, I discovered the plague and stopped the blood that was flowing from it.
Then you confessed that she had not cut a vein or done any damage, and breathed life into the plague, and healed it so that it was healed.
And if the servant had not injured her by piercing her, then some days later I returned to her good health.
Then tell me that in the section of the pilonidal abscess there is no fear.
Chapter XLIV.
On the section of an abscess that happens in the scrotum outside, and it is called a hernia of the scrotum.
This pilonidal abscess, which is called a hernia of the scrotum, is a great abscess according to the color of the body, and it appears in women.
It has two ways: either it is natural or it is accidental.
And in the natural it does not originate from cura.
And the accidental has two ways: one is similar to knotted flesh, and the other is like an abscess that is caused by the knotting of a blood vessel; in the latter there is a danger. And it is not known to cause suspicion because it does not resemble iron in the small one. And you should test it and investigate it with a knife, and if you find it similar to knotted flesh, then extract it with a thread that goes through the skin and the fat; and if not, then examine all his body, and heal the place with oil that cures it, and if necessary, then examine all his body.
Chapter XLV.
On the section of knotted flesh.
There are many kinds of nodules, and I have already described all their types in the division.
And if you doubt between a knot and an exit with a knotted shape.
Then I say that if it is an exit, it is hot and feverish, with violent pain, and complete decay stops the fever, pain, and heat.
Then a knot is not hot or feverish or painful, and it has a round shape that hangs loosely.
And it has two colors according to the body: either it is like knotted flesh and contains moisture, in which the color of the moisture is similar; or it is like a knot, and its beginning is a swelling.
Then when you approach the cure of a knot, test it and examine it with instruments that are called into question; according to which one is similar to this.
And this is the way to investigate abscesses and all kinds of nodules: you take this instrument, and introduce it into the place where there is moisture, which you find in an abscess; and then turn the threads small by small until you know that the instrument has penetrated the scrotum.
Then finish your treatment according to the measure of the size of the abscess, and then remove the instrument that has been introduced; and consider whether there is any trace of it.
And if the moisture is lost, of whatever color it is, then you administer a superficial section according to what I have said about other abscesses.
And if there is no trace of the instrument that has been introduced, then you know it is dry.
And dry over it with a section that does not have a shape of knotted flesh according to this form: Then follow the advice that has been given, and suspend it with a hook; and cut off all parts easily, and keep the thread or string, if you can, over the knot; and remove the thread from it with ease.
If it breaks during the operation, then it is impossible to remove that thread; and many similar things can be seen in it, and then you extract them with ease within it; and if there are any broken parts, then you extract them, all of them, within it, so that they do not break anything else.
If for some reason there is too much or too little blood, return it according to its nature.
And if you wish to cut off a small piece of the limb, then make a cut with sharp sharp-edged powder and apply it, and place over that area a poultice made from some corrosive sharp powder and heal that one with another treatment until it is healed.
And if the swelling is great, then cut open both sides of the limb and heal it with something that dissolves.
Or if the pulse is weak or not present, then bind it and apply heat to the area that hurts for three days or more until the wound heals and returns to its normal pulse; and then cut off what is rotten from the swelling.
Chapter .xlvi.
On the instruments necessary in section and perforation.
Of the three types of instruments, some are large, some are medium, and some are small.
The large instrument is called:
The small instrument is called:
If the iron, lead, or other sharp instruments are used, they must be sharpened properly so that they can enter the poultice.
These are the three forms of treatment, and they are called: 1. Astringent (albered) 2. Irritant (berid) 3. Calming (non-specific)
Of the three types of instruments, some are large, some are medium, and some are small.
The large treatment is called:
The medium treatment is called:
The small treatment is called:
It should be noted that the poultices, incisions, fistulas, and boils are for different purposes; they apply to bones and other causes.
And they are made round, long, square, etc. With large needles, sewed with silk, and made with citrus juice, or iron, or silver, and with many other types of thread.
And the treatments with black plums, which it is said that through them the fistulas in the cavities where they are reflected are opened; that those reflections are brought to light.
Of the three types of instruments, some are long, some are medium, and some are short, according to the size of the fistula and its tightness.
The large treatment with lead is called:
The medium treatment with lead is called:
The small treatment with lead is called:
The shapes of the needles are of different types, some being simple, with only one curve, and there are three types of shapes: large, small, and medium.
And they are needle-like, and there are three types of them.
And they are needles with two curves, and there are three types of them.
And they are needles with three curves, and there are also three types of them.
All of these are necessary in their place.
The small simple needle shape is called:
The large needle shape with only one curve is called: The medium needle shape with only one curve is called: The small needle shape with only one curve is called:
The large needle shape with three curves is called:
The medium needle shape with three curves is called:
These are the shapes of the scalpel that cut and scrape the nodules and poultices; they are of three types, since some are large, others medium, and some small.
The large scalpel shape is called:
The medium scalpel shape is called:
The small scalpel shape is called:
The extremities of the instruments that are used for section are sharp, and the other extremities are not-sharp; they are not stopped in such a way, but are cut quickly in order to extract the nodule or pustule; they are also used for cauterizing blood vessels or nerves. After this procedure is performed, it heals with ease, providing relief from bleeding or pain, and also helps to relieve the fever caused by the inflammation of the nodule or pustule.
These are the forms of the poultices, and they are of three types: large, medium, and small; also, with or without vinegar.
If it is made with iron or silver, and seems to radiate heat; if made with lead or copper, and feels cold.
And it is in the middle part, not punctured, and hidden within it; and it spreads out from inside to the outside, as you wish.
These are the forms of the plasters, which are applied between the fingers and the joints to heal the pustules; they are not sharp; they are of three types, large, medium, and small. And these are the shapes of those:
The forms of veils that separate the limbs are made with three types of thread: large, medium, and small.
If it is made with citrus juice, round in shape, and subtle; if it is made with lead, it is hard and sharp; if with iron or silver, it is strong and durable.
And these are the types of veil that separate the limbs, and they are made with different threads to prevent the flow of blood; and when it is first used, it does not have any medicinal value.
However, it does not use them to stop the flow of blood throughout the entire body, but only in certain areas; for example, at the joints of the arms and legs, at the sides of the neck, and on the skin. It is applied to the skin with moisture from humors.
Some veils are made with other small instruments that look like scars; because of this shape, the blood is stopped when it is cut by a bleeding vessel or artery.
Some veils are made round according to this form:
Chapter .xlvii.
Treating the breasts of men that are made of women.
Some veils are inflated with air; when the breast of a man is covered with cloth, they are deflated; then the breasts of women are assembled, and the nipples are inflated with air.
And if you wish to cut off a limb with a lunar section according to this form, from the line B to the line G; then extract all the badness, and apply the plaster of medicine; also, sew up both sides of the wound with a suture, and heal it within.
If the breast falls apart and is soft because of its size; then it is cut into two halves; each half is shaped like a lunar section, with one half containing the other within itself, as if the major line contains the minor line according to this form of the line B and the line G. And when the nipple is removed, which is between the two halves of the breast, then it is cut into two pieces; and the flesh is extracted with a suture, and applied to the wound with powder that eases the pain; and returned it to its normal state, as needed, within the sutures, and heal it.
And if you do not please the incision of this water that covers to incision by the uneasiness of the patient, and for flow of blood, then cover that you fill the cup with submerged in corrosive enguent and leave that it enters which corrupts that is bones of the grayssa, and approach cure that which is saned.
Chapter .xlviii.
On the piercing of blisters that come out from under the skin.
These blisters that come out from under the skin are of the species of scrofula, sores, which have a puss that is drained.
And of those some that contain moisture; and those that contain moisture cover that they are cut with lunar section according to this figure: from the line of G to the line of B. And when it is totally drained this water that is in the blister of the patient, then you close it with cotton wool and leave the entry open for another day.
And the cotton wool remain and are saned by means of a suitable enguent to water, entry that is saned.
And if the blister of the nodes is, and of the scrofula, then you cut it over that same way that I have said in section on the scrofula equally.
Perhaps if the plague is extended on a foot that hurts, then administer to it by means of the cautery according as I have said before.
Chapter.xlix.
On the piercing of blisters that come out by way of an artery or a vein.
When an artery is broken and the cord is consolidated that is over that, then see-like blisters appear: for by means of which the inflammation and blister come out by way of the artery or vein: since when the blister is pierced to the bowels with a needle, you hear it make a noise.
And that which is by vein is round on the surface of the body.
And the section of this blister is a mistake, and mainly in that which comes out from under the skin, and in the armpits, and on the back; and it is great, then cover that its cure by means of iron be avoided, and that which is in the extremities, or at the top, is avoided.
Perhaps on that which is by inflammation of the orifice of the artery, then cut in the cord in the middle; and approach the section to a needle and approach the artery, and free it from the tunics as much as you can.
And approach a needle on that and let it enter the other way, and stretch the artery by means of a double knot in two places; -- which causes you to have a good hand in cutting out two arteries which are in the temple.
And approach pierce the knot that is between two threads to the point within that it causes all the blood to come out while it is in your hand, and dissolve the blister.
And administer cure by means of which is generated fire within that falls the threads; and approach cure that by means of a suitable enguent to water be saned within that it is saned.
And if it is a blister by section of a vein, then cover that you hold with your hand where the blister is in the cord, and approach pierce the knot from which you have held your hand, and let the needle enter; and be in that double thread within that you extract that from the other way, and approach bind the blister to one thread as much as it can.
Perhaps if you are afraid to cut the thread, then approach pierce the thread with a needle from under all the blister, and tighten the threads in four places.
And approach dry the blister in its own place within that when it is wet there is water within that, then you cut off the surplus of the cord, and leave that which is wet.
And approach place over it the palm of your hand that you have submerged in oil or vinegar, and approach administer cure by means of water and enguent to be saned within.
Chapter 1 of the blister that is caused by twisting of the nerves.
As when it happens that a blister is caused by an artery or a vein, and as if it were caused by the percussion of anything or by unnecessary work, and as if it were caused by the tension of nerves.
And it is the same in all places where joints are swollen or in all places where they are sore.
And it is a heavy blister, and it corresponds to the color of the other part of the body, and it is in the major places of the skin that it has been stretched out by violence, you feel in it as if it were stunned.
And it is not a blister that is added to the bowels of the body, and therefore it remains by itself, and is swollen from ahead as well as from behind.
So then that which is at the joints does not seem to be inflamed by means of iron, because it would probably become stronger in opposition.
And that which is in the head or in the forehead remains by itself with a knot. Perhaps if it is a small blister, then you will cut it with a sharp knife and drain it from the root.
And if it is large, then you will suspend it by means of a thread, and drain it off, and approach stop it up; and bind the blister with sutures, and cure that which is saned.
Chapter.Li.
On the piercing of a blister that is caused by chewing which is caused by eating.
In the end of the meal, there are some people who have a blisters on their bellies and on other parts of the body by eating food which is similar to mushrooms, of which the root is fine and the top is large; and those whose lips are swollen, and those who are small, and those who are very much so.
And I have seen one, and in its belly there were two things that looked like mushrooms, and there was no difference between them, for their roots were small.
And the lips of those people were swollen, and they dribbled, and moisture flowed from them all the time.
So you cut off those things and weighed them against a weight that weighs eighteen pence. and the other one was sixpence.
And the operation in cutting them is that you consider afterwards whether they are wet or not, and if their color is white, wet, and of small roots; then cut them with a needle, and let them be in your presence, for it is said that the blisters are expelled by means of blood; and if you want to drink blood, cauterize that one.
And if the patient is a little bit afraid or scared, do not administer cure by means of iron; but then approach take some fresh metal from a fire, and tighten that which is white, the way that it has been said; and leave that for two days.
And then approach tighten that which is made of small metal; so, do not tighten that much as it would be broken, and let it fall by itself by means of its own work.
Perhaps if that which is made of large roots, then there is no cause for fear and anxiety in cutting it, but more so in that which is in the belly.
Perhaps you will cut off a part of it, and then cauterize it so that it does not return.
And approach cure that which is saned the wound.
And be careful not to cut the ileum which is of brown color, of scarce feeling, and little regard, for that is where cancer begins.
And I came to remember crucifixes nearby.
Chapter II.
On the cure of umbilical hernias.
Umbilical eminence may be caused by several factors: either by fissures of the navel that project into the abdomen, and the intestine or hernia exits through them; or by a mass flowing from a vein or artery depending on whether it emerges in front or behind; or by constriction of the ventosis.
Perhaps if it is due to a fissure of the navel and the projection of the intestine, then the color of the swelling is similar to that of the body; and if there is pain in it, and its appearance is different. If it is due to the exit of the intestine, then the situation of that is if we have described it, of very different nature, and when you press that with the fingers it disappears, and there is a strong sensation in it; and it is enhanced by a hot bath and hard work.
Perhaps if it is due to moisture, then it is obvious and does not disappear when pressed with the hand, nor is it constricted or crushed.
And if it is due to the passage of air, then these signs appear on the swelling: it darkens and declines.
Perhaps if it is due to meat, then it is a heavy, dense, and hard swelling, and its size depends on the quantity.
Perhaps if it is due to air, then touch is painful.
And the operation in it is that you consider: if the eminence of the navel is due to air passage, or to vein, or to ventosis; then you must prohibit the cure of it, because there is danger and fear in it, as I have taught in the chapter where I speak of swellings caused by veins and arteries.
And if the navel eminence is due to the intestine or hernia, then you order the patient to lie down on their back, and maintain the swelling in the center of the navel with your hand; and then you stretch it as much as possible towards the sides with your fingers, and hold it firmly. And then you cut off a large part of the swelling at its roots with a sharp knife; and then you tie it up tightly with a ligature, and make sure that it is well tied.
And then you cut off the middle part of the swelling with your fingers extended above the navel and insert your finger into that opening; and if you do not find any resistance by the intestine, you pull it out with force and push the hernia down towards the belly button.
And if you have reached the intestine, then take one; and cut off any excess.
Perhaps if it is opposite to your vein or artery, then you return to your work; and you take two needles and insert them into those two threads that you have made around the swelling in a crisscross pattern, which are to pierce; and then you tighten the swelling in four places with the needles.
And if you want to do so, then remove the needles and allow the location to remain as it is, and may heal on its own; or cut it off where it has thinned out, and then cure that with water that has been heated.
And if the navel eminence is due to meat or moisture, then you must cut off the swelling in such a way as I have described; and then cure that with water that has been heated, and consolidate the location.
Chapter LIII.
On the cure of cancer.
We have said, in the division, of the nature of cancer and how to treat it with medicines, and that a squiller is effective in treating it so that it does not ulcerate; and we have said that cancer is born in the mother, and with great caution in the treatment of it.
And they said that some small cancers are in the breasts or in the groin, and resemble those of the limbs, and especially when they are starting; and most importantly when they are still small.
Perhaps if it is old and large, you do not approach it, because I cannot cure it on my own, nor have I seen anything like it, nor has it been brought to me in water.
And the operation in it is as I have said: you proceed and leave the patient, and if you have found a small cancer, then you cut off its root; and if it is a large one, then you make an incision and drain out the pus, and then you cure it.
And then you prepare the patient for the operation, and if it is a small one, you make an incision with a sharp knife where it is located; and then you cut out all of it, and then you wash thoroughly with water from every part so that you do not miss any of its roots. And you let the blood flow, and do not wash it away, and press the swellings, and clean up the large blood with your hand or with an instrument that is at your disposal.
Perhaps if you have a contradiction with the flow of large blood from a vein or artery, then you cauterize that part so that the flow ceases, and then you cure it with another treatment while it remains healthy.
Chapter LIV.
On the cure of dropsy.
We have already mentioned, in the division, of the nature of water dropsy and the signs of each species, and how to treat it with medicines.
That which is cured by iron is only the species of algorism alone; it is not approached to the species of timphorism or to the species of hyposarcasm, because water is deadly.
And when you have already treated this species of timphorism with medicines and do not give your medicine to the patient, then be careful, for if it is a small dropy or large, as if it is a cough or stomach ache similar to that, then you must not treat it with iron, because there is danger in it.
Perhaps if you discover the patient's great virtue, and that is only a species of dropsy, and no child or old person, then the way to operate on it is that you raise the patient between your hands, and the servant applies pressure to the navel with his hand, letting the water flow from one side to the other, and then you take a sharp knife:
It should be of two sharp ends, one at each end as long as it is, and then little by little, so that in the operation with it you do not pass into the bowel, and that you wash it well.
And you must consider whether the generation of dropsy is from the intestines, because it is usual for the navel to project by three fingers from one side to the other, on the right side above the navel.
Perhaps if the generation of dropsy is from the fetus, then your incision should be on the left side of the navel by three fingers.
And if the generation is due to its own self, then your incision should be on the right side.
And that your section be not above the rib whereon you wish to operate on the patient so that superfluities do not run to that place of joy.
Then pierce the whole rope, and insert it into that section, and raise your hand to the spatulum between the rope and the syphac, and you shall extract that; and if the quantity be of an index finger or more.
Then pierce the syphac so that it enters where you wish, and this is a place of water. Then extract that and insert an instrument whose form this is: It is like a tube of fine silver; it is made of silver or ivory or brass, and in its end is put a little notch, and on its sides three notches: two from one end and one from the other; and its tip is sharpened according to the way of feathers, sometimes thus:
And at the end of it is placed an armilla, because when the instrument enters into the water, then suddenly, in half a measure quantity, for if you evacuate from that less than it covers in the hour, then greatly weakens the patient by rezolucion of his animal spirit, or happens to him five times that is approaching death.
Then evacuate from that according to the quantity of its virtue and according to what you understand the dispositions of the patient, the virtue of his pulse, and the goodness of it.
Then extract the instrument, and retain the water which causes this because as much is retained by the rope that retains the notch which is above the syphac of which I recommend to you that you pierce it according to that manner.
Then repeat the instrument another day if the patient tolerates water, and extract from the water a small quantity, and make water pass through several days for fear, and keep yourself from error within that not to let it run from the water except a little.
Then if you fear for the patient, and let go of a great quantity of water, then cure that person to bury itself in sand, and move it gently in a bath, and wait on the sun for a long time; and cure that with drying medicines within that it be healed.
Then cauterize over the stomach, and let it out of the water, according to what I have told you that it is preceded.
Chapter 51.
Of the treatment of children who are born with the places of their urine not pierced.
Some born children are found from the womb of their mother and the head of their mixture is not pierced (or a notch is not made straight or is not in its place).
Then it is necessary to pierce it so that it is born with the spatulum a little subtile movement according to this form:
Then place in the notch a little subtile hammer of lead and join it, then for three days or for .iii..
And when he wants to urinate, let him hang up and urinate; and place that one again.
And if you do not stop the lead, it is possible that the urine which goes over this place, does not leave this lock.
Then that child whose notch is straight is to be treated with a lead nail, as has been said, for three days within that it is increased.
Then those in which the notch is not in its place, are to be led, that cause this because of these, that person who is born with the notch is the end of the head of the penis so that he cannot urinate within it, within that he raises the penis to his hand at its ends; and it is not to the generation, for so the semen cannot come to the mother according to rectitude, and it is a disease much.
And the manner of operation in him is that the patient be laid on his back, and his head be extended by your left hand to the violent extraction, and incise the top of the penis at its end with the spatulum close, so that it is a cut of feather, or that you do not cut any part, within that his blood come out similar to the top of the penis and the notch falls into its place according to what covers.
Then keep that your operation of the flow of blood, because as much happens to you; and pause with him at the water which stops the bleeding, and heal the plague within that it be healed.
Chapter 61.
Of the treatment of the whiteness that occurs in the prepuce on the head of the penis and of the corruption, blackness, and adhering of the prepuce to it.
This whiteness occurs in the penis and is an eminence of flesh much.
And of this there are two: one is malicious and the other is not malicious.
Not malicious, you shall suspend with a little subtile oil and stop it within that it be completely; then place on it, a little immersion in Egyptian ointment, then wash it, and heal it with the ointment every day within that it be healed.
And if this whiteness is malicious, of a leggy color, then you shall cover that your cauterize is near the incision of it and its reason.
Then if this whiteness is in the prepuce of the head of the penis, and one part of it is inside the prepuce and another part is outside, then cover that your hold on this which is inside at the beginning within that it be consolidated; and afterwards you heal that which is outside, because when you heal that person with a whole prepuce, it is not assured that it has been circumcised.
Then this whiteness occurs in the testicles and in the prepuce, blackness and corruption, then cover that you capture all of that is already denigrated and is already corrupting or is already corrupted; then place a line on it with water, which is mixed with flour of scorsas of millet and of three parts and crivellated.
Then place that person again with another treatment within that it be healed.
Then if there is a flow of blood, then administer lunar cauterization according to this form:
Because the cauterization that is useful is to two arrangements together, so it is to the flow of blood and to the plague when it is corrupted.
Then if the head of the penis is corrupted and is destroyed entirely in the hour, then insert into its meat a lead tube within that the patient urinates through it.
In the adhesion of the prepuce to the head of the penis (and this adhesion does not occur except in that person whose prepuce is loose, and above it there is no circumcision required; and when adhesion occurs for plague or for apothermia) then extract with an obtuse spatulum within that it dissolve the liament and release the head of the penis completely.
Then if it is difficult to remove those exquisitely, then cover that you extract with an obtuse spatulum from the head of the penis and from the prepuce, so it is because the prepuce, when it is subtle, is greatly pierced by subtlety gently.
Then separate between the prepuce and the head of the penis with a lead of subtility, which is already much in the water that it does not adhere to anything else.
Then be healed with vi stiptic within that it be consolidated.
Chapter 62.
Of the washing of children and of the treatment of water that occurs in those of circumcision.
Circumcision is not a solution for continence even if it works with other plagues: however since it is our operation and our will, and its effect is proper to children, we must assign it to that operation and to the path of less loss to salvation.
Now I say that the ancients did not say circumcision in any of their laws, because they did not use it in their own laws, and it is only because we have acquired for experience, which causes this fact, that I have found most of the artisans and barbers to use circumcision and purification with new cuts and scrapings; and they use a ligament with great care and an incision with a scalpel.
And I have already found all these ways and do not find better purification with scissors, with a ligament with great care that in the purification with the unglue, because the thread of the foreskin goes up on the skin, and the skin itself is cut off, and it is painful to be forced into another incision and pain; certainly. And the purification that is made with the alpe, and it is manual, of which the butchers use, is not secure in the incision at the end of the male member, because it is forced into the tunnel.
But in the operation with the unglue, be careful not to force and corrupt your operation. And the thread of the child is short by nature, and it is seen in such a way that there is no need for purification, and I have seen this.
But of the purification that is done with scissors and a ligament, goodness, experience shows me that, because the sharpness that is removed is the same as the sharpness that is left; therefore, when you press your hand in proportion with two sharpnesses, and cut it according to a comparison at a time; and it is made by compressing the ligament with the shape containing the thread of the foreskin from all sides, and which does not make an error.
And the way of the first operation is that you make the child stay mostly if he is small, and that you do not let him get up until the next day.
Then bring joy to all this way that it is possible for you to receive intelligence from him. And then make the child stay between your hands or hide the scissors in your hand or on your foot, so that the child does not see those or anyone else's tools.
Then put your hand on the child's foreskin and blow into it, and pull out what is inside the foreskin's head; then purify him from that which has been added to it by filth.
The shape of the scissors for purification is this form:
If the extremities are not sharp and the others are, so that the edge of the claw is not sharp, and the length of the two sharpnesses is the same as the length of two hands clasped together.
But an error in purification is that it forces and cuts off the internal thread completely; therefore, you must cut it from the end of the member.
Then cover that with your hand on your unglue in front of the apostematico spot and cut it according to equality.
If you cannot hold it with your unglue, then take it out with a scalpel and cut it.
But if they have passed three days, and leave it that the foreskin is swollen from outside the appendage, then let him remain there until it softens, and take it out easily, and cut it according to what you prepare for him.
And keep the head of the foreskin away from him, because it will not be good for him.
Then heal that with water which solidifies the plague of the dust that we have described in the treatise on dust.
If the thread is cut from the end of the member and does not go beyond what is necessary, then it will not be seen by him.
But heal that with water which we have said is to be cured.
Chapter LVII.
On the Purification of Urine Retained in the Bladder.
Retention of urine in the bladder is done by obstruction from wind or a cold, or from poison or fattiness, and similar to those that we have said concerning purification in the division.
If the urine is not dissolved with water which we have said is violent; then prepare a syringe made of silver and fine leather, such as a pen point has, and a long cane in similarity to a palm and half, which is fine cane at its tip.
And the way of sending urine through it is that you make the ligament double and tie it in the end with a good knot; then put the tip of the cane into the bladder, and cut with scissors if there is any surplus skin in the bladder' end; but put the syringe in the bladder with pressure and milk of cow.
Then put the child on his back on a blanket, and place the bladder of him and the foreskin with oil; then oil the foreskin with olive oil and water.
Then insert the syringe with ease into the end of the bladder; then double the foreskin from above the bladder and tie it; then push the syringe through that which comes to the cause empty, and do not do so unless it is necessary, but let it come out by itself in the way it likes.
Then stretch the ligament little by little because urine makes the foreskin small.
Then expel urine and use a syringe; do not cease to make water and use a syringe within that is evacuated from the bladder and the wind is relieved by it.
Chapter LIX.
On the Quality of Bladder's Water with Clamshell and Similar Instruments.
When an ulcer or apium in the bladder occurs, or a cold is cut by a sharp object, and you want to distill water and medicines in it; then prepare an instrument called clamshell, and this is its form:
but in its extremity it is deaf, so it is closed. and in that same time three: two from one side, and then five times.
In the beginning it is a closed place, in which is stored that which is gathered there, and according to the quantity that it piles up there, six additions are made, until such time as when some cause is added from there, it is thrown out, and when it is expelled far away, according to what clings to it, naphtha is applied to the wounds of the sea.
Therefore, when you want to throw out the water in the bladder, put the end of the clamp into the water, and throw at it that which is pushed there from above, for the water is thrown into the cavity of the clamp.
And then put the end of the clamp in the veal according to what we have just said about the ring; and push that water into it, for that water reaches the bladder so quickly, and also the patient's navel.
The form of the subtle crucible in which the bladder is Crucibleized, and it is that shape:
it is made of silver or lead, which has the shape of a little feather, and place it very carefully inside.
And then take a bladder that is in motion, and place the water you want to crucibleize in it, and put that between two strong ligatures, and heat that water over the fire.
And then put the end of the crucible into the veal.
And then place your hand on the bladder with the water that you are heating, so that your hand is over the bladder with the water that is getting warm, so that the patient' navel feels it.
But if you don't have a bladder there, take a piece of leather and make a circle out of it; and pierce that circle all around; then put in it a strong ligature, so that it spins; and add the ring as it is added to the water, because you pause over that water that you want to gather the water, and sniff it, and drink it.
And then you ligature that in the instrument and make it with that as you have done with the bladder, and express your hand within that so that the water reaches the bladder.
Chapter LXVI.
On the Extraction of Stone.
We have already said in the division about the different kinds of stone and its treatment with medicines, and the difference between stone generated in the lungs and stone generated in the bladder, and the characteristics of each.
We have also said about the stone that is operated on with hands, and its section.
And the stone generated in the bladder properly is that which is stuck in the bladder.
And these are described with a clear explanation and a shortened version.
Therefore I say that the stone generated in the bladder mostly goes to children; and of its characteristics is that the urine that is passed from the bladder is like water in its subtility, and appears in sand; and the lead rubs his arm, and it becomes hard; and in the water there are little pieces of stone.
And the recovery of children from that disease is accomplished within thirteen years, but it is difficult to cure old people. But in young people it is only half healed by water because it is among those.
And of that from which the stone is larger and the treatment is less effective; and if it is little, it is contrary to that.
Therefore, when we come to the healing of that stone, at first we must make a cut in the bladder from which it comes out; for that cut prevents the spread of the disease by means of the urine.
And then let the lead be held between his legs and be pressed and heated until the stone descends to the lower part of the bladder, or jumps from one place to another.
And then make a cut between your hands prepared, and the hands of him who is to be operated on are placed on his sides, so that the entire bladder is moved to one side.
And then turn it over and move all of it.
Therefore, if you feel the stone in the space, turn yourself over to the section on top.
And if it doesn't come out completely from the left side by means of oil applied to the left testicle, if it is a child, or half of the right one if it is an adult, put that in his arsehole. And turn it over so that the stone is on top. And turn that stone little by little until you reach the neck of the bladder.
And then press on it with your hand and push out that stone to one side after having made a cut there.
And order the minister to press his bladder against his hand; and order another minister with his right hand to stretch the muscles between the thighs, and on the other side of that minister who is to be operated on, apply a bandage to the place where the cut will be made.
And then put in place a speculum so that this is its form: and cut between the buttocks and the muscles, not in the middle, turning towards the left side of the scrotum; and make that cut over the stone and the testicle, making a transverse cut so that the cut is wide outside and narrow inside according to the amount of stone that has been excreted from it, and no more, for it would break the testicle strongly if you cut it in the middle, since the stone will come out easily.
You know that there is no stone whose origin is in the bladder; therefore, the passage of urine is difficult by water.
The water from that bladder is like a drop of liquid, and it passes slowly by means of urine.
Therefore, if it is that which has its origin in the bladder, place it in the crack.
And if it is not that way, turn yourself over on it, or stretch it with your hand in a gentle way, so that the end of it is towards you and does not slip from your hand; or put in its extreme end an instrument with a curved end.
But if you can't turn on it, stretch that small trauc a little, and if you want to stop the flow of blood, cut with vinegar that has been diluted three times.
But if the stone is more than two inches in diameter, at first put your hand on the opening of the bladder, and then cut it over; and then push a small bit of water; and make a mark if there are more than two pieces.
And if the stone is very large, ignore that you cut it with a large section; for two things happen to the patient: either the stone remains in the bladder, or passes from the continuous flow of urine, but the location does not become completely solid.
But administer it from inside that is outside, or put in a fracture of the lead with pliers within, so that it comes out in pieces.
Therefore, when you have finished your operation, fill the wound with aloe juice and dragon's blood; then stretch that lead. And put on a cotton cloth in oil and vinegar, or in rosin and water that rubs; so that it softens quickly.
And so return the blanket over his chest, and do not remove the ligature for the third day.
And when that has been removed, soak the area with water and oil, and apply the medicine of mercury and saltpetre until it is healed.
But if the plague occurs with pus and it is similar to urine coming out from the penis, then do not enter it with your finger, for it could cause corruption of the bladder and putrefaction.
And then wash the plague with vinegar, water and salt, and in opposition to anything, apply water that has been boiled to it until it is healed.
And when the hours of the cure are completed, both cushions are placed and the medicines are applied that were suspended over the area.
If the pain is small and it is in the middle of the testicles, and it has become stuck there, it is forbidden to urinate, then treat it with water that you have boiled beforehand, for it is said that if you do not boil it, it causes sezation; and if you cannot boil it, then drink it, and this is how you do it:
with a triangular point, taken, placed in a pipe.
And then put the finger inside it, and leave the pain there so that it does not return to the bladder.
And then insert the iron into the testicle, piercing with ease until the piercer enters that pain. And then turn the piercer towards your own hand in that small pain little by little, and you will pierce that pain from the other side, for the urine is soon discharged.
And then place your hand on it that is on the side opposite to the pain of the testicles, for that is where the pain is removed, and it is healed because urine passes through; and the patient is healed.
But if this cure is not suitable for you because of some reason that prohibits it, then put the finger inside, and another finger outside the pain. And then cut on the pain in that testicle between two strips. And then take it out. And then remove the ligature and dry off the blisters that are on it.
And it is not necessary to put the finger inside, but so that it does not return to the bladder, and the other ligature outside, for when the finger is removed, the urine comes out of the pain, and the pain returns to its place.
And it is necessary for you to raise the ligature outside when you put the finger inside, or that it returns to its place from which it was removed, and it heals in that way too, as I have said.
Chapter LVI.
Of removing the pain of women.
Pain in women is rarely engendered.
But if you have pain in any of them, the cure is difficult, and it is forbidden to touch it with your hands.
One of theirs is because the female is strong.
The second is that you do not find a woman who discovers if she drinks what she should not when she is pure, or if she is married to a man.
The third is that you do not have an educated woman who knows this art well, more often the operation with your hands.
The fourth is that the place of sezion on women's pains is far from the place of pain, so as not to suffer sezion by accident, and in that it is forbidden.
But if necessity compels you to do it, then return that you take a married woman who knows this art well, and few are found.
But if you are deprived of that, then seek married women who are wise and subtle, or present a wife to a woman in the business of women, or a woman who practices this art well.
Therefore send that woman to you, and command her to do all that you order, from the inquiry about the pain until it begins; which causes her to look whether the woman is pregnant, then return that she says what she has said in her womb, and desires the pain.
Therefore if she returns, send that woman away from you, and then command her to write on it.
But if she is not pregnant, then command the wife to put her hand on the left side of the bladder and feel it, and touch it gently with her right hand.
Therefore if she returns, send that woman away from you, and then command her to gently touch that opening of the bladder between her hands, and feel it with her fingers until she touches its root.
And then write on that position of the middle of the bladder until it is stopped and centered in that place, and the sentence of the woman from that part is to her side, and the word of it is not to be turned back from that pain with a gentle movement of hands.
The sezion is to be little at first; and then put your hand on that sezion, and if you feel the pain, then adjust the sezion according to the quantity that you know that the pain causes it to be moved from that.
You know that the flavors of pain are many: for some are small and sharp, and some are long and round, and some have rashes.
Therefore you know how many flavors there are of it because you understand that sentence which you want to make.
And if you want to see the flow of blood from a wound, adjust the place where it is painful and hold that woman for an hour before it stops bleeding, and then return to your operation until the pain is gone.
And prepare those instruments for you that are mentioned in removing the pain of men, so that you may be helped by them in your operation.
And if you want to see the flow of blood from a wound, and you know that the exit of blood is through the opening, then pause dust on the place and spread it with powder and tighten it, and do not repeat that; and leave the pain, and do not extract that water, for a strong person will die. And this cures the plague.
Therefore when the sharpness of the pain is passing, return to your operation until the pain is gone.
Chapter LXII.
Of sezion on hernias caused by pain.
Achyous hernias is nothing but the addition of moisture to the blade white that leaves the ring of the genitals containing the water, and it is called Ciphac.
And some are in the proper padding that is naturally prepared by nature on the side of the blade, before it becomes a separate blade, and that is the ring of the genitals between the Ciphac white that we have said, and it is not water but salt.
And the generation of this hernia is by means of which that happens to the genitals, so that it is poured on this substance, and some times it is caused by striking on the genitals.
And this moisture is not of many colors, for the color of it is either turning to yellow or red or brown, or black that is turning, or clear and white, and it is water that is most.
And the signs by which this addition of water is known, for if it is in the Ciphac white that we have said, then it is round and slightly turning towards length as the shape of a horse, and there are genitals, because the moisture contains all parts.
And if the moisture is in the skin proper, then the pustule is readily formed with the heat of the fire and thus one supposes that it is another fire.
And if the moisture is between the skin of the genitals and the white ciphe, then do not touch the centimeter.
And if you want to know the color of the moisture in the pustule through its opening from which the form is preceded, and according to what comes out of the trace of the opening, judge from that what is inside it.
So when we come to the treatment of it by fire, then command the patient to be sweaty if possible, and sometimes wet his clothes.
Then have him sit up on his heels for a little while, and pause the bleeding with a few bandages.
And have yourself sit on the left side of him, and order the minister to follow on the right side of him, which will spread his blanket on one of two sides between the genitals and the mirabile part of the belly.
And take a sharp knife and cut the skin of the genitals from side to side along its length within a pentile.
And the section should be made according to the recipe evenly distant from the line that you should make the skin of the genitals, within until it reaches the white ciphe completely.
And remove it, and observe, and keep yourself away from it; and your removal of it on the ground that it is removed by fire may be suspended up to the heat of the fire, and carefully examine the removal according to the quantity as much as possible.
Then pierce the white ciphe all over with a wide piercing, and extract all the water.
Then separate the two sides of the section with your fingers, and extend the white ciphe on its edges; and do not touch the skin of the genitals together, and cut the ciphe in that way that is to your possible. And cut it all over or in pieces, and most importantly its left side, because if you do not scrutinize carefully the cutting of him, it is not secure that the water does not return.
But if the fire is drawn from that side of him by the skin in the hour of your operation, then when you have completed the section of the ciphe, return it inside him, and then join together the two sides of the skin of the genitals with sutures, and then treat him as well as other plagues, until he is healed.
And if you suspect that the fire is corrupted by another malady, then command that they take away the vessels that are suspended from him, and extract him, and then treat him with water which we have said.
But if the water is gathered in two parts, then know that two are hernias; so cut that part according to what you have done on the other side; and if it seems to you that it is an operation, then do it.
And then do not abstain from the salt, and immerse the section in oil or rosin-oil; and pause another cloth that you have immersed in vinegar and oil, and spread that over the mirabile part of the belly; and pause open bandages and herbs, and lie down on your side.
And then have two bandages and be humped with wool according to this appearance; and let the extremities be pressed with something of a coat or wooly cloth, and let them be added to the garment in the bra-garments, and one extremity take from behind the shoulder of the shirt, and the other from the edge of the panty, and two extremities over two cushions left, and two extremities on two sides, and all the stricture be adjusted in the garment of the bra-garments.
Some of these hernias are treated artificially by cauterization instead of section to be removed; and because you make cauterization with a sharp knife and cut the skin of the genitals, and it is ignited according to what we have mentioned, until you uncover the white ciphe containing the water, and then you make cauterization according to this way: And it is gathered in a Greek letter.
Then pierce the ciphe with it, and ignite until all the moisture be driven out.
Then extend the ciphe with your fingers, and cut it with a sharp knife, and cauterize it by igniting, and cut it according to what is possible until you remove all of it; and keep yourself away from the fire that the flame does not touch.
And know that this operation is safer and more distant from the flow of salt, and better than an operation by section.
But if you have contrarian symptoms of pustules in the hour of section or in the hour of cauterization, or flux of salt, then command that you cure those symptoms which are opposite to it by treatment which is said according to that.
But if the patient is a little bit fearful, and does not hope for the second operation because of its horror, then administer piercing according to what I have mentioned here; and it is only confirmed by what we have said about the signs that this hernia is watery.
Then command that you place the patient on a high table, and pierce the pustule at its lowest edge with a sharp knife, and pause the piercing according to the length of the body.
And make the opening wide until all the water is out.
Then pause on the place of cauterization and leave it, so that the water is driven out by the burning. Then treat him until the plague is healed.
But if there is contrarian to the flow of water in that hour that you pierce it: and water is not made except by that white pannicul at the orifice of the plague, then command that you introduce into the plague some or other instrument with which to extract the water from the liquid; or fix a small one in the shape of the plague.
And know that water returns, and is gathered after months or years; and when it is aggregated, then pierce according to the manner in which we have said, because the patient will thus live through its days.
Chapter LXIII
Of Section on T issue of a fatty hernia and the Treatment of It.
And know that in section on this hernia is lost to harm by the most ways; and for me it is a matter of sight, and to be saved by that one is better.
And I remind you of the operation in that way and the symptoms of pustules.
So, say that the pustule bursts in the sides of the genitals where they are joined, and it is caused by excessive heat: or by impact.
And it's the color of the abscess according to the color of the flesh, and it doesn't turn red in pain, and it's a hard abscess.
And a thick abscess is easier to cut, whose color is dark and not hot.
And some veins are cut by the knot of the arteries, and by the swelling of those already felt, or by the swelling of the veins.
May be that it's because of the swelling of the arteries is known by the disappearance of the abscess when you compress it with your fingers and do not touch it.
May be that it's because it's cut by the swelling of a vein, don't touch it with your fingers.
And it is possible that this kind of surgery be performed if the genitals are cut and the blood vessels are separated from them, and extrude the bladder from its supporting structures, and free those vessels, and you sever those supporting structures before you extrude that one from all parts of the bladder.
So if the bladder is already united to those flesh with blood vessels, then do not touch it; you extrude the bladder and sever it.
And if there is adhesion between the bladder and some reason, or between that one and the vessels, then do not touch it; you sever all those adhesions with a round incision.
May be that there is birth of flesh in the location of the adhesion, which is behind, then do not touch it; you sever all that one and extrude the bladder in this way, as I have said before.
So when your operation is completed, then fill the wound with wool soaked in rose oil and apply the other cure within, until it is healed.
Chapter 48.
Of the treatment of hernia that is with vitriolic acid.
It'a an abscess wrapped in a wrapping similar to the softening of the testicles, and it is difficult to move or walk on the patient' thigh.
In the treatment of this disease is by fear for the water from which the memory recurs.
However, if you say surgery in that one first, and then in the second.
And I say that you sever the patient' thigh on a raised table, and then sever the supporting structures of the testicles at their bases; and have other servants hold those ones who are to be cut with a sharp knife, and extend those ones towards me.
And then sever them with a sharp blade in a transverse incision on the right side of the vessels where they are exposed.
And then cut off all parts as I have said before in the removal of the arteries that are in the temples.
And then place one needle with double thread on the first of the places where it happens vitally, and another needle in the last of their positions. And then cut those in the middle of their locations with a right-handed incision according to the length of the body and extrude that one that is joined to foul, corrupt humors.
And then cure the wound with a cure for other wounds that you want to heal by falling the vessels of which one cuts off the two testicles, because it is not good in case of water.
May be that it happens vitally to all the vessels; then the testicles are cut off or made void by the cutting of the vessels, so that they lack nourishment by the incision of the vessels and die, or so that they do not grow by their being cut off.
Chapter 65.
Of the treatment of hernias in the intestine.
The coming of this hernia is by incision which is in the middle of the belly from side to side of the navel of the miracle of the belly, so that going out of those buds of the rupture comes to some of the buds.
And this rupture is either of the abdomen or from the rectum, and it happens for different reasons: by percussion, by sound, by a cry, by a sudden raising for some reason, or by similarity.
And the sign of this is that it happens slowly over time and not suddenly, and it'a an abscess within the abdomen from where the rectum comes out, because the ciphac compresses the budel.
And the sign of this is that it happens by incision in the abdomen because at first it causes sudden, sharp pain; and it'a an abscess on both sides of the navel as if it were cut off, and the body falls apart from the abdomen.
And sometimes the bowels are forgotten with the budel, and this hernia is called entestral zyrbal.
And sometimes it happens with a bulging belly, and sometimes it runs in the budel' fissure, and here is kept, and is causing great pain to the patient, and sometimes bad or strong pain when it is pressed.
In the treatment of this disease with iron is by fear, so that it is avoided in that one.
And the way of performing surgery on this is that you order the patient to turn his belly towards you with his back turned if he returns to his normal position, and then place his feet on your shoulders.
And then cut the cord that connects the testicles to their bases, and sever them all along their length; and then place two sharp knives on the incision according to what you want to eat to cut the incision with those ones.
And if there is a quantity of that one that can be taken from it, and it is possible for you to cut it off.
And then cut off the cord of that one whose end is joined to their bases, while it'a a hard white cord from each part.
Then you sever the testicles by cutting off the end of those ones that are between two hard cords, and leave the cord of the patient' thigh, and sever the adhesion between the patient' back and the base of the testicles.
And then sever the cord of the testicles to their bases, and stretch out the white cord on its left side with the help of a servant, and lift the patient' thigh towards that one with the help of a servant; and command those ones to stretch out the patient' thigh on its right side and cut off the end of the cord.
And then search with your fingers that there is no cause in the abdomen wrapped in a hard white cord. May be that you do not find any reason for it; then place that one on your belly from below.
Then cut in half the loop at the point where the girth of the testes ends, making a section which will serve as a guide to cut the testes in two parts at that point, so that they can be separated as we have described above in what we said about this.
Then give them water to drink, and pause at the edge of the pool; then give the string that we have described (and some of the white loop is cauterized, which we said should be cut in two at the edge where there are signs of bleeding, because blood may appear) and leave the string inside, so that it falls by itself.
May also be delayed, then cut the water off, and pause until it is dry, as we have said above.
Then cure the pool with another type of medicine, until it is cured.
Chapter LXVI.
On Ventilated Hernia.
In this hernial case, nothing has been seen to have been done to cure it by applying fire.
And the first one said that it should be done as we have described in the case of a hernial pain that is felt acutely; which is to say, cut at the point where the sensation is acute, and then let the wound heal by itself (by leaving it open) until the swelling goes down.
Then cure the pool as we have said, until it is healed.
Chapter LVII.
On Disroption in the Anguire.
Some break in the anus as we have said, and then clean out the area.
And do not examine the rectum for any cause of the bowel; and if they do so, there is little to be gained from it; and return in a few hours.
May also be prolonged the time with water, then a small incision is made in the loop (the hernia) inside which the bowel should be pushed; and this causes it as we have said, because the loop is stretched, and then becomes soft and clean out the area.
And the cure of it is done with a pointed cautery as we have preceded the description of it.
And some are cured with fire according to this method: and it is because the patient scratches his back between your hands, and then cleans out the area of the rupture of the anus by cutting along its length in three inches; that is to say, one inch at a time.
Then stretch out the white loop that hangs down below the testes, so that it is exposed.
Then take the rope and pause it over the spot where the loop hangs, and press it with your hand on the belly.
Then cut the two spots that are at the end of the loop, and join them together by sewing one to the other.
Then cut off the end of the rope, and do not cut into the loop at all; nor extend the foot, nor any other cause as we have said above in our description of how to cure a hernial disease.
Then cure the pool with the method described above for curing pools, and if you cut the skin, clean it out and restore the pool until it is healed; because the loop contracts and does not fit the protuberance of rupture.
And cauterization is better in this place, because it is closer to health.
Chapter LVIII.
On Softening of the Testicles.
In some men, the testes are softened by water because the flesh between them is softened, and that is why it is necessary to be careful with it.
Then it is necessary that in the case of the cure of it, the patient lie down on his back, and spread out the testes according to their length, and then join them together by sewing two lips together; and then let him rest for three days.
Then if you wish, cut off the excess of the softened testes with three or four cuts and make a firm stitch.
Then cut between the sutures, and then cure the pool as described above for the case of other pools until it is healed and the skin falls off.
Chapter LIX.
On Castration.
You should know that castration in our law is prohibited, except for a reason that can be shown to me; and I do not need to remind myself of it because there are two ways by which it is done, both of which are necessary for the sake of science when questioned about that case in which the cure is applied to them before they die; and the other way is that we should have needed to castrate other animals for our own benefit, as in the case of horses, cattle, and pigs, and similar creatures.
Then I say that castration is done in two ways: either by cutting off the testicles or by cutting them open and removing them.
In the case of castration by cutting off the testicles, the way of doing it with an instrument is that you should prepare the animal in the water until the testes are softened and made small; and let them hang down. Then take them by your own hand within your body, so that they are tight and do not appear to be loose with the touch.
In the case of castration by cutting and opening, cover yourself with the animal, and press the testes of it with your left hand.
Then tie up the suspension, and cut off one end, then join them together by sewing two pieces of string together.
Then cut those in half, and you will soon see which are the most painful. And do not examine any of the testes, except for the subtle one that hangs down over the vessel.
This method of castration is the best way, because it is done with a strong hand, so that no cause remains for the animal to desire to copulate.
Then cure the pool until it is healed.
Chapter LVII.
On Hermaphroditism.
Hermaphroditism in men is due to two causes: the one is because the space in the testes is divided between the testes of a man that resembles the figure of a woman because they are both male; and the other cause is because there is no division between the testes of those who are hermaphrodites, except for one testis that resembles the female figure because it is round.
And some men have a urine that comes from the testes.
In women, there is only one: and it is because the shape of the vagina over the penis is like that of a man with two testes that are small compared to the other.
The cure is made by three methods: by two of the men and one of the women. And it is because you should cut those parts that are adjusted within their limits so that they do not cause a problem for them; and then cure them with the method described above for the case of other pools.
In the second species of men from which you get a urine that comes from the testes, there is neither cure nor operation in it.
Chapter XXI.
On Lensing and Flesh coming out for Women.
A strong lens is adjusted above the natural causes until it is sharp, and is corrected by eye; and some women have been enlarged in such a way that they look larger when standing as men do, and are confused up to the point of incest.
Then you have the option of lancing your hand or arm or two fingers and draining them.
And do not finish in incision, mostly on the skin of the heel, so that it does not cause a flow of blood.
Then properly cure those with plague before they are healed.
May blood born is blood that stays in the mother's belly until it fills it, and it is strong to come out from the buttocks according to its appearance (and for this reason I originally called it "malady of the heels"); so then we must lance it like we do with lancing and cure those before they are healed.
Chapter .lxxii.
Of the Treatment of Gout
It is that the skin of the foot not be pierced, or a small hole be made. And it is either natural or accidental.
Accidental is if the gout that preceded it, and that is caused by either tight meat or a subtle cicatrix or spice.
It is made either in the heel of the mother or in the sides or in the upper part of the foot or in the lower part, and strictly prohibit lancing, piercing, or pregnancy, and strongly prohibit menstruation.
And the knowledge of that is gained by considering the shape of the foot, if the opposition is apparent, then probably; but if it is not apparent, then you must examine it with a sharp instrument or a ray.
But if opposition is by a subtle cicatrix and is between the two lips, then you must cut and break it.
And place dust on both lips, and place the fingers that indicate the two sides at their ends.
And the woman be on her two feet, with her cushions extended, and place both lips together with force until that subtle cicatrix is broken and opposition is revealed.
Then return the lanced area to the place, and rub it with oil, and put a bandage on it, and let the wound heal with the bandage in place for that place is not healed.
But if the cicatrix is thick and spicy, then you must lance it with a sharp blade or a leaf of mint.
But if opposition is by meat, then hold that area with oil, and lances it.
And put on those medicines that stop the flow of blood with their biting, as well as pain from dragons and poison, adjusted to white wine.
Then administer a wide silver needle so that the plague is not spread quickly.
Keep it for several days and then administer a hot poultice.
Then properly cured with the second cure of consolidation until it is healed.
And sometimes in the mother's birth of other animals, and then you must lance according to this way. But if it is for the cold foot, that cold foot in the mother is not caused by being placed in any way.
Chapter .lxxiii.
Of the Treatment of Hemorrhoids and Swelling and Redness that Occurs in the Foot of Women.
Hemorrhoids are the appearance of small veins that come from the orifices of the feet until they cause pain constantly; and if they become old, they are called hemorrhoids.
And I have said in the division about the spices of those and their characteristics, and direct like those that receive treatment and those that do not receive treatment.
Then I say that hemorrhoids and swellings when they are in the heel of the mother and do not appear on the surface, then in those is not caused treatment with iron.
But those that are in the orifice of the mother over which there is a feeling, then those are treated.
Then put the woman in a mayo that rubs, and extend those toes with scissors or a sharp knife, and lances them with razors.
Then sprinkle on those the dust of one of the powders that cause pain with their biting, as well as pain and resemblance to others.
Then hang those feet for an hour, and then place them in hot water.
And if the pain persists, then make that foot boil in a solution of salt and vinegar and pepper and resin.
Then return flour to the bread and rub it with honey and vinegar, and make a plaster with water on both feet.
And if the pain has disappeared, then it is good; and otherwise, make an incision between the toes, and cut off the toenails.
Then return the lanced area to the place with a solution of colander or yarrow or honey, and make an incision in the place; then cure that place with a hot poultice until it is healed.
Then cure that place until it is healed.
Chapter .lxxiv.
Of the Accidental Piercing of the Heel in the Mother.
And various kinds of bruises occur in the mother, such as cold and painful blisters, ulcers, and skin diseases and pustules, and hemorrhoids, and swellings; and other bruises. And I have said about these diseases and their characteristics and the treatments in the division.
Then I say in this treatise of the treatment of hemorrhoids how it is done in the mother, if you want to know how the operation is performed with iron.
Then consider if the pain of the bruise at its beginning is acute with percussion and fever, and sometimes it becomes swollen; then you do not lance that, but cure that with water that helps until the acuteness of the pain subsides.
Then you must make the woman lie on a couch that has two cushions; and she reclines on her two feet and adjusts her legs to the side of her belly, and places her knees apart, and holds her feet away from her body, and pours water on them as needed.
Then the woman follows behind and administers the instrument with which it is properly lanced at the orifice of the mother; its shape will be in those cases that you will make it fit.
And then when you want to administer this instrument that you hold it in your hand with the heel of the mother, and the instrument enters into the mother until it reaches the heel, and all the back. But if the instrument is larger than the heel of the mother, then you must place dust on the texture of the heel of the mother so that it does not enter the heel, and strictly prohibit the entry of any instrument into the heel of the mother.
Then place the juice that runs in the instrument on top and make the minister hold the instrument and turn the juice until it reaches the orifice of the mother.
Then when the excitement is over, and it feels cold and wet, then you must dry that place with a sharp blade.
Then when the pain has stopped, then you must place on the wound a hot poultice in rose oil or green oil, and let the poultice cool in the heel of the mother.
And place the mother on the fifth floor and above the penile, a clean wool is dipped in water that has been bubbled with lavender.
Then it should be washed twice a day with water that will make it well-watered so that it is healed.
And some are washed with the mother and the plague, which is crystallized in water and honey, and return to the dip, but the water should not be warm.
And if the plague is inside the mother that has been dipped, then you should not be forbidden from treating him with fire, but care for him in water that I have mentioned in the division.
Chapter .lxxv.
To teach the matrons how to bind a patient with an unusual pain according to the natural figure.
A necessary cause is that the matrona recognizes in the beginning of the natural figure of conception by signs of him, and it is that when you see her to express in the parts, and she desires to smell the air, and above that is attached to him who is on her, and hurries to put it on her head, then know that this part is a second-natural figure, and it is his expression over his head, or suspended or hanging from the navel.
Then when you see those signs, then know that his belly is troubled so that the embryo expresses lightly because when it is put on his head, put the second one, and it is separated from those superfluities with good purification.
May that which is another of this part be unnatural and unworthy, because when the embryo is put on his feet and his body is put in front of his head and his feet, and the mother's hand is one, or at his breast. Or it is put on his head and the mother's hand, or on his belly, and hard it has turned on her neck, and resembling the natural figures of him that are unworthy.
A necessary cause is that the matrona is wise and subtle in all those things, and that she guards from error and deception.
And I will show you all the figures of them, and which is good in those things because it should be understood by water and stand on him.
When the embryo is put on his head by natural excellence, and that one is violent over the woman and makes a difficult part, and sometimes the virtue of him has been weakened, then he should make those signs, or let the women have him, and evaporate his sweat with fenugrec and olive oil.
And the matron should put between his legs a small cloth and pinch it with her fingers until the sweat that is in him comes out by moisture. And press the belly of the woman until he expresses the fetus.
Then if she does not express, then know that the woman is cristallized with a tuft of wool and a tuft of fenugrec in a coverlet.
And let him cry out, that he be pressed and make those signs; and with his nose and mouth for an hour, because the fetus sometimes gets tired too soon.
And if the two more of the fetus are crying out at the beginning, then you should bring those down with small steps gradually. Then if she does not obey the instrument, then pause her on a bench and lift her feet up, and bring the bench down on the ground; and let the woman be held so that she does not fall by the impact.
And if the more are not inside and the fetus falls down, then cut those off and take out the fetus or tie it to the mother' hand with a rope, because that one is tired too.
And when the fetus is put on his feet, then you should push those forward, and make that one big, and make him small, and take a foot of him, and stretch those little by little.
Then when they are put inside the clothes, then you should command him to squeeze himself, and make those signs; because he is tired too soon if God wills it.
And if he is not tired by the water that I have mentioned, then return the small fetus little by little until you make the second natural figure, because that one is tired too soon by the expression.
And if it is forbidden by all the water that I have mentioned, then take a tuft of wormwood and a dissolved gum, and pound it all in a mortar with good beating, and pour out into the woman's navel, the upper part of her belly. And then make that hole in the water that is strong, so that it captures the hypochondria.
Then when the parts of him are lengthened, then make him smoke with mint and hold off from him. Then when you smoke him for an hour, then place him on a bench, and make those signs, and open his mouth, and take off those parts, and press the lower part of his belly with light compression, because the fetus is tired too soon.
Of expressing the fetus from side to side with one of its feet. Is to be taken by the mother's hand, but if you cannot take it, then lift the woman up and make her go.
Then if she cannot walk, then make her lie on the ground, and press those hard with a violent impact, and administer with equal steps those that I have mentioned.
And if the birth has come, then make those signs on a bench, and study on the reduction of the mother, and take the fetus in the second natural figure, and make the woman sneeze, and order her to squeeze herself within that she is tired out.
Of expressing the fetus on his neck with its feet above his head and its back above his mother' head. Then know that the mother should hold him and turn those small ones little by little, and do so with ease.
Then when it is turned and has been engualled, then pause over his navel the water and the mucillages that I have mentioned.
And then order him to rub himself little by little, and when he has done it, then make those signs on a bench, and order him to lean on his right side, and order him to be pressed; and make those signs. The exit of the fetus is prepared for the left side.
When they begin to be horrendous with this method, consider, and then you should incise the second with your finger until it is emptied of moisture.
And if that which is suspended over the neck comes out of its cavity, then you should incise it from the navel so that it does not hang and die.
Then place the baby inside, and send the woman to squeeze herself tightly, and let her be delivered gently, if God wills it.
Exits of twins or fetus. Know that twins may come out as well, and sometimes three or four, but this is strange for them to do it; there are only two causes for this, either by nature or dead.
And count those, even if they are multiplied, one after the other, and distinguish between them by their shapes, there are some that come out with an umbilical cord around their neck, and some that come out with a navel, as it is natural to do so gently; and some that come out with a navel, as it is not natural to do so.
And if they are difficult for them to be born and reach water that I have spoken of as not natural, then you should take care of those in this way.
And if the woman is subtle and makes water that facilitates and subtlety, and delay, and it is invented according to all the shapes that are prepared by the engineer towards salvation.
Remember that it is formed in the matrix from embryos and is aborted.
Some are formed in the mothers womb, and there are two, three, four, and five; and already have I seen that a female will abort six, and another ten, at all of these forms, which causes to be made by measurement of the glorious wise men.
And all that comes out is that which is in the science of the woman how firm he is to that little similar water, and therefore stops going out to that water where it stops.
Chapter 76.
Of the extraction of the fetus when it is dead.
When you take care of the dead fetus to the water that I have said in the division of medicine and it does not come out by itself, then force yourself to use surgery on her, because you consider if the woman is of good health and is not an accident for which she is a waste of loss.
Then consider that the woman is lying on her back, and her head is tilted down, and her legs are raised.
The minister should tie it with two knots or bind it on the back to prevent the person's chest from expanding too much during the extraction of the fetus.
Then you should moisten the mouth of the mother with cold water, and with a mixture of mint and fenugrec and a mixture of licorice.
Then you should rub the woman's back with those oils and mixtures, and then put her in a comfortable position in the mother, and then seek a place for the nails of the fetus.
A convenient place: then consider if the fetus is prepared to put it on her head, and then you should fasten its nails in its holes, or in its neck, or in its mouth, or in its palate, or let it grow a beard, or in the angle of its back, or in places close to its ribs, or let it grow hair on its chin.
Or if the release is over his feet, then in the palm of his hand, or in between the ribs.
Then he should hold the nail with his right hand, and place his hand in a comfortable position, and fasten the nail in one of those places that I have said, until it reaches the cause from above.
Then you should place another nail in the appendage of him, or three if necessary, to prevent it from slipping and only being attached according to its receptivity.
And if he should die suddenly from all of this, that his exit is eased in the same way as it comes out naturally.
In the water between them that the exit is softened; and if any part of him is retained, then consider that the woman should rub a little oil on her, and put it in order and turn it around with water that has been retained.
Then if the exit of the fetus is blocked, let the nails be swapped in a place that it is easier to put them on; and do so that all the exit of the fetus is blocked.
And if the woman is exhausted in front of the other one, and it cannot be reduced by twisting him, then consider that he be wrapped around him; and then take off him from there until all of him has been removed, and cut him at the joint of his hand or in the back.
Then consider that you make two cuts on the other woman and on her feet.
And if the head of the fetus is big, or if it occurs that his neck is twisted in his exit, or if it is above water, then consider that you put between the two points sharp and cut off its head, and extract the water, or separate him with an instrument called "unwinding", the shape of which will come to the shapes of the other instruments in the chapter where this one is mentioned.
And apparently make it if the fetus is a big head by nature: and then consider that you cut it with a knife, or hold it with an unwinding, as I have said; and then take out the bones with tweezers.
And if the head is already out and twisted at its neck, then consider that you cut it from between its points with water that is poured on its feet.
And if it is not complicated, and does not exit by itself, then you should cut its head as soon as possible according to your ability.
And if the one in the womb is deformed or is in the water, then consider that you pierce it where the moisture flows out of it.
And if the fetus is over its feet, then its attraction is easy and its direction to the mouth of the mother is also easy.
And if the fetus is twisted at its belly, then consider that you extract it with cloth, and consider that you cut its belly where water flows out of it.
And if the other members are still alive and turn around the head, then consider that the woman puts her left hand; and if the mouth of the mother is open, then put it in the palm of her right hand, and fasten its nails in its hole, or in its neck, or in its throat, or let them grow hair on its chin.
And if the mouth of the mother is closed by an apoplexy that I have spoken of as causing it to open, then consider that it does not cause trouble over it; before doing so, consider that you pour a lot of liquid water. And administer emollients; and follow the patient with water that softens and moistens him.
And if the fetus is over his side, then consider that it is twisted, and consider that water be administered as I have spoken of in a live fetus.
And if water is not possible, then he should be cut into pieces and extracted.
And so that there is no cause left inside of the second.
And when you have completed all your operation, then administer the medicine which I have said about the cure in the apoplexes cauterize the wounds which happen so from the mother.
And if there is a flow of blood from the wound, then let it be washed with stiff water and administer the other cure.
And I have already seen a woman in her womb who was with child, and another woman was conceived upon that body, and another dead body was made on it. It happened to the woman after a long time an apoplexis in her womb; and it swelled within her that body which was with child, and it began to burst.
And I was called to the care of him; and I treated him for a long time, and the plague did not become established.
Then I stopped doing certain things that cause strong attraction to him, and I made him eat an apple, and after a few days I made him eat another apple; and I was astonished very much, for in his womb there was not any apple.
Then I thought that they were the bones of the dead body.
Then I cured the plague, and extracted from him some bones, the woman who was in her own womb, and it happened to her after a long time, that she had a little child in her womb; but then it was not yet born.
And I did not think that strange, because in that body there is science and help to the medicine which the doctor prescribes by administrating it.
Of the forms of the instruments that are necessary to extract the dead body.
Form of turning over by which the mother is turned over:
This is the form of strength in which the bones are bent, and by which two virgins are tied to two feet of a dead body. And this form of strength, may it be that it is put subtler than the other, and made or of ebony or of pine wood.
And be the length of each stick two palms and a little more, and the width of each at its middle, so that the length is greater than a palm and a half, and the width of each is less than a palm and a half; and in place of two sticks there are two joints of the same wood, which are joined together, their length being a palm and a half and a little more, and their width being a palm and a half and a little less.
And these two additions are used to open the mouth of the mother, so that it is opened to what you turn the two prescribed virgins.
Another form similar to that which I have just described, but more subtle and lighter:
Let it be made of ebony or pine wood according to the appearance of forceps. But in the end of him are two additions like those which I have described before, and their length is a palm, and their width is two palms; and at the extremities are two joints of the same wood, which are joined together; and they are shorter than the other by a little more than half a palm.
And when you want to cover the mother's body, then turn it over so that its feet hang down, and make a space between the legs; And open your hand to the instruments in such a way that they are joined together according to how much you want the opening of the mouth of the mother to be smaller than the medicine which is to be administered;
The form of turning over by which the virgins are tied:
The form of driving by which the dead body is driven:
The form of contorting by which the head is twisted:
And it is put together like pliers, the form of which I have described before, but with different teeth; and some apoplexes are made by this form as well, but more gently, to the end that the head is twisted. The form of contorting a little:
The form of un bending by one hand:
The form of un bending by two hands:
The form of a staff with two extremities by which the head is cut off:
The form of two staffs that are joined together at one end by which the head is cut off:
All of these instruments are put into practice, and when they are very little to the medicine which is to be administered; it is necessary that the doctor be very skillful in his operation, and that the servant who assists him be strong.
And do not open any of these instruments; for it is not excusable that you should use them.
Of the extraction of the second:
And when the second is kept, then do so that it does not come out; but if by doing this it comes out in a violent way, let it be so.
And if not, then you take a bowl and pierce the lid with a sharp object; and press it down on the mouth of the mother in such a way that the leaves of calamus rubrum, of camomile, of marjoram and of St John's Wort are pressed between them. All these herbs or some of them are submerged in water in the bowl; then place it over the fire.
And place a reed cannula in the mouth of the mother; and let that water evaporate into the cavity of her throat.
And make the second one come out quickly with a blow; but let the first one come out slowly.
And if this cure does not become established, then command the mother to dip her left hand in olive oil or in a mixture of marjoram; and put it on the stomach with a cloth; and if the second comes out quickly with a blow, let it be so. But if the second is attached to the womb, then place the first one that you have described before, and when it has been found, take it away little by little according to the method which I have said for the mother not to get attracted violently. After turning him over so that his right side is up and his left side is down...
And if the mouth of the mother is closed, we have already recommended the cure with salivation and medication for the fever with herbs.
But if it is not forgotten with all the causes that we have recommended, then keep in mind that you do not rub on that area of abstraction, but rather cover it with a cushion and place it under her; and then apply the treatment to the mouth of the mother with vinegar and tetrafarmacon; for that will putrefy it within a few days and dissolve and forget it.
But when you are finished, it is an unpleasant odor to the head and to the stomach, and the bad taste remains; so that it is necessary to administer sub-fumigation and appropriately to water.
But some of the Ancients have already used sub-fumigation with nutmeg and dried figs.
Form of instrument to which the female is sub-fumigated in order to prevent menstruation and to prevent a second:
be made of glass or brass.
And the narrow end be placed in the navel and the wide end above the fire; and sub-fumigation be applied over the flames of the fire.
And let that be consumed with sub-fumigation and repeated again.
Of cure for the child's anus without perforation
The children who do not have their anuses pierced are subtle and delicate. Then the midwife should pierce with a needle the child's anus that is subtle; and if not, pierce it with a scalpel deeply, and be careful that it does not touch the urine.
Then return to that wound in veal wrapped in linen and oil; and then treat with salve inside that is soothing.
But if you fear that it will get worse, then wait for 3 days and stop the child from defecating.
And already happens oppilacion of the anus for consolidation of plague or abscess; then that consolidation is engraved, and then be treated with water that we have said for the cure and tar.
Of cure for the fistulas that are caused.
The fistulas that cause pain in the anus pus is located and treated with a massage that is soft or in the space between the buttocks.
It is a fistula or it hurts.
And with this massage, the pus is old and runs with watery blood or subtle putrefaction, and some of these are fistulas that penetrate.
And those that penetrate are called by water that comes out from them and by wind; and some have used the bed of egress, and strongly is it said to come out from them.
And those are the fistulas that penetrate into the bladder, and into the meat of the thigh; and those that penetrate into the joint of the leg, and into the knuckle of the foot.
And in water that is conogued from a fistula that penetrates into the anus and not, it is because you put the child's tongue in the anus, and carefully try to push a needle or ring in the fistula when it does not hurt.
But if that is painful, then carefully try to push a needle or hair of the horse into that area when you feel the pain or the hair in the child' tongue.
And if you do not feel that one at all or there is no discharge of blood or wind; then it does not penetrate and the cure is finished.
And when the fistula penetrates into the bladder or into the meat of the thigh, then the meaning of it is that urine comes from that and prohibition to urinate while applying medicine to that area so that it does not get worse.
But if it penetrates into the joint of the leg or into the bone and causes pain in the circulation of the leg, then the meaning is that there is blood in the urine and pain in the circulation of the leg; and that with time there is putrefaction; and that does not respond to treatment, nor does it get better with salve.
And in all these penetrating fistulas there is no cure at all, and the cure of them is a waste of time and effort of the doctor about which they are foolish.
But in that one that is not penetrating and does not hurt, healing with iron is expected according to what you have recommended, and that I have already said and practiced.
And it is that the mother walks between your legs two and raises the legs of her, the underpants are slanted towards her abdomen, and then carefully try to push a needle or ring into her when you know the place where she feels the pain.
And if that child feels the mother turn her back, then return to the child's tongue with a massage.
But if you feel the pain in the child' tongue through massage, then certainly that one is penetrating; and if not, do not work on it, for it is not in that cure, as we have said.
But also they say that it heals quickly in some men.
And of the cure, by which it is expected to heal quickly in men, that you use a subtle cauterization according to the width of the fistula; and then carefully apply the fire to the fistula where it feels hot; and repeat this two or three times within the fistula so that you know that it has all dried up.
And then treat that one with caloots wrapped in boughs within the fistula so that all those parts that are affected get well, and if it does not heal, then do not wait to heal it with another cure.
And if the pain enters and does not penetrate into the anus, which is in the buttocks, and between that and the pain that is slightly a smell of meat or of wax; and then cut the skin from the start of the fistula with scissors, and dry the flesh from the start of the fistula, and if you feel pain, cut the flesh again, and it will be free.
And then disassemble those fistulas that are made of meat that is joined to a cane of ash and do not interfere with any other cause.
But if the sweat flows between you and your surgery when you touch those parts of meat, then use a hot instrument to cauterize with fire or with acute medicine, because cauterizing with fire is very useful in two cases: first, it does not hurt those parts of meat that are close; and second, it stops the flow of sweat from those parts.
And then treat that one with caloots wrapped in thistle within the area where it is swollen, and then treat the fever with medicine for the birth of the flesh and to consolidate it.
And those are medicines that are used for strictness and excision; when you have cured it, it is healed and there is no need to worry about recurrence.
But if the fistula already penetrates into the pit of the anus and it is long from its surface, then carefully insert the child' tongue into the anus and feel with it.
And so if you have to reach between yourself and her where it is smooth or of flesh, and is prone to penetration, then there is no operation for it except by way of confidence and hope.
Which causes it to administer in him one of three ways: or that he cauterize there ayssily with what we said; or that he severs that part within which you can get the cavity so that it is possible for her to reach and cure by the means propounding; and do not perform a section because you will not cut the lacuna containing the bowels, and arrive at the side of the body according to your will; and appropriately heal that which we said that fortly cures; or that he elongates that velament and makes that pus that sever that part within which you can get the cavity by the means propounding, as we said, with an attempt or another instrument with a sharp end, and then cleans those fistulated meats whose part is in the section within the bowels; and then tries to make the restoration of all the wound by section, and if the orifice pus above does not consolidate, and it breaks the fistula open on the side of the buttocks, and then pull lighter through the malaute. And some are cured by this way: when you introduce the attempt into the fistula, and it is in the buttocks side near the surface of the body on the cord and at the margin of the buttocks, then take an attempt of sharp end, which is so as a needle to prepare the bodies according to this form:
and reaches into that envelope wrapped in 5 fields or enters between them; and then reaches an attempt at the fistula within which you can get the cavity.
Maybe if it penetrates in the side of the buttocks within going out, then you take the envelope from there as you introduce the tieu said in the buttocks; and you pull out the end of the envelope and adjust the two ends together, and stretch each one, and let it rest there for a day or two, and when more you insert the envelope into the flesh, stretch that which is inserted between those two ends of the envelope and they fall.
And then cure the wound within which has consolidated and healed.
Maybe if the orifice of the fistula does not penetrate, then you make it to pierce, in whatever way you prepare, but that it is made by the way of confidence, because it is not for you to do so as not to cut yourself on the bowels; and then make it within that is healed.
The form of the hook that is split: its curve is sharp and the other side is not-sharp, so that you do not cut yourself there which it is not necessary, as if times.
of suturing of hemorrhoids in those where runs blood in the incision of those.
Emorrhoids also according to two ways, because either between the buttocks resembling grass, or those are with fat of lard. And of those are so small and great, and that the blood runs from them always, and is one, and so many, and outside the buttocks, and in the extremes of him.
Maybe however those that are outside the buttocks are according to two of few moisture, from which runs yellow water or a little blood according to continuous body part, and according to the color of the body.
And the cure of that which is within the bowels is that you order the malaute to sweat and squeeze, so that the bowels burn and the hemorrhoids appear to you. Then you hide and hang yourself on a hook or what you have with your nail, and then cut those hairs of their roots.
Maybe if the nails do not have them in those by the humidity of them and their softness, then take them on a sharp or dry cloth or a sheep's wool, and pull out them with the nails, and cut those hairs of their roots; and then cut them with scissors at the base, so that they are at those instead of cauterization; or cauterize them according to what has been preceded in the chapter of cauterizing. And then cure those with the other cure, so that they are healed.
And if the buttocks do not obey to exit, then cross the malaute with a cross in the part that is mordicacio small, and is washed by the water that is in the bowels and which obeys to exit slightly when the malaute is crossed.
Maybe if the hemorrhoids are outside the buttocks, then the cause of them is slight, and it is because you take them with your nail, or that you take them with a hook, and cut them, and then cure those with water that we said within that they are healed.
And that which you want to make an incision, follow this way of administering: take the envelope wrapped and introduce it with a needle, and then pull out the emorrhoids at the ends thereof, and then make the incision in the middle of the other side, and wrap the two ends of the envelope around the incision, and then let go; and so turn the incision around.
And do it completely, and leave one of them uncut, so that the excess blood runs from it.
And then place on the buttocks cloth in oil of rose or in wax; and then place that which has been cut on the bowels, and orders the malaute to rest. And then you leave those within which it falls; and when it is fallen, cure them with oil or with another cure, so that they are healed.
And although they are very ancient and do not have the medicine, then you make those with the point of a hook or with your nail within that they are made moist and is host of them behind, which prevents their consolidation; and then cure those within that they are consolidated.
Then you make those with a razor pushing forward so that the first incision that hurts is made, and then cure those within that they are healed.
Know that it is necessary to wait, thus it is done, and it is not unless you notice a redness according to the color of the body resembling grass at the roots of the hair, which is made throughout the whole body, but mainly in the extremities of the legs and the hairs, and then from there by those go the pains; and these pains are felt for those.
And then follow this way of administrating: take those that are cut within the cycle of the clove, and make them with the forceps or a hook, and cut them out from their roots; and then cure that.
And if you want to, cauterize what is next according to what has been preceded in the chapter of cauterizing.
A small wart is a small round hard growth on the surface of the body, and some times it appears on children's hands.
The cure of him is that you stretch and cut those, or that you make those with a hook or within which it falls. And if you want to, cauterize it according to what we said, by fire or acute medicine.
A tickling is a small flat wart on the surface of the body apparently of little moment, and it stings like a mosquito; and it is made by going around the body.
And the cure for him is that you take a syringe from an awl or a bolt, and make it strong, and place that over the swelling until it contains the circle of the syringe's exit from his thigh; and then turn your hand around the syringe until you pierce what is in the circuit of the swelling, and place that on the front of the flesh, and drive out the swelling from its root.
And if you want, do it with a syringe made of iron or steel according to this form:
So that the exit of the syringe is small, dull (if it is not pierced), wrapped in such a way that on its side it is heated and the revolution of that one.
And if you want, cauterize the swelling according to what was said before in the cauterization of athymine on the cap of cauterization.
Of the form of the instruments that are administered to give .
Some swells are given crystal of silver or brass or melted or hammered; and some swells are given those small instruments and large according to those on which they are administered, because what is administered in the treatment of small children is small; and of those whose swells are painful or painful, the crystals of them are small.
The form of large and small crystal:
The cap of the syringe' side to which the bag is attached according to this way; and is at its distance the place where the bag is attached so often.
And the end of him that is further away, which enters into his buttocks, be dull  (if it is not pierced) with a lion's mouth, turning to the right and turning to the left; and on one side of its length there are two turns, and on the other side a turn, and the width of the turn according to the thickness of the rays and the smaller one.
And be the bag in which are placed the medicines of beast' bladder or sheep' hair, and the root of him is a palm.
And be pierced with sharp turns as it is turned over; and if the space between the turns is large or narrow.
And insert into those sharp turns a strong thread of cow' milk, or among those; and adjust the bag to it; and when it is placed in him the bag, be straight in the cap of the crystal between two distinct and strong constriction, and then cristalize each turn: But the quality of crystallizing each turn is that you fill the bag with medicine, that it be heated according to the tolerance of the patient; and guard that it not be too long or too short.
And place the patient on his back, lifting their legs up, and pause them a cushion on which the men are already present or a bed sheet; and approach those two fingers to the swelling with ease, and the minister takes the bag and squeezes it with two hands and expresses it rapidly so that it is discharged into the swelling until what is in the crystal is all discharged; and then remove the crystal and the patient lifts his legs up to the wall.
And if the medicine forces him to excrete, hold it as long as he can; and if he sleeps for an entire night, it is better to wait a day or two.
But if you crystallize him in the patient' stomach solues for constipation, then return to the crystallization until he is healed.
And if in the buttocks are hemorrhoids or painful bumps, then be the crystal small and sharp of a lion' mouth, of the crystals with which children are treated.
Of treatment for the skin.
You already know and have said in the division of treatment for the skin that it is appropriate to free them, and I will say as well the treatment of those with a disease and medicine according to the remedy.
Therefore I say that the skin diseases are diverse according to what causes the rash and according to the place where it occurs.
And the causes that produce rashes are: from drinking water, or cutting with a knife, or stinging with a lance, or a dagger, or an arrow, or similar to those of insect bites.
But the rashes that occur in the body are: those of a rash on the head, or neck, or foot, or stomach, or groin, and similar to those of limbs.
And I recommend treatment for some skin diseases in order that you consider the reasoning and rule on other skin diseases.
And I will begin with simple skin diseases, because the memory of the composed will come at the beginning of the third chapter.
Therefore I say that when it occurs in the head a simple rash and is not broken, then consider: if it is from drinking water or similar, and you have already taken some medicine, so wash your head often with cold water, and do not delay doing so; and extract the liquid from the wound according to the quantity of its virtue if there is no further cause that prevents taking cold water, more so if the rash that is cured is little.
And be the cold water of the opposite part of the infected skin; and keep the patient from eating or drinking anything thick.
But if there is no cause that prohibits it, then reduce the food and do not bring it close to meat or drinks.
And pause on the rash, if you have broken out a rash, apply a hot oil of rosewater or only in the wound which is stiffened.
But if you are sure that a rash will break out, then pause on the skin, if it is new and the air has not changed the powder that I recommend you put on slightly.
And if the air has already changed that powder, then pause over it covered with a cloth until it is healed.
But if the rash is large or it is from cutting with a knife and similar, and their lips are not close enough for the sutures, then adjust those to the sutures as I recommend:
But if the rash has already broken out from the bone and is not retaining anything but a little liquid, then cut that off and cure the rash with medicine and restore the flesh back to its original place, ordering the patient that he eat only vegetables: cheese and eggs in small amounts, and bread and water, until it is healed.
And if you suspect decay in the flesh and it does not adhere to the bone, then cut off all that is rotten and wash it with water, and then cure it.
But if in these plagues is an artery or a vein through which blood can flow, and it is not cut off by medicine, then inquire about the artery, and if you suspect that rash is not cut off, then cut it with a scalpel, or burn it; and if necessity requires that what I have said does not suit you, then cauterize until the blood is stopped.
And if these plagues are simple and small, then the cause of them is slight; and in any case, you put on powder on those, for it has already hardened from before the air changes.
And the way of the powder is this: take oil from a rose, two parts of dragon' seed, three parts of an unknown cause; all three are ground together and sifted, and if there is a rash filled with pus, and it is held tightly by a good constriction until it coagulates with the blood.
And then tie that above the powder and leave it, and do not untie while it is still there so as to not be infected by it, because medicine does not come into contact with it until it has been healed.
And sometimes he makes water only when it is necessary and there is no pain in the present case or dragon's fire.
And this surgical operation is done on the large wounds when it is necessary that they be stopped above those and straightened out, and the recent wounds have not been altered by air.
And if the air has altered them, especially when it is summer, do not place this powder in position, but rather cure those with water that we have mentioned, or put a layer of flour on them with water and honey so as to prevent them from being corrupted; and then cure them with the other treatment until they are healed.
But if it happens that the fracture in the wound is small and in an bone, then extract water with a sponge.
And direct the cure of fractures of the head in water that is poisonous.
Of the wounds of the neck.
But if the wound occurs in the neck, there is no difference in treatment, and between the head wound when it is simple.
But if the neck nerves are injured or arteries, then if they are nerves do not use a treatment with water that causes strong tightness, so as to avoid injury to them because it is similar to vinegar and resembling them because it does not affect nerves and does not cause pain. And do not place anything on the wound that causes a sudden stop, because the substance of nerves is lively and their continuity goes up to the brain, which is pus from all members.
And if water is used that is cured with light medicines, so as it is washed with warm water, some mixed with rosewater or not, and then dried when it is washed with warm water and the other ones with mint water according to this way, and rubbed with oil.
But if the wound is large, then administer stitches, or bind the lips together, and then cure that with powder until it has been healed.
But if the wound is deep or has occurred in the lower part of the pus that has been corrupted, then pierce it in the deepest place.
But if the wound is already an injured artery and there is a loss of blood because of the pain, then separate or dry that, or tie it up, or cauterize it if necessity forces you to water.
But if the bones of the jaw are broken and all of them, and the veins of the neck are saved, then you adjust the lips of the jaw to stitches over the joint of the jaw and do not touch that; instead, remove those and reduce it to its natural figure, and tie it tightly with a strip, and leave it for some days; and then cure it with oil in which there is stiffness and excitement until it has been healed.
But if the wound has already caused destruction in the bone, then strike it, and then if there are any bone fragments, extract all that you can; and water that is not covered, leave it until the wound heals, and separate it and wash it clean.
And if the wound is recent, then sprinkle powder on that powder that I have recommended to you. But if the wound has caused a fistula, then cure that with water that the memory will come to you in the Seven Churches.
If it is a knife or a lance that has caused the percussion and the depth, then consider whether there is wind in the patient' breath; know that the wound is deadly.
But if there is not depth in the wound and it is recent in the patient's time, then at first place powder on that, and do not tighten it so as not to be painful because it does not reach the bottom of the wound and returns to the heart, but pause for two days with water-based oil and then remove that.
If the oil that you have does not come to you at the moment, then pause in the orifice of the wound with a cloth so that it sucks water that has been there; and make the patient sleep on the wound so that it runs water that is inside it.
But if three days or more have passed since the wound occurred and there is no spasmodic pain, tremor of the heart, or tightness in it, and other good dispositions of that, then know that the wound has been healed; and then cure that with oil and water until it has been completely cured.
But if the healing of that is delayed and it has been open for a long time, then know that it has already become a fistula; therefore, cure that with the Seven Churches.
And if the wound is caused by a knife or similar and it is simple on the surface of the foot or leg, then cure that with water that has been preceded by stitches, if it is large, or powder, if it is small.
But if the bone has been destroyed and all of those bones are separated, then you will turn the wound over to extract those bones, if they have come out. But if they are not separated, then leave them until the wound heals, and extract those from them easily.
And for the other wounds that occur in the other members, the improvement in treatment is the same as we have mentioned.
Of the wounds of the belly.
The discomfort that occurs in the abdomen is great, small, or moderate.
A small disruption is difficult to manage in any way, and if you do not extract the intruding of them to their location soon, it will be very difficult because they are covered with a thick layer that makes them difficult to manage.
And the best disruption is moderate, because in that wound the reduction of intestines is not difficult, and it is difficult in two different spices that have been mentioned before.
And know that the stitches for the abdomen are second to four ways, but two stitches are common that are added to the stitches of the other wounds of the body.
But two more proper stitches communicate with the other wounds, but only one proper stitch is used in the wound of the abdomen.
And I recommend to you each according to exposure and declaration.
So I say that when the wound is small and there is no intruding of the intestines into it, and it is difficult to reduce that, then water is one of two ways: either by the slight disruption of those or when the intestine becomes swollen by the cold air.
And so when water is like that, then take care not to cut it too much because you might submerge a sponge or wet cloth in cold water alone, or take it into warm water, and cook the intestines with spice, salt, and pepper, and mix them with the intestine until the swelling has been resolved.
Some water contains stiffness, and it is better than cold water in resolving swelling.
And so when you find the swelling has subsided, then moisten the intestine with water in which it is wrapped and soaked, for by doing so the instrument will be made easier to move because of a few causes.
If it is not necessary to remove the instrument from the body in this cure, then cut out the rupture with a small instrument which has been carved into the hemorrhoids.
And the first cure is better when it is proper that it is not a section, and it is not an occupation to cut off by necessity and malnourishment.
Regarding the instrument, consider its shape:
One part of the instrument is sharp and acute, and the other not-sharp and not-acute, and its end is subtle, and it is not at the subtlety of a needle, because its point is obtuse, a few little.
And so when the plague is increased and the intestine comes out, then cover that its reduction is according to the shape of it naturally, in its proper place, if it is possible on it, because it is better.
But when the rupture is wide, and it is in the lower part of the abdomen, then place the patient on their back, and pause their legs as high as possible above their head; and if it is in the upper part of the abdomen, then place the head of them and their feet higher than the legs.
And apparently if the rupture is in one of the two parts of the abdomen, then pause your intention and your consideration at all times so that the part in which the plague is located is higher than the other.
And so cover that you administer it in the great and small plagues.
And in the small plagues, let it rest that you prepare it, and so that the minister is between your five fingers, which has all the rupture with its hand and ajustes the lips of it, and so discover from this to that which sews any cause appropriately another.
This is the common way of suturing: one in which you take the needle, or consider the needle according to the amount of the width of the plague; and then lay down the end of the rupture of the little finger, and tighten the needle a little more than you enter into both ends of the knot, both the ends of the thread that are inside the knots, so that it enters from this part; and you have added two ends of the knot and two ends of the thread, and then you do four orders.
And then tighten the needle a little more by the thread of the two ends, and add some ties of both parts, and then add the two lips and the plague by addition; and then lay down the thickness of the finger and take another needle, and so join this with the thread at the first needle; and do not stop doing this if it is necessary by the needles until you complete all the contortion of the plague.
And let the small needles be between graciosity and subtility, because the subtle needles cut with difficulty the flesh; and the thick ones are of difficult instrument in the knot, and so that by this they are less in subtility and more.
And do not consider that the needle is fixed in both ends of the knot next to each other by doing this, so that flesh is not cut with difficulty and the plague is not sheltered before its consolidation.
And do not be prolonged in the suturing so that the plague does not hinder the consolidation.
And so cut the ends of the needles that they do not remain attached to the patient at their sleep; and place over the expanded sutures of all parts, which have the ends of the needles; and leave them within so that you know that the plague has already been consolidated.
And these kinds of suturing with needles are more convenient in small plagues, because it is enough in the suturing of them a needle or two or turn those away.
But the second suturing is more convenient: and it is that you administer to suturing the four ends, of the knot and two ends of the thread, in a single tie, with the needle wrapped around in subtility and thickness.
And when the needle has passed through these four ends, reduce the needle from that meteyssa part of which it begins, so that the thread retreats by the lower end of the needle to enter into the next upper end of the plague, so that the suturing is according to the suturing of drapes with which the draps are strenguted.
And place between each suturing the quantity of the thickness of the thread half.
And this suturing pleases men.
And on this suturing I have cured the man who was affected in his abdomen with a knife, and it was the breaking of the plague that is greater than a palm, and the rupture at the middle of the limb, and so I reduced that which had been broken for twenty-two hours.
And the plague has been consolidated in the space of fifteen days or so, and I cured that one and it is healed; and so here I am returning to my work by doing this, and it has been discussed in its considerations.
And the other wounds had been healed that it was not healed; and by a miracle it happened, because I did not cure that one with gargles, because it was in a place where the water is not attracted nor any medicine is administered, but so I placed on the wound a cloth two days later, and washed it often with water of honey within so that it healed.
Then you made two special sutures according to the narrative of the Gospel.
And it is that you begin with the suturing of the knot, and introduce the needle from the outside part to the inside part.
And so when the needle penetrates into the knot and in all parts of the body, leaving the end of the thread for doing this, then introduce the needle from the outside part to the inside part; and make the needle penetrate from the outside part to the inside part of another part of the body.
And do not consider that you have made the needle penetrate once, then make it penetrate another time in the same part of the body; and leave the end of the thread for doing this, and so make the needle penetrate from the outside part to the inside part of another part of the body.
And make it penetrate with that penetration that you have made to penetrate the needle in the knothole at the end; and so make the needle penetrate from the outside part to the inside part of another part of the body.
And then begin from this side of the knot and cut that with the knife at the end; and so take the needle from the knot which is in the other part, and so return it to the knot and cut that with the knife at the end; and so bring out that needle from the knot which is in the other part.
And make it a single tie and another, and make it a single tie proper other within so that you cut all that is before according to that example.
And the sum of this way of suturing is that you cut it according to the suturing of hair; and so you cut the ciphac a single tie from the part of the end of the knot, and so you leave that other tie within so that you complete it.
But the second special way of suturing is that you cut it according to the suturing of Gules; and this is of speech of him and for him considered, it is that you add all part to his own part in a convenient way by nature; and so they apply the end of one to the other of them, and so it is done according to what I have considered.
Now you will find the first needle at the end of the mirror to your opposite side, and insert it into the opening from the inside out, leaving two ends; then turn the needle and insert one end into each of the two openings.
And then return those caps, and make the openings from inside to outside in two opposite directions on each side of the mirror; do this with another needle.
This type of stitching is better than common stitching, and it is the same method I have described earlier in memory.
This is the speech of Gualia
And they may call it "gualia" stitching of the belly is done with two needles, so that you put in place a thread, and start the needle of one side to go into the other according to the stitching of those who sewed them together;
And you should know that when there is a break in your belly, the stitching of it becomes more difficult than that of other areas of the belly.
The judgment of medicine to treat plague is the same as for the other plagues.
Which causes it when you can reach the recent plague with a stink before the air affects it, and reduce the intestine and tie it up properly; then place your hand on the area of powdery blisters.
And if the air has already affected the plague, then place your hand on it to soften and break up the blisters, so that they can be easily removed, and cure it in this way as one does for other plagues until it is healed.
And if you do not have any medicine with you, then place your hand on it for a long time, because it starts to hurt, and changes color, and may turn blue; then instruct as necessary, since you will not need other medication in this case when the plagues are simple.
And if you fear that the common plague might spread to the main members, then find a piece of wool that has been soaked in a solution of rose water or olive oil; place it on the affected area and leave it there.
And if you feel pain or putrefaction in the intestines, since it is clear that it has arrived there, then apply a violet stain to it, and most importantly if the putrefaction has reached the intestine and it is coming out.
And you should know that the one that comes from the large intestine has a different cure than that of the small intestine.
It is difficult to heal because the one that is called "gegunu" does not receive the cure of plague that affects it from all sides; and this is due to the great number of veins in it, its size, its subtlety as an organ, and its proximity to nature of nerves.
And if the one you are treating is a thread, and you reach it recently, then follow the same instructions for reducing intestines in general.
And if it has passed from there and has become dark and green, then place a thread on the area where it is infected to cause blood flow; since it is veins and arteries in this place.
And then cut off that other part of the thread, and place two ends of the thread hanging from the opening on one side of the affected area; so that above you is relieved the attraction that causes the plague to flow; since it is due to the blockage of veins and the escape of the fluid.
Memory of the plagues when they occur in the intestine.
When it occurs in the intestine and is small, it is possible that it will be restored in some people; because if you see a person who has suffered from this in their belly with a lance strike, it is the plague of the right side of the stomach, and the plague is old and made a fistula, and its discharge and ventilation.
Then you see that the cure of it has not been carried out properly; but follow the same instructions for reducing intestines in general until it is healed and the area is consolidated.
And you see that the area has been consolidated, then place a covering on the affected area of the patient's belly; and do not change it unless there is an accident of nature in their legs, drinking and eating, and exercising themselves in their baths.
And it has been said by experienced people that when there is a plague in the intestine and it is small, then find two large cheesecloth pieces; and adjust the two lips of the affected area and place one cloth between them; then, when you put the two hands on the area and apply pressure, cut off the end of the cheesecloth, since it adheres to it and does not dissolve.
Then place another cloth in front of the first one, and do not let it fall, so that there are two cloths between them; and continue doing this with more cloths according to the amount of the plague.
Then reduce that area and treat the affected area; and let those caps be attached to the intestine until the intestine is healed; and do not harm the patient in any way.
It is also possible that the intestine be tied with a thin thread that comes from it, since it is made of meat; and if you take hold of the end of this thread, and it is small and sharp, then place the tip on the end of the intestine; and wrap it in a thread, and tie it up properly; and reduce that area.
This stitching method with cloth is a reliable and trusted way to heal the affected area.
And if the plague is large and widespread, most importantly since it affects the small intestine, because it does not heal properly; and it will only get worse with time.
Of treatment of plague by cauterization and fistula.
And you should know that any plague and pustule when it has grown and is old, and becomes a wound, and is not consolidated and gets bigger all the time; and does not heal, then in any member it is called  "zuchem" generally; and we call it a fistula.
And the fistula according to truth is a feutrada nodacio, hard, white, and painful area that feels hollow when touched; and therefore it is called  "rizat" or "pain" in that area.
It is a wet fistula in some people, and it gets bigger; and the humidity is secreted strongly in certain hours. And sometimes that moisture becomes dry, and it is little, and thick, and subtle.
They have all been shown, and I will repeat them: from the nature of the wound that does not heal; to the type of medicine used in the treatment.
And so that you may know the cure for the fistula, which is performed by surgery without an incision.
And know that the fistula occurs in all parts of the body; for from those it penetrates into the veins and arteries or nerves or liver or bowel or bladder or any of the ribs on either side, or to any of the joints composed by union of the main member and the foot; and from those is what gives proximity to the main member and similar.
And therefore of those fistulas that are according to this manner is of the difficult curatives and not receivables, and occupation to them is work and ignorance.
And if it is any of the fistulas whose depth does not reach these places that are said, and wait and trust in the cure of them, and want to come to knowledge of them, then try to cut or pierce, and if the fistula runs according to rectitude, and inquire about it with them.
More if the fistula is tortuosity, then investigate it with a slight lead, for lead by its lightness of the body is relieved and curved from the tortuosity.
And if the fistula has a horrible motion, it is not in your power that you can say about it to try.
Then seal the opening by means of the opening, for the moisture that you seal that opening goes to the other openings and runs away from them.
And then inquire carefully, according to what manner it is possible that you can know if here are bones or nerves, and is the hollow of the fistula distant or proximate, or is a fistula to which there are only openings and is over this much as the whole of your strength, in the encasing of the patient's lower body, and the discovery of the cause of the swelling deves your compression on the back with the foot, and similar for the significances and the causes of the accident at the apoplexy.
And when you have put yourself in place on all these causes with care, then go to the cure according to confidence: and it is that you consider then if it is a fistula that appears proximate or in a place of salt, distant from a joint, or of nerves, or of an artery, or of a vein, or of one of the places that I told you.
Then you clean the fistula according to what is said in front of it, and this water that is in the filtration and
More if the fistula is of great depth, and it runs according to rectitude, then cut that opening as much as possible, and wash those completely with rotten meat; and put in there wrapped medicines sharp, and introduce them into the hollow of the fistula, which you have understood with iron.
And put there a few drops of sharp medicine that corrodes all that is rotten in the hollow of the fistula from corruption.
Then restore it with healing enervates, where they grow healthy flesh within that is cured.
More if it is not cured by water, then you cauterize that according to what I have recounted.
More if the cause of the fistula is bone and it is necessary that you make a cut on it according to what I have said, if you do not forbid any cause of a vein or of a nerve or of a main member as I have said.
More if the bone is discovered by you and it is in its some corruption and darkness, then you cut that part where the corruption is complete; and put in there water that heals it within.
And if it is not cured and becomes larger as the fire does, then you know that you have not arrived at the total eradication of the corruption; and therefore you discover about it secondarily and carefully find the cause of it and wash it with the last strong medicine, and restore it.
And therefore if it is cured, it is good; and if not, then you know that the corruption is in the depth distant of the body, which has not been achieved, and therefore on it there is nothing but to cut that.
And if the bone is corrupted little, or is within your power to shoot it with a forceps that can be done to water.
And if there are only bones, then carefully make an extraction of all of them, and leave none without a cause for your strength.
More if you find that there is an opposition for some causes of humidity, and in their incision there is no fear or mistake, then cut those bonds or meats if here are any, and free the bones.
More if you have not prepared the cutting of the bones for your hour, then stop on that opening water that can be found, and leave it within that is surrounded by those bones and bonds, and keep that water that has not been consolidated, and be forced to make a cut that you have made in your operation.
Then if you are afraid, pause over the crotch submerged in vinegar, or crotch submerged in Egyptian oil, or one of those green enervates, for when they will be poured out those bonds, and the bones are separated from each other, and is relieved by that attraction.
More if it is a large bone like the bones of the back or legs or similar to those, and water that is corrupted by it is the face of it alone only, then cut that one with a sharp knife only behind that is surrounded by that blackness and corruption, and restore that opening.
More if the water that is corrupted by it is a great mass, and corruption has already reached the bone marrow, then you make an incision all around that part where the corruption has arrived, and put in there medicine sharp, then heal that opening wherever it has arrived; and cure that within that has been healed.
And I recommend to you water that goes into a man in the crotch for him to put on it as an example and assistant on your operation.
A young man of about 30 years of age, who experiences pain in his testicles and has a large swelling inside the body that reaches into the scrotum, and from which the matter is discharged into the scrotum, and this matter is pus with a great abscess, and not to him by an extrinsic cause.
And then extend the time for that opening with error of the metges within which the abscess is large, and quickly put in it matter pus, and your cure is postponed until the crotch becomes fistulated, and its orificis are all small openings that they give pus and moisture from the body.
And then your treatment is many types of metges around two years, and not in those who have wisdom teeth, within which I was called.
And I saw the crotch of him and the matter running out of those openings for a great distance; and his body was completely trembling, and the color of his body was yellow.
And then I put in the attempt in one of those openings and went to the bone.
Then I searched carefully the orificis and found which ones come out of all the parts of the crotch.
And then I hid myself and cut into one of the orificis where I discovered a part of the bone, and turned that which was corrupted, and it was already rotted and broken and discolored; and it was already rotted a part of the crotch within which had penetrated into the mesentery.
And now I had discovered and prepared what was hidden for me of the skeleton.
And I judged that it was not in the bone but that corruption which I had discovered and prepared, and I had already removed it.
Then I paused the restoration of the plague with medicinal consolidatives for a long time, and it was not consolidated.
And I iterated again and discovered on the bone secondarily on the first discovery, and I continued to discover corruption on the bone.
And I had discovered what was hidden for me of that corruption, and I had prepared to perform its cure and restoration, and it was not restored.
And then I discovered another vein and did not stop to cut the bone little by little particularly and pierce its restoration, and it was not restored until I cut around a palm of it, and that I extracted to the marrow, and I continued to restore it with medicines, and it was consolidated somewhat and healed.
And there was no need to iterate in the operation of it and cut it again except for the disposition of its fever and because of the lack of tolerance of it and fear of death, since it happened in all hours from excessive evacuation of bad syncope.
And so it healed completely, and there was nothing in its place of hard bone; and it returned its virtue to it; and it became converted into its own disposition and did not cause it contrariety in walking or damage in any cause.
But if there is an eminence of bone in place of the body then cut it as follows: and that you take it carefully and stretch that at the end of that eminent bone, and command someone to extend that at its end; and pause that carefully of a thick wool of the first one; and bring that close to the flesh that is left of the bone, and stretch the end of it so that you draw the flesh to the parts that are left, and you discover the flesh on the place which you want to cut so that the saw does not hurt the flesh.
Then a table or bench is left of the bone properly: because when you do that water is not forbidden to cut which does not hurt the corrupted flesh.
And that the sawing be on the place of corruption little by little because if it is in the concave of the bone and does not appear in its appearance to the sensation, and forces the locking of another vein.
And if the bone is corrupted and not eminent, advance one part continuously to the other, and the corruption is at the place or in a part of it, then you discover all the flesh; and pause a table left, and bring that close to the place of corruption properly so that the locking of the other part is continued.
And let the sawing be according to the place of corruption a little, as I have said.
And if the corruption is in the joint, cut that corrupt joint, and saw the bone where it continues from the other part.
And if the corruption is in the continuation of two joints, then it is not in reason but invent.
And if the corruption is in the chest of the body or the foot, it is difficult; nevertheless, when you ask about the corruption appearing in what way to you, and cut that, and shape that according to each disposition which is possible for you, and according to each invention is corrected to you, so that it does not cause you contrariety coming or nerves.
And you know what tools are for cutting these bones are very different according to the situation of the bones and their preparation, and the thickness of them, and their subtlety and size and their smallness and their hardness and their rarity; so that you prepare for every operation special instruments suitable for that operation.
And you know that this operation requires for you the kind of instrument which you need; and for you it is great study and long and careful consideration of the methods of this art, and witnesses of methods of misfortune, because then you have already experienced through your own suffering what is convenient for each instrument in all cases of misfortune.
And I have taught you in the end of this chapter the number of instruments which you will find simple, with which you will perform your prohibition which you will experience on the others. Form of saw:
Other saw shape:
Other large saw shape:
Shape of a knife: May the head of this ray be according to the shape of the star's head, and the points of it are according to the shape of the points in alstefegi.
And do not suit but that they are crushed the heads of the joints when they are rotten, or is a large open mouth.
Shape of razors minor:
Shape of razors lat:
Shape of other serrate decently made: let it be done a curve to it and the sharpness of it of iron, and the member of it of knife decently made. Shape of it:
Shape of razors in which there is a concave:
Shape of other subtle razors:
Shape of other curved-ended razors:
Shape of small razor resembling tentacle:
Shape of other smaller incisor:
Shape of another incisor; this resembling ray, and its end is like a curve, and it is exhibited in many places on the edge of the bones:
Shape of ray which suits to the shape of that which pierces the bones:
And its end is triangular and has an acute tip.
It is made of Indian iron, and resembling curve that all causes which we have said of razors and of incissors and of curves.
Of incising ends and of the locking of the bones.
The ends may be crushed either by an innate cause or by an extrinsic cause, and if you treat that corruption with remedies which do not affect the member, then do so within this cavity that this corruption does not spread to the entire member; therefore, it is better that the patient dies rather than that a member is destroyed.
And the sign of that which happens to him is that the member becomes black within, so that it is known that fire has burned it, or that you can cut off that blackness within, so that the corruption of that one is within that member who is destroyed and takes hold of the whole body; therefore, cauterize that one.
And it seems that if the cause of corruption is percussion by some poisonous causes then also with scorpion, or with a bat, or with a rattlesnake, and from similar things.
And if the corruption or percussion is on the end of it, then you cut off that part and do not give space for the corruption to spread so that it does not enter into the whole member.
And if you attack the member, then cut off that part from the edge of fire, and do not give space for the corruption to spread so that it does not take hold in the fire of the arm.
And if you attack that part instead, then cut off the arm at the joint.
And if another corruption passes around that joint, then death for the patient occurs; and with other quantity of virtue administer.
And it seems that when corruption appears on one side of the foot instead of on the other, then you cut off that part into one of the nails.
And if it takes hold in the toe of the foot, then you cut off the entire foot. May the skin peel off the foot, then cut off the sole at the joint of the foot.
And if the corruption has already taken hold on the sole, then there is only one thing left to do, which is to destroy that patient; let him die.
And the way of cutting off a member or of sawing it is that you strengthen the ligament at the joint further from which you wish to cut, and another strong ligament over the spot; and extend the ministering ligament to the places apart, and extend another ligament over them; and you separate the flesh that is between two ligaments as if it were one piece; and that part is cut off.
And let there be a strap of leather from all the joints so that it does not touch the spot; and to avoid injury to the patient, fix it with care and apply poultice.
May the patient's condition improve when you work; then, cauterize the spot well, or put a few powders on it that restrain the blood; and return to your medicine within which is complete.
And then, remove the member plagued with a strong ligament, and care for that spot so that it is healed.
And I return to you the account of that man who was in your service in his shirt, this accident which happened to him in his shirt due to being gathered together with fire;
That corruption first occurred in the shirt of him that covered all his foot.
And then that man prepared himself for the purpose of preventing the corruption from spreading to the member with the speed of his breathing and the pain of his burning; and he cut off that foot at the joint, and fire healed him.
A long time ago, that corruption occurred on the shirt of the patient who was lying down.
And then he attacked me, and then I reflected on the excess of his medicine that was applied to his body because of its improvement; and the reflection did not cause any reaction, and it began to take hold in another place within the body.
And he appealed to me to cut off his body, and I did not want to cause any reaction of that excess medicine on him because it was dangerous; rather than that, I decided to kill him by cutting off his body.
And then he disappeared from me, and returned to his own land; I received him who was that man, and I cut off all his body, and it was healed.
And this story is not added to this text but to serve as an example of its effectiveness; and that it may be understood through it and interpreted according to its meaning.
Of care for the symptoms and with quality of clistery with medicines.
When an apoplexy occurs in the larger members of the body and the space of the apoplexy is prolonged within that member until it comes together with blood, then it is broken and pierced, and the blood flows from it; and the place where it opened is like a vessel, and the thread where it opened is not known; if it were a vein, or a nerve, or a ligament, it is called a sinus, and it is not known as a fistula.
However, if the space is prolonged within that corruption approaches another member, then it is called a fistula and not known.
And the care of it is that you cut off that vessel entirely in such a way, and especially when it is softened and cut with leather, and you ensure that it does not touch the spot because of its corruption.
And if you hope that the vessel will adhere and that that corruption has not been caused by the last consequence, and it is in the vessel that it has opened from the front, then care for it with clistery.
And you should consider the sinus, and if it is large, and the odor of that part is pleasant, then clistery with Egyptian medicine that is made of oil and vinegar and honey, and they are fixed in a vessel, and placed on fire within so that the medicine boils and penetrates to the bottom.
And you take from him the water that is necessary and dissolves it with honey; and clistery with the sinus, and strengthen the hole of it, and leave the medicine in it for two hours.
And then extract that one of use; and make it for so many days until the wind is cleansed and the shame is refreshed again.
And some enemas are made with ash water, when it is not useful to this medicine at present; and that you take the ash of wine, and put it on water; and then put them on her, and make them run through her until you believe that the wind has stopped.
And if the patient does not have tolerance to Egyptian medicine or ash water, then make an enema with water and honey, and mix it with three-fold turpentine; and make an enema with wine and honey mixed, because, by the property of honey, it cleanses and washes away, and the wine attaches the wind, and especially when there is too much stinging or dryness.
And when you make water for some enemas and believe that the wind has stopped, then make an enema with water that softens the flesh over it.
And that you take a dye and dissolve it in olive oil or red wine, or make an enema with some of the medicines, and anoint other parts of the body which have these properties which I have already described in the treatise on ointments.
And if the orifices of the wind are narrow where the canula of the enema cannot be received, then you make it larger little by little, and pause in it a few wrapped up in Egyptian ointment or basil ointment until it is made larger.
And apparently if the orifices are wide, then you add a little to the quantity in which the enema is added.
And if the orifice from which the arm flows is raised to the armpit, then dry that pus in a hot place because when the arm is pressed in the pit of the wind, the flesh there is heated.
And if it is not possible to dry the wind within the limits of the bone, then you should pierce that member so that the arm flows easily according to your clothing, and so that it does not hold back the arm for any reason.
And leave that which is over the orifice of the wind, which refreshes every hour so that it is removed from that by which the arm is held. And so that you know if the water that flows from the arm is little or much, or is not digested or is undigested.
And consider the place of that wind, if the patient feels pain there or not, and if it is in the swelling.
And when your medicine has been prolonged in this way, and you see that the matter is adhering to the orifice of the wind, or has come into possession of it, then change the sheet after three days, and when you change the sheet, replace the ointment.
And if from the wind there is a small space in which subtile viruses are present, then do not despair of the adherence to it because the healing takes place, for some men in whom the generation of flesh takes time, and in those in whom it is made in opposition to nature.
And if the wind is undigested for several days, then know that the wind does not adhere; and if the adherence of the wind is delayed because of prolonged disease, then adjust your medicines, and if the medicines are moist in their substance or in their virtue, then dry them out with dye ointment.
And the second medicine that is to be used after the first is that you take of dye ointment and dissolve it in olive oil, and put it over a basil leaf in its substance, and use that one; and use this one.
And it already seems like enguent, when there is no arm, dye ointment, and honey when it is thick inside, and use that one; or take myrrh and aloe, and grind them together, and sprinkle over the honey as you put it on a cloth, and line the one with honey up to the wind. And line the other with the honey that you have ground up, and spread it on a sheet.
And sometimes they are given a long, rasa of the lily of heaven (and it is the lily of heaven) and flour of erys and centaurea, and use them simple or mix them together, sprinkle them over the honey that I have described, and use it.
And if the wind is prolonged, and this medicine does not cure it, then know that corruption is in its pit; and inquiry has been made about bones or other hard members or joints; then you cure it with a medicine applied to the wound, as I have said before.
Of cure of paretic and nails rubbed together and cut into finger, added to cutting them off.
Paretic is an inflammation that does not leave the nail of the foot from the hand or the leg, and strongly hurts the others, and when it is prolonged, its cure is very painful, or is a pustule on a paretic, or is corrupted, and the finger gurgles with pus, and the tip of the finger becomes black.
And when you have the water that I have described in the division and do not believe your cure, then know that you should cut off all the excess of the nail, and cauterize the wound, for cauterization is helpful in this case.
And if the bone is sound and the nail is healthy, and if the additions of the nail have already reached the flesh at the base, and it has begun to break down and tear off, then know that you should pause a little thread from the angle of the nail where it rips the flesh, and push that thread up, and cut that flesh with ease, and pause over it water from the medicines that burn and corrode, until it is completely healed; and cure that one with ointment.
And if corruption has already reached the bone, then know that you should cut out the bone and remove it, for no time is there when it is not healed that it is corrupted within it.
And if corruption and corruption go together with the foot, then cut that one off, because it is not a painful memory; and cure that one within which it has been healed.
And if the nail is hit or torn, and there is a violent pain in it, then know that you should crush the patient at first, and then cut off the nail across with a sharp knife, and be sure that the cut does not go deep into the flesh that is beneath the nail, because you will cause intense pain to the patient, and excessive swelling of the flesh; and cure that place with water.
Mays dit adjusted, which is born in the muscles of some men, very strong it is, and also very strong in his bones, or very strong in his nails.
And some of them are born in the root of the joint, or the birth of them in some nuts of the said. That which is born in some nuts of the said does not hurt, but that which is born in the joints is very strong.
And of those who are born fleshy, the section is light, and it is because you cut the root of them with a sharp knife.
That which is born in the root of the joint, the cure is difficult; and therefore keep yourself from the separation of them.
That which is born in the said nuts, cover that you cut the beginning of the meat with a round incision into the bone, and place one of those saws close to water, and then cure that within so that it may be healed.
The consolidation which happens in them between the seen veins or by the birth of the man who gives it there, or by consolidation with plague or by combustion of fire, or by similarity, therefore when you dry up that consolidation so that those return to their natural form.
Then place between them a thin leaf of lead within which is not consolidated lightly, and separate between them, or place between them a thin leaf of copper within so that it may be consolidated according to what needs.
And if consolidation happens in some of them on the palm, then dry up that consolidation according to what it is prepared and conform it to the shape of the member.
Of the incisions of the veins, such are varicose veins.
And such are varicose veins, and such veins are thick with excess melancholy fluid that comes in the legs of the members of the body, and more so in the legs of travelers and laborers and carriers.
Then administer a purge of black cholera from time to time with a strong emission, and make the patient bleed from the basilic vein.
The cure of them is according to two ways: the one is that it be cut and that it be drawn out that black blood, and the other way is that it be lifted up and all be extracted.
The section of them is according to this way: immerse the foot at the beginning of the leg into cold water within so that the thick blood be dissolved, which is fermenting in the leg, and then tighten the leg of the patient from the top with a band, and then cut the vein in one place, or in two, or in three with a wide section, and then lift up the black blood to the hand of the patient at the bottom of the leg within, and above it in water, within so that the quantity be consumed that you want and that frequently be exhausted, and which tolerates the virtue of the medicine.
Then take that, and order him to abstain from black cholera-causing foods.
And repeat the cure by sanguination when the veins are filled with blood and the patient feels it.
The elevation of them is according to this way: you who race the leg of the patient, if it moves by itself, and then put it in a bath and immerse the leg into cold water within so that it swells and the veins are filled; or exercise it hard, if the bath is not to your hand, within so that the member is scratched.
Then dry up the vein in the right place by section along the long side or at the back of it, or at the bottom of it, or cut off the top of it.
Then open up the leg with a knife and extract the vein from all parts until it appears at the sensation, and that is the appearance of it which sometimes appears in black.
And therefore when you empty it out, and of the leg that white blood appears that should be corded.
Then tie that to the top so that it is lifted up and drawn out of the vein, and suspend that with an ounce or more of lion's urine.
Then dry up another section close to that section by three inches, and then extract the vein from the top of it within so that it appears.
Then lift up that and cut it in the rear section within so that it is extracted from the first section, and then extract that from the second section within so that it is extracted by that section.
Then make the blood flow so that it is extracted from the section which is higher or farther away from all the sections, within so that everything is extracted; and then cut it up.
And if you do not obey me in order to extract and raise it up, then insert a double-edged needle and tie that up and extract it, or insert it from behind the leg and turn your hand around all parts so that it is drawn out. Keep in mind that if it is broken, it is difficult for you to raise that leg and it has come back on the patient by that wound.
Then when it is completely extracted, then place over the spot of the plague that is submerged in wine and oil red and not red, and cure that within so that it may be healed.
And if the wine has been contracted without tortuosity in which it is wrapped at the joints, and it is not according to what I have said, then when you open up that within all the joints of the leg and at the spots of wrappings, and then suspend that with a knife within so that you raise that whole.
Keep in mind that your section should not be cut so as not to injure the vein and that wound, because it is difficult for you to raise that leg; and serve your prudence on it.
Shape of the incision which is dried up with wine:
It is not to your hand to cut like this with the knife or to be of acute extremities so that it does not injure the vein; and it is of gross flexibility, because if it were subtle, it would cut the vein because of its subtility; but keep in mind that we have said.
Of the extraction of the blood vessel.
This vein is generated in the legs on wet ground like this, as it is in the lands of Arabs and in the lands of India with dry, scarce vegetation and where there is no grass or water.
And it is very strong that is generated in other parts of the body other than the legs.
The generation of it is by decay which leaves the leg like this, as it comes from within the body of snakes and worms and scaly and slimy things that are generated between the leg and the flesh.
The sign of the coming of it is by this vein that occurs in the leg inflammation with fierce heat, and then the place is swollen; and then the vein comes out from the spot of that swelling as if it were the root of a plant.
And then take hold of the end of him; cover that with a piece of lead from which is the weight of one dragon, within two dragons, and leave it suspended from the chest.
Then as many times as you see any cause outside of the joints, wrap up lead and feel that. And if it is prolonged, then you cut one of the joints and wrap it up; and do not cut that from its root so that it does not contract and enter into the flesh and cause pus and ulceration in that spot and bad healing.
So that it may be treated smoothly and extracted little by little until it is completely removed from the back of the patient and does not cause any problems in the body.
And of this vein I have met in some men who are as long as their hands and half-a-hand, and already it has come to me that I should see one of 20 palms.
And if it is inscribable in the hour of its medicine, then introduce the hook into the patient's navel and pierce that long way through the body, until all that is in the matter is evacuated, and administer putridness at the place for several days with medicines; and then cure it by the cure of abscesses.
And this vein sometimes produces rashes and mostly when it appears at the junction of the foot or in the foot, and comes out from each orifice, and is seen to come out from each orifice.
And therefore cure it as we have said above in the division and at the water that has been said above.
Of section on worms born under the skin, and is called bovine disease.
This disease is called in some countries bovine disease because the worms are seen in the meat and also because they go throughout the body and break up the flesh, and it shows itself by a certain feeling in the limbs until it breaks up the flesh and comes out.
And its generation is by putrefaction of certain humors, so that when this happens worms and snakes and earthworms and roundworms are born in the belly.
And it is feared because of its malignity that when it goes through the body and rises to the head, and has come to the neck, then a strong fever attacks it and destroys the neck, and there are seen worms in it.
And so when you want to treat it and extract it, then do not do it unless you feel its movement and appearance at your hands, and then cover it with your hand smoothly and firmly, and dry it on top of it, and extract it.
And if it is pressed into the flesh and you do not feel it, then pause cauterization on the place where it is located, and the main cause that is feared is the corruption of that place as we have said above.
If you should find that it has come to the neck next to the throat, then grip it tightly on top of the neck with a firm grip, and dry it out, and extract it; and if the patient uses a method of drinking medicines that evacuate bad humors, and does not consume foods that cause putrefaction.
Of section on the disease of fire.
This disease is called in our country nafir, and it is a painful disease that appears in some limbs, and then changes from one limb to another.
And I have already seen that second thing that I recommend to you. You were called to a female patient in a village, and you saw her arms and discovered a small swelling in the vein of the arm, and after it had been for an hour, I saw that swelling move towards it like water flowing from one place to another, and more easily than silver flows when it is liquid.
And then it went away to the pain in that place and stayed there in the muscle, and then came back after an hour.
And then it returns to the other side until it reaches the other arm.
And then I told you that it should be mixed all over the body, as I saw it; and I was very surprised at its change and at the speed with which it went from one limb to another. And I have already seen that second thing in my own body the way you showed me, however, I have not seen many of those that change limbs with pain. I did not see it in the arms like that when it was on the woman.
And you did not think it was here because the woman is of small stature, for she has short arms and veins that are open to the air, and such an appearance appeared to her when she moved.
It is necessary that it does not appear according to this reversal of blessing in those who are healthy and have thin veins.
And if you want to cure it and the patient feels pain, then do not appear to him in the shape of a doctor as we have said above, then grip it and hold it gently and dry it out on top of it, and stop the flowing motion with cauterization at the place.
But if you do not see it in the arms, then you will treat it with the extraction of the body and with water that you throw out from it, and take pills made from the ashes of serapin and similar things.
Of the extraction of arrows.
Arrows are different according to their points, and also according to the places of the body where they strike, for their diversity is this: some have large tips, others are small, some are concave, others are convex, some have tongues, and those to which languages belong; and those that are star-shaped.
And of the limbs of the head is when the arrow strikes it and enters through the bone, and is seen coming out of the nape, because this happens with violent sudor, and scotoma, and vertigo, and stiffness in the arms, and inflammation and stiffness of the tongue, and spasms, and confusion of thought, and colic, and the word is suddenly lost, and is seen from the place of the plague a white fluid-like substance, resembling blood, and has a similar appearance to the moistness of the flesh.
And so if you appear to those limbs, then you abstain from treating or extracting the arrow unless it is outside.
But if the arrow strikes in the heart, so that it is near to the left arm, and feels like something stuck in a hard cause, and does not feel like a wound; and a strong movement of the arrow is like a pulse movement, and the plague comes out black, and stiffens the limbs, and makes a hissing sound, and then you know that death has set in completely.
And when the arrow has struck in the lung, it seems like a froth of plague coming out from it, and the vessels that are next to it appear to be swollen, and the color of the patient changes, and he exhales great breath, and desires air to breathe.
And if the arrow strikes in the veil that is on the foot, and pain appears to be close to small ribs, then it causes great pain and a deep sigh, and all the limbs of the body become limp.
And if the arrow strikes in the stomach, then there is great pain of indigestion.
And if the arrow strikes in the belly and is stuck there, then there is a breach of the plague, or the cloth, or the bag, which is torn, and there is no hope for the cure of it by extracting the arrow.
If the arrow hits the bladder and urine is discharged from it, and if there is some cause for discharge from it to the outside, and if the pain over the patient's back becomes strong, then you know that it is deadly.
The other members as well when the head, neck, throat, shoulders and sides are affected, and the spine and its auxiliaries, and the pelvis, and the sacrum and coccyx, and their similar parts are affected, are saved according to the main dispositions when the arrow does not hit a vein or an artery, and is not a poisonous one.
And I recommend that you see from the nature of these arrows, so that you know how to act about the cure of the patient.
That cause is, because in a man an arrow hits the lacrimal duct of his eye at the root of the nose, and I extracted it from him from the other part, I cut off his ear, and he was cured, and nothing happened to his eye.
And I extracted another arrow from a Jew which hit him in the eye lid, I cut off his eyelid, and the arrow was hidden already, and there was not much of it left except a small end which was attached to his eyelash, and it was a sharp arrow of the Turks, with an iron point; there were no ears.
Then the Jew was cured, and nothing bad happened to his eye.
And I extracted another arrow from a Christian which had hit him in the throat, and it was an Arabic arrow, and there were no ears on it; then I inserted between two guideposts, and already it had been submerged in his throat, and then I extracted it slightly, and he was cured of Christianity.
And I extracted another arrow from a man which had hit him in his belly, and I thought he would die of it; so then, as the time passed thirty days and there was not any change in his condition, I inserted into the arrow and pulled it out, and he was cured, and nothing bad happened to him.
And I saw another man in whom an arrow had hit him in his back, and the plague was established on him, and then, as soon as he had been a few days ill, the arrow lodged in his crotch.
And I saw a woman in whom an arrow had hit her in her belly, and the plague was established inside her, and it did not change its disposition in respect of some of her natural qualities; but the woman was not harmed in any way with regard to some of her external qualities.
And I saw another man in whom an arrow had hit him in the face, and the plague was established on him, and it broke the arrow; he did not suffer any pain, but he seemed like these.
And I extracted the arrow from the prince of the king which had hit him in his nose; it had already slipped to one side a little, and all the arrow was hidden.
Then I was called for the cure of the patient within three days from when the arrow had lodged in it.
And then I reversed the plague of the arrow which had slipped to one side; and then I inquired about it with subtle questionings, and did not feel it; but I felt a pulsation on his right ear, and then I waited for that pulsation to be caused by the end of the arrow.
And I applied an ointment to the place with a plaster which is effective for contracting and digesting, making known to myself that the place will dry up for me so that the arrow's end appears to me; so that it can be extracted.
And nothing bad happened to the place where the arrow had hit it; but I continued with the plaster on it for several days and there was no change; but in the meantime the plague was established, and it broke out of the nose by space of five days from then, when he felt the arrow inside his nose, and he brought it to me.
Then I applied to the plague an acute corrosive medicine for several days from then, until it burst; and I inquired about it with subtle questioning, and I felt the end of the arrow which was attached to its shaft.
Then I applied to the plague with that acute medicine for those days until I clearly saw the end of the arrow, and then it came to me time after time within four months.
Then the plague became more violent, and I had to use a pair of scissors in order to open it up, because that was how the shape of those was described at the end of this chapter, until then I did not extract it; but I restored that plague.
And certain doctors said that the cartilage of the nose was not restored, and I restored it, and the plague was established on it, and he was cured by a whole healing; and it did not leave him for any cause in his body.
And I recommend to you the quality of extracting some arrows from him, so that you know how to extract them with care and meaning, because the parts of this art and the definitions of those are not understood by me, as they are described in this book.
And the skilled workman knows a little about it by experience; and in this case, which is absent from you, he knows how to operate in a new way, and to use new instruments for removing the foreign causes of the art when they occur.
So then I say that arrows do not shoot out of the members from where they are stuck, but only according to two ways: either by attracting the location in which they enter, or by the opposite of the other part.
And that which is shot from a place towards another one, or proceeds from a meatly place, and is shot out of it; that is called an arrow.
And if you do not obey the instructions of the hour when it is shot, then know that you will have to wait a few days before finding the meat which is in its environment, and from which the attraction of it and its exit can be discovered.
And seemingly if it is stuck in the flesh and you do not obey me with care, then let it lie for a few days and every day repeat that with care and moisture; and there are no arrows of it left.
And if you do not obey me with care for a few days, then know that you have to pierce the course of the arrow in that bone from beginning to end with subtle questionings until the place is made known to you which was caused by the arrow; and then extract it.
But if the arrow has already been lodged in the middle of the body and is of a bad feeling, then you should ask about it with subtle questioning; and if you feel it, then shoot it with some instruments which are suitable for attracting it.
And if you cannot operate over him for the constriction of the plica and for the length of the preon, then you should operate on the plica before it is widened and before the arrow can be extracted.
And if he has his ears attached to the skin, then you should free the flesh in which they are embedded from all sides as much as possible; and devise how to operate on them, unless you can operate on the eversion of the flesh in the fracture of the ears or in the torsion of those within that it becomes necessary.
And when you extract the arrow from any place where it is, then use your hand with forceps on all sides until it becomes loose; and be subtle at the last subtlety that the arrow does not break and that it is done to your difficult extraction of him and of that extraction.
And if you cannot operate on him in your turn, then leave it for a few days until the parts that are in his path have healed; and repeat the operation when they are healed. Maybe if you have trouble with blood flowing, then administer to him that which we have said about cure in his book.
And keep your virtue of incising veins or nerves, or a cord, and administer remedies to him as much as possible in the eversion of the arrow; and make water with ease and tranquility and delay and firmness thus and then to you and to his recommendation.
And thus you should guide the arrow so that the patient is according to the figure according to which the position of the arrow in him should be, because it is more useful. Maybe if this is not possible for you, then administer to him what is possible for you according to the figures.
Maybe the arrows that are outside-directed by the contrary of the other part, or that you have already operated on some parts of the outside, or if the tip of the arrow is felt by the sensation of the part below the cord corresponding to it; then cut off that part; and do so according to the quantity in which the forceps hold; and throw that away, because it is done lightly at a little.
Maybe if it is held in the bone, then cut it with forceps according to the contrary within which the arrow presses on the bone, and make it bigger itself, and extract that.
And otherwise, leave that for a few days, and repeat that within that it burns.
And if the head of the arrow is in him, then push it into his body.
Maybe if the head is fallen and you want to administer an impulse, then insert it, if it is deaf, into the concavity of him in the nose of the arrow, and push it into his body.
Maybe if the arrow is concave, then push that with a strong instrument entering into it, because the arrow is loosened by that.
And if the arrow is poisoned, then cover all the flesh in which it is with water, if this is possible for you, and cure that with water that suits you.
And if the arrow has struck in the foot, or in the belly, or in the bladder, or in the rib, and it is close to you so that you touch that with your hand, then cut off that part, and keep yourself from cutting the veins or nerves, and extract that, and if you feel pain, then treat that within that it is healed.
Shape of forceps that are thrown with the arrows:
If the extremities of his arm or leg are frayed with awl, then cut them off with shears when you take hold of the arrow so that they do not get in the way.
And of these are made with special threads, large, small and medium, according to the quantity of the size of the arrow and the width of the plica, and the constriction of him.
with a ray so that it is loosened the tip of him in the concave arrow and is pushed with that.
of venepuncture from the veins.
The veins of venepuncture from which blood is usually drawn are .xxx., of which the head is at .xvi., so are two pulsating veins that run along the ears, which are called auricular veins; two herbs that grow in the two temple areas; and two veins that flow into two tears from two holes that are called lacrimal veins; and the prepared vein at the middle of the forehead, and the vein that is at the end of the nose; and two guide veins that run along the cheek; and two veins that run along the upper lip; and two veins that run along the lower lip; and - these are the veins that are called algidal -; and two veins that flow from the tongue. Maybe the veins that are venepunctured in the arms are 5; Because one of those is a cephalic vein, and it should be the main wild one; and the people call it "the vein of the head", and it is a vein that runs through the forehead, and another ram of the cephalic vein, and another ram of the temporal vein; and its name is that which is paused on the forehead in the domestic latz, and it is called "citillar", and they call that one "the vein of the belly"; and the veins from the arms, and it is paused over the fire, and that is the vein which is operated on, and that is the one that appears above the pout by clear manifestation; and the save-vein, and it is the vein that runs between the two auricular veins and the smallest pus.
And in the head and chest are three veins; the one of those is what is from the left side of the forehead; and the second one is a phrenic vein, and the place of it is from the right side of the forehead; and the sciatic vein, and the place of it is from the left side of the forehead; and in the chest are other veins that resemble those.
The improvement of the veins that are brought to the ears is due to small and emigrant and sahafate and ulcerous headaches of the old head.
And the quality of those to be bled is according to which you have turned his head: it is that it is shaved at the top of the patient, and that he is frayed at the top of the patient in the occiput in the place of both veins together with a wide cloth on all sides; and bind him tightly to the side of the head with a bandage within that it appears the two veins and their places next to the ears in two dimple-like places on the top of the head; and you want those with the small words, and if you feel the pulse of those with the small words, then there is no attempt.
Here is the translation of the first sentence: And raise your hand to the vein and to the cavity on its sides, and cut the vein with a deep incision. And be the length of the incision equal to or more than two fingers' width from the edge, and make a cut as long as you want; and add as much as necessary.
Then hold it firmly in the pulse and let that be healed.
And what has been said at the beginning of this book about the incision and about cauterization is also true here.
Of the two veins, the arterial one is the older and more bad; it causes frequent headaches, and sharp pain in the eyes and in the sides.
And the quality of bleeding these veins is according to what I tell you: if there is pain in the patient's hand, it is a good sign, and their pulse is strong; but if the pain is in the thigh, it is not so good a sign, and their pulse is weak. Then you may try.
Then raise the vein above the cavity with a gentle pull until you feel it; and insert the incision there, and then raise the vein up; and make the same cut in the other two veins; and add as much blood as your need requires.
Then remove the tourniquet from the patient's thigh and let it fall; and place your hand on the vein for an hour, and then put pressure on that point and hold it firmly, and let that be healed.
And what has been said before about them, about the incision, and about the drawing of blood at the beginning of this book is also true here.
And the healing of bleeding from the vein in the forehead is due to bloodletting from the cerebral vein because of old headaches, and also to ancient emesis, rigor, and foul-smelling ulcers.
And the quality of bloodletting from him is according to what I tell you: if the patient's thigh hurts, it is not good; but if there is no pain, then take the instrument which is called a hook; and this is its form.
Then make the point eminently on the hook near the vein and strike it with a soft or sharp blow in your hand, and allow blood to flow as much as you want; then remove the tourniquet from the patient' thigh and let that be healed.
And some say that bloodletting is done in the middle of the body, but it is not so severe as when it is done at the ends; for the bones are close together and strong, and would be split by bloodletting if it were done at the ends.
Of the two veins which are behind the eyes, one passes through the eye and the other through the palate for the sake of the eye, and causes headaches and old emesis in the face.
And the quality of bloodletting is that the patient' thigh hurts when the tourniquet is tight; and make the bloodletting from the thigh, and you stand on top of it.
And make the bloodletting according to the transverse line at a short length, because it is not flesh there; and if the bloodletting is soft, then the end is strong, and would be split if it were done with a sharp instrument.
Then let blood flow as much as you need; and place your hand on those points, and hold them firmly with a grip; then remove the blood from those points.
Of the bloodletting from the nose, it is related to sudden fever and to sharp pain in the face, and also to old emesis in the face, and more so when it is done at the beginning of this process.
And the quality of bloodletting from him is that the patient' thigh hurts when the tourniquet is tight; and take his left hand, and make the bloodletting softly long, and place it in the middle of the nose according to the direction; for the vein does not appear here, and because the pulse begins to flow soon.
Then finish the bloodletting with your hand gently, and let blood flow according to your need; and then put it in your hand for a while, because that is restored little by little.
Of the bloodletting of the two veins by constricting the pulse, it is related to the beginning of leprosy, and to sudden headaches and violent emesis and foul-smelling ulcers which corrode.
And the quality of bloodletting from those veins is that the patient' thigh hurts when the tourniquet is tight, and hold it firmly; and place the hand on the top of the thigh, and make the bloodletting from the thigh, and stand on a stool.
Then make the bloodletting from the vein long with wide bloodletting little by little; and then take as much blood as necessary, and do the same for the other vein.
Then remove the tourniquet and hold the two veins firmly with a grip that does not hurt; and let those be healed because the plague is cured.
Of the bloodletting of the veins which are causing pain in the mouth and in the gums, it is related to small blisters and pustules, and to corruption of the gums, and to bad ulcers and fissures, and to bad ulcers in the nose and in its openings.
And the quality of bloodletting from those veins is that you cut the patient' nose before you, and hold his hand firmly with a tourniquet; and then lift up the lips of his mouth and look at two veins which are on the right side of the lip, and the other on the left; and demonstrate which one is darker than the other, and this is because those veins are small black ones; and then cut one of them with an innocent incision.
Then if you are in doubt, leave that one alone, and do not know which of them it is; then go to cut the most prominent one, and the most manifest pustule on those veins.
And make a incision like those two veins are in the lips above them.
Of the two veins which are behind the tongue, it is appropriate to bloodletting from the cerebral vein because of old headaches, and also to emesis in the mouth, and to old emesis in the throat.
And the quality of bleeding these veins is that you follow the tongue between your two hands in front of the sun, and raise the patient' tongue, and look at both sides of it, one side dark and the other light; and note which one is darker than the other.
Then bloodlet from each one; and remember not to use your hand in bloodletting these veins, because those are arteries.
And the veins which are bloodletting in the arm are those from which blood is taken in all men, and the bloodletting from them is done according to two ways: either by making a incision with a sharp instrument, or by pressing; or by cutting with a scalpel, and adding if it needs, and this is its form.
is the shape of the incision which is done several times, and it opens concave veins which are full of blood, and those that contain large amounts of blood.
And this kind of enema is smaller and has a milder temperature and effect on the very fine blood vessels that contain mild acid sap.
May the improvement of the bazilian vein enema which is one of three veins: it extrudes the blood from the patient's head and neck, and from there that it reaches the feet and abdomen.
And let the fluidos be expelled by that vein enema which is one of three veins: it extrudes the blood from the patient's head and neck, and from there that it reaches the feet and abdomen. And if this enema should be used, that the person who performs the enema take care to avoid hitting that artery, and if he makes a mistake and stings in the injection site of the enema, it will cause blood flow, so it must be prevented that this enema is done with a puncturing enema, after which it will be cut with an axilet, but not before.
And if the bazilian vein does not appear by itself, then let it be that you give up that vein and that you switch to another one, or look for a small vein; or perform the enema at the end of the arm, because that vein is obvious, and dry it with an axilet after the enema has been performed.
May the enema be performed from the back of the arm, from the place where you can feel the pulse until the elbow, and then rub it with a cotton ball; and then hold the arm and cut the vein with an axilet as mentioned above; and remember that the piercing must not be made in a certain space of the vein.
And when you stretch it with your hand, if there is a strong pulse, then this inflation is an inflation of the artery and therefore it will burst.
And if the blood flows in an enema like a child's breath, then you know that it is the blood of the artery; and then place your hand on the area for a long time; and then remove your hand, and if the blood stops flowing, because the eyes are blurred when they stop flowing, then hold your arm tightly and let it go.
And watch for any swelling on the patient's leg, and be cautious with it, and do not cause any injury to it for a few days until it heals.
May the blood not stop flowing, and if you have to go somewhere without medicine with water, then cut the artery, if it is apparent; because its tip is contracted, and the blood stops flowing; or that you take a piece of fistula, and open it up, and pinch one end and tighten it over the vein's stricture until the next day.
And then if the blood has stopped flowing, it is good; and if not, then treat that leg with water from which the memory of the place where the swelling has occurred has been removed by the flow of blood.
And the stopping of the blood from that leg is difficult in small conditions due to the small space of the elbow, and because of the possibility of injuring the arm.
May the bazilian vein enema be useful to extract the blood from the cerebral part of the head and the neck part of the body; because it is composed of veins from those two parts, as mentioned above.
And if the person who performs the enema is cautious about performing the bazilian vein enema, because that vein is a nerve; and then, if he makes a mistake in injecting the enema and injures the nerve, it will cause stupor, and its recovery is difficult; and this nerve appears when feeling is lost; and if this nerve is hidden from many people and is subtle and not obvious, then let the person who performs the enema pause the enema at the point where he injures the nerve, and avoid hitting that nerve with his own hand.
And if the vein is between two nerves, then you open it in length.
The improvement of the cephalic vein enema is that it attracts the blood from the head and relieves the patient'
And in this case, if you want to perform the enema with an olive oil enema or a mint enema; because it is the safest of all veins, because it does not contain nerves or arteries.
But a severe fever may occur in some people if it is pricked with the first strike; and such an apoplexy will not be noticed on the patient' side.
The first of them is that one from which it can be known that an enema should not be administered except for the sake of health and in anticipation of its occurrence; that it should be performed on one of the veins that are part of the body: cephalic, facial, or bazilian; and that it should be done at the beginning of spring, during the day, and closer to winter when digestion appears.
And an enema should be performed on the third day or at the earliest on the second day after the start of a day that passes three hours later.
May the enema be administered when it is convenient and necessary; or at noon or at night, or during any other time.
And if the person who has to be enema is not over sixty years old and a woman is not over fifty years old; and the elderly should not be enema'd unless they are ill.
And if someone wants to be enema'd by any method, then he should moisten his body before the enema with an axilet; because the veins do not suck blood from the areas that are wet, which are useless, and do not cause pain to the main parts of the body.
And do not enema patients who are sick with jaundice and drunkenness, or who have diarrhea or vomiting; because the enema will cause a change in them, and will dissolve their strength, or their body, or their animals; and this is not an enema that should be performed during pregnancy or childbirth, or for any other reason that causes pain.
And then consider the subtle humors before that if the blood is thick, or because of food and drinks, or because of medicines; because that will cause the blood to become thicker; and this should be prevented by not eating or drinking certain things near the time of enema.
And then enter into water if there is no reason to prohibit it, or exercise that causes the blood to be subtle; because the blood will become thinner and stronger by such exercises.
And pause the enema of that leg at the foot of the day; because it is close to three o'clock in the afternoon, as mentioned above.
And remember that the foot of the day is a good time to perform enemas for all kinds of animal accidents, such as anger, fear, or unnecessary work and trouble; because it is an appropriate time to perform enemas for all these things.
And then, in the same day and time, perform enemas with respect to these causes according to their quantity of possibility: for the smell and odour of balsams and substances similar to them.
And follow the enema administrator with a pointed cautery that is easier for him; or with the one used on that leg.
And he should then remove his arms, and rub the area with a fluitron for two or three times; and then tighten the ligature with a belt and wrap it with two times.
And the constriction should be early, since the constriction when it is not tight, or the constriction is too loose, then prohibit the flow of the wound; or if it is too soft, and then prohibit the binding of the wound with a bandage.
And the constriction should be applied, so that whoever is supposed to be fluitoned should rub their hands together between their legs until the veins swell and become noticeable.
And the fluitomator should rub his fluitomator with a little olive oil specifically; and then place his left hand index on that vein, leaving the spot where he wants to do the fluitomation so that the vein will escape a little, and the percussion will stop because from those veins is that it is full of ventilators and when you pause the fluitomation above that it contracts, then the fluitomator should be discovered; and the fluitomation does not constrict the vein, and if it constricts, that vein is tight.
And therefore, because the fluitomator should be stopped and be solicited in all these causes.
And then pause the fluitomation, more so if the vein is found in a crease, then do not; and if not, then repeat the process in another crease nearby, or above it at a fast pace, if the spot is not apparent.
And if the spot is apparent or the patient's leg is swollen, then leave it alone for a day or two, and do not tighten the ligature, because it will cause pain; nor let it enter a bath.
And then repeat the fluitomation if the area is swollen.
And if the sight is small and the pain is slight, and you fear that the amount you want will not come out, then repeat the fluitomation in that spot again correctly and adjust a little at the site, and do not let it enter a bath beforehand because the spot is apparent in most people; indeed, the spot is apparent in most people.
But if that has already become apparent, then do not repeat it, because it will not excuse you from any cause; and pause over that part of the foot where the oil is, for it eases the pain of the foot. And this location is better than other locations to rub with oil.
And it seems that administering oil during the whole fluitomation with which veins you should prohibit the binding of the foot, and you make a water-like mixture of tar and sage when you pause from one of those spots on the spot, because the pain has lessened and has spread out when it is thick.
And if a large lump has been generated in the spot of the fluitomation, since crease-like spots occur, and more so at that which does not bleed but that crease, or in the site of a small vein, then you should lie down and pause on the spot with a sponge infused with water and salt, slightly cut, and tighten it for an hour, because it dissolves.
And when water is made from the foot of the foot of that vein in the form of a bandage or another vein.
And if it remains in the spot for several days any blackness or greenness, do not use water; and if you want to, pause over that part of the foot with a mixture of almond oil and myrrh dissolved, or a mixture of mint juice and calamus, or something similar.
And crease-like spots occur, and the constriction should be administered with fluitomation from the base.
And therefore pause your hand on that spot, and if you feel a soft feeling on that spot, then the eminence is bad and evil; and then remember that you should not pause over that part of the foot with any water that we have said, because it will flow strongly from the artery of the foot.
And make a plaster with that water in which it is tightened, so that the spot is hardened, and then heal that part with another treatment until it is healed.
And when you remove the foot from the patient completely, according to the amount of its virtue and according to the winning color over the foot according to what appears.
Because if the foot is black, then you should leave it alone until it heals; and if you make it thick, then you should leave it alone until it becomes thinner; and if it is hot, then let its sharpness go away.
And when that which is swollen and strong and needs to be removed from the foot in a crease, then the fluitomation of the vein should be widened and the fluitomation should be made.
And when that which is swollen is soft, then do the opposite of what you have done; and when you remove it in three creases, and make the three creases tight.
And the best thing to be administered is the vein fluitomation, which is a transverse section, not a puncture.
And this method of fluitomation saves the foot from pain and nerve injury, and it is more praiseworthy and more saving than fluitomation according to its depth and length.
And to which is accustomed to happen faints, then do the fluitomation before it, with a little of water infused in milk or simple syrup cut; and remove from the foot in three creases or four.
And if it is a cold and wet day, then rub before the fluitomation with an infused water of myrrh or of honey flavored with spices such as cinnamon, ginger, and cloves, or something similar, or of infused oil and aromatic herbs, or of infused water and fragrant spices.
And if fainting occurs due to the fluitomation, and it is a cause of the foot to be cold, then rub with infused water of spices such as cinnamon and cloves; and use mint for the patient's feet.
And use other causes that we have said in the division in the chapter on fainting due to evacuation.
And whoever wants to ease their arms and dissolve their foot according to the second crease, then rub with water for a mobile foot; and its virtue is that it eases, and you should remove the foot little by little, so is according to the amount of its virtue in consecutive days.
But whoever wants to ease their arms and remove their foot according to the third crease, then make water for seven or nine hours after the first fluitomation.
And whoever wants to remove the foot from their body in the opposite direction of the spot, then rub on the second or third day.
And that foot in which it is already hot and has become sharp and causes fever, then rub it on the first crease, and make a large amount of fluitomation, and make a bandage with it; and pause your hand on the patient' arm over their pulse, so that it does not die because of syncope, because when the spots are like creases, all the conditions for fluitomation are preserved; and you should not put your hand on the patient's wrist near their pulse, because they will die instead of fainting, since carelessness causes it.
And when you want to ease your arms and remove the foot according to the second crease, and it is already blocked the opening of the vein, and it will be difficult to remove the foot from the foot; then push down on that part with force and bend it gently, because water is too bad.
Here is the translation of the text:
If the vein is broken, then leave it alone and do not touch it until the bleeding has stopped.
And if necessity compels you to evacuate the blood secondly, and it is no excuse, then leave him alone in that place or in another limb in some other vein.
And the vein called "funis of the arm" is flubotome when it is uncovered or unhidden, for it is made up of those.
And the quality of the flubotomy is that the patient's hand enters into cold water before the vein bursts and the vein appears clearly.
Then tighten it gently with a ligature halfway; and then flubotome across the small, not laterally or along its length.
And be wide open and your flubotomy should you make on the joint of the hand a little bit.
And if you prevent the flow of blood, then you should put the hand in cold water and leave the blood to run into the water until you satisfy your need.
Maybe if you are in the summer days, then you are excused from putting the hand in cold water, and the body is paused in cold water in wintertime.
And the flubotomy of this vein is more safe than any other veins, because there are no pulsating veins or nerves there.
And the flubotomy of the right arm's forearm is connected to the neck.
And the quality of the flubotomy is that you tighten the hand or your own hand, because you put it in cold water, before the vein bursts and becomes very visible; then cut across the small vein, not laterally or along its length. And if you cut this from the top down, it will not be seen.
And keep your hand away from flubotome, because there are nerves under the skin to be cut off.
Then return the hand to cold water and let the blood run into it, because if you do not put that hand in cold water, the blood will coagulate in the vein's orifice and prevent its flow.
And when you extract the blood according to the quantity of need, then place a salt and oil over the vein so that it does not solidify too much; and apparently, cover that you do not cut through all branches straight.
Maybe the improvement of flubotomizing the left arm' is that it is connected to the neck.
And do the same for the right arm.
And the benefit of flubotoming the sephena vein is to the causes of diseases that are in the beginning parts of the body, so as to the causes of mother' diseases, and to the retencin of menstruation, and to the causes of rashes and sores of legs and thighs, and to their similarity to the causes of diseases.
And the quality of flubotoming is that the patient puts his hand in cold water and makes a friction on it until the veins appear; then place a knot on the joint of the hand; and the location of the vein cut appears clearly, and from there it branches into the face of the hand many times.
And then flubotome the upper arm widely or from there cut the skin clearly, because it is better and safer; for it is more convenient to cut the skin here rather than on the hand.
And if you flubotome on the face of the hand, then keep away from nerves that are there over the face of the hand, and your flubotomy should be made across the small, not laterally or along its length.
And it is a safe flubotomy.
Maybe if you prevent the flow of blood; then you should put the hand in cold water and let the blood run into it before it is evacuated.
And if the flubotome is wrong in the first cut, then repeat the flubotomy a little bit more, for the location is safe; and you do not fear it here rather than keeping away from nerves.
And do the same thing with the other arm by wrapping it up.
The location of the sciatic vein is here rather than keeping away from the root of the leg; for the location is where the bone begins to branch out.
And the benefit of flubotomizing the sciatic vein is that it is for the cause of pain in the hip when it is due to gout.
And the quality of flubotoming is that the patient goes into a bath, and quickly tightens his hand from the base of the thumb to the tip with four fingers in a long, thin band; for it does not appear until it is done so.
And when it appears then flubotome that limb according to the cross, which is at your hand and according to the length; for the location of that limb is safe.
And it is in the form of men when it is heated; and if you feel that limb, and it does not cause a sensation to appear to you, then flubotome any part of it, and it is that which appears on the face of the hand before the ear' bone and the ring finger.
And keep away from nerves, and let the blood run in the quantity you want.
Then take off the ligature and place it over the location of the flubotomy carefully; for it will heal gently.
Of windiness and of the qualities of using those.
Of windiness is for corns, or for earache, or for dizziness.
The windiness is done in two ways: one is to cut and extract blood, and the other is to induce windiness by cutting.
And this windiness that is induced by cutting is done in two ways, for it is either with fire or without fire.
And the locations of windiness that are administered by cutting and extracting blood are twelve parts of the body, of which one is under the nose, and it is the last part of the head; and the back of the neck from the two sides of the jaw, and the mouth from below the jaw, and two spatulas, and the alohosters, and it is on the end of the chin; and two fire, and they are of the two arms; and two chisels, and two knives.
And windiness does not extract blood except from small veins in the flesh, and it does not cause virtue by those, as if it were done by flubotomy; nor does it cause windiness to be made with fire or without fire in any disease caused by repetition within the body until it is completely emptied.
Maybe if necessity compels you to induce windiness for any reason or continuously, then leave it alone at the beginning of the meal and at its end; and in the middle of the meal; and in the middle of the night.
And thus when times because of some such cause, and particularly if it is in the third or middle part of the month, then I command that a wind be made before it has passed two or three hours.
And the relief of wind from the nape is that when it puts pressure on the head and makes one wet, it is appropriate that there be an evacuation from all the body.
And this wind is in place of cerebrospinal tap.
It is not appropriate that one who uses a rub-down composition or in which there is catarrh should give wind, for it causes great harm.
And by this water it is not appropriate that one use those old things, and in the heads of which there are injuries from scratching.
And by this water it is not appropriate that one continue over it; and by this water you command the wind-maker to pause your hand for a moment in the area of the genitals, fearing the generation of oblivion.
And the relief of alcohol is in place of cerebrospinal tap and of the basal artery; and by this it puts pressure on the larynx, and on the contraction of air and on the splitting of the vocal cords, and on coughing, and on retching.
And if the wind-making of alcohol is stopped for a little while, for if it is paused from behind, it generates weakness in the body and in the stomach.
And the relief of alkaidahan puts pressure on the accidental pains in the head and on opthalmia, emigration, prefaciousness, and the pains in the roots of the teeth; and it is in place of the basal tap.
And if you command the wind-maker not to press your hand for the sake of cutting so that it does not cut the artery and cause a flow of blood.
And if wind is blown behind the jaw, it gives alcohol in the mouth and causes corruption of the gums and a resemblance to the maladies that are in the mouth; and it is in place of cutting the other way, which is between the two lips.
And the wind that is made on the two spatulas puts pressure on Caphistan, who is made by the replete quality of heat.
And the wind that is made in the two openings inside the mouth gives relief from the cerebral tap of three veins, for that one is from the basal artery, the fuscular and the cephalic; for those three veins are smaller than the others veins within which can arrive the attraction to the three veins.
And command the wind-maker not to process in cutting, for the place is naked of flesh, and leave it without nerves and arteries.
And it is a wind that is blown on the ass and gives relief from hemorrhoids of the anus and from ulcers that are open.
And if you command the wind-maker to make a great wind, for the place is worthy of firm division; and a strong wind that does not cut should be made in cutting.
And the winds of the legs are made by a manifest minimization, for they attract the blood from all the body, and give relief from ancient pains of the chest and of the mother, and of the bladder; and they cause menstruation, and give relief to both urinary and faecal matters; and it is in place of cutting two veins, and alhorcoben, and two chilblains.
However, it does not beautify all the body and causes fainting in men.
And of the winds of alhorcoben, the relief is similar to the relief of two legs' wind.
And the quality of position of the winds is that you pause the wind at the beginning and let it go by early time, and do not prolong the position of the winds; rather, pause them slightly, and keep them in a controlled manner, and may the humors come to their place by adventitiousness. And it does not cease repeatedly, and continue inside until it sees the place turn red and inflate and see the appearance of the heat of the blood.
And then you cut off and repeat the flow slightly by slightly, and approach in disposition of the bodies.
For that man who is of tender flesh of the heart, it is appropriate that you cut him once and not more, so that the place is not ulcerated.
And command the wind-maker to amplify the cutting and make it slightly longer, and make the flow easily.
And if the blood is thick, then cut two times, for in the first time it makes the way of subtleization to the blood and to the liquidity of it. And may there be in the second to the acquired scrutiny of the extraction of the gross blood.
And if the blood is foul, then let there be made a cutting on the third time for it to achieve the latter.
And at last, when we want to extract the blood little by little or a little, it is enough with one cutting.
And if we want to extract from one blood, cut by the weight of cutting; and if we know that the blood is thick, then cut by a heavy cutting.
And the term of "cutting" in which is the depth of the knife so only.
And if the one of whom the knife is thick, hard, rough, and the pores are tight, then make the places of the winds smooth slowly, wide resolutely; and if it is in summer, then there is oil of aloe or oil of violet, or oil of strawberry flowers, or oil of chamomile of the flower-bed; and if it is in winter, then make oil of snow, or oil of lily, or oil of chamomile, or oil of garlic, and to those resemblances.
And if the superfluity is thick, scrape, then make the oil be violet, or oil of balsam, or oil of aloe, or oil of anise, and to those resemblances.
And if the wind-maker is of tender flesh, then make it not be with oil; and if these places of the winds of their appropriates, then make the wind be washed by a strong water, or by fresh water from the well, or by salt water, and resemblances to those.
And if the blood is of a moist thickness, then wash your winds with wine or water of mirth and pomegranate, and resemblances to those.
And if the superfluities are thick, then wash your winds with wine of age, or water of santer, which is marjoram, or of anise, or of chamomile, and to those resemblances.
And if the wind is kept in front of a bath; and if it is administered after one or two hours, and if it sleeps next to the wind.
What is necessary that the phlebotomist be ruled so as to govern the wind-making before the winds are made.
And if you consider the beginning: then if the wind-maker or that which should be cerebrospinal is hot and blows on the head of inflammation, then take causes that cool; as with cold grains, and melons with sweet wine, and pomegranates with fresh water, and honey, and to those resemblances.
And pause their food thus: with little grains, and meats of small birds, and mixed foods with sweetness, and to those resemblances.
And if the constitution is of the age of youth, then take in drinking honey-water or honey-water of ashwagandha of sweetens, and salt, and wine slightly between meal and food; and that it be commanded that he uses little of drink and eating, and pause his meals of little grain and canaan and pisons and pet birds and pigeons.
And so that on the day of ventosisio and of flebotomia the drink is greater than the food.
And so that it is given in drink at certain times to some men a tonic or medicinal drink, of musk or alcelid before the ventosisio or flebotomia or appropriately, so that the main members are comforted and the blood is thinned; and it is not necessary for them to take that scaly wound.
May the wounds that are to be sacrificed be those that are stopped with their own flesh and blood on the joints and heel, and the navel, because these members do not suffer from sacrifice.
And it is not desired for those except the attraction of blood from a member, so that with the pause of the wound on the breast in the flux of blood from the member's own wound; and they use that one to dissolve the firm wound of the member, so that with the pause on the belly and navel; because that thins out the member and scrapes it and causes pain because it resolves the wound.
And it is paused on the breasts when they happen in their operation or fever, because by virtue of the strong attraction of the leech's blood, the operation of the leech and the removal of the fever from its place.
And it seems that when it is paused on the flesh and blood, there should be a firm wound in those who are clamped down.
And these wounds are administered with juice only; and some are administered with fire.
And some wounds are administered full of running water in the navels of the patient.
And it is for that the wound is filled with water and made strong, or is water in which herbs are boiled to make it fit.
Form of wound administered with fire: the width of the opening should be two fingers wide, according to how we have formed it; and the quantity of the poison should be a quarter of an ounce; and it should be on the back side of it in its orbit, most of it, the trail should be small, according to the quantity that enters it a needle.
It is made of dried blood or citron, with large edges, lion, whale and tiger's bile in order that it not lead the member out of its own position.
And it is at the middle of it a transverse pole of dried blood or iron, where it is paused with candle to fire.
And this wound is greater than that which we have described before; and the smaller of that, according to the navels and the condition of the person who uses it.
And the wounds of old men and debilitated people are other than the wounds of young men and big-boned people.
And the quality of stopping this wound with fire on the member is that it extend the meat to the fire with a decent amount of candle-wax, and stop it in the middle of the transverse pole in the middle place of the wound, so that the fire be kindled from the start of the wound so that it does not burn the patient'
And it is paused on the member of the patient, and the trail on which we have said, until when we have opened the wounds and do not want to hold the trail and cause the vapor to rise over that trail, then stop the wound so often dissolved.
And he lights the meat according to his way, and repeats that if you do not want to hold it.
May the wound that is administered in the navel of the patient, with water, which does not have a transverse pole or trail, and is not administered but filled with water, and it is paused on the member only.
And this form of it: This wound, how much greater it is, the better it is, so that it may receive a great quantity of water.
Chapter xcvii.
Sanguineous wounds are not administered in motz members but in the members in which it is not possible to make positions of wounds, because of their smallness, or otherwise with the pot and gingiva and similar to them; or in a naked member of flesh, so that it seems like its own.
And the quality of using those which you have found blood-vessels that are in the clean water of a river or spring.
And they should be laid down in the morning and washed in clean water until they are hungry, and that no disorder occurs in the abdomen of them; and it is evacuated from the body with flebotomia and ventosisio; and it is rubbed on the member of the patient until it turns red; and they are paused on it.
And so they are filled and case.
And if it is possible to obtain juice from the wound, it is better to delay with treatment.
But if not, then wash the place with vinegar and prepare some water; and it should be rubbed and pressed.
And if the member is prolonged, then put the place where the blood-vessels are to rest in running water; and let it be covered with a cloth, and pause it on it until the residue is washed away.
And if the wound multiplies, then powder on it with trissated vitriol, or boil and similar to them of the stinging causes, until the wound is dried up; or the places are paused on it where the beans of cooked eggs are, and they are laid down until the beans stick to the place, and the wound is dried up.
And so, if necessary, a repetition of blood-vessels when it can be done to change them.
And if the blood-vessels are forbidden to suspend, then rub the place with fresh blood or hold an awl in the places until it stings; and they are paused on it, because those who do not feel any pain so often pause.
And when you want them to stop hurting, powder on the wound with a little of dried aloe, or salt, or ash; and sometimes often rub it.
As such begins the process of healing of the third part: of restoration. This chapter is necessary in the art of medicine; and it is restoration of a fracture and accidental dislocation in the bones.
Oh, son, know that these medical men boast of this chapter, and vulgar ones who never in their time have looked at the books of the ancients or read a letter from them.
And for this reason it is made that this way of the scientists in our land is kept secret; and I have not forgotten it at all in any season from all of them, and have not applied it except by a long reading of the books of the ancients and study on their understanding, until I drew out science from them.
And I have devoted myself to experimenting and studying in the length of my life.
And I have already written all this in this chapter as my science; and what it contains of my experiment and study in the length of my life; because it is not necessary for me to explain any further here what I have written about my experience, since it is explained in two other chapters that precede.
Chapter first.
The greatest and most complete treatment of broken bones, from which the following explanation is necessary before we begin to consider the various defects of each individual member. Thus, in the preface to this chapter, let us state the greatest and most complete treatment of this subject, which will make it necessary to consider at length each individual defect; for then the craftsmen will know or learn from those who already know and can practice this noble art better than you.
And therefore say that when it happens to one of the fractures or dislocations or twists or jolts, at first you should cauterize or cut off the part concerned, or both together, if it is not forbidden by some cause, thus gradually removing the harm with virtue, or if it is a fracture which has just occurred, or if it is in decrepitude, or if it is during a time of violent heat, or of intense cold.
Then provide himself with a diet of green herbs and meat of fowls and crabs; and forbid gross meats and any food that fills the veins with blood, unless you are certain that there will be no effusion of matter into the member.
Then return the patient to his normal position first by the way he usually lies.
And therefore say that when the broken bone begins to be restored, let the patient eat nutritious food of meat and fat and heavy and thick in which there is viscosity, also food made from wheat ground with water, and rice, and roots, and feet, and bellies of cows, and geese, and fresh fish, and such like food, and at this diet a coagulability of the fracture will be achieved more gently and more easily.
And know that bones break in old people and in decrepitude it is not possible that they should continue or be consolidated according to their nature by the drying up of the limbs of them.
But nature itself, by its arrangement and attachment to the broken bone, in any way that adheres and strengthens it until it is joined together, so that it comes to an end of strength and firmness; thus fire at first, so that by some cause it does not prevent those works from being done.
And for this reason you must pause the patient's food, food in which there is gravity and viscosity and thickness, as we have said.
And know that the kinds of fractures are different according to the different members, a fracture of the hip bone is different from a fracture of the head bone; and a fracture of the foot bone is different from a fracture of the leg bone; and all the other members are different from each other.
And I will present before you the entire species of fractures, separated in a separate chapter from the others.
There are different types of fractures within themselves. There are different types of fractures within themselves; for it happens that a fracture is curved in some places and not in others; and some are caused by the impact of a hard object, and others by the fall from a height: and there is a fracture due to pain and disturbance in the head, and a small fracture.
And to each species of fracture is assigned its own peculiar pain or trouble in the restoration; for it will be remembered separately in its place.
There are different signs of a fractured bone. And this is recognized by the curvature of the bone, and by its eminence and appearance when it is felt; and it is recognized by the bone when it is held in your hand.
And therefore when it is not in the apparent curved position and does not cause great pain when touched by motion, then there is no fracture; but if the patient has great pain, then he must have a broken bone.
And in the meantime it may be a curvature or a small fracture, so that you do not feel it when you hold it in your hand and press it together; but pause for a moment from the medicines of which you have a reminder that moment when you put it on; and make it tight by tightening it slightly.
And know that when the site is curved and does not split into two or another, except for the fact that it is broken in its whole length, then you must begin immediately to correct it by cauterizing it where it has happened; because if it is not corrected immediately, there will be a serious consequence.
And if cauterization has been applied to it, then leave it alone for a few days until the swelling stops; and make it move in any way you can, by levitation or by another method.
And know that the restoration of it and the reduction of it is more gentle than with the bone in which this has happened.
Then make it strong by what will come next, when you remember it.
But if the bone is broken in two parts, then it is necessary to separate them by two feet or more, if it is the arm or the leg; or by two hands or by one hand and a foot.
Then place the limb in a position where it will not be moved by your own movement; and if those parts which are broken have been spread out from the limb, then you must make an incision so that they may move again into their natural place; and do this in such a way as to facilitate their return to their natural place.
And take care that nothing happens to the patient through your own operation or injury; and do it in such a way as to be able to apply the bone to another, according to its best form.
And in this hour you can take advantage of touching that member by yourself; and if there is any other reason, correct it and bring it together by the quantity of your strength.
Then do not make an excessive extension or compression; for this would cause an unnecessary apoplexy by the operation of the muscles, or a constriction of the limb, as when we saw it by the operation of the muscles of the leg.
And the quality of the limb's relaxation is what I recommend; for you should know that broken limbs are different in their smallness and size and shape.
And of those that are small like a bird or a bee; so that the wrapping be with a thin cloth.
And of those that are large like the hip or the back; let there be a thick wrapping around it, for when the tight wrap is applied to a large limb with a strong hold, it connects the limb in all its parts with a severe grip, and thus prevents the spread of the fracture.
And then start, and your evacuation of the fluid, pause in a convenient way in water, on the spot of that fracture with three wrappings or four according to whether the member deserves it; and strengthen your hand a little by the joint.
And then see if the patient is in a more stable position on the side of the fracture, and strengthen your hand that does not hold the joint; and tighten it as much as you can. And then extend yourself a little bit more in the joint of the fracture, and soften your grip little by little until you feel it start to move.
And then take another object and wrap it over the joint with three wraps, and then see if the wraps can be moved a bit more from the fracture; and your operation in the grip of the joint and softening of that as I have said in the first wrapping.
And then pause between the wraps of leather or cloth wrapped around the joint where the curvature of the fracture is; if there is a curvature in it; and do not pause for any reason.
And then pause over another object, and then wrap it tightly with the help of a stick as much as possible if there is no inflammation or effusion at the site, and then pause over that water where that effusion or pus is found, and leave it for some time; and then tighten your grip on that.
And the sticks that make up most of the joint should be made of cane, and it should be formed wisely; or they should be made of oak; or they should be made of palm branches; and the width of each stick should be according to this form and shape:
But also that the stick that is paused over that fracture should be a little thicker and a little further away from the other sticks than those; and the length of the stick according to its magnitude and smallness; and then tighten on the sticks with another object according to your first grip, and then loosen it little by little as I have said in the grip; and this is your grip according to the site of the fracture, and how much it is away from the fracture, the more it is away from the fracture, the less is the grip.
And also that the threads should be of medium thickness and thin, and if they are thick, then cut them with a sharp knife by stopping in between those strings of leather, and it is a great mistake to stretch the joint too much; for if you stretch it, the grip will be equal.
And especially thin threads are not convenient, because you will not be able to get a grip with them; and it is not convenient that there be space between one stick and another of up to a finger.
And if the patient is seated or lying on his side, pause those of leather or woolen thread between the sticks in order that they do not damage him.
Some fractures are caused by a blow, and it happens that the tendon is interrupted, and I come to remember in those of the capitulum according to its uniqueness.
And you should know that a broken limb does not heal with sticks in the first day; and this is because the limb, if it is large, does not hold up to the pressure of stopping on the sticks for one day or two or more, according to your confidence about the coming of an effusion.
This is the way that the ancient physicians used to treat, who placed them over a fracture and dislocation and torsion.
A method of treatment as a shower of restoration for a fracture, complex in nature and more so for women and children, because it is cool to the touch and does not cause friction: and you take powder of flour, and that is the dough; and that moves with the movement of the mill on the sides of the millstone.
And then see if it is suitable, but rather take it as it is, and pause the process of it that is not thin nor subtle; and then use that.
Another way of dressing wounds healing fractures and dislocations and twists: Take assa-fetida, laquemum, acacia, anise, and mirra, which is called the grain of salvity, all in one dragon; myrrh and aloe in another dragon; alochile in a third dragon; and all are to be finely ground and mixed with either water or with the white of an egg if the patients complexion is scarred; and then use this plaster for it confers good composition and restores broken bones lightly, and gives health to many men.
Another way of dressing wounds healing fractures and twists: Take myrrh and aloe in one dragon; mirra and aloe in another dragon; acacia in a third dragon; and bole armeniac in the fourth dragon.
All threads should be mixed with mortar to make a paste, and they should be thinned out with water or white of egg, and given to the patient.
A method of treating joints and separated bones from their sites, and it is pain to happen in them or cracks and fractures: take wool thread and dip it in wine vinegar and olive oil, and then pause it on the site.
It is not useful for this plaster to restore, to expel an effusion of fluid, or to remove pain in particular.
Another way that plaster restores a broken limb: take leaves of fig tree and leaves of poppy sauvage; grind them all into a paste.
A method of fresh plaster administered for the restoration of fracture of bones and when you want a resolution of an effusion: take razes of mint, chamomile, violet flowers, flour of erba, all of which. i. All threads should be thinned out with water if the limb is not scalded.
But if it is scalded, then take it with water of coriander or with water and use that.
Another way to treat it strongly in resolution than the first, when an effusion is caused: take razes of mint, hyssop, marjoram, violets, chamomile, all of which; all threads should be thinned out with water if the limb is not scalded. But if it is scalded, then take it with water of coriander or with water and use that. In any case, all these ingredients should be boiled in a piece of cloth. All these threads should be thin if the member is swollen.
But the Hippocrates did not say that a plaster placed on the injured limb should be removed and dried, but rather that it should be made with a certain material, and this is to be applied over the limb with its injury; and also that it should not be made of any material other than those mentioned in this text.
But the Quailia is also seen that it should be placed over the injured limb for its restoration and to treat the causes of its drying up with a small quantity of calamine, as with myrrh, and like those causes that we have recommended.
A method of plaster that is applied to a wound and pain: take ground pepper, garlic, hair of men or feathers, and salt; all ingredients should be mixed together as thick paste; the threads should be thinned out with water if necessary; it is made of those ingredients in order. All threads should be thin.
But the quantity should be according to which is able to keep the bandage in place and then remove it, and if there is no pain or injury nor is the bone broken, the member does not hurt him from his site; then you do not remove it with a certain number of days. And if it happens to the place of violent pain or pricking or swelling, then you lie down or shift it at that time, and apply the poultice to him.
And take a cloth and dip it in marine water, and submerge that in boiling water, and wash that place until the pricking or pain subsides and the pain is soothed; then let rest the limb for an hour; and place wool soaked in wine or rosewater on him, and lay that on him for an hour until you are sure of a blister, and that the swelling of the limb stops, and its pain is relieved.
Then repeat that slight constriction and small poultice and do not tighten it due to your first tightness, and wash lightly that place so that it is healed.
And if all those pain and swelling and all those accidents have been completely relieved and poultices and constriction no longer help him, then you repeat that same treatment as the patient recovers his strength.
And if nothing happens to the limb of those things that we have said, then do not lie down on it until three or four or five or seven days; And some women treat all that for twenty days according to how the limb breaks down, and if it is not broken, then let rest on top of its clotting, as we have said;
Then tighten it more than in your first tightness, and adjust the thickness of the patient's food according to how his memory returns.
And if you find that the broken place is completely dry and exhausted more than it can cover, then know that food cannot reach him; and therefore dip him in marine water completely so that he is wet, and be that way for three days; and ease a little constriction, and with this operation restore movement to the limb, and it will be slightly healed.
And if he does not restore the broken limb completely the first time, according to how it covers, and restore it according to its tortuosity, is an error according to its operation, and a great fear, and if he should make him grow larger the ancient joints in his free state, and go up with him into the water.
And I have not seen anyone do this to him before, so it is reasonable that he does not do it.
Capitol according to: Of the fracture when it happens on the head.
The types of fractures are different, and the causes are distinct, since some fractures are caused by impact with a spike, and that impact breaks all the bone inside it, and leaves it broken, as if it were broken by a blow in one place, and perches on the back of the other; and this type of fracture is called "absolute levitation."
And the plague of these two fractures is either great or small, and the fracture that is contraction or atrangement; and its cause is impact with a stone or falling from a height, and they are similar in appearance.
And this fracture is either perforating so that it brings the skin near to the bone, or in the face of the bone; and the plague of these two fractures is either great or small.
And some fracture is that it softens in the bone, in the subtlety of fine hair, and this type of fracture is called "capillary fracture."
And it is a fracture that is caused by impact with the ground or by impact with a stone, and similar to what happens, which makes some of the bone's layers enter inside, and is broken in the hollow place as if you were to break them when they are inside, and this type of fracture is called "perforating fracture."
And mostly it is broken here in the bones of humans, as if they were caps of candles.
And all these special fractures are deadly, and that is how they are called. And I come back with a memory of all this in its place.
And I have discovered all these special types of fractures by detection on those and by questioning them, and by noticing the corruption of flesh that is on them.
And the capillary specialty is known by the blood that is discovered on the bone, and it is washed, and it is not noticed on it because the fracture appears black.
And in the treatment of fractures consider at first the patient' s accidents, and if you find by manifest sign that it means pain, as if it were vomiting from cholera, and ekstasis, and loss of mind, and absence of breath, and fainting, and high fever, and a smell of the body and its heat, and similar things to those accidents in major situations, then do not heal.
And if you do not find these non-correctable accidents, then begin to heal him.
And the cause is because if it came to you with plague in the beginning and it is plagued, and that is the way it is in the twelfth day according to all dispositions.
And if it is in the summer days, then know that you will heal the bone before the seventh day, and let rest the bone in front of you while that is left behind the skin, and that happens to the patient' s accidents as we have said.
And if the fracture has reached the skin that covers the neck, and is broken into small pieces and atranging, then know that you will break the broken piece according to what I recommend.
And that you remove the head of the troubled patient, and discover what is on the bone according to custom and its way, and let it be slight on the patient.
And if it happens to you, the bone' s detection, and blood or blister cauterization, then pause him with water that cools him down, and let it be quiet in the place of the blister, and it is certain of blood loss; and when you are sure of the blister, and start working on the bone' s circumference and removal.
And let that be according to one of two ways of operation.
And the first way is that you break the bone with a straight knife, and this is how it is done: And then administer another knife like this one, slightly smaller than that one; and this is how it is done:
And then administer a larger knife more than the second one.
And let there be different knives whose some are larger than others; and some of them are smaller than those ones, and they are sharp in their tips, and made of iron or steel.
And use them easily on the knife that does not cut the head and that one cuts it.
And if the bone is strong and hard, then know that you perforate it before administering the knives on its sides, which are called  "non-deep taravels."
And they are not called that way because those do not stop the end of the bone from the water that is above it, as if it were a small circle or margin on the bone, which prohibits being submerged and passing the bone' s substance.
And it is convenient that you take many of these taravels, and the quantity of them depends on what each bone' s substance requires, until it is present in all the bones of the neck whose tip is sharp, and the length and brevity depends on the amount of the bone' s substance.
And this is the form of three types of instruments: The quality of piercing into the circuit of a broken bone is that you pause the instrument over the bone and turn it around with your fingers until you feel that the bone has already been penetrated; and then move it to another place, and pause where all the thickness of the ray or surround it.
And then insert with the chisel between each break of the bone, and make that subtle pus which can be on it at the end of levitation, as I have said, in order to root out the bone, or with your hand, or for some other cause by any instrument which you will prepare for water, in such a way as to tanalize and forceps subtle.
And so that you keep with all care that the chisel does not touch any cause of cyphac.
And so when you have finished the circuit of the bone perforating, and separate from cyphac if it is continued to it, and extract that, with care and caution that races and engules that in the asperity of it from water that it is in the bone with another instrument similar to a chisel, but rather that it is pus thick and subtle than the other chisels.
And if any part of the small and satagic bones remains, then take it with ease with water that it is necessary for you with instruments; and then curar the plague with leeches and wet those which we have said.
And another way of operation is very simple, far from fear, which says Gualia and the lauzec for great lausor; and this is the speech of it: It is necessary to you in the beginning that you start to uncover the joint of the bone in the place where the fracture is most violent and most obvious, so that when you have uncovered that joint and have paused apart him the extremities of this chisel soft and pleasant by which this is the form:
And that the lenticular joint is leon and not inscideys any cause, and the sharp joint is of it in two sides before in length, so that sometimes; that the lenticular joint is adjusted to cyphac at the face of it that inscides sharp in the bone.
And then you hit with the chisel on one side a small malet within that you inscides all the bone with ease so that it is turned, and you are sure of the panicle that does not happen in it an accident that you fear in any way, and if the medicine was pus fol of all men and more ignorant of their; certainly, and if it was a dorment.
And then if Rome any cause annexed to the bone of the panicle in some places of os, inscidira that of it at the extremities of the chisel that lenticular one, and releases that of it with ease, for it is released from it to no nocument and to no fear.
And if the fracture of the bone does not penetrate into the panicle, and that which is abscidit or remains in the bone is the face of it, and there are in its asperity and satagies subtils, then you race that asperity and root out those satagies with razor subtil by which you have prepared the number, of various quantities so that it is possible to administer of them at any place the pus convenient for them and the most right of them according to that which you are lost your operation that bone trencat and the figure of it.
And so that you administer in your razor with the which rases the bone at the beginning the most late of those razors, and then use immediately him of the most subtil of it, and do not cease to make water according to continuity within which you arrive to administer the pus teon and the most subtil of all.
But in any other small fracture capilar and subtle fracture, so that you administer care according to that which you are lost to the rectificacin of it.
And this is a cause for not being used in all those who have studied in that art. And he wrote on it that we have shown in great fractures.
And if the panicle is retangut when you root out the bone, then take care that you take a cloth of it according to the quantity of the plague, and immerse that in oil rozat, and pause that over the orifice of the plague; and then take other cloth double or triplicat and immerse him in vi e oli rozat and pause that over prim-cloth and make water on that pus leugierament that you can about it, that does not strenhas cyphac; and then administer on that liament lat, and do not press that except for the quantity of the plague so only.
And leave that with this care for a day or two until you are sure of the apoplema caut; and then remove that and then administer medicines to those by which it is superfluous siccitat, so that rases of lin and flour of ers, and powder of enses and aristology, and similar to these.
And this is that you make of these medicines powder that you sprinkle on the plague, as they are dry; and universally, administer in that all medicine of property by which it is Abstergescac and not morderque.
And keep you according to your virtue that the plague in your cure is net; and is not in a surdicia of enguent or other; nor does you leave agreguar virulencia on it; for when it is adjusted on the panicle of the brain, corrupts that one and gives it that, and happens about the patient's leg.
And happens in the cyphac of the cap, from which it is mondificat the bone and more when it is expressed the cure of it, and is negror in the surface of it; and then consider at that time if it happens to the patient' leg those accidents that we have said, you would know that it is parnicioses all.
And if it does not happen blackness but of the medicine that is paused on it, and is in the virtue of that medicine that makes that blackness, then you take of honey a part and of oil rozat parts. iii. and to them linen a cloth, and then pause that over the cyphac; and then cure that with the species of cure that are convenient within that be sanar.
Capitol
of Restoracion of the nose when it is trincat.
You would know that it is not trencat of the nose but two pieces of pus independent, or one of those alcunas screened, for so it has two bones, because the joint of them is cartilaginosa, and is not trencada and does not happen to it but atricio and tortuositat and sinuitat.
But if it is trencada the one of the two parts of it, then you enter the dit petit in the nose of it, and that engualhas that fracture dedintz am the tieu dit indic, and with the dit pous defora, within that returns the nose according to its natural figure. And be made by it for you with ease, and keep you that does not box by that your operation on the patient' legs.
And if the fracture is in the most independent party of the nose, and the dit does not perforate that, then it is equated to the extreme of the ray in which it is subtil thick.
And if the fracture is in two parts, then you make the semblant of it.
And rest for you in the restoration of it on the first day that is possible; and then after, you enter to the seven or eight days to make a pause for the apoplema caut.
And enters in the extreme of the nose a cloth meca of prim, if the fracture is in one party, or metz two calguas, if the fracture is in two parties, and be it in the grossitut of such quantity that it fills the trauc of the nose.
And I said to some of the ancient restorers that the horses should be covered in cloth and that they should be changed every day, but it has not been seen by me; except that if the joint is covered with albumen from milk that has been powdered then leave it inside until the bone stops aching and the cartilage hardens.
And some of the servants are put between the nose, in place of the calva, otherwise it will be wrapped in cloth of lion that he is covered; and it is that already has broken the nose with force and that the patient is not forbidden to breathe.
This cause is not necessary for you; and if you want, make water, and if you want, make calvas.
And if another serva should break a tooth, grind it with cerume or with a piece of wood in vinegar and rosewater, or with a diamond.
But if another serva does not break a tooth, then return that it is covered with flour of sizami and with powdered ensete cofigit mixed with albumen from milk; and place over it the skin of a lion, and do not put the nose in any way.
But if the bones of the nose are broken or fractured, then return that you split over them, and extract them with instruments suitable for them; and then sew up the split, and cure it with water that hardens and consolidates it, and with plaster suitable for it.
And if there is a plague inside the nose, then return that you cure it with calvas and administer pipes of lead inside so that they are all cured.
Chapter 2.4
Of the restoration of the mandible when it is broken.
When the mandible is broken and the fracture is only outward, and not curved on either side, but bent towards the inside, then its perception is slight.
And therefore, if the fracture is on the right side, then you introduce the little finger of the left hand into the mouth of the patient; and with ease if the fracture is on the left side of the mandible, then return it to its proper place; and move it slightly from the inside towards the outside, in the same way as you would move a tooth that has come out. And apply this to both sides of the break in the bone.
And if the fracture of the mandible has separated into two parts, then return that you administer extension of two parts according to their orientation so that the equation of it is possible.
And if there is a dislocation of the teeth, then strengthen those from which you hope that they will break with wire of gold or silver or reed; and place them on the mandible that has broken, wrapped in cloth, and place it on a double sheet, and place it on the star-shaped thread, or a string of a single thread according to its length; and then return it above the other one so that the bond is established with ease, and that it does not break.
And order the patient to rest and be quiet, and stop his food being sour or bitter.
And if you think that the shape has already changed in some way, then return it on the third day; and then correct it as much as it has been altered, and cover it with flour of wheat, with albumen from milk, or with flour of cypress, so that you no longer have to remove the cloth from it, and place it on the leather of a lion.
And when it is joined and adjusted, then leave it as it is, that it does not fall until it has healed and strengthened the fracture; for if you move it before it has healed, this fracture will last three weeks.
And if another serva should break a tooth, then return that you administer water to it that has been boiled twice, and that you mend the tooth that has broken.
And if the fracture is a tooth that has come out, then consider whether it is separated or stuck to the bone, then return that you administer water that hardens to the tooth in its attachment to the bone.
And if the hole of the fracture is small, then return that you widen it according to the quantity of your need.
And when you have stopped those that are hanging, and those that do not hang, return to the hole of the fracture if it is large; and otherwise place them over one of the leathery covers that you administer water to them so that they harden, and that they are healed.
Chapter 5.
Of the restoration of the fork when it is broken.
It has been broken on one side of the front part of the muscle, and this fracture is done in one of three ways.
It has either been broken, or separated, or separated into two parts that do not hang, and this is difficult to restore; or it is like this that the fracture occurs in the hanging part, and this is difficult to restore; or it is like this that the fracture occurs in the tooth, and this is easy to restore.
And the operation in this case, when the fracture is a tooth, is that you bring two assistants, so that one of them holds the fork that has broken and moves it to the side; and the other extends the jaw at that split.
And return it to its proper position with the teeth, so that it takes the shape of it as it was; and not in its little prominence or concavity.
And if you are in need of an extension, then return that you pause the tickling of the patient with a cloth or with leather, and make it larger according to your need; and extend and raise the fork and cover it with your hand so that it covers the fracture as much as possible.
And if you cannot put the end of the fork on either side, because it comes out to the front, then return that the patient is supported on his neck, and place a cushion over the muscle of it in half its size.
And the assistant presses the muscle of the patient on its split sides so that the end of the fork comes out in the front, and then return it to its proper position with the teeth.
But if you feel hanging of the fork and they are annoying, then return that you cut them off with ease.
And if it is caught on the bone, then you will have to use an invention of it from one of the tools that you have administered water to, because you had stopped the fork from its attachment; and this tool can be made of wood or of iron, with which this shape has been given.
And it looks like one of these [tools]; and make it larger according to your need for water, and according to the size of the bone or its length.
But the length of it should be as much as possible for the operation; that there are two extremes, and one extreme is wide and the other is narrow.
And if the dislocation of the tooth that you have extracted from the bone is wide, and certain that there will be a swelling after the operation, then return that you adjust the two lips of the tooth with sutures.
And if the dislocation is small, or you are afraid of swelling after the operation, then return that you use cloth and powder according to the quantity of the split in the tooth.
And if there is a swelling after the operation, then return that you wrap it in vinegar and rosewater and vinegar; and place it over that.
And then that the star does not break the broken bone; and so that you see the patient every day, that when the ligament is softened or you see the tablet has already been relieved, then you correct it and tighten the bandage.
And approprimate put the patient to sleep on his neck, and leave the seed of him in a small cushion; so that, from there, is raised the assistant of him by the lat of that, and thus is raised the fracture of the furcula to the elevation of the muscle; or be the arms of it tied to the neck of that.
And do not loosen the ligament unless an accident happens in the place immediately or swelling, within twelve days.
And appropriately renew the plaster if you have seen the face of it to water, and adjust in the tightness and restore that and leave within that it is restored and is coagulated the fracture of the furcula.
And is strengthened and comforted according to the month in twenty-eight days, and some watched in some men is done in the time of that.
Chapter VI.
Of the Restoration of a Shoulder Fracture.
A spatula pie is broken in the place of it late and not broken from it but the edges.
And when it is broken the place of him  and is broken in the middle place of him  and is not known except by touch, then according that it is the figure of the fracture displaced you prepare it for him and reduce that according to the natural figure in all ways of engineering with which it is possible.
And approprimate put over the place flour dust mixed with milk of the hen and lion's foot; and approprimate put cloth dust in two folds; and approprimate put over the tablet a thin board according to the quantity of the spatula whole or less a little.
Then if the seed is concave in some places of the spatula, then you swallow that concave with lion' s foot, and approprimate put the tablet according to equality.
And approprimate tighten it with a long hand from its contraction and its tightening of the tablet within that it is not relieved from its place.
And consider the ligament every day; and all watched that it is softened, another watch and tighten it and equalize the tablet if it is relieved from its place.
And beat the patient over his lat.
And the spatula is restored in twenty days or in fifty.
Then when this number is completed, then you dissolve the ligament, and that you know assuredly because that is of the bones whose beginning is not painful nor its dissolution.
And if you break the place of the bone that is heavy and put away the cord, then you cut it over it, and stop it, and do according to what I have said in the fracture of the furcula of sadness of swelling watch if it happens here.
Chapter VII.
Of the Restoration of a Foot Fracture.
The foot in some watched is broken in the middle place of him and is pie broken therein; more the extremities of it are broken that they are ciccadas and comminuted.
And of the accidents of him when it is broken in the middle of him is that it declines to the insides and happens to him great pain, and difficulty in drinking, and coughing, and holding himself strong and vomiting blood; and is declared in his cavity in the broken bone and is not hidden from feeling.
And the restoration of it is that he is raised up the patient on his two feet, and put between the shoulder blades of him a cushion; and approprimate press the muscles of him, and adjust the ribs of him to the sides of the two sides, and subtily you in the operation of him and in the equality according to all ways that it is possible and that convenes to water, within that he returns the figure of the bone according to what I have said.
And approprimate put the plaster and tow over it and open a thin board of wood or of caligari and of its resemblance in levitation, because you wrapped that around with cloth; and approprimate subtilize in tying that on the broken bone that is not relieved; and go to the bandage according to roundedness of the back of some watched, and tighten that by the tightness going down; and approprimate consider the bandage every hour, and whenever it is softened tighten that.
And if necessity causes to the relief of that deves corrosion or pruziment, or pain, or swelling which happens in the place, then you cut and destroy that and eradicate the plaster and correct it that is happened by water according to the way of curing him; and appropriately reduce the plaster, if times to water the face; and adjust the tightness within that he is healed.
Chapter VIII.
Of Restoration of Ribs When They Are Broken.
Know that fracture of the ribs does not happen except in large places which touch each other; and from the extremities of them from the insides do not happen to those contusions except by water because they are cartilaginous. And the knowledge of it is not hidden from feeling because of the question of it to the sides of the six.
And the restoration is also that it is united the fracture according to the ways that are possible, within that it is swallowed according to what I have said; and approprimate plaster and tighten the bone broken with the stela, if you are disturbed by that.
And if the fracture of the ribs is declining to the insides, then happen to the patient great pain and punctures, and so happens to that which has wept, and by water because the bone is put under the veils; and happens to the difficulty of cleaning, and coughing, and vomiting from a strong pain; and this one is difficult to heal.
And already the Ancients are prepared in that with strong medicines.
And of them so that you say: Heal the patient who has made a swelling go down and ventilation, because his belly is swollen and extended, and the fracture is driven to the insides.
Then we should prepare it by water because it is not likely to cause swelling to generate, if it happens; and if it has happened, then help is already with it.
And some of them say that it should be stopped from ventilation and approprimate drink with strength; and is similar to reasoning, however, it is feared that ventilation will throw the excesses to the place because of weakness.
And some of them say: Cover that place with a wool that has already been submerged in oil, and let the powder be between the ribs within that it is filled, that the bandage be tight when you wrap that around according to roundedness; and approprimate heal the patient with the cure of pleurisy and ventilation and medicine.
And if a violent constriction causes the loins not to endure, and the bones of the loins cause pain by puncturing their veils, then wait until they break into place, uncover from the broken ribcage, and immediately remove that instrument which contains the cypher, whose memory is preceded, and which carves the bones easily, and removes it.
Then let them adjust the two lips of the wound, if it is large, with a wound, and treat that with plaster within to heal.
And if pus comes out inside, then let them cut and pour rosin powder in oil and place it over the area, and wash the loins with water that covers the pus inside.
And let it be raised over the bed on which he sleeps, so that it may heal.
Chapter .IX
Of Restoring a Fracture of the Spine in Two and the Neck.
Some broken bones of the neck, and also to their atricles, and similar to the spines of the back. And if water comes out a lot and you want to know if it will heal or not, then consider, for often their muscles are already weakened and stupefied and dead and cannot stretch them or strengthen them and when you pinch them with a needle there is no pain in them, then you will know that it does not heal, and in the same situation it is deadly.
And if those muscles hurt when pinched and pricked, then you will know that the spine of the bone is saved and that the loins are healed with medicine.
And if you see the spines of the neck similar to water and want to know if it will heal or not, then consider the feet.
If you find that they are already weakened, and water comes out which happens in most cases, and when you stand on their back, there is wind and excretion of their own will, and some broken backs rise up on their back, and they want to urinate but cannot, then you know that it is deadly, and do not work on their healing.
Maybe if there is no cause for those, the cause is better and lighter.
The healing of the loins is that you pierce into the space behind the spine with olive oil, or with a needle full of herbal tar; place over that tar sometimes, and let it rest inside for some time until the pus is healed.
Then place one of the plasters that remain comfortable and existing, and strengthen it with a thread; and order the loins to rest and be peaceful, and not sleep on the bed where they are uncomfortable, so that they may heal.
And if the fracture of the bone is severe or there is some cause that has already separated from it, then wait for it to dry on the bandage and sew those bones together; and immediately adjust the two lips of the wound, with sutures if it is large, and immediately treat those with blood clots inside them, so that they may heal.
Maybe if the back of the bone is broken, and it is the end of the spine, then let them enter with the left hand into the back, and join the broken bone with the other hand as quickly as possible by means of a thread; and immediately place plaster over it and tie it up, if you are tired of those, and strengthen that.
And if you feel severe fractures on your loins, then let them sit on that, and strengthen it, and treat the wound with medicine that precedes to heal it.
Chapter 10.
Of Restoring a fracture of the spine.
The bones of the neck, if broken, then that fracture is not different in its ends and is spread out along its length and declines towards the fractures inside; and pain in the area occurs when it is broken, and the chest is stupefied when the fracture happens.
The healing of that is that you stretch your hand over it so that it is above the fracture, which is the shape of the spine.
And if that fracture is only at one end, then you drink that water in order to assemble it again according to its natural shape.
Maybe if the fracture is long or has already declined towards the fractures inside, then you prepare your loins to heal that fracture. And then when you have healed that, place plaster over it, and strengthen it with a thread or bandage, and do not fear the fracture's puncturing or moving of the stelha.
And drink the concave shape with water that fills it up, so that it keeps equal, and order the loins to sleep on their back or keep their sides open.
Maybe if you have pus inside, then stop the spreading of it and the healing of that pus until it is healed, and place water on it according to what precedes; and immediately return to the healing of your loins, and strengthen it with a thread or bandage.
And if the bone is severed or broken into pieces, then you join them together.
Chapter 11.
Of Restoring a fracture of the assistant.
The assistant is the shoulder that is between the ribs at the top of the shoulder blade.
The healing of that is in two ways, the first of which is that you take a small piece of wood and make it with a thread or bandage, and this is how you heal it:
And tie the two ends of those threads together, and then hang them from an elevated place.
And order the loins to lie on a pillow; and immediately cut off the end of the arm that is broken, so that it reaches up to the middle of the back where the curve of the shoulder begins, and the limb is attached to that curve.
Then suspend it over some difficult cause, or let the medicine flow into the fractures inside; and immediately bring the fracture together again, so that the fracture returns according to what precedes.
The other way is that the loins are raised above their necks and strengthened with a thread; and order two servants to hold one of them by the water, which opens the fracture with its hands, and another holds the pus away from it; and each of them stretches their side.
If you want the spreading to be stronger, then let them stretch those sides with two threads or bandages and each of the servants stretches their side.
And if the fracture is close to the end of the muscle, then it should be held in place at its middle over a pillow and the other end of the muscle is broken into pieces.
And if the fracture is close to the shoulder, then it should be held in place on that spot and on the shoulder itself.
Drink water easily, and do not be afraid of a fracture if it occurs; then strengthen that when it is healed, and if you do not have water, then find a way to obtain it.
Maybe if you have pus inside, then release it on the seventh day, and place over it a fine woolen thread soaked in olive oil within vinegar until the pus is healed, and then strengthen that.
The way to strengthen that is to place plaster over the fracture, and then cover the plaster with a drape: and then adjust the arms over the assistant, and place their hands on their shoulders.
And put the drape and stretch over the assistants' arms so that the arm is in place of the foot, if it is not prohibited by any cause of broken bone.
Then use a staff.
And it is that you pause over the fracture those staff which is put beside and stronger than the others staves; and pause between each staff the thickness of the said, and be the length of the staves according to the fracture adding three inches of all side.
Then stretch over the staves in the width which was mentioned at the beginning of the chapter.
And it is that your width over the place of the fracture be wider. And when the fracture is shorter, make the width smaller.
So if you place the situation of the staves and the width as we have said at the hour in which you restore the member to its position, then do so.
And if you fear gangrene, leave the width and the staves inside on the seventh day as we have said before.
Then consider the member in all parts for three days so that no happens in the place inflammation or swelling; or is prohibited the food reach to the member by disposition of superfluity of width; and then correct everything according to what we have said.
But if you are sure that there will not be any cause of that, then do not untie the bandage until three days or more have passed.
And let it sleep in his bed on its back, and its legs be over the stomach.
Then put on the assistant's foot a full bed of wool and consider in all hours of the night or the day that there is not broken the figure of the broken member, or that the joint is soft; then correct everything according to your virtue.
Then put the food of the patient according to the order which we have said before, that the food be not heavy at the beginning but becomes stronger; then cover when it becomes thick.
And it is that the custom of the assistant and the patient's leg be strong in ten days; and then cover them, and let it be given a bath and be medicated with ointments which correct that.
And if the fracture is stiff, then do not untie the joint and the staves from that day or from two months.
Chapter XII.
Of Restoration of a Fracture of the Arm.
The arm is composed of two bones which are called two shafts; the one is small and is that which is said to be below, and the other is large and is that which is placed on the side away from the small said, from the starting point more distant.
And the heavy shaft is broken alone, or the small one, and the tips of both are strong.
And when the small shaft is broken above, then the restoration of it is easier, and its healing is faster.
And when the shaft is broken below the fracture, the healing of it is difficult, and its healing is difficult.
And worse than that is when two bones are broken together.
Then if the broken bone is the small shaft above, it is convenient to the doctor, considering the restoration of it, that it be covered with a thin bandage easily within that it be covered.
But if the large shaft is that which is broken, then cover it with a thick bandage violently.
And if both shafts are broken together, then cover them with a strong bandage tightly.
Then cover the figure of the patient more tightly than for its restoration and its extension on a cushion, and be the hand of the patient over the parts above, as well as all others said, and the ear be placed in a bowl-shaped base.
Then a cushion before him in height or behind him, so that the patient does not work hard.
Then the minister extends the arm from the starting point more distant to the hand of the patient or to the joint, and another minister extends over it gently.
Then the doctor covers the bone within that it is not seen again according to the best figure that can be made.
And if in the fracture of the bone there are no signs, then do not use any ointment at all according to your virtue.
And if in the separate fracture there is no pain or does not respond to your expectations in the restoration of it, then do not use any specific method above it and let it heal by itself.
But if the fracture is due to pain, I have already written a special chapter on it, and therefore take that treatment.
And if a gangrene occurs at the beginning of your restoration, then you will prepare a paste of ash and salt, and let it rest for three days; then put on staff over that fracture more distant and stronger.
You know that the number of staves of the arm is two when the fracture is in one shaft or in both together.
Then stretch over the place of the fracture more strongly and violently, and when it is less painful to remember it in the beginning of the chapter.
The blankets which are wrapped around the fracture should be soft and moist, not hard or sharp, and the string to secure them should be thin, as we have said before.
Then consider the member and the bandage for three days. And if any cause occurs that requires a correction, such as when you are applying pressure to the member with a string, then cover it with water gently until that pressure stops.
Then remove the member without stretching it so that it rests, and return to the width.
And if the width is already softened and the bone is almost healed with a good appearance, then correct everything according to your virtue.
Then consider whether the food reaches to the member by superfluity of width, because it softens that slightly and leaves it for several days until the food is given again, then stretch it.
But if there is no cause of those we have said, then do not untie the bandage until approximately ten days or more have passed.
Then hang the patient by his hands above the ground with a strong rope for its movement to be active, and let him sleep on his back.
You know that this fracture is restored in thirty days or in thirty-two days, and it is restored strongly in twenty-eight days, and everything depends on the order of complicatedness and virtue.
Chapter XIII.
Of Restoration of a Fracture of the Hand of the Hand and of the Fingers.
You know that for the hand and its fingers there is a different fracture, and it does not occur unless they are seen in motion.
Then when the fracture occurs in the hand or in the fingers, then cover it with a long bandage before it and place the hand at rest on an object-like base, and let it rest for three days.
Then the minister extends the broken bones of the patient and covers them with a bandage that is not too tight until they are properly joined together.
Then put on a paste and ash, if there is not gangrene, and put staff over it according to the quantity of the place, and you have wrapped that in a drape.
If the strain is on the inside of the wrist then place the palm of the hand down, and make a shape like an hourglass out of cloth, and order the servant to put pressure with their other palm against this one; also bind it tightly in long strips of cloth.
And place the piece of wood on top of the cloth so that it is applied to the palm; and tighten it in two places so that it covers well.
If the fracture is on the outside of the wrist then cover and bind tightly two pieces of wood to the side of the palm, so that it is opened and turned towards the heel; and with this the hand is bound up tightly with bandages.
And if the fracture is in any of the carpal bones then, if the bone sticks out, cover and bind tightly according to how it curves; and place a small piece of wood on top so that the fracture does not stick out anymore.
If the fracture is in any of the other carpal bones then it should be covered and bound tightly according to the continuity of the bone; or, if this cannot be done, then a small piece of wood should be placed over that bone, as we have said about the little finger.
And consider in your treatment and bind tightly the joint of the thumb with the operation described above - when any cause of those is happening - according to how it has been told.
Chapter XIV.
Of the Restoration of a Fractured Bone of the Thigh.
The thigh bone that is broken and has been reduced to its normal position, and the head of the bone is above the joint, is not yet healed.
The treatment of it is made as follows: the bandage is tightened over the fracture and another is left loose on the fracture, and the servant lies face down on his stomach and on his chest.
Then the minister extends all the bandage according to the quality, when the fracture is in the middle of the bone.
If the fracture is in the middle of the bone then extend the bandage to its tail at the bottom of the joint, so that the extension wraps around; and leave the bandage loose on the fracture.
If the strain is in the middle of the bone then extend the bandage to its tail at the bottom, and make the extension on the inside; and leave it loose on the outside.
Then the doctor should join the bone to itself with a paste and bind it tightly, if there is no swelling in the member; otherwise, leave it loose. If there is swelling in it then you should leave it for a few days before returning to your treatment; and if the swelling goes down, return to your treatment.
The bandage should be made as follows: cover the fracture with a hard cloth, and fold it twice or three times, and trim off any excess; then wrap it around so that it reaches to the neck and to the root of the thigh.
And insert a long piece of cloth between the thigh and the bandage at the bottom near the joint, and bring the two ends of the cloth over the inside of the leg; then turn the cloth back on itself so that it covers the bandage; and trim off any excess.
Then place over the thigh in the place of that fracture a piece of cloth, and place one on top of the bone of the leg.
Then fill the spaces between the bandage and the thigh with soft cloth so that it is kept from sticking to the skin.
Then begin the firm bandage on top of the fracture with three or four folds; and if you are moving away from the site of the fracture, your bandage should be looser and lighter and wetter.
Then extend the two ends of the cloth to the inside of the thigh until it reaches the heel of the foot; and tighten both ends of the cloth on the outside of the other half so that the bandage does not come off its place.
Then leave it there for a while, until then no swelling or swelling or swelling occurs in the member; and if any of those causes occur, then wait for it to settle down, and correct what has happened as far as possible, according to what we have said about broken fingers.
If the bone is heavy then cover it according to what is possible for you; and if not, place it on top of something, and cure with water from which it has been prepared, within time it will be healed.
In some cases this fracture of the thigh is strengthened by the bandage that is tied around it as we have said in the Adjuncts and Arms.
However, in the treatment of it in this way, there is no need for the servant to walk with a limp; and if it is treated alone, another cloth should be applied to it, so that it walks with a limp from then on.
You should know that the thigh is strengthened in ten days or a few more months or a few less months, and all this is according to the diversity of complexions and other dispositions.
Chapter XV.
Of the Restoration of a Fracture of the Ankle Bone.
You should know that a fracture of the ankle bone at the back is not yet healed, and it may take time for healing to occur.
If there is a fracture, then it is not yet a crack or a tear in the joints; and if there is swelling or pain, then follow the instructions above according to that.
The treatment of it is made as follows: the bandage should be extended around the ankle and tied at the bottom of the joint; and if there is swelling, then follow the instructions above according to that.
Then place paste on top of it; and tighten it with bandage as far as is comfortable for you; and bind it tightly in a way that it does not hurt.
Then consider all the instructions that we have given for other fractures; and if there is swelling, then wait for it to go away before making any decisions about this, according to what is convenient for you within time it will be healed.
Chapter XVI.
Of the Restoration of a Fracture of the Leg.
You should know that in the leg there are two bones which one is thick and called the femur; and the other is thin and called the tibia; and they join each other with the kneecap.
A fracture of either bone in the arm is treated similarly to a fracture of the femur; and the treatment of it is the same as for the arm's bandage, and its operation is one and the same.
And if both bones are broken at once then the leg becomes completely dislocated.
If one of the two bones is broken from the front, then the leg becomes dislocated in the front.
If the thick bone is broken, then it sticks out, and it is of those causes that are not familiar to you.
Then administer an equal amount of acid and ligature to the joints according to that bandage; and do not add anything else to it.
However, if the fracture of the leg is simple and there are no broken bones in front of it, then let the extension be short and lighter; and praise your own virtue.
In the leg there is no need for any operation on the arms; and if you tie the joints tightly together then you will carry out all your operations with ease; and take care not to twist your hands in front of it, and do not tie them too tightly so that they are cut off from circulation; and be careful when tying them because of the smallness of the fingers, and do not use large knots, but rather use knots according to the length of the leg, and from the back forward to the smallest part of the hand.
And then wrap each sheet in two wrappers according to the length of them, and put one over the crotch of one leg and the other on the other leg, and they are on the inside at the bottom of the feet.
And then place the two sticks in three places of the two extremes and at the middle, because with this configuration the back is prevented from bending to the right or left, and it is in good position.
And then a chest of wood is given according to the length of the back; and the back is placed on it so that it maintains its movement.
And mostly it is necessary that you pour water on the fracture, and when it has been done it is called properly gout.
And then consider the back every day and study it carefully, and you should keep it away from swelling and inflammation or other similar causes; and when any of those causes happens, then do not pour water on it until it is healed.
Chapter XVII.
Of the fracture of the talus bone and the bones of the foot and of the said.
To the talus bone does not happen fracture completely; but to the bones of the foot happens fracture in some places; and to the feet of the donkey little happens fracture, and it does not happen to them except at the ends in the middle of disposition.
And if to the bones of the foot has happened fracture and those bones are raised up above themselves between them, then return the patient to the ground prepared in this way while walking.
And then place one foot on the water that is raised from those bones, and then trample them and press them, and put them back into their places.
And then place plaster and stop on it, and leave the belly of the foot on a small table to which two heads are placed.
And then strengthen that foot with the stretching downward, because you have wrapped it in sheets and for other reasons from which it suffers.
And after three or four days pass by, then remove the plaster because you would think that the bones are broken, or they are twisted or displaced, and the operation in those is done as with coneys.
But if some donkeys are twisted, then restore them, and put those back as with the eye and carefully treat them in the restoration of the donkeys' eyes. And then place the twisted stick according to its length, and leave it on one side a little; and then return the foot to the table that you have been recommended, and strengthen it with the stretching downward.
But if the stick that is twisted in the bones is two or three or more, then you place each one according to its quantity wrapped in a sheet of leather, and strengthen the table at the bottom of the foot, and let it stand on one of the heads of the table so that the belly of the foot remains in good retention.
And it is appropriate that you do not forget that you do not consider all the causes that have been said to you in other fractures of the accidents that we have mentioned; and then pour water on any accident as needed.
Chapter XVII.
Of the fracture of the cheekbone of the woman and the bone of the penis and the beard of the man.
When the cheekbone of the woman is twisted, then make that cut in the middle of the teeth, and then tilt that at the end of the two little, and it should be held behind.
And then the woman's mother will wrap the cheek with gauze, and make it fast with a knot, and then the woman should be hit, and raise the two little bones little by little, because all this is outside the cheekbone until in front of the end of the cheekbone with a knot, and the twisted bone returns.
And then place powder on the two legs, and when he wants to urinate, he removes it with ease, and then pour water on it, and reduce it and return it according to the method that was mentioned in the beginning, and then return the first powder.
Then do it for seven days or so, because that is restored.
And if you want, take a little bladder and tighten it on the end of it a tube; and insert all the bladder into the cheek, and then blow into the tube with force until the bladder is inflated inside the cheek, because the fracture returns.
And then it should be filled with gauze and kept for several days as we have recommended, so that it is healed.
And when the penis bone of a man or woman is twisted, then administer in the restoration and injection of water that we have recommended in the bones of the leg.
And this water that is right does not hide these close fractures and little it happens to those who are in the middle of disposition in the restoration and the constriction of it, so understand well.
But in the beard of the man when it is twisted, take a cloth, and wrap the beard in it; and then place it wrapped up, and keep it wrapped for three or more days, and it will be healed.
Chapter XIX.
Of the Restoration of Fracture of Bones when it is infected.
It is convenient to you that the fracture has happened when it is infected, and mainly if the bone is large as with the cheekbone or the jawbone, or similar to that, that you protect it and boil water on it again and again if the conditions of boiling water allow you so to do. And here we have mentioned it.
And if the plague goes away by itself, then return to you in the retention of water for three days that you sprinkle on it as described above, and if there is no other cause.
And then begin to restore the fracture in a few days' time, and do not delay water, unless an apoplexy happens.
But if the apoplexy happens carefully, then return to you in restoring it on the ninth day, so that the apoplexy stops, and do not approach to it until the third day of all, because you would cause bad accidents.
But if the twisted bone is eminent over the cheekbone uncovered, then return to you in reducing it and putting it back on your side with ease and a little extension.
But if the extension is not prepared and the equation of it with your sides, then you reduce it with your side with ease and a little extension. But this instrument is made of iron, its length is seven or eight days, and its width is according to the amount of plague; and for water it is necessary that the doctor take three or four according to the quantity that you need for water in the treatment of any type of fracture.
And then it is wrapped up, and it is a little bit small so that it does not double the compression on it at the time of the operation.
And it should be of acute extremities, and then the one side of it is wide, and the other side is narrow, and then return to you in the restoration of it at the most; and from the middle of it, then return to you in the division.
This is how it is done:
It is named in Greek "labra volenztare atelaram", so it is a little palette.
So that the end of the limb be raised on the other end of the bone that is eminent.
And then put it in a single-bladed scythe so that it returns to the bone, and place it on an equation.
And so, place the ends of the fracture next to each other, and if the broken end is delicate, and you do not have a good instrument for the operation, cover that end with something so that the instrument can reach it.
But if you cannot reduce the bone at all before reducing it with the scalpel that we have described, then cut it with one of the scalpels that the surgeons have, or make a cut in some other way as best as you can.
Then remove what remains in the bone of roughness and small cuts.
And when the bone has been reduced, and severe pain occurs in the patient's leg, then you will know that the bone has not returned to its natural position; and at this point, put a great deal of hope in it for the patient.
And when your work is finished in restoring the bone, then cover it with a black salve, and especially if it is in summer, and do not place it on any plaster or other cause which might cause it to become dry, so that it does not cause damage or corruption.
And administer the medicine at the hour of the patient's death in order to complete the bone restoration, and leave the plaster uncovered so that it may be cut with scissors and wrapped up according to the amount of plaster.
And guard carefully that you do not damage the plaster with the fracture, for it may cause bad blood to flow, and the result might be death or severe corruption or decay, so that it is healed. And if the patient' stress breaks, it becomes soft, different from the stress of other fractures.
And if the plaster is large or is bad plaster and you fear a terrible accident due to the scalpel that we have described, and feel pain in that place, then do not cover it with a soft cloth, but wrap it tightly with hard cloth instead of the stelae.
And when the plaster begins to take shape in one or two days, which is a sign of good healing, then remove the cloth that you had placed on it, and administer calques, which we have described as being used for cleaning the plasters, so apply them while they are wet with the same medicine.
Consider the plaster every day and night until it is fixed and firm, and cover that member so that it is prepared in such a way that corruption will run from it to the joints with ease.
And if the plaster takes more than a few days to heal or to separate from the break, then you will know that these are false signs and that you should not trust them. And of those false signs that remain and grow apart from each other, some make the member move and cause pain, then cut them according to what is possible for you to do it.
And if the plaster begins to rot or turn black, then you will know that it is a sign of corruption and decay, so cover it with what we have described in order to heal it.
And so that your speech may be better heard and your present situation is clear: when the skin becomes thick, apply to the member as well as to the large bones of the hips and thighs, and do not trust in its reduction, nor in its growth, because bad blood flows through it, which can kill you; leave it uncovered for a few days so that it heals. And then heal the plaster if it is visible, and if not, leave it alone.
Chapter 23.
Of the Cure for Fractures.
This is a treatment for fractures in the form of a medicine that is applied to the bones' scars and is mostly used for members that are close to the joints, and strongly prevents their natural movement.
Then consider whether the treatment is recent and administer those medicines that have been used to treat it, and use them as needed; and if you can, apply a few drops of those medicines on the scar, and wrap them tightly with cloth to tighten the wound.
And leave that scar alone for a few days; and then remove it and repeat the treatment again, until the wound has healed completely; or press tightly on that layer of lead, because lead has the property of holding together all that is inflated in the limbs.
But if the wound has already become hardened and is completely healed, then it provokes an ostar, and so cut it with a sharp blade, and separate its parts with a smooth movement, and make a cut in the front of the wound or behind, as needed, so that it may not be reopened; and heal that part that needs to be healed.
Chapter 21.
Of the Restoration of Fractures. When a fracture has healed, and so return the member to its natural position, and do not restrict its movement.
When a bone fracture has healed, and so return the member to its subtle form, but do not restrict it except for necessary reasons: such as an excess of ligaments that prevent its movement from being natural; or due to a lack of nutrients reaching the member; or because of too many useless treatments; or due to excessive movement at the wrong time; or because of pain in the body's joints and because it needs to be calmed down.
And the treatment for this is to feed the patient and make the heart strong, so that the pain multiplies in it; and administer baths and apply cold and soothing things to it.
And then place something heavy on the member, so that the weight provides nutrition, or continue with excess treatment with water, so that the nutrition runs and returns to its natural form.
Chapter 22.
Of the Cure for Broken Bones That Have Healed with a Twist and Preventing Their Operation from What is Necessary.
When the healed member has been restored with a twist and a bump in the bone, and it is in the form of the broken member, but the member does not prevent its natural operation, then you should know that this member comes from a new break.
But already some few months have passed since the breaking and healing of these bones, and such an operation is most cruel and is done with great danger to the patient's life, which can be taken from it at any time.
But if the claudication and nodulation are recent, then they are soaked in water with soft herbs, as well as leaves of mint and grass, and a few drops of oil of chamomile, and wrapped with a cloth; or that it is spread with a mucilage made from mint leaves, and that it be covered with a salve made of chamomile; or that it be smeared with olive oil, and that it be wrapped in a cloth; or that it be spread with a mixture of fat fig (olive) and that it be tressled with a thread of karamel, and applied to the wound; or that it is soaked in a warm milk, and wrapped tightly with cloth.
And sometimes it is dissolved with a gentle friction that is moistened, and is administered movement of the member at all times.
But if the twist has already occurred before and has caused pain that is severe and is turned into a wound, then it should be treated with fire, because it can burn it; and that part that needs to be burned is removed, and continued treatment of the bone is given, and ease is given to the member that needs it, and care is taken with it.
Chapter .xxiii.
On dislocation.
Dislocation is when one of the joints of the body becomes dislocated, causing pain and damage to the member.
Therefore when a dislocation occurs, it is necessary to pierce and reduce it quickly, for if reduced late, the joint is stiffened, and it becomes difficult to reduce the dislocation.
And so it is not necessary that it is stretched or bent at the time of the piercing, because if the muscle contracts it will cause pain and spasms.
And when it occurs to you, hide yourself from the flab of the leg, and let the piercing be made within so that it rests; and let the member be broached with water and oil, and reduced easily.
And this member be washed with the water from which the memory will come to its place.
And you have already ordered the chapters of dislocation according to whether they precede a fracture; from the higher part of the body to the lower.
Chapter.xxiiii.
On the treatment of a dislocated jaw from the lower jaw.
So the two jaws are either dislocated from their places by little movement, and become slightly softened; or they are dislocated completely and completely, so that they are softened at the joint before saliva comes out of the mouth and cannot close it, and the tongue is wrapped in it.
And when the dislocation of him is little, then in most cases return by themselves for a little reason.
But if the dislocation is whole and complete, then it is necessary to administer a reduction of him little by little, and not be late at all.
And let the minister hold the head of the patient, and insert his finger into the mouth between the teeth of the dislocated jaw from within the mouth if the dislocation is on one side; or that he inserts both fingers together, if the dislocation is on both sides, and the other fingers are outside where they belong; and let him order the patient to cease moving his jaws, and perform the treatment in this position. And let the jaw be held in place and kept in position until it returns to its place.
And if the reduction of him is difficult, and more so if both jaws are completely dislocated, then administer with water and oil, so that the reduction of both is little and not delayed at all, as we have said.
And so when it returns and is closed, and the mouth is not softened, then pause on those dusts of cloth with a needle, and make a stitch and oil thread; and let it be tied easily with a loose knot.
And let the patient lie on his back, and let his head be between two pillows, so that he does not swallow anything at the right or left; and do not let him pass by force any medicine; having the patient's food forbidden to him, so that when the pains return and the jaws are locked, then let him drink what he wants.
And let it be administered easily, and do not work on the opening of the mouth before eating and drinking and calling, so that the jaw is locked and healed.
And if the reduction of two jaws is difficult when they are dislocated at any time and do not return to their places, then fever and constant sodium occur, and the abdomen of the patient swells up, and strong nausea and pure colic occur.
And when you find it, then know that it is a loss; and mark the one on which it occurs within ten days.
Chapter.xxv.
On the reduction of a dislocated furcade and extremity of the muscle.
The furcula is not dislocated from its place by the continuation to the feet; and some are dislocated at the end of it, and then it is felt.
And the restoration of him is that the patient jumps on his back and spreads his legs. Then cut the place with your hand firmly, for it will return.
Then pause on that paste and dust, and strengthen it.
And the extremity of that which seizes you and continues to it is not dislocated in any day; then it is necessary to reduce and tie it according to what we have said, and according to your apparatus.
Then pause on that paste, and dust, and tighten it, and command the patient to remain quiet and at rest until it is healed.
And in this treatment the extremity of the muscle is reduced when it is separated from its place.
Chapter.xxvi.
On the reduction of a dislocated muscle.
Know that the muscle is not dislocated except in three ways; and one is that it is dislocated from the end of the rib to the end of the collarbone.
And the second is that it is dislocated from the end of its muscle, and then it must be kept from moving; and it is not dislocated from behind by the shoulder blade; and it is not dislocated from before by the nerves.
And most often it is dislocated and comes out at the end of the rib from behind, and in those in which the muscles are few, it is little dislocated; but in those in which the muscles are many, it comes out with difficulty.
And a great noise occurs in some men by hitting or falling, and the muscle of him is drawn out from the swelling with the piercing, and it is found that he has already been dislocated.
Then wait until you are certain that he will not fall again, and then proceed with the treatment of him.
And the dislocation of him is recognized when it is at the end of the rib from behind; but so you can distinguish between the dislocated muscle and the other, for you see a great difference; and you touch the back of the muscle then, as if there were an ear, and the patient cannot reduce his hand to his ear, nor move it at all.
If it is dislocated then either of the legs or from behind, then you must feel a great touch, and he does not hide it.
And of this dislocation requires little reduction when it is fresh and the patient is a child.
And the reduction of him is that the minister raises his hand to his sides; and then the threads are tied behind him from the rib at the end, and raises the joint with strength to its place, and the minister raises the patient's hand, and extends it in front of him; and then the threads are tied behind him because he returns little by little.
But if, as we have said, it does not return, and only at the beginning of the dislocation occurs, then wait a few days; but when the patient is bathed with water and oil is given to him so that he becomes soft and smooth, let him be given in brocacio, so that it softens and smoothes him like his hair cut from above; and fenugrec, and melilot in water, and administered.
Then the patient is to lie on his back and be lifted up by the legs from behind, waiting for him to soften and tighten, and then the foot of him is placed on the spine, and the head of the muscle is raised with strength, and the hand of the patient is thrown so that it is not moved at the end of the ribs, and another minister holds the patient' s head, so that he is not moved at the ends, because it returns to its place soon.
And if you wish, reduce this second in this way: and it is that you be present a man who was put longer than the patient, and he was of the part of that piece, and entrometa his muscle from the titillic of the patient and lift the titillic of him to the dividers within which the patient is suspended on air, and another minister pull the patient's navel from the dividers of him of his belly. But if the patient is looser, then note that another cause is suspended, so that it causes that one, because the displacement returns so soon.
And it is reduced judiciously in another way: and it is that he is stuck on the ground one pole whose tip is round of figure, there cum mortar's pilo, that not be thick nor thin, and is paused from the patient; since it is paused over the tip of the pole lions' skin, and the patient is standing according to the length of the pole, and his hand is extended from him in the dividers where he is suspended, and his leg are extended from the other part because the joint returns to its place with speed.
And if it is difficult reduction of him for all the causes that we have said, then use this cure: and it is that you take one pole whose quantity be in length of two bras, and his width of four fingers, and his thickness be withdrawn in the preon of the titillic according to this form:
And approach over the round tip there are skin' leons because it is not that the pole slides the patient.
And it is approached from the tip of the patient, and his hand or legs are extended over the pole within the dividers, and the pole is sloped on the assistants and the arms and the end of the hand.
Then return the hand or legs over one step of steps according to the width, and the hand is extended in the dividers, and the other thing is suspended from the other part because the joint returns so soon.
And when the instrument of him is complete according to each way that you make possible, and then note that you pause from the tip of the muscle a quantity of wool; and it is approached plaster prepared with mortar of mill' and album of cow on all muscle, since it is turned over him, and then tighten from the tip in a constriction; and the liament is turned over the plaster, and the hand of him is connected to his neck, and is left, and not be touched the hand of him for seven days.
And since the food of the patient is few while he is comforted, because it is looser to the recovery of him.
Then return the food is given more while there are seven or nine and be exercised a movement; and since it is stopped and not softened, then already it is healed.
But if the joint is displaced movements seen by moisture that happens to him or another cause, then note that in that one is administered cautery with three strokes according to what it was said before in the chapter of cautery.
And if all that remains is done and seven days are passed it is turned the liament and the joint does not close, and the plaster and constriction are reduced over him few movements, and it is not closed and becomes cut or extended or softened, and you know that the nerves of him, which are in the tip of the muscle, already they are incised or extended or softened, and you know that the joint will never be fixed in its place.
From the displacement of that which is done in the feet and the breast or back dividers, the reduction is done with an impulsion and expansion to the most, while it returns.
Then it is administered in that other constriction, and care in that until it is healed.
And if it is happened near the recovery of the member and delay in the movement of him, then the patient uses with water movements seen by the gravity that happens to him or another cause, since it returns to the nature of him first.
Chapter 27: Cautery
Of cure of displacement of the neck.
You know that the joint of the neck is displaced with difficulty and seems to return with difficulty; and it is displaced at all dividers, especially in the front divider to the back one, and the displacement of him does not close to you because it is dislocated from the veil or touch according to some figure, and when it is adjusted the dislocated neck with the sand, then it is declared manifestly, because the joint is concave and cannot bend the arms, nor touch in it the muscle of him.
And since you are going to cauterize him and reduce the displacement with difficulty before it comes out blood, because if he sees the blood, then the reduction of him is difficult, and more so when it is in the back dividers, because it is worse than all the other causes of displacement, and of great pain, and movements seen should be made to that one the death.
And the recovery of him, when that which is possible to reduce, it is that the hand of him be extended with two hands, and his arms be expanded, and the tips of his members be over the neck and leave him, and he pushes the joint with the knuckles of his fingers together, or with the root of his hand while it returns to its place.
But if the displacement is in the front dividers, then return so that it doubles the hand with his own hand, while it strikes the neck with the root of his hand.
And if the displacement does not obey to the reduction, then administer violent expansion with a strong hand.
And it is that two ministers extend the arms, and they have him expansion by two ministers so that he is not disturbed with violent expansion.
Then it is turned the arms over all part, since it is wrapped skin' rolled long on the hand of him, or liament.
And when the touch of the neck with his own hand, then it is unlined him with any oil so that those causes help in lubrication of the joint with ease; and it is approached the joint with a violent impulsion while it returns to its place.
Then the reduction of him is approached since he is paused on that plaster in which there is stipticitat and excisit with album of cow, and it is turned down with a constriction, and the arm is suspended from his neck, and it is left for some days.
Then return so that it is turned off; and since the joint is formed in its place, then you turn the liament of him off and leave him.
And if you see the joint is not strong, then you repeat the plaster and the liament, and leave him for some days while it is turned off; and return so that it is turned off.
But if it is happened to him gravity near the reduction of the joint, and the movement of him is in a way that it can be turned off, then administer with water bath and gentle friction, and compression, while it is relieved; or pause over the joint with a cloth, since it is moved by heavy motion; and return so that it is left, and leave that one on the bone after a day or two. Then return that one, and put him in a bath; and when he swells, then you rub the joint with gentle friction, and return so that it is repeated over that one with a cloth, since it makes sound of motion, once, and the second, and the third, and: The corruption has already come upon the skin between the bath and the body, which is liminal.
Here is the translation of the provided text into English:
Chapter .xxviii.
Here is a translation of the provided text:
Here is a translation of the provided text:
Here is a translation of the provided text:
Here is a translation of the provided text:
Here is a translation of the provided text:
Here is a translation of the provided text:
Here is a translation of the provided text:
Here is a translation of the provided text:
Chapter.xxix.
Here is a translation of the provided text:
Here is a translation of the provided text:
Here is a translation of the provided text:
Here is a translation of the provided text:
Here is a translation of the provided text:
Here is a translation of the provided text:
Here is a translation of the provided text:
Here is a translation of the provided text:
Chapter.xxx.
Here is a translation of the provided text:
Here is a translation of the provided text:
Here is a translation of the provided text:
Here is a translation of the provided text:
Here is a translation of the provided text:
Here is a translation of the provided text:
Here is a translation of the provided text:
Here is a translation of the provided text:
Here is a translation of the provided text:
Here is a translation of the provided text:
Here is a translation of the provided text:
Here is a translation of the provided text:
Here is a translation of the provided text:
Here is a translation of the provided text: And then place the table's end over the spine, and the doctor places his feet on the other end, and he is sure that the spine is bent and has returned to its place.
And if you want, open the one that is turned away from the hand; and it is that you remain on the ground, put the top of the patient's blanket in the back of his head, and make two pegs on the length of a forearm behind him, and put the top of the blanket on the back of his head exactly as far apart as two hands are; and the distance between each peg is one palm, and already it is made in both pegs that run through, and let each be firmly held on the ground so that it does not move.
And there is a round peg where it turns, and it is turned in both ends of the two pegs.
And at the end of it is a peg where the peg is made, its length is one palm that turns away; and in the other two pegs it is similar to this.
And then tighten the ties that you have stretched on the feet of the patient in the peg where his head should be, and the ties that you have stretched on the legs of the patient in the turn where his feet should be.
And then it is necessary that each turn be turned and a minister twist the turn with his hand, and the doctor crushes the spine according to what we have said.
And when the spine has returned to its place and the hole is closed, then apply a dry paste of honey on the skin, and then put it out; and then place over the paste the table's edge where its width is three fingers or less around it, and its length is a quantity that takes up the place of the yellow spot, and on the side of the spine.
And then tie it with the ties we have said, and use a patient of subtle nutrition inside so that it is healed.
And if there is any urgency in the place at the end of the cure, then when it is necessary to administer medicines that soften and cleanse by means of a table cure for a long time, which we have recommended; and already it is administered in that place a piece of lead.
And in some cases there is an imminence of dislocation on the back of the two vertebrae, which is caused by that displacement; and it is the bone which you have already mentioned because it does not need to be done prosompce to it with this medicine, because it will greatly hurt you.
Chapter 31.
De Cure of Hips Dislocated.
You should know that the joint of the hip and the junction of the muscle do not need anything other than displacement, and that is what happens in those parts where there is little movement and concavity.
And the hip joint is displaced in four ways, because it is displaced at the front, or at the back, or on the left, or on the right.
And mostly it is displaced at the back, and less at the front or behind.
And the sign of the hip's displacement at the back is that when you adjust the patient' blanket to his body, it becomes longer and narrower, and the patient can not bend his neck, and this is the place where the tongue comes here.
And the sign of that which you experience is displacement at the front, it is that the accidents of him are opposite to this accident.
And the sign of that which you experience is displacement at the back, because it spreads his blanket according to the form, but it does not bend that part that hurts him, and if he walks, he will not be able to go forward; and his urine is retained and his skin is inflamed, and his walking must be over the ground.
And the sign of that which you experience is displacement at the back, because it does not spread his neck, and he cannot bend that part in front of him that bends his skin, and his blanket becomes narrower than the other, and his skin is softened, and the top of the patient' blanket is the place.
But the reduction of these spices of this displacement is that you consider, then, if the displacement is old and ancient, which has already been old to him, you administer a reduction to him and it is according to its disposition, then it does not need to be done prosompce; but if it is in that form, then it is necessary to do so.
But in that which the displacement is recent, and it is one of the four spices of displacement, then you return to the joint and extend it at the front and back, and turn it on the left and right, because it will return strongly and does not need other treatment.
But if it does not return in this way, then you prepare a strong minister and extend the blanket of him from the back, or under his body, or with ties that are tied over his neck; and another minister extends the hand of him on the side that comes above his toes, holding its ends to the other side; and you tighten the ties over the spine, and have another minister hold it between his hands.
And it is an extension of him from the front to the neck, or from the back to the hip.
And it is the extension of all these in one case within which the patient is lifted up by his neck to the ground, and his legs hang down.
This type of extension is specific to all four.
And therefore, if the displacement returns to the place that we have mentioned, it is necessary, and otherwise, then it is necessary for all specific purposes of the patient' cure.
In the reduction of him himself, when he is displaced, and the displacement is at the back, then the patient is lifted up on his side; and then place the ties over the spine at the front of the patient' blanket in that place where the head is, and then extend the ties from the back to the neck.
And then another minister takes the arms of him, and tightens the place where the blanket is thick on the patient' side, and extends it to the back by violent extension, because that returns to its place.
This type of treatment is the lightest for this member, with which it is reduced as compared to the other specific treatments.
But if you are not willing to follow this treatment for this type of cure, then you tie the two ends of the blanket together with strong ties, and place them on both sides of the patient' feet, and under his legs.
And it is the length of each of them in relation to four fingers, and the blanket is extended more than the other by two fingers.
And then the blanket is suspended from the top of the pole, and it is in the middle; and the length of him is two arms away from the ground.
And then you order a strong young man to cut the top of the blanket, and another young man hangs it on the pole, and the other young man cuts the blanket with a sharp knife, because the joint returns quickly to its place.
But in the reduction of him himself, when the displacement is at the back, then he keeps the blanket as it is described above, and it is tightened on his neck specifically, and over his legs.
And two staves should be placed, one at the feet and the other at the head; and these two staves should be adjusted to the middle of the patient lying on his back, wrapped in blankets so that the bed doesn't get wet by the sweat of the patient, for so the staves don't get between the thighs of the patient, so that the extension to the legs that are not extended doesn't get pulled.
Then each servant should extend their part, and the doctor with his hand shall receive the reduction according to the art.
And when the dislocation is in front, then cover that the chest is slightly extended, and this according to this narrative about the body; and the doctor places his right hand on the patient's side, and the other hand he raises above the patient's back, and with that hand he places the extension that has been placed in front at the patient's back.
And if the dislocation is in the back, then don't cover that the patient lies on his side, and he is lifted up from the ground; while, for a moment, cover that it is placed on a hard surface, so that, if the bed of the patient has been displaced in front, according to what we have said about the extension of the bed of the patient between two broad pieces; and it is on its face, and the joints are extended, as we have said, there is no turning back.
And cover that a compression is applied to the joint with a wooden board.
Then, with the reduction completed as you see it and that the doctor doesn''t turn his head towards you, and is because you extend two legs of the patient, and when you notice those joints and the patient's leg extends its knee, then you know that the second member has been returned and then you place two cushions and pause a towel under them, so that the bed doesn''t get wet by the sweat of the patient; and then the patient lies in repose for three days or four.
Then return the joint and the towel, and compare one leg to the other.
Then, if you see those joints in your face, then you know that the dislocation has already been stopped, and let the patient walk.
Then, if you see any cause of softening, then you return and apply it to the first, and extend the second according to your first extension, and let it rest for three days.
Then remove that one, and let that one walk a little every day until it is comfortable.
Chapter LII.
Of the Treatment of a Dislocated Shoulder.
The shoulder is displaced in three ways, because it is displaced in front, and at the back, and to the sides more towards the front; and it isn't displaced in front.
And the sign of a dislocated shoulder is that you command the patient to extend his chest to the cushion; then you know that the shoulder is displaced.
And the restoration of all types of shoulders is that you place the patient on his right side, then extend his chest, and if he can stand over it; support his legs with your hands, and place the patient' neck between his legs; and then, using strength, place the shoulder under your hand, and another servant extends its leg until the shoulder returns to its place.
And the sign of recovery is that his chest touches the cushion lightly.
Then cover that one and attach it to the cushion, and then place those for three days or four, and then remove them.
And don' t use the patient for walking for a few days, until he is healed and comfortable.
May also, if the reduction to you is not sufficient, administer a strong compression to the joints in the treatment of the shoulder as a previous narrative has preceded.
Chapter LIII.
Of the Treatment of a Dislocated Hip.
The hip sometimes is reset by a small movement, and sometimes it is displaced by the complete extension, and the displacement of the hip is made either in front or at the back.
And the sign of a displaced hip is that it rises towards the leg that has been displaced.
May also, the treatment of resetting the hip is a slight extension, and it is extended with ease to the leg, and is placed within that returns.
May also, in the treatment of the hip when it is displaced by complete extension, cover that you make a cross with your two hands behind the patient' hips, and place the patient' legs on either side of yours.
Then stand on your right side towards the patient' head, and on your left side towards the patient' feet in the position of the crown.
Then throw the feet on either side towards you, and then extend them towards your left, and place the feet of the patient with your right hand, and let the bed work.
Do this twice as we have counted it.
Then place the feet on the third time, and you are at the crown.
Then, if you return the feet once or twice in this way, and if they get stuck, then repeat the operation because those feet return.
May also, if you are forbidden to reduce the patient on a bed as we have mentioned, then make the patient lie on his back on the ground, and place a mat between his thighs, and let him walk until he is comfortable; and cover that he doesn' t come out because of the mat.
Then the servants of the patient hold their legs, and another servant extends his foot to the side towards your leg, or against your knee; and another minister extends the foot of the patient towards your leg, or between your knees, so that the patient' heel doesn' t get caught in front of you by the mat.
Then the doctor receives the displacement in his mouth, and another minister holds the patient' leg at the back, because the displacement returns easily.
And then, when the displacement has been returned to you, and you see that the reduction is good, then cover with a towel and place it on the patient' chest; and tie up the feet to the bed.
Then, if you fear or are careful of the nerves that lie behind the hip, so that the joint does not move suddenly and strongly.
Then leave it alone for two or three days; and if the joint is softened, remove it.
Then remove that one after three or four days, and don' t let the patient walk for ten days. May also, if it is difficult to walk after that space, don' t be sure that the displacement has not been broken and corrupted, and then do not receive treatment.
And if it happens to him that he is parched by a caustic, then cover that you administer in the treatment of him as we have preceded in our narrative, in another place of treatment and of emulsion, until he is reset.
Chapter .xxxiiii.
On the Treatment of Dislocations of the Foot.
Caution in Relocating a Dislocated Foot: This work will address the treatment of a dislocated foot with careful movement and a gradual approach to relocate it; it is not a difficult process, but it must be done carefully.
If the dislocation is in the toes of the feet, then you must carefully move the patient's foot off the ground or table, and support it as if they were walking.
And then place the foot you are working on on top of something that supports it off the ground or table, and carefully move it back into position little by little until it is in its correct place, and make sure it does not slip; this will help keep it in place.
And then place a table that supports the entire foot on top of it, with two ends supporting the heel and toe, and make sure it is firm and secure for three days; and then, after those three days, let them rest from walking for another five days to ensure it heals properly and does not move.
Chapter .xxxv.
On the Types of Dislocations: From Plaague, Fracture, or Any Joint Dislocation.
When any of these causes occur, and you are involved in the treatment of that person and their recovery, be aware that death may result.
And regarding the treatment of the patient, do not be proud, long-winded, impatient, or arrogant; use only a small amount of medicine to soothe it slightly, and leave the patient in God's hands for judgment, but if you have any hope of salvation from harm, offer some relief from pain, and there is some hope. And then strive to relocate it as soon as possible at the start of the cause, before any blisters form.
And then, if the limb returns quickly, administer medicine that soothes it slightly and treats the plague with the water of enchancments.
And if the dislocation is a fracture and the bones are separated, then you must carefully re-align them, and make sure that what has been said before in simple words regarding plagues also applies to this.
And beware and avoid, according to your virtue, the instrument in fear as my predication has preceded you; for it is better that you should seek your Lord, and remain steadfast in your glory, and greet your true Lord with those who are most worthy of it at the right time. Thus ends the words of Al-Bucasmi, explaining in detail what God has willed. Amen.
