O son, I give you this book, which is the last of medical science; its completion brings me great joy. With its explanations and descriptions, it is clear that I have fulfilled my task in writing this treatise, which is a supplement to surgery.
For although the operation of maiming is laid out in our region and at our time entirely deprived, yet it is a very dangerous science; and the evidence of it remains; but a few small descriptions are found in the books of the Ancients, which change their intentions and put them into error and confusion, because they are closed and lengthy in their reasons and the force of them and the art.
And I see that I have brought life to this treatise with the second order of its exposition and description and brevity; and for it to come to the forms of cautery instruments and other tools of the operation by means of addition to the description, and for preparation of it, which is necessary cause.
The cause why a good surgeon does not exist in our time is that the art of medicine is long, and because before he exercises himself in the science of anatomy which covers Gualia, for he knows the growth of the members and their shapes, and the joint and separation of them; and has knowledge of the bones, nerves, and ligaments, and the names of them, and the structure of them; and of the pulsating veins and quiet ones, and the locations of their sensation.
And for this I say that the name of Hippocrates, which is by itself, is enough in the small work, and more so in the art of maiming.
And we have already said of that in the introduction to this book; for who does not know that I have told you about anatomy, it is not evident that he will fall into error by which men will die; so many errors have been found in this science and taken from that other science and those experiments.
For I saw a doctor look at an apple and find an abscess in the neck of a woman; and he hit some of the arteries in the neck with a needle, so that blood flowed out in large amounts from her neck, causing her to die among many others.
And I saw another doctor who said that he would drink a draught of a man who had fallen sick; and the draught was large, and he drank it, and cut off a piece of his bladder, causing that man to die on the third day.
And I have already called it to mind that because of the large size of the draught and the state of the patient, it was clear that he would die.
And I saw another doctor who took a stipend from our duke for surgery; and he was about to break a hernia on his chest, but because of his ignorance he broke it over the skin, using ashes and straws to strengthen the fracture, and left the skin unhealed.
Then he followed his own desires and his god, and left it unhealed for several days and commanded that we cut the lien; and so, within those days, the hernia in the foot broke out and came to ruin.
And I have been called to do it, and I prepared myself to cut the lien, and when it was done there was peace and comfort for his sufferings.
But corruption had already set in the member, so that I could not stop it; and it did not cease to walk until the patient was in danger.
And I saw another doctor who pierced an abscess of cancer, and it became ulcerated near the skin after a few days; then the malignancy of it spread to its master.
For the reason that the cancer cauterized is pure of melancholic humor; otherwise it does not remain in its place, but goes to another member than that on which you suffer, so that it becomes a source of all suffering.
And therefore, son, it is necessary for you that the operation of maiming be divided into two operations: one in which health is associated with it, and another work by which danger is incurred in the main dispositions.
And I have already examined this book completely in every place where it involves an operation of error and fear; therefore, you must keep this book away from your eyes and not allow it to be read, so that its pages do not turn your way and distract you.
And therefore take up your weapons with diligence and protection from God, and your ailments to facilitate and fortitude.
And use the best way through God's grace to achieve salvation and worthy succession; leave behind you terrible illnesses of difficult healing, and hold your weapons away from those who cause you fear, so that you do not falter in your faith and do not abandon your name: for more remains to be done by you out of love, and further on to the end of your sanctity.
Gualia has already said in some of his motivational quotes: "Do not treat a bad disease, so that you do not offend a doctor."
And I have divided this book into three chapters.
Begin the division of the book, and first of the first part. The first chapter is organized by chapters; in the forms of instruments and tools of cautery, and from which it is necessary for the operation.
The division of the second part: The second chapter, of incision and perforation, and of vacuums, and of clouds, and of extracts of arrows and similar things, completely organized by the shapes of instruments.
The third chapter, of restoration and displacement, and of cure for twists and similar things; a chapter organized by chapters; in the forms of instruments.
I will tell you the quality of those who perform cauterization and those who are unsuitable for it, and in which combination it should be done.
Therefore I say that the speech of the quality of cauterization and the unsuitability of it is long and tedious, and subtle by science, and hidden away; and there is much wisdom in it, and I have enough of their disagreements, and I am satisfied with a little of their speeches, fearing repetition.
And therefore I say that cauterization is done in every combination universally; which is either of one matter or of two matters, except for two combinations, which are combinations of the tail of two matters.
In the combination of tail and dry matter, they disagree; for some say that cauterization is appropriate to that, and others say the opposite, that cauterization is not convenient in a dry disease, which by nature of fire is quality and dryness, and inappropriate is that the tail and the dry water should be healed.
And he who says the opposite, that by cauterization is done good in all tail and dry diseases which are found in the bodies of men, for when you compare the bodies of men with the moisture of them to the combination of fire, you find the bodies of men burned up.
And I say by that speech of him, which experience have I had several times to discover.
Yet I do not see that this has come upon him who is already exhausted and exercised in the chapter of cauterization by latter exercise, and he knows the diversity of the complexions of men and the disposition of diseases in their bodies, and the causes of those, and the accidents of them, and the space of time of them.
In other complexions, however, there is no fear on your part, and most importantly in the wet diseases, since all doctors have agreed upon those, and they have not disagreed in the juvenile exercise by cauterizing them at those times.
And know, children, that of the secret of cure by fire cauterization and of the goodness of it, only by fire are burned, since the force of it does not reach another member except with slight injury.
The force of the burning medicine reaches that in the member which is blistered, and strongly causes a painful inflammation in the sick member, which is difficult to cure, and strongly causes an unpleasant smell.
But the fire, for its smallness and for the goodness of its substance, does not hurt except when it is superfluous; And we have already known by experience and by long service to study about the truth of causes; and so I am excused from the length of speech and if it were not that it is not read at my free will in this pause to you hidden with fire, and the quality of the operation of it on the bodies and of its expulsion by which the diseases are expelled, with philosophical demonstrative words, which would be improved in your ears.
And know, children, that the seasons do not agree on the time when it is convenient to make fire-cauterization and pause for the best time in spring.
And I say that cauterization is convenient at all times so that the injury of time by accident is immersed in the youth of those who are drawn by cauterization, and most importantly if cauterization is for pains or necessary pains, strongly and painfully, which do not suffer delay so that they are feared from those that come with a malice, which is greater than slight injury entered by time.
And then they do not understand in your ears, or children, this is considered by the common people and foolish doctors; for it is that disease which is cured by fire at all times, and pause that consequence.
And the cause is not good then what they consider by water, for fire is not but in place of medicine which alters the complexion and dries up the humidities which are the cause from which pains come.
But fire is superfluous over medicine because of the virtue and effectiveness of its operation, and the greatness of its Lord.
And it is possible that the disease return in some hour of time, according to the complexion of the patient and the location of his disease, and the virtue of it, and that it is prepared in his body from the addition of the superfluities in it, and that which comes to him in his acquisition in foods and resembling those causes; but if the disease by which cauterization was administered is a subtle disease in one member of few superfluities and humidities, then fire of teeth with pain and resembling that, it is possible that in him it does not return that pain, but instead it comes there.
And yet the vulgar speech is that fire is the last medicine, and it is a hasty speech, not to those who understand it, for I believe that there is no cure that benefits from medicine or any other cause, except by fire.
And the cause is opposite to that; and I believe that fire is the last medicine, it is only when we administer the ways of cure in some diseases, and those medicines do not benefit him, and at the end of the cause we administer fire to him, and benefit from it at that time. Then from here I understand that fire is the last medicine, not according to the understanding which I have of the common people and the foolish doctors.
And the fools said that fire on gold is better than fire on iron, and they did not say it except for the equality of gold and for the smallness of its substance.
And they said that the place of fire does not burn up, unless absolutely vertat, for I have seen it and turned away from it; but you make fire on gold, which is good and better than iron, as the fools say; but when you make fire on gold, it is not revealed to you, because it is equal according to the quantity that you want to make rough of the gold, and because it prepares to receive it; and if you place it over fire, gold melts by the fire, and case in the fire some plates so that the artifice sees them for the occupation of it.
And to make fire on iron you must place it gently and carefully on the right side of operation.
And I have ordered this chapter on fire according to the other chapters, and I have ordered those of the book within the book so that you ask what you want from it.
The first chapter.
This cauterization confers to humidity and cold a servile accident of which there are two causes, so is the cause of sodium and many fluxes rheumatic, called rigor, from the head to the parts of the body and from the ears flowing, and much sleep, and toothache and gurgling, and generally all diseases that come by cold; then paralyticly, with sodium and apoplexy, and resembling those diseases.
The form of this cauterization is this: first, you command the patient to be evacuated with lacative medicine in his head, for three or four nights, according to whether you require the virtue of the disease and its age and custom.
And then command him to shave his head, and then he will sit between your legs on a bench laid down, and place your hands over his feet.
And then pause the razor of your palm on top of the razor of his nose between his ears. But, however, when the patient says that this place is reached, mark that place by testing, and then burn fire on it from which this is the form:
And then you turn that place by testing, in such a way that the patient's hand be restrained little by little, and you turn it.
And then lift your hand gently and look at the place, and if you see already any quantity of hair, as well as the amount of gravel in it, then raise your hand, and if it does not return to that iron, take another from that, if it is cold, until it is seen that bone.
And then take a little salt and dissolve it on the place and leave it there for three days.
And then pause the ring in water wrapped in the bandage and leave it there until it is destroyed by the fire's heat. And then heal that place with four-part farmacon ointment so that it is cured.
And they say that as much as the plague of Rome brings, so many cure with ease; because it is better and more pleasant.
And they say that some of them say that the cartilage should be cauterized within the bone, and that a part of the bone's structure should be burned.
And then it is shaved that which is close to the bone, and then it is cured.
And they said to him that he let the cautery reach the end, until it enters the strong bone instead of making it break, and this is the form of small alpecat. And they estimate from that place to exhale the vapors of the head.
And let the wound be kept open for a long time, and then heal it before it is solidified.
But for me these two kinds of cauterizations are not seen, but in some cases out of fear; and it seems to me that this is better for salvation when it is done, because the head is separated by solution from the rest of the body, and even more so when the patient's head is naturally freaked.
And the first kind of cauterization is better saved and seems to me more beneficial; and of those two, I prefer this one for salvation.
Capital second.
Of the head's cauterization.
When in total the head causes chronic and long pain, and this is prolonged in the patient, and uses of plasters and poultices and enemas and embalmings and calms and balms and salves, and above all if it has already been cauterized with a cauldron that it tells and does not benefit from any of those causes, then consider that since the head is of strong creation in its nature; and it is not freaked and turns the head, then that head should be cauterized with another cauldron, little by little. Then he cauterizes that on the edge of his hair on the head with a cauldron until the hair is burned. Incis the hair and expose it to the bone, the amount that we have counted, then cauterize that with a cauldron in the back of the head in the place called vasa, — and this is the place where the wind is stopped. And praise your hand in such a way that you do not expose the bone, because by water the patient suffers a great deal of pain different from the pain of all the other head cauterizations.
And this cauterization is done in its place, for since the head' s hair and forehead are easier to cauterize than that which is at the top of the head; and this is the form of it.
Capital third.
Of cauterization of a migraine not ancient.
When the back of the head hurts hard, or there is pain within the ear, let the head be cleansed with medicines, and another treatment that I have mentioned in the seven causes of illnesses; and if it does not benefit, then cauterize it with two methods: either with a burning medicine, or with iron.
But to cauterize with a burning medicine is better than to take an ointment from olive oil and to rub both ends of the head. Then cut the place that hurts on the temple with a sharp knife until it enters the flesh, and then cover it so that the hair is hidden.
Then put pressure on it with a strong constriction, and let it be for three hours; then remove the ointment from olive oil, and leave the wound open for two or three days, and then cover it with bandages soaked in water until the place swells up.
Then heal that with unguent until it is cured.
And if you see this, make some of the burning medicines that I have written in the two treatises on burning medicines.
But cauterization with iron according to this method:
is called a nail, because the head is thus shaped in one place like a nail, and in the middle part of it is a small prominence.
Then place your hand on the painful place, and rotate the iron little by little at high speed.
And if the amount of blood that is drained by the incision at the back of the hair is almost half of it, and then raise your hand so that the artery not be drained which is left, so that there is no flow of blood from it.
Then dip the wound in salt water and place it on the place, and let it rest for three days; then remove the bandages that are soaked in water, and heal with unguent until it is cured.
And if you see this, cauterize at the end of the knife according to cauterization, and do not make an incision of the artery in this migraine not ancient.
Capital fourth.
Of cauterization of a migraine ancient.
When you heal a migraine with water that we have mentioned in the treatment preceding this one, and with water that we have mentioned in the seven causes of illnesses, and if this treatment does not benefit; and more because of the illness for which we have mentioned the first cauterization with medicine or with fire, then consider that you ignite the cauterizing knife so that it is whiteened, because it indicates the place of pain on a line of length that is almost half of it, or that one; and then rest your hand by turning it for a moment, and then rotate the iron very fast.
However, you must take care not to damage the continuing mandible, which is important for chewing, and that the tongue is not drained and the nerve is not damaged, and that it does not become entangled in a spasm.
And if you are careful to prevent the flow of blood from the artery that is being cut off, because in cutting it there is danger, and more so at those who do not know what they are doing and do not study beforehand; and then leave the operation in a place where it begins.
And I come to mind of the memory of the rule for preventing accidental flow of blood from the iron according to your way, in your place of this freedom.
If this illness does not benefit from this cauterization and tolerates the piercing of the hair, then cauterize that in the middle part of the head as we have counted, and heal the wound until it is healed.
And if you see this, administer the cauterization that we have mentioned in the first part of the iron treatment with two knives, and this is the best cauterization and more effective.
Capital fifth.
Of cauterization of ear pain.
When there is pain in the ear and it is treated with lacative medicines and with the other treatment that I have mentioned in the division of causes, and if the pain does not return; then burn the cauterization, and this is the one that has no points, which is called:
Then place the point near the ignition, and direct it towards the entire ear as if it were rotating, or in the circle of each one if the pain is in each one. Along with the cauterization of the ear tip slowly little by little, and then place your hand on that place to prevent pain from spreading.
And if the cauterization of it is made with points all over the ear, and this is it, then heal the places until they are healed.
Capital sixth.
Of cauterization of torture.
The torture that is cured and the cauterization is not except for the kinds of medicine that comes by blood.
Avoid cauterization of the kind that causes dryness or spasm of the nerve.
When you heal that kind of torture with jerks and purifications and gurglements, and if your treatment does not benefit; then consider that you cauterize the patient from three directions: the first is the tip of the ear, the second is a small piece from the temple, and the third is the junction of two lips.
And place the small cautery against the opposite side of the hernia, for healing does not occur except in the area that is sore.
And the form of cauterization is that you cauterize the small cautery against the right side of the earlobe by placing a small piece on top of the ear, and in the opposite one, its length being according to the length of the said foot, and pause your hand cauterized until it is burned the amount of the bulk of the wound of the skin.
And this is the form of the cautery, and is especially made of a knife, the shape of which is placed in front. However it is better that you place a little more of the knife; and cover with a thin layer of grease a little.
Then clean the area carefully before treating it.
Chapter VII.
Of Cauterization for Old Stroke.
When an old stroke has occurred and you have already used the water (which we have mentioned) and do not give it medicine and the patient does not have a fever, then cauterize with four cauteries: on all the ears of his head; and on the top of his head, as well as the place that is sore; and on the nape. And the way of the cautery is done according to what we have said.
Then it is cauterized over the mouth of the stomach; and there is a delay; and then clean those areas that have been cauterized.
Chapter VIII.
Of Cauterization for Oblique Wounds Made with a Flame.
Cover the patient in the beginning with large sheets and provide him with water to drink.
Then shave the head of the patient completely, and place a plaster on his forehead, as described in the treatise on plasters.
Then place some small needles, for that is a way of cauterizing. Then give water according to the measure which we have mentioned.
And if by that it is healed well, then do not do anything; but if no, then place three cauteries on the back of his head, which are placed from the top of the head, over the left side, within the space between the two ears. Then place the thickness of the knife between each cauterization; and then clean the cauterization with water which has been prepared.
But if the patient consumes water, then place the cautery in the middle; and if he consumes more, then cauterize on either side.
Then clean those areas that are healed; and let the cauterization be olive oil according to the form which we have mentioned.
Chapter IX.
Of Cauterization for Paralysis and Softening of the Whole Body.
Cover the head with a moist cloth and give water to drink as we have mentioned; and then shave the head of the patient, and place the cautery in the middle of his forehead, and on all the ears of his head, and on the back of his neck, and on the nape; and place three cauteries on the joints of his neck.
And if it is necessary in the softening of the body of the patient and that the patients are tolerating it and the softening is strong, then cauterize with four cauteries on the joints of his arms, and continuously clean the area with the intent of burning it off, and hold your hand. Then clean those areas that are healed; and let the cauterization be olive oil.
Chapter X.
Of Cauterization for Epilepsy.
It is not cauterized with the epileptic one unless it is due to a flame.
Then cover the patient's brain at the beginning of his illness with a moist cloth and with another cure which we have mentioned in the division when the patient is ill and tolerates the experience of medicines.
Then if it is a child who does not suffer the medicines, then administer gruels and chewing tablets, in front of water for three days, with the benefit of food.
Then shave the head of the patient and place a cautery in the middle of his forehead as we have described before; and another cautery on the top of his head, and on each ear of his head; and let him be cauterized. Then if the patient is strong and tolerates it, then cauterize with the following: on the joints of his neck, and on the joints of his arms, and on the joints of his legs.
Then let the cauterization be olive oil according to what has been said before.
But if the patient is a child, then place a little cautery in this way.
Chapter XI.
Of Cauterization for Melancholy.
When the causes of melancholy are corrupt humors and a thick flame, then cauterize with the following: with the cauterization which we have mentioned in case of paralysis.
Then if the cause of melancholy is flowing towards melancholy, and the patient's body is moist with water, then give water to drink which covers the brain according to that which we have mentioned in the division: "When the patient is ill and tolerates the experience of medicines."
Then shave the head of the patient, and place a little torch on his forehead gently; then pause it in the middle of his forehead.
Then the patient is seventy years old, and let him be held by all his parts.
Then pause the linenment; and it is more fitting for a shepherdess. Then scald with fire in moderate heat according to measure, which the patient endures when he is half-naked. Then blow on him in the middle of his forehead gently and let him cool down.
Then give water to the patient once a week; or, if you prefer, cauterize with small points according to his age, but let your hand be careful: this is especially good for softening the brain with equality.
Then pause the linenment that has been prepared in blue or gray wool.
Chapter XII.
Of Cauterization for Water Descending on the Throat.
When it is declared at the beginning that water descends in the throat through the nerves which we have mentioned in the division, then begin and give to the patient water which covers his forehead, and keep what has been said before.
Then place a little vinegar in a bath prepared with cold water for several days.
Then command him to shave his forehead, and cauterize with a cautery in the middle of his forehead; and cauterize with two cauteries on two temples if it is the beginning of water descending in two throats, or on the one temple if it is the beginning of water descending in one throat.
Then place a cautery on all the veins and arterioles which are left uncovered by the skin; and place those cauterizations at a distance from the temples.
Then take care not to cauterize in the presence of blood, but if you do, then there is no harm; or else give some medicine, which may be necessary.
Then I come with sweetness that is extracted from arterioles and the absence of those, and take care not to be in the presence of blood.
Then sometimes it is cauterized in the throat between two bones with two cauterizations constantly produced.
Chapter XIII.
On the cauterization of ancient tears.
When the tears of the eyes are ancient, flowing strongly through the veins and arteries that go up to the head, and it is seen that this is superfluous fluid, then cauterize the part with fire, which we have mentioned in the beginning of water droplets dropping into the eyes, and fire cauterizing at the top of the head, and two cauterizations on the temple, and two cauterizations on the neck between the two temples, and two cauterizations on the neck between the two bones. And if there is an addition, then cauterize that in all depth of the hole of the eye on the extreme end of the eyebrow with a small cautery.
Chapter .xiiii.
On the cauterization of a bad smell from the nose.
When you give the patient three cups of wine; then shave his head, and cauterize half with fire, and half with olive oil. And then cauterize that with a clavus cautery on the two temples, leaving the hair between them small.
And keep away from fire so that it does not burn that out.
And of the cauterization with a clavo, this is the way.
Chapter.xv.
On the cauterization of the membrane of the eyes.
When the eyelid of the eye is softened by illness or moisture, then cauterize that eyelid with a fire shaped like the moon; and this is the way to do it:
And if you want to, then cauterize that on the two temples with a small fire, and let them be long from the temples. And have the length of each cautery according to the quantity of the eyebrow.
And do not press too hard on your hand with the cauterization, more according to the quantity that the third part of the eyelid is dry.
Chapter.xvi.
On the cauterization of the eyelid of the eye when the hairs are converted to dust and hold the eye closed.
When the hairs of the eye are converted to dust and hold the eye closed, then cauterize that in two ways, for cauterization is either by fire or by burning medicine.
If you want to do a fire cauterization, then order the patient in front of you that he does not blink his eyes, so that they are stretched and fixed; and if you hold him with one hand, then your hand should be strong enough that he does not blink, but his eyelids should be completely closed.
Then, with the eyelids completely closed and fixed, place the head of the patient in your lap, and put a cloth on it, with one corner over his eyes, so that the corner does not touch his eyelids; then start the timer from when you put your hand on his eyelid, and count according to the figure of a sword-play, and this is the beginning of the count next to the hairs.
And then put a cloth on it, wet with milk or vinegar, over his eyebrows.
And then light the fire for cauterization, and this is the way to do it:
And then cauterize the figure according to which you have counted, little by little, until the surface of the eyelid is completely burned with a clavo, all appearing properly.
And the sign of health of this work is that you see the eyelid of the eye already tightened, and the hairs of the eye already raised from the edge of the eyelid.
And then lift your hand and hold it over it for three days, and put a cloth on it, wet with milk or vinegar, every day. And then treat that with ointment, so that it heals.
But if the hairs return for some reason and hold his eyelid closed, then do the cauterization again all at once.
But if the hairs are in the eyelid itself, then cauterize that until it is raised to its natural place and fixed, and so that the hairs do not hold the eye closed.
But the cauterization by burning medicine is this: tell the patient to blink his eyes until they are stretched and fixed, then put a cloth on it with one corner over his eyes, so that the corner does not touch his eyelids; then start the timer from when you put your hand on his eyelid, and count according to the figure of a sword-play, and this is the beginning of the count next to the hairs.
And then take a sharp knife and cut off the hair with a lively stroke. Chapter i. Take those things together and mix them well, so that they are not chilled; and then spread the mixture on the cloth in the form of a sword-play, and put it on the patient's head, and hold the knife above it, ready to strike. Then take a sharp knife and cut off the hair with a lively stroke.
Then put those things in the patient' mouth, and press it lightly on his teeth, so that he feels the burn of the medicine, for that burn is in his mouth as fire.
Then when he feels the burn of the medicine in his mouth, then let him spit it out and wash his throat with water; and if the eyelid has been raised already with the burn or cut, then you have done well; but if it does not raise, then repeat the operation and see that the eye does not become inflamed because of the medicine.
And then put a cloth on it, wet with milk or vinegar, over the edge of the eyelid, so that it is completely removed, and then treat that with ointment, whether it heals by itself or with another medicine, so that it heals.
It is necessary for you to be vigilant in your operation so that the medicine does not fall into the eye, and if the eyelid is swollen because of the hairs, then repeat your operation on that place where the eyelid is swollen, and exactly as it starts, put the medicine where it is swollen; and then turn yourself, and see that the place where you have put the medicine heals.
And this is the way of a sword-play.
You know that the eyes of men are different, according to their size and age, and so your operation should be adjusted to each eye.
And do not forget the way of treating those who have been operated on before in this art.
Chapter.xvii.
On the cauterization of a fistula that is in the eye's eyelid.
When you treat a fistula with the medicine that we have mentioned in the division of the eyelids and do not apply your treatment, then cover that you cauterize that according to this way: tell the patient to place his head between your shoulders so that he does not blink or move his head; and if there is anyone who can hold him, so much the better.
And then put a cloth on it, wet with milk or vinegar, over his eyebrows.
And then light the fire for cauterization, and this is the way to do it:
with one end in the form of a cane or a feather of a bird, from one end which is made to be cauterized.
And if you see it, let it go into the other end. And if you want to come out so try.
But certainly that which is constipated is better for the work.
Then press the fistula if it is open, and draw out and dry up its matter. And if it is not open, then open that and extract the pus from it.
Then place over it the cautery which is well ignited, and touch lightly your hand or the patient's nose at the beginning of the nose, so that your hand or their hand does not shake, and then place the cautery on the furrows of the nose and burn them.
And if at the beginning of the burn the skin blisters, it is good; and if not, then repeat the burn one or two times, if necessary; and leave it there for three days, and then place over that wound a poultice made with salt and water until it heals.
But if it has not healed after eleven days, then place over it an acute corrosive medicine until the bone is exposed and scrape it according to what you believe is best in its own chapter.
And another method of burning a fistula, which the first doctors said: "Go to the place of the fistula and pour in it a small quantity of molten lead; and if your hand is well protected, so that the molten lead does not reach the nose of the patient; then cover that with a thin layer of plaster, either made from the blood of a horse or water, because lead clings to the place of the fistula and heals it by a wonderful remedy.
And if the fistula is healed by the water that I said about the burn and the cure, it is good; but if not, then it is necessary to administer a trauch of the nose and to reduce the fistula to its own place according to what comes in its own place.
Chapter XVIII.
Of the Burning of a Wound with Lead.
It happens that blisters occur in the lips, and mostly in the lips of children.
Therefore, when you cure those sores with the water that we have said in the divisions and do not profit from our cure, then ignite the small scalpel according to this form which is made thus:
And its cavity according to the subtility of a knife.
Then place it carefully in those sores so that the burn reaches the edge of the sores.
Then cure it with a sharp knife so that it heals.
Chapter XIX.
Of the Burning of a Fistula in the Mouth.
When in the root of the uvula or on the palate or in the roots of the teeth the aphum is made, and it is broken, and it is hardened, and it is corroding, and there is a fistula; then you cure that and do not profit from our cure, then place over that where the burn has entered the fistula, and then ignite your cautery according to the quantity that is received in the fistula, and then place it ignited on the edge of the fistula, and at its other end make a blister one or two times; and then cure it with water that we have said for the cure so that it heals.
And if the healing is broken and it heals, it is good; but if not, then it is necessary to expose the place and burn the bone according to what you believe is best in its own chapter.
Chapter XX.
Of the Burning of Teeth and Softening of the Veins.
When the veins are softened by moisture and the teeth are hurt, then cure those with medicines and do not confer with me, then place the cap of the mallet on the head, and then ignite your cautery quickly according to its form; then, without taking your hand away from the patient' s jaw, place the tip of the cauterizing knife at the root of the tooth and burn it very quickly, so that the heat of the fire reaches the edge of the tooth.
Then take your hand away, and repeat the burn a few times according to what you want.
Then the mallet should hold a mouthful of saltwater and keep it for an hour; then drink that, because the hurt tooth is closed and the softened gum is hardened and the corrupted moisture is dried up.
Chapter XXI.
Of the Burning of Toothache.
When toothache is due to cold or there is a burning or stinging sensation, and you do not confer with medicine the cure, then the burn in that place according to two ways: either by burning with cow's blood, or by fire.
Burning with a cow' s blood is that you take the cow' s blood and boil it in an iron pot, and then place a bandage and wrap it over the end of the tooth, and quickly place the burned blood on the tooth according to the form that has been boiled; then place that on the painful tooth so that it cools.
Then repeat the burned blood a few times according to the power of the fire reaching the roots of the teeth.
And if you want, dip wool or a bandage in the cow' s blood, and place that on the tooth, and place an iron burned one according to what reaches the edge of the cavity of the tooth.
But certainly the burning according to fire is that you take the whetstone of steel or an iron, and it is sharp and does not reach the edge of the cavity of the tooth, and the acute power of the fire does not reach the patient' s mouth; for such things do not help in healing.
Then ignite your cautery according to its form, and place that on the tooth and your hand within so that the burn cools; and make a blister in some places because the pain returns or on that day or on another day.
And then, because of the impression of that burn which the mallet should hold its mouth with good cover and keep it for an hour and then drink it; and this is the form of the burn.
And burn the end according to what you see necessary.
This is the form of the tube:
Chapter XXII.
Of the Burning of an Extrophyl.
When an extrophyl is made of fluid and frigid humors that do not submit to medicine through digestion, and you see the digestion of those a little, then ignite your cauterizing knife according to this form which has two open ends so that the smoke from the fire reaches the other end, and place that burned one on the abscess once, and if it is desired, place that within so that it reaches the edge of the abscess.
And if the abscess is a little, then place the burn according to the quantity of the abscess, and leave it for three days and place over that on a bandage in good cover so that it heals by the smoke from fire.
Then cure it with oil and try it again and wrap it up, so that it heals.
Chapter XXIII.
Of the Burning of Scurvy and the Constriction of the Throat.
When moisture comes on the throat of the lung, and mostly when water is due to cold weather, then it is necessary to evacuate the mallet at the beginning with laxative medicines, and then burn that where the tonsils are embedded in their place.
And you should not apply to the throat of the lung or burn it with the cord of the larynx, but a little bit only.
Then cauterize it with another cautery, as the joint of the neck at the last spine. And the cautery be made by the same way as was described above.
Then treat it with the medicine that was mentioned before until it is healed.
Chapter.
On the Cauterization of Pulmonary Maladies and Coughing.
When coughing and pulmonary malady are caused by moisture, and there is no fever or consumption, but it is an old disease, then cauterize twice on the furcula in the place where the bones join together, and another cautery on the middle of the foot between two breasts; and let the cautery be made as was described above.
And if you wish, your cauterization may be made with the same pointed cautery that is called a point, the shape of which you have used in the cauterization of ear pain.
Then make points within those, and treat with medicine those that were mentioned before until they are healed.
And after having made the cauterization, there are three ramps for the cautery, which can be made in this way: first, make a ramp that is flat; then make another ramp that is pointed; and finally, make a ramp that is round.
Chapter.
On the Cauterization of Tickling at the Tip of the Tongue.
When the tip of the tongue is dislocated by means of moist and oily substances, so that it does not return to its place at first, then reduce the dislocation, and then the malady returns to its place, then raise the finger which is in the mouth at the tip of the tongue; and then lower the same finger to the root of the tongue from above, by means of the fingers of your left hand.
Then make two points on it, and this is the way of doing it:
And then cauterize the tip within so that it enters one place and comes out another; and after having made three points on it, there will be a figure of cauterization, which is as follows:
In some cases it is made according to this count, and for that reason are made the following cauterizations. »xii.
Then place over the cautery salt, and then make it adhere with quietness to the member, and do not cause it any pain until it is comforted.
If the dislocation is at the tip and it returns, then cauterize over the muscle with a pointed cautery, because the joint is confirmed and the moisture is thickening and the malady is healed.
Chapter.
On the Cauterization of the Stomach.
When there is a flow of liquid and it multiplies in the stomach, and if you continue with the treatments and do not confirm it, then treat the malady, which is that the malady be on its back, and extend your hands over it, and then make three cauterizations: first, leave one finger on the foot for a quantity of a digit; second, make two cauterizations on either side of the finger, so that they form a triangular figure; then lengthen those which are not joined, so that they will split.
And if the depth of the cauterization is according to the quantity of the third part of the thickness of the tip?
And be the figure of cauterization according to this way. If you wish, cauterize with a great cautery in the middle of the stomach according to this form; and this form is a circle according to this way:
And the stomach be cauterized by piercing that person who is frightened of cauterization: and this is to say that you feel a piercing sensation in your stomach according to the quantity that you wish, and then cauterize with another cautery in the place; and then treat with the treatment mentioned before until it is healed.
Chapter.
On the Cauterization of a Fretted Instrument.
When there is pain in the instrument by cold or moisture or rough wind, and if it deviates from its normal state, then treat the malady with the medicine that we have mentioned, and do not confirm it; then, if the malady be on the back, place the patient's head between your knees, and feel a piercing sensation.
And be the space between each cauterization according to the thickness of the digit, and be the cauterization according to the length of the right side.
And do not compress your hand with the cautery.
And if the quantity of water that is applied is according to half the thickness of the tip, and the malady be on the feet; and if it is not standing up, then place them down, which are already extended, and raise your feet.
It is possible that you make these cauterizations with a knife-like cauterization, when it is subtlety and prudence in the art.
And keep in mind that you do not over-process the cauterization, so that the thickness of the entire tip is uniform, and so that it reaches within the buds, because the tip here is delicate; and know how to control it.
Chapter.
On the Perforation of a Fret on the Instrument by Piercing with a Cauterization.
When there is an inflammation or an abscess in the instrument, and you wish to know if it is in the meat of the instrument or in its sheath, then, if it is in the meat of the instrument, the malady will be heavy and there will be pain;
And if it is in the sheath of the instrument, the pain will be great and your treatments will not help the patient.
Then, if the malady be on the back, place the patient' head between your knees; and feel for the location of the abscess by piercing; and then make the cauterization with the same shape that was described in the previous page. And cauterize with it and with another cauterization, so that the entire tip is melted together, so that it reaches the cypher, so that it is healed when it is used.
Then treat those others with the treatment mentioned before until they are healed.
And I do not know if the form of cauterization that is used here is the one mentioned in the art of medicine and which has been prolonged; and likewise some cases, but then let it be left to experiment with this operation; however, let it be left to us, and it is better.
Chapter.
On the Cauterization of Blisters.
The little cauterizations of the chirurgical blade to blister are made according to this way: and it is as follows what you take from the chirurgical blade that is long and dry, and is of the thickness of the digit.
Then submerge that in oil and burn it with a flame, and then cauterize by means of a small cauterization at the place where the furcula joins with the neck; and another small cauterization to one side, declining a little from the beard, and another on the part which is inclined; and another small cauterization in the middle of the foot; and another over the stomach, and three small cauterizations in the parts which are inclined behind; and another small cauterization in the place between the two breasts, and two cauterizations on either side of the foot from above, declining a little to the sides.
And do not covet your neighbor's wife when you are using a sharp cautery, for it is un-Christian to lust after one's neighbor in such a way.
And also tell us tales of men who use a sharp cautery made like a ray and ignites it so that we may know if the blood clot will come off when we place it on that spot where the disease is, just as we have said in the case of the foot clot.
May it be known that there is no fear in piercing with a sharp cautery, since often such things happen at the spot of the fistula, where there is no healing.
Chapter .xxx.
Of the cauterization of the melasa.
When you treat the melasa malady with water, as we have said in the division chapter, and do not confer the cure, then cauterize it in three ways or four according to its length: according to the shape of the cautery figures that preceded this one for the foot.
And between each cautery be the thickness of a finger or less, and the shape of the cautery is the same as we have said in the cauterization of the foot, turning it.
And do not covet your neighbor's wife when you are using a sharp cautery; and the patient is lying on their back.
And another way to cauterize is, when you hold the cautery with two hands, to ignite it, causing a fire as we have said in the chapter on dislocation of the muscle, and raising the cord that is in the middle of the disease, this will burn the patient's sinew.
And let your elevation be the same as the length of the body, so that the cauterizations are made according to the breadth of the flesh.
Then put both hands on either side, ignite a fire, and place it between them so that the cord comes out on this side.
Then remove the cautery; and there are four cauterizations to be made.
And if you see it, cauterize with three hands.
Then cure the cautery placed there, for it is more convenient to cure it with fire than to wait for it to cool down; because it is more certain that other causes will precede in the cure.
Chapter .xxxi.
Of the cauterization of the hydropic disease.
Do not cauterize in hydropic disease, but only in a third type of disease.
When you treat the hydropic disease with the methods of cure we have said in the division chapter, and do not confer the cure, then it is necessary that he cauterize with four cauterizations on the circuit of the womb, and one on the stomach, and another on the foot, and another on the melsa, and two between the spondils of the legs, and one on the right side of the foot, and another on the stomach. And the quantity of the depth of the cautery is proportionate to the thickness of the cord.
Then let the cautery cool down so that it does not burn for a long time.
And do not evacuate the patient with water after cure, so that they are not added to the two effluents, and the third is stirred with a helping hand for healing.
The shape of the cautery that is used for cauterizing the stomach is square according to its previous form, and this is the one used for cauterizing the legs, which is olive-shaped according to what comes before it.
Chapter  .xxxii.
Of the cauterization of the feet and thighs.
When the feet are infected with hydropic disease and are swollen with clear water, it is necessary that you cauterize them between the second and third metatarsal bone with a sharp cautery, raising your hand with the cautery and not turning it; then return your hand to its original position, as the clear water will dissipate.
This is the second form of cauterization: And two cauterizations are made on each thigh, one at the end of the knife-shaped cautery. And make the cauterization according to the length of the thigh, and do not return the hand to its original position; but, on the contrary, move your hand down to its usual place; and two cauterizations are made on each thigh.
Then leave the wound uncovered for a long time so that no water is lost from it.
And cure according to those causes we have said.
Chapter .xxxiii.
Of the cauterization of the belly.
When the belly is clean with water and moistened inside so that it digests and retains, which are in the stomach and intestines, and is treated with water according to the methods of cure we have said, and do not confer the cure; and sometimes patients suffer from cauterizations of the exhalent virtue, then cauterize them with a large cautery on the top of the stomach according to what has preceded in the cauterization of the stomach, with a large cautery around the belly, and four cauterizations on the circuit of the small intestine, one with a square-shaped cautery; and a cauterization over the alcatins on the right side, or two cauterizations.
And if the patient's water is abundant and they can tolerate it, then cauterize them with a pentagonal shape on the top of the stomach and on the intestines, and firmly adjust two cauterizations on the stomach and close to the inguinas, for this is an excellent cure that does not leave any trace.
Chapter   .xxxiv.
Of the cauterization of ancient hemorrhoids.
When it is in nature the later stage of ancient hemorrhoids or a humor of thick water that infiltrates or corrupts with moisture, and they are cured with water according to the division chapter we have said, and do not confer the cure; then cauterize with three cauterizations on the lower spondil of the small leg, and a square-shaped cautery over the ombelica, cutting it in two parts by means of two cuts.
And if you perceive that the person' stomach is swollen and their food is not digested, and their face is swollen, then cauterize them on the stomach with a large cautery according to what has preceded; and one on the foot, and another on the melsa with a square-shaped cautery, and leave the cautery in place for some time, and cure that which is inside.
Chapter    .xxxv.
Of the cauterization of the atheyl close to the absence of it.
When you separate atheyl, then ignite the cautery made like a ray. Then place that ignited cautery inside the separated atheyl, and return your hand to the opening of the vein from which you can see the blood coming out.
Then make one or two cuts, for if the steps are three, then cauterize each one according to what we have said, and cure those with water so that they are not wet within, and this is how you treat them until they are healed.
And if you cauterize with a large cautery on the right side, it is more likely to be followed by death.
Chapter .xxxvi.
Of the cauterization of fistulas that are caused in the later stage in the division of the legs.
When nature does not obey to the work we have recommended at its place, and the patient is frightened by water, then he is healed with cautery.
When there is a fistula in nature behind, and it is ancient, I extract the corrupt wetness, and therefore that which is put into dignity that it should cover - that I try with subtle touch, and proportion the amount of its depth with the aforementioned attempt.
Then bring the cauterizer that seems like fire. And then set this cautery on fire in this fistula, and according to the amount in which it mixes with the attempt.
And repeat over that cautery within which are burned those corrupted humors one time or two or three, according to the quantity of your need.
And beware of burning the nerves and veins; or if the fistula goes into the channel of the bladder or into the channel of the intestine, then beware of all those places; and do not pour liquid there unless it is in a fleshy place and you think that it will not penetrate.
Then heal the area within that it be healed.
And if the area is sealed and there are no matter separated from it, and it has been thus for a long time, then you will know that it is entirely healed.
And if those matters are not held back by it, then you will know that it is penetrating or in the channel of its os corrumput, or it comes from those causes of which there will be recall in its place.
Chapter .xxvii.
Of cauterization of the humors.
When there is pain in the humors due to cold or strong wind, and because of this the patient's coat becomes soiled, then cauterize that which causes the pain on the humors with a cautery that can be used for all the humors, and remember the memory of it.
Then firmly cauterize with a small piece of wood so that three tiny scars will come out, and then they will heal quickly behind them.
Chapter.xxviii.
Of the cauterization of the bladder.
When there is pain in the bladder and softening due to cold or wetness, so that the patient does not retain urine, then cauterize that which causes the pain on the posterior part of the bladder with a small piece of wood, where the hairs grow, and cauterize with one cautery on the right side, and another on the left.
And let the length of each cautery be according to the quantity of hairs in the place; and cauterize that which causes the pain with a cautery in the posterior lower part of both, or with two cauteries if necessary.
And let there be a cautery that can be used according to how it is treated.
Chapter.xxix.
Of the cauterization of the large intestine.
When there is cold and wetness in the large intestine, and because of this there is a danger of pregnancy, and the menstrual flow is corrupted, and there is a delay in its occurrence, and pain arises when it moves, then cauterize that place with three cauteries on the path of the navel, as we have said in the cauterization of the bladder; and on the posterior lower part of both, or two cauteries, and let there be a cautery that can be used.
Chapter.xi.
Of the cauterization of the dislocation of the tongue.
When there is moist mucus spread on the part of the tongue, and it causes a feeling of sticking in its place, and it signals that the cough is prolonged when compared to the other, then know that it is due to cold. And the part of the tongue that is dislocated is turned towards the back of the throat.
Then when you cauterize the patient' tongue on the part that is dislocated with a cautery that seems like fire, knowing that you will have to try in the path of this part as if it were rolled up, and so that the part falls into its normal place within the circle.
And let there be a cautery that precedes the shape in the cauterization of the stomach.
And if you do not have such a cautery with you, then cauterize with three small cauteries on the large intestine.
And let there be made according to the amount of severity in all the body; and then heal that part within which it should be healed.
Chapter.xi.
Of the cauterization of the sciatic vein.
When there is pain in the tongue and it is due to cold and wetness, then the patient is given water that we have mentioned, and if it is old, then know that you lack the humors of the large intestine with spoiled pills or artificial pills or those that resemble them; and then cauterize that which causes the pain.
And the way of cauterizing in that part is according to two ways: or cauterize with burning medicines, or cauterize with fire.
And according to two proven ways, the first of which is that you cauterize that part on the back with three triangular cauteries according to this form, and let them have depth. And let there be space between each cautery the amount of the thickness of the wood or if it is small, then let the olive-sized cautery or large one be used.
Some few times that cauterize on its normal place on top of the tongue so that there are four cauteries.
And if you wish, then cauterize with a circle that precedes the shape in the cauterization of the dislocation of the tongue, and let this circle be large enough to burn all the severity in all the body.
And this is the way of cauterizing in the case when pain adheres to the tongue and does not extend within the cushion.
And if it is extended within the cushion, then cauterize that which causes the pain with two cauteries on the cushion over the part of the tongue that hurts, and let one cautery be placed over the joint by four small pieces; and in the middle of the tongue, place a cautery that can be used.
And if you have a scalpel, and let the depth of the scalpel be according to the amount of severity in all the body.
And if the patient feels that the pain is extended within the place of the tongue and it is a few pounds away from it, then cauterize that part where the patient feels it with three points or more, or as many as you need.
And if the patient feels that the pain is on one side of the tongue and it hurts when you touch it, then cauterize that part with a scalpel.
And beware in all cauterization that you do not use fire that damages nerves or causes great pain, and because of this your hand becomes injured or you die.
You have already seen another of those that I cauterized on the tongue and I ended with cauterization, and the fire was inflamed within the patient' head, and it penetrated through the entire head. Then a strong solution for the stomach came, and death followed soon after.
And if the pain is in two parts, then cauterize each according to this way.
And the wise say in the cauterization of the tongue, that this way is: make a circle of iron that its path is most of an inch; and it should be the length of a finger or two according to the thickness of a date fruit or the width of a fingernail.
And within this circle, let there be another third circle; and let the distance between them be according to the amount of hairs in the palm of the hand; and may these circles be open from both sides; and this is the way of it:
Then set fire to it at the tip so that it glows and is held over the area of the ankle, the mattress placed on top of the sheet. Then cauterize this with three pointed cauterizing tools in one stroke.
Then leave it alone for three days; then apply ointment to the wound and leave it open for seven days; then heal this with poultice.
Albucasius: O son, of this type of cauterization we have used little because of the danger of looking at it and for those few that we have found who look up at it.
May he have fewer cauterizations than those who suffered from them, and turn away from him the place where he was.
May he have fewer cauterizations with medicinal oils than those who suffered from them, making two circles of a certain length on the skin, through which to pass the iron rod; let it be a long way from the edge of the wound in the direction of their hair.
And if the space between each is the same quantity as the thickness of it; and are open on both sides, and hold themselves together in this way:
Then place the mattress over the area of the ankle, the patient lying down on top of it, and compress your hand on the area of the ankle; then take cold water between the two circles, and its quality should be little by little fire, and hold it for an hour quantity, and suffer the patient to feel the biting and heat of it—as if it were fire—until the biting stops.
Then raise your hand away from the tool and rinse off the cold water from all of the ankle.
Then leave it alone for three days and place a poultice on top until the heat returns, then let it run cold; this is done after the third day.
Then heal this with poultice until it is healed.
And if the pain extends within the crotch or the leg, then make it into a shape that holds water according to how it is made on the ankle joint.
This is the way of cold water, and I have already written about it in the treatise on the correction of medicines. Take from the alkali and from a certain plant a little at a time on each side; and twist them together in a new wave, through which the opening between them is pierced with a small hole, according to how much enters into it.
Then leave the edge of the other wave wrapped up, and place that on top of the alkali and fresh water plant which is taken in little by little, and then compress those with your good hand; and leave the wave from which it comes to go away from it.
Then adjust all of that water, and place another on top of it, fresh and new, because this one causes a sharp pain, which is administered in small doses as a medical procedure or to cauterize the other members, because it operates with fire.
And from the medicines some that are cauterized widely, thus quickly and without delay, and a certain plant in which to soak it until they are mixed together.
And Gualia reported about a man of the old ways on how to operate and heal the pain in his ankle and sciatic nerve, and he said that no further cure was needed, for it is healed by itself with time; for such a small thing has already been done to him.
It is because it has been taken from a certain plant that grows on the ground, and if it has not been turned into an oil, then take a fresh fig; and make three drops of it and place them on the ankle where the pain is, or in the crotch or on the leg, and leave it.
Then leave it for three hours quantity or how much the patient feels heat.
Then put it in a bath and when the man's body is heated up, put that into the sun, for the pain stops and he is healed.
You should know that there is nothing to be done with these medicines except for the elimination of the body's contents.
May he also say that when the vein of the goat is cut and cauterized with wool, it heals well; but if it is done in this way: take wool and soak it in old oil, and place it between the toes of the foot and between the toenails.
Then take dry goat's skin and heat that with fire until it turns into charcoal; then place it over the wool and leave it until it is hardened. Then repeat this water, and do not stop doing so until the biting stops reaching the ankle where the pain is; then pause it.
This way of cauterizing is called cauterization of cows.
Chapter LXXII.
Of the treatment for pain of two parts.
Some pains are due to two causes, because of contact or rubbing, or because of excessive elimination, and because of similar things, by the infusion of dry matter and wet matter.
But cauterization does not occur except in this single specialty, which is done by the infusion of rubbing material.
Then, therefore, the elimination of the body's contents is done by pills that resemble them and are made in two parts, according to the location of the pain; then three lines of fire or more, depending on how much is tolerated by the patient and how useful it is for him.
Then make cauterization with a pointed cautery.
If you want to, cauterize with three or four cauterizing tools in the form of a point:
Chapter LIII.
Of the treatment at the beginning of gingival disease.
Some ways to treat this disease in small children; and indicate the beginning of it in them by observing when the teeth begin to move, raising their cheeks, and the movement of milk in them.
It is noticeable at the back of the second spine and at the base of the neck, which has already begun to rise above the others.
Then, when you see this water and want to stop it, cauterize it with a circular cautery according to this form: so that the cautery is placed on the entire joint, wrapped around it.
If you want to, cauterize in the circle of the spine with a pointed cautery made up of two or three lines. Then place the tips of these points next to each other.
Then heal that area where it hurts with water which we have said.
May he also know that cauterization is not administered in gingival disease that is caused by muscle spasms.
Chapter LIV.
Of the treatment for gout and joint pain.
When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customary to call it gout itself.
Then how is gout cured by rubbing in the way of healing and not being reawakened with pain? Then it is properly cauterized.
It is because you cauterize that by elimination in the circle of the joint of the foot with several cauterizing tools.
Then it is an olive cautery, which has this form:
If there is a need to make marks on the foot's sole, then do so with a pointed cautery. And if the pains press down into the ankles or other joints, and this becomes worse, then cauterize each one of them with three or four cauterizations altogether, using this cautery as an olive.
And if you must cauterize in this way, then cauterize it and do not press too hard on the hand with the cautery, but rather only touch the skin of the foot.
And if the pains press down into the sole of the foot and the arch, then administer the cautery that I have mentioned in the previous chapter.
And if the pains only occur in the sole of the foot, and it is called "sweet uric acid," then make a point on the circuit of the fire thus: make a point between the two lines.
And if the pains remain in these parts, then make a point on the circuit of the fire on each finger and on the palm of the hand.
And if the pains press down into the hips or thighs, then cauterize each one on all sides of the assistant.
And do not evacuate the patient if he does not have good regulation and reception of medicines, for if it is done in this way and inflammation occurs, God helps it with this cauterization, may He be praised.
Chapter. XLV.
Of Cauterization for Breaks.
When a hernia breaks in the groin and the intestines come out before the hernia, then return them to their place in the abdomen, and let the patient eat as usual and use milder food that does not cause inflammation of the wound.
Then follow the patient between your legs and order him to keep his belt on, so that it does not slip or come off, or the intestines or hernias appear.
Then return it to the patient with his legs together and touch the break on the bone at the top of the thigh, where it resembles the half-circle of the hip bones that are broken.
Then light the cauterizer in this way:
within which it is bright and produces sparks. Then return the intestine or hernia to its cavity, and place your hand over the area to prevent the intestine from coming out.
You have already opened the space between the patient’s thighs, placed a cushion under them, another servant on their legs, and another on their chest, holding their hands.
Then pause the cauterizer on that mark with your hand, holding it steady, and touch it to the bone at the top of the thigh within the middle of the hip, and repeat this second time if you did not succeed in the first touch within the bone.
Observe carefully during the time of the cauterization that you do not burn that intestine, so that it does not cause death or some great evil on the patient.
And know that if you do not feel the bone, you have not performed the operation.
And know that the cauterizer of children should be subtle according to their age and size.
Then clean the place where you made the incision for three days, so that it does not become infected.
Then heal that with the others in a timely manner, may it be healed.
And let the patient remain upright on his feet for 10 days, so that he does not move about or trouble himself, and that the wound remains closed and the plague does not spread.
And know that you should pause the patient’s food according to the length of time for his recovery, so that his belly does not ache and that the intestine is not burned because of the effort of healing.
Then when you want to remove it after 10 days, administer it carefully and thoroughly, and keep it for another 10 days.
And let him work and eat and drink well, and be zealous in observing this whole way of healing, for if you do so, it will be healed.
And direct the healing of breaks in other parts of the belly, and begin at the beginning, and let them not stop, then cauterize that break with a third cauterization according to the quantity, and so it is taken out of the foot when it comes off; and clean that with water as I have said, and do not hurry.
And already they say that the first break should be cauterized with a triangular cauterizer according to this form, because it is marked in this way:
and the line that runs through its width under the break, and another line above it; and pause your hand with a nail, for the first cauterization is shorter and better done.
Chapter XLV.
Of Cauterization for Twisting.
When pain twists the limbs through bedding or percussion, and that pain persists for a long time and does not respond to medication, then know that you should cauterize it with the point of a nail.
And know that the entire limb should be cauterized according to its size and age, and its virtue and urgency, and the location of the twisting and the pain.
Therefore if it is healed by the first cauterization, it is good; otherwise, repeat the cauterization; for it is usually because those pains are caused by punctures in that member near the body, so that you may heal those with a cauterization that does not cause death on the patient.
Chapter XLVII.
Of Cauterization for Leprosy.
Some leuks are healed by cauterization with great benefit, and others are not healed lightly if the specific type of leprosy is caused by the decay of fire and melancholy.
Then consider if you want to cauterize that person, whether the leprosy is caused by fire decay and melancholy, as I have said, and do not heal it with water that has been said, and do not heal it with a third cauterization: one on the top of the head in the middle location, and another after leaving it, touch the forehead at the end of the hair; and both on two sides; and one behind, on the neck or servitor.
And finally touch your hand with a little bit of the cauterizer to give it strength, so that the exhaled vapor is removed from him; and cauterize it as soon as it is needed.
And if the leprosy has already spread over the body and manifested itself clearly, then know that you should cauterize it with those cauterizations I have mentioned in the head; and one on the tip of the nose, and two on the ears, and two on the sides, and one behind, near the neck or servitor. And touch the top of the foot, and two on the toes, and two on the heels, and two on the calves, and two on the thighs, and one on each thigh, and two on the knees, and one at the bottom of the knee, and one at the ankle, and one behind near the heel, and one in front of the foot.
And keep away from those nerves that are on the sole of the foot, which you should not burn.
Some are cauterized with one cauterization on the bone at the top of the thigh and another on the mouth of the stomach, and one on the finger.
And know that the more you administer cauterizations, the more beneficial and effective they are; and know that the patient does not feel pain in cauterization, as they do when cutting the hair, for the bodies of them have already become stuporous.
And because the cauterizations are big or few according to the members and joints according to that it is preceded of the spices of the tools.
Then cure the cauterization with flour of eruca, with honey, and with the other cure within that it is saned.
Chapter .xlviii.
On the Cauterization of Stupor.
When any member is stiffened or dormant and is treated with medicine, oils, and plasters, and does not heal, then you should cauterize that stiffened member according to whether it is large or small.
Then may the little cauterization enter into the specificity of the wound a little. Then cure that with oil within that it is saned.
And some veins are cauterized that which end to the most and to the feet, and to the spines of the two and of the feet the nerves which move that member, and is renewed the stupor.
May not advance over this but that which is wise in the anatomy of the members and of the exit of the nerves throughout all the body moving.
Chapter  .xlix.
On the Cauterization of Swellings that are Morphed.
When swellings are old and do not conform to any of the medicine oils, then you should cauterize that with cauterization before a little according to the specificity of the wound within that it is renewed the whiteness and the color of it, and the color of it is changed.
Then cure that with flour of eruca and lentil, with rosin oil and leaves of arnica, and with sand of kolombangla or of yarrow, each a little and all mixed together, and may it be bound with a cloth over the area within that it is saned.
Chapter .l.
On the Cauterization of Cranky.
When cancer is just beginning and you want to burn that star, then cauterize it with cauterization in the form of a circle on its orbit as soon as it has rotated.
And the wise say that it should be cauterized with the last cauterization in its place; but to me is not seen this, because I think that it is ulcerated, and already have seen this several times.
It is also said that it should be cauterized in the orbit on its circle as mentioned above, or with a little cauterization.
Chapter  .li.
On the Cauterization of Adulterated.
When some adulterated is delayed in maturity, and so it becomes per the superfluitat fazen that one, or by age of the old man, because it is late in ripeness, or by time, and you want to hurry up on its maturity; then cauterize it in the orbit on a little pointed cauterization; and let go that one because it quickly matures.
But if you want the piercing of it with cauterization, then you should set that cauterization which is the shape of it: and let rest that one in its place of adulterated within that it enters the wound.
And if that cauterization is placed in a place which is left behind, so that the cross of the arm is eased; and then cure that within that it is saned.
Chapter   .ii.
On the Cauterization of Corrosive.
Corrosion is walking corruption in the member, which corrupts that one as if it were eating dry wood with fire.
Therefore if you burn that corrosive in a place which suffers from cauterization with fire, then you should set some little pointed cauterizations, and large according to what is convenient in that place in which it is corrosive.
And then cauterize that entirely within that you eradicate all the corrosion and do not affect any cause of it.
And then let rest that for three days, and pause over the cauterized places wet-wet within that the scars are completely eradicated and all the corrosion is gone.
Then cure that with oil of rose.
But if instead of the three days the flesh is born that is healthy and does not corrupt, it is good; but if not, then repeat the cauterization on that one which is rotten in the places where it is corrupted.
Corrosion is cured by some times with acute medicine, because that one is half in place of cauterization. But therefore cauterization with fire is a lighter cure.
Already have I said the cure of it by acute medicine in the division, and therefore take that one when you come to your end.
Chapter   .liii.
On the Cauterization of Claws and the Rest of the Semblants.
There are some eyes that are placed in the tip of the foot that is called claw, and it is a gross cause, exit, which rubs the foot; and cauterize those according to two ways: if it is cauterized with fire, then cauterize it with tail water.
But cauterization with fire is that you ignite the cauterization as if it were turning back, which is made of iron according to its quantity that contains the claw entirely, and it is of subtle margins.
Then let rest that ignited on the claw, and then turn your hand around with the cauterization in its orbit within that the cauterization reaches to the depth of the claw. Let rest that for three days within that it begins to burn the arm. Then apply that with dried-up hibiscus leaves minced with salt, and let rest the application on that for a night, because that one eradicates its roots.
Then cure that place with oil of rose within that it is saned.
But if it does not convert, and some eyes appear on the surface of the body, mainly on the hands and feet, then you should provide in that one a little amount of water-tail: and if it does not get, take a small amount of salt or of iron or of rust, and let rest that over the claw; and then pour in the tail-water a small quantity, and turn your hand around, and you should press that with the pressure of your hand from all sides, and should compress the margin of the tail-water tube at the root of the claw, and let return the tail-water pipe to where it came out from the root of the claw; and then wait for the old man a little of the biting of the tail-water within an hour, and then remove that, because the claw with its roots will erode.
And then I prepared them so that the other can come in, completely surrounding all of their bodies.
And then cure those pustules that the claws of the animals have created by applying the ointment to those areas where the flesh has been affected.
Chapter III.
Of cauterization for tremors.
When one has a tremor due to friction in the nerves or from a fever-like cause or from another similar cause, then it is necessary to cauterize four times on each side of the spine between each vertebra with a single cautery; and a cautery on the feet, and one on the abdomen.
And so the tremor of the patient will cease, and the healing of the fever-like disease will advance.
Chapter V.
Of cauterization for accidental white marks on the body.
When white marks appear on the body and pustules are formed by gross corrupted matter, then at the very beginning, when they appear, let them be cauterized with a subtle fire of the martinet, extending the end of it; or with a long-headed razor; or with a slow-burning cautery.
And some wounds are cauterized at the beginning of their discharge in this way; and they do not need to be bandaged, and the excess matter is dried up, and made healthy by doing so.
But however, it is necessary that a fluid be evacuated with the help of a needle.
Chapter LVI.
Of cauterization for white blood that flows from an incision of an artery.
When there is a flow of blood from an incision of an artery that needs to be stopped, or from the removal of an aphematoma or a cauterization of the member, and in similar cases, it is difficult to repair them.
Then when you encounter blood, place your hand over the orifice of the artery, and pause it on that spot so that the blood does not flow out from under your hand.
Then place a few large and small olive-colored cauterizations on the spot, and exhale breath onto those spots where fire will light up;
And then take from those a small or a large one according to the place and the wound where the artery has been broken, more quickly than you can repair it again, and apply cauterization onto that spot where it was broken;
And if the blood is expelled from the artery's orifice when you release your hand and the cauterization is applied, then take another cauterization that has been prepared in the fire, and if you do not stop the flow of blood, put it onto another spot where the blood needs to be stopped.
And be careful that you do not burn the nerve that is here, and let another evil come upon the patient.
And you should know that when blood flows from an artery, it is not possible to stop the flow of blood by narrowing it, and much so when the artery is large, unless in one of four ways: or if it is cauterized as mentioned above; or if it is removed when it is not removed, for when it is removed, the extremities of the patient are burned and the blood is narrowed, or if it is tied with a knot or a ligature by a strong tension, or if it is placed on medicine that its virtue is to narrow the blood flow; and they are tightened with the help of the pulse.
But that which restricts the blood flow by means of a knot and by stricture placed on the pulse or due to similar causes that cause burning, does not benefit much.
But if you come across something that is not the present medicine or remedy, then open the hand with which the bandage was applied to the wound as mentioned above, and understand that for the great constriction of the place where the blood needs to be stopped, and over the artery the word "do not touch" is not applied; and by pouring cold water onto it from a high temperature, so that the blood congeals and thickens; and in addition, you can burn the wound with fire or apply medicine as necessary.
Of incision and piercing and of winds and of phlegm and of their similarities.
We have already mentioned in the first chapter all disease that benefits from fire cauterization and medicine burning, and the occasions and causes of it, and the instruments by which these forms of cauterization are applied; and we order the chapters of the subsidiary topics according to their places.
And we will proceed in this chapter according to that method, so that whatever is wanted may be found easily; then on this subject that has been mentioned, the following chapters will deal with its causes, symptoms, diagnosis, and prognosis.
In advance of what we will begin here, be aware that in this chapter the following things are mentioned due to fear; for these things are mentioned in the first chapter of cauterization:
And for the following things, be aware that they are mentioned in this chapter due to caution; for in the operations mentioned in the previous chapter, there is the possibility of blood flowing from a vein or an incision on an aphemia or an excision of a growth or a scar or an incision with a knife and similar things: And all of them are accompanied by fear and tremor, and in addition to them is death.
And I warn you that it is not desirable for you to encounter this fear; for sometimes a person encounters the ways of men from hell because of the diseases mentioned in this chapter. And some of them are those who persist in their disease and die due to the severity of this disease, and because of the length of the patient's illness, and because of the fear of that disease for which death is a sign.
And that type of person is one who gives hope and promise to you, while his own disease is destructive.
And therefore I do not agree with that person who sees you in this way; and your caution should be greater than your suspicion and your impatience; and do not assume any cause about this without a certain knowledge that will validate it for you, and to which the praise of God be given for its success.
And use in the treatment of all your diseases by prediction and indication; for in that is given to you aid in acquiring fame and memory, praise and glory.
Or children, may God inspire you and not mislead you; for this faith is in your hands.
And I have ordered this chapter differently according to the chapters that precede it in the chapter on cauterization; of the cure of the head within the body, so that whatever you want may be found easily from here and whatever you needed has been provided for you.
Chapter One.
Of the treatment of water that is contained in the head of children.
You should know that this disease appears in children when the brain's weight increases.
Some of them are due to a hidden cause that is not apparent.
But I did not see this disease in children except for those whose deaths I have witnessed; and because of that, I have observed in them remarkable works.
And I have seen a child whose head was completely full of water, and the child's head continued to grow larger because of the water inside it until fire killed him.
And this moisture or is added between the bone and the ankle, or it is added below the ankle over the arch.
For when the operation is in that if the moisture is between the bone and the ankle and the pus is few, then it is necessary that you make a cut on the top of the head at an angle, and that the length of the cut be two fingers wide where the moisture runs, and this is the form of the sponge:
And if the moisture is more increased and the pus is larger, then there are two fissures according to this manner:
And if the moisture is below the bone, then it is necessary that you open the combs of the head completely and water is squeezed when you compress that with your hand at the inner parts and not at the outside. Then it is necessary that you make three cuts according to this manner:
And take out all the moisture with a sponge; and strengthen the cuts with drapes and plumsols; and pour water from above on to it for five days, then wash the limb and cure the plague with ointment and anoint the head evenly; and feed the patient with dry food of little moisture until the member is comfortable and healed.
And there is another way to cut, which you consider according to the size of the pus and the collection of water, for some are more in the back of the head, or at the sides, or on the left or right; and so it is necessary to make a cut where the pus appears and the water collects, and pour water as well as you can.
And observe that you do not cut the artery and cause blood to flow from the head because of this flow of blood as an evacuation of moisture.
Chapter II.
When you introduce a cathartic or room into the chest or foot, and it is old water, and do not add to it the cure of medicines, then the last cure in this case is cutting off those two arteries.
And if you want to cut those who the patient's head is red, then wash the area with an asperous sponge so that the veins appear, and make it strong with a certain cloth; and consider where the pulse beats; and the places above the ears are pinched, and some hide in some men.
And then open the vein with a sponge, and cut each one with a sponge according to each part going up to the head, and pour it through the angle of the head.
And if you want to, insert the sponge below the artery and take it up to the sides of the head.
And the length of the cut is two fingers apart, for when a vein is cut the pulse is quick to go out, and that should not be because it would cause pain.
More if the artery does not appear with a touch, then it is necessary that you measure from the ear the quantity of space of three fingers, and open it then within the bone.
And where there is a quick flow of blood, there is a quantity of 20 drops, and hold it firm from above 20 drops or more, and this is according to the quantity that appears of the value of the patient and the volume of the artery.
And consider the plague, and if there remains on the bone any cause of the arch, then cut it so that it does not cause a pus.
And strengthen the plague with plums and a cloth of linen, and cure it with anointing within that it is healed.
Chapter III.
Of the extraction of the veins which are in the temples.
When you introduce any type of headache or catarrh into the temples, because of salty water and quality of the cloths in the temples, or if it is a violent headache and looks like those with head injuries, then there are two ways to treat these headaches: by extracting the veins from the temples, or by cauterizing those.
And the manner of the operation and extraction of those is that the patient' head is shaven where there are hairs; and consider the pulse at the temple because it is shown by your hand; and it is hidden in a few men because of its speed.
And if it is hidden from you, then the back of the patient is made strong with a cloth; and wash the area with an asperous cloth or evaporate it with water into a tail within that the artery appears clearly to you. And then you take the sponge of this shape: And then you untie the bow with that ease within that it reaches to the artery; and then cut it apart from above and extract that from the bow and uncover those of the tunics which are left there, all around.
More if the artery is thin, then wrap it with the end of the finger, and cut one from that according to the quantity in which the ends of the fingers are extended and contracted, and do not cause a flow of blood because, if not cut, the blood would not flow completely.
And then empty out the blood from 20 drops. Within three.
And if the artery is large, then it is necessary that you tie it in two places with double thread of silk or a cord long, and do not cut it until the consolidation of the plague and causes a flow of blood.
And then cut the superfluity which is between two cloths; and pour it in that hour or at another.
And if you want to, cauterize it with a hot knife within the bone from where the ends of the fingers are cut, and keep that place of that operation.
And the best operation is that the patient has fever or a cold complex; for cauterization helps to end the moisture, and therefore it is better in summer.
And then extract the veins where you can see them clearly; and let them rest on a clean cloth, and then cure it with dry medicines to make the flesh heal quickly before that it is healed.
And if while you open another vein in the head from which blood flows, then you stop that blood with a bandage or by pressing it, and strengthen your hand within that the blood does not flow again. And if there is no cause of those with you, then pause the bandage on the area until the headache is relieved, and put it on water very cold to relieve that headache, and make it strong according to what has happened.
And where pus is coming out of the extraction of the vein, you cut it with two knives, because you have tied the two places with a rope according to a signal, and then pause each one, igniting a fire, within that they reach the bone and cut the vein in two places, so that it is stretched between the ends of the fingers, because they are not consolidated by that time.
And this is the form of the cauterization:
And let the two knives be sharp. But if, however, there is only a small sharpness with two knives, since they cut the meat with less speed, but do not cut it so deeply as one sharp knife, then use one sharp knife.
And if there is some roughness in them, the heat of fire is held against them, and the flesh is separated easily.
This work is better for all works and lighter.
And be the space between the two knives the quantity of the thickness of the same.
Chapter four.
Of the treatment of acute and acidic joint pains.
When the painful and acidic joints are above the scalp of the head, and you do not find any cause in that medicine for the cure of it, and the skin of the patient is already red and blisters form on it because of the acidity of the tears, then use a different treatment for this operation, and do not use that one again.
And you command the servant to cut the hair on the forehead quickly, and make three incisions evenly spaced according to the length of the forehead. And if the length of the incision falls two times: the first incision is evenly spaced to the length of the nose in its middle place on the forehead, and the second incision according to the length a little less than the movement of the eyelids which are on the tear. And the third incision from the other side.
And keep your hand away from the incision of the cheeks which are in two places, and extend your hand from the continuation of both jaws. And if the space of each incision is the quantity of three times the size of a grain.
And you have a piece of sponge prepared or dry cloth wrapped around your waist.
And then put the spatula between two acute ends, for this is the shape of the incision: to separate the temples until the second incision. And scrape away all the tissue between two incisions that goes up to the bone, and then make a small incision from the first one until the second one. And then put this spatula in the first incision again, or another instrument called a scalpel, taken from one side and not sharp on the other.
And then cut the meat attached to the bone with a sharp edge, and cut it off from its attachment to the jaw, and separate all the vessels that descend from the head into the mouth.
Then continue the incision as far as possible with the spatula away from the bone, and then make a small incision in the middle until the other incision.
And then pour out of the teardrops a quantity that is even, press the sides of the eyelids with ice.
And then place a small veil in each incision, and place over those dusts covered with blood, sweat, and tears, and let it be so that it does not produce an apoplexy of blood.
And on the third day, take off the bandage and administer a great infusion of cold water or a bath, and then treat water with basilic oil or rosewater and other things that the plagues are healed.
Chapter four.
Of the treatment of tear pains by catharsis and in the joints that descend from the inside of the head.
When there is an acute pain of the head due to catharsis and sometimes the joints of the patient are very weak, and already his look at his eyes is disturbed, and his eyelids are ulcerated and their hair falls out, and in the front part of the head has a sharp and painful sensation of stinging and extrusion, you know that these accidents do not come except from the small veins that proceed from the inside of the head.
And the best treatment for these is this: command the servant to shave the forehead, and make a single incision in its middle place on the forehead, a little less than the width of a grain (and begin the incision up to the bone; and extend your hand from the eyelids which are bitten by the food), within which the bone is exposed.
Dry all the head with a sponge or dry cloth, and then place between the two lips of the incision a small veil or a piece of dry cloth. And then cover with dust covered with blood, sweat, and tears, so that it does not produce an apoplexy of blood.
And when the apoplexy has decreased and you see that the bone is beginning to heal, then take two parts of flour and four parts of colophony, mix it together, and make a paste of it, and administer it to these plagues in natural fruit, so that your bread is made out of it.
Chapter six.
Of the treatment of water that catches in the ears.
Any cause that catches in the ears is one of four species, because it is mineral or similar to mineral, so that it is metal or its resemblance, or it is a plant, so that it is thyme or fava, or it is variable like water and sweat and their resemblances, or some animal.
And so when the mineral catches in the ear or any other similar cause of these causes that do not fit into the ear, and put the ear to the sun, and if there is still a catch, then distil it with the oil of violets or cumin, and then administer the infusion to it, and make it sneeze, and close its eyes from the coming of sneezing. And then place some cloth or wool over the ear, and extend the ear from its attachment, for the motas that are seen in this way are more easily removed by these causes.
And if it is not removed, then administer the infusion with an instrument called a gentle epiciaticus that this is its form:
And if it is easily removed with the instrument, then do so; otherwise, administer the infusion with ten drops of double-distilled water.
And if it is not easily removed with water, then make a tube of iron, and insert the end of the tube into the hole in the ear, and close the opening of the tube with wax and moistened oil so that it is not too strong but just right. And then expel it with a small wind or strong suction, because four motas that we have mentioned are caught by water.
Then if it is not easily removed in this way, take a ring of silver or an iron ring, and place on one end a small quantity, and put that end into the hole in the ear, and then wrap the other side around the ear gently. And then insert that one into the opening of the ear with ease, and then dry the ear from moisture.
And if it is not easily removed with all the causes that we have mentioned, then you should wait until there is no apoplexy or spasm of the muscles.
And the way to cut that off is this: you command the servant of the head of the patient and extract from it the blood-vessel, and then treat it with the virtue of water, and then make a small incision in the middle of the ear, according to the virtue of it, and turn it over its ends, and then wrap it around the ear gently. And the wound of a round shape that reaches the cheek, and, if the cheek is swollen, hold it back with an appropriate instrument; and in that hour close the wound quickly, and cure that which has been wounded within it so that it heals.
And if the cause hurts the ear it is one of the grasses that grow there and swell up, then administer the cure and extract it; but if you do not obey your own advice, then take a fine string according to this form: and administer to that grass which has fallen into the ear.
And do not pour water when you think that it is already moistened by the steam of the ear, and pause it in drops, and extrude it gently with your fingernails or with a sharp instrument, or cut it off as far as it has gone, for its extraction is easy.
But in the water which has entered into the ear, let the patient use sneezing at the beginning, and fill his ear with a few drops of vinegar, and rub it over that ear in which the water is, and if by water there is a discharge, it is good; and otherwise, then take three or four young and long peals, and bind them on the fire a little, and let the patient put one of those peals into his ear, and jump over him from that split, and strike with another peal on the ear which has the discharge, and let him throw it away. Then do not stop water in the ear until all the water is discharged.
Then do not stop water in the ear until all the water is discharged. And then, when the water has been discharged, take paper or a piece of wool,. and put one end into the ear and stretch the other end towards the fire until it is burned up completely.
And then take another piece of wool and make as many turns as necessary until all the water is discharged, and strike it with a pin as far away from the ear as it has gone.
But in the extraction of beasts which enter into that ear, if it is a small thing, then pinch it and pull it gently, cure that with what has been said above; but if it is a large thing that causes pain to the head by means of the ear, then extract it with your fingernails or with a sharp instrument, and that cause is lighter than all the other causes which enter into the ear.
But in the extraction of a vermen which is generated in the ear, when you cure that with water which has been said above and in the treatise on distillation, and do not keep your own cure, then look at the ear to the sun.
And if there appears any cause of the vermen here, then extract it with your fingernails or with a sharp instrument; but if there does not appear any cause, then take a long and thin pipe from which this is the shape: And introduce the thin end into the ear according to the quantity which the patient suffers; and draw it out with a strong suction, and make drops of water, so that all the vermen are discharged.
But if you do not obey your own advice, then take a candle and close it in the circle of the pipe with wax as has been said above; then administer distillation which has already been poured out the small drops in the cure for vermen, and look at water in the treatise on distillation.
And let your effusion be with which you pour the medicinal oils into the ear with this instrument, of which this is the shape: and make it long and thin, in which there is a small split, and on top.
And then, if necessary, put it in the cavity of the cannula where it is necessary. And if you wish, take the ray and wrap it in the end of it with care, and pour oil or juice from any herb, or water which you wish of these medicines into the cannula — and that is in the ear —, and then introduce the ray with care and squeeze your hand over it, so that the oil is discharged into the cavity of the ear and the patient feels it inside.
And if water has been poured into the ear, it is already cut with fire a little bit. And keep in mind that the cause which you will extract from the ear should not be rubbed too much, for the ear does not suffer from water.
Chapter VII.
On the Cure of Earache.
Some young men who have had their bellies stretched by swaddling do not perforate them, and water already exists in some people, opilation in the middle of the ear because of pain or meat there; and this opilation sometimes occurs on the outside split of the ear which does not see the head, and sometimes it is in the splits.
And that which happens in the outside split of it, which does not understand the head, is in difficult situations of healing.
And in that which you can understand the head, keep the ear of the patient away from the sun and look at it. But if there is an increased swelling, open it with a sharp instrument which has been said above and which this is the shape of:
If the end of it is small in size, which has one split sharp and the other not; and the knife is two thick so that it does not hurt the ear.
And if the opilation is because of hidden meat in the ear or in the middle part of it, then remove it with sharp fingernails and strike it gently, so that all the meat is removed easily.
And if the opilation is in the split of the ear, then take a long and sharp instrument, and rub it over it with fire a little bit, and then put that in the middle part of the ear.
But if you feel increased swelling which the patient does not notice easily, then try to press it gently; and keep in mind that you do not hurt the nerves of the ear.
Then put a strip of linen on it according to the width of the split which you have wrapped in Egyptian ointment; and make drops over it every day until you are sure that the plague has consolidated; or take some and sprinkle it on the ear with three leaves, and use oil; and if the ear is already swollen, then look at the ointment which you have used, and if it is rose-colored, then change it to another ointment which you will wrap in wax, so that it does not hurt; and then heal that until it is healed.
But if there is a flow of blood, then dip a sponge or cloth in water and rub it on the ear, and use the other cure which has been said above to stop the flow of blood; which is said in the treatise on distillation.
Chapter VIII.
On the Cure of Earache.
The cause of earache which is due to dampness in the ears of young people causes some sweatiness; and some dryness.
And then if you have those with headaches or with sharp nails, and cut their hair short, and put that over the areas where the hair is cut; and put it on the skin where the cuts are made.
But if there is a flow of blood due to pain, then you should cauterize those with a small cauldron.
And the best cauterization is to return those hairs which remain when there is no cause of their hair; and when they are cauterized with fire, those hairs are burned up and do not return.
Chapter .ix.
The treatment of blindness that comes to the eyelids.
Vision spots in the eyelids due to some cause that is associated with blindness and increased strength and toughness, hence why it is called blindfolds.
And is accumulation of thick moisture on the lower and upper eyelids.
Therefore, the procedure on them is that you should consider whether the blindness comes from above or below the eye and is spread across all of it; and the cause of it is infection.
Therefore open that wound by its width, and with ease remove it all, and then suspend it by a rope and cut off that limb.
And if the wound is large, then you should adjust it with sutures; and heal that within so that it is healed.
And if it is small, then don't worry about it because the blood of that wound will restore and heal it.
And if the blindness is declining inside the eyelid's surface, then remove the eyelid and hang the limb by a rope, apart from any incision, and press it from all sides; and if the eyelid by an incision becomes long, there will be no reason for it.
And then make that incision, wash the eyelids with salty water; and heal that place with water that heals within so that it is healed.
Chapter 10:
The treatment of blindness in the eyelids of the patient.
Axtirnaht is when it is born in the membranes of the upper eyelids, and most often affects children, causing them to cry and have a catarrh; and they cannot see clearly because of the tears.
And therefore you should always look at their faces, and sleep on them; and their upper eyelids are covered with moisture, which already has inflammation, and the appearance of discharge appears in it; and when you press that place with your fingers, you can feel the discharge within.
And there is a way to operate on that limb; the patient holds their head in the right hand and another person places a cloth over it and makes a circle according to the amount of discharge that is found all at once, and then places that over the head and presses it with fingers, so that the discharge is forced out through a small incision made with a scalpel.
But in the press there is a covering that you make a small incision completely so that you reach the arachnoid, because in certain positions you produce arachnoid by incision according to the shape of white grays.
Therefore remove it with bandages that you have wrapped between the fingers, from the front to the back, and roll between the right and left palm so that it is cut off.
And be careful that you don't put pressure on the incision so that the spray doesn't reach the eye and burn it.
But if you don't see arachnoid at the beginning of the incision, then put pressure on the incision with a small object so that it produces arachnoid; and then remove it as we have said; and then place bandages on him in water and oil and dust, and put them on the place and clean those with powder.
And then let them drink salt water and place it in the cavity of the incision so that the water that is left of that humidity.
And then heal that within so that it is healed.
But if it appears pus in the place, then heal that with ointment that softens within so that it is softened.
Chapter 11:
Of ways to test for blindness.
When the eyelids are swollen and pricked due to natural causes, and they have been there for a long time, then test them by burning them with fire so that the pain comes; or, as it is said in the chapter of cauterization, or by sharp medicine according to whether it is in front or behind, cut and stitch them; or by canes according to whether they see.
And then place the patient's head on your right hand; return the eyelid of the eye to your left hand, and if it is turned around, then let it be; and otherwise, insert a needle into that part in which it is faithful from below the eyelid, and make it penetrate the eyelid— close to the edge of the eyelid where there are no hairs— close to the hairs, and pull the thread up towards the lid, and turn the eye towards you.
And then open that part within the eyelid's edge, and extract the thread from the small hole or cloth, and then press the eyelid with your fingers, and see if it is like a sheet of oil.
But in any case, it is the figure according to the amount of swelling on the eyelid, because it varies in men; and if you can't tell by how much the eyelid is swollen.
And then open at the edge of the two lines that you have drawn, and start from the lacrimal major to the lacrimal minor. And if your incision is close to the natural hairs, then let it be as thick as the hair.
And then place the needle in one of the two angles of the cloth, and carefully cut it all off, and then adjust the two lips with a thin thread or a piece of hair, and wipe off the blood, and stick what is left of that thread on to the eyebrows with some glue, if you want to do so; and if not, don' t do it.
And then let the thread heal for three or four days, and then heal that.
And if you want to, let the wound open without stitching it, and heal that with water that dries up and hardens, because the eyelid is swollen due to the sealing of the wound and the accumulation of it; but one way of stitching it is better. And so say the ancient doctors.
But in any case, it is a treatment that can be applied to the patient; and it is a good operation, and it is not dangerous.
And another way to do it is to put the patient' eye in a box; and raise the eyelid with three separate and close needles according to this shape:
But if that is not possible, then take a needle with thread, and put that in the middle of the figure, and insert another needle close to the lacrimal major, and the third one close to the lacrinal minor, and adjust those threads according to equality, and then place them on those fingers with a slight elevation, lift all the cloth up from that part with a slight elevation.
And then adjust the two lips of the wound with stitching, and heal that within so that it is healed.
But if pus appears at the place of your incision or your cut, then heal it with ointment and wrap it in a cloth.
In some cases, the eyelids' hairs are turned around, and then use that of incision; but stitching is more artificial.
The second sentence to be translated. And you make two slits, or two tiny prongs, of the same length as the eyelid and their width is less than the breadth of the spatula. You have already inscribed on the ends of each part, where you have the threads.
Then you add a small amount of water to the lid, and tighten the prongs of each part with great care, and leave it for several days, because it will die and rot if it is not cut off soon.
But if it is delayed, then break the lid, and cure the plague before it heals over itself.
So when it is hard, the eyelid is raised, and the hairs do not prickle.
And this is the form of two prongs that you will make according to this form: and there is the quantity of length and breadth, neither more nor less.
Chapter XII.
Of raising hairs that prickle in the lid when the hair is hard.
When the hairs are unnatural, hard and prickly, then you take a small needle, and insert it in the lid with great care, and let it run through the soft part of the eyelid, and adjust the ends to be as close together as possible. The length of the strings is a palm's width.
Then you take another small needle and insert it between the first one and the eyelid, and adjust the ends as you wish.
Then place the patient' s hat on his head upside down, and keep it close to the sun because the operation is subtle and small.
Then you insert the needle into the root of the hair, with great care, and make it penetrate quickly into the eyelid so that it does not damage the natural hair.
Then you pull the hair out from under, and insert it into the needle, and the hairs are one, two or three at a time, neither more nor less.
Then you remove your hand so that the hair is pulled out from under and inserted into the eyelid with the hair attached to it in the lid with the hair attached to it.
But if the hair is pulled out with the root, you will pull it out from above with the thread that you have tied to it, but if it is not pulled out with the root, then you will pull it out of place and it will be difficult to cut off.
Then you will cut off the thread with the vision of the lid, because then you will remove it from place and tighten it, and leave it for two or three days, so that the hair does not fall off from its place and does not grow on top of it.
And if the hair is too long, then you adjust a long hair of the natural hairs, and lift it up to that spot, or let it fall so that it is not pulled out, but instead you lift it up.
Chapter XIII.
Of the cure of the lid above.
When the lid is contracted above it, and is contracted to the right or left side, in case of a bad consolidation of plague or of a section or cauterization, it is called leporina, and this is contracted by consolidation of plague or of sections or cauterization, or by analogy with them.
The manner of the operation is that you make an incision in the consolidation and separate the lips of the lid, and keep them apart until they are healed between two strips of cloth.
You should not use the cure of the lid from the causes that dry it out, because if you do so, the pus will return to its place rather than being cured.
You should use fenugrec for the causes that soften it, and bathe it in hot water with some salt and oil, or with oil of dandelion, which is to be liquefied with some oil, and dip the cloth into it, and cure it with it.
The treasure of your cure is that you perform all the operations except those which are consolidated according to the beginning.
And this operation that we have described is no other than a correction of the lid which does not return to its place according to what it was before.
Chapter XIV.
Of the cure of the lid above.
This cure, which is made in the lid below, is called by the name of alxacrati, and it is of two kinds, either natural or accidental.
The accidental one is made because of plague or section or cauterization or by analogy with them.
And the way of the operation is that you take a needle with two threads, and keep it in the flesh, and make it run between the lacrimal bone from the left side to the right side, so that the thread runs into both ends of the flesh.
Then you stretch the flesh between the prongs with the needle and cut it off with a sharp blade, and mark it with a wide line. And then if the shape of the lid returns to what it was before, it is good; otherwise, you take the line and keep it on the split, and at that place you turn the lid over, and make the two slits in the middle of the eyelid.
Then make the ends of the two slits at different angles from the incision, so that they meet together, and so make the figure of them come together.
And this figure is Greek letter: Lambda.
Then hold the flesh that way, according to the breadth of the eyelid, so that it closes the eyelid.
Then you adjust the separated parts and stitch them with a thread, and then you cure those with water that we have spoken of to soften, and with calamine within which is cured.
And if the alxacrati of this chapter is by section or suture or cauterization, then you should make a flat incision on the hairs of the eyelid according to what comes before. Then separate the calamine between two lips according to what we have said.
In the sum of the speech of the cure of the alxacrati when it is below or above, which is carried out in the operation, according to what it is prepared as the alxacrati, and that is in a form of different shapes.
And the craftsmen who are wise prepare all at any time in such a way that it does not return to its place according to what is natural, or close to that, and this bad one according to what it suits him from the operation and of the instruments in the greatest dispositions.
Chapter XV.
Of the adhesion of the eyelid to the conjunctiva or cornea.
When this consolidation occurs in men who are prone to it, so that the eyelid is solid with the whites of the eye, and is forbidden by the ease of movement and natural works, so when you put your finger on the edge of the lid from below, and lift it up, or extend it with a point.
Then you mark the adhesion with a sharp blade, which should not be sharp at all of the incisions, holding your hand slightly away so that the bad one does not disturb the operation, and keep the blade from cutting the eye with its sharpness.
And your incision, which will remove that adhesion with ease so that the eyelid returns to its natural shape and all of the adhesion is healed.
Then add water to it, salty water that you will rinse with; or distill it in zunic water which dissolves in water.
Then separate the eyelid from the eye with a chisel; put a woolen pad dipped in an alum solution over it, and after three days use a cautery to cut away any hardened tissue so that it is healed.
Chapter .xvi.
Of incision of the eyelid and of eminence of flesh of the eyelids.
Know that the eyelid is according to two ways, because it is either nervous, and resembles hard ciphe or subtile; or non-nervous, resembling frozen white humidity, which when pricked, can easily come off, and the point where it was pricked, does not stay there.
And both substances do not begin until they are in the eyelid; and that which is above the eye begins little by little, covering the sight, and preventing the light from moving the eyelids.
The way to work on the incision of the eyelid is that the patient raises his head to the sky, and opens his eyelids with your hand, and removes the lid with a small knife and cuts at the roots of the eyelashes. And take an awl and insert it into that hair of the horse or cow or fish, or of the same, or of the fat, and double the end of the awl little by little and make it stay in the middle of the eyelid, and pierce it with the awl, and cut it through with the awl; and remove that one at the roots, and separate it from the lid, and that which remains is to cut through the pupil. And you should follow that with the hair inside to the back of it.
Then cut the edge of it with a sharp knife or with small scissors, and leave the flesh of the eyelid intact by itself, so that through that incision there does not flow continuous tears.
And in some cases the eyelid is extended with oil or fat, as it has been said; and after that, cut through with a lion's claw, whose form this is.
And beware that you do not touch the corneal membrane with the blade, and that the hole is made in it, and that the pupil is pierced.
Then make an incision in the eye a little bit of salt mixed with fine sand, and leave that inside for another day; and after that, wash it out with water so that it is healed.
If the eyelid is not nervous and you cannot put the awl in it, nor stay there attached to it; then cure this kind of eyelid with medicines, and so heal it without incision and recommend it in the division.
If you want to cut that, then open the eyelids of the patient and take a sharp lion's claw; in this form: with subtlety. And if that is rarefied and confining and becomes in the edge, then distill it from your eye with fine sand or salt, and wash out the eye after another day.
Then repeat the operation on that until all of it is removed, but if not, let it remain in the eye; because then leave it alone, and at first cure any swelling within, so that it is healed.
Then repeat your operation on that with reason until it is healed.
The eminence of the eyelid, if it is a great inconvenience in the eye, is suspended with a point; and cut that one from that one, and do not complete the incision so as not to cut off the tears.
Then distill in the eyelid with sharp sand or salt, until it is healed.
Chapter .xvii.
Of incision of the eyelids and of water which is born from flesh that is attached to the eye.
Some of the eyelids of cows is born flesh that is attached to the eye, and it overlaps the pupil, or approaches it closer to the brow bone and is assembled with rope of a bull's horn.
The operation on it is that the patient raises his head to the sky, and opens his eyelids with your hand, and removes all that flesh with a convenient knife, and then wash it with water, using a forceps or basket; and at first cut that flesh, until it is completely finished with the incision, and guard against the eye that does not cut off that part of your operation.
And be the incision that you make with this, or with a sharp blade, which we have recommended in the incision of the eyelid, or with small scissors, according to the form of it, which is appropriate for this chapter.
Therefore, when your incision is complete and all of that flesh has been removed, then fill the eye with salt and spice, or distill in it a powder which resembles the corrosive medicines, and place it over the eye with a paste of horse's skin, so that the swelling within it is prevented from happening.
If there is any cause of algardenici and it is severe and sharp cauterization, and you are afraid of the swelling within, then leave the eye alone, and cure that swelling with water, which softens that swelling, and repeat your operation on that with reason until it is healed, and resembling in the attached flesh what happens in the eye.
However, keep in mind that you remove any cure of the brow bone by a natural or accidental way, done with fire, and do not put your hand on any of these operations until you see that the member is suffering from that operation.
Chapter  .xviii.
Of collection of sap in the eye.
The sap is also a vein which is attached to the eye and prevents you from doing its operation, and it detaches the brow from days.
Therefore, at first it is necessary that you consider if the brow in which the sap is attached is strong and in it there is not another malaise than the sap, then collect that sap.
And it is that you order the patient to raise his head to the sky, and suspend those veins with a point, a little or according to your prudence; and may that point be double according to this form:
or also two points gradually in one part according to this form:
Then those veins are collected with sharp scissors, with subtlety, and abstains from taking the sap more than once an hour, until those veins are separated from the brow and they are rolled up.
And beware that you do not touch the eye with the edge of the blade; and if your operation is in the morning sun, and keep firm in your operation so that you do not cut off anything but those veins.
And when you are finished, then you distill in the eye with sharp sand or salt so that the sap which is separated from the brow is softened by it.
If water is not possible for you to collect all of it in an hour, and then you implant all of it with water which softens the pain, and leave it for a few days until the pain in it is subsided and that swelling within it is prevented from happening.
Then repeat on it according to the same way until it is healed.
This is the form of the scissors:
Chapter   .xix.
Of reduction of aridity to the nose.
When you treat acute inflammation with sharp medicine or cauterization according to what precedes the description of it and is not healed, do not work on it except that you break over the abscess to reach its maturity, and extract all moisture in it that can be exposed the bone.
And therefore when the bone is exposed and infected or blackened, then you should use a tool which has this form:
It is called a sharp hat, and it is made of iron, and the hat is curved so that it can be punctured by a lime point or finely cut by a small point (so it is in this form).
Then put that above the place of bone corruption, and move it back and forth between the fingers, and gently press your little hand on it little by little until you feel that the corruption is smooth.
Then make some cuts, and restore the area with drying and constrictive causes.
So if the place is consolidated and it is good meat that is separated from the sinew of the body and heals by itself in ten days, and is not renewed and does not become an abscess and does not happen to it an accident, then you know that it has healed.
And otherwise, it is not a matter of working on it except to reduce the breach to the shape of the nose, and according to this method: and it is that you uncover the second bone with iron or sharp medicine, and when you have uncovered the bone, then you should work according to this form:
The edge of the iron is triangular, and the handle of it is first weakened within the edge so that it is like this sometimes also.
Then put that above the bone, and it is near the lacrimal; and make your hand long on the handle, and put your little hand gently on the tribe until it enters all the bone, and the patient feels heat through your hand touching his leg.
Then restore the area with drying medicine also according to this: if you have heated it well.
So when the meat and place have been hardened, then the matter that had escaped from its opening returns to the nose, so you put a little bit of salt on it.
Chapter 20.
On the Reduction of the Emphasis of the Hand.
When the hand swells to its entirety and does not happen an accident or a decrease, then you should loosen the bandage, and then what follows, and then what stops wind in the neck with a good sacrifice and sucking; and then put oil on the hand which is made of catarrh and bile and salves and blood, and tighten the plaster on the hand with powdery dust.
And the method of the powder is that you take linen cloth which is made of lions' hair, and each cloth is doubled into four pieces; and make these clothes out of the hair.
Then put those on top of each other according to the quantity which the hand needs. Then tighten those on top of each other with a strong tight bandage; and repeat the wind with a good sacrifice and sucking; and then stop the wind and leave the hand alone for a day and night.
Or if the bandage becomes soft between times, then you should make it tight again.
Then stop the bandage until the next day and night as well.
And if the hand has already been reduced, it is good, and if not, then you should repeat the plaster with the powder and constriction and wind until it has healed.
Chapter 21.
On the Incision of the Emphasis of the Vein.
When the emphasis in the vein is disrupted, and it becomes prominent and protrudes outward with a little blade of razor, and it is like this that the form of a man is shown through it, and you want to make an incision, then perform the operation as I have described, that you insert the blade into the base of the veils of the eye on the side of the orbit, and then put another blade which has double the thread from the lacrimal part, and let that penetrate and leave the first blade according to its disposition; and then make an incision at the base of the double thread and pull it out along with the edge, and tighten that.
Then remove the blade and place it on the hand, immersing it in almond oil and leaving it until it hardens.
Then heal the hand with oil so that the plague is healed.
Sometimes all the edges of the hand are made smaller by a circle of cloth tightly around the emphasis, and then it is pierced with a fine blade that enters into the root of the finger, and runs the watery albuminous fluid, and relaxes the hand and enters as much as it can.
Then tighten it so that it has healed.
Chapter 22.
On the Treatment of Eye.
This disease, which is called alconati, is not anything except a sickness that is adjusted in the hand resembling falling water and is not that.
Then the method of working on it is that you make the bandage with three fingers and hold it so that the eye is higher than the hand, and then take four fingers and place them under the eye so that the eye does not touch the bandage, and then let the eye rest until it comes to its sense; and then stop the disease from coming to the openings of the eye.
And if it does not come down in the lower part, you know that it is water.
And if it is not prepared to let the disease fall into water which we have described, then make a small blade on the edge of the cloth and place it under your fingers so that the eye does not touch the cloth, and then let the disease come out as much as possible; (at the edge of the veil) connecting to the conjunctiva with the cornea in the crown  (in the location where the vein comes out), until the disease is completely gone.
Then when it has been completely removed, then you should distill in the hand water that is mixed with honey or water in which you have already built fennel and honey.
Then it should be cleaned with other causes so that it is healed.
Chapter 23.
On the Treatment of Water Falling from the Hand.
We have already spoken about the spices of water in the division and what conveys to pierce with sound saying, then do that for healing.
Then you should make the bandage tight between your fingers on a ring and hold the patient's hand so that the pulse is high, and then take four fingers and place them under the pulse so that it does not touch the bandage, and then let the water fall on the hand; and then stop the disease from coming to the openings of the eye.
Then put your little hand next to the eyelid of the patient' hand, if the water is on the left hand; or next to the patient' right eyelid, if the water is on the right hand.
Then hold your little hand with your right hand if the hand is left-handed; or with your left hand if the hand is right-handed.
Then place the end of the blade next to the crown according to its thickness with almond oil on the hand from the side of the lacrimal, and then insert the blade with skill and move your hand.
Then pierce into the almond oil on the hand and feel that the water has come to the eye cause;
Then the measurement of the path of almond to the root is the measure of the space from the pupil within to the end of the blackness, and it is the crown of the hand; because you see the eye through the clarity of the cornea.
And place the kidney into the hollow where the water is; and throw one of the servants up another step, so that if the water falls soon it will fall on a higher level than the kidney; and then the patient will hold the kidney in his hand.
And if it stops for a moment; then, if the water falls soon, you will put another step down before the kidney is thrown.
And if it stops for a moment and does not fall, then you will remove the kidney easily and slowly, and place it in a cup of clear salt water extracted from a gem; and then wash the wound thoroughly with rose oil and albumen mixed with water. And finally stop the bleeding by applying a compress or a wool pad soaked in rose oil and albumen.
May no longer be used, as they are only from our own time; instead, place a trisseled cake on it made of rose oil.
And if you do not obey the instructions regarding the hard part of the wound – for some men's wounds are very hard because of their constitution – then, when you have taken the spatulum which is called 'alberid' and which has this shape:
And then pierce it with the spatulum at that point, and do not finish your stroke; and if you have not already done so, stop and make a small incision.
Then place the kidney according to what I have said.
You should praise his work, prepare a comfortable bed for him to sleep on in dark surroundings, and prohibit all movement.
Place the kidney in its natural state so that it is soft, and do not touch his head to the left or right.
And place the kidney according to its disposition within three days.
Then remove it from that dark room and examine it carefully; then return it within seven days.
And do not make a water infusion at the time of the cure, nor too soon afterwards. However, when you have removed it, do not immerse it in water because the water will wash it away with great force.
May no occur an aposteme if you do not remove the kidney within seven days; then return it to water in order to obtain an aposteme.
Then you shall remove the patient's hair and cover his face with a cloth so that he does not feel the cold; continue to keep him in the dark room for several days, because it is in this way that he will get over his cold.
And then remove him from that house with care and ask about his reasons.
You must know that the doctor is not allowed to show any favoritism towards anyone; and then you should be diligent in performing the operation.
It has already been revealed to us by some of those who are of the Order, and some said that it causes a fire in the eye when the kidney is pierced with an awl, causing water to gush out.
However, in our own land it has not yet been determined whether water is the cause of this condition or if it is due to some other factor; and perhaps it is a new disease.
These are the forms of the medications which can be applied to those who do not know how to apply them correctly:
They are made of iron or steel, and the ends of the triangle are shaped like this: [A triangle with one point up and one down]
Chapter xxiv.
Of the cure for a nosy nose.
When there are various kinds of hidden carns that gather together like a swarm of flies, or because of a certain type of weightiness, this illness is called polyps because it resembles the appearance of a fly swarm. And if the carn is cancerous, or has a green color; and if it is not, then it is lion carn with a grayish color.
Then in those that are neither fraudulent nor cancerous lion carns, place them between your palms and put them in the shade, and pierce them with a small needle in those areas. Then remove it from between the palms, and cut it with a very fine tool that is easy to hold; then, if for any reason you need to cut it again, do so with another tool that is also very fine. May no occur an aposteme if it is caused by cold or heat, then remove the water from it carefully; or if it is a malicious apostema, cut it open with a sharp blade and cauterize it thoroughly. If it is necessary to cut it again, make sure all cuts are clean.
Then place the nose in a position where the incision can be made with ease; and if the nose needs to be cut into two parts, do so with care. May no occur a nosy if it is swollen and there is moisture inside the palate; then you will know that it has already healed.
May not occur if the moisture does not penetrate according to what has been said; then you will know that inside the nose there is no carn or pus, because there has been no cutting.
Then place the needle firmly into the center of the nose, and test it with different types of movements; then place one end of the needle inside the nostril, another inside the mouth, and so on, depending on what reason it might serve.
And when the water comes out, let it run over so that it reaches the nostrils and the mouth; and if it makes a sound like that of a cow, then know that children have this effect in school; and let there be no objection to doing this.
Then place both ends of the needle outside the nose and inside the mouth; then wrap a thread around the ends of the needle tightly, and make sure the thread is secure because it will be used to remove the needle. The needle should be placed inside the nostril and the mouth so that its odor can reach the nostrils; and if it makes a sound like that of an ox, then you know that children have this effect in school, and there is no objection to doing this.
Then remove the needle and place the nose between your palms; and if it is necessary to cut again, do so with care over a period of three days or more while applying a cooling substance to the area where there is any pain.
Then at the end of the matter, place a lead tube or pipe in the nose for the discharge of the secretions over time until it heals.
May no occur if you are using an effective cure, use that one.
This is the shape of the instrument for cleaning and making medicinal oils in the nose: [A small curved tube with a sharp point]
It should be made of silver or iron; it should resemble a small open lamp with a small wedge, and the metal should be shiny.
If you wish, make the tube closed at one end with a flat or rounded end; and place it in your hand so that you hold it by its tail, as you will use it to apply oils or water to the secretions and for other reasons.
Chapter xxv.
Of the nose's two ends.
The nose tips are red, and are swollen in the extremities, and become more so over a period of time; then, there is a pain in it.
And so that you may find out about its beginning, and see all of this. Then place over the area a hot or healing medicine that was in its place.
But if it is delayed until it becomes swollen, then consider that it is infected, hard, of a bad color and of little feeling, then do not touch that one, because those who cut this wound will be responsible for the great damage that will happen to him.
But if the ulcer is sharp and not of a dark color, and sometimes cutting it is possible in all of this, then empty out the patient’s bowels and cut away part of it without fear, and heal the area with water that comes out and constricts it until it heals.
Chapter .xxvi.
On the Surgery of the Nose, Lips, and Ear When the Continuity is Broken by Plague or Similar Causes.
You should know that when this continuity occurs in one of these cartilage bones, it rarely gives the opportunity for surgery except in a few people.
Therefore, when such a thing happens because of some cause, consider whether it is fresh plague and then adjust the two lips of the disease with sutures and carefully heal them until they are healed.
But if the lips of the solution for continuity are already separated and each one is healed separately, then consider that you remove any piece of its knot apparently until it does not cause pain. Then adjust the two lips with sutures and make them strong, and sprinkle on them dragon's blood and honey-concoction three times, and place over the powder a little gold leaf, or of some other kind of consolidating plaster, and let it lie for two or three days, then remove it and replace the plaster and let it lie for seven to ten days, and carefully heal it with ointment until it is healed.
But the way of the suture is that you add the solution for continuity or with needles as it has been mentioned in the suture of the abdomen, or add the solution for continuity with needles if there is a break in the suture.
Chapter.xxvii.
On the Removal of Causes That Come About in the Two Lips at the Points of Separation Internally.
The nose tips are red in some men in the points of separation internally in their lips; some of these are small and some are large.
Therefore, when you remove the lips and divide each of those hard things completely, then fill in the place with three threads carefully until the pain is relieved, and wash it with vinegar and cure the area with water that has been made stingy, until it is healed.
Chapter.xxviii.
On the cutting of the flesh adjusted in the gums.
Great care must be taken when cutting the flesh adjusted in the gums; those who do this should use white cheese or cut it with knives and then put on the gum a little blood, and let it run out or let the pain come.
Then place over the area carefully a dry thread or any other kind of stingy powder.
And if that flesh returns, then cut it again secondarily and heal it with a hot cautery, because the cauterization will not return.
Chapter.xxix.
On the Reasons for Teeth to be Sharp.
When in the surface of the teeth, at the points of separation inside and in the foramen and between the gums are adjusted, sharp and rough, some become black and turn yellow or green due to decay in the gums, and some of the teeth that are broken into.
And so when you take the head of the victim between your hands and place it in a certain position, then cut the hair that is on it, and carefully examine the teeth where those roughnesses and causes are similar to sand, until you can distinguish the blackness and the yellowness and the others until they are completely removed.
Then if what is left is in the beginning of the reason, then do not cut it; but if it is in the middle or at the end, then carefully repeat the reason over those again and again until you reach the last point in which you want to arrive.
You should know that teeth have different shapes and forms, depending on how they are prepared for your operation. And therefore, because the reason for the tooth that is separated inside has different shapes from the reason where it is sharp between the teeth, and these shapes of reasons are always prepared in advance by you, so that you will soon see them.
Chapter.xxx.
On Root Extraction of Teeth.
When you heal the tooth from its pain with a strong medicine and delay in the total extraction of it, because there is no reason that replaces the lost substance of it when it is extracted, because it is an exalted substance within which is an excuse for the extraction of it.
Then when the victim is forced to extract the tooth, you must carefully determine which tooth is causing pain; because the pain of the tooth can be lost in a healthy tooth, and you extract that tooth and let the pain continue until the tooth that caused the pain is extracted, because we have already seen this through the operation of barbs.
Then you must carefully determine which tooth is causing pain, and that you know well, then when you cut into the route of the tooth with a sharp scalpel where there is no virtue, until it dissolves from the gum completely, and carefully extract it little by little with tiny tweezers or with scissors at the beginning slowly until it is extracted completely.
Then place the head of the victim between your strong tenacles or hold it with a strong grip that does not hurt you; then let go of the head and carefully extract the tooth that is causing pain slowly with a gentle pull or with a loud noise, and let the other tooth that does not cause pain be extracted in such a way that it does not break it, nor hurts the victim.
Then if it is not a foramen (a hole), then take one of those instruments, and put that under the gum completely with ease and attempt to remove it in such a way that it is done at the beginning.
But if the tooth is twisted or corroded, then consider that you take a piece of cloth and tie it up with a knot at the end; then carefully remove it from under the gum completely in such a way that it does not break in your hand during your constriction on it with a strong grip.
Then when you open completely with a sacrifice in the route of the gum completely and hold your strength so that it does not break it and cause pain in the first place; then return to the head of the victim by the evil that is greater than the first pain of it.
And remember that you should not do anything similar to what the barbers do in their final stage and audacity regarding the extraction of them; because the teeth that break out in large men are more difficult than those that are broken, and the roots of their teeth are completely removed, or some of them, or extract them with bones from the mandible in such a way as not to be torn, and the teeth that come out like this have been testified by many.
Then the extraction of it should be washed with vinegar or acetic acid with a salt solution.
And if there are flowing pus on the wound, then also add a few drops of oil to it, and spritz on the plague, and if that does not work, then apply cauterization.
The shape of the forceps and tweezers is different, but at the beginning a long thin tip is used, a short handle and thick, so that they do not bend when operating with them.
And if sometimes the handle is too long, so that it does not bend when you start to use it, then short ends should be used.
And they are made of iron from India with short ends, and at the ends of those are teeth that enter each other and start to squeeze tightly, and some have a beaked shape like a crow's beak, which is sharp, and they are very tight in their grip.
Chapter.XXXI.
Of the removal of teeth and the breaking of bones from the locked mandibles.
When you need to remove a tooth that is locked in place due to some cause, then let the area rest for a day or two until it softens; and then insert tweezers or forceps at the ends that are joined together like a crow's beak, which is sharp, the shape of the forceps:
The ends of them are made to enter each other thus: with a file or an awl.
And if you do not obey your master with these forceps or tweezers, then let him cut off the flesh completely and insert the instrument which has the name of an awl, so it is a small lever whose shape is this:
And it should have a thick end and not be bent so that it does not break.
Therefore, if the flesh is hollowed out by this water, it is good; and otherwise, help yourself with these other instruments, of which these are the shapes: the first instrument has a triangular shape at the end, with some thickness:
The shape of the second instrument is that it should be triangular and have a thin tip.
And you are now helped with these instruments, having two ramps whose this shape is suitable for the following: And with other instruments which will be used to shave teeth; for comfort is achieved with this instrument which is assembled like an apple core remover, and this is its shape:
of the triangular end twisted or short, which should have some thickness, and not be bent so that it does not break.
And you know that the dental tools are similar to other tools.
May the master artisan be wise and subtle in this art, take care of himself according to what is written for him, as it is his duty to know the various malady; because the small tools did not say or pause their own instruments, due to the different shapes.
May the master know how to remove locked bones of the jaw or other teeth, or if they are loose; then take care in his place with the instruments and forceps that we have mentioned for extracting the roots of teeth, and help yourself with these gestures whose this shape is suitable:
And it should be of a small size to the large, and be applied or held tight to the mouth so that it does not escape or run away until the whole bone is hollowed out; and then restore the place with suitable medicines according to what has been written.
May the master know how to remove small fractures, then break that fracture from its color and blackness, and care for it until it is healed.
Chapter.XXXII.
Of the care of prominent teeth compared to others.
When prominent teeth are not in line with the natural structure of the mouth, and especially when they are in women's mouths, and even more so in elderly women; then let you consider: if a tooth is not adjacent to another tooth, and it is impossible to cut it or apply oil to it, then pull it out; but if it is attached to another tooth, then cut it off with this instrument whose this shape is suitable for it; and it resembles pig's tail, and is made of iron from India with a sharp end.
And let you cut it off on the third day due to the hardness of the tooth, and not let it be joined to another tooth.
And if the prominent tooth is difficult to cut with a razor, then cut it with this razor of iron from India whose this shape is suitable:
And it should be all of iron from India and the point is sharp; and it should have a small end with a file that makes needles, and the tooth should be shaved slowly and easily on the third day due to ease, so that another tooth is not joined to it. And let you tie it in a knot, and cut it off with a small razor.
And if it is a tooth whose one side is locked and the tongue does not let it go, then cut that part off which is caught and bent, and flatten it so that the tongue does not stick or corrupt the speech.
Chapter.XXXIII.
Of the restoration of broken teeth with gold or silver.
When there is a concussion or removal of teeth by impact or impact, and the tongue does not bear out on it that it is painful to touch with gold wire, but rather with silver wire, because silver hardens quickly, whereas gold takes longer; but silver does not change its shape over time, whereas gold does.
And let the wire be so fine and strong according to what can be inserted between the teeth; and the shape of the cut is that you take the wire and double it between two healthy teeth, and then increase the twist of the wire between two broken teeth, or if one or both are loose, until the thread reaches the healthy tooth on the other side. And then repeat the process to the other side of the tooth that you started with, and strengthen your hand with ease and skill until it does not hurt.
And let you tie up the wire in a knot to hold on to the roots of teeth that do not come out.
And then cut off the excess ends of the wire with tweezers or nippers, and place it in any location with the gesture, and hide those between the healthy tooth and the broken tooth, so that they do not damage the tongue. And then let you leave it there straightened out with a string.
May the master know how to handle those wires that have slipped or broken; and hold them in place as needed during all their time.
And this is the shape of teeth and the figure of the removal of two healthy teeth and two broken ones, as follows:
And when a tooth or two are pushed back into their places, and they are healed with this receding; and they remain.
But it is not done by anyone but skilled and wise artisans.
And some are suitable for a cause of the bones of cows, and they are made to fit like teeth, and are placed in their place where it does not hurt the tooth, and are strengthened with this, and remain there and serve them for a long time.
Chapter.XXXIV.
Of the cutting of the thread which is seen in the tongue, and the speech is forbidden to be corrupt.
And this thread which leaves the tongue behind it some times or is natural to the tongue; or it happens by accident due to a wound that has already healed.
And the operation on him is that you open the mouth of the patient, there being a lid in the middle of his chest; and you raise his tongue, and cut that nerve according to its depth so that the tongue does not move from its place.
Now if there is any stiffness or swelling, and this is done for the consolidation of the plague, then you pour oil and cut that according to its depth so that the joint is cut and the swelling is dissolved.
And be careful that there is not a fracture in the bone of the foot, and that you do not cut here flesh and blood flows out.
Then wash the wound of the cut, whether it is dry or wet or has been rubbed with water; and let the tongue rest; but if it is necessary to move the patient's tongue, do so carefully so that it does not become stiff again.
Now if there is a flow of blood, put vinegar on the spot three times; now if the blood flows, then cauterize that spot with the cauldron of wine which is put in water. Then heal this one from other causes, so it is healed.
Chapter.
On the extraction of the tongue.
Some wounds leave the tongue swollen like a small swelling preventing the tongue from its natural operation; and it is very strong to open the mouth.
And the operation on him is that you open the mouth of the patient before the sun, and examine the swelling.
And if you see that it is red or black, hard, for which the patient does not feel any sensation, then do not touch that part, for it is bitter.
And if it is white, for which there is moisture, then pour oil on it and cut it with a sharp knife, and cut all of it; and if the blood flows at the time of your operation, then stop it with vinegar, so that the blood does not flow again.
Then return to your work as soon as you have finished it with care, washing it with water and salt; and heal this one from other causes, so it is healed.
Chapter.
On the extraction of two ears and that which is nothing in the olive oil and other swellings.
When you have tried in the olive oil, then such glands are assembled as small swellings, which appear suddenly and are called two ears, which, when you treat them with water which I have mentioned in the division, and they do not heal, then examine whether the swelling is hard, red or black, and whether it hurts, do not touch that part, for it is bitter.
And if it is a swelling of pain and the root is large, then do not touch that part because of the flow of blood; but if it has grown older, and he or she tears it himself or herself.
And if it is a white swelling, small and the root soft, then that one is likely to be cut.
And the operation on him is that you examine, before your operation, whether the swelling has subsided by itself or has decreased by any decrease; and then put the patient in the sun, with his head turned back, and open his mouth, and place a servant under his tongue, holding it down so that it does not move.
It is made of silver or brass, and it is sharp with a point.
Then put oil on it and show it to him; and pour oil on the thumb, and hold it in the crease of his wrist, pulling it with your fingers as far as you can. Another water that does not cause any harm to the patient, and hold him in this way:
Another water that does not cause any harm to the patient, and hold him in this way: and it is assembled with forceps, however, the ends of them are sharp, so that the opening of each one is in the edge of the other, very sharp, which is made of iron tempered and annealed.
Now if this instrument is not with you, then cut it with a sharp knife, and make it so: It is sharp at one end, not sharp at the other.
Then, having made one cut, make the other according to this method of cutting, and then wash the patient with water mixed with oil.
Now if there is a flow of blood, wash the patient with water boiled with rose water or apple juice and similar things, so that the flow of blood is stopped, and then heal this one from other causes, so it is healed.
In some wounds there are two ears and you cut them according to what I have said in the cutting of two ears, and heal this one from other causes, so it is healed.
And I have already treated a woman with a swelling that was born in her olive oil, which swelling was red and not painful, and the woman had closed her olive oil, and she could breathe well, and she had forbidden her to eat or drink anything, and she was about to die if she did not drink water, and so it was.
And the swelling has grown so much that it has made two hernias within her, which have come out through two openings.
Then I cut him with a sharp knife and pulled it out, and threw it far from me, and then I held his tongue with my hand, and then I put the oil in that swelling.
Then I cut him a large piece off, and there was no blood flowing from it but a little blood. Then absolutely I cut off the olive oil of that woman, and soon after she drank water, and then I stopped her from eating anything for a long time; then that swelling occurred in its place, which cut it as it should be cut, and succeeded in healing it.
Then I went away and cauterized her olive oil, then I walked and did not know that God was near me.
Chapter.
On the cutting of a blister when it is swollen.
When it blisters, and is swollen and long, then it is called a pimple; and if it is round and large, then it is called a bunion.
Now when it is healed with water which I have mentioned in the division, and has not responded to your treatment, and that swelling is long, and there is blood, red or black, and it does not hurt the patient; then you can cut off the swelling which is added to him, for it is a matter of fear on the patient.
And when you see that swelling according to the way I have told you of its whiteness and length, then let him go free, and put your hand on his tongue with the instrument which I have mentioned in the cutting of two halves; and then hold the oil in one half, and cut it with the other half.
And you will not cut off that swelling but with water which is fit for the natural term; for if you cut it off, it will prevent her from speaking.
Then heal this one by cutting it, using water which I have mentioned in the cutting of two halves; and then heal this one from other causes, so it is healed.
Now if the patient is frightened by the cutting of him, then you can use oil in cauterizing him; and the way of cauterizing him is with sharp water, which I have mentioned in this chapter, and you stop that person from speaking, and you put your hand on his tongue with the instrument which I have mentioned in the cutting of two halves; and then pour into the cavity of the instrument the water which I have mentioned in the chapter on cauterizing; and then heal this one from other causes, so it is healed.
Here is the translation of the text into English line by line:
And place your hand on the medicine, and squeeze it onto the uvula for an hour from when you start, so that it doesn't become discolored and numbed by the taste of the medicine.
And if you want, take hold of it and wrap it around the tip of the finger, dip the finger in the medicine, and insert the finger wrapped in the medicine into a tube for as long as you can obtain what you want from the cauterization of the uvula, and leave that there for three or four days.
And if you want to repeat the medicine, do so again, and sterilize the cauterization with a cotton swab dipped in alcohol, rinse it with water and apply oil, and wash it with soap, and cure it externally with salves, within which it will heal.
This type of treatment is safer than surgery and less feared.
Some are cured of the uvula with water that is more subtle than cauterization and incision, as it is treated with smoke in this way: Take herb steam, hyssop, chamomile, dried leaves, and similar things to those listed here, and prepare them all together in a bowl, and dip them in vinegar, and boil them; then strain the liquid well, and put it in a container with a lid, and a hole in the lid over which place an instrument that is sharp and pointed, made of silver or metal; do this often.
And dip the end into the patient's mouth so that the steam reaches the uvula through the opening, so that the uvula becomes dark.
And repeat this treatment several times over the affected areas until they are dry, and be sure not to do this type of treatment at the same time as taking an emetic, because it would greatly increase the emesis, which is not what you want with this cauterization.
Or if you don' have this instrument, take a cane and close the end with a stopper of clay, so that the patient' mouth is covered, because the stopper of clay prevents steam from burning the mouth.
This treatment is good for healing.
Chapter  .xxxviii.
Of extraction of thorns and of water that adheres to the throat and of other causes.
Thorn-like deposits adhere to the throat or spine of a patient, or any other cause.
Then extract water that appears from it, and observe through which part of the mouth it flows, because you place your tongue on the instrument in front, so that it is clear to you where the water comes from.
And water that does not appear to you in the throat, be sure to make the patient vomit before the food is digested in the stomach, because it greatly increases the cause of inflammation of the throat; or have the patient drink a nut of oil or radish leaves or a piece of dry bread; or take a dry sponge of sea grass, and squeeze it hard on the flesh, and put that to the patient' mouth, because it forces it down; or because the patient drinks a piece of dry sponge. And take a snake and put it on the meat, and extract it with a twist and a pull; or take a pig and twist its tail; or because you twist a piece of meat.
Or if you don' do those things that we have mentioned, then use an instrument made of lead according to this shape:
It should be larger at one end than the other, and in the end you should make a cavity that you can easily put into the patient' mouth.
And keep the patient' head elevated, and be careful that your touch doesn' reach his jaw bone or spine, so that it does not cause him pain when you place your hand on his face; or because you put your hand on his throat.
However, if the patient puts his hand on himself, he will feel more pain because of the heat of his own body, and it will touch the area where the cause is attached and cause him pain; or because he pulls his hair back.
Chapter .xxxix.
Of extracting blood that has become attached to the throat.
When blood is extracted with water that we have mentioned in the division of treatment with medicine and does not flow easily, consider the throat of the patient on the left side, because you have moved your tongue with the instrument that we have described.
Then, if you want to extract the blood, do so with a small blade or a gentle grasp.
And if it is not possible to extract it with your own hand, take a hollow tube and insert it into the patient' throat, and place a burning iron in the hollow part of the tube, and make as many passes as necessary (while the blood is dead and no longer attached to the throat) and stop up the mouth.
And then take a jug full of water, and work the mouth with it, rinsing it; and do not drink any food or drink water for an hour after that, because the blood is soon removed from the throat when it feels wet.
Or if the blood is not flowing with water that we have mentioned, then smoke the patient with camphor or asafoetida using the instrument that we have described in the smoking of the uvula.
Do as much as you can.
This is another way to operate by smoking the uvula, which involves taking a bowl in which there are carbon ignitions, and covering it with a cloth, and placing a tube on that, and dipping the end of the instrument into the bowl; then remove the smoke from the tube; and have the patient place his mouth at the end of the tube, and close his mouth so that the smoke does not escape; because you know that the smoke reaches the uvula when it feels hot.
And if the smoke does not work, then repeat this treatment several times over, and keep the patient from drinking; and have them eat salty food and herbs, and not drink water, and do so until it works.
And this is the form of the instrument that works best to extract blood from the throat when it is visible; and it is similar to pliers, except that it is curved: It should be placed in the throat, and the end is similar to a parrot' beak, which is sharp, made of lead; because when you press it against something, it does not leave.
Chapter 10.
In which is the sum of speech in the form of aphorisms and in the section concerning surgery.
Aphorisms are special types of phrases, remembered in different ways, from each of the following in this text.
And so, in piercing and cutting them with two methods, one is due to the kind of blisters in themselves; and because of the moisture they have.
And the second method is due to the areas in which it occurs on the body, for the blister in the head is different from the one in the buttocks; and the one in the flesh area is different from the one in the joints; and each of them is treated by a different operation.
More blisters are some that cover without being pierced, but rather due to the maturation of the pus in them or completion of them.
Other blisters are those that cover and must be cut when they are crossed, but not mature according to their completion, then there are blisters that are close to joints, because the blister when it approaches a joint, its essence is prolonged within until it is able to corrode the ligaments or nerves of that joint, causing pain in that limb; or it is a blister close to a principal member, and if you delay perforating it, it will not be mature towards that principal member; or it is close to the buttocks, then you should pierce what does not mature, otherwise it will not be cured; or that it does not cover, because it will not be able to remove its pus; or that it does not come out of the body, so as not to produce a fistula, or that it does not come out from the word of it so as not to be cured. More cover that you know the time for perforating the blister, and then it is when it has matured.
And you know that it has matured when there is a cessation of pain and fever, and there is a decrease in rigor and pulse, and the sharpness of the head of the blister, and other signs.
And because you know that piercing will come out from the pus area of the blister and from the pus coming out from the cure of the eminence.
And piercing should always be done from the length of the flesh or the body, if the blisters are in the parts of the limbs or feet, and in the locates of the intestines, nerves, arcologies; and finally, in all places that are joined to each other, because in those that are reflected, use piercing according to that member.
More when the blister is in a carnous area, then there are two things to do, first, let's leave the perforation of it until its complete digestion according to its completion, as I have already said; because if you pierce it from ahead, the substance of it will be prolonged within until it reaches a hard matter, and its lips will be thick and deep.
More blisters should be pierced according to the thickness of the flesh or body that necessity requires, or according to which member it belongs.
And if you administer a small piercing, and in the large blisters make a large piercing or cut them according to the diversity of their size.
And other blisters are those that cover and must be crushed when they are cut, so as not to spread it out, because it does not happen in the skin but in the flesh, or in the bones; or that it is in groups of two or three together, which must also be treated with a different operation.
And of those that are not cut on three sides; and of those that are cut in a shape like an oak leaf, and of the blisters that are made on the joints.
And of these two types, round section and lunar section, and resembling to them.
More than that one whose blisters are superficial lions, you should pierce it with a superficial piercing or flat piercing only.
And when the blister is thick and has collected some pus, then you should pierce it and do not cover it up; first take a little out, and on another day take more out, and make small cuts according to the gradient until you reach the piercing.
And in general, if the person is of a fiery nature, or of a feminine one, or a small child, or an old man in decay, because the animal spirit has moved to get rid of the pus, and it hurts the patient greatly; then close them up.
Keep this chapter well-protected, and when you administer a piercing on these blisters, avoid the plagues and consider carefully; if the blister is small, or it is a flat cut, then you should pierce it with a thin needle, and if the blister is large, and the cuts are deep, then you should pause a moment so that they come together.
And if a part of the cord or a part of the blister is cut off or crushed in the circuit, then you should bind it with a old man's thread or a thin ribbon of linen, and as soon as it has been washed or shaved, wet it; and make it strong after three days; and then treat it, and cure what water comes out from within that it may be healed.
More if a flux of blood happens during your operation, then you should administer warm water and vinegar on it, and put a cloth on the area where the blood is; and pause it with a thin cloth.
More if the blood does not stop, then you should administer the medicine and treatment that I have recommended in several areas of this book, and in division.
More if it is in winter time, and the area of the blister is a cold area of nerves, then you should put powdered vinegar or oil on a wound, and pause it.
And if it is in summer time, and the areas are flesh, then you should put powdered vinegar or oil on water and oil, and all of this should be done after three days, as I have already said; and then treat the blister, and cure what water comes out from within that it may be healed.
Then this is what is necessary for the knowledge of the cure of blisters in general, but according to the way of distinction that I have already said, there are different ways of curing them by chapters separately.
Chapter L.
Of the cutting of blisters that come in the cord of the head.
In the cord of the head are small blisters and they have two types: some contain thin layers, and others contain thick ones.
And of them are pigs, and those that contain moisture resembling to lemon juice. And of those that contain moisture resembling to honey, and similar to them; and of those that are hard, and dry.
And in the cutting of all of them, and in the extraction of those that are not cut with a sharp knife, do not make an opening that will cause pain to the patient; and when you extract those, then do so with a sharp knife.
And the operation in the cutting of them is that you prepare those with an instrument in the shape of which you wish to cut; that is called an entomes, until you know that it contains.
Because if the thing that contains it is moisture, then cut it with a section according to its length; and do so with a superficial section according to this shape.
And begin in the section of the line B to line G; then, when the moisture is removed, then you should skin off that which contains that moisture, and do not leave any trace of it; because five sights return if they are left, because there will be five causes.
And then dip it in Egyptian ointment if it is available, and if not, then in water and salt; and fill it with the ointment up to a certain point, because water corrupts it; and leave it for another day, because with water it will be corroded all over.
And let it repeat that ointment with Egyptian oil twice and third time if you want to, until you are sure there is no remaining cause of that film; then cure the plague with the same ointment until it is healed.
And if there is a swollen patch of skin that is greasy, then let you draw this line over it in this form: a section has the form of a crust, and cut between two lips of the section and scrape it all out, and strain your power into the tunic which contains that.
If however you have trouble with burning, then let me tell you first.
And apparently do on the swollen patch of skin and cure it according to what I have told you; and if cutting over the swollen patch is easy, then it is little blood and little moisture.
And some times so much of these swollen patches that are on the head of some old men and cut them with sharp knife and put them in water; for it causes that if you cut over a swollen patch on the head of an old woman and cut them like this with a sharp knife, pain will come to her; and if there is someone who has a swelling, plague will come to him.
But in other swollen patches on the head this chapter is not about; for example, if the swollen patches come to the heads of children and make their ears grow out, then let all cutting of these be only a superficial cut.
And pause the piercing of those that are from the lower part of them, so that their body is relieved from the heat in the lower parts.
Then let you cure those with water that agrees with it.
Chapter.xliii.
About the cutting of scrofulas that happen in the neck.
The following are the signs of the scrofula in the neck and on the shoulders, and some of them appear in other parts of the body.
And the following are those that happen in the neck, and all of them are born out of their own tunic, and therefore, as mentioned before.
The qualities of these scrofula are: some are little balls, and some contain moisture, and the malicious ones that do not respond to cure.
So therefore in that which you see of good disposition in the Treatment, whose color of the water that is revealed is similar to the color of the grapeskin, and it is thin throughout all parts, and not attached to the nerves of the neck or to the veins, nor is it thick, cover that you draw over it with a thin cut from the edge on one side to the edge on the other side of the body of the skin of the line of B., and scrape it off entirely, and cut off two pieces from its edges with the shape of an onion, or cut off many small pieces if there is a need for them, as was said before in the chapter about the cuts on the head. And extract that little by little.
And it is more careful that it should not be drawn over a vein or nerve.
And do not take blood or water that is not necessary to draw; because if you were to cut a vein or an artery and prevent your operation from continuing, the plague would stop, and you would have to wait until the pain of the swelling subsides and the plague softens and begins to rot. When the blood is cut off.
Then return to your operation until it is completed.
And then ask the wise man if there is any remaining cause of those other small scrofula; so do those and clean them up.
And if it is in the neck of a large vein, then do not draw that scrofula from its root. Before you leave, draw that over with a strong rope and let it hang until it falls of itself.
Then fill the plague with fresh meat which you have already soaked in Egyptian oil, and then cure it.
And if you draw that scrofula whole, then cover both lips of the plague with two layers until there is no remaining superfluity.
But if you think that there is still remaining superfluity because of the size of the scrofula, then cut its root and extract it, and then administer to it the sutura and water which has been said before.
And those scrofula that contain moisture, pierce them with a shallow cut here where the pus is seen coming out of it, and pause the piercing of those that are from the lower part of the body, as mentioned before.
Then administer to them the piercing, similar to those that are already in a state of corruption; for it causes that the water which is there will corrode and be broken down. Then when you see the plague has been cleaned up, then administer to it fresh meat that is generated; then cure it.
Chapter.xliii.
About the cutting of an accidental swelling in the head.
They said that this section is about the epilepsy, and I have not seen such a person in our land who has done this.
And this is the inscription of the sermon about those.
But in people it may be that the extraction of the epilepsy is avoided by using water, but all veins and arteries of the body are here; for it causes that it should not be extracted with water, or else it will kill you immediately.
But in those who have swollen patches in the mouth or in the ears or in both of them when the plague is not in the head, then use the cutting of epilepsy to avoid its destruction which is caused by piercing.
Then when we want to drink water, let us draw the epilepsy from between three circles of the epilepsy, or four in a small section per length, that the cutting be done in the middle, not in cartilage, and this place is suitable for the cutting, because it is deprived of meat, and the vessels of blood are easily cut.
And if the meat is little, then let you extend the grapekin of the ear to one centimeter; and then cut the grapekin through the canal, but avoid the blood vessels if there is any remaining cause.
Then let you draw it according to what I have told you; and it is shown on the section of the ear by the torchlight, which is from that eye which sees with water, and by the absence of blood.
And leave the plague open for a while.
Then, when the hour is right, and the piercing is done, add two layers of grapekin to the ear of the plague, and cut it off as one piece, because it is cartilage.
Then administer medicines that make the meat be healed within.
And Albucasis said that the summary of the sermon which we have told you, is not otherwise than what you have seen, for some of these swollen patches already show the skull of the body; and the body has come to death, and its blood has clotted up; and some are going to pierce the epiglottis so that it does not suffocate the person at the place where the plague is, and be saved from death.
And by water command that the plague be left open until the evil of the plague is consumed; and this evil lasts for three days; and then command it to do so, and cure that which can be healed.
And I have seen this for myself in my experience: one servant took a knife and cut into the patient's armpit, and another servant, taking a portion of cane from the pulse, inserted it into the wound; I was called to his aid, and at that moment I heard the sound of his moaning with pain, and discovered the plague and stopped the bleeding, which was being caused by the small plague.
Then I confessed that she had not cut a vein or made an incision, and the plague came out of her, and I cured it from within so that it was healed.
And did not hurt the servant, but after three days I returned to the improvement of her conditions.
And now I say that in the section on epilepsy there is no fear.
Chapter .xliv.
Of the section on apoplexy that occurs in the armpit, and is called a hernia of the armpit.
This apoplexy, which is called a hernia of the armpit, is great according to the color of the body, and it happens in women.
And it happens in two ways: either it is natural or it is accidental.
But in the natural one there is no hope of being cured.
And the accidental one is in two ways: one looks like grass nodules, and the other resembles an apoplexy that is caused by the rupture of an artery; and in this there is danger. And I do not know that one should make a judgment about it without iron, but only in the small one. And you should examine it closely and carefully: if it looks like grass nodules, and is not suspended from any vein, then cut those nodules off with a sharp knife, and extract them with water that comes out of her body; and if not, then examine all of her body thoroughly, and treat the place with water that comes out of her body so that she may be healed within.
Chapter .xlv.
Of the section on the spices of nodules.
The nodules have many types, and I have already spoken about all their types in the division.
And I will tell you here the difference between a node and an eruption with a doubt.
Then I say that in an eruption there is heat and fever and violent pains, and it is complete putrefaction which, when the fever, pain, and heat are stopped, completes its course.
But in a nodule there is no heat or fever or pain, but it carries the lion or sack of itself.
And it is according to the color of the body, and the beginning of it is with a swelling, and it happens like this: either it has fat in it and contains moisture, and the colors of the moisture are different, as I have said in the division; or it is according to the following description.
And when you have reached the treatment of nodules, to avoid expelling it and to examine it carefully with a sharp instrument, according to the following description: for if it has the shape of a knot, then its treatment is close to this one.
And this is the way to examine apoplexies and all nodules: you take this instrument and insert it into the place where you suspect, little by little, until you feel that the instrument has already penetrated the skin.
And finally, with careful measurement of the size of the apoplexy, take out the sharp instrument and examine the tracks that it leaves; consider whether it is being caused by the small plague.
And if the moisture is lost in the course of running, of whatever color it may be, then you cut it on the surface according to what I have said about other apoplexies.
And if there is no moisture in the tracks of the insertion, then you know that it is fat.
And dry on top without a form that resembles a knot according to this form: as I have taught you, and tie it with a knot, and cut off the skin from all parts easily, and if you can, keep the hair or sack on it; then extract the snot from the nodule.
But if it is broken during the operation, it is not possible to extract that snot, and many visible marks will be left; then you will extract them in pieces, so that they do not cause any trouble.
For if it causes any trouble, whether little or much, the nodule returns according to its type.
And if you find that it causes any small part to break off, then completely burn the plague of some sharp corrosive powder, and press strongly on the area that is apoplexy, and heal it with another treatment within which may be healed.
And if it is a large nodule, then you cut it in two places and heal it with water that comes out of it.
But if the pulse is pulsating to it, or not pulsating, then you stop bleeding and apply a dry cloth to the place that has been cut three times a day until the plague disappears and the fever stops; and then return to cutting it, because it is like a knot.
Chapter.xlvi.
Of the necessary shapes of instruments in section and piercing.
The forms of insertion are three: one is large, another is medium, and the third is small.
The large form of insertion is this:
The small form of insertion is this:
If the instrument is sharp, or blunt, or both, it must be well balanced, in order that it may easily enter into the apoplexies.
And these are the shapes of experience: they are not many, and one of them is called drinking.
The three shapes are: large, medium, and small.
The shape of a large experience is this:
The shape of a medium experience is this:
The shape of a small experience is this:
It is agreed that those are apoplexies, and that they are caused by the bubbles that rise from the bones; and for other causes.
And they are round, large, and with sharp points, and they are made of wool that is sewn on, and they are made of citronwood, or iron, or silver; and the majority are made of ironwood.
And those experiences are black feathers, which agree that they cause the fistulas to open in the cavities where they reflect, and reflect on their own surface.
The three shapes are: long, medium, and short; according to the amount of width of the fistula and the narrowness of it.
The shape of a large experience of lead is this:
The shape of a medium experience of lead is this:
The shape of a small experience of lead is this:
The shapes of the knots are of various types, for some have only one curve; and there are three shapes: large, small, and medium.
And they are knots that grow larger, and there are three types.
The knots that have two curves, and there are three shapes.
And they are knots that have three curves, and there are three types.
All of these are necessary in their place.
Form of a single simple dose, form of it:
Form of a large dose that has two curves: Form of a small dose that has two curves: Form of a small single dose that has two curves:
Form of a large dose that has three curves:
Form of a small dose that has three curves:
And these are the forms of the scalpels I have, with which I cut and scratch knots and warts; and they are of three sizes, one large, one medium, and one small.
Form of a large scalpel:
Form of a medium scalpel:
Form of a small scalpel:
The ends of them with which the section is made are sharp and the other ends are not sharp, and they are not stopped in such a way, but so that it is done quickly in the excorciation of the knots the fear of incising a vein or a nerve, and by doing this the patient is healed and also has great peace through the adjustment by which the wart is removed.
And these are the forms of the ointments, and they are of three kinds: large, medium, and small, thus:
When it is caused by cold and has the appearance of rawness, and it is made with alcohol.
And on the other side, with a pointed spatula hidden with ointment, and in that split second, as you wish, thus:
The forms of the spatulas, which are rubbed between the thighs and cause the warts to pierce, and do not feel the pain, and they are of three kinds: large, medium, and small. And these are the forms of them:
The forms of the veils with which the flow of blood is stopped, and they are of three kinds; large, medium, and small; the forms of the foot:
When it is caused by cold and has the appearance of citrus, round in shape and a certain length, and they are subtle.
And these, of the three kinds of veils, should be large, medium, and small, so that by their stopping the flow of blood quickly, as needed, and when you first begin, it is not medicine.
However, do not use them to stop the blood from flowing all over the body, but only in fleshly places, that is, in the creases of the legs and thighs, and in the creases of the arms, and of the nipples and abdomen and thighs, and resembling them, in the fleshly places, with humors.
And some veils are made of these other instruments, small in size, resembling scalpel-like scours of skin according to this form; for by doing so the blood is stopped when done with bloodletting or an incision of a vein or artery.
And some veils are made round according to this form:
Chapter .47.
For the treatment of male nipples that are made from women's breasts.
Some veils are inflated to the nipples of old men with a certain amount of sleep, and then they are inflated, and the nipples of women are assembled, and Roman adustios, big.
And to anyone who desires it, I will show how to incise those that are caused by the moon according to this form, from the line of B to the line of G; and then cut out all the groesomeness, and also apply the plague of medicine made up, and also adjust the two lips of the wound with suture, and heal that which is within.
If the nipple sags and is softened by its magnitude, then it is cut in two halves above, with two sections resembling a lunar figure, each of which contains the other within itself; that is, the major section contains the minor according to this form, from the line of B to the line of G. And then cut out the codeness that is between the two lips of the wound, and stop the bleeding, and also give the medicine that has been said about suturing and powders, whatever is necessary in the treatment; and heal it.
And if you do not approve of incising that which is caused by the trouble of the patient, and of the flow of blood, then you should use a plague of medicine made up of a certain amount of vinegar, and then cut out that which is corroded by it; that is, it is cut off from the grayish part, and heal that which is within.
Chapter .48.
Of the piercing of warts that come from below to the tip.
Those warts that come from below to the tip are of the kinds of scrofula and dura; they contain a certain pus that is drained.
And of those that contain moisture; and those that contain pus, are incised according to this lunar section figure: from the line of G to the line of B. And when it is completely emptied of water that is found in the wart of the scrofula, then you should remove the cot yvel and leave the wound open for another day.
And let the cot remain so and be healed with a certain amount of vinegar that is suitable to it, until it is healed.
And if the wart of the nodules is, and of scrofula, then you should cut it according to what has been said in the section about scrofula above.
If the plague is extended in ash that is burned, then administer it according to what has been said before.
Chapter .49.
Of the section of warts that come from artery or vein.
When an artery is broken, and the codeness is solid that is above it, then see the veils of warts that come from there according to the section: because when a wart comes through an artery, it is long and agregate in the preon of the body; and when you hear the stridor of a wart with the tips of fingers, you feel its pain.
And that which enters by way of the veins returns to the surface of the body.
And it is error to make the section over this apoplexy, and chiefly in that which remains the anus, and in the throat, and in other places of the body; and it is great, when its cure must be avoided, and that which is in the extremities, or at the head, must also be avoided.
And above that which is of it by way of the inflations of the orifice of the artery, make a long section; and approach the cut with knives and separate the artery, and free it from the tunics, so that it may be discovered.
And approach a needle on that and make it penetrate into the other side, and tighten the artery with a double knot in two places; — which causes you to have great pain when you extract two arteries that are in the temples.
And approach the place that is between two ligaments with a knife into it so as not to harm the santum, and dissolve the apoplexy.
And approach with a cure that is generated within so as not to harm the ligaments, and heal that with water convenient for healing within.
And if it is an apoplexy from the section of a vein, then you must have in your hand water that is at your possible of the apoplexy with the cord, and approach the needle below the place where you have held your hand, and make it penetrate; and be it in that double thread within which you extract that of the other side, and bind the apoplexy with a single ligament according to what I have said before concerning the ligament of the veines of two parts with two extremities of the thread.
And if you are afraid to extract the thread, then approach the double thread with a needle below all the apoplexy; and tighten the threads in four places.
And approach to dry the apoplexy in its place within so as not to harm water that is in it, and then cut off the surplus of the cord, and leave the water that is in it.
And place on it the palm of your hand, which you have dipped in oil and water, and approach to administer the cure that is done with water and oil within so as not to harm it, and make it heal.
It is a capital apoplexy that happens from the twisting of nerves.
As apoplexy from an artery and a vein, and resembling that which happens in the percussion of nerves or by excessive work, and resembling them.
It is made more often on the sides of the helpers or of the neck, or at all places where joints are bent.
And it is a hard apoplexy, and is like the color of another body, and in its main dispositions it is from within, and when it is strident with violence, it causes the patient to be like a stupefied person.
And it is not an apoplexy from the front of the body, and for this reason the cord is left behind, and it bends all over; it does not bend forward or backward.
So water from those which is in the joints must not be allowed to flow away by way of a pipe, because it would force strongly against it.
And that which is in the head or in the forehead with a knife. But if it is a little apoplexy, then approach to the roots and cut that off of the root.
And if it is great, then suspend it with a hook, and remove that one, and fasten the other one; and patch up the wound with sutures, and heal that within.
Here I stop.
Of the section of an apoplexy that you cause from the mouth to the belly.
And put on all the men whose bellies are swollen and other parts of their bodies that are like mushrooms, of which the roots are thin and the heads are large; and those whose lips are swollen, and who are small.
And I have seen one, and in its belly were two mushrooms that seemed similar, and there was no difference between them, having thin roots.
And the lips of those men were turned inside out, and moisture ran from them at all times.
So I cut off those men and turned over in bed eighteen times. and the other one was five inches long.
And consider that the patient is moist when you operate on him with a knife, and that his color is white, moist, and has thin roots; then approach to cut off a part of it with a knife in front of you, and if he bleeds, cauterize it.
And if the patient is a little afraid and anxious, do not cut him with steel; but approach to hold a piece of fresh lead, and tighten it on the part that has been pointed out, and leave it for two days.
And approach to tighten the thread of lead; then, do not cut it with a sharp edge, or it will be torn and fall from its place by itself.
And if the lead is of large roots, then in the cutting of it there is a cause of fear and anxiety, especially in that which is in the belly.
And perhaps you might cut off the tip of it, and approach to cauterize it so that it does not return.
Then approach to heal the wound within.
And be careful that you do not cut off a piece of lead that is of a dark color, with little feeling and without regard; for that part will be cancerous.
And I was reminded of a previous error.
Here I stop.
Of cure for the umbilical prominence.
The prominence of the umbilical is done for different reasons: or because of fissures in the navel which are over the belly, and from which the skin or intestines come out; or because blood flows from a vein or artery according to whether it comes from the front or back.
And if it is because of a tear in the navel and the intestines come out, then the color of the apoplexy resembles that of the body; and it is a sharp pain, and you can see different situations. And if it is because of the escape of the intestines, then you can see different situations with him who has been told about it, and if you press that one hard with your fingers, he will return; and a sharp pain comes up to his belly.
And if it is because of moisture, then it is a sharp pain and does not remain hidden when you press it with your hand; neither is it forced back or released.
And if it is blood, then these signs appear: the apoplexy turns black and declines towards the back.
And if it is because of meat, then the apoplexy is hard, thick, and long; it clings to a certain quantity.
And if it is because of wind, then touch from him is sharp.
And consider that the operation on it is that if the prominence of the umbilical is because of blood from an artery or vein, or wind; then you are prohibited from curing it, for in that case there is fear and anxiety; so you are taught in the chapter in which it has been said that apoplexies from the artery and vein.
And if the umbilical prominence is for the intestine or hernia, then cover that you command the patient to lie down and remain still; and approach to try in the course of all the umbilical, and command him that he stays towards between your hands on his back, and approach circles a needle sharp in the course of the umbilical over the place that you have sent am to the attempt; and approach extend the most part of the abscess on the parts below with a big unction; and approach tie in the course at a strong rope or at a string and the method of tying decently.
And approach cut the most part of the abscess extended on the tissue and introduce the needle in that hole and try the intestine; and if you have not hit it or kept by the tissue, then you take off quickly and push the intestine into the parts inside of the belly.
And if you have hit the hernia, then take that one with a big needle; and cut the superfluity of it.
May if it is contrary to your fire or vein, then circle that point, and return to your operation; and take two needles and put those two strings strong and introduce two needles in the course that you have made around the abscess in a manner of cutting, which pass to penetrate; and approach tighten the abscess on the four parts over the needles.
And if you want, take away the needles and leave the place inside that it can heal the flesh extended and fall by itself; or cut that point when it has become thin and then treat that with water that covers the tissue inside that it is cured.
And if the umbilical prominence is of flesh or moisture, then cover that you cut the abscess as well as I have said and destroy the flesh or moisture, which you have hit, and approach treat that with water that covers and cures the place.
Chapter 3.ll.
Of treatment of bones.
You have already said, in the division, of special types of bones and how to treat them with medicines, and that it is easily damaged by treatment without causing an ulcer; and you have said that bone is born in the greatest and most careful way for the treatment of it.
And they said to the small ones that some broken bones are in a place where it is possible to remove them completely, thus when of bone that is in the nipples or in the crotch and similar parts of the members allocated to extract everything, and especially when it starts little.
May if it is old and large, then do not approach to it, for I have not seen how to heal such an ulcer nor have I seen another, nor that it has come out into water.
And the operation on it is when it is allocated in this way as I have said, that you proceed and leave the patient and flush out some diarrhea, and approach heal that one, if it has hit him clearly.
And approach prepare the patient for the preparation in which it is located for the operation, and approach predict in the trail uncin what you cover on that; and approach cut from all parts with a sharp knife good excretion until it does not cause any reason of its wounds. And leave run the water, and do not let that dripping, and squeeze the places, and wipe the water from the hand or from the instrument which is at your disposal of the instruments.
May if it causes a contrario of the thick water of a vein or an artery, then make a cauterization on that until the flow of the water stops, and approach heal that one with another treatment until it is healed.
Chapter 4.l.
Of treatment of dropsy.
We have already said, in the division, of special types of dropsy with water, and the characteristics of each type, how to treat them with medicines.
And that one which is cured with iron is not but the type of gout alone, and does not approach to cure the type of tympanic or to the type of hypophyra, because water is deadly.
And when you have already treated this type of gout with medicines and do not give the medicine to the patient, then consider that if the gout has been conquered, or is another type of gout, as if it is in the throat or abdomen and similar to these, then keep away from giving it iron because fear is about water.
May if you see the patient of great virtue, and is another illness but gout only, and is not child or old man, then the way to operate on him is that you raise the patient between your hands, and the minister approaches him and squeezes his belly with his hand, pushing water out from the part of the neck, and approach take a sharp knife according to this form:
is of two sharp points long, of a sharp point at each end, as well as a knife; but however short it is, little by little, in order that during the operation on him you do not pass into the bowels, and that you cut off that one.
And approach consider that if the generation of gout is of part of the bowels, because then you cut away from the umbilical for the quantity of three fingers from the bottom, on the right side of it over the neck.
May if the generation of gout is by a disease of the feet, then your section is on the left side of the umbilical for three fingers.
And if the generation of it is by the mother's milk, then your section is on the right side.
Do not cover that your section is on the back on which you want to work with the patient so that the superfluities do not run into that place.
And approach pierce with the instrument all of it, and approach introduce in that section, and raise your hand to the knife between the cut and the syringe, and you squeeze off that one; and if the quantity is a little.
And approach pierce the syringe until it reaches the knife to the desired place, and that is the water place. And approach take that one away and introduce an instrument which has this form: It is similar to a silver tube thin; it is made of silver or brass or lead, which has in the part of the bottom a little hole, and on the sides two holes: one from the top and another from the bottom; and it is finished with feather-like points, as well as you sometimes do:
It is in the extreme of it, a ring, because when the instrument touches water, then that one immediately rises on top of the instrument, so it evacuates the water in half a quantity, because if you evacuate from it more than not to hit it in the hour, then it breaks strongly the patient by the resolution of his animal spirit, or happens to him five times approaching death.
And evacuates from that second quantity of the virtue of it and second what you mean in your dispositions of the patient's virtue of his pulse and goodness.
And approach take away the instrument, and hold back the water which causes it because it is held back by theコード that holds the hole that is on the syringe over which you have said to pierce that one according to this method.
And approach repeat the instrument on another day if the patient tolerates water, and approach take out a little water, and make it run for a long time over fear, and keep away from making a mistake in which it does not run into water but little.
May if you fear for the patient, then leave out a large quantity of water, and approach heal that one in a dry sand, and make him drink some water, and expect on the sun long time; and approach heal that one with desiccating medicines until it is healed.
And cauterize over the stomach, and the mattress and fit it near the extraction of water, according to what I have told in it that is preceded.
Chapter. V.
Of the treatment of children who are born with holes in the places of urine do not perforate.
Some are born with the head of their mixture not perforated (or is straight or is not in its place).
Then let us treat with the perforation of it so soon as it is born with a subtle touch according to this form:
Then place in the throat a small platinum nail and tie it on, and let it be for three days or for four.
And when he wants to urinate, let him stand and urinate; then return it.
And if you do not hold the platinum, the urine that goes over the place, does not allow this closure.
May the one of the throat that is straight be treated with a platinum nail, so as it has been said, for several days until it is increased.
May those who are in the throat not in their place, be led out, which causes it to be because of those, that is born with the throat, the end of the penis per so that it cannot urinate at the base, within that it raises the penis to its base at the basis; and it is not for its generation, for so the semen cannot come to the mother according to its rectitude, and it is a disease of the body.
And the way of operation in it is that the patient be wrapped over his back, and place the end of the penis with your left hand to a violent extraction, and cut the top of the penis at the place of the perineum with a sharp blade, or so that you do not cut any part, for so the blood of it comes out similar to the end of the penis, and the throat falls into its place according to what has been said.
And keep in mind that when you operate to stop the flow of blood, because it may happen to you; and pause it until the blood stops flowing, and heal the plague within that if it is healed.
Chapter. LVI.
Of the treatment of the skin that occurs in the tip of the penis and of the corruption and blackness and adhesiveness of the skin of the tip of the penis.
The skin that is born with it occurs in the penis and is an eminence of slow-growing flesh.
And of that one is malignant and another is not-malignant.
Not-malignant, let us suspend with a small oil and cut off that within it is all; then place it on the edge of Egyptian ointment; then put that, heal with it the next day until it is healed.
And if the skin is malignant, of a dark color, then let us treat with a pointed cauterization near its cutting.
May if the skin that is born in the tip of the penis is not circumcised, and one part of the skin is inside and the other part is outside, then let us treat with the skin that is inside at the beginning until it is hardened; and then let you heal the outside, because when you heal the outside with ointment, it is not assured that it has been cut.
And it occurs in the genitals and in the skin that is black and corrupted, then let us treat all of what has been darkened and is beginning to corrupt or has been corrupted; then place a line of this on it with milk of sour dough and dried herbs and seeds.
Then heal it with the other treatment until it is healed.
May if there is a flow of blood from the penis, then administer a lunar cauterization according to this form:
Because cauterization that is younger can be done in two positions together, as it is for the flow of blood from the penis and for the plague when it is corrupted.
And if the tip of the penis is corrupted and is destroyed completely in the hour, then let us enter into the meat of the penis with a platinum tube so that the bad urine passes through it.
In the adhesion of the skin to the tip of the penis (and this adhesion does not occur except in that for which the skin is tight, and when it occurs because of plague or pustule) then let you draw out with a sharp blade within that it is dissolved the flesh and released the tip of the penis completely.
And if it is difficult to remove them carefully, then let you draw out with a sharp blade any cause of the tip of the penis and of the skin, for it is because the skin is thin, it is easily pierced by the skin's subtleness gently.
Then separate between the skin and the tip of the penis with a small blade, which is already wet with water to prevent it from adhering again.
Then let it be treated with a vi stiptic within that it is hardened.
Chapter. LVII.
Of the cleaning of children and of the treatment of that which occurs in those who are circumcised.
Circumcision is not only a solution for continence but also for other plagues: however, since it is of our operation and our will, and its way is heavier to save those who are lost in order to achieve salvation.
Then I say that the little children do not say circumcision in some of the free nations, because they do not use it in their laws, and it is only because we have acquired through experience, which causes me to admire most of the craftsmen and barbers who practice circumcision and purification with a sharp blade; and they use an ointment and cut with a scalpel.
And I have tried all of these ways and did not find a better purification with scissors or an ointment that is used in purification with a scalpel because the cord of the skin of the penis has two tunics, and the thread remains above them, and it is easily cut; and it is difficult to force another cutting and is painful. In the purification that is done by alpeceating, and it is a digital one, which is used by barbers, is not secure to cut the end of the penis because it is difficult to enter into the throat of it.
May in the operation with a scalpel, it is difficult to force and corrupt your operation. And the cord of the child is short by nature, and the skin that is born with it occurs in such a way that there is no need for purification, and I have seen this.
May from the purification that is done with scissors and an ointment, the goodness, experiment shows me, because the scissors are of proportional cutting, for in the sharpness that it is above is as such as in the sharpness that it is below; then let you press your hand with a proportional sharp blade, and cut according to a comparison at a time; then make a compression of the scrotum containing the cord of the penis completely, which does not have any error.
And the way of the first operation is that you make wait the child completely if it is one of those who understand a small one, so that you do not make lie the scrotum on its penis at all times, and let it sleep that night.
Then place joy in all those ways that are possible for him to accept your intelligence. And make him sit between your two knees, properly prepared, and not let the child see those or any other of the tools.
And put your hand around the boy's throat and blow into the tube, and pull out that which is stuck in there, and clean it off with water.
This is the shape of the scissors for cleaning:
The tips of the scissors should not be sharp and the other ends should be sharp, so that the bar at the end does not hurt; and make the length of the two handles equal to each other with the same length of the blades when they are closed together.
The mistake in cleaning is that a long time may elapse before all the foreign matter has gone; or some of it may be pushed deep into the tube and difficult to remove.
So when you put your hand out in front of you with your thumb up, you must hold the tube at a right angle to it and make the second cut at an equal distance from that.
And if you cannot hold it up with your thumb, then take it out with a finger and make the cut.
But if it has been three days, and the tube remains inflated, then leave it as it is until it deflates, and then make the second cut with ease, and clean that one which you have prepared.
And keep your hand away from the end of the tube, for it will not be nice to touch.
And so care for him with water that the plague is removed by the powder which we have described in the treatise on powder.
And if it has been cut too much from the tube, and you follow the instructions for making it smaller again, then it will not be nice to touch.
But care for him with water that we have said is healed.
Chapter LXVIII.
Of the Treatment of Urine Retained in the Bladder.
Retention of urine in the bladder is caused by obstruction due to fear or a sudden cold, or from bad diet or too much meat, and similar things which we have said regarding the methods of treatment in the Division.
And if the urine is not dissolved by the treatment which we have described, then make an instrument called a syringe, whose shape is as follows: it should be made of silver and very fine leather; and the tube should be like a long palm tree in shape, with a small hole at the end, like a needle point; and the leather should be fine.
And the method of introducing urine by means of the syringe is this: first put the loop of the thread around your finger and tie it firmly; then insert the end of the tube into the opening of the bladder, and make a small cut with the scissors if any of the leather should become loose; but first insert the end of the tube with force into the bladder.
And put him on the bed, and wrap his bladder in cloth and oil; and oil of olive and water.
And insert the syringe with ease into the opening of the tube; then double the end of the tube over itself at the end of the bladder; then push the needle into that point; and push it in as far as the cause allows, and no further; but if it is difficult to push it further, do not force it, but leave it as it is.
And remove the thread from around your finger little by little, for urine causes the leather to contract.
Then remove that and use the treatment of urine; and use the syringe, not to force further urine out, but to relieve the bladder and ease the pain.
Chapter LIX.
Of the Qualities of Bladder Clamping with a Clamp and Similar Instruments Which Agree with Water.
When a ulcer or pus, or a sudden cold, comes to the bladder, and you wish to distil water and medicine into it, then use an instrument called a clamp, and its shape is this:
It should be loud at one end, but silent at the other, so that it is closed. And in that there are three openings: two of a size and shape similar to each other; and thirdly, which is smaller.
In the beginning it is a closed shape, in which water is absorbed; and then, according to the quantity that collects there, some of it is thrown out with the wind; and when it is expelled, all of it is thrown out; and when it is expelled far away, according to how tightly it is closed.
Then when you wish to introduce moisture into the bladder, insert the end of the clamp into the water; and throw out with the wind the water which collects in the cavity of the clamp; for the water is thrown out with the wind from the hollow part of the clamp.
And insert the end of the clamp into the tube according to what we have said in the description of the syringe; and push the moisture into it with force, for that moisture will reach the bladder very quickly, and relieve the patient.
The shape of the small clamp which is used to tighten the bladder, and this is its shape:
It should be made of silver or leather, the end being like a small feather, and the leather being fine inside.
And then put the bladder in motion, and keep the moisture which you wish to tighten in the bladder; and place that end of the tube between two strong knots of the thread, and heat that moisture over a fire.
And insert the end of the clamp into the tube.
And then place your hand on the bladder with the moisture which you wish to tighten, and make it spread out from that point, so that the moisture is completely absorbed by the bladder.
And if you do not have a bladder, then make a ring with a piece of string and pierce it throughout; and insert the end of the tube into that hole; then put the ring on tightly around your waist; then turn yourself round and roll so as to pass the tube over your body several times; and then remove the tube and place it in water, and oil and water.
Then take that instrument and do as you have done to the bladder; and express the liquid into the bladder with your hand, so that the moisture passes into it.
Chapter .lxi.
On Extraction of Stone.
We have already spoken in the division about the species of stone and the treatment with medicines, and the difference between stone generated in the lungs and stone generated in the bladder, and the signs of each.
We have spoken about the stone that is operated on and cut out.
The stone generated in the bladder itself is that which is lodged in the bladder.
And I shall now set forth that which has been spoken, clearly and concisely.
Therefore I say that stone generated in the bladder mostly affects children; and of its signs is that the urine which is passed from the bladder is similar to water in its subtlety, and appears in sand; and the patient's testicles are drawn up, and there are visible motes, and it is dressed with a cloth; and it causes a stinging in the scrotum from those.
And it is easier to cure children from that entrapment which they have acquired by the age of twelve; and it is difficult to treat the old. In young people, half is cured by water, because it is among those who are affected.
And of that from which the stone is larger and the cure is more difficult; and if it is small, it is opposite to that.
Therefore, since we have arrived at the cure of that disease, let us begin with what has been mentioned about the patient' s intestines; for that fissure, some motes prevent the entrance of the stone by inquiry.
And let the patient' s intestines be placed between his legs and bound and pressed together that the stone may descend into the bladder, or jump from one place to another.
And then make a cut between your breasts prepared, and the breasts of him are placed on one side, so that the entire bladder is turned towards the side where it is.
And then he makes a turn with his hand.
Therefore, if you feel the stone in that space, immediately lie down on your side and cut it off.
And if you do not completely release his treatment from both sides, immediately stop and apply oil to the patient' s tongue with the left hand, if the patient is a child, or to the right side if he is a grown man, and insert it into his scrotum. And turn the stone within that space which is on one side of him. And turn the stone little by little within the neck of the bladder.
And then press upon it with your hand and push out that stone to one side away from the place where you made the cut.
And order the minister to press his hand upon his bladder; and order another minister that he extend his testicles towards the sides from his right hand, and with his left hand he pulls back the skin where you have made the cut.
And then insert your finger in an oblique manner into that place where this is done: And then cut in it with water that is between the testicles and the genitals, not at the front of the patient' s scrotum, but behind, cutting transversely so that the cut on one side is broad and straight according to the amount of stone which has been passed into the bladder, and no more, because if the patient' s hand presses very hard upon his bladder, it may be that the stone will come out through the cut without a cut being made.
And you should know that there is no stone which is difficult to extract by water, because its extraction becomes difficult by water.
And that water is like a lion' s tongue, and it is round, and its extraction is more difficult by water.
Therefore, if it is that stone which is difficult to extract, arrange it in the crack.
And if it is not easily extracted in this way, immediately stop and apply pressure to it with your hand, or stretch it gently by holding it between your hands, so that the end of it is turned towards you, and do not let go; or insert a very thin instrument with a curved tip.
In addition, if you cannot apply pressure to it with your hand, immediately increase the stretch a little, and if you see a flow of blood, cut it off with three-sided vinegar.
In addition, if the stone is larger than one, at the beginning of the process, press your hand upon the mouth of the bladder, and then cut it off; and then press a little water upon it; and if there are any motes, cut them off little by little.
And if the stone is very large, at the beginning of the process, ignore that it has been cut off with a large cut, for two reasons: either because it will be very painful to him, or because the location is not completely solid.
In addition, administer to him a medicine that will cause a discharge from within, or arrange the fracture of it with a scissor within so that the stone is taken out in pieces.
Therefore, when you have completed your operation, immediately fill the cup with herb of aloe and dragon' s blood, and stretch it. And then cover that cloth upon which you have operated with oil of roses and water, or with rose water and a little soap, so that it may be easily washed away.
And then remove the patient' s clothes from his scrotum, and do not wash the wound within three days.
And when you have taken off the bandages, immerse the wound in water and a little oil, and then clean it with pure vinegar and a little hydrogen peroxide within, so that he is cured.
In addition, if there is an apostema from within that is sharp and corrosive, and it seems as if the blood is frozen in the bladder, and because of this, it causes the patient' s pain, and to prevent the bladder from being destroyed by rot, immediately insert the patient' s hand into the wound, and remove the stone, because it causes the blood to flow away from the bladder.
And then wash the wound with water and salt, and in opposition to all species, with water that is like tears, so that it may be easily cured within.
And in the hours after your operation, put on both the bandages and apply the medicines which you have prepared upon it.
And if the stone is small and it is lodged in the scrotum, and it causes a lack of urine, immediately cure it with water that has been prepared in advance before you cut, because it is difficult to extract by surgery; because there are ten motes, which prevent the extraction of it, and this is the form of it:
of a curved tip, sharp, and lodged in a tube.
And then hold fast, and draw away from the patient' s scrotum that stone so that it does not return to the bladder.
And then insert the iron into the scrotum, piercing with ease within, in order to pierce that stone with an iron which has been prepared for that purpose. And then turn the iron around in that small stone little by little, and you will pierce that stone from one side to the other through which the urine passes; because it is quickly lost.
And then place your hand upon it that is like a bow from which the stone has been cut off on one side of the scrotum, because it is sharp, and it is difficult to extract by urine, and the patient is cured.
In addition, if this cure is not appropriate for him because of some reason which you have mentioned, immediately hold the patient' s scrotum away from that stone, and then place upon it another scrotum. Then cut along the line in that corner between two threads. Then remove that one. And then cut away the ligament and wash away the blood, which is made in the groin.
And it is not necessary to tie the bowstring so that it does not return to the bladder, and the other string above so that when the bowstring is cut, the bladder returns to its place and no blood is lost.
And therefore it is necessary to tie the bowstring above so that the bladder does not return to its place and then cut it again, lifting the bladder back up or returning it to its place and no blood is lost.
Chapter LXVI.
On the extraction of the bladder from the groin.
The bladder in the groin is rarely generated.
But if there is a bladder at any of those places, then it is difficult to cure it, and it is forbidden by many methods.
One of their ways is because the strong woman's leg is tense.
And the second reason is that you do not find a good woman who discovers whether she has eaten meat when she is pure, or whether she is married to a man.
The third reason is that you do not have good women who know this art, mostly the operation above all.
And the fourth reason is that the place of section over the bladder in the groin is far from the place of the bladder, so that it does not suffer from a heavy section, and then it is feared.
But if necessity forces you to do this with water, then take a married woman who knows this art well, and it is rare to find one.
But if you are deprived of that one, then seek a married woman who is learned and subtle, or present a widow well-versed in the art of women, or a woman who knows this art in the midst of women's affairs.
Then present that one, and command her to do whatever you order, from the inquiry about the bladder to the beginning; which causes her to keep her vows secret, so that she does not want the bladder to come out.
Then if that one is angry, remove that one from your orders, and then command her to pierce herself.
But if she is not pure, then command the widow to put her left hand on the bladder, and pierce herself with a good needle.
And if that one is angry, then it is desired that she grumpily withdraw her left hand from the bladder's orifice at its root before she pierces herself with a needle.
Then pierce her on the orifice of the bladder from the back of the neck towards the front, so that it is stopped in that place and the bladder is pushed in that corner, and her words are not disturbed by the pain of the piercing.
And the section be short at first; and then insert the ray on that section, and if she feels the bladder, then adjust the section according to the quantity that you know the bladder will go out of that place.
And you know that the spices of the bladder are small: because some are little and big, and sharp and round, and there are hills.
Then you knew how many spices there were in it, so that you would not make a mistake in your calculation of the quantity that you meant to measure with water.
And if you want to see the blood flowing, then adjust in that virulent place and stretch it for three hours, and then return to your operation before the bladder is discharged.
And prepare for yourself the instruments that are described in the extraction of the bladder in men, so that you are helped by them in your operation.
And if you want to see the blood flowing, and you know that the expulsion of the blood is from the orifice where the needle pierces, then pause the powder on that place and then apply it with a duster and tighten it slightly, and do not repeat water; and leave the bladder, and do not extract that one, because the man will die. Then heal the foot.
Then when the sharpness of the pain decreases gradually, that place softens, then return to your operation before the bladder is discharged.
Chapter LXII.
On Section over hernia.
Hernia that is caused by moisture being added to the skin is what is left of the genitals containing the water, and it is called cyphac.
And some vealed are in the proper pannicol, which is what nature prepares at the root of the water, so that it is what it is, and not water; and it is the coden of the genitals between the skin, which we have called cyphac, and not water.
And the generation of this hernia is by the loss of blood, which happens to the genitals, so that that matter is discharged there, and sometimes it is caused by a blow struck on the genitals.
And this moisture is not colored, for the color of it is declining to yellow or bloody, or dark and ropy, or black and boiled, or clear and fresh water, and that is what it is made of.
And the signs by which this addition of water is known: because if it is in cyphac, which we have said, then the swelling is round and declining a little towards length as well as the figure of a cow, and there are the genitals, because moisture contains them all.
And if the moisture is in the proper pannicol, then the swelling is round at the root of the water, and so it is thought to be another cow, and so that man estimates that it is another cow.
And if the moisture is between the coden of the genitals and cyphac, then the temperature decreases.
And when you want to know the color of the moisture in the swelling, then examine the shape of the orifice from which it comes, and judge from that what is inside.
Then when we come to heal him with water, then it is desired that the dog be thirsty if water is possible, and fill his bowl with water.
Then it should be lifted up on its two feet for a little while, and then remove the blankets from it.
Then place yourself on the left side of him, and command the minister to follow your orders on the right side of him, which causes his arm to stretch out from his shoulder as if he were going to reach for something at the root of the genitals, and then presents the wonder of the belly.
Then take a spoon, and cut the coden of the genitals from its place by its length, and then return it to its place, so that the genitals are not cut off.
Then the section be made according to the rule of joining together the edges of the genitals, so that it covers the skin completely.
Then wash that one, and observe it, and keep it in mind so that you do not pierce that one; and your washing of it be careful, for the purpose is to suspend it from its root slightly higher than the water level, and carefully examine the washing according to the quantity that you are able.
Then pierce cyphac thoroughly with water by a wide piercing, and then extract all the water.
Then separate between two sections of the section by a nail, and then stretch cyphac from above; and do not touch the genitals together, and cut cyphac with a sharp knife in the way that is convenient for you. And cut the whole of it or in pieces, and more importantly its thin layer, because if you don’t examine the incision carefully, there is no guarantee that the water won’t return.
If the patient’s pain comes from cold humors that have infiltrated each part of their body, and pain occurs in their feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
And if the patient’s pain is caused by another disease, then know that you must remove the vessels that are hanging from the suspenders, and extract them, and then treat it with water as we have said.
And if the water is gathered in two parts, know that there are two hernias; therefore cut that part according to how you have done it in the other incision; and if it seems to you that it is an operation, then do it.
And then rinse the wound and immerse it in oil or rosin; and place another cloth on top of it, and spread the powder on top of that, and place a towel over it, folded up, and put a cloth on top of it, which is according to this form:
And then place two cloths and humph them with wool according to this appearance; and make the extremities tight with a cloth or wet wool, and join them to the belt of the shorts, and one extremity should be put between the other, and the second between the crotch, and both extremities on top of two thrones, and all the tightness is adjusted in the belt of the shorts.
And some of these hernias are treated artificially by cauterization instead of surgery to remove them; and it is because you take a sharp knife and cut the codena of the genitalia, and burn it according to what we have said before, until you discover the white ciphe that contains the water, and then you make cauterization according to this form: and it is formed like a Greek letter.
And then pierce that ciphe, and burn it so that all the moisture leaves it.
And then tear the ciphe with nails, and scrape it with a sharp nail, and burn it with a burning cauterization; and cut that according to what is possible for you, so that you remove all of it; and guard against the fire of the cauterization.
And know that this operation is more safe and further away from flowing blood than surgery by incision; and better than operation by incision.
And if it causes you pain during the incision or during cauterization or bleeding, then know that you must treat what causes you pain by this method that is said.
And if the patient is a little bit afraid and does not expect the second operation because of its horror, then administer cauterization according to what we have said before; and it is when it is proven that it is an aqueous hernia.
And then know that you must place the patient on a raised platform; and pierce the abscess at its lowest point with a needle, and make the incision according to the length of the body.
and it is the wide opening where all the water comes out.
And then place your hand on the area and cut that, so that all the water comes out. And then treat it in such a way that the illness is healed.
And if there is a reaction to the extraction of water in that hour you pierce it: and it is not done except by what we have said before because the white pannicle in the orifice of the wound makes pain and prevents the entry of water; then know that you must introduce into the wound a liquid instrument with which to extract water from the droplets, its shape being preceded; or place something small on the edge of the wound.
And know that the water returns, and it is collected within a few months or years; and when it is gathered, then pierce it according to that method of manual injection, because the disease will last its time.
Chapter LXVI.
Of Incision on Chronic Hernia and the Treatment of It.
Know that in surgery on this hernia is a lost cause to turn into a chronic illness; but for me, it is seen that its removal and being saved by it is better.
And I remember the operation on her and the spices of abscesses.
Then know that the abscess arises in the bodies where the genitalia are joined, and it is caused by various factors: or because of acute excess of water in the body, which is spread in the genital area; or because of impact.
And it is the color of the abscess according to the color of the body, and it does not hurt in pain, and it is a heavy abscess.
And there is a very hard abscess that islapified, whose color is dark, and does not feel to the touch.
And some are caused by the swelling of the intestines, and by the inflation of the veins; and it is seen that this is an abscess because of the previous remembrance of it, or by the inflammation of the blood vessels.
And that which is caused by the swelling of the intestines is known by the spread of the abscess when you press it with your fingers, and it is not known that it hurts when touched.
And that which is caused by the swelling of veins is not spread because of the pressure exerted on them with your fingers.
And it is possible that on this type of hernia surgery should be performed and on other parts of the body; and it is because you cut the codena of the genitalia, and then separate them from each other, and extract the white ciphe that contains the water, and tie up the vessels, and cut them, and cut those according to what we have said before.
Then if the hernia is already firmly established on those parts of the body, then know that you must extract the hernia and cut it.
And if there is an adhesion anywhere for any reason between the ciphe and between the veins, then know that you must free all of that adhesion and cut it with a round incision.
And if there is a birthmark in the place of the adhesion that is behind, then know that you must cut all of it and extract the hernia as we have said before.
Then when your operation is completed, then fill the wound with infused sheep's wool in rose oil and water; and then treat it with the other treatment until it is healed.
Chapter LXIV.
Of the Treatment of Hernia that is due to a lack of water.
There is an abscess wrapped in a wrapper resembling a budge from the testicles, and it is difficult to perform movement exercise or walking on the patient.
And in the treatment of this illness is due to fear about which there is a remembrance of it.
However, know that I will speak about the operation on her according to what we have said before.
And I say that you must place the patient on a raised platform; and then suspend the testicles between two ties; and then pull the codenas of the genitalia with your fingers in such a way that they do not touch the side of the patient's body; and hold them like that, and extend those to the extreme with vehemence.
Then cut the spinal cord in half, cutting it from side to side through the vessels where they are exposed.
And then remove the entire arteria all at once, as you have already said in the section about cutting the arteries from the temple.
And then place in those a needle which is doubled up at the end, and tie this thread at the first spot where it occurs, and another one on the other side. Then cut these in half crosswise according to the length of the body, and extract what is attached to the putrid and corrupt fluids.
And then cure the plague with the cure for other plagues in which you want to heal it so that the vessels do not break, otherwise they will rupture one of the two genitals, because this is not good for it.
But if all of the vessels are cut off, then it is necessary that the testicles be removed or that they are severed from the vessels by themselves, so that they lack all nourishment through the section of the vessels, and wither away, or that they are removed so that they do not increase in size.
Chapter 65.
On the Cure for Hernias Caused by Intestines.
The occurrence of this hernia is due to a section that has broken out on the abdomen from one side of the navel to the other, so that these intestines break out from it; and because of this, some of the intestines come out.
This break is either from the navel or from an exit; and these two things happen for different reasons: either because of a strike, or because of a loud noise, or because of a sudden sound, or because of some other heavy cause, or because of a resemblance.
And the sign of this is that it happens little by little over a long period of time, and not suddenly; and it is a swelling inside the navel, pressing against the intestine, for the navel compresses the intestine.
And the sign of this is that it happens when the navel splits open, for at the beginning it causes a violent pain suddenly; and it is a swelling that appears different in appearance near the navel, and the body breaks apart at the split of the navel.
Some are overlooked when the intestine comes out of its cloth, and this is called the hernia inguinalis internal.
Some are made of a vent in the cloth, and some run in a split in the intestine, and here it is held, and from it comes great pain to the patient, and some make the pain worse and more intense when it is pressed.
And in the treatment of these types of hernias with force, it must be remembered that the cure should not cause pain; so that it is covered from the side where it is being treated.
And the manner of operating on this is that you order to the patient that he return the intestine to its cavity if it comes out, and place your hand on his chest between his breasts, and raise the legs.
And then cut the string that ties the testes together at the top, and cut the string of the testes completely; and then place two knives on the section according to how you want to cut it for them.
And if, after the section, there is a hole that has been overlooked, then it is necessary to close it with a thread.
And then remove the navel string from the testes, leaving the navel cord exposed on both sides; and cut it completely so that there is no navel cord left.
And then cut the string of the testes, which is between the navel strings, leaving only the navel cord that has already broken open; and leave the attachment that is at the back of the navel intact.
And then cut the string of the testes on both sides, and extend the navel cord on its left side up to the navel with your hand; and order the minister to bring the testicles up there and completely dissolve the attachment that is at the back.
And ask with the help of the tools whether there is any cause for the navel to be wrapped in the hard navel cord. But if you do not find a reason for it, then you will find it inside.
And then cut the navel cord from side to side with a sharp knife, and make a hole in it; and tie this thread tightly so that it does not break.
And then administer a hot liquid; and place the needle in the plague; and tie the string that we have described (and sometimes the hard navel cord is cauterized, which we have mentioned as a precaution against bleeding, because some occur) and leave the thread inside it.
But if the cure is delayed, then it should be boiled; and place it on the navel in the way that has been said.
And this plague is cured with another cure for the plagues in which it is to be healed.
Chapter 66.
On the Cure for a Windy Hernia.
In this hernia, it is not seen that anything has been done on it with respect to healing it with force.
First they said that this is done in the same way as we have described in the hernia caused by wind; which is that you cut the vessels from side to side with ease; and then dry them out in the middle, removing all the swelling; and let them fall; so that the vessels do not break.
And this plague is cured according to what we have said, so that it is healed.
Chapter 67.
On the Dropping that Occurs in the Intestines.
Some drop out of the intestines in this way as we have said, and it comes out.
It does not cause pain to the genitals when the intestines come out; and if it does, it is little; and it returns in an instant.
But if this time is prolonged, it causes a break in the navel through which the intestines come out into the navel; and then this happens to the navel as we have said, which is caused by the navel string being extended; and then the place softens, and the swelling increases, and it comes out.
And the cure for this is with a sharp knife as we have mentioned before it.
Some are cured with force according to this method: and it is that the patient jumps on his back between your breasts, and then dry out the place of the swelling caused by the discharge with a section according to the number three times.
Then tighten the white cloth that lies under the chest until it is tight.
And then take the rope and place it over the immediate location of the cord, and press it against the navel.
And then cut the two locations immediately above the end of the rope of the cord, and join one to the other.
And then remove the end of the rope, and do not cut off any of the cord, nor let the skin spread out, nor for any other reason should you know about the treatment of an intestinal hernia.
And then treat that with the treatment of pus, and when you cut the strings, clean it and restore the hernia within so that it does not break out; for the cord is contracted and the prominence of rupture is not adjusted.
A cauterization is better in this place, since it is closer to being saved.
Chapter .lxxxviii.
On the softening of the testicles.
In certain men, the testicles are softened by it because the meat that is between them is softened, and one should observe this.
Then, for the person who is being treated, it is necessary that he lie down on his back according to his habit, and spread out all the cord that has been softened over the natural cord; and when he tightens two lips together at the location of the hernia.
And if you want, cut off the excess of the softened cord with three or four and a secure stitch.
Then cut between the stitches; and then treat the other hernias for healing, so that they are healed and the strings fall off.
Chapter .lxxxix.
On castration.
You should know that in our law castration is prohibited, but for a particular reason it is mentioned in this book; and it is not necessary to remind myself of it unless I mention two things, of which one is that it happens that the doctor who is questioned about that knows the treatment of that person whose castration is needed; and the other way is that we have, because of the animals' juice, had a need for castration of other animals to serve as our brood, just as with pigs and goats and creatures similar to them.
And therefore I say that castration is done in two ways, either by cutting off the testicles or by sectioning through an incision.
In the one that is done by cutting off, the way of operation is that they cut the animal in the tail area so that its testicles are softened and reduced and hang down. Then return those to your hand within so that they do not come off by touch.
In castration done through an incision and sectioning, cover that you have the animal and press the cord of its testicles to your left hand.
Then tie the suspenders, and cut on each side with one section within so that two sections are made.
Then cut off those pus that you have on each excision. And do not leave any of the cord for any reason; but cut the subtle cord above the vessels.
This way of castration is better because it is done by cutting off; since cutting off prevents the desire of the animal to copulate.
Then treat that hernia within so that it is healed.
Chapter.lxx.
On the treatment of hermaphroditism.
Hermaphroditism in men happens in two ways: one is that it appears when the space between the testicles narrows, and this is a sign of female nature; because there are two testicles that form an outline of a woman's body because of the presence of female characteristics.
In certain men, there is a discharge from the penis, which is in the cord of the testicles.
In women there is one kind of hermaphroditism: and this is that the woman's genital opening is like a man's penis with two testicles, but it does not open down; it opens upwards as a man's penis does and has two testicles.
The treatment is of three kinds: of the two men, and one kind for women. And since you have cut off that flesh within so that it does not retain the smell of that person; and then treat those with the treatment of other hernias.
In the second kind of hermaphroditism in men, from which there is a discharge from the cord of the testicles, it is not treatment or operation for him.
Chapter.xxi.
On lenting and on prominent flesh due to women's causes.
A very strong lenting is adjusted to natural causes within so that it does not break out, and in some women it is increased within so that it does not break out at the time of intercourse.
Then return that excess of lenting with your hand or with oil, and cut on it.
Do not end in incisions, mainly in the hairline, lest it cause a flow of blood.
Then treat that with the treatment of hernias within so that it is healed.
There is hidden flesh that lies in the hideousness of the mother within so that it fills, and a very strong one comes out at the time of birth according to its appearance as if it were cut; therefore, since we have cut lenting, let us treat this with incisions and heal that person.
Chapter.lxxii.
On the treatment of a rash.
Alergia is that the woman' s opening not be pierced, or that it be small. It is either natural or accidental.
Accidental is by bad luck which has preceded it, and that person is caused by either adjusted flesh or a subtle cord or string.
It is done either in the hairline of the mother, or on the sides of her, or on the upper part of her, or on the lower part of her, and it is forbidden to cut, to engage, or to get married, and a very strong one forbids menstruation.
The recognition of that person is done by observing the mother's attitude, if the objection seems obvious, certainly; but if it does not seem so, then try to recognize that person with the rope or with the rope-like thread.
If the objection is by a subtle cord, and it is between the two lips, then cut that person and destroy it.
It is done by pausing on the two lips, and then pause the rope-like thread on each side in front of them.
The woman is on her two legs, with her knees spread out in front of them, and she extends the two lips under force within so that that subtle cord is broken, and the objection appears clear.
Then tie a rope and send it to the location, and put that person on it, and hit him with a whip every day until the location is firm.
If the cord is thick and stringy, then cut it off with a sharp knife or a piece of wire.
If the objection is by flesh, then hang that person from a tree, and cut it.
There are medicines for you to stop the flow of blood with a bitter taste, such as acacia, and blood-draining medicine, adjusted to honey of two fingers.
Then introduce a wide silver tube so that the hernia does not break out in an unhealed manner.
And keep him for a few days and administer some of it every day.
Then cure him with the other cure of consolidation until he is healed.
And sometimes it happens in the mother's womb of other animals, and then cover it according to this method. But if this is for an aching tooth, and the aching tooth in the mother is not done contrary to it with some method.
Chapter .lxxiii.
Of the cure of hemorrhoids and of swelling and of red botulism that happens in the vagina of women.
Emorrhoids are those of the openings of small veins that hurt continuously, and if they are old emorrhoids and have become hard.
And I have already said in the division the spices of those and the signs of those, and direct there those that I receive cure and those that I do not receive cure.
Therefore say that hemorrhoids and nodules are when in the womb of the mother and do not appear on the surface, then in those there is no cure to be done with some method.
But those that are in the openings of the mother on which a sensation appears, are those that are cured.
And then cover the woman in a loose garment and extend them on a pair of scissors or a sharp blade, and cut those off with rasps.
And then sprinkle over them the flux of a certain powder to be cut with rasps, thus: with acacia and similar to those.
And then put on weights for an hour, and then remove them in hot water.
And if the flux of the pain persists, then make it boil in a solution of sumac and peppercorns and herbs and similar things.
And then take flour of mustard and make paste with honey and vinegar, and apply it to both sides.
And if the pain has separated, it is good; and if not, then adhere to both with bandages, and cut off the nipples.
And then take wool and dip those into the juice of coriander or the juice of argol or the juice of grapefruit, and apply it to the place; and then cure that place with ointment until it is healed.
And then cure that place until it is healed.
Chapter .lxxiv.
Of the piercing of the skull in the mother.
Small spices of skull are happening in the mother, thus: with aching and piercing and ulcers and hubble-bubble and pustules and fistulas of hemorrhoids and raggedness and nodules. And I have already said about these miseries and the spices of those and the signs of those, and their cures in the division.
And I say in this treatise of the cure of skull which is in the mother when it is of those that you have cured, and if you want to know how to make the operation of skull.
Then consider whether the pain of skull in the beginning is acute with percussion and fever and sometimes that hardens on it, and if it feels about it, then do not pierce it, but cure that with water which helps to mature until the sharpness of the accidents ceases.
And then consider whether you cut the woman on a table that has two tables; and arrange her on her back lower than her belly, and spread her legs, and pause her breasts from her sides, and tie some string around her middle.
And the woman should sit on a chair from the right side and administer the instrument with which you will open the opening of the mother, the shape of which will be in those cases that she will make it.
And when you want to administer this instrument, that you keep it from the right side of the woman's womb, and the water of the instrument enters the mother until it reaches the bottom of the womb. But if the instrument is larger than the womb, then consider that you sprinkle dust on the texture of the womb so that it does not allow the entrance of any instrument into the womb.
And consider that you pour the liquid that runs in the instrument above and that the minister has the instrument and mixes the liquid until it reaches the opening of the mother.
And when the excitement appears, and is touched with the hand, and is hot and moist, then consider that you dry those off with a sponge.
And when the cure is evacuated, then consider that you put a sponge submerged in rose oil or green oil in which there is no stiffness; and pause the calce on the section in the womb.
And then pause the mother and put clean wool, dipped in water in which are mixed mauve dye.
And it is customarily cured twice a day with ointment applied to water until it is healed.
And sometimes the mother and the placenta are washed together, so that they become crystallized with water and honey, and applied to water in which are boiled rags or long hair, and then return to the ointment.
And if the placenta is within the mother's womb, then consider that you do not cure it with some method, until I have said in the division.
Chapter .lxxv.
Of teaching the women how to be clean with this method when they are pregnant according to the following figure:
Necessary cause is that the woman with child comes to term with signs of it, and that when you see the woman express herself with open legs, and over it is extended by water which comes out of her, and quickly the excitement appears, then know that this birth is a second natural figure, and that the excitement of it is on her head, and the second after it is hanging or suspended from the navel.
Then when you see these signs, then consider that the mother's belly is shaking so that the fetus appears slightly on her head, then put the second one, and it is distinguished from those superfluities with good discrimination.
But that which is the other birth is not natural and not praiseworthy, because when the fetus is lying on its back and the head of it is lying in front of its mother' s head and its feet are stretched out before it, then it is not praiseworthy. It is stretched out the head of it and the mother of it, or to the belly of it, and strongly moved its body over its chest, and resembling the figures of it unpraiseworthy.
A necessary cause is that the woman be wise and subtle in all these cases, and that she keep herself from error and deception.
And I am showing all these figures, and which is the meaning of them in order that it should be understood by water and should be placed on it.
When the fetus is lying on its head by natural virtue, and that one is fierce with the woman and difficult to handle, and sometimes its virtue has been weakened, then consider that it should boil, or that women have it in their hair by boiling fenugrec and honey.
And then he inserted the probe between his small testicles and cut it short, or sewed it up with a thread, so that no moisture remains in her. And press on the female abdomen until she gives birth.
May she be cured if she is not delivered, then cover her with a cloth of wheat and mustard poultice.
And then command her to be compress and have a cold shower, and for a while the mouth and nose are covered, because the delivery is painful.
And if the two fronts of the baby are already getting cold at the beginning, then you should reduce those with small steps gradually. May she obey the instrument, then place her on a table and lift her feet up, and then shake the table onto the ground; and the woman should be held so that she does not fall due to the vibration.
And if the last part is not turned in and the baby falls out, then cut it off and pull it out with your hands equally, because it is getting cold.
When the baby is on her feet, then you should press those below, and then turn the baby over little by little, and then wrap it up, and then take one of its feet and spread them little by little.
May she be delivered inside the thighs, then you command her to squeeze, and have her exhale with a sigh, because it will be cold if God wills it.
And if it is not delivered in the water that we have described, then you return the baby little by little until you pause her second natural figure, because that will be delivered soon.
And if it is forbidden in all water that we have described, then take a compress of aloe and dissolved gum, and hit all of it with a good blow, and then line it with the water of the female's navel, the lowest part of her abdomen. And then make a cut in the water that is moving, so that it reaches the hypogastric muscles.
And when the openings of her legs are no longer relaxed, then make her sniffing and breathing with mint. And when the sniffing has lasted for an hour, then place her on a table, and then make her sneeze and open her mouth, and take off her clothes, and press the lower part of her abdomen lightly with compression, because the baby will soon be delivered.
Of the embryo hanging downward from its leg. She should be held in your arms, but if you cannot hold her, then raise the woman and make her walk.
And if she cannot walk, then make her lie on her back, and shake her with a violent vibration, and then administer the medicines that we have described earlier.
And if the delivery has occurred, then make her lie on a table and study the reduction of the mother's abdomen, and wrap up the baby according to its second natural figure, and have the woman sneeze and command her to compress herself so that it is pushed out.
Of the embryo on its back with its legs spread wide, and the sole of its foot is facing up and the sole of its mother's foot is facing down. That the mother should hold her baby, and then turn it over little by little, and then wrap it up easily.
And when it is wrapped, and then pause her on the water that we have described of oil and mucus.
And then command her to rub herself little by little, and when the water has formed, then make her lie on a table and incline her on the right side, and then command her to compress herself with small steps, and have her exhale with a sigh. The exit of the fetus is prepared on its side.
When it is coming out of the mother' side in this way, consider it, and then you should cut the second with your knife inside that it is evacuated from the moisture.
And if the baby is suspended over the face and the neck of the woman, then you should cut it off, so that it does not hang back and suffer from a delay.
And then you should make the baby open its mouth little by little before you stop it, and command the woman to compress herself several times, and that one will be delivered soon if God wills it.
The exit of twins or a multiple birth. Know that twin eggs are rare, and sometimes three or four, but five is very unusual and uncommon for nature; however, there may be five in a single womb.
And know that they may be multiplied, the second being separated by ciphe, distinguishing those between the ligaments at the navel of each one; and sometimes five are delivered in a single birth, as it is natural for them to come out small. And some are delivered by the mouth, not through the navel as we have described earlier.
And if the birth is difficult and they are coming out in a difficult way, then you should take care of them as we have described earlier in the case of abnormal figures.
And if the mother is clever and has the water that makes it easy and gradual, and is slow, and is prepared according to all figures in order to save herself.
Recall that it is formed in the mother' body from embryos and it is aborted.
Some veiled women are formed in the first, second, third, fourth and fifty-first, and six, and seven, and eight times, and each time a woman is born, which causes foetuses to be formed by measurement of the glorious wise men.
And all this reminds us that it is in the science of the mother that strength lies for that little-looking water, and then pause at the water as it reminds us.
Chapter LVII.
Of the extraction of the baby when it is dead.
When you care for the dead fetus in water that we have described in the division of medicine and it does not come out, then you should use surgery on the mother, considering if she is of sound health and not at fault for the accidents for which she is a loss.
The woman should be positioned on her back, with her head tilted upwards and her legs raised.
The minister should hold the baby's two parts together, so that the child's body does not extend further down during extraction.
Then moisten the mother's mouth with a mixture of water, honey, and fenugreek, as well as sesame seeds.
Then anoint the woman' hands with those oils and mixtures, and place her hand on her womb, finding the spot where the foetus is located.
Then find a convenient place: then consider whether the foetus is ready to be delivered; then place the claws on its head, or in its collarbone, or in its mouth, or on its palate, or let it hang from its beard, or from its breastbone, or at the top of its ribs, or between its ribs.
In case of delivery in the feet, then lie down on the left side, facing upward.
Then let the woman lie on her right side, and place her left hand in a convenient location for support; then insert the claw into one of the locations mentioned previously, until it reaches the cause of the blockage.
Then place and fix another claw in its position, or the third if necessary, so that it is strongly held in place, and not pulled out according to its rectitude alone.
Then let it be removed completely at once, in order for the relief of its distress to take place immediately if delivery occurs during the extraction.
Then let the extraction take place smoothly; and if any part of it is retained, then anoint the woman with a mixture mentioned previously and insert something to turn it over and free it from the water.
Then if the foetus is partially delivered and stuck, then replace the claws between locations mentioned previously, and deliver the entire foetus.
In case the woman's back is facing away from the other side, and it is not possible to reduce it by tightening the umbilical cord, then wrap a cloth around it; and extract that portion at which the whole is delivered, and mark that or the joint of the spine or the coccyx.
Then also cover the other side and feet.
In case the head of the foetus is large, or if the umbilical cord becomes tight during delivery, or if it is caught on something in the vagina, then insert between the spines of the spine and split the head, extracting the water or dislodging that; or use an instrument named "alundum", the shape of which will correspond to the shapes of the other instruments mentioned previously at the point where this one is placed.
Then it should be delivered by caesarian section if the foetus' head is large by nature: and then mark that with a needle, or pick it up with an alundum; and extract the bones with forceps.
If the head is delivered and caught on the breastbone, then split it until the water that is in the feet is emptied.
Then if it is not complicated and does not require delivery during pregnancy or childbirth, you should mark the head as soon as possible according to your skills.
In case the foetus is present in the womb or in the uterine tubes, then you should pierce that portion where the water that is inside it flows out.
Then if the foetus is located on the woman' side of her body, its attraction to her is light and its direction to her mouth is also light.
Then if it is caught on the woman' belly or legs, then extract that with cloth wrapped around your hand; and split the belly and legs until the water that is inside them flows out.
Then if the other limbs are still standing and turning the head, then let the mother lie on her back; if her mouth is open, then insert it into her mouth, holding it with one hand, and place a claw in its position with the other; then turn the head over and free it from the mouth.
Then if the mother' mouth is blocked by a swelling, then do not worry about turning it over; instead, provide an abundant supply of moist substances. Then administer emollients; and attend to the patient in water that softens and moistens.
Then if the foetus is located on the woman' side of her body, it should be split; and water should be administered to it while it is still alive.
Then if water is not possible, let the foetus be extracted in pieces.
Then do not leave any cause inside the second one.
Then when you have completed your procedure, administer water to the mother in order to soften the swelling that has occurred during her labor.
Then if a flow of blood occurs during the delivery, it should be washed with stiff water and the other cure administered.
Then I have seen a woman in whose womb there was a dead fetus, and another one in her arms is born alive; and that one is a dead fetus. A long time after, swelling occurred in the womb; it swelled up and exploded, then began to emit heat.
Then he was called to treat him, and he cured him for a long time; and the plague did not subside.
Then I stopped him from using some strong emollients that attract the body, and extracted a bone from it; and after a few days, another bone; and I was amazed when there was not a single bone in her womb.
Then I realized that they were the bones of the dead fetus.
Then I cured the plague by extracting those bones; and the present woman was in her usual condition, and after a long time, she gave birth to a small child.
Then I did not believe that it was strange; but in water is science and help for the sick woman to be administered medicines by the hand of God.
Of the shapes of instruments necessary to extract the fetus.
The shape of the vertigo that presents the mother:
This is the shape of strength in which you are enclosed, and at which the two free ends are attached; there are two vertigins on each side of this shape. However, this vertigo should be slightly less strict, and it should be made of light or sturdy bois.
Then each kind of wood should have a length of two palms and half; and its width at the bottom should be two palms and a little more, and at the top two palms and a little less.
Then these two additions should be inserted into the mouth of the mother so that it is open to those two prescribed vertigins when you turn them over.
Another shape resembling this one but slightly smaller and lighter.
The wood used should be like that of ebony or boy's wood according to the appearance of the pliers. May there be two additional aids at the end of them, and the length of those aids is a palm, and the width of each one is two fingers.
And when you want to cover them, then turn the woman over on her back with her legs hanging down, so that it is between her thighs. Then open your hand with the instruments in such a way that the forken meet according to the quantity you want of the opening of the mouth of the woman before the midwife does it, so that you want it.
The shape of the turn that they say the ancients:
Shape of the throw that throws the one who is thrown:
Shape of the impact that hits the head hard:
And it is assembled with forceps on the end, several times, and some are forged long with forceps in this form, several times, which has the end cut and is impressed and broken: Shape of a little impact:
Shape of an uncut spine:
Shape of an uncut two spines:
Shape of a staff with two ends, in which the head is cut off:
Shape of two long staffs:
All these instruments are practiced, and when they are more multiplied the species of that one and are prepared by the artisan, how much is easier to their operation and more able men for its quantity.
And do not open these instruments, because the need for them is not excusable.
The extraction of the second.
When the second one is retained, it is necessary to order the bad woman that she retain her breath, and if it should fall out, it is good.
And if not, then you take a cup and pierce the roof with it and pause in that grass burning the mouth of the woman, with a calm and rough hand and anointing with camel's milk and Arabic myrrh and cassia wood and holy thistle. All these herbs or some of them are submerged in water in the cup, and pause that over the fire.
Then return a straw of camomile in the mouth of the woman, and let that run until the vapor comes out into the cavity of the woman.
And then make her sneeze with this, and the second one is expelled with speed.
If this cure does not work and is not expelled, then order the midwife to submerge her left hand in olive oil or a mixture of thyme, and if it should stick again, order her to immerse it in water little by little according to the recipe, so that the woman does not catch fire violently. In advance, prepare what is needed for the right and left sides with ease.
If the mouth of the woman is blocked, we have already described the cure with sneezing and with the medicine of the cup with herbs.
If none of the above methods works, then you must keep in mind that what is needed is to prevent her from falling into a state of abstraction, but if it should fall out of her mouth, then make sure that she gets better soon; because that will turn it purple and dissolve and expel it.
If it turns purple, it is bad for the head and the stomach, and if it should be raised by the midwife; then make sure that those substances are administered subcutaneously and conveniently to it.
Some of the ancients already use subcutaneous infusion of nasalt and dried figs.
The shape of the instrument with which the woman is infused subcutaneously, to prevent retention of menstruation and the second one:
Is it a vision or an illusion?
And the end that is subtle in the cavity and the wide one on top of the fire, and the infusion should be applied above the flames.
Let that run until that infusion is consumed and repeat: another.
The cure for a piercing wound at the bottom of the child not pierced.
Mouths of children not pierced, and the bottoms are pierced in such a way that they are subtle and hidden. Then order the midwife to pierce her tongue in such a way that it is subtle; and if not, pierce that with a staff close up, and make sure it does not touch the larynx.
And then pause over that clouded vision with smoke and oil; and then treat that with vinegar until it is better.
If you fear that it will be pierced, then pause in the roof with a straw for days, and if the child wants to bite it again, take care.
And the piercing of the bottom is due to consolidation of plague or abscess; then when that consolidation is cut, and it is cured with water that we have described in the cure and in the ash.
The cure for the fistulas that they have left behind.
The fistulas that remain in the part of the child, put a paste of the following ingredients, and if it remains at the bottom further or in the space between one part:
It is a fistula or motus.
And with that paste of the following ingredients is dried up and cured from the subtle moisture of white pus or subtle pus, and some of those fistulas are penetrating.
And those that penetrate are treated with water that is expelled from them by exit and ventilation; and some of those times use the exit strategy, and strong ones are expelled from them by wind.
And some of those fistulas that remain in the space penetrating into the bladder, and into the meat of the hip; and some of those that penetrate into the junction of the crotch and into the neck of the pelvis.
And in water that is conoguded in the fistula penetrating into the bottom and not penetrating, it is because you put the child's tongue in the butt, and make a subtle attempt to clean or iron out the fistula when it is not turtuosity.
If in that there is turtuosity, then make an attempt with iron or hair of the horse within that you feel the attempt or the hair on the child's tongue.
And if you do not feel that or the hair on the child' s tongue, then know that it does not penetrate, and then make a cure with it.
And when the fistula is penetrating into the bladder or into the meat of the hip, then know that it is absolutely urine from her and prohibition to do at another time than the location with medicine.
If it is penetrating into the junction of the crotch or into the bone and causes pain in the circle of the hip, then know that the attempt is piercing here if not turtuosity within the bone, and pain in the circle of the bottom; and that from her is always a sign of piercing, and if it does not pierce, then it is always a sign of piercing. And if it is always a sign of piercing, then know that it is always a sign of piercing.
And in all those fistulas penetrating there is no cure of everything, and the cure of those is work and vanity of the physicians on which they are sealed.
But in that which does not penetrate and is not old, the cure of metal is awaited according to what you have recommended, and that which I have already tried and premeditated.
And it is that the patient squats between your two hands and raises his legs inside them, the cushions are inclined towards his belly, and approach a metal to pierce or burn if it is in the tortuosity of a fistula, so that you know the place where the piercing occurs.
And if that hurts the patient's crotch, then cover that you introduce the finger into the crotch.
And if you feel that the piercing has already entered the patient' finger and the tentacle or flesh, then certainly know that it is penetrating; and therefore do not work on that one, for I have said so.
But however they say that some curas are made in certain men.
And of the cure with which he hopes to heal him thoroughly is that you ignite the cautery subtly according to the width of the fistula, as it is preceded, and introduce that ignited thing into the fistula until it enters through the crotch; and repeat that two or three times until you know that all those adjusted, fistulated parts that resemble a feather of an owl are firmly closed.
And cure that one with warm water enveloped in a sack until all those parts that are adjusted and tightened are fully healed; and if it is cured, it is well; and if not, then it will not be cured by any other medicine.
And if the piercing enters and does not enter into the finger that is in the crotch, and between that one and the tentacle that is slightly flesh or meat, and sometimes the fistula opens where the surface of the codena (a small bag) is broken; then dry the codena from the beginning of the opening of the fistula, and you see if it dries out completely; and if the piercing is completely cut off at the place where the tip of the tentacle enters, and by that one is released and cured.
And then unbundle those fistulated parts that are assembled like a tube of an owl's feather, and they do not break due to any other cause.
But if a flux of blood comes between you and your work when you are cutting those parts, then the instrument that is used to cut it off with ease is to cauterize with fire or with acute medicine, because cauterizing with fire adjusts well: so it is tightened on those adjusted parts, and the excess of that blood is removed from the dry part.
And cure that one with warm water enveloped in a sack or a twisted rope until the place where it breaks is firm, and then cure plague with bitter medicine, which generates and hardens meat.
And such medicines are used to tighten and cut off; when they are restored, it is already cured, and you do not fear repetition.
But if the fistula has already entered into the crotch and is elongated from its surface, then introduce the finger into the crotch and feel it out.
And if you feel the tentacle and it is slightly meat or flesh between you and it, and it is similar to the piercing; then there is no operation in that one according to trusted and hopeful ways.
The cause is to administer it in the following three ways: either to cauterize that one as we have said; or to dry that one inside which you can achieve the cavity of it so that you can possibly introduce your finger and cure that one accordingly; or do not cut off that one with a sharp thing, so that it does not hurt the patient' crotch, but let it arrive at the will of the patient, and cure that one with water that we have said because it heals strongly; or to elongated that one slightly and make the pus come out from that one which you dry inside according to what we have said about the anus, or with the tentacle or another instrument with a sharp tip, and then unbundle those fistulated parts inside which you can achieve the cavity so that you can easily introduce your finger, and cure that one accordingly; or try to make the restoration of all the plague by cutting off, and if the pus opening does not solidify, and the fistula opens at the crotch's junction, then let the pus come out from the patient' anus. And in some cases the fistula is finished according to this way: you introduce the tentacle into the fistula, and it is at the crotch' junction facing the skin surface with the codena, and on the edge of the crotch; then take a sharp instrument's tip, which is like preparing threads according to this form:
and introduce that one into the codena wrapped in six threads or around it; and then introduce the tentacle into the fistula until you reach its cavity.
But if it penetrates in the margin of the crotch towards inside, then you take out the codena from that one as it is introduced into the crotch; then you remove the tip of the codena and adjust both ends with a sharp thing, and let it rest there for a day or two, and when you cut the codena into meat, those parts are inserted where those two ends fall.
And then cure the plague until it is consolidated and cured.
But if the orifices of the fistula are not penetrating, then make that one pierce in some way that is convenient for you, but not inside it, because it is not convenient to you that you should make it cut off so that you do not hurt the patient' crotch; and then make that one be cured.
The shape of the knife that is used to cut off the fistula: its curve is sharp and the other end is not, so that you do not hurt him where it is not necessary, as in some cases.
Of the sutures of hemorrhoids that bleed in the incision of those.
Hemorrhoids are like two things: either they are between the buttocks resembling wood, or those are with grass-like roots. And they are small and large ones; and that the blood from those is like drops, and it is one thing; and that those do not come out of their own accord, but only come out when pushed by a sharp thing, and that those come out of the crotch' sides.
But those that come out from the crotch are according to the amount of water: that which comes out is yellow or a little blood; and according to the color of the skin.
And the cure for that one which is inside the crotch is to command the patient to lie down and squeeze the crotch until the hemorrhoids appear. Then you cut yourself with a sharp object or with your nails, and then cut off those veiny roots.
But if those nails are not held in them because of their moisture and softness, then take those with a rough cloth or a woolen blanket, and remove those with your fingernails, and cut off those roots; and then feel them out, and sprinkle some dried herbs on them according to the incision, so that they are there for cauterization; or cauterize those as it is preceded in the chapter of cauterizing. And then cure those with the other cure according to which they are healed.
And if the buttocks do not obey the exit, then cut the patient' hair with a sharp thing that causes a little pain; and wash those with water from the crotch, which obeys the exit slightly when the patient is washed.
If hemorrhoids emerge from the anus, the cause is likely to be mild; it is because you are holding those with your thumb or with a finger and scratching them and then applying medicine to that which has been said to have been healed within.
And whoever is doing the incision should follow this manner: take a tightly wrapped thread and insert it into a needle and then pull out the hemorrhoids at their ends; and wrap the two ends of the thread around the needle's point from the opposite side, and then remove the needle. Then tighten the knot firmly, and then untie the thread and remove the needle.
And do this for all of them; and leave one un-scratched, so that the excess blood from the heart may run out from that.
Then place a cloth soaked in rose oil or wax over it; and place that on the patient's buttocks and order the servant to rest on top of it. Then let it fall into a box; and when it is falling, heal those with oil or with another medicine within that is healing.
And since those ancient remedies are no good in that medicine, when you scratch them with a spatum or with your thumb within so that they are moist and bathed by that water which is above them, which prevents them from drying out; and then heal those that have already dried up.
Then you should cut them with a sharp instrument more forcefully than the first time that it was scratched, and when they have been scraped, heal those that have already been healed.
You should know that gangrene is final; and it is not unless you notice the color of the body resembling a clove's head, and it is present throughout the whole body, more so in the thighs and feet, and especially in the joints, and from these pain comes from within.
And then if it is incised where it is in the circle of gangrene, and it has been caught with scissors or a finger, and then eradicated from its root; and then heal that.
And if you wish, cauterize the second one that was preceding in the same chapter.
A warts is a small, round, sharp, raised area on the surface of the body, and it is seen in most children.
The treatment for this is to stretch and then scrape it, or to open it up with a thread from within that box. And if you wish, cauterize it, as has been said, with fire or with acute medicine.
A bee sting is a small, raised area on the skin that looks like a mosquito bite, and when it touches something sharp, it breaks open inside the body.
The treatment for this is to use a pen of an owl or a vulture's pen, and make it firm; then place that over the area of the sting that contains the circle of the pen's tail; and then turn your hand around so that the stinger touches the skin. Then heal those that have been stung by fire, and if you wish, cauterize them with fire or with acute medicine.
And if you wish, do this using the pen of iron or steel according to this form:
Make the tip of the pen slightly rounded, silent (so it does not pierce), wrapped in a way that keeps it from breaking and turning inside out.
And if you wish, cauterize the sting according to what has been said in the cauterization of athyle in the chapter on cauterization.
Of the forms of instruments that are used to administer surgery.
Some stings are treated with silver or melted brass or iron; and some of these instruments are small and others large, depending on the instrument used in treating small children, for those that are painful or painful are small.
The great and rare form of surgery:
The top of the pen' s lid is made wide according to this manner; and it is distinguished from that point where the bag is attached in such a way.
The tip of the pen' s lever is inserted into the buttocks, silent  (if it does not pierce), turning towards a subtlety; and on one side of the handle there are two grooves, and on the other side, one groove, and that the thickness of the groove is according to the thickness of the rays and smaller or larger.
And may the bag that holds the medicine be made from the bladder of an animal or from sheep's wool, and its handle is a palm.
And it is pierced by sharp grooves in such a way that the pen turns; and if the space between the grooves is large, so is the length of the pen' s lever.
And then insert it into those sharp grooves with a strong, pointed thing that is made from the bladder of an animal or from wool, and adjust the bag to it; and when it is placed on top of the pen' s lever, make it straight in the center of the instrument using two sharp things, and then heal each groove: If the quality of healing with this is that you fill the bag with medicine, boil it according to the quantity of tolerance for the patient; and be careful that it is not too short or too long.
And then place the patient on their back, raising their legs up, and placing a blanket over them, or a mattress; and then apply the tip of cauterization to oil or white honey or to an ointment of fenugrec or similar; and then insert it into the buttocks with ease, and the servant holds the bag and squeezes it with two hands and forces it out into the air within the surgery; and then remove the cauterization and the patient' s legs from the wall.
And if the medicine forces that person to vomit, hold back as much as possible; and if they sleep for a whole night, it is better to leave them alone.
If you heal that in the surgery of abdominal pain and vomiting, then you should repeat the cauterization within so that it is healed.
And if in the buttocks there are hemorrhoids or painful boils, then may the surgery be rare and sharp, of the instruments that are used to treat small children.
Of treatment of wounds.
I have said and done in the division of surgery of wounds that suits the patient, and I order you to perform those with medicine according to the prescription.
And therefore say that wounds are different depending on where they are made and depending on the place where they are laid.
And the causes for which stings are made include a cut from a sharp object, an incision with a blade, a stabbing with a lance, a cut with an ax, or an arrow, or similar to those of the causes of stings.
And the wounds that are in the body' s places include a wound on the head, the neck, the feet, the abdomen, and the chest, or similar to those of the members.
And I recommend the cure of some plagues so that this reasoning and order is applied to other plagues.
And I will begin with the simple plagues, because the recollection of the composed will come at the beginning of the third chapter.
And I say that when it happens in the head simple plague and is not fracture, then consider: if it is by consumption of fluid or appearance, and has already trinquada the neck so only and is great plague and you fear over this patient having an apostema cauterization, then you coyta and fleubotomize the head at once, and do not delay it; and extracts according to the quantity of the virtue of him if there is no more cause to fleubotomia, more so if the disease that is caused by the plague is few.
And be the cauterization of the opposite of the infected part; and keep the patient away from replies and coarse foods and drinks.
But if by moderation prohibit any cause, then it is decreased from the food and do not approach meat or wine.
And pause on the plague, if to him happens an apostema cauterization, then put a fus in olive oil only or in wine in which is sterilized.
But if you are sure of an apostema cauterization, then pause on the plague, if it is recent let him rest and do not change that powder that I recommend to apply.
And if the air has already changed that powder, then pause on alscus wetting within so that it is healed.
But if the plague is great or it is by incision of hair and appearance, and their lips are not closed by puvis, then adjust those according to what I recommend from the suturing of them.
But if the plague has already been discovered from the bone and it is not retenir by him but a small suspension, then cut off that and cure the plague with medicines and restore the flesh to its place instead of the neck, and order the patient that he is eaten foods in which there is cruelty: heads and formen coyts and appearances before it is cured.
And if there is an odor of decay in the neck and it does not adhere to the bone, then you cut off all that and throw it away and cure it.
But if in these plagues there is an artery or vein from which the flow of blood may come out and it is not absorbed by medicines, then you inquire about that artery, and if there is an odor of non-incision, then cut off that with a knife, or tie it; and if necessity forces you that what I have said does not conform to you, then cauterize it within so that the disease is removed.
And if these plagues are simple and small, then the cause of them is slight; and I put on those this powder, for consolidated that before the air changes those.
And the way of this powder is this: take an olive of part-scented plants, two parts of dragon's blood, three parts of non-extinct ingredients; make all well mixed and crushed, and if the plague is filled with it, and is constrained by a good constriction so that it adheres to it, and it coagulates itself.
And then you apply this powder to it and let it rest, and do not move it while it is so that it is not an apostema, for it is not absorbed by him the medicine within that it is healed.
And any other time make only water, when it is not to you in present olive and dragon' blood.
And this method of operation is suitable for the great plagues when it is convenient that they be applied to those and be well-mixed, and only the recent plagues are affected by their disease, and whose air has not changed them.
And if the air has altered them, and especially when it is summer time, then I do not recommend the use of this powder, but rather cure those with water that we have said, or if you apply a hot compress on the affected parts, or apply cold water to them; and then cure those with another method within so that they are healed.
But if it happens in the fracture of the plague on the bone and it is small, then you extract water with a vessel.
And I recommend the cure of head fractures in venenous water.
of the throat plagues:
But if it happens in the throat plague, then it is not distinguished from the head plague in medication, and between the head plague when it is simple.
But if the nerves of the throat are incised or arterial, then if it is a nerve, do not apply to him the medicine that causes a violent stinging, and also cut off those that are similar to them for the sake of the nerves and counteraction. And do not pause on the plague for any reason of all froth, for the substance of the nerves is frothy and the continuation of it is to the brain, which is the pus from all the members.
And if water with drugs is washed away, then wash it with hot water, and make it a small fire in olive oil, and let it rest, and apply a strong compress on the affected parts; and give them wine mixed with water to drink.
But if the plague is great, then administer a suture or constrict the lips of him, and cure that with powder within that it is healed.
But if the plague has depth or happens in the pus that is lower part broken down, then pierce that in the place most affected.
But if the plague has already been incised an artery and there is a flow of blood, then separate or dry that, or tie it, or cauterize that if necessity forces you to water.
But if the spine of the neck has already been incised, and all veins have been saved from the throat, then you adjust the lips of the neck with a suture over the cana of the neck and do not touch that; in advance you straighten it over its natural figure, and apply to it with a strong compress for the sake of tightening it and let it rest over those days; and cure that with hot water to make it stiffer and excited within so that it is healed.
But if the plague has already occurred in the bone and it is out of shape, then strike that, and if there are any fragments of bones, extract all that you can; and if the skin does not cover him, let it rest so that the plague is cured, and separate and relieve it.
And if the plague is recent then apply this powder to it, which I recommend to you. But if the plague has occurred through a fistula, then cure that with water of which the recollection will come at the beginning of the third chapter.
And if it is a piercing of a lance or a knife, and deep in the throat, then consider more if the patient has windiness from this plague; then know that the plague is fatal.
And if it is not deep and the plague is recent from the first hour, then you apply this powder to him, and do not constrict that so that it is not the disease retained in the depth of him and it returns to the patient's heart; and then pause on him with a strong compress, and let go those two days.
And if the poultice is not on hand, place an open vessel over the area to let it drain and dry out; and make sure the patient sleeps on the bed so that blood can run from the injury.
And if it has been more than three days since the poultice was applied and no spasms or tremors occur in the patient or constriction of breath, and other signs are good, then you will know that the poultice is effective; and then treat them with caliches and the other treatment until they are healed.
And if the patient's recovery is delayed and it has been a long time since the injury occurred, then you will know that a fistula has formed; treat them with surgery accordingly.
And if the wound is due to a sharp object or knife and is shallow on the foot or leg, then treat it with water that has been preceded by suturing, if it is large, or with powder, if it is small.
And if it has already come loose from the bone and only a few pieces remain embedded, then you should twist the poultice to remove them, if they are separated. And if they are not separated, then you should leave them in place and let the poultice remove them, which is more convenient.
And for other wounds that occur on different parts of the body, the treatment is the same as that which we have described.
For abdominal wounds.
The discomfort that occurs in the abdomen can be severe, slight, or intermittent.
A small disruption is difficult to repair in any other way; if you do not prevent the protrusion of their content into its place soon enough, it will become thicker and more difficult to deal with, as it becomes blocked by internal organs.
The best course of action is to take the middle road; because it is not difficult to reduce the intestine in this case, nor is it difficult in the two categories mentioned above.
And you should know that abdominal surgery involves two main methods and additional techniques; common surgery can be performed in several ways, but the basic principles apply to all types of wounds on the body.
There are two other types of surgery that are specific to abdominal wounds, but they can be applied to other wounds as well; however, they are primarily used for abdominal injuries.
And I remind you to expose and declare each wound.
So then I say that when the wound is small and there is no obstruction from the intestine in that area, and it is difficult to reduce it, this can happen in two ways: either due to the size of the disruption as mentioned above, or when the intestine is swollen due to cold air.
And so, when this is the case, you should pierce it with a sharp object as if you were to dip a sponge or cloth into running water alone, or if you were to scoop up water from a stream, lake, or river, and pour it over the abdomen until the swelling goes down.
Some hernias have a natural tendency to shrink on their own without any intervention; in this case, it is better to use water from a spring or well for relief rather than running water alone.
And if you notice that the swelling has gone down, then you should rinse the intestine with water that is already warm and slightly salty; this will help to soothe the affected area due to its cooling effect and the mild salt content.
And if this treatment is not sufficient for the injury, then you should cut the wound with a small instrument; this will help to remove any internal hemorrhoids that may be causing discomfort.
The first treatment is best when it is not necessary to cut and remove excess tissue; you should also avoid unnecessary surgery and starvation.
Regarding the instrument, there are several forms it can take:
The one is an acute, sharp edge; the other is blunt and slightly rounded, lacking the acute quality of a knife's edge.
And if the wound is large and the intestine protrudes, then you should reduce it according to its natural shape, in its own place, if possible above water; this is better than reducing it elsewhere.
And if the wound is wide and located in the lower part of the abdomen, you should place the patient on their back, pausing their legs out beyond their shoulders; and if it is located in the upper portion, then turn the patient over so that the head is facing upward, and their feet are extended.
And if the wound is located in either of the two central areas of the abdomen, you should pause your attention and consideration momentarily to ensure that the wound is positioned higher than its opposite; this will help prevent any complications.
And thus you must prepare water for the large wounds and also for the smaller ones.
For small wounds, prepare the water and then place it between your patient's three or four most prominent parts; the wound should be entirely enclosed within these parts, with the suture being the last to be completed.
This is the common way to sew: one that holds the needle, depending on the size of the wound; and then leave the end of the thread at the opposite end of the knot, or two ends of the thread, hanging, keeping them out of reach from within the two openings created by cutting the knot in half, ensuring it does not get tangled; and there are four orders: first, secure one end of the thread to the needle; second, cut the thread at the desired length; third, tie a simple knot; fourth, leave the other end loose.
And then secure the thread in double knots around the needle's circuit, and sometimes combine two openings from each side, and then add two layers of skin to the wound by means of a cut; and then leave a loop of thread at the end of the needle, tying it to the first knot, ensuring that it does not become tangled; and if you need more thread, continue filling the loop until the entire construction is complete.
And the smaller needles should be delicate and subtle, as they cut through flesh easily; and the thicker ones are difficult to handle in a knot, so they must also be combined with subtlety and delicacy.
And it is not necessary that the needle should be fixed to one end of the knot, but rather, that the thread does not easily slip through the skin and that the wound remains intact while it heals.
And do not extend the suture too far so that the wound is not prevented from healing properly.
And you should cut the ends of the needles so that they do not get stuck in the patient' bed; and then place them on top of the expanded sutures, ensuring that the needle' ends are secure; and leave it like that until you are sure that the wound has healed properly.
These types of sutures with needles are most suitable for small wounds, as they reduce the risk of damage to the surrounding tissue; this is because either a single needle or two separate ones can be used to secure the suture.
And the second type of suture is similar: and then you prepare the four ends of the thread using one needle or two; each end is tied to the corresponding end of the two openings created by cutting the knot in half, keeping it secure within the needle' handle; this is done with care and subtlety.
And when I hold the needle against these four extremities, reduce the needle from that half-part where it begins, so that the thread retracts from the pus rising from the wound, so that the suture is a second suture of cloth held by which the cloths are strong.
And place between each stitch the quantity of thread of this smaller one.
This stitch is for men.
And this stitch is for a man who was struck in the belly by a knife, and it was the beginning of a wound that measured two palms across from one side to another, and it was a rupture on half the body; then I reduced that part that the intestine had broken out by the space of twenty-two hours.
And that wound was consolidated in the space of fifteen days or so, and I healed it, then applied honey to its surface, and turned it over; and there were no more complaints.
And the other wounds had not healed; and, by a miracle, for I did not heal that one with ointment, because it was in a place where ointment is not applied or any medicine used, but I placed a piece of cloth on the wound twice each day and washed it thoroughly with water containing honey until it healed.
Then I said two kinds of stitches, according to the narrative of the Bible.
And it is that you begin with a stitch of twine, and insert the needle from outside into inside.
And so, when the needle penetrates in the twine and in that half-part according to direction and length of all the thing, and leaves the end of the thread in which you have inserted the needle; and make the needle penetrate in the other half-part from outside into inside in the other end of the thing.
And so, when you have made that penetration, then you make that same penetration another time in that end of the thread where the needle has gone from outside into inside; and leave the end of the thread that is on that side, and make the needle penetrate in the other half-part, from outside into inside, in the other end of the thread.
And make that penetration with your own hand, in which you have made the same penetration in the thread, into the thread at the end where the needle has gone from outside into inside; and make that end of the thread come out, so that it comes out through the part where the needle has penetrated.
And then begin to sew from that side, and cut the thread at the end where you have made the needle enter; and return that same thread to that end where it has come out of the thread, and bring it around to that other end where it is on the other side; and cut that thread.
And then you make one more cut, and another, until you have made all the cuts that are necessary according to that example.
And the whole of this method of sewing is that you sew with a stitch that includes the skin, so that you sew the twine once from one side of the cut to the other; and that you do not leave any part of the cut uncovered by the twine.
And the second kind of stitch is called 'Golia', and it is made according to his speech that it is made with medicine that sews those cuts together, so that it adds half of a cut to the other half by nature; and apply the end of one to the end of the other, and it is done according to what I have told you.
And when you hold the needle at the end of the thread that is on your side, and make that penetration from inside into the other half; and leave two ends of the twine, and return the needle to that end where it has gone from outside into inside, in two extremities of the thread.
And then you return those ends, and make that penetration from inside into the other half in two extremities of the thread; and it is done according to what I have told you.
And this method of sewing is better than the common way of sewing that has been told before, and it is a stitch on which I have reminded you.
This is the speech of Golia
And they said to him, "This is a stitch of the belly that is done with two needles; so you should insert the needle from here, where it is necessary, and make that penetration inside the other half according to a stitch of those that are made with nails; and make that needle enter there."
And you know that when there is a rupture in the middle of the belly, then the stitch of it is more difficult than in the other parts of the belly.
And the joke about medicine for wounds is different from that of other wounds.
And the cause is that when you achieve a recent wound on the body before it heals itself, and you remove the intestine from within, and sew it so that it does not fall out; then place over it powdered garlic.
And if the air has already altered the wound, then place over it powdered garlic, and let those that are present there rot, and that the intestines be consolidated twine and flesh; and so heal it in this way as is done for other wounds, unless it heals.
And if you do not have medicines at hand, then place over it for a while, because it begins to hurt; and change that cloth twice a day, and wash it thoroughly with water containing garlic, in order to heal it; because you will not need other medicine in different situations when the wounds are simple.
And if you fear that the wound will spread to other main members, then place over it wool of a lion soaked in oil of anise, or in rosewater; and leave it there in the space between the pains and let them drip.
And if you feel pain or putrefaction in your intestines, since the wound has opened, then apply a black stinging substance on it, and more so if the pus has reached the intestine and caused an opening.
And you know that the one that is of thick intestine is a light healing for the one that is of thin intestine.
And it is a difficult healing because the intestine that is called 'gegunu' does not receive wound healing in its place of all; and that is due to the great number of veins that are in it, and to its size compared to those, and to its closeness to the nerves of the body.
And if what you remove from the wound is cloth, and you achieve a recent wound, then reduce it according to your instruction on how to reduce intestines in a bundle.
And if it has passed to that space and it has already become black or white, then you should sew with a twine on the area that is damaged by it, in order for blood to flow from it; because there are veins and arteries in the cloth.
And then you cut off that other thing, and place two ends of the twine pendent to the left of the wound; so that on your side there is no attraction from it due to the movement of the blood; because that part is the one where the wound has opened.
Reminder about wounds when they happen in the intestines.
When a disruption happens in the intestines and it is small, then it is possible that it will be restored in some people; because I have seen one who was struck by an arrow in his belly with a lance and it was the beginning of a wound on the right side of the stomach, and the wound was old and made a fistula; and from it came pus and gas, and there was a putrefaction and a stench.
So then you continue the treatment of him already, for he is not yet stabilized in his recovery, but I will continue to sublimate that medicine that makes him healthy and solidifies the wound.
And then you put a bandage on him that covers the wound in his belly; and do not let the patient eat or drink anything, nor do any exercise or wash, and stop this treatment for now.
And some experienced people say that when the hernia is small, you should wrap it up according to this method: and that you take long threads; and then you tighten the two lips of the hernia and put one thread of those between them; so that, when he bites his lips together, the thread will be under them; therefore, when he opens his mouth, the thread will not come out, but it will be cut off.
Then place another bandage next to the first one, and do not stop making bandages as the amount of hernia increases.
Then you tie that bandage and cut off the excess; and so, when the hernia is completely healed in its place, do not harm the patient in any way.
And it is possible that the hernia be easily removed with a subtle knife made of animal bone, for it is sharp; and you take the end of such hernia-strings, and if they are thin, cut off the excess; and then tie the end of these strings to another string, wrapped, and then insert this string into needles and tie them together, and reduce them in this way.
This method of suturing with strings is only another way of trust and hope.
But if the hernia is large and wide, certainly, because it only involves sub-cutting, and not healing him completely.
Of treatment of swollen joints and abscesses.
Know that any abscess and suppurative inflammation, when wrapped up and aged, become an ulcer; and does not consolidate and get hard all the time, and is not cut off, but rather forms a fistula, which we generally call swollen joint, and to which we apply this treatment.
And a fistula, according to its nature, is a deep, hard, white tunnel, and does not hurt, and which is concave on the outside as it is concave from pain; therefore, it is called "pain" in this case.
And in men of the moist type, which gets hot; and the moisture is cut off in a few hours. And sometimes this moisture becomes thick, and it is small, and it is thin.
I have already explained all these causes, and they are the same as those that were mentioned in the division of treatments.
And so I will tell you how to treat the fistula, which is done by surgery with a knife.
Know that fistulas occur in all parts of the body; for some of them reach the large veins and arteries, or nerves, or the cypher, or the bowel, or any of the cavities, or any of the joints composed by two bones together, and so on, from one part of the body to another. And these fistulas are of different types: they either emerge from a main member and similar members; or, from the skin in different parts of the body.
And therefore, of all these fistulas, this type is the most difficult to heal and treat, and it is difficult to cure, and work and ignorance are responsible for this.
If one of those fistulas has not penetrated deeply into these locations that I have mentioned, and you wait and trust in the treatment of it, but also want to gain knowledge about it; then take a sample of it and analyze it.
But if the fistula is twisted, then investigate it with a subtle magnet, because lead, due to its lightness, can be easily bent and shaped according to the twists of the fistula.
And if the fistula is not too horrible, it is not possible for you to distinguish its nature by smell alone.
Then freeze the opening with ice, because the moisture that you use to freeze it will flow through all other openings and run off.
And then ask carefully, according to which method you can understand if there are bones or nerves here; and it is the concave shape of the fistula that is far away or close by, or a fistula with only openings and no bone underneath; and this opening is entirely under your control, and with your own hands you can feel it; and understand its nature and causes through symptoms and accidents of the abscess.
And then, when you have considered all these causes carefully, proceed to the treatment according to confidence: and I tell you now if it is a fistula that appears near by, or in a place full of pus, far from a joint, or nerves, or an artery, or a vein, or one of those places that I have mentioned.
Then dry up that fistula according to what has been said above in the description of it; and keep the opening closed with a plug, and wash your hands often, for it is from the dirtiness of the fistula and the rotting meat that it comes out; and wash it out with water, and do not let any medicine touch it, or wash it off; and if it comes out through the skin, do not put anything on it.
But if the fistula is very deep, and it is still open, then fill it up completely with medicines, and wrap them tightly in bandages; and insert them into the opening of the fistula, which you have already examined for bones.
And let that medicine sit there in the cavity of the fistula, because the sharp medicine will corrode everything that is rotten in it.
Then restore that with bandages that will warm up the flesh that is being healed.
But if it is not healed by water alone, then you should cauterize it according to what we have said above.
But if the cause of the fistula is a bone, and you must be careful not to harm any veins, nerves, or main member; then dry it up according to what we have said above in the description of it; and do not put anything on it until you are certain that it will heal.
But if the bone is yours and it is in any corruption or darkness, then fill that cavity with water completely so that the corruption may be all washed away; and then treat it with water, which will heal it.
And if it is not healed and gets hot; know that you have not completely eradicated the corruption; and then you discover, with great effort and care, the reason for it and clean it thoroughly; and restore it.
And so if it is well, it is good; and if not, then know that corruption is in the depths of the body, which cannot be reached, and so you do not have to worry about it but only heal it.
And if the bone is corrupted, then it is small, or if it is possible to reach it with your fingers, then you should use sharp tweezers to remove it.
And if there are many bones, then carefully extract all of them, and because they do not cause any trouble with your strength.
But if for some reason there is moisture, and in its place there is no fear or mistake, then cut off those ligaments or muscles if they are there, and free the bones.
But if you are not prepared to put the bones back in place immediately, then pause on the edge of the wound that you have made, and let go that part so that it does not get stuck between those bones of meat and ligaments, and keep the wound open so that it is not consolidated, and the cut that you have made in your operation does not close.
While waiting, if you are afraid, pause on the edge of the wound immersed in a strong oil, or an Egyptian ointment, or one of the green oils, for when those ligaments are cut, and the bones are separated from each other, then the application of that ointment will be helpful.
But if it is a large bone, then cut it with a saw or some other instrument similar to those, and if that bone which is corrupted is on the surface of the foot so much only, then carefully remove that blackness and corruption completely, and restore the wound.
But if that bone which is corrupted is large, and the corruption has already reached the marrow of the bone, then it is necessary to close that wound completely at the place where the corruption has entered, and then heal it completely so that it does not get worse.
And I recommend to you that you send someone to a doctor for him to pause there, so that he can help and guide your operation.
Find a young man of about thirty years old, who has pain in his testicles, and the pain comes from within the body, going deep into the flesh, until it reaches the testicles, and it is caused by a large swelling, and not by an external cause.
And then wait for the time to pass with that medicine given by doctors until the swelling becomes large, and hurry up with that medicine, and it will help to stop the pain and the moisture of the body.
And then after two years, many doctors were consulted, but they did not know what to do, because I was called.
And I saw the leg of that man and the fluids running out from those orifices for a long time, and his whole body was very pale, and the color of it was yellow.
And then I intervened with one of those orifices and pushed that fluid into the bone.
Then I carefully examined all the orifices, and I found where those fluids came from all over the leg.
And then I hid myself and cut carefully on one of those orifices until I discovered a part of the bone that was rotten, and I removed it completely, and it was very dry and corrupted, and another part of the femur had already been penetrated into the pelvis.
And then I carefully closed that wound on me, which had been discovered and prepared for that bone.
And I saw that it was not a bone but that corruption which I had removed and sealed up, and I had already broken off a piece of it.
Then I waited for the restoration of the wound with consolidating medicine for a long time, and it did not consolidate.
Then I went again and discovered the second bone from the first discovery, and I continued to remove that corruption completely with the bone.
And then I closed that wound on me as if there had been corruption, and then I performed the cure and restoration of that leg, and it was not restored.
And then I discovered another bone on the other side and did not cut it completely, but I carefully cut a small piece of it at a time to perform the restoration of that leg, and it was not restored until I cut into it around a palm of it, and I extracted the marrow, and then I healed it with medicine, and it consolidated slightly and was cured.
And there is no need for repetition in that surgery or section of the leg except by the disposition of the person's age and his poor tolerance and fear of death, because he dies at any time due to excessive vomiting and fainting.
And then it is cured completely, and there is nothing wrong with the bone's texture; the virtue of that person returns to their body; they become accustomed to their conditions, and they do not cause any discomfort in walking or in any other way for any reason.
But if the bone is prominent in your body already broken, then you should do this according to this order: first, take a piece of strong thread and tie it tightly at the end of that bone; then command someone to stretch that bone, and let him extend that bone as much as possible, so that when you cut the thread, it does not reach the flesh.
Then wait a little or put it on a table in a comfortable position, because when you cut the bone, you do not have to cut the corrupted flesh.
And you should cut the bone little by little, because if it is in the cavity of the bone and does not appear in its appearance to the touch, then force it with another piece of thread.
And if the bone is corrupted and prominent, then you should discover all its parts completely; then wait a little and stretch it, and then cut that bone at the place where corruption begins, so that it does not spread to the other bone.
And let the cutting be done according to the location of corruption a little bit, as we have said.
But if the corruption is at the joint, then cut that joint completely rotten, and force the bone to join with another bone.
And if the corruption is in the continuation of two joints, then it is not a reason for anything else.
And if the corruption is in the chest or neck, it is difficult; however, if you ask about the location of that corruption and cut it, then do so according to each person's ability, and at any time, correct your course if it goes against any blood vessels or nerves.
And you should know what instruments are suitable for such operations, and how to prepare them, and their size, shape, and material; because all of these things are important for performing a successful operation.
And you should know that this operation requires a specific instrument; because you are experienced and knowledgeable in the methods of this art, and you have witnessed many cases of success and failure, because you have already performed similar operations on yourself.
And I will teach you the number of instruments that you should use simply in case you need to perform an operation on yourself. Shape of a saw
A different shape of a saw:
A different big shaped saw:
A shape of a ream: The head of this saw should be shaped like the star's claw, and the points of it should be shaped like the points of an astragale.
And unless you find that the heads of the joints are corroded, or the large mouth is wide open.
A shape of a smaller razor:
A shape of a lateral razor:
A different nicely made saw: let be done a curved shape of it and the keenness of it of iron, and the member of it of a dagger nicely made. A shape of it:
A shape of a razor having a concave:
A shape of a subtle razor:
A shape of another curved razor:
A shape of a small razor resembling a tentacle:
A shape of a smaller engraving tool:
A shape of another engraving tool resembling a saw, and its end is curved, and it is shown in multiple locations in the sculpture of the bones:
The shape of a saw which matches the cutout shape of those bones:
And its end is triangular with an acute point.
It is made of Indian iron, and its appearance is a covering that all the causes we have said of razors, engraving tools, and saws.
Of engraving ends and the locking of bones.
The ends can be cut off due to an intrinsic or extrinsic cause, or because you have treated that corruption with those medicines and the cure does not confer with you, or sometimes the corruption occurs away from that member which does not affect any cause, then cover that member within this water in order that it causes the patient's death or a malice which is better removed from that member.
And the sign of that member on which it occurs is that it becomes black within so that it burns the flesh and is burned away, or because it has been cut off close to that part which becomes black within so that the poyredura (corrosion) of that part comes within that member that affects all the body; and therefore you should cut off that member.
And resembling if it is a cause of corruption due to some poisonous causes then also with scorpion, or a snake, or an adder, and in similar way.
And if the corruption or injury is at the end of it, then you cut off that end and do not give space for the corruption to enter the body.
And resembling if it affects the whole body, then you cut off that part from which the corruption arises or has spread to the entire arm.
And if not, then cut off that arm at the joint.
And if it is a different corruption and it surrounds the joint, then that member will die; and the amount of virtue in order to cure this different cause is quantity.
And resembling when corruption arises in one part of the foot, then you cut off that part within one of the toes.
And if it takes place at the heel of the foot, then you cut off all the foot. Maybe if it is in between the legs, then you cut off the crotch at the joint of the legs.
And if the corruption has already spread to the heel, then there is only one option, which is to put the patient to death.
The way of cutting off the member or sawing it is that you strengthen the joint at the end where you want to cut, and make another joint on the spot, and extend the ministering joint on the spots, and extend the other joint on them; and you separate the flesh that is between two joints, and cut all of it; and that be cut or sawed.
And if it is stopped by a strip of linen from all the spots so that it does not touch the spot, and brings the patient' injury into order and the poultice cold; and
Maybe if it occurs during work, then you cauterize the spot with care or pour some dust onto it and tighten it up; and then return to your medication as soon as possible.
And then cut off the infected member with a convenient joint, and cure that within so that it is healed.
And I tell you that in an old man's foot, this mistake that I and you had forgotten, which is that he has come to him black by the heat of fire;
And that corruption first occurred in his toe within so that it tends all the foot.
And then that man prepared himself for this second time more than the first cause causes him to go to that member with the speed of fire that burns him with pain and the burning up of his own flesh, and he cuts off that foot at the joint, and it is healed.
Long time it happened to him that member of the body that causes corruption in the toe of the hand.
And then I ran to him, and so I pierced the excess fluid from his body with care that I had placed on his body for his cure, by the improvement of his body; and the excess fluid did not cause any reaction, and it began to go into another part within the body.
And he called me to cut off his body, and I did not want to make any hope that the excess fluid would cause a reaction, but I preferred to cut off his body, for the virtue of the patient' death was over sacrifice.
And then he departed from me, and he returned to his own country, and I made him prepare himself and cut off all of his body, and it was healed.
And I have not added to this narrative but that it may be an assistant over him who is affected by this malady, and that it may serve as an example for others in order that they should know how to treat this malady.
Of medicine with its quality and the application of poultices.
When it occurs in the middle of large bones and the space of the abscess is prolonged within so that it forms a collection of pus, then cut it open and perforate it, and drain it out with care; and when it comes out, bind it up tightly as if it were a bandage, and do not let it spread to the bone or to the nerves or joints, it is called a sinus, and is not named as a fistula.
Maybe if the space is prolonged within so that it leads to corruption in some member, then it is called a fistula and not called zookem.
And the cure of it is that you cut off all of that abscess as if it were rolled up, and especially when it is softened and done with care so that it does not stick to the spot because of its corruption.
Maybe if you hope that the abscess will adhere and that that corruption has not occurred through successive cause, then in that abscess has opened up a hole from the front, then treat that with poultices.
And that is what you consider to be a sinus, and if it is large, and the odor of it is unpleasant, then treat it with an Egyptian medicine consisting of oil and vinegar and honey receving parts in equal amounts, and let them be applied to a bandage, and bound to the fire so that the medicine boils and penetrates to the inside.
And now you take from him the water that is necessary and dissolve it with honey; and you cloister him at noon, and strengthen his orifices, and leave the medicine with him for two hours.
And now remove that with waste; and make water for so many days within that it purifies the sinus and restores the discharge.
And some times the cloister is made with ash water, when you do not have this remedy at hand; and it is because you take the ashes of wine, and place them on the water; and now add that to it and cloister him within so that you swear that the sinus will be healed.
And if the patient does not tolerate the Egyptian medicine or ash water, then he is cloistered with water and honey and it is mixed with three parts of licorice, and he is cloistered with wine and honey mixed, for by the property of honey that it purifies and washes, and the wine binds to the sinus, and most when there is an excess of dryness and dryness.
And when you have made water a few times and are satisfied that the sinus is healed, then he is cloistered with water that makes the flesh come out on it.
And it is because you take of the ointment of daphnicum and dissolve that with rosin oil and wine; or that you cloister him with some medicines and ointments that have the properties that I have already written in the treatise on ointments.
And if the orifices of the sinus are tight in which the tube of the cloister does not enter, then you widen it little by little, and put a few wrapped in Egyptian ointment or in basil ointment within so that it is widened.
And apparently if the orifices are large, then you add sutures to the lips and leave the quantity in which the cloister is added.
And if the orifice from which the vein flows is raised at the top of its leg, then dry that place with a poultice in it so that the vein runs inside, for when the vein is constricted in the sinus, the flesh becomes engorged in it.
And if it is not possible to dry the sinus within according to the shape of the leg as you wish, then you perforate it that you prepare the member for which the vein runs smoothly according to what you wear and not being held back by any cause of the vein.
And that which is on the orifice of the sinus, which you restore every hour so that it comes out water that is adjusted in it from the leg. And so that you know if the water that runs from the leg is much or little, or is it digested or not digested.
And you consider the place of that sinus, if the patient feels pain there or not, and if it is in apoplexia.
And when your medicine is prolonged in such a way, and you see the matter that is adhering to the orifice of the sinus has already become attached, or takes possession of it, then every three days, and when you move the napkin, change the ointment.
May you not despair of the adhesion to it, for the cure takes possession, because such men are there who in generations of flesh have had this in their lungs, and such men are they who do not possess it.
And if the sinus has had many days of indigestion of the leg, then you know that the sinus is not attached; and if the adhesion of the sinus is prolonged, then adjust the medicines in a state of drying out of the medicines, and if they are moist in their substance and in their virtue, they are dried up with ointment of daphnicum when there is an excess of addiction of tar.
And the last of these remedies is that you take of ointment of daphnicum and dissolve it in rosin oil, and be about him with wine of antispasmodic in its substance, and use that, and employ it.
And this already seems in that action when there is no leg, ointment of daphnicum, honey when it is hot within so that it thickens, and use that; or you take mirra and allantoin and mix them, and cut the whole down and powder over a napkin and tighten it on the sinus; and line the honey which has been heated inside so that it thickens, and powder over a napkin and tighten.
And some times you administer to him the long herb of the sky and cut it from the celestial lily and flour of erbs and centaurea, and use those simple or adjust them, and mix those and pass them through a sieve and powder over the honey which I have repeated; and use that.
And if the sinus is prolonged, and it is not healed by this cure, then you know that the corruption is in its head, and has already been investigated in the bones or in the other hard members or at the joints; then you treat it with a fistular cure, thus: when above is dit.
Of Cure of paretic and fingernail rubbed and cut and incising the finger added to and section.
Paretic is an apoplexia that leaves the nail of the toe of the hand or foot, and greatly weakens the others, and when it is prolonged and its cure is long in coming, or is a cauterized apoplexia, or is corrupted, and a leg runs within so as to corrode the nail root, and greatly corrupts all of it, and greatly perverts the color of it.
And so when you have that water which I have said in the division and do not agree with your cure, then cover that which is excessive of the nail root and cauterize the wound; for cauterization is beneficial in wounds.
May the bone be sound and the nail healthy, and the additions of the nail have already compromised the flesh to the joints, and they begin to hurt and cut them off, then cover those with a small amount of the medicine that burns and corrupts within so that it is all burned; and treat that with ointment within so that it is healed.
May the corruption already have entered into the bone, then cover that bone and extract it, for no time is healed when it is in the bone corrupted.
And if the corruption and the corruption have gone into the finger, then you cut it according to which it is measured, and treat that within so that it is healed.
May the nail be pierced or cut, and if it causes a violent pain in it, then you draw blood from him at the beginning, and you dry the nail with a sharp knife through a transverse section above it, and be careful that the section does not reach the flesh that is under the nail, for you will cause pain to the patient that is excessive; and treat that place with water that causes pain.
Here comes the first sentence to translate. Do not add any comments, like "here is the translation", just reply with the guessed translation and nothing else:
Some are born at the root of a joint, or in some nuts of the described fruit. May who is born in some of the nuts described above is not affected, but those who are born in joints are very much affected.
And of those who are born carnose, the section is light, and it is that you cut deep with a sharp scalpel at the root of this fruit.
May who is born in the root of a joint, the cure is difficult; and therefore you should keep away from its removal.
May who is born in the described fruit, cover that you cut its flesh at the beginning with a rounded incision into the bone, and then close with one of those convenient nails, and then cure it within to make it well.
The consolidation that happens in the described fruit between visible threads or by birth of a man who is born there, or by consolidation of plague or by burning with fire, or by similar means, then dry that consolidation within so that those threads return to their natural form.
Then place between them a thin leaf of lead so that they are not consolidated too quickly, and separate them or place a leaf between them according to how long it takes for consolidation to occur.
And if consolidation happens in some of the described fruit on the palm, then dry that consolidation according to how it is prepared and fit it to the shape of the member.
Of the removal of four times, there are varicose veins.
The above text describes varicose veins, which are thick veins filled with excess fluid that appears in the parts of the body, especially in the legs, and more commonly in the legs of travelers, workers, and those who stand for long periods.
Then you administer a strong poultice on the body of black cholera with frequent bloodletting; and then draw blood from the patient's basilar vein.
May the cure of them by two methods: one is that it be cut and blood drawn from it; and the other method is that it be raised and all blood drawn therefrom.
The section of them by this method: immerse at the beginning the foot to water tail moving that black blood is resolved, which is fermenting from the foot; and then tighten the foot of the patient at the start of a loose sock within, and then dry the vein in one place, or two, or three with wide sections, and then raise the black blood up to the patient' side away from the sock at the start of the joints within so that the quantity is exhausted that you want and which tolerates the virtue of the malady.
Then dry it and order him to abstain from the foods that cause black cholera.
Then repeat the cure by bloodletting when the veins are filled with blood, and then ask the patient.
May the elevation of them by this method: you who rasps the foot of the patient, if it is dry there, and then dip it in water tail moving that it hardens and the veins are inflamed; or that it exercises much exercise, if bath is not to your presence, within so that the member is cut.
Then dry the vein in the right of the vein by section along its length or at the back of it you cut from the front, or at the top of it you sever it.
Then open the vein with sharp nails and cut the vein completely within so that it appears at the sight, and it is necessary for that blood to change color.
And then you will know if that blood changes color.
Then hang it up and suspend it so that it is raised and taken away from the vein, and then hang it with an ounce of gold.
Then dry another section near that section by three threads, and then sever the vein from the top of the blood vessel within so that it appears.
Then raise that one and cut it in the back section you sever it from the top of the blood vessel within so that it is exhausted by the first section; and then remove that one from the second section it has been cut, and then remove that one from the part where it appears to be lifted up.
Then make water come out of that section that is highest or further away from all sections, within so that everything is exhausted; and then cut it.
And if you do not obey me in cutting it and raising it up, then put a double sharp needle and tie that one; or turn it on itself and cut it, or turn it around it all within so that it is tied up. Then keep in mind that it is not cut; for if it is cut, it will be difficult for you to raise that one up, and it has come back on the patient by that wound.
Then when you have removed all of it outside, then place over the location of the plague the water that is submerged in vinegar and oil that is not rosy, and cure it within so that it is healed.
And if the wine has been contracted without having rectitude according to what we have said, then you should cut it across all sections of that tortuosity and the locations of its wrapping; and then suspend that one with sharp nails within so that you lift it up completely.
Then keep in mind that you should not cut the vein and that you do not wound that one, because it is difficult for you to lift it up; and then use your caution with it.
Shape of the incision made by the vinegar:
Is not to him accustom the needle in that way or is of an acute extremity so as not to wound the vein; and it is of great flexibility of gold, because if it was thin, it would cut the vein by its thinness; having such a surplus of thickness, then do it.
Of the extraction of a vein from the leg.
This vein is generated in the legs on tail-like feet so as not to get caught up in the sand of Arabic lands and in dry, arid lands with little texture and where there is no grass or sand.
And it is very much generated in other parts of the body besides the legs.
The growth of it is the decay that comes from within the foot so as to cut off the foot, and then draw blood from it; and then ask the patient to drink a mixture of poisonous snake, scorpion, and worm generated between the foot and the flesh.
Then the sign of the arrival of this vein is a violent inflammation in the leg, and then it swells; and then the vein comes out of that swelling which resembles the root of a plant.
And then when you come to the end of it, then wrap yourself in a piece of lead from which its weight is two dragons, and do not remove it from the chest.
Then in many cases when you see any cause outside the parts, wrap water in lead and then cut it. Then if it is prolonged, then you cut one section of the leg and wrap it in rawhide; and do not cut that one from the root so that it does not contract and enter into the flesh and cause a pustule and a sore in the part and a bad ulcer.
So that it may be treated gently and extracted little by little, until it is completely removed from the back of him, and does not cause any obstruction in the body.
And of this vein, some men have had it in their length of 20 palms and beyond; and now it has come to me that I should extract one of 20 palms.
And if it is incised at the time of its medication, then insert the hook into the hole of him and pierce that with a long hole through the body, so that all that is in the matter be evacuated, and administer putrefaction of the place for some days with medicines; and then cure that with the treatment of boils.
And this vein sometimes has some bumps, and mostly when it appears at the junction of the foot or in the foot, and comes out from each bump;
So then heal that one as I said above, in the division and with water that is used above.
From the section on worms generated under the skin and it is called bovine disease.
This disease is called in some countries bovine disease because these worms live inside the bowels and are very few; that which is born between the grape and the meat, goes through all the body and causes pain to the animal, breaking the bowels and causing them to come out.
And the generation of him is by putrefaction of some fluids, so that worms and snakes and earthworms and roundworms are generated in the belly.
And it is feared for the malignity of him, because when he goes through the body and ascends to the head, and comes out at the mouth, then a great fever is raised in him and destroys the mouth; and there are bumps generated inside.
And so when you want to heal it and extract him, then do not do it unless you have your own walk and appearance of him at the ready, and then cover that one who is above him with a dry cloth and pull him out.
And if it has sunk into the flesh and you do not notice it, then pause cauterization on the place where it is located, and the main cause that is feared is the corruption of him; so that it corrupts the flesh in that way.
But if you see that animal come out at the throat near the belly, then strangle him with a strong constriction, and then dry him off, and extract him; and let the patient use medicine to evacuate dirty fluids, and keep away from foods that generate corruption.
From the section on disease of the Nafir.
This disease is called in our language Nafir, and it is a pain that attacks some members, and then changes from one member to another.
And I have already seen that second thing, which I recommend to you. And I was called to a sick woman in a village, and saw his arm swelling and discovering a small swelling in the vein of the arm, and because it was breaking for an hour, I saw that swelling go away with him, little by little; so as if it were living silver running from place to place.
And then he sat down in the pain of that place and it stuck there in the muscle, and then came out little by little for an hour.
Then it correks itself in the other side of the body until it reaches the other arm.
And then I was told by me that it twists itself all over the body, according to the second thing that I saw; and it marvelled me greatly at the change of him and the speed from one member to another. And I have already seen those bumps before in my hand, according to that way, but I have never seen the change of members as it is done now. But I did not see this in the hands of the woman.
And you did not think that it was in the woman because she is of the sex that does not have hair on the body; and in this way, the change of her appears like wind.
And it is necessary that you not appear according to this retro-curation in those who are delicious and have soft skin with veined legs.
And when you want to heal him, and the patient feels pain in that way, then do not appear at the throat as I said before; strangle him a little and dry him off where he is being extracted; and stop that wind with cauterization of the place.
But if you do not see the bumps in the hands, then heal him with the extraction of the body and with water that expels wind; and take those pills made from rotting animals and those similar to them.
From the extraction of arrows.
Arrows are different according to their shape, and according to the places of the body where they lodge, because their shape is varied: some have large tips, others small, others concave, others round; and those that have three angles, and those that have tongues; and those that are flat.
And of the necks is when the arrow enters through them and pierces the bones, and comes out of the back where it is about to come out, because it occurs with great violence; and scotomatous, vertigo, and stiffness in the hands, and inflammation and stiffness of the tongue, and spasms, and confusion of thought, and colicky vomiting, and a strong pain that causes the speech to be lost, and white discharge from it similar to pus, and a similar appearance to the wetness of the flesh.
So if you see these things in the neck, then do not interrupt the treatment or the extraction of the arrow; unless it comes out completely.
But if the arrow enters into the heart and is near the left armpit, and feels a hard thing in it that does not move easily, and does not see a hole; and sudden coldness of the extremities, and a grating sound, and fainting; and then you know that death has come.
And the neck when the arrow has hit the lung and seems to emit foam from the plague, and the vessels that are near it and the color of the patient changes, and he breathes hard and asks for fresh air.
And if the arrow enters into the cloth on the foot and the pain is near the toes, and it feels a great pain with great violence and sighing, and does not feel any sense in all the members of the body.
And if the arrow enters into the stomach, then there is a great pain with no movement in it, and there is a great indigestion of food.
And if the arrow enters into the belly and stays in it, then there is a cut of the skin or a budel that comes out, and there is no hope for the treatment of this arrow by extraction from the belly.
And if the arrow goes into the bladder, and urine flows outside, and causes some harm to the outside parts, then the pain on the patient's thighs is very strong; you should know that this is deadly.
The other members, when it is the chest, the neck, the throat, and the shoulders, and assistants, and the spines of the back, and the loins, and the hip, and the thigh, and the leg, and their equivalents are saved according to the most effective measures when the arrow does not hit a vein or an artery, and is not a poisonous arrow.
And I recommend that you see if these arrows exist; so that knowledge of their treatment can be obtained quickly.
This is the case when a man has an arrow in his eye's lacrimal gland at the root of his nose; and I extracted it from him on another side, I cut off his earlobe, and it was healed, and nothing happened to his eye.
And I extracted another arrow from a Jew which had gone into his ear' at the side of his cheek; I cut off his eyelid, and then the arrow was hidden; and it was not a small arrow, but one of the sharp arrows of the Turks, with a lion's head on it, and there were no ears.
And he is the Jew; and nothing happened to his eye for bad luck.
And I extracted another arrow from a Christian which had gone into his throat; and it was an Arabic arrow, and there were no ears; then I inserted two guide-strings between the arrow and the neck of the man; already it was completely submerged in his throat; then I removed the arrow with care, and healed him.
And I extracted another arrow from a man which had gone into his belly; he thought that he would die from it; and then, because it did not change for three days, despite the measures taken, I inserted an instrument between the arrow and his body, and healed him, and nothing happened to him for bad luck.
And I saw another man in whom an arrow had gone into his buttocks; the plague settled on him; and then, after ten years, the arrow went into the space between his buttocks and legs.
And I saw a woman in whom an arrow had gone into her belly; the plague settled inside her; and it did not change the natural order of things in any way; and the woman was not affected by it in any of her natural functions.
And I saw another man in whom an arrow had gone into his face; the plague settled and broke out; it did not cause any great pain, but looked like this.
And I extracted the arrow from the prince of the king which had gone into his nose' side; it had already fallen to the right side a little, and the whole arrow was hidden.
And I was called to heal him at the place where the arrow entered within three days.
And then I removed the plague of the arrow from his right side; and then I inquired cautiously about it; and he did not feel that; but then he felt a prick on the right ear, and then he realised that this was caused by the point of the arrow.
And I applied an ointment to the place with a plastron; it is beneficial and digestive, and I declared to myself that this place would show me where the arrow was; so that it would dry up on it.
And the place did not become infected with bad luck because I had obtained that place; and I continued to apply the ointment on it for many days, and nothing happened; but the plague settled in between those days, until one day he felt the arrow come out from his nose; and he brought it to me.
And then I applied a strong, corrosive medicine to the plague for many days, until one day it was dried up; and at the trial I tasted that, and removed the point of the arrow which had adhered to the stick.
And then I applied medicine to the plague with strong, corrosive treatment within that time, until the point of the arrow appeared clearly to me; and then it passed from me by water for the space of four months.
And then the plague grew worse, and I approached it with scissors, and removed it, and did not give it to anyone; but then, at the end of the chapter, I extracted that plague; and I restored that plague.
And the judges decided that the cartilage of his nose had not been restored; and I restored it, and the plague settled, and healed him completely, without any bad effect.
And I recommend to you the quality of extracting some arrows; so that it stops on its own; and this is not done because the parts of this art and the definitions of those are not understood in writing or by understanding.
And the wise men know a little about it; and they do so by experience when such things happen; and they do new operations and use new instruments for removing the foreign causes of the art when they occur.
And I say that arrows do not come out of the members in which they are stuck, but only by two ways: either because of the attraction of the place where they enter; or because of the opposite force.
And that which comes out by way of the place is attracted, or is an arrow moving in a fleshly place, and is thrown and comes out.
If you do not obey the hour when it is needed; then, after three days, leave it alone for a while; until you find meat that is near to it, and free from attraction towards it, and its exit.
And apparently if it is stuck in bones and you do not obey me by waiting; then leave it alone for a few days, and every day return to attracting and moistening it, and it will be thrown out.
If you do not obey me by waiting; then leave it alone for a few days, and if the arrow is stuck in any bone in any part completely, and its location has changed because of the movement of the arrow, then extract it with a sharp instrument.
But if the arrow is already stuck in its place, and it hurts when you touch it; then you will ask about that to yourself, and if you feel that pain; then you will throw that with some instruments for removing it.
And if you cannot handle it because of the plague's constriction and its length, and there is neither bone nor nerve nor vein; then you will handle the plague until it is increased, so that you can extract the arrow.
And if he has his ears covered, then you should free the flesh from all sides with all the instruments you can; and be careful about it, if not in avoiding the flesh in the fracture of the ears and in twisting those within that they become heavy.
And when you administer the extraction of the arrow in any place where it is, then you should use your hand with forceps at all times within that it does not get heavy; and carefully from behind to the last detail so that the arrow does not break and that it is made with great difficulty from it and from that extraction.
And if you cannot do that with your hand, then leave it for a few days within that the cuts that are in the circulation of it heal, and then repeat it when they are healed. Or if you have pain from blood flow, then administer the water that we have said about cure in its chapter.
And keep your virtue of cutting veins or nerves, or strings, and administer instruments in all possible ways from your ability to avoid the arrow; and do so with ease and calmness and laziness and caution and you will be advised and told.
And then make the arrow go against that the patient is according to the figure according to which you should place the arrow in him, because it is more helpful. Or if this is not possible for you, then administer the water that is possible for you according to figures.
Or if the arrows that are discharged contrary to the other part, or if you have already broken one of the parts from outside by hitting it with your hand on the corresponding cord and then moving it away; then cut according to the quantity in which the forceps take hold; and then throw it away, because it is made lightly at most.
Or if it is stuck in the bone, then you should twist your hand according to the opposite direction within that the arrow presses on the bone, and make it bigger; and then extract it.
Or if not, leave it for a few days, and then repeat it while burning.
And if the tip of the arrow is in that place, then you should push it into him.
Or if the tip is fallen and you want to administer an impact, then insert it, if it is deaf, into the cavity of the arrow with a pointed instrument; and then push it into him.
Or if the arrow is hollow, then you should push it with a strong instrument into that place, because the arrow is relieved by that.
And if the arrow is poisoned, then you should cut all the flesh where it is, if this is possible for you; and then heal it with water that it heals.
And if the arrow has gone into the foot, or into the belly, or into the bladder, or into the ribcage, and it is close so that you touch that place with your hand, then cut it off; and when you cut it off, keep your virtue of cutting veins or nerves, and extract it, and if it causes disease, then heal it until it is healed.
Form of forceps that the arrows are shot:
If the ends of your pliers have a hook, which they make with a knife when they grab onto the arrow, so that they do not let it go.
And of those are made special threads, big, small, and thin, according to the quantity of the size of the arrow and its weakness, and the width of the wound, and the contraction of it.
with a click so that the arrow is pushed into him inside the hollow arrow, and it is driven into it.
Of bloodletting by veins.
Veins of bloodletting from which the blood used to be taken from. of those from which the blood is drawn in the head. and these are the veins that are pulsating: those in the temples, those in the cheeks, and those behind the ears; and this vein is prepared at the middle of the forehead, and this vein is in the end of the nose; and these two strings are on the jaw; and these two veins are on the lips on the right side; and these two veins are on the left side of the lip; and - these are the veins that are called algidic -; and these two veins are behind the tongue. Or if they are taken from the arms, it is five. Or if they are taken from the legs, it is five. Because one of those is a cephalic vein, and it is called the wild lat, and the people call "vein of the head", and it is deaf, and it is a minor vein, and it is composed of a branch of the basilica, and another branch of the cephalic; and they name that one the people's "vein of all the body", and basilica is the vein that is stopped in the domestic lat, and it is called "citillar", and they call that one the vulgar "vein of the belly"; and veins from the arm, which is stopped above the fire, and this is the vein that is extracted from it, and it is the one that appears clearly on the pout with a manifest appearance; and the save, and it is the vein that is between the two little auricles and it has two branches.
And in the foot and chest there are three veins: the one of those is that it is on the left side of the curvature of the denolh of the wild lat; and the second is the sciatic vein, and its place is on the right side of the curvature of the denolh of the domestic lat; and the third vein is sophena, and its place is on the left side of the chest's curvature. And in the chest there are other veins that resemble those.
The juveant of the veins that run to the ears is caused by chronic bronchitis, emphysema and scrofula, and from ancient head wounds.
And the quality of bleeding from those is according to whether you cut his hair or not: it is that his hair be shaved at the back of the head, and the scalp be fomented with hot cloths; then bring the patient around to their side where both veins are close together behind the ears in two places, which are buried in the hair; and examine those carefully. If you feel the pulse of those two places, there is no need for any further examination.
Then bring the scythe, and it is that which is at fault, and put your hand below the vein in the socket where the blood comes out; Then raise your hand up to the vein and socket where the blood goes out, and cut the vein with a sharp knife. And the length of the cut is the amount of two dice or more of water; and make a thread with the needle as long as you wish it to be.
Then tighten the knot, and let it lie there until it is healed.
And this has been preceded in the beginning of the book with the cut and cauterization.
More than the two veins that are cut in the bloodletting is due to ancient emulsion, and the sudden bad smell and frequent headaches, and the blood flowing out from the nose.
And the quality of bloodletting from those is according to whether I cut his hair: it is that he has his hair shaved at the back of his head, and that you see the pulse from his feet clearly without any difficulty; then you will be able to examine those.
Then bring the socket up above the vein where it goes out at the tip, and insert it into the vein with a sharp knife; then bring the vein up in its place; and cut those other two veins as well; and make the blood flow according to your need.
Then take off the patient's coat, and place his feet on the ground; then bring the knee of the leg over the vein for an hour; then tighten that knot, and let it lie there until it is healed.
And this has been preceded with the memory of them, and of those the cut and the cauterization in the beginning of the book.
And the bloodletting from the vein in the forehead is due to ancient headaches, emulsion and bad smells from the mouth; and from the head.
And the quality of bloodletting from him is according to whether I cut his hair: it is that he has his hair shaved at the back of the head, and the scalp be fomented with hot cloths; then bring the patient around to their side where both veins are close together behind the ears in two places, which are buried in the hair;
Then put the point of the instrument on the vein at the top, and pierce it with a sharp knife or other means in the manner of your choice, and let the blood flow as much as you wish; then take off the patient' head and tighten that knot, and let it lie until it is healed.
And some people say that the bloodletting is late, but it is not true that this bloodletting is of extreme importance compared with the others; for the bone is soft and weak, and if this bloodletting were to be too strong, then the patient' life would be in danger.
More than the two veins that run down to the eyes are due to the patient' tears for pain and swelling of the eye sockets; and to ancient head wounds.
And the quality of bloodletting is that the patient has his hair shaved at the back of the head, and those are cut with a sharp knife; then bring the patient around to your side.
And let the bloodletting be according to the transverse line at short length, for in this place there is no flesh; and if the bloodletting is gentle, then the strength of it is great.
Then let the blood flow as much as you need; then tighten those knots, and then release them.
More than the bloodletting from the nose is due to fierce fever and frequent headaches; and to ancient head wounds, and more so when they are old.
And the quality of bloodletting from him is that he has his hair shaved at the back of his head; then bring your left hand to his nose and cut it gently with a sharp knife; then let the blood flow as soon as you can.
Note that you finish your work on the bloodletting little by little and let the blood flow according to your need; then tighten it again for a moment, because it will be unfastened.
More than the bloodletting from two veins that are cut in constriction is due to old age, and to the beginning of leprosy, and to sudden bad smells; and to frequent headaches and painful sores that corrode.
And the quality of bloodletting from those is that the patient has his hair shaved at the back of the head, and the scalp be fomented with hot cloths; then bring the patient around to their side where both veins are close together behind the ears in two places; and the scalp be placed on a table.
Then cut the vein with a long, gentle bloodletting; then let the blood flow according to the time or more water as needed; and do the same for the other vein.
Then take off the knots and tighten those two veins slightly so that the patient does not choke; then let them lie inside for seven days because the plague is cured.
And the bloodletting from these veins is due to old age, and to small boils and pustules in the mouth, and corruption of the gums and painful sores and cracks; and to bad sores that are in the nose and on the sides.
And the quality of bloodletting from those is that you cut his hair in front of you; then put your hand on his back, and bring the scalp around to the side where both veins are close together behind the ears; and examine those two veins carefully; and make one incision with a sharp knife for each vein.
Then if you are in doubt, leave those; and cut the one that is at fault, and examine those with bad pus on them.
And make the appearance of those two veins that are behind the lips similar.
More than two veins that are behind the tongue is due to bloodletting from the forehead because of old age, and to ancient headaches; and to ancient head wounds.
And the quality of bloodletting from those veins is that you bring your hand to the back of the patient' mouth, and lift up his tongue; then examine on the one side where the vein is close to the tongue, and on the other side where it is far away; and observe the color of each one as it turns darker.
Then cut either one; and be careful not to finish your work on the bloodletting of those, for those are arteries.
And those veins that are cut in the neck are those that run through all men, and the bloodletting from them is done according to two ways; or put them on sharp knives with slow cutting; or cut them with a pointed knife, and if they do not bleed, then use this method.
is that of opening the concave veins filled with blood and proceeding from thick vessels, and to those which contain heavy blood.
And this phlebotomy is of lesser latency and extreme subtlety of extremities, and is suited to phlebotomy of veins that contain subtle citric blood.
May the improvement of the phlebotomy of the basilic vein, which is one of three veins: take away the blood from the gut and the colon, and from there that goes to the feet and the legs.
And it is to be remembered by the phlebotomist, when he performs that phlebotomy, that he keep back and be careful there, for he may miss the vein and if he makes a mistake in the puncture of the phlebotomy, he will injure the artery and cause bleeding, so that it is not convenient to perform that phlebotomy with a pointed cautery.
And if the basilic does not appear by clear sign, then know that you have missed it and change to another, or look for a little vein; or phlebotomize in the place where the arm ends, for that is clear; and dry up that with an annesthesis.
May if you wish to perform a phlebotomy on the arm, then know that in front of the strictness of the arm where you touch the place within which you know the place of the wrist, and approach over it; and approach the arm and dry up the vein with an annesthesis as mentioned above; and be careful that the percussion is done for a certain distance from the place of the artery.
And when you press with strength the ligament, it inflates in the place where you have pressed over it; then that inflation is an inflation of the artery, and so let it go.
And if the blood flows in phlebotomy as the blood of a child and that blood is thin, then know that it is the blood of the artery; and put down and pause the knot for a long time; and approach the knot, and if the blood is cut off (for you see that it is cut off), then tighten the arm and let it go.
And look to the patient for any feverishness of the body, and be careful of that and do not hurt it for a few days within which it is healed.
May if the blood is not cut off, and you see that you must give medicine to water, then know that you should make a cut on the artery, if it appears to you; for the end of it is contracted, and the blood is cut off; or take some scorser (a type of herb) and squeeze it, and extract the liquid, and put one half and tighten that over the place of the vein with the strictness of the ligament and within the powder within another day.
And then if the blood is cut off, it is fine; and if not, then heal that with water from which the feverishness of the place of the powder that cuts off the blood flow is remembered.
And the cutting off of the blood from him is difficult in different arrangements because of the small place of the pulse and the possibility of the ligature of the arm.
May the phlebotomy of the black vein is very helpful in extracting the blood from the superior part of the head and leaving it to the body; for it is composed of veins from the basilic and cephalic branches, as mentioned above.
And if the phlebotomist is careful in the phlebotomy of that arm, for it is a nerve; and if he makes a mistake in the puncture of the phlebotomy and injures the nerve, it will cause stupor, and the healing of him is difficult to do completely, and even if he gets better it is not good for long; And this nerve appears with the pulse. And if it is hidden from some people and it is subtle and does not show itself, then know that you have stopped the phlebotomy at which point you are performing the phlebotomy with an annesthesis, and avoid the nerve with your grasp.
And if the vein is between two nerves, then you should cut the vein according to its length.
The improvement of phlebotomy of the cephalic vein is that it draws the blood from the head and keeps the patient calm.
And in this especially, if you wish the phlebotomy to be performed with a phlebotomy scissor or with a phlebotomy needle; for it is the safest of all veins, for it does not leave the artery nor the nerves.
But strong pain is caused when phlebotomy is done in the first percussion; it is not noticed in this place.
The first of it is that you must know that phlebotomy is not administered unless in the preservation of health and with the hope of avoiding accidents, and that it be done at the beginning of spring, at the start of summer, and close to winter, when it appears that it is coming out.
And it should be performed on the third day or at the earliest time of three hours after the day has passed.
But phlebotomy that is administered causes convenience and necessity to water, or of a new day or of the same day, at any time and at all times.
And it is known that the heart does not pump for 12 years and women should not be phlebotomized if they have passed the age of 60.
And if anyone wishes to be phlebotomized in any way, know that you should specify the budels before phlebotomy with a leathern cord, if they have a fende retentive, so that the veins do not draw the superfluity during the phlebotomy of the budels, which are useless, and that they do not harm the main members.
And do not phlebotomize the patients who are nauseous and have a tendency to vomit or have stomach pain or multiple pains, or those that cause diarrhea or work or sleep for meals or vigils or any other reason that destroys virtue, either in the body or in animals.
And you should consider the subtlety of humors before him if the blood is thick, with food and drinks, and with medicines if he can to water.
And enter into a bath if any reason does not prohibit it, or exercise for some exercise so that the blood is subtilized.
And pause the phlebotomy of him in the feet of the day, which is the hour of third, as mentioned above.
And know that the foot of him is to be preserved on this day from all animal accidents, as when there is anger, fear, or any other bodily accident, as when there is work and unnecessary hunger and sleep.
And on his seat let the causes of the problem be present in the use of which men usually take with aroma and odour, and balm and similar things according to the amount of possibility.
Then follow the flubber-maker on a cushion that is placed or that the cushion of the one who has to be flubbed is put;
And bring near his arms and rub them with the flubber-maker two or three times; and bring near the ligaments and wrap them in cloth two or three times.
And let it be a tight fit, because the tightness that is not fitted, or the tightness is too much, then prohibits the flow of the blood; or if it is too soft and prevents the body from being tied up.
Then bring near the tightness, and let him who has to be flubbed rub his hands together between them so that the veins are swollen, and are revealed to the touch.
Then bring near the flubber-maker unifies his hand with a little oil of an ancient remedy specifically; and bring near his free hand to the location of that vein, which you want the flubbing, so that the vein runs a little, and the percussion stops because the veins are those from which blood rushes out, so when you stop the flubber-maker on that one, it is discovered; and the flubber-maker does not tighten the vein, and if he tightens it, that vein is constricted.
Therefore, because of all these things that the flubber-maker should be stopped and solicited in each one.
Then stop the flubbing, maybe if the vein is caught in a loop, then do not; and if not, repeat this process somewhere else, or on top of it lightly, if the location is not marked.
And if the location is marked or the patient shudders, then let it rest for a day or two and do not tighten the ligaments, because it will hurt severely; nor will it enter the bath.
Then repeat the flubbing if it is needed.
And if the glimpse is small and the pain subtly occurs, and you are afraid that it will not occur in the quantity that you want, then repeat the flubbing at that spot according to the right position and adjust in the glimpse a little bit, and do it lightly before the location is marked, because the location is marked in some men's case very few glances.
Maybe if that one has already been marked, then do not repeat on it, because there is no excuse for you to have any cause; and place your hand over some part of the back, because it eases the body's pain. And this spot is better than others that ease the body's pain.
And apparently administer oil of the back in all flubbing when you want to stop the flow of blood from a vein because of the pain of the body, and make it a little sweet and taste like a nut when stopped on that location, because the pain of the body subsides and spins when it is thick.
And if in the location of the flubbing a great swelling occurs, because it happens in a loop, and mainly at that one which does not bleed but that loop, or on top of the glimpse of a little vein, and then bring it out, and pause over that sponge soaked with water and salt, lightly cut, and hold it for an hour, because it dissolves.
Then bring near the blood of the body from that vein according to him or from another vein.
And if it remains at that location for a few days any black or green color, then do not notice it; and if you want to, pause over that spot with some cause of aloe and myrrh dissolved, or some other cause of mint juice or calamus or similar.
And so the loops occur in the flubbing that is needed for a major flubbing from the base.
Therefore pause your hand on that one, and if you feel a softness or pain in the compression on that one, then that eminence is evil and bad; and then keep in mind that you stop over that spot with some cause of water that I have said, because a lot of blood will flow from the arterial vein.
And make an impression with that water in which it is tightened, so that the location remains firm, and then cure that one with another cure until it is healed.
Then take from the body as much of its strength and as much of its color as it has, and let it be above the body according to what is seen.
Because if the body is black, then let it rest and heal as much as possible, and if you make it thick, then let it rest and heal until it is soft, and if it is hot, then let it rest and cool down its heat.
Then if that one is full of blood and strong and has a need to extract the body from a loop, then increase the flubbing of the vein and make the flubbing wide.
And in that one which is hot, then do the opposite, and if you extract it in two loops, then make the loop tight.
And the best thing that is administered in vein flubbing is to cut it across, not to puncture.
And this way of flubbing saves the body from blood flow and nerve injury; it is more praiseworthy and useful than flubbing according to its length and width.
Then if you are used to fainting because of flubbing, then do it before the flubbing with a little bit of water in wine or simple oxymel cut; and extract from the body in three loops or four.
And if the body is cold and weak, then bring near to the flubbing a little bit of water in myrrh or honey flavored with spices so that it is warm, or in flavored water with aromas, or in scented water; and bring near a little spice for flavor.
And if fainting occurs because of flubbing, and it is caused by the flow of blood from a vein, then bring near to drink water and a little bit of honey-flavored water or warm water; and use aromatics in a little amount, and let the body be held with that hand.
And use the other causes that I have said in the division of fainting due to evacuation.
And who wants to avoid his arms and dissolve his pain according to the second loop, then do it with water, and its virtue is to drink, and drink little by little, so that it is in proportion to the strength of the water in the days that follow.
Maybe who wants to avoid his arms, and take away his pain according to the third loop, then do it with water, and its strength is strong, and bring near water after seven or nine hours from the first flubbing.
Maybe who wants to remove pain from his body and direct it in the opposite direction of that part, then do so on the second or third day.
Maybe that body in which pain is already there and it is severe and causes fever, then do so with water from the first or second day, and let the hand of the patient be placed on his wrist near the heart, so that he does not die in place of fainting, because it happens in loops when the doctor neglects and is ignorant.
And it is not when you want to release your arm and evacuate the pain according to the third loop, having already closed the orifice of the vein, and if it is difficult to extract the pain from that one, then press hard on it with vehemence and extend it slightly, because water is too bad.
Here is the translation of the provided text:
If the vein is swollen, then leave it alone and do not touch it until the swelling has gone down.
And if necessity forces you to evacuate the blood secondarily, and it is not an excuse, then leave it on that spot or in another arm in some other vein.
And the vein called “brace of the arm” is to be flebotenomated in place of the fistula or bazilica, when they are not blocked or closed, for it is made up of those.
And the quality of the fluabotomy of him is that the patient inserts his hand in cold water as long as the vein swells and the vein appears clearly.
Then strengthen it with a ligature of a narrow thread; and flebotomize it secondarily, not transversally or longitudinally, but according to its length.
And be the opening wide and be your fluabotomy with which you flebotomize it on the joint of the hand a little bit.
And if you prevent the flow of blood, then you should repeat to insert the hand in cold water and let the blood run into the water until you fulfill your need.
But if you are in the summer days, then you are excused from repeating to insert the hand in cold water, and the body is left in cold water during the winter.
And the fluabotomy of this vein is more safe than that of all the other veins, for it does not have a pulsating vein or nerve.
And the fluabotomy of the palm of the right hand is made in relation to the knuckles of the fingers.
And the quality of the fluabotomy of it is that you strengthen your hand with a thread or with your own hand, more than putting it in cold water, for when you put it in cold water, the vein swells and is clearly seen; and then flebotomize it transversely; and if you cut that, you will not see it flow.
And keep your hand away from fluabotomy, for it has the nerves of the bare skin denuded.
Then return the hand to cold water and let the blood run into it, for if you do not repeat to put it in cold water, the blood will coagulate at the opening of the vein, and the flow will be prevented.
And when you extract the blood according to the quantity of necessity, then place your hand over the vein with oil and salt so that it does not solidify tightly; and apparently it seems like you have done nothing.
But the improvement of the fluabotomy of the palm of the left hand is that it is in relation to the knuckles of the fingers.
And make a similar fluabotomy of him, as you have made of the other.
And the improvement of the vein of the head in fluabotomy is to the parting of the hair, as it is to the mother's parting, and the retention of the menses, and the parting of the skin and ulcers of the legs and thighs, and their resemblance to the parting of hair.
And the quality of the fluabotomy of him is that the patient inserts his head in cold water and makes a friction on it until the veins appear; and place it over the joint of the neck with a cord; and from the location of the vein, he cuts it apparently as soon as it comes out; and from that same, it branches out on the face of the neck.
And therefore fluabotomy the wide palm or leave the thigh apparently as soon as it comes out, for it is better and safer; and cut it apparently, for it is more beneficial.
And if you flebotomize it on the face of the neck, then guard yourself from the nerves that are under it on the face of the neck; and make your fluabotomy in this way, as if you want to cut it.
And let it be known.
But if you prevent the flow of blood; then return the head to cold water and let the blood run into it until it is evacuated.
And if the fluabotomizer makes a mistake in the first place, then repeat to make the fluabotomy a little bit, for the location is safe; and do not fear it, but guard yourself from the nerves as we have said.
And apparently make of the vein of the other hand, engaging it.
And of the sciatic vein, the location apparently as we have said is to cut the skin from the parting of the hair.
And the improvement of the fluabotomy of him is to the pain of the sciatic vein when it is caused by blood.
And the quality of the fluabotomy of him is that the patient enters into a bath, and hurriedly and firmly presses his hand from the lap of the leg within four fingers in one long and thin cord, for it does not appear otherwise than by water.
And therefore when it appears, then you should make the fluabotomy of it according to necessity and in the second way, for that is better; or cut it with a knife or cut it with a saw, for the location is safe.
And it is in the middle of men who are reduced; and if you feel that, and it does not appear to you from all, then make the fluabotomy of a part of him, and that which appears in both ears of the neck before the ear, and the ring finger.
And guard yourself from the nerves, and let the blood run in the quantity that you want.
Then release the tightness and place it over the location of the fluabotomy, tightening the location, for lightly it is healed.
Of windiness and of the qualities to use those.
Of windiness and of the quality to use those: for corns, or hair, or teeth.
And windiness is done according to two ways: one of them is cutting and extracting blood, and the other is windiness with cutting.
And this windiness that is done by cutting is according to two ways, for it is either hot or cold.
And the places of the body where windiness is administered by cutting and extracting blood are twelve, of which one is between the neck and the shoulders, and it is the last parting from the head; and a half of the throat under the jaw on the side of the mouth; and two spatulas; and two hammers; and two chisels; and two drills; and two nails.
And windiness does not extract the blood except from the small veins that are scattered in the flesh, and through it the virtue is not extracted by those veins, either by cutting for fluabotomy; nor does it cover that windiness is done by hot or cold in any malady caused by filling up the whole body until it is completely emptied.
But if necessity forces you to do windiness for a disease or continuously, then you repeat it at the beginning of the meal and at the end of it, and in its middle place, and whenever you want.
And so whenever in any of those causes, and especially if it is in the third or half-way point of the month, then I command that ventilation be done before it has passed two or three hours.
And the immediate relief from such ventilation at the nape is that when it presses down on the head and causes water to run down the throat; but also that it be promptly emptied from all of the body.
This ventilation is in place of cephalic phlebotomy.
It is not beneficial to use it on a person who has a complex mixture of diseases or a severe cough, as this can greatly harm them.
And in no way should one apply it to the elderly, nor to those who have severe illnesses or frequent pain.
But to the one who is already suffering from it, continued application of this is like causing forgetfulness; and I command that you tell the ventilation operator to pause his hand slightly from the area where they are applying it, out of fear of causing forgetfulness.
But ventilation with alcohol is in place of phlebotomy from the black vein and the basilic: but also causes asthma, contraction of air, and the splitting of the wind instrument, coughing, and hoarseness.
And if the ventilation with alcohol is slightly stopped, for when it is paused from one side, it weakens the body and the stomach.
And ventilation with ale brings on accidental pain in the head and eye pain, as well as headache, toothache, and migration of disease; it is in place of phlebotomy from the basilic.
And I command that you tell the ventilation operator not to press too hard on the skin so as not to wound the arteries and cause sudden flows of blood.
And ventilation from one side brings on alcohol in the mouth, and corruption of the gums, and similar symptoms to those that occur in the mouth due to something else; it is in place of phlebotomy from elsewhere that it occurs on the two lips.
But ventilation that is applied to the two spatulas brings on caphitan, which is caused by the expansion of heat.
And ventilation from the two inner openings of the mouth brings on quick relief from phlebotomy from three veins, unless it is from the basilic, black, or cerebral veins, for that one draws blood from all those veins more easily than from the flesh; and those smaller veins from the other larger ones so that the attraction reaches the three veins.
And I command that you tell the ventilation operator not to cut too much skin off, for the location is bare of flesh, and leaves the nerves and arteries exposed.
And this ventilation is applied to the anus and brings on hemorrhoids of the buttocks and ulcers from one side.
And I command that you make a strong ventilation, and that it be gentle, for the location is able to bear strong division; and strong ventilation with sharp cuts, rather than cutting with a scalpel.
But very small windings from the legs bring about sudden pain throughout the body, and cause old headaches and of the mother, and of the bladder; and they provoke menstruation, and cause both-and-bustle and aching of the joints. And it is in place of phlebotomy from two different veins, as well as from a large vein and an arc of veins, and from two cavities.
However, it greatly weakens the whole body, and causes syncope in young men.
And of the windings that cause aching in the legs is proportionate to the relief brought by ventilation from two legs.
And the quality of the position of the windings is that you pause the ventilation at the beginning to see and drain through rapid purification, and do not prolong the position of the windings; rather, pause them gently, remain in them carefully, and let the humors come to their place by gradual arrival. And do not repeat this several times, and continue within until you see the location turn red and swell and the appearance of the pain of stabbing;
Then scrape off and repeat the purification little by little, and carefully consider the disposition of the body.
For a person with tender skin is prone to wounds, you should scrape off once and not more, so that the location is not ulcerated.
And I command that you tell the ventilation operator to make the scraping wide and short, and to make purification easy.
And if the pain is severe, then scrape off twice, for in the first scraping you open up the path of subtleization to the pain and fluidity from it. But also, in the second, to the acquired inspection of the extraction of the gross pain.
And if the pain is violent, then let there be scraping three times so that it achieves the final result.
And lastly, when we want to extract small amounts of pain little by little or a small bit at a time, a single scraping is sufficient.
And if we want to extract a certain pain, scrape with an abundant scraping; and if the pain is known to be large, then scrape with a thorough scraping.
And the term of "scraping" where the depth of the wound is only limited.
And if the skin of that person is thick, hard, dark, and the pores are narrow, then let the locations of the windings be slightly gentle, open, and resolute; if it is in summer, then also with olive oil or violet oil, or mixed oil, or chamomile oil, or rose oil, and to those that resemble them. And if it is winter, then olive oil, or lavender oil, or chamomile oil, or rose oil, and so on.
And if the superficial fat is thick and oily, then let the oil be amaryth, or balm mint oil, or aloe oil, or anise oil, and like them.
And if the ventilation operator has large fingers, then let him not use oil, and that the locations of the windings be slightly gentle; and that the ventilation be done with cold water, or warm water, or steam, or salt water, or vinegar, and like those.
And if the pain is of a moist nature, then wash your windings with wine, or water from merlot grapes and pomegranate juice, and like those.
And if the superficial fats are thick, then wash your windings with wine of old men, or water from marjoram, or a decoction of anise, or chamomile, and like those.
And let the ventilation be kept in front of a bath; administered properly after one or two hours of bathing, and that it be slept in front of the ventilation.
What is necessary for the administration of wind-wounding before phlebotomy.
And consider at the beginning: then, if the ventilation operator or one who should undergo phlebotomy is coleric and applies wind to the head and inflammation, then take cool drinks, as well as wine, honey, and lemon juice, and like them.
Then pause their meals; as for meat, let it be of medium size, and prepared with spices, and like them.
And if the complex is of a middle age, then take in honey and almond syrup, or almond syrup with a hint of spice, and that it be eaten in the morning, and that meals be avoided of fish and birds and cats; and that a person use moderation in drinking and eating, and pause their meals of fish and birds and cats.
And when in the day of vomiting and of bleeding the drink is greater than the food.
And when given to drink in certain hours to some men the astringent medicine or alcaravea, or medicine of musk, that is musk, or acacia before vomiting or before bleeding or nearby, so that the main members are comforted and the blood is thinned; and it is not good that they take that cut.
May the vomits that are made by sacrifice be kept until they are ready in the body, and above the foot and the joint, and above the navel, because these members do not suffer sacrifice on themselves.
And do not want those to be attracted by the blood of a member, so when a vomit is kept until it is ready in the body, and above the foot and joint, and above the navel; for these members do not suffer sacrifice on themselves. Now when you keep a vomit over milk in a malady of flux of blood from the blood of the member of the nares; and use that so that the blood is dissolved, fresh and soft to the member, so when it is kept over the navel and belly button; for that rarefies the member and scalfies it and makes the pain easier because it resolves the vomit.
And is kept over the pillows when it happens in their illness or fever, because by virtue of strong attraction light blood is drawn out and the fever is rooted out from its place.
And seems like it when kept over the body and navel, ready vomit in those locked up.
These vomits are given by sight with juice only; and some are given by fire.
And some vomits are given full of running water in the malady of the navel.
And that water is to fill the vomit and be larger, it is fresh water alone or water in which herbs are boiled according to convenience.
Form of vomit given by fire: is the opening width of two fingers, according to what we have formed it; and the quantity of the fluid be the majority of a palm; and be in its center, in the place that is in the path, most of it, the tray is small according to the quantity that enters into it a needle.
It is made with an acrid juice or citrus, with large margins, lion, înguale and ternary, so that it does not harm the member to its position on it.
And is made in half of it a transverse wedge of acrid juice or iron, where it is kept burning by the fire.
And this vomit is much greater than that which we have described before; and the little less of that which is suitable according to the illness and the condition of the one who uses it.
And the vomits of the sick and exhausted are other than the vomits of young people and robust bodies.
And the quality of keeping this vomit by fire on the member is that he extends the fire to the fire of wood well ahead of a small candle of wax, and keeps it in the middle place of the wedge in the middle place of the vomit, so that the fire burns around the part of the patient's body.
And is kept over the member of the patient, and is over the tray which we have said, until when you have vomit and do not want to hold it in your hand and let the steam burn that tray, then the vomit is taken out slowly dissolved.
And light the fire according to its way, and repeat that if you don't want that.
May the vomit that is given in the malady of the pleurisy, with water, in which there is not a transverse wedge or tray, and it is not given except to be filled with water, and is kept over the member only.
This is the form of it: And this vomit, how much greater it is, so much better, so that it receives a great amount of water.
Chapter  .xcvii.
Sanguineous are not given in the head or neck members but in the members in which it is not possible to position vomits, because of their smallness, so when they come out and gingival and similar to their taste; or on a naked member of flesh, so when said and the nose and similar.
And the quality of using those that have been found to be in the water of the world's mouth.
And are removed in the day and night in water two, unless they are hungry, and do not cause a rumble in the stomach of those; and are evacuated from the body at the beginning by bleeding and vomiting; and the member of the patient is rubbed until it turns red; and are kept over it.
And when they are filled up and case.
And if possible juice of the place is kept in vomit, it is better to do so.
Then, washes the place with water and keeps it moving water; and is rubbed and pressed out.
And if the body of the member is prolonged to the place of the blood suckers, and it is water, then put a cloth of leather in running water, and keep that over it until the residue is washed away.
And if the blood is multiplied, then powder vitriol tri-salted on it, or rub and similar to their taste of the causes that are stinging, until the blood is washed away; or are kept over the place the majority of dried beans, and are removed until the beans adhere to the place, and the blood is washed away.
And when necessary, a repetition of blood suckers, as much as possible, change those.
And when the blood suckers are forbidden by suspension, then the place is rubbed with fresh blood or a needle is placed in the places where it hurts; and are kept over, because those cause pain when there is a little blood.
And when you want them to fall down, powder on them a little tri-salted aloe, or salt, or ash, and sometimes quickly.
Thus begins the process of the third part: of restoration. This chapter is necessary in the art of medicine; and it is the restoration of a fracture and an accidental dislocation of bones.
Or, son, know that the jesters of this chapter are not for the common doctors and the vulgar, nor did any one at any time look at the free books of the Ancients or read a word.
For this reason is made that this way of the scientists in our land is private; and I have not forgotten it in any part of all time; and I have not presented it as long as reading the books of the Ancients and studying their understanding, until I extracted the science from them.
And is directed to experiments and studies in the length of my life.
And I have described all this in this chapter all that contains my science and about which is passed the greatest experiment of my life; since it has made you, who are far away, free from occupation and long hours; and it has renewed itself at the end of renewal; and has shown itself at the end of declaration; and has formed it into different shapes of the instruments that are given to them, with addition to declaration, as I have made it in two preceding chapters.
Chapter first.
First chapter. Now let's say that I should state in the beginning of this chapter the first principles of the discourse; and those chapters to the understanding whereof it is necessary that the craftsmen should be firmly fixed on the truth of those, so are you and those who are prompt at knowing or learning this noble art better than yourself.
Now I shall say that whenever an injury like a fracture, dislocation, twist, or sprain occurs, at the beginning it is necessary to perform bloodletting, bleeding, or some other treatment, unless there is a prohibitive cause; but then treat with remedies of virtue, or if it is the injured person, or old age, or a time of great heat, or of great cold.
Then let him be content with his own food of herbs, and of birds and crabs' meat; and prohibit heavy meats, or filling himself with food, and all food that fills the veins with blood, as long as you are sure there will be no vomiting, and if you do not fear effluxion of matter into the limb.
Then return the patient to his normal state at first; for it is usual that he should be kept in bed.
And now that the broken bone has begun to be restored, let it be said that the patient should be fed with nutritious food of milk and strong, dense, and heavy substances, in which there is viscosity; also with water, rice, cabbage, and vegetables, and fresh milk, and thick and similar foods to those, and with this regimen the fracture begins to coagulate more lightly and more gently.
And you should know that broken bones in old men and in children cannot be made whole and solid according to their nature by the drying up of the limbs.
But nature, however, adjusts and glues together the broken bone from all sides by a certain gluiness that adheres to it and strengthens it until it is completely joined together; and at the beginning there is fire, so that there is no prohibition in this case of doing her works.
And for this reason it is necessary that you should abstain from feeding the patient with food of gravity, viscosity, and weight, as I have said.
And you should know that the kinds of fractures are diverse according to the diversity of limbs, as a fracture of the neck bone is different from a fracture of the head bone; and a fracture of the foot bone is different from a fracture of the leg bone; and all the other members are different from each other.
And I shall now proceed to recall for you every kind of fracture, distinguishing it from others in a separate chapter.
There are various kinds of fractures within themselves. And the kinds of fractures of the bone within themselves are diverse; for some occur in the arc of the bones and others occur at their ends; and some occur according to the length of the bone: and some are caused by a blow or injury and some occur spontaneously, as when they are prepared to write, and a small fracture occurs in the head, and a fracture is caused by a headache.
And to each kind there is a different way of restoring it; for some require time and patience, as they are recalled in their place in the chapters.
There is also a symbol for a fracture of the bone. And this is how a fracture of the bone is recognized: it is an enlargement and prominence that can be felt with your hand, and feels sharp when touched.
And now, whenever you do not find the prominent spot that can be felt with your hand, and the patient does not feel great pain when you touch his bone with a gentle motion; then there is no fracture here.
And then, it is possible that it is a prominence or small fracture, but do not say that you feel it with your hand and with a gentle pressure on all of it; and if you remember the moment when you touched it, then let it be tight by gradual tightening.
And you should know that the place where it is arched and does not split into two or any other kind of fracture occurs in the satagia; and whenever it splits all at once from its center, then start to make amends to it right away, as soon as an aphorism causes a wound.
And if an aphorism causes a wound, then leave it for several days until the wound stops bleeding; and then take care of it in any way you can by levitating and creating it.
And you should know that restoration of the limb and its healing is lighter than a fracture in the limb where such an injury occurs.
Then strengthen it according to what comes next in your recall of it.
But if there are two satagies in the bone, then it is necessary to amputate the broken member from the upper or lower part; or from the middle if the member is small; or from one side and the other by dividing it with a cord.
And be in a position that you stop the limb from moving naturally while the broken part is extended; then pierce it so as to make it join together, and in any way you can put it back in its place.
And take care that you do not cause injury or pain to the patient through your own operation, nor pierce him in any way; and by means of the power that you possess, join one bone to another according to its best form.
Then take care to do this at the right time; and if you find any other cause, correct it and put it back into its place with the quantity of your strength.
And he has a violent extension and compression; for this causes aphorisms that cause wounds because of his own operation, or that cause pain in the limb when you see it with your eyes because of his own operation.
And the quality of the firm fixing of the limb is this which I recommend; for you should know that broken limbs are different in their smallness, in their size, and in the form of them.
And those that are small like a little arm or hand, and the bandage is of thin cloth.
And those that are large like the leg or hip, take care that it be wrapped around and firmly fixed; for the binding around connects the large bone and strengthens it with a bandage from all sides, so that there is no gap in it.
Then take care to stop bleeding, and pause it gently at the place of that fracture with three wrappings or four according to how much the member deserves; and strengthen your hand with the bandage a little.
Then look at it carefully and take care not to tighten your hand too much at the place of the fracture, and strengthen your hand so that it does not feel pain when you move your finger a little. And if it is necessary to stretch further into the area of the fracture a little, and to soften gradually the tightness little by little, until you can grab hold of a large portion of the area.
And take another object and wrap that other veil over the area three times, and leave the wraps a little further back from the fracture; and your operation in the tightness of the first wrapping and in softening that second one as we have said above in the first wrapping.
And place between the wraps of tarred leather or cloth that is wrapped around the area where there is some curvature of the fracture if there is any curvature; and in no way do so for any other reason.
And place between another object, and wrap those other wraps around properly for a long time, if there is no swelling or abscess in the area, then pause over that water where that abscess is located and which causes swelling; and leave it for some days; and then you tighten them again.
And if the sticks are of different sizes and made properly; or of reed reeds, or palm fronds; and be the width of each strap according to this shape and figure:
However, it is necessary that the strap which is placed over that fracture be a little thicker and a little wider on one side than the other straps, and according to the length of the member in its size and thinness; and place another object under those wraps according to your first tightness; and remove those wraps gently according to the way we have said above for tightness, and that is your tightness according to the location of the fracture, and how much it is increased from the fracture, then tighten it a little.
And it is necessary that the strings be of medium thickness and thin; and if they are thick, then do so with a needle made from the skin of a snake, for if you cut the tightness in equality, then there will be a great mistake when the tightness is increased.
And especially thin strings are not convenient because you will not be able to get a good grip with those strings; and it is not necessary that there be a space of a finger between each strap.
And if the patient is tied by the ends of the straps to the tightness in those places, then pause for a moment with that tarred leather or woolen cloth until there is no injury.
Some fractures are caused by a fall from a height, and there is dislocation of the tendon, and I remember that in the chapter according to its uniqueness.
And you should know that a broken limb does not tighten with the wraps on the first day; which is why, when it is large, it is necessary to pause for 2-7 days or more, according to your certainty of the coming of an abscess.
This is the way that the old surgeons used to do it, they wrapped them over a fracture and dislocation and twist.
A way to wrap like a shower of restoration of fracture, suitable for complicated cases and mainly for women and children, because it is not necessary that there be heat or friction: and that is because you take powder of flour, and it is the meal of flour that spreads very slowly on the movement of the mill in the parts of the mill.
And in such a case as this, not only do you crush it, but you grind it with an egg white, and apply a very thin spread; and then use that.
Another way to wrap and repair fractures and twists: Take assafetida, myrrh, acacia, aniseed, and mastic, which is derived from the wild fennel, and all are mixed with water or milk of one thousand dragon's weight; of mirra and aloe, a dragon's weight each; alochile, two dragon's weight; and all are cut finely and mixed with oil of hyssop or albumen if the body of the patient is scarred; then use this plaster, for it has good composition and restores broken bones lightly, and gives strength to many men.
Another way to wrap and repair fractures and twists: Take a dragon's weight of myrrh and aloe, a dragon's weight each; of acacia, six dragon' weights; and Armenian bole, twenty dragon' weights.
All of them are crushed in a mortar and mixed together, they are sifted, and they are mixed with very little water or egg white and applied.
A way to wrap joints and bones that are separated from their locations, causing pain in those places and splitting them or breaking them; take wool yarn, immerse it in wine and oil, and place it on the area.
It is not useful for this wrap to relieve an abscess, or to expel pains properly.
Another way to wrap and restore broken bones is: take leaves of fig tree and leaves of wild poppy; crush them together, and make a paste out of them.
A way to wrap and administer a new preparation for the relief of an abscess, and also for the resolution of pain; take razins of aloe, camomile flowers, violets, flour of ergot, all of it together. They are all crushed and mixed with a little wine, if the member is not scarred.
But if it is scarred, then crush those together with very little water from coriander or use that water and apply it.
Another way to wrap and administer a strong preparation for the resolution of this first one, which is caused by an abscess; take razins of aloe and licorice root, fennel seeds, marjoram, violets, camomile flowers, all of it together; they are crushed and mixed with very little water from sage or double-strong water or wine, depending on the quality of the member and the repose of the color of the blood.
But the hypocrisis should not be wrapped with wax that is placed over the member in order to restore it, but with oil and nothing else for cause; and it is necessary that it be very thick or very thin.
But with the use of gall nuts it is seen that they are placed over the broken member in order to restore it and for the causes of exsanguination with small quantity of quality; such as those mentioned above: mirra, essences, and similar to those causes.
A way to wrap and relieve injury and pain is by taking a paste of meal, ashes, hair of a man or bird's feather, salt, and aloes; they are crushed and sifted and mixed together, and the wrap is very thick; it is then applied.
But the quantity should be such that it does not cause pain or trouble, and that the member is not moved from its location; then you do not remove for any time. And if there is pain or trouble or swelling at the location; then you should take it off in that hour, and then apply the wrap to the area.
And take cloth of linen and marine sponge, immerse that in wine and water, and scrub the area until there is no trouble or pain, then rest the member for an hour; and then place that wrapped cloth on it for an hour, and then pause over linen yarn immersed in wine and oil, or rosewater, and let it sit for a moment until you are certain of the absence of an abscess, and that it stops swelling the member, and it is relaxed after pain.
And repeat that same stricture, smear a small paste and do not tighten it for your first constriction, and with subtlety apply that inner part so that it is cured.
And if many times the puss, the pain and the inflammation and all the accidents are already gone away, and you no longer need paste or constriction, then do what I have said above, but with a different order.
And if nothing happens to the member from those causes that we have said, then do not wait more than three days or four or five; and some have waited all this time for twenty days according to what I have said before, until the fracture has healed and placed on it a coagulation of the blood over that one.
Then adjust the constriction more than in your first constriction, and adjust the thickening of the patient's food, according to what comes before his memory.
And if you find that place of the fracture is completely dried out and more than not covered, then know that the food is forbidden to reach it; and therefore immerse that one in lukewarm water every day that has passed since its drying, and let a small constriction remain on it, and with this operation allow food to enter the member again, and heal slightly.
And if the food that regenerates the fracture of the member is completely dried out and more than not covered, then know that it has been regenerated in error according to its operation, and great fear, and if it were to be consumed by a dog, it would make the large ones free and they would run away from the water.
And I have not seen anyone drink that water, so that is more reasonable than it makes no difference.
Chapter according to: Of the fracture when it happens in the head.
The species of fractures are pieces, and the figures of them are various, and the causes are distinct, since some fractures are caused by the impact of the hammer, and that impact stops all the bone inside the case, which is left without a bone, so that if it breaks in the middle, and that break does not pass within the last part of it; and this species of fracture is called absolute levitation.
And the plague of these two fractures is great or small, and the fracture that is contrary or opposite; and its cause is impact with a pole or a wall, and they have a similar appearance.
And this fracture is either penetrating, so that it approaches the skin from which it is left without a bone; or in the face of the bone, and the plague of these two fractures is great or small.
And some fractures are so that they are embedded in the bone, in its subtility of fine hair, and with this one is called this species of fracture capillary.
And this is a fracture that is caused by either impact or percussion of a stone, and to it corresponds, which makes a part of the bone enter from inside, and is made in the concave cavity as if you were to hit the roll of an egg when hitting it with a hammer and splitting its shell.
And mostly this is made in the bodies of bones, as if they were caps of enfants.
And therefore all these species of fractures are bad, and they are similar to those that separate the stars. And I come to your memory of everything in its place.
I have learned all these species of fractures by detection from those and by inquiry about them, as well as by the appearance of rotten meat that is on them.
And the capillary species is known by the same that appears on the bone, and is dried up, and placed on it with a thread, since the fracture appears black.
And in the treatment of fractures, consider at the beginning the accidents of the patient, and if you find by manifest sign that means pain, such as vomiting from cholera, and fainting, and loss of memory, and absences, and syncope, and acute fever, and nausea, and the appearance of the accident on most occasions, it is not cured.
And if you do not find those accidents that do not correspond to your expectations, then begin the treatment of him.
That is because if it has come to you the plague at the beginning when it was plagued, and it is in the winter days, then know that you study the appearance of the bone before day twelve according to all dispositions.
And if it is in the summer days, then know that you keep the bone out of the skin before day seven, since the bone is left without a skin, and those accidents occur that we have recommended.
And if the fracture has already reached the skin covering the neck, and is split into small pieces, then know that you burn the split one, as I have recommended to you.
And that is because you make the head of the patient infected, and discover on the bone according to its usual and appropriate way as the figure of the infection, and let it be light on the patient.
And if it happens to you the detection of the bone, then pause it with a cautery of san or poultice, then know that you put on the skin infused in oil and rose water, and allow the pain to subside until it is calmed down, and be sure that the flow of blood stops; and then begin at the circumference of the bone and its ablation.
That should be according to one of two ways of operation.
And the first way is that you cut the bone with an incisor of strength, and this is its form: And then administer another incisor less than that one; and this is its form:
Then administer a larger incisor than the second.
Then know that you have several incisors of which some are less sharp than others and some more; and those of them are at the end of their sharpnesses, and they are made of iron or steel.
And use them easily in percussion on the incisor that you do not feel pain, and this one touches your head, and let him be guided by his position.
And if the bone is strong and hard, then know that you perforate it in front of its circumference before administering the incisors with the tweezers, which are called non-deep tweezers.
And they are not called that way because those do not stop the end of the bone from reaching out to him, but because with this one stops the blood from flowing through the bone.
And it is convenient that you take many of these tweezers, as many as are appropriate for the texture of each bone, as far as it is present in all testes from the head to its extremity whose tip is sharp, and the quantity in length and brevity is according to the amount of the texture of this test.
And this is the form of three species of tweezers: The quality of piercing in the circumference of the broken bone is that you pause the tweezers on the bone and twist them with the tweezers within what you know that the bone has already been penetrated; and then move it to another place, and pause what is between all the amount of the thickness of the thread or turn it there.
And approaching the incisers here there is between each turn of the bone, and make that subtle pus that you can on it in the end of levitate, so as we have said, within which root the bone, or with your hand, or with some other instrument by which you will prepare to water, so as to heal and forceps subtle.
And keep in mind that the inciser does not touch any cause of the cypher.
And so, when you have gone around the bone, separate the cypher if it continues, and extract that, keeping in mind to cut and pull that in the asperity of it from the bone which is another instrument similar to an inciser, but more rather than that pus be thick and subtle that the others incisers.
And if there is a small piece of the bone coming out and hanging, then take it with ease with water that you have from the instrument; and approach that cure the plague with leech and dip the ones that we have said.
And the other way of operation is less dangerous, far from fear, which cuts Gualia and the loof for great relief; and this is the meaning of it: It is necessary that you begin to uncover the turn of the bone in the place where the fracture is most violent and obvious, so that when you have uncovered that turn and have stopped for a moment the extremities of this inciser gentle and easy of which this is the form:
That the turn is round it is strong and does not incise any cause, and the sharp turn is of him in two sides before in length, so as times; that the turn is adjusted to the cypher by the face of it cutting the sharp turn in the bone.
And approach the inciser of a turn on a small piece within that you cut all the bone easily so as it is turned over, and you are sure of the pain that does not happen in him in any way, and if the medicine was the pus of all people and the most ignorant about them; certainly, and if it was sleeping.
And if there is a cause of the cypher attached to the bone in some places of the bone, incise that from him with the tip of the inciser, and free it easily, for it is freed from him without doing any damage or fear.
And if the fracture of the bone does not penetrate into the cypher, and the water that has been cut off or remained on the bone is in its face, and there are small and sharp asperities in it, then approach that asperity and cut those sharp ones with sharp subtile razors by which you have prepared the number, of different quantities so that you can administer them in all places the pus convenient to them and the most right of them according to the water in which your operation is lost; that bone broken and its shape.
And keep in mind that you administer the water according to the tip of your razors on which you cut the bone at the beginning, and use near him the subtile water of him, and do not stop making water according to continuity until you reach to administer the most right water of them all.
But in any other small fracture and subtle fracture, keep in mind that you administer the cure according to the water which you lose on the correction of it.
And this is the cause why they have not applied all those who have studied in that art. He shown us in great fractures.
And if the cypher is round when you cut the bone, then take a cloth according to the quantity of the plague, and dip that in rose oil, and place that on the orifice of the plague; and take another cloth folded or tripled and dip it in wine and rose oil, and place that over the first cloth and make the water most gently that you can over that, which does not damage the cypher; and then administer over that cotton thread, and do not tighten it except by the quantity that has the plague so only.
And leave that with this cure for a day or two until you are sure of the pus; and then remove that and then administer medicines with which it is superfluous to dry out, such as rawhide and flour, and powder of enses and aristology, and similar to those.
That you make of these medicines powder that you sprinkle over the plague when it is dry; and in general, administer in that all medicine of its property by which it is dried up and not chewed.
And keep in mind that, according to your virtue, the plague in your cure is clean; and it is not in him surdicia of enguent or other; nor does he leave adding virulence on him; for when it is adjusted on the skin of the head, it corrupts him and gives it, and causes the disease close to the patient.
And you happen on the skin of the head, when it is completely removed from him the bone and more so when the cure of it is expressed, and it is darker on its surface; and then consider now if you happen to the plague that we have said, you know that it is dangerous in all its forms.
And if you do not happen blackness but only of the medicine that is stopped from it, and it is in the virtue of that medicine that makes that blackness, then take a piece of honey and a piece of rose oil. and line them with a cloth, and approach that to the cypher; and then cure that with the spices of cure which suit you so that it is healed.
Chapter 3.
Of restoration of the nose when it is broken.
You know that it is not broken from the nose but only two pieces of cartilage above the skin, or one of those nettle-like bones; for because there are two bones, because the turn of them is cartilaginous, and it is not broken and does not happen to him only pain and tortuosity and sinuitate.
But if it is broken from one of the two pieces of him, then take the little tip into his nose, and make that fracture inside by the little tip, and outside by the big tip, so that it returns to the nose according to its natural shape. And do it for him with ease, and keep in mind not to damage by that your operation on the head of them.
And if the fracture is in the uppermost cartilage of the nose, and that does not continue to it, then approach that with the tip of the inciser to the end of it which is small thickness.
And if the fracture is in two pieces, then you make a simulacrum of it.
And keep in mind the restoration of him on the first day of the fracture if it is possible; and if not, then approach the seven days to rest the plague.
And approach the end of the nose with a cloth of linen, if the fracture is in one turn, or two pieces, and be in the thickness of the nose as much as it fills the turn of the nose.
And say some of the old restorators that the calças are wrapped in cloth, and they are exchanged throughout the day, but I have not seen it; keep in mind that the cloth is wrapped in album of four-fold comfit with powder of mol; and then leave that one until the bone is fixed and the cartilage has been hardened.
Some are wrapped in the nose, in place of one, unless it is wrapped in linen cloth; and be that you have already broken the nose from a violent pain and that the disease is not prohibited from inspiration.
And this cause is not necessary to you; and if you want, do that, and if you want, make water.
And if another type of blister occurs, apply cerottes or cotton pads soaked in vinegar and olive oil, or a scalpel.
May if that doesn't happen, then you should cover it with flour and castor sugar soaked in egg white; and place your hand on the area, and don't do so because of any cause.
May if your bones are broken or crushed, then you should cut them open, and remove the bones with the appropriate instruments; and sew up the wound, and treat that water which enters and hardens, and apply poultices to that water that convenes.
And if plague occurs inside the nose, then you should treat that with water and administer lead tubes inside because it is completely cured.
Chapter.
Restoration of the mandible when it is broken.
When the mandible is broken and the fracture is not caused by plague, consider whether it is only a little out of place and not curved at the sides, then its recovery will be easy.
And therefore, if the fracture is on the right side, you should introduce the little finger of the left hand into the mouth of the patient; and if the fracture is on the left side, then introduce that same little finger of the right hand; and push those bones apart from each other with ease at the sides, at your own hand's other end in the direction of the break; and arrange those bones carefully.
And if that fracture of the mandible is separated into two parts, then you should administer extension of two parts according to the right direction so that its position can be made equal.
And if you experience a concussion of the teeth and a disruption occurs, then strengthen those which you hope will remain intact with a thread of gold, silver, or silk; and place cerottes on the broken mandible, and place a double sheet of cloth over it, and place a star-shaped piece of cloth carefully over it, or a single thread according to the length of the mandible; and bind that below according to your custom and how you apply it, so that it is not destroyed.
And command the patient to rest and be calm, and pause his food with sips of warm wine.
And if you suspect that the shape has already been changed in any way, then you should lie down and wait for three days; and correct what has already been altered, and cover it with flour, egg white, or chamomile powder, because you have removed the cerottes from it, and place wool over the covering.
And after that is set and adjusted, leave it alone so that it does not change its position, until it is healed and strengthened the fracture; for those who are seen to heal this fracture in three weeks.
And if another type of blister occurs, administer the water that we have mentioned above in the patient''s seat so that it is healed and that blister remains; for those who are seen to heal that blister.
And if the fracture is caused by plague, then consider whether it is a bone separated or broken in two pieces; then you should introduce those bones into water that moves them apart from each other.
And if the hole of the plague is narrow, then you should enlarge it with a needle according to the quantity of your need.
And when you have stopped those bones from moving apart, and they no longer move, then sew up the hole of the plague if it is wide; and if not, place one of the poultices that moves them so that it is healed.
Chapter. v.
Restoration of the fork when it is broken.
A broken fork occurs at the front part of the muscles, and that fracture happens in one of these three ways.
Either it is broken, or separated, or separated into two pieces so that it doesn't cause separation; and it is easy to restore it; or it happens as a result of plague in the fork, and its restoration is difficult; or it happens as a result of separation in the fork.
And the operation in that case, when the fracture is caused by plague, is that you present two ministers, so that one holds the assistant and the other extends the fork broken at the sides.
And bite that fracture with the fingers so that its shape is formed according to how it has broken, and don't make it high or a depression.
And if you want to extend it, then place the patient' bed with hope of cloth or wool, and make its size according to your need; and extend and raise the fork, and cover that end with your hand so that it is extended according to how it has broken.
And if you can' reach the end of the fork to the sides, because it reaches the neck, then place the patient face down on their back, and place a pillow under their chin, and place one of your hands in the middle in size.
And the minister presses the muscles of the patient to the sides so that the fork bone is raised as it reaches its neck, and then you straighten the fracture and bite it with the fingers.
May if you feel a pain in the fork that is getting worse, then cut off that and remove those pains easily.
And if it is stuck in the bone, then you should use the same instrument that you used to attach water so that you have stopped that fork with something sharp. And this instrument is from wood or iron, and its shape is like this:
And it is like any vessel whose shape is like this; and make its length according to the water that you need for it, according to the size of the bone or the thinness of it.
May the length be according to what you can do for the operation; that there are two ends like this, and one end is wide and the other is narrow.
And if the disruption of the plague that you have cut out from the bone is wide, and confident of a blister, then you should join the two lips of the plague with a stitch.
And if that disruption is small, or you fear a blister, then you should use cloth and powder according to the quantity of the plague' s split.
And if that happens, put cloth in vinegar and olive oil, and place that on it.
And all, that the star of the broken bone is not too long; and for this you will see the patient every day, so that when the ligament is softened or the star has been completely healed, then you correct it and tighten the ligature.
Then place the patient's sleep on their neck, and let them lie on their side with a small cushion under them; so that by doing so, it is raised the assistant of him from the nape of him, and therefore the fracture of the furcula is lifted to elevation of the muscle; or is the arms of him bound to the neck of him.
And do not loosen the ligament if it does not happen in the place immediately or swelling within twelve days.
Then renew the plaster if you see the face of him wet with water, and tighten it and restore that one and leave it until it is restored and the fracture of the furcula is coagulated.
And is strengthened and comforted according to the month in twenty-eight days, and some have seen in certain men it is done in the space of time of that one.
Chapter VI.
Of Restoration of a Shoulder Fracture.
The spatula pie is broken in the place of him late and not broken of him but the edges.
And when it is broken the place of him — and is broken in the middle place of him — and is not known except by touch, then according to that figure of the fracture is prepared you for reducing that one according to the natural figure in all ways so as to engineer the same, the which is at your possible will.
Then place over the place powder of mill the white of egg and stop it with leather; and place a cloth double; then place over him the star light according to the quantity of the spatula whole or a little less.
More if you leave the star is a concave cavity in some of the places of the spatula, then you engula that concave cavity with stopa leather, and place the star according to equality.
Then tighten it with a long thread of cotton or silk and with the tightness of the star until it is not remounted on its place.
And consider the ligament every day; and all seen that is softened, then another seen and tighten it and equalize the star if it has been remounted on its place.
You have already opened the patient' s nape.
And is restored in twenty days or on the 25th day.
And when that number is completed, then you dissolve the ligament, and that you know assuredly because that one is of the bones whose beginning is not broken nor its dissolution.
And if you process the place of the bone heavy and leave the ligature, then you cut it over him, and let go; and do according to that we have said in the fracture of the furcula of sadness or swelling caut if it happens here.
Chapter VII.
Of Restoration of a Foot Fracture.
The foot in some seen is broken in the middle place of him and is pie cut inside; more the ends of him move inside that they are ciccadas and comminuted.
And of the accidents of him when it is broken the middle one of him is that it declines to the inside parts and happens to him great pain, and difficulty in the hale, and hoarse voice, and fort levitate, and vomit; and is declared in his cavity in the broken bone and is not hidden from feeling.
And is restored him is that he be lifted the patient on his two legs, and place between the ribs of him a cushion; and squeeze the muscles of him, and adjust the ribs of him to the sides of the two ribs, and subtilize in the operation of him and in the equality according to all ways that it is possible to do and that you bring back into water, within that returns the figure of the bone according to what happens.
Then place over him the plaster and staves and place open the star of a table subtile of saw or of chalk and of its likeness in levitation, because you wrap that one in cloth; then subtilize that one is placed on the broken bone that it is not remounted; and tighten it according to roundness at the back some seen, and tighten it with a tightness decent; and then consider the ligature in all hour, and when it is softened, then strengthen it.
And if necessity provokes to desillusion of that one you have corrosion or pruziment, or pain, or swelling that happens in the place, then you cut off and undo that one and eradicate the plaster and correct it that happens by water according to a way of cure of him; and then reduce the plaster, if times into water the face; and adjust the tightness until it is healed.
Chapter VIII.
Of Restoration of Ribs When They are Broken.
Know that the fracture of the ribs happens only in large places which meet each other; and of the ends of them from the split forward does not happen to those contusion because they are cartilaginous. And the knowledge of him is not hidden from feeling; therefore the inquiry of him with the evidence.
And is restored him is that it is covered the fracture with the evidence according to the possible way, within that it is swallowed according to what happens; and place over the broken bone the star, if you have indignation of that one.
And if the fracture of the ribs is declining to the inside parts, then it happens to the patient great pain and puncturing, so that it happens to him that has weeped, and for water because the bone has the veil; and happens to the difficulty of being cleaned, and hoarse voice, and vomiting of a strong voice; and this one is difficult to heal.
And the old ones are made firm with those by means of which it is strengthened.
And of them so that you say: Cover that you put the feed of the patient which produces inflation and ventilation, so that the belly is inflated and extended, and the fracture is driven to the outside parts.
More we should not put him by water because it is not a light cause to generate swelling if it happens, unless it happens; and if it has already happened, then help by water.
And say some of them that it is suspended by the wind and placed over him to suck strongly; and it seems like reasoning, more however it is feared that the wind will throw away the superfluity to the place because of weakness.
And say some of them that the place be covered with a cloth which has already been submerged in oil if it happens, and let staves lie between the ribs until it is filled, that the ligature be opened when you wrap that one according to roundness; and then be healed the patient with the cure of pleurisy of feed and of medicine.
And if the cause is violent is to be restrained the patient which does not suffer it, and the bone has the veil punctured with heat, then you fear for the patient, then cover that they split over the place, discover the broken rib, and place a sharp instrument that preserves the cipher, the reminder of which is preceded, and I write the bone according to ease, and take out that one.
Then place over the two lips of the flay, if it is large, with a burn; and heal that one with plaster within that it is healed.
And if swelling happens inside, then you cut off and place in oil rose water and place over the place, and is healed the patient with water that covers swelling inside.
And be lifted up on the bed on which he sleeps, until it is healed.
Chapter .ix.
Of the restoration of a fracture of the spine of two and the collar.
Some broken ends of the bones of the neck, and then to their atrail, and likewise to the spine of two. And when water happens to a man and you want to know if he will be healed or not, then consider, for sometimes his hands are already softened and stupified and dead and they can't move them or stretch them or tighten them, and when you squeeze them with needles or pierce them with a pin, and there is no pain in them, then you should know that it is not healed, and in the same circumstances it is fatal.
And if you feel a contraction in them when you squeeze them with needles and pierce them, then know that the neck of the bone is saved, and that the hernia is healing with cure.
And if you see the spine of the neck wet, and want to know if it will heal or not, then consider the feet of the man.
If they have already become softened and you want to know if it is due to water that happens in the most cases, and when you get on their back, they vomit and cannot hold it, then you should know that it is fatal, and do not attempt to heal them.
But if there is no cause of those, the cause is better and lighter in kind.
And the healing of him is that you pierce into the cavity of the hernia, and place a pad on top of the spine attached there, or a cloth wrapped around it, or a piece of cloth laid over it; place something soft on that part for some time until it is soothed.
Then place a comfortable and soft pad on it, and tighten it with a ligament; and order the patient to rest and be peaceful and not sleep on the bed where he has pain, until it is healed.
And if the hernia of the bone has already separated from it, then cut it with a knife and remove that bone; and then join the two ends of the skin together, whether they are large or small, and then heal those that are inflamed with an ointment, until it is healed.
But if the bone of the leg is broken, and it is the end of the fracture, then cut a small piece from the heel of the foot on the left side, and join the two ends together with a pin as close as possible in kind; and then place a pad on it and wrap it up tightly, if you feel pain from those, and tighten that part.
And if you feel a hernia in him, then pierce it and heal that with the cure; until it is healed.
Chapter.x.
Of the restoration of the anus.
The bones of the anus are often broken, and when they are broken, their fracture is not but common in the ends of them and they decline to the openings; and water happens to the patient's pain and pricks, and the chest is stupified when it is fractured.
And the healing of him is that you stretch your hand over him until it is above the fracture, which is the shape of him.
And if the fracture is only in one end of him, then you should dress it with a garment that fits him well, as close as possible to his natural shape.
But if the fracture is in the long part or has already declined to the openings, then you should prepare the patient' s belly for your healing of that fracture. And then when you have dressed him, place a pad on it, and then place the cloth of fust or of codenda over it, and tighten it tightly so that there is no pain from the fracture or movement of the sthela.
And dress the concavity with water that fills it, until it is filled, and order the patient to sleep on his back or open his side.
But if there is an apoplexy, then you should stop the flow of blood from him and heal him quickly; and place a pad on it according to the order that precedes; and then return to his healing, and tighten him with ligatures in turns.
And if there are broken bones or separated, then you should set them.
Chapter.xi.
Of the restoration of a fracture of the adjudicator.
Adjudicator is that which is between the neck and the top of the shoulder.
And if it is broken, then the healing of him is in two ways, which are as follows: the first that you dress with a cloth of fust according to this shape:
And tie both ends of the ligament, and then hang him from an elevated place.
And follow the patient on a sleigh; and then pour a little water from his arm that is broken onto the cloth in such a way that it reaches the top of the wood where the curved part of the cloth is attached.
And then suspend it over some heavy cause, or dress the patient' s openings in turns; and then heal the fracture with a medicine that comes from above, until the fracture returns according to the order.
The other way is that the patient be raised on his neck and suspended with a ligament; and then order two servants that one of them hold water that is opened for the fracture, and another hold the pus from him, and each of them extend it to his opening.
And if you want the opening to be closed more strongly, then you should tighten it with a ligament and with another, and each of them extends his two openings.
And if the fracture is close to the end of the muscle, then you should place it on half the ligament over the collar and the other half on the fracture, so that it is between them.
And if the fracture is far from the collar, then you should place it on the ligament over that place and on the collar itself.
Dress it with ease and do your best, and then tighten it if there is no pain from an apoplexy after you have dressed him.
But if there is an apoplexy, then let it rest for seven days, and place a soft pad on it, wet with warm water and mixed with honey, until it stops, and then tighten it.
The way to tighten that part is that you place a pad on the fracture, and then wrap it with a cloth; and then join the arms over the adjudicator, and place their hand on the muscle.
And then tighten the cloth and tighten the arm in such a way that it is not in the place of the sthela, if water does not cause pain from a broken bone.
And then use the sthela.
And that is that you place on the fracture a sthela that is stronger and further apart from other sthelas, and that is the length of the sthelas according to the fracture plus three times the width of the whole.
And then tighten it on the sthelas with the tightness that you have specified at the beginning of this chapter.
And your tightness on the place of the fracture should be stronger. And when the fracture is healed, your tightness on the place of the fracture should be looser.
And so if you return to the situation of the bones and strictness as I have said at the hour when you restore the member to its position, then do so.
And if you fear an abscess, then leave the strictness and bones inside for seven days as I have said above.
Then consider the limb in all parts for three days so that it does not happen in the place of swelling or inflammation; or food is prohibited from reaching the member by means of a surplus of stricture; and therefore correct everything according to what we have said.
But if you are certain that there will be no cause of this, then do not delay the ligature for more than three days or more.
And its sleep on the patient's back, and their hands are on their stomach.
And pause over the assistant cook full of wool swaddling, and consider in all hours of the night or day that the figure of the broken member does not disappear nor become soft, so you correct it with your virtue.
And pause the food of the patient according to the order that we have mentioned above, so that the food is not delicate at the beginning until it has become harder; and then cover so that the food of him thickens.
For the custom of the assistant and his blanket is that they are strengthened in ten days; and then cover so that bath is administered and medicine is given to him with which they correct it.
And if the fracture is stiff, then you do not delay the ligature and bones inside for a day or two months.
Chapter 12.
On the Restoration of the Fracture of the Arm.
The arm is composed of two bones which are called two sockets; one of which is small, and is that which is called "push", and the other is large, and is that which is placed on the left side of the small one, from the upper part left.
And a strong fracture is made in the large socket only, or the small, and the locks are very strong together.
And when the small socket is broken above, then the restoration of him is light, and his cure is more rapid.
And when the small socket is broken below, the fracture of him is bad, and his cure is difficult.
And worse than either is when both bones are broken together.
Then if the bone that is broken is the small socket above, then it is convenient to the doctor, according to the restoration of him, that he pause a little extension with ease within so that it be swaddled.
But if the large socket is broken which is broken, then cover him with more vigor.
And if both sockets are broken together, then you shall pause the extension with more force.
And so that you pause the form of the hand deviously before its restoration and extension on a cushion, and the palm of the hand be on the upper part, more than any other says, and the ear is more low than all the others, and the patient' side leans on a raised couch.
A cushion before him in height or beside him, so that the patient does not fall asleep while working.
Then the minister extends the arm of the left side to its full length at the side of the hand or ligament, and another minister extends it above all.
Then the doctor swaddles the bone within so that it may be restored according to the best form that can be.
And if in the fracture of the bone there is no relief, then you shall pierce with your virtue all the flesh in its place.
And if there is any separation of the flesh in it which hurts and does not satisfy you with its restoration, then you shall pass over it and do as I have said above.
But if the fracture is with pain, I have already written a special chapter on it, and therefore take the cure of that.
And if an abscess appears at the beginning of your restoration, then you make a bandage with wool swaddling and wax white, and it is not too tight between speculatio and subtilitas, and a strict bandage is placed on it with subtle within so that the abscess yields; and then remove the bandage and replace it with plaster made from powder of mint in water, and place the stelas; and let be the bone which is stretched over that fracture more to the left and more strongly.
You should know that the number of steles in the arm is in five positions, or that fracture is in one socket or both sockets together.
Then you place your stricture on the place of the fracture more strongly and vigorously, and when it is not remembered at the beginning of this chapter, you place your stricture a little less wet according to that.
And the cloths that envelop the fracture are soft and moist, not hard or sharp, and the thread used to tighten it is strong, so as I have said above.
Then consider the limb with the ligament for seven days. And if there is any cause by which the cure must be made, then you shall dip the member in water to the tail so that that pruziment ceases.
Then leave the member unconstrained within so that it rests, and then return to the stricture.
And if the stricture is already softened and the bone is already restored to its form, then correct everything according to your virtue.
And consider if food is prohibited from reaching the member by way of superfluity of stricture, for it is customarily called gout. For then you soften that a little and leave it alone for several days so that there is no risk of that with regard to food, and then strengthen it again.
But if there is no cause of those which we have said, then do not delay the disconnection for more than a few days or less.
Then hang up the patient' side from a vertical beam with his virtue of movement, and let him sleep on his back.
You should know that this fracture is restored in three months or in three and twenty days, or strong is restored in twenty eight days, and everything depends on the complexios and the virtue of it.
Chapter 13.
On the Restoration of the Fracture of the Hand and Fingers.
You should know that with regard to the fingers of the hand and the nails of them there is a fracture, and do not appear any of them with small wounds.
And when there is fracture or injury to the hand, then cover it with a raised couch before him in equalitas, and place the palm of the hand on the extended one.
Then the minister extends the broken bones and the doctor swaddles them within so that they are tightly wrapped.
Then cover with plaster and chalk if there is not an abscess; and place the stelas above according to the quantity of the space, and you have enveloped it in a cloth.
But if the lock is in the inner part of the hand, then make a bandage of cloth, and order the patient to tighten his hand with it; place it tightly wrapped with long cloth.
Then let be the stela of wood on the cloth so that it is lifted up, so that the wood is applied to the palm; and place it strongly according to that.
If the fracture is above the elbow, then cover that part with one hand and another with the palm of the hand so that the limb is uncovered and straight; and then hold the stricture in place while you turn the limb over between your two hands.
And if a fracture occurs in any of the bones of the foot, then if it is the little toe that is affected, cover that part with your hand and hold it firmly; and if necessary, turn the limb over so that the fracture is raised and not crushed.
If the fracture is in any of the other toes, then if it is at the base of that toe or the middle joint, or the ear or ring finger, then cover and hold it with your hand; or all of them together, which is better; or hold over a small elbow, as we have said above.
And consider in your recovery, and then place the affected part in a position that reduces pain; - with the right operation - so that it covers whatever causes those symptoms, according to what has been said above in the narrative of this work.
Chapter 14.
On the Restoration of Fractures of the Bones of the Thigh.
The thigh bone is broken and the feeling is lost; it is discovered that the fracture has moved forward and the top part has become raised.
The restoration of the limb is as follows: tighten the joint over the fracture and hold it tightly; place the patient on their stomach and face down.
Then the minister extends the whole limb in its position according to quality when the fracture is at the base of the bone.
If it is at the tip of the thigh, then hold the limb forward at the hip joint; and if it is at the tip of the leg, then hold the limb back at the knee joint; so that the extension hits its target, and the other limb holds the fracture in place.
And if it is at the tip of the thigh, then make the extension forward to the hip joint; and if it is at the tip of the leg, then make it backward to the knee joint; so that the extension hits its target.
Then the doctor joins the bones together with a plaster and a strapping, if it is not already broken at that point; but if it is, then cover it with a bandage and a tight strap. And if it is broken in the limb that has been affected, then leave it for several days so that the wound heals; and then return to your treatment.
The strapping of the limb is done as follows: wrap a hard bandage around the fracture; then double it two or three times and remove any excess; and then wrap the chest, leg, and thigh together so that it reaches to the tail and the root of the thigh.
And insert a long cord between the thigh and the chest, near the hip joint, to the bottom of the leg; and make the ends of the cord come out at the top part of the two limbs, and then turn them over the bandage and skin, removing anything that is too loose.
Then place a small elbow over the thigh in the place of that fracture above the hip joint; and place another under the chest, so that they hold the limb straight.
Then fill in any gaps between the bandage and skin with a soft fabric, so that it is tight; and then cover the whole limb in a loose cloth.
Then start with a strong strap from the middle over the place of the fracture, with three or four wrappings; and if you want to add more straps, then do so in places where there is space for them, making your straps smaller and looser and less damp as they go upwards.
Then extend the ends of the cord to the bottom of the leg until it reaches the heel of the foot, and strengthen them both; and then make the other end of the string come out at the top part of the two limbs so that the limb does not move out of its position.
Then leave that strap in place, assuming it does not cause any problems with corruption, an ulcer, or swelling; and if it causes any of those things, then take care of it well; and correct what happens to it, according to what we have said above about the movement of the limbs.
If the bone is thicker than that upon which you are placing it, then cover it as best you can; and if not, then put it under it, and correct it with a cord; and treat it with the water from which the memory comes, until it is healed.
In some cases this fracture of the thigh is strengthened by making an adjustment to the limb's joints, as we have said above about the aid given by the assistant and by the arms.
However, in the restoration of the limb, this should not cause any limping; and if it is restored on its own, then apply another bandage to the other leg, so that this one will not have to limp.
You should know that the thigh is strengthened in ten to twelve days or a little more or less, and everything depends on the diversity of the circumstances and the other conditions.
Chapter 15.
On the Restoration of the Fracture of the Ankle Joint.
You should know that the fracture of the ankle joint is discovered behind; and if it has been broken in front, then leave it for several days so that it heals, and then treat it.
If the fracture has occurred, then it is only a split or a crack in its joints; and if it is in front, leave it for several days so that it heals, and then treat it as one would treat a wound; and in the meantime, all you need to do is what we have said above about the treatment.
The restoration of the limb is as follows: join it together with a bandage that covers any split or break in its joints, and which reaches from one limb to the other, holding them together; and then secure it so that it does not come apart, and make it as easy as possible to construct and fabricate.
Then wrap the limb in a round bandage if you want to; and hold it tightly with a strap; and then add more straps as needed to support the joint.
And then consider all the treatments we have recommended for other fractures, assuming it is also broken; and avoid any accident that may happen to it, until it has healed completely, following the treatment described above for similar cases.
Chapter 16.
On the Restoration of the Fracture of the Chest.
You should know that in the chest there are two bones, one of which is large and is called the chest bone; and the other is small, and is called the rib bone.
It occurs to both sexes of people in the following fractures of the arm bones; and this is also the restoration of those limbs by wrapping them, which is a single operation for both arms and legs.
And if the two bones are broken together, then the chest becomes completely dislocated.
If the smaller rib is broken, then the chest is dislocated in front.
And if the larger chest bone is broken, then it falls to the side; and such cases are not familiar to you.
Then administer the following in equal proportions according to the wrapping of each limb.
However, if the fracture of the chest is very thin, so that it cannot be wrapped, then make the strappings lighter and less stiff; and rejoice in your strength.
In the chest there are certain operations that need to be done on the arms; and you wrap the limbs together with the straps, completing the whole operation; then you will have no need of large nails; and make small holes in the palms, as is necessary for smaller ones, not too big; and if they are too big, then use a needle to thread the string through them; and tie those strings according to the length of the chest from the hip joint to the elbow joint, and the other way around.
And wrap each drape in two wraps according to its length, and place one over the junction of the leg on one side and the other from the other side, and let them be wrapped from below at the base of the foot.
And place the two stakes in three places of the two extremities and at the middle, for with this orientation the spine is prevented from inclining to the right or left, and it is in good position.
And already a breastplate of leather has been administered according to the length of the spine; and let the spine be placed so that it retains its mobility.
And most commonly you should pour water on a fracture, and when it has been done to him it is called properly gout.
And consider the spine each day and study it carefully to follow up, and you guard it from swelling and inflammation or other similar causes; and when any cause of those happens, then stop putting water on him until he is healed.
Chapter XVII.
Of the fracture of the talus bone and the bones of the foot and of the following diseases.
To the talus bone does not happen a fracture of all; but to the bones of the foot happens a fracture in some places; and to the feet few happen a fracture, and do not happen to them except at the tips in their middles of disposition.
And if a fracture happens to the bones of the foot and these bones are raised up over themselves, then return the patient to the ground prepared in this way as he goes.
And place one foot on the water that is raised by those bones, and press them down, and wrap them up in their places.
And place plaster and stop on top of it, and return the patient's belly to a small table which have two flat surfaces.
And stretch those legs out by the feet down, because you have wrapped them up with drapes and with other causes from which they are relieved.
And after three or four days pass by, then untie the ligature because you will think that the bones are wrapped up, or they are twisted or displaced, and the operation on them is as such with care.
But if some of the feet are twisted, then restore those, and wrap them up as you wish and order to you in the restoration of the feet' joints from the hand. And place the twisted stake according to its length, and place it on one side a little; then return the foot to the table which you were ordered, and stretch those legs out by the feet down.
But if the twisted bones are two or three or more, then you place each one wrapped in drap leather over a stake, and stretch the table up at the base of the foot, and let it stand on one side of the table so that the belly of the foot is held in good retention.
It is convenient to you that you do not forget that you do not consider all the causes which have been told to you in the other fractures of the accidents which we have said; and stop putting water on any accident.
Chapter XVII.
Of the fracture of the kneecap of the woman and the bones of the penis and of the man's jaw.
When the woman's kneecap is twisted, then make it cut in the crotch divided, and bring this one to the junction of the two legs slightly, and let it be held behind.
And the wife will wrap her kneecap up, and make it stay in its place with care; and the woman will be injured, and raise the two legs little by little, because all this is painful and the twisted bone returns to its place with care and relief from pain.
And place powder on the two legs, and when he wants to urinate, he removes the crotch easily and urinate, and reduce it and return it following the same method as you followed at the beginning, and then return to his powder first.
And let that be done for seven days or more, because that is restored.
And if you want to, take a bladder of oil and place it on the crotch of him with a bulb; and insert all the bladder into the kneecap, and blow into the bladder within the kneecap, because the fracture returns.
And let it be filled with oil and leave it for a few days according to what we have said, until it is healed.
And when the man' or woman's penis is twisted, then administer in the restoration and relief of water which we have said in the bones of the hip.
And the water that is on the right does not hide these nearby fractures and few occur, mostly to the person who studies and uses this book; because those fractures indicate to you in the main dispositions of the right way in the restoration and stricture of him, and therefore understand well.
But in the man' jaw when it is twisted, take an oil-based paste, and place it on the wrapped drape, and wrap him up, and let it be left for three days or more, and it is healed.
Chapter XIX.
Of the Restoration of Fracture of Bones when they are aching.
It is convenient to you that the fracture is aching, and mostly if the bone is large, such as the femur or the pelvis, or similar to it, that you lie down and move him sometimes if the conditions of the fluids permit you to do so; otherwise, follow what we have said above.
And if the ache flows, then stop that you lie down in the retention of him until he is completely healed, and if there is another cause that does not appear, then sprinkle on top of him powdered oil, or a similar thing.
And begin to restore the fracture in him as soon as possible, and do not delay doing it; if there is no swelling.
But if the swelling occurs slowly, then you leave the restoration of him until the ninth day, until it has gone away, and do not bring him close to the third day or the fourth, because you will cause other accidents.
But if the twisted bone is about to break through the skin, then stop putting it back and wrap it up with your clothes or a similar thing, easily and slowly.
But if the extension is not prepared and it is not possible to make a cast for him with his own clothes, then you reduce it with your hand easily; and this instrument that I have spoken of is made of iron, its length is seven or eight days and its width is according to the quantity of the ache; and this one is necessary for the doctor to take from those three or four according to the amount of the ache in any specific cure for any kind of fracture.
And let it be rolled up, and hold it with his hand easily; so that it does not bend the compression on him in the hour of the operation.
And let it be of acute end that has margin on its ends; and let the one side of him be held with great care, and most of the other side within the joints.
This is how you do it:
It is called in Greek "labra volentzaratelam", which means "a little wheel".
So that the end of him be raised and supported above the end of the bone that is about to break through.
And place it on a flat surface until the bone has returned, and wrap it up with an equation.
And so try to bite the ends of the fracture between them, and if the end that is broken is delicate, and you do not have that instrument for a good grasp, then cover that you insert the end of that bone where the instrument has power over it.
If you cannot reduce the bone altogether with that we have recommended, then cut that one with which we have spoken; or saw it with some of the saws in some way or another, as is possible for you.
And place that which remains on the bone with sharp points and small scratches.
And when the bone has been reduced, and the pain of the foot is severe and burning, then know that the bone has not returned to its natural place; and so do you give the patient much relief.
When your repair of the bone is complete, and then cover it with a black syrup, especially if it is in summer, and do not pause on the skin of cerott or any other cause that would cause it to be damaged and corrupted.
And administer a salve in the hour of the full moon when you complete the repair of the bone, and leave the skin uncovered until it heals; cut it with scissors if it is thick, and use wrapping according to the amount of the wound.
And keep yourself with all care from stretching the wound over the fracture, because it can produce bad blood, and if it causes pain in the patient's feet, it may cause death or a corrupting disease or putridity, so that it heals. And if the patient' s stiffness is mild, soft, different from the stiffness of other fractures.
And if the wound is large or is a bad wound, and you are afraid of an accident with those we have recommended, and feel pain in that place, then do not cover it with a salve; rather wrap it with hard cloth instead of a salve, and tighten it up well.
And when a day or two after that the wound begins to discharge, which is a good sign, then do you remove the cloth that you had placed on it, and administer water, with our custom that we treat wounds, thus with water of four parts and herb to it.
And you should know that you must make the limb move and consider the wound every day from morning to evening until it is healed and sealed, and that the member be prepared in such a way that corruption will run from it to the joints more easily.
If the wound takes more than a few days and is not healed or separated from it, then know that there are only two outcomes for this: either the patient dies, or they will have an infection. And of those outcomes that are separated and remain, and of those that are not separated and put the member in danger and cause pain, then try to cut them as is possible for you.
And if the wound is swollen or black, it is a sign of heat; or another kind of corruption or putrefaction, then you should pause and take any of those that we have recommended for its cure, which is preceded in our book in the chapter dealing with it.
And in that place where you must speak your best words and present your case clearly: When it is heavy, use the instrument of the thigh and of the support, and wrap it with cloth around the large bones; and do not assume attraction from it, or extrication from it because bad blood may flow through it and cause death; let that remain where it can be easily found, for if it is lost, it cannot be recovered. And so leave it there for three days, and then cut it off with a sharp instrument. and then treat the wound if you can, and if not, let that remain.
Chapter xx.
Of the Cure for a Swelling That Occurs from a Fracture
This swelling occurs in the trace of a healing fracture, and most often it is located near the joints, and its shape is strong enough to prevent the member from performing its normal function.
Then consider whether the swelling is recent and administer those medicines that have been used in it, such as: bloodroot, or allium, or wormwood; and if some of them are missing, or all of them, and apply those to the swelling with a salve, and tighten those over it for good constriction.
And let that constriction remain there for a few days; and then remove it and try again, except that you place a thin plate of lead over the swelling, because lead has the property of retaining all the fluid that is inflated in the limbs.
If the swelling has already become hard and strict, and necessity forces you to cut it open, then cut it at the most secure part of it, and remove the excess fluid and fat, or if there is only a little fat, cut it off with a sharp instrument; and then treat that place where healing can take place.
Chapter xxii.
Of the Repair of a Fracture When Restored and Return the Member to its Natural State with Freedom of Movement.
When a fracture of the bone has been repaired, and return the member to its subtle state with freedom of movement, then it should not be done unless: because there is a great number of solutions for the limb and connection between them, which may prevent nutrition from reaching the member; or because of an excess of strictness in the limbs through which nutrients cannot reach the member; or because of too much useless mixture; or because of excessive movement that is not appropriate at that time; or because of pause in the blood flow to the body and for the purpose of dispelling it.
And cure that wound by causing the patient to gain weight and make his heart strong, so that the blood is multiplied in it; and administer a bath; and pierce the nose and lips.
And then pause with a bandage on the member, so that the bandage brings nutrition to it, or continue with an emulsion of it in water, within which nutrition flows and returns to its normal shape.
Chapter xxii.
Of the Cure for Cracked Bones When Restored by a Twisting and Prohibiting of Their Operation from That Which Causes It.
When the member has been restored by a twisting and healed of the fracture and nodulation, and there is a swelling on it that does not prevent its normal function, then you may take the word of one who says that this member is new-twisted.
Already there are some good medicines and restorers that have done this on our land; and this operation is very contemptible, and it is against the law of nature, which is deadly.
If the claudication and swelling are recent, then consider that they be bathed in water with herbs that soften it, such as: leaves of althaea and razors of the plant, and melilot, and similar to those; or that it be soaked in a paste of molasses made from leaves of althaea and rubbed with the oil of caraway, or that it be covered with a paste of gualine dye mixed with olive oil, and wrapped with a cloth; or that it be dipped in a paste of honey made from the seeds of chamomile, and wrapped with a bandage; or that it be dipped in a paste of butter made from the seeds of chamomile, and wrapped with a cloth; or that it is trussed with string made from colza, and similar to those medicines that are called gradual consolidation.
And some times are dissolved by the continuous light friction that is given to the most moist ones, and the movement of the member is administered from the very beginning in all hours.
And if there is already a tortuosity in advance and it is done strongly and turned into pain and necessity of cure with iron, then cover that pus on it and continue the bone, and what is superfluous from the nodulation of that member to the bone with very fine incisions, and this is administered easily on it with sollicitation and study.
Chapter .xxiii.
Of speech concerning dislocation.
Dislocation is entirely of some of the joints of the limb, by which movement is prevented, and the figure of the member is twisted, and great pains and injuries come upon the patient.
Therefore, when it happens that there is a dislocation, then immediately pierce that it be reduced, and do not delay such reduction, because if it is delayed, the place is swollen and very difficult to reduce the dislocation.
And therefore it does not come that it be moved or stretched in the hour of the piercing, for it brings about spasm and pains that are relaxed.
But when it happens to you, then cover yourself in the flabotomy of the patient's side, and let that rest until it is relaxed; and reduce the member easily with ease by dipping it in warm oil.
And all members are cured with the water of which the memory will come to its place.
And you have already seen and ordered the chapters of dislocation according to which it is preceded in fracture; from the top of the body above to the bottom of the body below.
Chapter.xxiiii.
Of cure of dislocation of the patient's jaw.
So dislocated the two jaws if they are not tightened; and the dislocation of both is done according to one of two ways: either they are loosened from their places by a little movement, or they are completely dislocated and fully separated, so that they are softened at the beginning of the joint within which saliva comes out of the patient's mouth, and it cannot hold it nor close its mouth, and the tongue of it is wrapped up in words.
And when the dislocation of him is a little, then, according to his major dispositions, he returns by himself a little cause.
And if the dislocation is whole and complete, then it is administered reduction of him lightly, and not delayed at all.
And the servant has the head of the patient, and enters it between his teeth with its own tongue at the root of dislocation within the mouth, if the dislocation is from one side; or that he enters both of them together, if the dislocation is of two sides, and the others outside where they are; and orders the patient to cease his jaws and do not move them in any way; and the tongue wraps around it and ties it up within so that it returns to its place.
And if the reduction of him is difficult, and more so if both of the jaws are completely dislocated, then administer vapor to it with warm oil, within which the reduction of both is done lightly and not delayed at all in the reduction of both from all; otherwise, as I have already said.
And therefore, when it returns and is wrapped up, and the mouth of the patient is closed and not softened, then pause on those dust of cloth with a cotton ball, and be made of wax and oil rosin; and be tied easily with ease by means of soft string.
And let the patient sleep on his two sides, and his head be between two pillows, that he not moan at all; and do not pass by force any cause; having the patient' food forbidden to be eaten, so that when the pains are relived and the jaws are no longer aching, then make him eat.
And let that water be administered with ease, and do not work on the opening of the mouth with eating or drinking, so that the jaw is aching and healed.
And if the reduction of two jaws is difficult when they are dislocated at any time and do not return to their places, then immediately pierce them with piercing, and very strongly pour the water on them, and very strong and vomiting colic.
And when you see that water is lost, then know that it is a loss; and immediately pierce the patient in which it has happened within 10 days.
Chapter.xxv.
Of reduction of the dislocation of the patient's furcula and of the end of the muscle.
The furcula is not dislocated from the neck within because of its continuous connection to the chest; and some are dislocated at the end outside, and this is shown by feeling.
And the restoration of him is that the patient jumps on his two sides and spreads his arms wide. Then cut the place with your hand firmly, for it will return again.
And then pause on that paste and dust, and stretch it strongly.
And the end of that which seizes and continues to it is not dislocated in any way within the day; then reduce and wrap it up according to what I have said, and according to your equipment.
And then pause on that paste, and dust, and stretch it strongly, and order the patient to be quiet and at rest within so that he is healed.
And in this member' cure, the end of the muscle is reduced when it is separated from its place.
Chapter.xxvi.
Of reducing the dislocation of the muscle.
Know that the muscle is not dislocated except according to three ways, and the one is that it is dislocated at the end of the neck at the end of the neck at the end of the neck at the end of the neck at the end of the neck at the end of the neck at the end of the neck at the end of the neck.
And the second is that it be dislocated at the end of its own muscle, and this is done with difficulty; and it is not dislocated behind by the shoulder; and it is not dislocated in front by the nerves.
And mostly it is dislocated and comes out at the ends of the neck, and mostly in those where the muscles are few, it is slightly dislocated; but in those where the muscles are many, they come out with difficulty.
And very strong pains happen in some men by hitting or bumping, and the patient' muscle is swollen with swelling, and it is discovered by water that has already been dislocated.
Then, when you hope for water within so that you are above it, and then proceed to the patient' cure.
And the dislocation of him is similar to what happens at the ends of the neck; but so that you can distinguish between the dislocated muscle and the other, because you can hear a very different sound; and hear the concavity of the neck at the end of the neck, and the touch of the head of the muscle in this way how much, and to the patient' head can not reduce his hand to his ear, nor does it move it in any way.
And if it is dislocated from the side or behind, then immediately hear a very different sound, and do not turn your head back;
And of this dislocation, a little reduction is made when the patient is fresh and his water is warm.
And the reduction of him is that the minister lifts his hand from above their legs; and nearby he stops the threads that support them, and raises the joint with strength to its place, and the minister lifts his hand, and extends it in front of him; and nearby he stops those, for she returns lightly.
And if by chance that I have said does not return, and only at the beginning that occurs a dislocation, days let's wait, when the patient is bathed in cold water and is administered brocacion that softens it and makes it loose like hair, and fenugreek, and meletol in water, and be administered.
And the patient is raised on his back and is stopped from below from turning, waiting for the wool to be engorged between levitation and constriction, and nearby the doctor stops his leg from above, and raises his head with strength, and pulls the patient's hand so that it is not twisted on the sides, and another minister holds his head, because it should not be twisted on the sides, since it returns to its place lightly.
And if you want, reduce it in this way: and it is that you are present a man who is taller than the patient, and he is on the side of him, and enters his muscle from below turning of the patient, and raises his turn to the sides above their legs while the patient hangs in the air, and another minister pulls the patient' hand from the sides of his abdomen. And if the patient is light, wait until you know that another cause does not exist, because this one returns lightly, since the dislocation comes back quickly.
And it is reduced in an appropriate way: and it is that he is placed on the ground a long staff whose head is rounded in shape, like a mortar, which is not thick or narrow, and nearby it is stopped from below by the patient; then, because it is stopped above the patient's head, and the patient stands according to the length of the staff, and its hand is extended to the sides with strength, since the joint comes back to its place quickly.
And if the reduction of him is difficult for all the reasons that we have said, use this cure: and it is that you take a staff whose length is two bras, and its width is four fingers, and its thickness is reduced in the top according to this form:
And nearby, on the rounded head, are tied leathery straps so that the staff does not slip from the patient' head.
And nearby it is stopped from below the patient' turn, and its hand or arm is extended over the staff in front of its legs, tying the staff on the assistant's side and the arm, and its end on the other side.
Then the arm is placed on a step, according to its width, and the hand is extended in front of its legs, and the other side is suspended from the other side, because the joint comes back quickly.
And when the instrument is complete according to every possible way that you can manage it, and nearby you stop from below the patient' turn of wool a quantity; and nearby stop the paste prepared with powder of mill and egg white on all the muscle, so that it is rolled up, and nearby tighten it from below by constriction, and the bandage is rolled up on the paste, and its hand is connected to the neck, and it is left, and its hand is not twisted for seven days.
And since the patient' food is stopped a little while, until the member is comfortable, because it returns lighter to its healing.
And nearby the food is given more often after seven days and is practiced a movement; and when it stops being stiff and does not become softer, then it has healed.
And if the joint is dislocated there are seen drops of moisture that occur on it or by another cause, nearby it is administered a cauterization with three steps, according to what has been said before in the chapter about cauterization.
And if it still does not heal and seven days have passed, the bandage and the constriction are reduced a little on him, and it is not stiff and tight, and he cannot lift his arm to its sides, then you will know that the nerves of it, which go up to its head, have already separated or become loose or softened, and you will know that the joint will never heal in its place.
From the dislocation of that which is done to the feet and the breast or back parts, the reduction is done by thrusting and stretching to its sides, until it returns.
And be administered in that other constriction, and care for that one until it is healed.
And if by chance there is late healing in the limb and delay in its movements, then the patient uses cold water nearby until that gravity is relieved and returns to its natural state first.
Chapter 27.
On the treatment of a dislocated shoulder.
You know that the shoulder joint is dislocated with difficulty and seems to return with difficulty; and it is dislocated in all parts, mostly at the front of the front and back sides, and the dislocation of it does not disappear from your side when you are turned away or touched according to some shape, and when you adjust the dislocated shoulder with the hand, then you will know that the joint has become concave and cannot bend the arm or touch it with its muscle.
And if your patient is, reduce the dislocation as quickly as possible because, if you see it in cauterization, reducing it is difficult, and it does not heal completely; and more so at the back parts, because it is more difficult of all the other dislocations, and it is more painful, and nearby are seen drops of blood on him, then that one will die.
And the restoration of him, when it is possible to reduce him, is that his hand be extended with two arms, and his hands are open, and the doctor' hands are on the shoulder and below it, and he pushes the joint with his fingers or the palm of his hand until it returns to its place.
And if the dislocation is in front of its parts, then return it in this way that his hand touches with his own hand, until it hits the shoulder with the palm of his hand.
And if the dislocation does not obey to the reduction, then administer violent stretching and move it strongly.
It is that two ministers extend their arms, and hold him up with two ministers so that he does not fall over from the stretching.
Then the arms are rolled up a long way on the hands of him, and nearby is wrapped in a long cloth over his hand, or bandage.
And when the doctor touches the joint with his hand, he lubries it with any oil so that it helps in lubricating the joint easily; and nearby pushes the joint with a violent thrust until it returns.
Then the reduction of him is done nearby he is stopped on the paste in which it is constricted and stretched with egg white, and is left suspended from the neck, and is left for a few days.
Then it is unbound; and if the joint returns to its place, then you unbind the bandage of him and leave him.
And if you see that the joint is not strong, then apply the plaster and bandage again, and leave it for a few days until it is well; and then take it off.
But if it happens that the gravity approaches the reduction of the joint, and the disposition is in motion, then administer moisture in bath and gentle friction, and compression, until it is relieved; or pause on the joint to be relieved, unless it is a movement of great speed; and then tie it up, and leave it over the bone for a day and a night. Then lift it up, and put it in a bath; and when it has eased, then you shall rub the joint with gentle friction, and repeat over that to be relieved, unless it is grumbling of movement, once, and the second, and third time. Corruption has already come about on the denouement of the bath, so that it is limited.
And if you want, pause on that cow's split with wet and sharp edge pressing upon it; and make it a few times, for that is wet and reduces its disposition.
Chapter 28.
Of treatment of a dislocation of the shoulder, if it is of the joint that is between the arm and the body.
Of the shoulder a few bones are displaced, and the reduction of the dislocation is easy, and the opposite is of the other joints, but it is necessary that speed be in the reduction of it in the hour in which it is displaced, before the place be sore or that accide on it a contusion.
And the reduction of the dislocation is that you pause the joint of the arm of the patient on a table and the minister extends the arm of him, and the metge pauses his hand or palm over the proximity of the joint, and presses it in until he returns to its place.
But it is necessary that be considered if the palm already is seen to the belly of the arm, then the patient pause both hands on a table directly and the reduction; and if the dislocation is previous, then both hands are in front, then place the hand of the minister intricately over the table, so that his hand box on that proximity of the joint.
And then if it returns soon, it is good; and if not, then apply pressure to it with bandage allowing the contusion to go away, and do not repeat this, for in case that it does not return soon, it will suffer or will not be able on the reduction of it until it pass a few days.
But the joint is second according to its tortuosity; and there is no reason to the patient, except that his hand is softened and cannot be strong for any reason; then know that the nerves are torn or twisted, and it does not come in him unless it is strong by cauterizing properly its end and strongly pressing it gives some reason.
Then if it returns bad, then pause on it the bandage that we have repeated, and let it be and strengthen it for a few days; and then take it off and exercise his hand.
But if the movement of it is little and it happens that there approaches some gravity, then apply pressure to it with water tail and gentle friction a few times, until it is relieved.
Chapter 29.
Of treatment of a dislocation of the fingers.
Some times the fingers are dislocated all together.
And when any finger is dislocated with the two of his hand or the belly of it, then stretch that finger and press its reduction a few times, until he returns.
And then support the tip of the finger, and suspend it from the part to which it is dislocated, and leave it for two days.
And then hang him and extend him until it becomes one with that day.
And when it is quiet at night, then apply pressure to it according to that narrative, and do not cease to untie him in the day and exercise its movement, and let him be for a few days until he is strong.
And do it similar to him, if it is dislocated to the belly of the arm, and let him hang at that part and make its first operation, until it is healed.
And do it similar to him when it is dislocated in other parts.
Chapter 30.
Of treatment of a dislocation of the spine of the arm.
And when there approaches a dislocation of the spine of the arm or of the neck, and it does not remain in its place, then in that there is no treatment, for death hides from the patient.
The sign of this is that the excretion of the patient is without will, and cannot hold it; and some members of his are softened or two bones of his or two arms of his, or one of those; or it is moved from its place, for in some cases it is moved, and in some others it is made.
Then that has already been moved to the back parts and is called gelbozitat.
But the treatment of it is that you consider if the gelbozitat comes from poultice, because there is no treatment nor healing in this case.
But in that which comes from contact or impact or resembling those, they said the ancient ways of treatment with long words, of which some return to profanation; and some have taken away from it for too much of it, because of my proximity to the beginning and my exposure to it, I have taken it away and formed it a different instrument than that with which I had shown it and spayed it.
And of those is not healed except that which happens properly, as I have repeated it.
And that the patient is extended on its face over a mat, and the instrument is wet by his side so it is not dried up his foot.
Then a staff is hung straight, placed on the ground at the tip of his foot turning his head, and another in its back in the other extreme of the foot.
And the minister holds that staff, and does not stop in a ditch; and another minister holds the other according to that form.
Then he wraps his head with a cloth and holds it firm; and he extends the tip of the limb to the staff that is held by him, and let him be; and then he strengthens the other limb under his belly, and lets him be; and then he adjusts all the limbs and lets them be in the other staff that is held by him, and he holds those feet.
Then the minister drops him and extends his limb to the end of the staff, and does not hold the two staffs and limbs in their places in which they are fixed, but holds them in a certain way; however, it is not held thus as I have said.
And the minister pauses his palms on the spine with strength until he returns, or that he pauses them over a table, and then adjust his feet on the table until he returns.
But if it does not return in this form, then take a table whose width or length is in the air of three arms, and place in the wall in which I have said that is close to the patient a place where the end of the table enters. And then place the table's edge on the spine, and the doctor places his feet on the opposite end, and he notes immediately that the spine is pinched and returns to its place.
And if you want, open the one that is turned towards the back; and it is that you stay on the ground you must place the head of the patient behind the leg two pegs, the length of which is a arm, and you must place the head of him behind the leg exactly the same two pegs; and be the length that there is between any peg one palm, and already is done in any peg turn away from the ground, and each is stopped firmly on the ground so that it does not fall.
And also a round stick in which there is the turn, and it is turned away in the two pegs of the two sticks.
And at the end of him is a hole in which there is the peg, its length being a palm so that it turns away; and in the other two sticks is similar to this one.
And then tighten the ties that you have put on the legs of the patient in the hole through which the head must pass, and the ties that you have put on the thighs of him in the turn through which the feet must pass.
And then it is necessary that each turn and there is a servant who twists the turn towards his hand, and the doctor crushes the spine according to what we have said.
And then that the spine has returned, and the place is crushed, it is customarily that you put an exsiccate paste of white wine on a sponge, and then cover; and then place over the paste the table edge from which its width is three fingers or less than those, and its length is quantity to fill the space of the yellowness, and in front of the spine so.
And then be tied with a tie that we have said, and use the patient's diet of subtle food as it is cured.
And if there is a certain imminence in the place at the end of the cure, it is customarily that you administer medicines that moilify and soften to the administration of the table for a long time, which we have recommended; and already is administered in that place a piece of lead.
And in some cases it is imminent in the back of the two spine, and it is broken by that dislocation; and this is the bone which we have already mentioned for you not to be forced to make any compromise with him with this medicine, because it will be strong enough to kill him.
Chapter 31.
Of Cure of Ankylosis (Dislocated Hips)
You should know that the joint of the hip and the tendon connection do not cause anything but dislocation only, and this does not happen in those cases that it happens to other joints with small movement and concave shape.
And the hip joint is dislocated in four ways, since it is dislocated at the front and back, or at the sides, or at the front and back.
And mainly it is dislocated at the front and slightly to the back.
And the sign of the dislocation of him to the front and inside is that, when you adjust the curve of the patient's body in a healthy way, it becomes longer and the back is more curved than the healthy one, and the patient cannot bend his head because the tongue has come out; and this is the place where the tongue has come out from being in.
And the sign of that one that happens to dislocation is at the sides, it is that the accidents of him are opposite to this accident.
And the sign of that one that happens to dislocation at the front is that it opens its curve in a perfect way, but in addition, it does not bend the back and it hurts; and if it penetrates into going and he cannot walk because of it; and his urine is repressed and his tongue is inflamed, and it must move on foot.
And the sign of that one that happens to dislocation at the back is that it does not open its curve, nor bend his back and it hurts; and if he bends his front side so that he bends his tongue, and his tongue becomes inflamed, and this is the place where the tongue has come out.
But the reduction of these spices of this dislocation is that you consider, then, if the dislocation is old and ancient, it has already become ancient and old with you; and if it is not in this cure, and at that time it does not happen to be necessary to make any compromise with him.
But in that one of which the dislocation is recent, and it is one of the four spices of dislocation, then you must move the joint and extend it at the sides and at the front, and put it to the left and right, because it will return strongly and it will not need any other cure.
But if it does not return in this way, then you prepare a very strong servant and extend the curve of him from the side that is more to the left, or on his back, or with a tie that is tied to his back; and another servant extends the hand of him above his head, and if he feels pain, then make a cut at the joint, and if he does not feel pain, then cut it; and another servant tightens the knot on his back, and has another servant hold his feet.
And it is extended of him or of the side that is more to the left to the joint that is at the hip, or from the back to the hip of two.
And it is extended in all these ways within one case, so that the patient is raised on his back with his feet hanging down.
This type of extension is very specific to all four cases.
And therefore if the dislocation returns in the way that we have said, it is good; and otherwise, then it is necessary to all the spices that will direct from its own cure.
In the reduction of him alone, when it is dislocated, and the dislocation is to the front sides, then the patient is laid on his back in that position; and then place the ties on the root of his throat at that place where the tongue is inside; and then extend the ties from the side that is more up to the hip.
Then another strong servant takes his arms, and tightens the place of the patient' s throat with it, and extends it at the sides by violent extension because that one returns to its own place.
This type is less serious cure with which this member is reduced than the other spices.
But if it does not obey on you to this type of cure of all members, then tie the two feet of the patient together with a strong knot, and take both hands above the shoulders; and tie them together on both sides and on both backs.
And be the length of each one of them by the quantity of four fingers, and be the curve of him extended more than the other by a quantity of two fingers.
And then hang the patient from his feet on to the beam, and that it be in the middle; and be the length of him from the ground by a quantity of two arms.
And then order a strong young man to cut off the head of the patient, and hang it from the other side with a strong rope; and another young man pulls the body up by the rope because the joint returns quickly to its place.
When the dislocation occurs on the outside, cover that the patient lies on his side according to what we have already told when it has been heated; and strengthen the joint above the hernia itself and above its feet.
Then place two paddles, one on the patient's feet and the other on his head; and place some damp rags around the joints that are being stretched to prevent the patient from getting wet by the water between their legs, so that the extension to the extremities does not pull out.
Then each servant extends his part, and the doctor puts his hand on the reduction according to the art.
And when the dislocation is on the front side, then cover that the chest is extended slightly, and it is according to this narrative on the patient's back; and the doctor puts his right hand on the hernia side, and close that with the other hand, and extends it to the sides of the legs at the hip.
And if the dislocation is on the back side, then do not cover that the hernia is extended to the sides of the legs, and raise it above the ground; keeping in mind that it is paused on a hard thing, so as when the joint between the legs is displaced on the outside, according to what we have said about the engagement of them on two boards; and it is on its face and the joints are extended, as we have said, not bent.
Cover that a compressive massage is given to the joint.
Then, when the reduction is completed according to that, and the sign of the patient's reduction is not hidden from you, and it is because you extend two boards on him, and when you see those joints engaged and the hernia expands its area by two inches, then know that the second member has returned; and then you adjust two cushions and pause a cloth, and so the board does not bend in any of the sides; and fasten the hernia to rest for three days or four.
Then return the joint and the cloth, and compare one board with the other.
Then, if you see those joints engaged in a vestment, then know that the dislocation is already stopped, and let the patient go away.
And if you see any cause of softening, then you return and apply that one, and stretch the other according to your first order, and let it rest for three days.
Then return that one, and allow that one to walk with a limp for some days, until it is relieved.
Chapter LII.
Of treatment of dislocation from the hip.
The hip is displaced according to three ways: because it is displaced on the outside, and on the inside, and on the sides more on the inside than on the outside; and is not displaced on the front side.
The sign of a dislocated hip is because you order the hernia to apply its chest to the cushion; then know that the hip is displaced.
And the restoration of all its parts is that you pass over the hernia's side right, and then extend its chest, if it can on this; adhere the two to the patient' face, and pause his foot between these; and another servant applies pressure between its feet with strength, and other ministers extend its foot until the hip returns to its place.
The sign of recovery is because its chest adheres to the cushion with a light effort.
Then return that one and apply its chest to the cushion, and then bind those limbs together with a light cloth for three days or four, and then remove them.
And do not use the hernia for walking for some days until it is relieved and relieved.
Then, if the reduction to you is not explained, then administer a strong massage on the joints in the treatment of the hernia.
Chapter LIII.
Of the treatment of dislocation of the tongue.
The tongue is sometimes jarred by a little movement, and sometimes it is displaced according to the fall, and its displacement occurs on the inside or on the outside.
The sign of a dislocated tongue is that it swells according to the fall in which it is displaced.
The treatment of a little movement of the tongue is easy recovery, and it is that it is extended with ease to the sides and is engaged until it returns.
When the tongue is displaced according to a fall, then do as if you were right, and have another strong and brave servant keep his side in your place.
Then return to you with the right hand of the upper part of the foot, and with your left hand at the lower side of the foot in the place of the heel.
Then return the foot to you with the right hand, and throw it two times with the left hand, and then extend it with the left hand; and protect the feet of the upper part with the right hand.
Then make two steps according to what we have counted.
Then return the feet to the chest on the third step, and you are in the heel.
Then return one time or two times according to this way, and if the foot is engaged, it is good; otherwise, then perform the operation again, because that one returns.
Then, if to you is forbidden the reduction of the tongue by water which we have recommended, then make the hernia perform on its side on the ground, and apply a dry cloth to it so that it does not come out; and wrap a cloth around the patient so that it does not slip.
Then the servant of the patient holds its joints, and another minister extends his foot with the hand or limb that lies on the hip; and then extend that one against the extension of its side, and the cloth between the hernia' sides so that the body does not come out by the extension to the sides.
Then the doctor absorbs the displacement with his hand, and another minister holds the patient' side, because the displacement returns easily.
Then, when the displacement returns and is declared to you the recovery of the patient' tongue, then return the compressive massage and apply it with force, and bind the foot to the chest.
Then you will be protected or guarded from the nerves that are behind on the tongue, so that the joint on that one is not violent and strong.
Then return that one for two days or three; and if the joint is softened, apply it.
Then return that one after three days, and do not allow the hernia to walk for ten days. Then, if it is necessary to walk in front of that space, it is not necessary that the displacement is on the tongue, dissolved and corrupted; then return that one because it does not receive treatment.
And if it happens to him when you administer to him in the treatment of his tongue that which we have preceded in our narrative on another place of cure and cure, then return that one because it is jarred.
Chapter .xxxiiii.
On treating a dislocated joint of the feet.
If that which is dislocated is small and can be pushed in with a little force, it is easy to reduce; but if not, it must be done cautiously.
But if the dislocation is in one of the toes of the foot, then return the patient to the ground or table, and reduce it as if he were going out.
Then return to the feet, and place the big toe on top of that which is dislocated, pressing it firmly down so that it does not move, and so that it may be reduced; and let him see if it has been reduced and does not protrude.
Then place under the foot a table that supports the entire foot, which has two ends and is strong and firm for three days; then, after reducing it, let him rest from walking for four days, so that it does not hurt and recovery is assured.
Chapter .xxxv.
On the different types of dislocations that are caused by pain or fracture or some other means.
When any cause of those occurs, and you take on the treatment of that and seek to restore it, many bad outcomes must be feared.
And in treating it, do not be hasty, merciful and compassionate, late, not impatient or proud; but use only those medicines that have a mild effect, and leave the patient to the divine judgement, but give hope of salvation from destruction, and some relief of pain. Then make every effort to reduce it as soon as the cause occurs, before the disease takes hold and causes vomiting.
Then, if the limb returns quickly, administer a remedy that causes vomiting and treats the fever with cool water.
If the dislocation is due to a fracture and the bones are separated, then you must set them, and do it in such a way that there is no pain in the simple cases of such things as precede in the places of those.
And guard and avoid according to your ability that of the instrument in the ways of fear according to which my prediction precedes you; for it is better to you that you should serve your Lord, and remain persistent in your glory, and increase in your goodness to the true Creator, and increase in your benefits. Thus ends the words of Al-Bucaimi which he has explained perfectly from them, for God is pleased with him. Amen.
