O sons, when I have completed this book for you, which is the last of the science of medicine, by its accomplishment in it and by its expositions and declarations, it has seemed to me that you will understand this treatise, which is a part of the operation with the hand, that is surgery.
For the operation with the hand is spread abroad in our realm and in our time deprived of all, while the science of it perishes, and its vestige is obstructed; and there remain of it only a few small descriptions in the books of the Ancients, which have altered the most part and led to errors and confusion, so that the minds of men are closed to it, and its force and art are prolonged.
And it has seemed to me that I should animate this with the arrangement of this treatise in the second place according to the way of exposition and declaration and abbreviation; and so that the forms of the instruments of cautery and of other tools of the work might come by addition of declaration, and by preparation of it, which cause is necessary.
But the cause why no good artificer is found with his hand in our time, is because the art of medicine is long, and that requires one to be exercised in the science of anatomy, which knows the joints of the members and their forms, and the conjunction and separation of them; and has the knowledge of bones, nerves, and tendons, and the number of these, and the issue of them; and of the pulsating veins and the quiet ones, and the places of their issuing.
And therefore Hypocras says that by name is much, but in the work little, and especially in the art of the hand.
But we have already said this in the introduction to this book; for whoever is not learned in what we have said of anatomy, it is not vacated that he may not fall into error by which men will die, as I have seen troops of these, for some are formed in this science and throw themselves from it without experience.
For I saw a foolish and experienced doctor open an abscess of scrofula on the neck of a woman, and he cut some arteries of the neck so that much blood flowed and the woman died under his hands.
And I saw another doctor who had taken a stone from a man who was in his condition, and the stone was great, and he brought it out with a part of the bladder, so that the man died on the third day.
And I called to take it out, and I saw that by the size of the stone and the disposition of the patient that he would die.
And I saw another doctor who received stipends from a duke of our land for surgery, and he treated a broken black slave; and through the ignorance of the doctor, when he had extracted the fracture, over the wound with poultices and bandages with strong pressure, he did not leave the wound to breathe.
And he did this according to his desires, and he released it, and he bound it for many days and commanded that we should not loosen the bandage; and he did so until the thigh and foot were apostematized, and he came to perdition.
And I was called to him, and I prepared to loosen the bandage, and I obtained tranquillity and he was eased of his pains.
But indeed the corruption was confirmed in the member, so that I could not restrain it, and the corruption did not cease to wander through the member until the man died.
And I saw another doctor who opened an apostema of a canker, and it was ulcerated for some days, until the malice of it was magnified with his lord.
The cause of this is that the black cautery is pure of melancholy humor, therefore it does not come to him with fire from all, but that there be a member which suffers that from all.
And therefore, sons, it is necessary for you that the operation with the hand be considered in two ways: first, in operation which is associated with health; and second, in work with which there is peril in the major dispositions.
And I have already exhorted this in all parts of this book in which comes operation in which there is error and fear; so that it is necessary for you to guard this and leave that, so that the foolish may not obstruct the way of speaking and disgracing you.
And therefore take up your weapons with solicitude and with protection of God, and your patients with facility and firmness.
And use the better way by the grace of God to health and laudable success, and leave terrible diseases of difficult cure, and bear your arms against that which makes you afraid, so that solicitude in your faith and in your name does not abandon you; for there remain for your glory, and most in the world and beyond to your sanctities.
Gaulish already said in some of his maxims: “Do not heal ill disease, so that evil doctors are not named.”
And I have divided this book according to three chapters.
Begins the division of the book, and first of the first part. The first chapter arranged of the head-to-toe, in the forms of the instruments and in the tools of the cauteries, and of what is necessary in the operation.
The division of the second part. The second chapter of bleeding and puncturing, and of cupping-glasses, and of bandages, and of extraction of thorns and of their likes, all capitulated and arranged of the forms of the instruments.
The third chapter of restoration and of dislocation, and of cure of torsion and their likes; a chapter arranged of the head-to-toe, and of the forms of the instruments.
I will tell you the quality of the humors of that cautery and the pains of it, and in what complexions cautery is prohibited.
Therefore I say that the term of the quality of the humor of cautery and of the pain of it is long and prolix, and subtle through science, and secret hid; and of it have spoken greatly many sages, and of it are they disagreed, and for me a little suffices of their terms, fearing prolixity.
And therefore I say that cautery confers with all complexions universally the which is of matter or of matter, excepting two complexions, which are cold and moist complexions.
In the cold and dry complexions with matter they disagreed; for some said that cautery is beneficial to it, and others said the contrary of that, that cautery is not convenient in disease which is by quality and by dryness, for nature of fire is quality and dryness, and convenient is that disease cold and dry with that which is cauted and dried be healed.
And I said the contrary of that, that by cautery is made benefit in all disease cold and dry which you see in the bodies of men; for when you compare the body of man and its humidity to the complexions of fire, you rub the body of man moist.
And I speak from experience, as I have tried this myself several times.
However, it is not advisable for someone to attempt this who has not already been instructed and practiced in the art of cautery, and become familiar with the variety of human complexions and dispositions of illnesses within them, and their causes, and the accidents of those illnesses, and the span of time involved.
But in other complexions there is no need for fear, especially in moist and humid illnesses, for all doctors have agreed on these, and they are not at odds over the use of cautery in those.
And know, my children, that the secret of healing with cautery by fire and of its goodness is that cautery is a simple action, the effect of which does not reach except to the member that is cauterized, and it does not affect another member by it except for a little harm.
But the action of a burning medicine reaches to those members from which it is removed, and it strongly brings about an illness in the member that is difficult to heal, and it strongly causes pain.
But fire, by its subtlety and the goodness of its substance, does not do that except to make it superfluous. And it is known to us by experience and by long service in the study of art upon the truth of causes; and because of this I am excused from the length of speech. And if it were not for the fact that my free will is not read in this hidden secret of fire, and the quality of its operation in bodies and its expulsion by which illnesses are expelled, in philosophical speech demonstrated, which would be sharpened in your hearts.
And know, my children, that they disagree on the time in which it is convenient to perform cautery and they pause at the best time in spring.
And I say that cautery is convenient at all times, because the harm from the accidental time is submerged in the benefit of what is drawn by cautery, and especially if the cautery is for pains or necessary pains, strong and fierce, which do not tolerate delay, so that it is feared that evil may come, which is greater than the little harm that comes from the season.
And yet, do not wonder in your hearts, o my children, at this, for it is not esteemed except by the common people and foolish doctors; it is that to that illness which is healed by cautery, there is not a reduction in time, and they pause at that consequence.
And the cause is not as they think it to be, for cautery is only in place of medicine which alters the complexion and dries up the moistness which are causes that bring about pains.
However, cautery surpasses medicine in the strength of its value and the power of its operation and the greatness of its lord.
And it is possible that the illness may return at some time according to the complexion of the patient and the location of the illness, and the power of it, and what is prepared in the body of it from the aggregation of superfluities in it, and what is come to it in its acquisition in foods and likenesses of those causes; unless that the illness on which cautery is administered is a subtle illness in a member with few superfluities and moistness, so that as with cautery for tooth pain and likenesses, it is possible that the pain will not return in him, but what happens in him is small.
And yet, the common speech is that cautery is the last remedy of medicine, and it is a just speech, not to what they understand about it, for they believe that there is no cure that benefits by medicine nor by any other cause except cautery.
And the cause is contrary to that; and the intention that cautery is the last remedy of medicine is not except when we administer the manners of cure in some illnesses, and those medicines do not confer it, and then at the end of the cause we administer man cautery, and it benefits to that. And then from here it happens that cautery is the last remedy of medicine, not according to the intention which the commoners and foolish doctors understand.
And they said that cautery with gold is better than cautery with iron, and they did not say this except for the equality of gold and the subtlety of its substance.
And they said that the place of cautery does not do harm, when it is not absolutely true, for I have already tried this and have proven to you that it does not do this except in some bodies without the others, and cautery with it is good and better than with iron as they said; but when you perform cautery with fire and gold, it is not declared to you, because it is kindled according to the quantity that you desire by the heat of the gold, and because it prepares to receive burn; and if you apply fire on it some leaves so that the craftsman sees by the occupation of that.
And because of this, cautery with iron must be made more gently and closer to the site of operation.
And I have already ordered this chapter in cautery according to chapters, and I have ordered those of the head into the feet, so that also ask me what you want from him.
The first chapter.
This cauterization confers to the moisture and coldness on the servile accident of which there are two causes, it is cause of soda and multitude of flux, called rhachitis, from the head to the tips of the ears and from the ears flowing, and multitude of sleeping, and toothache, and generally of all illness that comes by chill, so as paralysis, palsy, and likenesses in those illnesses.
The form of this cauterization is this: that first you command the patient to be evacuated by laxative medicine the head cleansing, for three or for four days, according to the strength of the patient and his age and habit.
And then command that he shaves his head with a razor, and then let him sit between your hands on a heated bed and let him rest his hands on his feet.
And then place the root of your palm near the foot over the root of the nose between your heels. However, when you have reached the mid-point of that location, mark it with a tent and then apply the olive oil cautery whose recipe is as follows:
And then place this over the marked spot, in such a way that it covers and presses down gently, and you shall keep turning it.
And then lift your hand gently and examine the spot, and if you see some of the bone exposed, with some amount of flesh, then lift your hand again, and if not, return your hand with that iron, with another one of those, if it is cooled off, back to the spot until you see what I have described to you.
And then take a little salt and dissolve it over the spot, and let that stay there for three days.
And then place raw meat over it, wrapped in a cloth, and let this stay until the burn scar is destroyed. And then treat the spot with four-ingredient ointment until it is healed.
And they also say that when the plague sores open up, the better the pus flows out, and so it is healthier and more beneficial.
And some of them say that the bone should be cauterized within, and that the cautery should stay until some part of the bone is charred.
And then it should be cut away from the bone, and then treated.
And others say that the cautery should reach down to the nerve, causing strong pressure within the bone until it breaks, and this is the recipe for alphecat in small amounts: And they consider that location to be where the brain's vapors escape from.
And if the plague sore remains open for a long time, then it should be treated until it is healed and consolidated.
But I have not seen these two cauteries used in their entirety except on some men according to the way of fear; and it is better for them as they are, since the head is made transparent by solution of continuity from there, as we have testified in other members, especially when the patient's head is of a phlegmatic nature.
And the first cautery is more gentle and better for them; and it works in this way with advantage.
Chapter according to St.
Of cauterization of the head.
When in every part of the head there is chronic and long-lasting pain, which has been prolonged in the patient, and he uses oils and salves and clysters and poultices and compresses and bandages and other similar remedies without any benefit, then consider that if the patient's head is of a strong constitution by nature, not phlegmatic but having a great deal of heat, then cauterize him with another cautery after the first one. And then cauterize that at the crown of his head with a cautery until the bone is split. The bone split and the amount we have described exposed, then cauterize that with a cautery at the back of the head in the place called the foramen magnum — and it is the location where the ventouse is applied. And move your hand back and forth, and do not expose the bone, for by doing this he will experience great pain unlike with any of the other cauteries on the head.
And I will describe this cautery in its place, for the cautery by which the horns of the head and the occipital are cauterized is more gentle than that cautery by which the middle of the head is cauterized; and this is its recipe:
Chapter three.
Of cauterization for non-ancient hemorrhoids.
When there is pain in the head caused by a cold disorder, or pain within the eye socket, first let it be evacuated with purifying medicines, and let other remedies also be administered as described in earlier diseases; and if nothing helps, then cauterization can be performed in two ways: either cauterization with burning medicine, or with an iron.
But the cautery with burning medicine is that you take a piece of wool and burn it and then put out its ends in both parts of the head. And then prick the location of the pain in the temple with a sharp lance, going deep enough to reach the bone, until it is covered over.
And then press down on it with a tight bandage, and let this remain there for the space of three hours; and then remove the bandage and treat the wound again, letting it heal in two or three days, and then apply raw meat to the spot, covered with a cloth until the wound breaks out.
And then treat that with ointment until it is healed.
And if you wish, do this with some burning medicines which I have written about in the two sections on burning medicines.
But cauterization by iron is performed like this: heat up the cautery, of which this is the recipe:
And it is called a closed nail, for the head of it is like a small claw with some curvature and in the middle of it is a small prominence.
And then apply it to the place of the pain, and move your hand — so that it is not burned — and turn the iron little by little with speed.
And if the amount that is burned by the nature of the bone is equal to the thickness of it, and you raise your hand so that the artery underneath is not burned, so that there is no flow of blood.
And then dip the cautery in salt water and apply it to the spot for three days; then apply raw meat wrapped in a cloth, and treat it with ointment until it is healed.
And if you wish, cauterize with the edge of the blade according to the cautery, and be careful to avoid cutting the artery in this non-ancient hemorrhoid.
Chapter four.
Of cauterization for ancient hemorrhoids.
When you treat hemorrhoids with what we have said about its cure, and what we have said in the divisions of diseases, and if this cure is unsuccessful, then consider that if it does not yield to this treatment, or to cauterization with medicine, or with fire, then light the cuterry until it turns white, and then press down on it with a bandage, pricking the artery underneath, until it bleeds into the bone.
But you must take care that the jaw is not broken due to chewing, and that no artery is burned and no nerve underneath it, and that no spasm ensues.
And if it is about the caution and protection of blood flow from the artery which is cut, for in the cutting of it there is danger, especially to one who is ignorant, and unaware, let the operation be performed at the beginning.
And I will give you instructions on the course of blood flow from the artery according to its own way, in your own house.
And if you see that this disease does not yield to this cautery and the patient' body tolerates it, then cauterize him in the middle of the head as we have described, and treat the wound until it is healed.
And if you administer the cautery we have described in the section on stretching of the artery with two prongs, then this cautery is better and more effective.
Chapter .V.
Of cauterization for ear pains.
When there is pain in the ear from a cold cause and it is treated with remedies that produce lacrimation and also with other remedies which have been mentioned in the division, and if the pain still persists, then ignite the cautery and it is called punctum, of which this is the form:
And then point to the heat, and move it all around the ear as a wheel is turned, or in circles throughout each part if the pain is in any part. Along with the cautery from the root of the ear, inch by inch as you heat the place with it.
And if the cautery makes ten points all around the ear, and then heals those places in between so that they become healthy again.
Chapter .VI.
Of cauterization for torture.
Torture which is cured by cauterization and not only of the humors that come through phlegm, as we have said in the divisions of illnesses.
Avoid cauterization of the humor that comes from dryness or from a spasm in the nerve.
When you cure that kind of torture with syringes and blood-letting and poultices, if your treatment does not work, then apply cauterization to the patient in three places: first at the root of the ear, then a little below his temple, and the third at the junction of two lips.
And apply your cautery opposite to where the pain is, because softening does not come except in the part that appears healed.
And the form of cauterization is that you cauterize at the right side of the most upper part of the ear, and in the temple another one whose length is according to the length of your finger, and hold your hand with the cautery over it until that quantity of half the thickness of a hair is burnt.
And this is the form of the cautery, and it is the specialty of the surgeon, whose form is represented in front of a table. But however more subtle it is that one goes there with the cautery just as it is, and then he puts some on the wound to cover the superficial roughness.
And then cure the place with what is before you until it becomes healthy again.
Chapter .VII.
Of cauterization for old apoplexy.
When apoplexy is old and you treat it with what we have said but your treatment does not work, and the patient does not have a fever, then cauterize that person in four places: over both corners of his head, as we have said, and also the middle part of his head, and also cauterize in the throat. And the manner of the cautery is done according to what has been said above.
And you have cauterized on the mouth of the stomach, and it is more difficult to cure; then let it be healed by what comes out.
Chapter .VIII.
Of cauterization for obliteration made by phlegm.
Let the patient receive at the beginning large syringes and purgatives.
And then scrape the whole head of the patient, and place on his throat the ointment described in the treatise on ointments.
And apply that several times because this is the manner of cauterization. And do that according to the methodical order which I have said.
And if he is healed by that then well and good; but if not, then do to him three cauteries in the back part of his head which descend from the highest part of the head to the lowest part of the neck. And apply between each cautery the thickness of a finger, and then cure the cautery with what comes out.
But if you can and the patient can tolerate it, then do to him cauteries in the middle part; and if you see greater tolerance, then cauterize on both corners.
Then cure that until it becomes healthy again; and let the cautery be olive oil according to the form given above.
Chapter .IX.
Of cauterization for parasites and of softening of the whole body.
Let the patient undergo blood-letting of the head with syringes and with what we have said; and then scrape the head of the patient, and cauterize that with cauteries on the middle part of his head, and also cauterize on both corners of his head, and also cauterize on the back part of him, and also do three cauteries on the vertebrae of the neck.
And if it is necessary in the illness of softening of the body and the patient can tolerate it, then do four cauteries on the vertebrae of the back, and finally with cautery over what has been burnt, raise your hand. Then cure that until it becomes healthy again, and let this be olive oil.
Chapter .X.
Of cauterization for epilepsy.
Let the epileptic be cauterized only when epilepsy is caused by phlegm.
And let the brain of him be purged at the beginning of his illness with syringes and with other remedies which have been mentioned in the division when the patient is large and can tolerate the exception of the remedies.
And if he is a child who does not take the remedies, then give him poultices and masticables which the servant will apply, before what comes out for several days, with good food.
And then scrape the head of the patient and then cauterize that with one cautery in the middle part of his head according to the previous method, and also cauterize on the occipital bone, and also cauterize on both corners of his head. And if the patient is strong and can tolerate it, then cauterize him with cauteries which I have said, having paralysis and softening of the body on the vertebrae of the neck and also the vertebrae of the back.
And let this be olive oil according to what precedes it.
But if the patient is a child then apply a subtle cautery according to this method.
Chapter .XI.
Of cauterization for melancholy.
When the causes of melancholy are corrupt humidities and gross phlegm, then cauterize that with cauteries which I have said in the case of paralysis.
And if the cause of melancholy is excessive decline into melancholy and the body of the patient is humid then let him drink what purges the brain according to what precedes in the division.
And then scrape the head of the patient and also make a decently twisted bandage over his forehead, and then place that over the middle part of his head.
Let the patient be quiet and let him lie on his back.
And then apply a poultice and it is also worthy of being bathed with hot water from sheep. Let that be heated over the fire by moderate heat according to measurement so that it does not suffer when it is put on him. And then apply vinegar in the middle part of his head in the forehead and pour it over so that it runs down.
And do that to him for a week with vinegar, and let him have the other regimen of him until he is healed; or if you wish, cauterize him by making small points according to his strength unless you have your hand with one cautery as it is ordered: this is the cautery which moistens the brain with equality.
And then place that wet cloth in a bowl or in a basin of warm water.
Chapter XII.
Of cauterization with water descending into the ear.
When to you has been revealed the beginning of water in the ear through the signs which I have told in the division, then begin and give the patient something to drink that cleanses his head, and keep him from all moisture.
And let him sweat in a bath for several days.
And then command him to wash his hair, and cauterize that with a cautery in the middle of the head; and then cauterize it with two cauteries over the two temples if the beginning of water is in both ears, or on one side if the water comes from one ear.
Then, with a cautery, cut all the veins and arteries which are below the collarbone; and let the cauteries be in that length in the width of the temples.
And beware of any bleeding when it is cauterized; and if you see any bleeding from it, stop it with some medicine which is possible for you.
And I came with wisdom which is in the extraction of arteries and veins, and cauterization of them and cautioning against bleeding.
And sometimes it is cauterized in the neck below two bones with two cauteries recently produced.
Chapter XIII.
Of cauterization of old tears.
When tears from the ears are old and persistent and through veins and arteries which are in the manifest location of the head and it is verified that this is surplus phlegmatic moisture, then cauterize that with a cautery which we recounted in the chapter on the beginning of water coming into the ears, and with a cautery in the middle of the head, and with two cauteries over the temples below two bones. And if you see the need for addition, then cauterize that on all sides of the ear canal at the end of the outer ear with a small cautery.
Chapter XIV.
Of cauterization of blood in the neck for veins and arteries in the neck, and for the throat.
When you treat him with that which we said in the division and your treatment does not profit, then prepare and give the patient a poultice for three nights, and then shave his head, and cauterize it with an olive-oil cautery. And then cauterize that with a cautery of garlic with two cauteries over the two outer ears below the hair, one small.
And beware of the artery that you do not ignite it.
And of the cautery of garlic, this is its form.
Chapter XV.
Of the cautery for softening of the eyelids of the eyes.
When the eyelid of the eye is softened by sickness or humidity, then cauterize that eyelid with a cautery which has this lunar shape; and this is how you make it:
And if you, cauterize that on the two eyebrows a little bit with two cauteries all divided, and let them be elongated from the temples. And let the length of each cautery be according to the amount of eyebrow.
And do not press too hard with your hand on the cautery, but according to the quantity that the third part of the eyelid is affected.
Chapter XVI.
Of the cautery for the eyelid of the eye when the hairs are converted into the parts within and close up the eye.
When the hairs of the eye are converted into the parts within so that they close up the eye, there are two ways of cauterizing them: one cautery is with fire, and another cautery is with a burning medicine.
If you cauterize it with fire, order the patient to open his eyes so that he cuts his hairs as they grow, while you prolong and burn them; and if he closes it you must strengthen the eye with a bandage so that he does not hurt himself as the hairs are growing.
Then as they grow and burn, put the patient's head in your lap, and then mark on the eyelid of the eyes with a piece of coal, the shape of which is like a leaf of an oak tree, and let the beginning of the mark be near the hairs.
And then put cotton soaked in white vinegar or in mullein tea on the eye.
And then light the cautery of which this is the shape.
And then cauterize over the figure which you have marked, little by little, until it burns the surface of the membrane which is like a leaf of myrtle, appearing properly.
And the sign of health from your work is that you see the eyelid of the eye already contracted and the hairs of it elevated above the puncturing of the eye.
And then raise your hand and open that for three days, and then put on it a poultice until the scar is healed. And then treat that with ointment until it is healed.
But if they return because of the hairs for some cause, and the eyelid is softened, then do the cautery on it again completely as you did at first.
But if the hairs are in the eyelid, then cauterize that until it is elevated to its natural place and burned and that the hairs do not poke into the eye.
But the cautery with burning medicine is that you order the patient to open his eyes so that he cuts his hairs as they grow and burn; then make the shape of the leaf of myrtle out of cloth.
And then take one ounce of dry salt and a quarter ounce of vitriol. That is: Take this mixture and stir it well so that the vitriol does not stick to the bottom; and then spread this mixture over the cloth which is made in the shape of a leaf of myrtle, and put that on one eye or both; and put under the eye cotton soaked in white vinegar, and let the patient's head be in your lap.
And put the finger over the medicine and press that gently so that he does not hurt himself while the patient feels the burning of the medicine, for it burns in him as fire.
And then when he perceives the burning, let him open it with your finger; and then take away the medicine and wash the eye with water; and then consider if you see the eyelid lifted as it is washed because of the cautery by fire or by cutting, for then it is well; and if not return to that on which the medicine has not bitten and is not blackened until your operation is healed and the eye is contracted.
And then put on it a poultice until the membrane of the cautery is eradicated, and treat that with defynition ointment or other until it is healed.
And it is necessary that you watch over your operation so that no residue of the medicine falls into the eye; and if the eyelid after a few days is softened and for some cause the hairs poke into the eye, then repeat your medicine on that place from which the eyelid is softened, and do it just as you did at the beginning, and bandage him until he is healed.
And this is the shape of a leaf of myrtle:
And know that men's eyes are different in size and smallness, and therefore according to this is your contraction made.
And the way of straightness does not lead to that one who is taught in this art.
Chapter XVII.
Of cautery for the fistula which is in the tear duct of the eye.
When you heal fistula by what we have said in the divisions of sickness and do not trust your healing, then know that you cauterize it according to this way: order the patient to put his head in your lap, and let some servant hold his head between their hands in such a way that he is not hurt nor agitated by his head.
And then put cotton soaked in white vinegar or mullein tea on the eye of him.
And then light the cautery of which this is the shape:
Which is hollow, like the shape of a reed or of a feather of an owl, from one extremity which is made the cautery.
And if you see that it is penetrating to the other extremity. And if you want it to come out like a thread.
However, that which is hollow is better for your work.
And then press the fistula if it is open and draw from him the pus and dry that. And if it is not open, then open it and take out the pus of it.
And then put over it the cautery which is lit, and hold your hand over the eye at the part of the nose so that you or the patient are not hurt, and then put the cautery on the edges of the eye and rub that.
And then if at the beginning of your cautery it penetrates into the bone, well; and if not, then repeat the cautery once or twice as need is; let him open his eyes for three days, and then put over that a poultice and bandage him until he is healed.
But if after ten days it is not healed, then put over it sharp medicine which erodes the bone and let it be open so that you see the membrane, and scrape it according to what it says in its chapter.
And another way of cautery for the fistula which some first said: stop at the place of the fistula and pierce that and then put in that fissure a thin wire of which the shape is: And melt in that one ounce of lead molten; and hold your hand over the eye with good retention so that he is not hurt as the molten lead does not come to the eye from that; and see that you put on the eye of the patient cotton soaked in white vinegar or water, for the lead erodes the place of the fistula and heal it by a wondrous healing.
And if the fistula is healed with what we have said about the cautery and the treatment, it is good; and if not, then it is necessary to administer an incision in the nose and reduce the fistula to the body of the nose according to where it will go into its proper place.
Here begins the eighteenth chapter.
Of cauterizing the wound in the fistula.
Many times there occur fissures in the lips, and mostly in the lips of children.
Therefore, when you heal those fissures with what we have said in the divisions and your treatment does not work, then light the cautery knife in this way:
And its cavity according to the thinness of the blade.
Then place it gently in those fissures until the cautery reaches the bottom of the fissure.
And then heal that with bandages so that it will be healthy.
Here begins the nineteenth chapter.
Of cauterizing a fistula in the mouth.
When in the root of the uvula or the palate or the roots of the teeth there is an ulcer and it is swollen and broken and old and has a fistula, and you heal it with what we have said about healing but it does not work, then know that you should ignite cautery according to the quantity which was received in the fistula; then put that fire into the hole of the fistula, and hold your hand over it so that the hot iron reaches the bottom of it; and at the end of it make an incision or two; and heal that with what we have said about healing so that it will be healthy.
And therefore if the sore is healed and healthy, that's good; but if not, then it is necessary to discover the place and remove the rotten bone according to what will come in its chapter.
Here begins the twentieth chapter.
Of cauterizing teeth and softening gums.
When the gums are softened by moisture and the teeth are rotten, and you heal them with medicines but they don't work, then put the patient's head in your lap, and ignite the cautery in the form which will come here, in such a way that you place the hook over the tooth and insert into it the ignited cautery quickly, and hold your hand gently over it so that the heat of the fire reaches the root of the tooth.
And then lift up your hand, and repeat the cautery several times according to what you want.
And then the patient should gargle with salty water and hold it for an hour, and then spit it out; for the rotten tooth is hardened and the softened gum is strengthened, and the corrupt moisture is dried up.
Here begins the twenty-first chapter.
Of cauterizing a toothache.
When a toothache is from coldness, or in it is cold or wormy, or the medicine does not work, then the cautery in that place is according to two ways: either cauterize with cow' hide, or cauterize with fire.
Cautery with cow hide is that you take a cow hide and boil it in an iron pot, and then grab it by the tail and wrap it around the end of the tooth, and then plunge it into the boiling hide and place it quickly on the painful tooth until it is cold.
And then repeat that several times until the goodness of the fire reaches the root of the teeth.
And if you wish, immerse wool or hide in the said boil, and place it on the painful tooth, and hold the hot iron over it so that the iron reaches the bottom of the cavity of the tooth.
But the cautery with fire is that you take an iron or ram horn, and it should have some thickness and the heat of the fire not reach the patient' mouth.
And then ignite the cautery in the form which will come, and place it on the tooth and hold your hand over it so that the cautery is cold; and do this several times because the pain will be reduced or on that day or the next day.
And know that because of that cautery, the patient should fill his mouth with good salive and hold it for an hour, then spit it out; this is the way of cauterizing.
And cauterize with whatever you want according to what is possible for you.
And this is the way of the hook:
Here begins the twenty-second chapter.
Of cauterizing hernia.
When hernias are of phlegm and cold humors and they do not yield to digestion with medicines, and you see that light digestion, then ignite the cautery in such a way that it has two ends bent so that smoke comes out of the cautery through one end, place the ignited cautery on the hernia once, and if it does not yield from that, then hold it over the hernia until the heat reaches the bottom of the hernia.
And if the hernia is small, then place the cautery according to the quantity of the hernia; and then let it cool for three days, and place wool soaked in cow' hide over it so that what the fire has burned is cooled down.
And then heal that with ointment and bandages until it is healthy.
Here begins the twenty-third chapter.
Of cauterizing rawness of throat and constriction of voice.
When moisture comes from the lungs, and especially when it is from coldness of constitution, then know that the patient should be evacuated at the beginning with laxative medicines; then cauterize him from the root of the gullet in the place which has been weakened.
And beware that you do not reach with the cautery to the gullet or burn the membrane of it, but only a little.
And cauterize him with another cautery from the joint of the throat in the last vertebra of it. And the cautery of him should be like a nail, according to the preceding way.
And then heal that with what has been said so that it is healthy.
Here begins the twenty-fourth chapter.
Of cauterizing sickness of the lungs and of coughing.
When coughing and sickness of the lungs are from cold humors, and the patient does not have fever or typhus and it is an old sickness, then cauterize him with two cauteries on the breastbone in the weakened places between the ribs, and with another cautery in the middle place of the chest between the nipples; and let the cautery be like a nail according to the preceding way.
And if you want, let your cautery be punctured by the cautery which is called puncture, the way of which precedes in the puncturing of toothache.
And let the points be inserted into them; and then heal that with what has been said so that it is healthy.
And if the cautery has three bends, for cauterizing is with that: with one cautery you can do three cauteries according to this form:
Here begins the twenty-fifth chapter.
Of cauterizing of thorns which is the head of the helper.
When the helper's head is dislocated from the cause of moistnesses lubricas and it does not return in its hour of its return from the dislocation to him, then know that first reduce the dislocation, and then the patient returns over his shoulder or on his side; and if the joint is dislocated to the parts within with the movements of your left hand, then know that the patient should be raised by the codena which is in the part within with the movements of your left hand, if the joint is dislocated to the parts within.
And then light the cautery having two heads, and this is its shape:
Then cauterize the vein where it penetrates into the other side, and the figure of cauterization comes from four-headed cauteries.
And sometimes it is adjusted according to this count, for which reason they are eight cauteries:
And then put some salt on the cautery and attach the patient to tranquility, and the member must not be disturbed for any length of time until it is comforted:
And if the dislocation is above and below, then it is done like this: cauterize on the muscle with a nail-like cautery or with pointed cauteries, for the joint is confirmed, and moisture is driven out, and the patient is healed.
Chapter .XXVI.
On cauterization of the stomach:
When there comes into the stomach a rubbing and moisture which makes that part to be extruded from its own composition and to be multiplied within it, and if you continue the methods of treatment and do not give relief, then see that the patient lies on his back, extends his arms and legs, and cauterize him with three cauteries: one cautery under the feet for the quantity of a finger with a nail-like cautery, and with two cauteries under the armpits of the cautery, so that the figure of a triangular cautery comes out; and stretch between them so that they are not close to each other to make a wound.
And if the depth of the cautery is the quantity of two fingers or as thick as the vein:
And the figure of the cautery is according to this shape with its addition, and if you want, cauterize in the middle of the stomach with a large cautery in this shape; and that one be a cautery according to the shape of a circle like this:
And the stomach is punctured at the place where it is frightened by that cautery: and you feel on the stomach a point according to the quantity you want with a thread, and then cauterize it with a cautery on the points; and then treat it with the treatment which has been preceded so that it is healed.
Chapter .XXVII.
On cauterization of a fretted liver:
When there is pain in the liver from rubbing or moisture or grossness and it is extruded from its normal composition by superfluous egress, and the patient is treated as we have said and does not confer with that, then see that the patient lies on his back on his head, and feel with a thread three cauteries according to this shape and quantity placed on the liver below the hypochondrium on the right side:
And let the space between each cautery be according to the thickness of a finger, and let the cauteries be according to the length of the body straight.
And do not move it with the cautery.
And if the quantity of that which is burned is the quantity of half a thread of the thickness of the vein, and it is not close together; and if the patient stands on his feet, and if he does not stand, then let him lie, having already extended his limbs and elevated his arms:
And you have the ability to cauterize these cauteries with a cutlass cautery, when you have subtlety and prudence in the art:
And beware that you do not go too far in cauterization and that the thickness of all the vein is burned so that it reaches into the intestines, for the vein is here subtle; know this.
Chapter .XXVIII.
On boring of an abscess of the liver with a cautery:
When there is an ulcer or abscess on the liver and you want to know whether that abscess is in the flesh of the liver or in its tunic, then if it is in the flesh of the liver, the patient will groan heavily and pain will be sharpened:
And if it is in the tunic of the liver, with great pain increased several times so that the doctors tire from curing him:
Then see that the patient lies on his back on his head; and then feel the place of the abscess with a thread; and then light the cautery which is assembled like a rag, the shape of which has been preceded in the other page: And cauterize with that cautery until all the vein is burned so that it reaches into the spleen, where bile flows:
Then treat him with treatment for the other abscesses until he is healed.
And do not use this form of cautery except that one by which the study in the art of medicine is prolonged, and many diseases are known from it; but rather let us know that one, for although sometimes it is tried on this operation, it is better.
Chapter .XXIX.
On cauterization of a hernia:
Dissent the ancient cauteries of the roots of aristology for hernias with a rub according to this manner, and it is this which you take from the roots of aristology: a long, dry root that is found, and it is as thick as a finger:
And then immerse it in oil and heat it in the fire, and then cauterize with a cautery on that place which is between the continuance of the furcula and the collar-bone; and with two small cauteries below the guids, one slightly declining to the part where the beard is, and with two cauteries on what declines between the fifth rib and the breast-bone, declining a little to behind; and with a cautery in the middle of the foot; and with another over the stomach; and with three cauteries on the parts behind; and with a cautery in that place which is between the two shoulders, and with two cauteries on the sides of the leg, below the cautery which is between the two shoulders.
And do not move your hand with the cautery but let it be in the evident appearance of the vein as it appears:
And they have also said some ancient things which are of men whose cauteries of iron are like a ray and heated that, and put it in that place which is between the ribs so that it reaches to that abscess, and it is foreseen bile, as we have said in the abscess of the liver:
But in this boring with a cautery there is no fear, for it happens to them at once in the place where a fistula appears to which there is no cure:
Chapter .XXX.
On cauterization of a hernia:
When you cure the illness of a hernia with what we have said about the division and do not confer your cure, then cauterize him according to three ways which are all right, one of which is that you make three cauteries or four lines according to the length of the hernia according to the figure of the cauteries of the liver, the figure of which has preceded:
And let there be between each cautery the thickness of a finger or a little more, and the manner of the cauterization is the same as we have said in the cauterization of the liver with a straight edge:
And do not move your hand with the cautery, and let the patient lie on his back.
And another manner of cauterizing is that you ignite the cautery having two verminents, which cause has been said in the chapter of dislocation of the muscle, and elevate the vein which is in the end of the hernia where the patient’s left hand is:
And let your elevation be such that you raise the patient according to the length of their body, so that cauteries can be applied according to the breadth of the body.
Then insert the two hot rods into the space through which you have penetrated the patient from the other side.
Then withdraw the cautery; and thus are made four cauteries.
And if you wish, cauterize with a cautery having three rods.
And then you treat the cautery until it has ceased to smoke for several days, because it is more beneficial than the other previous causes in the cure.
Chapter 31.
Of cauterization for dropsy.
Cauteries should not be used for dropsy except in the intestines specifically.
When you treat the dropsical person by the methods of cure which we have stated in the division, and do not make your cure concordant, then you should cauterize four cauteries in the circuit of the groin, and a cautery over the stomach, and another cautery over the liver, and another cautery over the spleen, and two cauteries between the vertebrae of the back, and a cautery in the right side of the abdomen, and another cautery over the stomach. And the quantity of the depth of the cautery should be proportionate to the thickness of the body.
And then withdraw the cautery so that it smokes for a long time.
And do not discharge the patient of the cure by the cautery with that which has been used so that two tendencies are added to him and he is helped to health by them.
The form of the cautery with which the belly is cauterized should be key-shaped according to that which is above it previously, and that with which the back is cauterized should be olive-shaped according to that which precedes it.
Chapter 32.
Of cauterization for feet and the thighs.
When the feet are swollen with dropsy and filled with yellow water, you should cauterize the feet over the instep of the foot in between the ring finger and little finger, and elevate your hand with the cautery and do not twist it; then elevate your hand and do not return it at all, for the yellow water flows.
It is cauterized in this shape: and then make two cauteries over both thighs, and in each thigh there should be made a cautery with the end of the cutlass-like cautery. And let the cautery be according to the length of the thigh: one above the knee and the other below, and on each thigh two cauteries.
Then withdraw the plague after the cure for a long time so that no water flows from him.
And then treat it with those causes which we have stated.
Chapter 33.
Of cauterization for body of the belly.
When the body of the belly is affected by rubbing and moisture which weakens the intestines, there is digestive and retentive vertigo, which are in the stomach and intestines, and it is cured with the methods of cure and not concordant, and sometimes the patient suffers from vertigo of excessive heat, then cauterize him with a large cautery over his stomach according to that which precedes in the cauterization of the stomach, with the cautery of the circle and four cauteries in the circuit of the groin with subtle key-shaped cautery; and cautery over the anus over an ulceration great, or with two cauteries.
And if you see the excessive moisture and the patient can tolerate it, then cauterize him over the penis and over the intestines, and tightly press two cauteries over the stomach and near the groin, for that is a perfect cure of generation from which one does not err.
Chapter 34.
Of cauterization for old hemorrhoids.
When in nature there remain old hemorrhoids or one of gross humors rubbing or of corrupted moisture, and they are cured with that which we have stated in the division and do not concordant with your cure, then cauterize with three cauteries over the pus below the small vertebra of the back triangularly, and cautery above the navel through two holes.
And if it seems that his stomach is rubbed and his food is not digested, and his face is sometimes swollen, then cauterize him over the stomach with a large cautery according to what precedes; and a cautery over the liver, and another cautery over his spleen with key-shaped cautery, and withdraw the cautery for some time, then cure him so that he is healed.
Chapter 35.
Of cauterization of atheyl near its incision.
When you excise atheyl, then you heat the cautery which is assembled with wax. Then place it burning into that atheyl which is excised, and finish your hand until it reaches the opening of the vein from which comes the blood.
And do this once or twice, for if they are several, then cauterize each of them according to what we have recounted, and then cure those with that which agrees with them in the wounds until he is healed.
And if you cauterize with a large cautery over an ulceration, it is better for generation.
Chapter 36.
Of cauterization of fistulas which are made in nature through openings in him.
When nature does not obey the work which we have commanded in its place, and the patient is frightened by that, then let him be healed by cautery.
Therefore when one sees a fistula in nature through, and it is old, draw the pus from him and corrupted moisture, and therefore what is best to do is to probe him with a subtle probe, then know the quantity of its depth by that which has been stated before.
Then heat the cautery which is like wax. Then place that cautery burning in this fistula according to the quantity in which it entered the probe.
And repeat the cautery over that until those putrefied bodies are burnt one time or two or three according to your need.
And beware of burning nerve and vein; or if the fistula goes to the bladder or to the intestines, then beware of all those places; and do not do that unless the fistula is in fleshy place and you are sure that it does not penetrate.
And then cure that place until it is healed.
And if the place is sealed and the matter has been excised from him and it has healed for a long time, then know that it is entirely cured.
And if the matter is not excised from him, then know that it is penetrating or in his preons are corrupted, or sends something of those causes which will bring a reminiscence to its place.
Chapter 37.
Of cauterization for warts.
When in warts there is pain from rubbing or from grossness and moisture, and the flesh of the patient is damaged, then cauterize those over the warts with a cautery over each wart with key-shaped cautery from which you predict the reminiscence.
And then tightly cauterize with the second a little below, so that three cauteries are linear, and therefore they will be better for generation.
Chapter 38.
Of cauterization of the bladder.
When it happens to the bladder weakness and softness due to friction and moisture so that the patient cannot retain urine, then cauterize that area below the bladder, where the hairs of the pubic region begin, and cauterize with one cautery on the right side, and another on the left.
And the length of each cautery should be according to the size of the testicles; and cauterize that area with one cautery below the buttocks, or with two cauteries if necessary.
And let the cauteries be like nails according to how they are applied.
Chapter 39.
Of cauterization of the thigh.
When there is moisture and softness in the thighs, and due to this pregnancy is prohibited, and their menstruation is corrupted, and their induction is delayed, and pain occurs from carrying them, then let the area be cauterized with three cauteries around the navel, just as we have said in the cautery of the bladder; and with one cautery above the buttocks, or with two cauteries, and let the cautery be like a nail.
Chapter 40.
Of cauterization of the dislocation of the hip.
When moist humors are infused into the hip joint, and this is caused by the displacement of its place, and a sign of it is that the thigh is prolonged over the other when compared between them. And the location of the dislocation is obstructed in the spot where it hurts.
Therefore let the patient be cauterized over the hip joint with a round cautery like a ring, after you have marked it with a tent in the circuit of the joint as it is turned, and because of this the joint falls into the middle of the circle.
And let the cautery be of that shape of which we spoke in the cauterization of the stomach.
And if this cautery is not available to you, then cauterize that area with three cauteries using a large olive-shaped cautery.
And let the cautery be made according to the quantity of the thickness of all the tendons; and then heal that area after it is cured.
Chapter 41.
Of cauterization of the sciatic nerve.
When pain comes in the hip joint, and its cause is friction and moisture, it is cured with what we have said and does not return, and that is old, then let the patient be bled of gross humors with fetid pills or artificial pills or similar; and then cauterize that area.
And the manner of the cautery in that is according to two manners: either cautery with burning medicines, or cautery with fire.
They go according to two known manners, of which one is that you cauterize that area over the hip joint with three triangular cauteries according to this shape; and make them good and deep. And let the space between each cautery be the quantity of the thickness of the finger, and if the cautery is olive-shaped or large.
But sometimes let the cautery be over the middle joint of the hip so that there are four cauteries.
And if you want, cauterize with the ring of which we spoke in the cauterization of the dislocation of the hip, and that is a containing circle and burns the thickness of all the tendons.
And this is the manner of cautery in sciatica when pain is attached to the hip and is not extended within the thigh.
But if it is extended within the thigh, then cauterize that area with two cauteries over the thigh over the spot where the pain lies; and with one cautery over the ankle four fingers from the wild side.
And if the cautery is cut, then let the depth of the cautery be according to the quantity of the thickness of the tendon.
And if the pain goes from that area where it lies within the foot by three or four or more points, then cauterize that spot with a cautery in three places or four or more if it is needed.
And if the pain goes from that area below the knee to the thigh, then cauterize that spot with one cautery cut.
And beware in every cauterization that you do not burn with the cautery any nerve or large artery, and because of this there is harm to you or contraption upon it.
And you have seen one and another of those who cauterized over the ankle and ended in cauterization, and the fire was inflamed within which the tumor was achieved by the foot, and the fire pierced and corrupted all the foot. And then a strong solution of the belly occurred, and then death followed.
And if the pain is in two places at once, then cauterize each according to this manner.
And the wise say in cauterization of the hip that this is the manner of the cautery: make like a ring of iron of which the circuit is the size of a palm; and let its orifices be according to the thickness of a fingernail or more than a little.
And within that circle let there be another third; and let the space between them be the size of the testicles; and those circles are exposed in two places; and let the length of those nails be one or two fingers, and make on those edges of iron decently wrapped in the circles; and this is the shape of it:
Then let it be ignited in fire within that it is curved and emits sparks, and then let it be laid upon the spot of the hip, the pain lying upon its side. And thus cauterize that area with three round cauteries in one go.
And then let it lie for three days; and then plaster that area with wool and let the wound remain open for several days; and then heal that area after it is cured.
Albucasis says: O sons, of this kind of cautery we have used few for the sake of his guard, and because of it we have found few who guard him.
But of the many cauteries which afflict him, and that spot upon him.
But cautery with burning medicines is that you make two circles having a perforated armlet in which the hook of the door of iron is placed; let the length of their edges be two nuts or nails.
And if the space between each of them is the quantity of the thickness of the finger; and let them be exposed below and above, and let them contain themselves according to this shape:
And then let it lie over the hip joint the pain lying upon its side, and press your hand upon the spot of the hip; and then take cold water and pour it between two circles, and let its quality be by the fire little by little, and let that afflict him the biting and the squeezing of it — for that which inflicts biting as well as fire — until the biting stops.
And then raise your hand by the instrument and wipe off cold water from all over the hip with warm water.
And then let it lie for three days and let him rest upon that bandage until the blackness of the squeezing is gone, and let him lie for several days, and let the swelling of him depart; this is the last in healing.
And then heal that area after it is cured.
And if the pain extends to the thigh or leg, have him lie on his side containing water as is done in the armpit similarly.
And this is the manner of water bath, and I have already written about it in the treatise on the rectification of medicines. Take an equal amount of alkali and caustic not extinguished from both, crush them and place them in a new pot of which the bottom is perforated with a small hole according to the quantity that goes into it.
And place below the bottom of the pot another pot covered, and pour over the alkali and live caustic sweet water which collects it through a finger, and since you compress it with your hand by good compression, and let the hot water flow from it into the pot below.
And then collect all that water, and pour it over another live caustic and renewed alkali, because that time it will be of a very strong acidity, which is administered in many operations of medicine and in cauterization of the other members, because this operation is done by fire.
And some medicines with which it is cauterized widely, such as tetter and honey of vinegar mixed with soap, so that they are mixed.
And Gualia recorded from a man of the ancient operation and the cure by which it is healed pain in the armpit and sciatic vein, and magnifies very much that one, and says that no other cure is needed, and because it is healed with one wash and hot bath as well, for he has known that one.
And it is to be taken from a certain ragwort, and if not found, then take fig recently; and it must be crushed with a little grease and placed on the armpit where there is pain, or in the thigh, or leg, and be bound.
And it is to be left for the amount of three hours or for the quantity that the patient can bear the tightness.
And then put him in a bath and when his body is relaxed, place him in the sun, because the pain will cease and he will be healed.
And know that there is no doubt that anyone uses cautery with these medicines except for the evacuation of the body.
But Escorides said that when with goat's gall the sciatic vein is cauterized, it would be beneficial to him; and the cautery on him should be according to this way: wool should be taken and dipped in old oil, and placed between the big toe and the second toe.
And then take dry goat' gall and inflame it with fire into a charcoal; and then place it on the wool and let the fire go out. And then repeat this, and do not cease doing this until the sensation of the bite comes into the armpit and stops the pain.
And this way of cautery is called cow's cautery.
Chapter .XLI.
Of cauterization for pain in the throat.
Sometimes pain is in the back for various reasons, such as from a blow or piercing or from excessive discharge, and because of causes like these, from infusion of moist matter.
And cauterize not at all except in this sole species which is made by effusion of moist matter.
Then, appropriate evacuation of the patient with blisters and like them, which are made on the back in which there is pain in three lines according to its width, since you mark with a tent in each line for cauterization or not, according to the quantity that comes from the tolerance of the patient and of his strength.
And cauterization is to be done by pointed cautery.
And if you want, cauterize with three cauteries or four with mid-sized cautery according to this form:
Chapter .XLI.
Of cauterization for the beginning of goiter.
Many times this malady happens to small children, and sign of the beginning in children is that there occurs to them constriction in the neck by elevation and movement.
And press on the last vertebra of the back and on the notches of it that already begins to rise above the others vertebrae.
And therefore when you see this and want to prohibit, then cauterize that with circular cautery according to this form: that the cautery takes on both sides of the vertebra evenly.
And if you want, cauterize in the circuit of the vertebra with pointed cautery two lines or three. And the points are close to each other.
And then cure the place within which has been healed by what we have said.
But be careful that cautery is not administered in goiter that is made by spasm of nerve.
Chapter .XLI.
Of cauterization for gout and for pain in the joints.
When pain in the joints is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
And therefore when gout caused by moist matter is healed by the way of cure and not gone away the pains, then they are cauterized.
And it is that you cauterize that after evacuation in the circuit of the joint of the foot with many cauteries.
And cautery oil of which this is its form:
And if it is necessary to make points on the surface of the foot, then do so with a pointed cautery. And if the pains penetrate into the joints or the other joints, and this happens many times, then cauterize that on each toe with three cauteries or four from all sides with this cautery oil.
And if many cauteries that these cauteries are necessary to you, then cauterize that and do not press too much your hand on the cautery before, but only wrap around the end of the cautery.
And if the pains penetrate into the toe and the back, then administer the cautery which we have said in its chapter.
And if the pains are only in the hands and it is called arthritis, then puncture on the surface of the knuckles as they rotate, puncture them two lines.
And if remain of the pains in the fingers, then puncture on the circuit of the knuckles on each joint and on the palm.
And if the pains penetrate into the bones or the muscles, then cauterize all parts of the joints.
And do not evacuate the patient from good regimen and reception of medicines, because if good regimen and phlegm is evacuated by this cautery it will be healed, God helps.
Chapter .XLI.
Of cauterization for broken bones.
When there is broken bone in the angles and they say the intestines within the chest of the child, and this is the beginning from within, then know that you order the patient to stop his food for the day and use healing causes for it so that the crack goes away from his belly.
And then follow the patient between your hands on his back, and command him that he has his mouth within that it is split or appears the skin or the bones.
And then return that by his fingers and know that you point out the fracture on the bone of the finger by pointing to the extremity which is similar to the tip of a circle in the upper parts of the body.
And then light the cautery of which this is its form:
while it is still wet, let it drip into the wound and repeat several times. Then return the intestine or hernia to its cavity, and place your hand over the area to prevent the intestine from coming out.
You have already opened the space between the patient's thighs, placed a cushion under them, another servant on their legs, and another on their chest, holding their hands.
And then place the cautery over that mark with your hand holding the cautery straight, and push into the wound until you feel the bone of the testicle within the scrotum; and repeat with the other testicle if you have not managed it on the first try.
And be very careful with the movement of the intestine during the cauterization, lest you burn it and cause death or some other great harm to the patient.
And know that when you are using the cautery, if you do not feel the bone, your operation is pointless.
And know that the cautery for children should be fine according to their size.
Then treat the site of the cauterization for three days by applying a plaster once the burn scar has healed.
Then treat it with other ointments until it is healed.
Then have the patient lie on his back for 40 days while the wound is closed and the plague sealed.
And know that you should regulate the patient's diet according to the length of his recovery time, which will lessen the strain on his belly, and prevent the intestine from slipping out during the efforts of healing.
Then when he wants to get up after 40 days, administer to him a decently prepared laxative and have him take it for another 40 days.
And he should avoid hard work and refraining from eating and drinking, and violent movements, for if he uses this course of healing fully, he will surely recover.
Now I will tell of the cure for ruptures in other parts of the belly, and above all at the beginning, and you should not delay it: cauterize the rupture with a round cautery according to its size; then let it be what is expelled from the cord, just as from the third part of him; then treat it as we have said, and if it is not adjusted.
Now some early authorities say that ruptures should be cauterized with a triangular cautery according to this form, since they are caused by tenting:
And if it had been broken between the elbow and wrist, then cauterize the rupture according to the location of the forearm with a round cautery, since that is where it was caused by the arm; and if it had been broken between the wrist and hand, then cauterize the rupture with a triangular cautery according to this shape: place a line through the width in the upper part of the rupture, and another line above it; then place your hand with a nail-shaped cautery, but the first cautery is lighter and better.
Chapter 46.
Of cauterization for torticollis.
When pain occurs in any part of the body due to a sprain or blow, and this pain persists for a long time without responding to treatment with medicine, then know that you should cauterize it with a pointed cautery.
And the cautery of each member should be according to its size and smallness, nature, and location of torticollis and pain.
So if he is healed by the first cauterization, that is good; but if not, then repeat it on him; for usually these pains are caused by puncturing of a member near to him, so know that you should cauterize it and find it in order to heal the patient.
Chapter 47.
Of cauterization for leprosy.
Lepers at times are cauterized for great benefit, and especially if the nature of leprosy is caused by putrefaction of phlegm and melancholy.
And so when you want to cauterize him, consider if the leprosy is dry and cured as we have said in Division, and not disintegrating, nor is it, and fear for the patient that the corruption does not include his whole body and all its parts, then cauterize him on the head with v cauteries: one in the middle of the head, and the second lower down, avoiding the forehead to the end of the hair; and both over two horns; and one from behind, over the nape or neck.
And finally place your hand with the cautery a little into the bone so that it makes a small impression, and if from him are displaced the scabs, so that the expiration of thick vapors is driven out from him; and cauterize over the wound according to what was requested.
And if the leprosy has already spread over the patient and appears manifestly, then know that you should cauterize him with those cauteries which we have said to place on his head; and cauterize on the tip of the nose, and two cauteries on both ears, and two cauteries over the two shoulders of the collarbone, and six cauteries over the two shoulder blades, and one large cautery over the shoulder blade near the armpit, and one over the armpit, and two over the hips, and one over each hip, and two over the knees, and one over each ankle, and two over the heels, and two over the fingers, and one over each toe joint, and two over the muscles, and two over the tendons of his feet.
And be careful not to burn those nerves which are on the sole of the foot.
And sometimes one is cauterized with a cautery over the bone of the testicle and another over the mouth of the stomach, and another over the anus.
And know that the more you make the cauteries, the greater the benefit and the more they work; and know that the patient does not have pain from the cautery as the healthy do, because his body is already stunned.
And know that the cauteries should be large or small according to the members and joints, according as is preceded by the properties of the instruments.
Then treat the cautery with flour of bran with honey and with the other cure until it is healed.
Chapter 48.
Of cauterization for stupor.
When any member is paralyzed or asleep and is treated with medicines, oils and bandages without healing, then you should cauterize that paralyzed member with cauteries according to the size of the member or its smallness.
And let your cautery enter into the thickness of the cord a little. Then treat it with ointment until it is healed.
And sometimes the paralysis of a member which affects the arms and legs, and shoulder blades is cauterized, and one sees the movement of the nerves which move this member, and the paralysis is healed.
But do not presume about it unless you are wise in the anatomy of the members and the exit of all the nerves which move all the parts.
Chapter 49.
Of cauterization for barbitons.
When barbitons is old and does not respond to any of the ointments of medicine, then you should cauterize it with a cautery little according to the quantity of the thickness of the cord so that the whiteness and the color of it are driven out, and its color is changed.
And then treat the area with a paste made from ground ergot and lentils, roasted in oil and mixed with pigeon's blood or the blood of a young dove; each should be a separate portion, and they should all be mixed together. Then line a cloth with this mixture and place it over the affected area to promote healing.
Chapter 1.
Of cauterization of the cranium.
When cancer begins and you want to stop it from spreading, then cauterize the affected area with a circular cautery around its perimeter as it is being rotated.
And the wise say that it should be cauterized with the pointed cautery in the center of the affected area. However, I have not seen this done, for I am afraid it might cause an ulcer, and I have seen this happen a few times.
It is also more appropriate to cauterize the affected area with a circular cautery as mentioned above or with a flat cautery.
Chapter 10.
Of cauterization for swollen wounds.
When a wound is slow to heal due to excess humidity, or because of the patient's condition, such as old age and decreased blood flow, or simply due to the passage of time, and you want to speed up the healing process; then cauterize the affected area with small punctures using a pointed cautery. This will stimulate faster healing.
However, if you want to create a piercing in the wound with the cautery, then ignite the cautery, which should be shaped as follows: and apply it to the center of the wound, allowing the heat to penetrate the tissue.
And if the cautery is applied lower down on the arm, causing the body of the arm to be raised; then treat the area to promote healing.
Chapter 12.
Of cauterization for ulcers.
An ulcer is a rotting wound that eats away at the flesh, similar to how a fire consumes dry wood.
Therefore, if you see an ulcer in a place that can be treated with fire cautery, then ignite a small, pointed cautery tool, and apply it to the ulcer according to its size.
Then cauterize the entire ulcer, ensuring that you remove all traces of corruption and address any underlying cause.
Then let it be for three days, and apply a poultice of mixed oil over the cauterized areas so that the scars are completely eradicated and all corruption is removed.
Then treat the area with a meat-based ointment to promote healing.
However, if after three days you see that the flesh is growing healthily without any corruption, then it is good; but if not, then repeat the cauterization on the affected areas.
And ulcers are sometimes treated with sharp instruments as an alternative to cautery. However, cautery with fire is still the most effective method.
And I have already mentioned the treatment of ulcers with sharp instruments in the section on surgery; therefore, take that approach when you see signs of infection.
Chapter 13.
Of cauterization for warts and other similar growths.
Often, there are growths under the skin of the foot that are called warts, and they are a significant issue. They are caused by an ingrown hair, and there are two methods to treat them: either by cauterization with fire or with boiling water.
However, cauterization with fire involves igniting the cautery tool, which should be shaped like a vulture's beak, made of iron according to the size of the wart, and it should have fine edges.
Then place the ignited cautery on top of the wart, and rotate your hand holding the cautery around the perimeter of the wart so that the heat penetrates to its depth. Let it be for three days until you see pus coming out. Then apply a poultice made from crushed mallows mixed with salt over the affected area for one night, as this will uproot it from its source.
Then treat the area with a meat-based ointment to promote healing.
And if it persists and appears on the surface of the body, especially on the hands and feet, then you must apply cauterization with boiling water. For this, take a quill made of brass or iron or a vulture's beak, and place it over the wart; then allow the boiling water to flow into the quill, and rotate your hand so that the heat penetrates to the root of the wart. Wait for the patient to bite their lip for an hour due to the pain of the hot water, and then remove the quill. This will uproot the wart along with its source.
And you should also treat any others that appear anywhere on the body in the same way.
Then treat the pus resulting from the uprooting of the warts with meat-based ointments that stimulate flesh growth.
Chapter 14.
Of cauterization for tremors.
When you see a tremor caused by friction on a nerve, or due to fever from some other similar cause, then cauterize the affected area with four small cauteries or five cauteries on either side of the spine, one cautery between each pair of vertebrae; and cauterize the feet and stomach with an olive-shaped cautery.
And the tremor will subside and the patient's health will improve due to the treatment of the feverish condition.
Chapter 15.
Of cauterization for accidental wounds on the body.
When the body is afflicted with boils and pus-filled blisters caused by corrupt humors, then at the beginning, when they appear, cauterize the top of the boil with a thin, pointed cautery made from myrtle wood, the end of which is heated; or with a long, sharp razor; or with a flat cautery.
And sometimes, cauterization is done around the entrance of the boil as it starts to drain according to this method; and when they are not ruptured, and the corrupt humors are expelled by cauterizing them in this way, they heal.
However, it must be done with an incision using a flebotomy.
Chapter 16.
Of cauterization for accidental blood flow through an incision.
Sometimes, there is blood flow from an incision that has not healed properly, or from the incision of an ulcer or cauterization on a limb, and it is difficult to heal.
Therefore, when this happens, then you should apply pressure with your hand over the incision and place a finger over the hole of the artery, and apply pressure over the affected area so that the blood flow stops; and do this several times until it is stopped, and make sure it does not start again.
Then apply the hot olive-shaped cauteries a few times, and blow over them so that they ignite; do this several times until they are extinguished.
Then take a small or large one according to the location and the hole through which the artery is torn, over the vein that is bleeding profusely after you have stopped it by cauterization; and cauterize it so that it is constricted and the blood flow stops.
And if the blood flows from the hole of the artery when you release the finger and tighten the cautery, then take another cautery that has been heated in the fire, and do this repeatedly until the blood flow is stopped.
Be careful not to burn the nerves here, and that no other harm comes to the patient.
And know that when blood flows from an artery, it is not possible to restrict the flow of blood in those places, especially when the artery is large, unless by one of four methods: either by cauterization as mentioned earlier, or by extraction if it has not been extracted; for when it is extracted, its extremities are burned and the blood flow restricted. Or it may be tied with a thread or with a ligature to tightly constrict it; or medicines whose virtue is to restrict the blood flow should be applied to it, and it should be bound with a pad with a decent constriction.
But he who administers a decent restriction to it with a ligature and constriction with cloth or by position of burning and similar causes, should not confer it but slowly.
But if it is aimed at someone and neither the doctor nor medicine is present, then open by pressing on the said hole of that vein as we have said before, and understand to the great constriction of it within so that the blood may be stopped from the upper part of the plague; and over the artery let it not be rubbed; and over the artery, let it be sprinkled with water rubbed with a very cold thing until the blood is congealed and thickened. And when there is need for cauterization or medicine.
Of incision and piercing, and of bleeding and phlebotomy, and of plagues and their likes.
We have already said in the first chapter all about sicknesses for which cauterization with fire and burning medicine is convenient, and its occasions and causes, and the instruments in which they are necessary, and the forms of cautery; and I have ordered the chapters from the upper part of the head to the feet.
And we will go through this chapter in that same way so that it may be clear to the one who reads it and then ask about it.
And before I begin that, listen, you children, that in this chapter there is what is terrifying to you that is in the first chapter of cauterization.
And because of that, one must be very cautious in it, for the operation which is in this chapter many times involves evacuation by bleeding which is through blood through the vein or incision over an abscess or opening of a wound or purification of the plague or extraction of arrow or incision of stone and their likes. And from all those are accompanied by fear and trembling, and in most of them death.
And I warn you that it does not happen to you in which there is a loss, for sometimes because of men's ways many sicknesses occur. And of them is the one who goes away because of his sickness and escapes death, but also because of the vehemence of that from which he suffers because of his sickness, and because of the length of his sickness and because of the sickness which signifies death.
And of them is the one who gives you hope and says it to you, you waiting for that health, but his sickness is harmful.
And therefore do not consent to one who comes to you whose nature is like that; and your caution should be greater than naivety and your rapaciousness; and do not presume any cause over it unless by certain science which verifies it for you, and to whom there comes laudable success.
And use in the cure of all your sicknesses from prediction and indication for that to which health is converted, for in it is your helper for acquiring fame and memory, praise and glory.
O children, may God inspire you with his understanding and not refuse you direction and protection, for that is in his hand.
And I have ordered this chapter distinguishing according to the chapters that preceded in the chapter of cautery, of the cure of the head to the feet, so that it may be clear to you that which you ask about and for which you have need.
First chapter.
Of the cure of water that is contained in the head of children.
Know that this sickness many times occurs to children because of childbirth, and when the nurse tightens the head of the child it becomes loose.
And sometimes because of a hidden cause which is not washed off.
But I have not seen this sickness except in children; and to all of them to whom I have seen it occurs death, and because of that I saw the act lessened in them.
And I have seen that a child whose head was filled with water and the head of him magnified so much that he could not move his neck because of the size of his head, but also because the moisture increased, causing death by fire.
And this humidity is added between the scalp and the bone, or is added below the bone on top of the skull.
For the operation on that if the humidity is between the scalp and the bone and the abscess is small, then you should cut in the middle of the head with an incision in the breadth, and let the length of the incision be two inches long so that the humidity may flow out, and this is the shape of the spatula:
And therefore if the humidity is more increased and the abscess is larger, then here are two incisions according to this way:
And if the humidity is below the bone, its sign is that you will see the edges of the head swollen and the water is pushed out when you compress it with your hand at the edges within, and that is not hidden from you. That you should cut in the middle of the head with three incisions according to this way:
And then draw out all the humidity; and then tighten the incisions with cloth and bandages; and then anoint it with oil within the fifth day, and then loosen the ligature and cure the plague with ointments and poultices, and tighten the head with equality; and feed the patient with dry food of little humidity so that the member is comforted and healed.
And there is another way of incision that considers where the abscess appears and the collection of water, for sometimes it is more in the occipital, or in the front, or on the right, or on the left; and therefore pay attention to the incision where the abscess appears and the collection of water, and cut it according to what is best possible for you.
And observe that you do not split the artery and draw out blood flow and cause death to the patient through that flow of blood by evacuating humidity.
Second chapter.
When it occurs to someone cataracts or raucous in the eye or in the foot and it is old, and the cure of medicines does not confer on it, then the latter cure in this is incision of those two arteries.
And therefore when you want to cut them so that the patient's head is loose, then compress the place with a rough cloth so that the arteries appear, and let it be tightened on the neck of the patient with some cloth; and therefore consider where pulse the vein; and the locations of each over the locations where they are depressed, and as much as they are hidden except in some men.
And therefore press on the artery with a tent, and then cut each one with the spatula of each wound penetrating into the bone, and let it be that by the breadth of the head.
And if you wish, cut beneath the artery and draw out the blood to the point where it meets the skin above.
And the length of the incision should be about two fingers wide, because when a vein is cut the blood flows out in pulses and gushes out frequently.
But if the artery does not appear in the measurement, then you must measure from the ear the amount of space of three fingers, and then pierce with the needle and enter into the bone.
And what is needed to stop the bleeding is an amount of wine equal to one ounce, and pour it quickly in a little or a lot, and all of this is according to the amount that appears from the nature of the patient and the pulsation of his artery.
And then consider the wound, and if something remains on the bone that could cause an ulcer, then cut it out so that an ulcer does not form.
And then strengthen the wound with cotton wool and strips of linen cloth, and then heal it with ointment inside so that it may be cured.
Chapter 3
On the extraction of arteries which are in the temples.
When someone suffers from old migraines or headaches caused by cold and moist humors in the temples, or severe old headache with symptoms similar to those, and is treated with the methods of healing medicine but does not respond, then we have discussed in these maladies the extraction of arteries in the temples, or cauterization of them as we have demonstrated.
And the manner of the operation and extraction of these is that the patient lies on his back with his head turned to one side; and feel the artery in the temple as it will be shown to you by its pulse, and it is hidden in most people because of the heat of the skin.
And if it is hidden from you, then have the patient's neck held tightly with some cloth; and rub the area with an abrasive cloth or apply warm water to make the artery appear clearly to you. And then take the needle, which should be formed in this way: And then pierce the skin with it easily as you reach the artery; and pour in it wine and extract it from the upper parts as you pull it out of the skin and uncover it from the tunics which are beneath it, from every part.
But if the artery is slender, then wrap it with the end of the needle, and then cut it from one part according to the amount by which its ends are elongated and are contracted, and there will be no flow of blood, for if they are not cut, the blood will not flow at all.
And then pour out an ounce of wine. and let it flow out to three.
And if the artery is large, then tie it in two places with a strong double thread of linen or with cords long enough that putrefaction does not come before the healing of the wound and it experiences flow of blood.
And then cut away the superfluity which is between two strips; do this in that hour or another hour.
And if you wish, cauterize it with a cautery within the bone with a sharp cautery as far as its ends are cut, and it will be in place of that missing part.
And it is better to do this when the patient does not have fever or is of heated constitution; for cautery is one of those causes that help drive out humors, and therefore is better in youth.
And it is proper to extract the arteries that hollow out the place of an old wound, and have powders decently made placed upon it, and let it be healed with dry medicines that make the flesh grow and with cauteries so that it may be cured.
And if while you operate another vein begins to flow from the artery, then you must stop that blood with your hand or with a cautery, or by pressing the place of the wound and strengthening your hand so that the blood is restricted. And if any of those causes is not present to you, then place your finger on the place where the blood congeals, and wet the spot with water of violent coldness so that the acuity rests, and let it be bound according to what is needed.
And that which is easier in the extraction of an artery is that you cauterize the vein with this cautery having two points, since you have felt the two places with the needle and have laid them open, burning the places with fire so that they reach the bone and cut the vein in two places so that it is elongated between its ends, for it is not consolidated at all by this cautery.
And this is the form of the cautery:
And let the acuity of its two points be blunt. But if it is better with blunter acuity than two points, for if they are acute as two points it approaches each other by quick friction and does not cut into the flesh.
Therefore when there is any thickness in them, the heat of the fire is held in them and the flesh is cut more gently.
And this work is better in all work and more gently.
And let the space between its two points be the quantity of the thickness of the finger.
Chapter 4
On the curing of bodies with sharp and sour pains in the joints.
When there are sharp and sour pains, and the veins of those which are above the head are torn away, and no cause for the cure of medicine is found in that, and the face of the patient becomes red and he feels a walking sensation as if it were from ants, and his eyelids are scorched by the acuity of tears, the ancients used to cure those with this operation using a sponge.
And it is that you command the patient to scratch his skin which is on his forehead, and then pierce three slits evenly distant according to the length of his forehead. And if the length of the slit is two fingers: let the first slit be evenly distant to the length of the nose in the middle place of the forehead, and the second according to the length of a small movement of the tear ducts which are in the eye socket, and the third on the other side.
And beware of cutting the arteries which are on two sides, and lengthen your hand from the continuation of both jaws. And let the space between each incision be the quantity of three fingers placed together.
And if you have a sponge or dry rags with which to stop the blood.
And then insert the needle between two acute ends of which this is the form of its incision: that it is from the joint of the temples to the second incision. Excise with it all the membrane which is between two incisions by the bone which is above the bone, and then do this of the smaller incision within the second incision. And then stretch this needle and insert it into the first incision another tool which is called a sharp blade, sharp on one side and blunt on the other.
And lay the sides of it which are sharp against the flesh against the membrane, and the side of it which is blunt against the bone, and insert it so that it reaches to the smaller fissure, and cut with it all the vessels that descend from the head to the joints.
May the incision be continued until it appears at the base of the tailbone, and then do this in the small crack between the other cracks.
Then, as blood quantity flows out, press on the places of the frozen blood.
Then place in each crack a piece of old wood heated in fire, and place over these powders mixed with wine and oil and vinegar, so that there is no wound blisters.
And on the third day, loosen the ligature and administer a large infusion of hot water or tea, and then treat this with basilicon ointment made from rose oil and others within so that the wounds are healed.
Chapter 5:
Of the treatment of ulcers by cauterization and for descending humors from the parts within the head.
When to someone come cauterizations and continuations of humors, and you see the orifices of the patient weakened and small, and already the protection of them is debilitated, and the eyelids are ulcerated and from this the hair, and in the brain there is acute pain and consequent throbbing, then understand through these accidents that the matters and cauterizations do not come except from many veins within proceeding.
And the best cure in those is this: that you command the patient to raise his brow, and then make a cut in the middle of the forehead, small in width (and begin with the cut of the left temple between the right temple; and it must be an incision into the bone; and you must extend your hand from the lacerts of the temples which are hurt because of mastication), so that the bone is uncovered.
Dry all the blood with sponge or dry cloth and then fill between the two lips of the cut with old wood or with rags of it. And then tighten above it with powders mixed in wine and oil so that there is no wound blister.
And when you loosen this and see that the blister has diminished, then know that it is necessary to heat the bone where it begins that new flesh is growing, and then cure that with an exsiccative regimen which makes the flesh dry, thus as if you take two parts of wheat flour and four parts of rosin and mix them together, and from this make an ointment and administer it to these wounds of the native flesh.
Chapter 6:
Of the cure for cauterizations in the ears.
All causes that cauterize in the ears are of four species, either it is mineral stone or cause like stone, thus as iron and glass, or is from plant thus as chives or beans, or is fluid cause thus as water and vinegar and their likenesses, or some beast.
And thus when stone cauterizes in the ear or other cause like those causes which do not attach to or grow within the ear, and put the ear to the sun, and if you see the stone then distill into that some cause of viola oil or sesame, and then administer its extraction, and make it sneeze with some condiment, and close its nostrils due to the action of sneezing. And then put around the ear some pieces of cloth or wool, and extend the ear to the parts above it, for many times it has been torn away by these causes.
And if it is not torn away then administer extraction of it with the instrument called a subtle epicyclic hook for which this is the form:
And if it is torn away by the hook around the ear then make it sneeze with condiment that is negated, and then with the subtle epicyclic hook make extraction of it from the other circuit.
And therefore if it is not torn away by that then make a tube of ram and insert the end of the tube into the hole of the ear and close around the tube with wax and softened oil so that only the tube is open. And then extract it by your own wind with strong attraction because many times they accompany what we have recounted.
But if it is not torn away in this manner then take from ash alumbat or from wood prepared with which birds are trapped a little quantity, and put that into the end of the ray, and then wrap around it decently with wood paused over it. And then insert that into the hole of the ear with ease, and then dry the ear from moisture.
And therefore if it is not torn away by all the causes which we have recounted then you cut before that it becomes wound blister or spasm.
And the manner of cutting it is that at the beginning you cut the patient's vein in the sephatic vein and extract blood according to the manner of its virtue, and then make the ear to cese between your hands and turn the ear to the parts above it, and finish with a small cut at the base of the ear due to the pressure on it. And let the cut be moon-shaped so that it comes to the stone, and if you find the stone then stop it with appropriate instruments; and then close the cut in that hour with speed, and cure it while it is healed.
And if the cause that cauterizes in the ear is one of the fats that grow and so inflates then administer its cure and extraction; but if it does not obey your command then take a subtle needle according to this form: And you insert the end of that into the hole of the ear and then put the ear to the parts above it; and if it is torn away by that then distill viola oil or sesame.
And do not do that when you think that it is already moistened by the vapor of the ear, and put that into many pieces, and then extract them with pins or with a subtle hook, or by incision as we have said before, for its extraction is eased.
But in the water which is entered into the ear come to use sneeze with condiment at the beginning, and fill his own ear with some old wood, and put on that ear in which there is the water, and if by that it is torn away then it is good; and if not then take some stone teals and lions according to the length of the finger, and heat those in the fire a little, and let the patient insert one of those into the hole of his ear and press on that spot with another stone which is within the ear. Therefore do not cease that with stone until all the water is torn away.
Therefore do not cease that with stone until all the water is torn away. And then the water is torn away let the patient take some paper or gons, i., and put one end of it into the ear and extend the other end with fire until its end is burned.
And then put another gons and do that as many times until all the water is torn away, and draw it with the tube as we have said before of the stone extractor.
But in the extraction of a beast entered into that ear, if it is a small cause like pus and to him similar then cure it as we have said in the division; but if it is of great cause which causes appear within the brain then administer its extraction with hooks and pins, and the cause of it is greater than all other causes that cauterize in the ear.
But in the extraction of worms generated in the ear, when you heal that with what we have said in the division and in the treatise on distillation and do not confide in your cure, then you must look at the sun.
And therefore if any cause of the worms appears, then extract that with a thin or sharp instrument; but if no cause appears, then take a tube with a narrow end and a wide top, of which this is the shape: And insert the narrow end into the ear according to the amount that the patient can endure; and then suck with a strong suction several times, until all the worms are extracted.
But if he does not obey your movements, then you place a plug of wax in the tube as we have said; then administer distillation remedies which the ancients have tested for the cure of worms, and you will find these remedies in the treatise on distillation.
And let your effusion be the means by which you pour medicine oils into the ear with this instrument of which this is the shape: And make it of silver or bronze, narrow at its end and wide on top, with a small hole in the middle.
And thus let it be closed so that no content escapes from the cavity of the tube where the necessary medicine is contained. And if you want, take the needle and wrap its end with a piece of cloth, then pour oil into the cavity of the instrument, or juice from some herb, or anything from these medicines in the tube — and that is placed in the ear — then insert the needle wrapped in cloth above it, and squeeze with your hand this medicine in the cloth until it is pressed against the ear, so that the oil is expelled into the cavity of the instrument and the patient feels the oil inside.
And what is inserted in the ear shall be already warmed by fire a little. And beware that the cause for which you distill into the ear is not too strong, because ear remedies cannot endure that.
Chapter 7.
Of the cure of an ear blockage.
Sometimes some children are born with their ears closed, and this happens to some adults, by blockage in the middle of the ear caused by pus or by swelled flesh inside; and this blockage sometimes occurs in the outer part of the ear, and sometimes in the inner part.
And that which occurs in the middle part, which does not allow hearing, is in a more difficult disposition for healing.
And in that one in which you achieve hearing, let the patient look towards the sun and pay attention to that. And therefore if you see blockage, open it with a thin spatula of which this is the shape:
If the width of its end is small, one side should be sharp and the other not; and the spatula should have two sides smooth so that it does not cut the ear.
And if the blockage is due to flesh grown in the ear or in its middle part, then cut that with thin instruments and remove it thoroughly so that all the flesh is removed.
And if the blockage is in the middle part of the ear, then take a thin needle and heat it in fire a little, and insert that into the middle of the ear.
And therefore if you have felt blockage due to the patient struggling with difficulty to hear, relieve the pressure of it with ease; and beware that you do not cut the nerves of the ear.
And then place on the ear a bandage according to the width of the opening which you have wrapped in the Egyptian ointment; and do this for several days until you are sure that the wound is healed; or take some gum arabic, soak it in rosewater, and powder it over the wound; and if you see that the ear is already swollen, then let you remove the gum and replace it with another which you will wrap in cerot made of rose oil, until the swelling is reduced; and heal that.
But if bleeding occurs, then immerse sponge or bandage in warm water and place it on the ear, and use the other cure which constricts the flow of blood, which is said in the treatise on distillation.
Chapter 8.
Of the cure for white film which appears on the eyelids.
White films which appear on the eyelids of men sometimes are humid, and sometimes they are dry.
Therefore let you have them with thongs or with instruments, and cut those with a spatula from their roots, and then place over the wounds powdered with rosewater.
But if pain comes with the flow of blood, then cauterize those with a small, thin cautery.
And the best cautery is to cut and pull out the roots which return when any cause remains in their roots; and when they are cauterized with fire, those roots are burned and do not return.
Chapter 9.
The cure for granulation which appears on the eyelids of men.
Many times it appears on the eyelids of men some cause which is similar to granulation in its strength and hardness, and therefore granulation is called.
And it is an aggregation of thick moisture under and over the eyelid.
And its appearance is that you should consider whether the granulation comes from the eyelid and is swollen on every side; and the cause of it is inflammation.
Therefore cut it with an incision all around its width, and then scrape it from every side with ease so that it is relieved, and suspend it with a thong and cut it off.
And if the figure is large, then adjust it with a suture; and heal that.
And if it is small, then you will not harm that because its edge restores that and incorporates it.
And if the granulation is declining to the inside parts of the eyelid beyond its surface, then cut open the eyelid and suspend the granulation with a thong, then that you pierce an incision, and press it from every side, and if the eyelid by incision is stretched out, then that will not be noticed in any cause.
And then the incision, wash the eye with salt water; and heal the wound so that it incorporates.
Chapter 10.
Of the cure of axcyrna above the eyelid on top of the eye.
Axcyrna is gray matter which is generated in the tunics of the eyelid above, and mostly occurs in children, harms the eyes of those and comes to them cataracts; and they cannot look at the brightness of the sun because tears close up to them.
And therefore you see them over their faces all the time, and over their faces they sleep; and on their eyelids under the eyebrows are humid, which have already covered inflammation, and imminence of axcyrna appears in the eye; and when you press the place with your fingers, you feel axcyrna within them.
And some way of operation is in that the patient holds his head down with his chin to his chest, and then place bandage on him and make a cool poultice, and do a circle according to the amount which contains the arthernach all around, and then place that over it and press it with your fingers from all sides so that axcyrna is gathered within the circle; and then cut in the middle of that humidity with a spatula cutting through the width, and the incision should not be larger than the one made in phlebothomia.
But in the majority of cases where you split the tendon all the way until you reach the Achilles' heel, in most cases the Achilles' heel is processed by fissure according to the shape of white grease.
Then remove with drapes which you have wrapped between the teeth to the ends outside and roll between the right and left hand until it is unwound.
And be careful not to tighten the fissure, so that with the spatula you do not reach the heel and damage it.
But if you do not see the Achilles' heel at the beginning of the fissure, but only tighten the fissure a little to facilitate the process; and then remove it as we have said; and then moisten the drapes in water and wine vinegar, place them on the site and apply the powder.
And those who break salt and place it in the cavity of the fissure, so that what remains of that humidity.
And then cure it until it is healed.
But if the wound becomes pustular, then cure it with soft bandages until it is healed.
Chapter .xi.
Of ways of touching the heel.
When the eyelids of the heels are born by tightening the natural hairs and are old, then those cause damage to the heel and cause diseases in such a way as constant tears and softening of the eyelids and membrane, so that this is the cause of destruction of the heel which is called tactinir of the heel, and it is cured in four ways: either by cauterization with fire; or with sharp medicine according to what was said before in the chapter on cauterization; or atactinir is caused by incision and suture; or with reeds according to what I will say.
And then you place the head of the patient towards you; then turn the eyelid of the eye with your left hand, and if it is turned, that's good; and if not, insert a needle in that part where there is pus under the eyelid, and let the needle penetrate above, close to the margin of the eyelid where the hairs grow, and close to the hairs, and pull the needle up towards the upper part of the eyelid, and turn it with your finger.
And then split the part inside the eyelid under the hairs with a spatulate incision of the major lacrimal into the minor lacrimal; and then remove the pus and place small pieces of cotton or cloth underneath the eyelid, and then close the eyelid with sutures, and it should be like a leaf of myrtle.
But indeed it should be the shape according to the amount of elevation of the eyelid, because that has been varied in men, for there are those who require that the eyelid is greatly split according to the amount by which the eyelid is softened.
And then split with a spatula above the two lines you have drawn, and begin from the major lacrimal into the minor lacrimal. And if your incision is close to the natural hairs as the thickness of the king's hair.
And then place the hook in one of the two angles of the tendon, and then scrape away all of that, and then tighten with the suture the two lips with wax or fine wool thread, and wipe away the blood, and attach what is superfluous of the hairs above the two eyelids with some causes viscous, if you want to do so, and if not, don' t cure.
And then loosen the suture of the hairs after three or four days, and then cure it.
And if you want, remove the poultice after the suture, and cure it with what dries it out and constricts, for the eyelid is lifted due to the sealing of the poultice and the accumulation of moisture; but the suture is better. So therefore I say this about the ancient taxanir.
But indeed it should be careful on the patient, and it is a good operation, and there is no fear in it.
And there is another way in taxmir, and it is that you draw on the eyelid a figure like a leaf of myrtle, and then elevate the eyelid with three hooks separated and gathered together according to this shape:
But if that is not possible, the hooks are not available, and it is not greased, then take a needle with thread and place it in the middle of the figure, and insert the other end near the major lacrimal, and the other end near the minor lacrimal, and tighten between the teeth the hairs with equality, and then with these elevate your hand with an equal elevation, elevate all the tendon on which you have drawn as we have recommended.
And then tighten the two lips of the poultice with a suture, and cure it until it is healed.
But if pustules occur due to your incision or your split, stop that pustule with cerote and something similar, and with ointment.
And some times the eyelids turn inside out, then you should use what we have said about incision; but in each case, suture is more artificial.
Taxanir with reeds is according to this form: And it is that you turn the eyelid inside out and split the figure which is inside according to what I have recounted; and then with skill make two reeds or two astils which are thin, of whose length is according to the length of the eyelid, and their width is lesser than the width of the spatula. And you have already split at the ends of some parts, where you hold the threads.
Then add some with subtlety underneath what is superfluous of the eyelid of the heel, and tighten the reeds from some parts with a strong grip, and leave it for several days, for the tendon will die due to the tightness and turn black and fall off by itself.
But if it is delayed, then cut it with tweezers, and then cure the poultice until it is healed.
Then when it is solidified, the eyelid is elevated and the hairs do not sting.
And this is the form of two reeds which you will make according to this form: and have the quantity of length and width neither more nor less.
Chapter .xii.
Of elevation of hairs pricked in the heel with a needle when the hair is hard.
When the hairs are not natural, hard and rough and sting the heels, then the operation on it is that you take a thin needle and place it in the hair of wool, and then tighten the ends of it very subtly, and not each one in a subtle manner. And let the length of the hairs be the quantity of a palm.
And then you place another subtle hair underneath it briefly, and tighten the ends of that if you want to.
And then place the patient's head towards you, and be in front of the sun so that your work is revealed, for it is a subtle and minute operation.
And then insert the needle in the root of the hair which has need of cunning, and let it penetrate the eyelid quickly while you pull out the natural hair.
And then pull the hair out from underneath and insert that into the wound, and let there be one or two or three hairs and not more.
And then pull your hand with it so that the hair is drawn out, twisted in the eyelid with the natural hair.
But if it is drawn out twisted and the hair is not drawn, you will draw out the wound from underneath with the thread which you have composed there, so that in it is drawn out twisted from the root.
And you will apply it to the eye, and when you remove the bandage and the patch, and clean the eye, and let it remain for two or three days, until the skin adheres to its place and new good flesh is born over it.
And if the hair is short, then you should attach a long natural hair, and it will be elevated with that, or you can attach it in between so that it is stretched out a little bit, and then you elevate it.
Chapter 13
Of the cure of a growth which comes in the upper eyelid.
When there is a growth in the eye and it is a contraction of the eyelid, either on the right or left side, due to bad consolidation of plague or sectioning or cauterization, and it is called leporina, and this growth, whether natural or accidental, is caused by consolidation of plague or sectioning or cauterization, or something similar.
The manner of the operation on this is that you should split that consolidation and separate its lips, and place in it a piece of linen that is between those two, and ligature them together until they are healed.
And be sure not to use remedies for this which cause drying and constriction; because if you do that it will return worse than it was before.
Use in that one of the causes which softens, like fenugreek, and steep it in water in which are cooked aniseed and sesame seeds, or ointment of squill, which should be liquefied with some oils, and immerse the piece in that, and heal it with that.
And the treasure of your cure is that you should not pierce anything which has not been consolidated according to its shape from the beginning.
And this operation which we have described is not but a rectification of the growth which does not return the shape of the place according to what it was before.
Chapter 14
Of the cure of a growth which is done in the lower eyelid.
This growth which is done in the lower eyelid, which is called verrraderamente a growth; and it can be natural or accidental.
More accidental is done by plague or sectioning or cauterization, or others like them.
And the way of operating on this is that you should take a needle with a double thread, and insert it into the flesh, and make it pass from the tear duct on the left into the tear duct on the right, so that the thread passes through both ends of the flesh.
Then stretch out the flesh at its upper ends with the needle and sew it up with the needle, and insert it with a wide spatula. And if it returns the shape of the eyelid as it should be, that is good; and if not, take the thread and place it in the split figure, and with that convert the eyelid, and sew up both slits on the side of the lower eyelid.
And the ends of the two slits are at the two angles of the incision, which you have made so that they meet, and there is made an angle between them when they come together, and a figure is made from them.
And this figure is a Greek letter: the lambda.
Then stop the flesh that is the length of the side of it below it, that which covers the eyelid.
Then sew together the separated parts with the thread of wool; and then heal them with what we have said about the softening remedies, and the poultices until it is healed.
And if the growth occurs due to sectioning or suturing or cauterization, then you should split it with a flat incision over the hairs of the eyelid as has been preceded. Then separate them with the poultice between two lips as we have said before.
In the total number of words of the cure of a growth when it is above or below, the operation should run according to how it is prepared in the form of a growth, and that is in the form of diverse dots.
And the wise artisans always prepare everything in every way which is possible for them so that they may return the figure to its natural shape, or close to it, and the patient according to what he requires from the operation and the instruments in the greatest dispositions.
Chapter 15
Of the adhesion of the eyelid to the conjunctiva or to the cornea.
When this consolidation happens to many people that the eyelid is glued more above the white of the eye, and it is prohibited from the facility of movement and its natural actions, then you should insert the end of the thread below the eyelid, and elevate it up, or stretch it with the unguent.
Then you should insert the adhesion with a spatula which is not sharp at its edges, having made a small one so that the patient is not distressed after the operation, and remove the spatula so that it does not irritate the eye with its acuity.
And your incision should cut that adhesion with ease so that it is returned the eyelid according to its natural shape, and all the adhesion be healed.
And then put in the eye salt water with which you wash it, or distill on it water of vitriol dissolved in water.
Then separate between the eyelid and the eye with poultice of it, and place over the eye wool infused in white of egg, and then the third day use causes of consolidation until it is healed.
Chapter 16
Of incision of the unguis and of eminence of flesh of the tear ducts.
Know that the unguis is according to two manners, because it is nervous, and is like a hard thin ciphac; or it is not-nervous, like white congelated humidity, which when the iron touches it, or it is forced, takes on the unguent, it is separated and the unguent is not put in it.
And both species do not begin unless from the great tear duct, which goes little by little and covers the sight, and prohibits light and the movement of the eye.
But the way of operating on it is that the patient should close his eye and open his eyes, and elevate the eyelid with your hand, and then gather up the unguis with unguent of little doubling, and stretch it to its upper ends. Then take a needle and insert into it a hair of horse or of ox, or of something similar, or of strong pitch, or double the end of the needle little by little and put it in the center of the unguis, and pierce with the needle the unguis; and stretch that to its upper ends, and open up the side of the unguis which is the pupil. And then follow it with the hair into the back of it.
Then you should insert the remainder in the root of the tear duct with a subtle spatula or small forceps, and cut the flesh of the natural tear duct so that through the incision it does not bring continuous flows of tears.
And sometimes the unguis with the sole unguent stretched out as we have said before, and then it is cauterized with the fire of which this is its shape:
And beware that with the spatula you do not touch the tunica cornea and that it does not come in a rupture, and that the pupil is perforated.
Then the incision goes in the eye a little salt or vinegar, and let it go in there another day, and then heal that with what it comes in so that it is healed.
If the nail is not nervous and you cannot insert the needle, nor is it stuck in that place, then this type of nail is healed with medicines, and is cured as I said and recommended in the division.
And if you want to split it, then open the mouth of the patient and take a thin, pointed spatula according to this form: with subtlety. And if you see that it is rarefied and dispersed and has taken on an odor, then distill from your mouth into the wound made of rosemary or with red wine or with salt dissolved, and pour the liquid in through the other side the next day.
Then repeat the operation as long as everything from him is expelled; otherwise, a cauterized ulcer will be in the wound, and you will let it be, and cure the ulcer at its beginning until it is healed.
Then repeat your operation on that with reason until it is healed.
The tear gland, if it is noted in the eye due to great harm, should be suspended with a thread; and insert that from one side, and do not finish the insertion so that there are no outbursts of tears.
Then distill into the tear gland red wine and rosemary made into a salve until it is healed.
Chapter .xvii.
Of the incision of a wound and of what is born of flesh pressed in the wound.
Sometimes in wounds of the eyes, flesh that is red is born, and it covers the pupil, or approaches or stretches out over the eyelids, and it strongly presses on the lids into the holes, and is assembled to the appearance of marble.
The operation on him is that the patient rests his head in your lap; and then open the wounds of those, and gather up all that flesh with convenient threads, and take it by one end with a forceps or with a basket; and then insert the flesh at the beginning so that everything is finished with the scissors, and be careful of the wound so that you do not hurt it with your operation.
And your incision should be with the one by which you insert those or with a spatula which we recommended in the incision of the nail, or with small scissors by which is gathered ash according to the form that will come the chapter next to this one.
Therefore when your incision is complete and all that flesh has been expelled, then fill the wound with ground salt, or distill into it powdered red salve resembling the corrosive medicines, and place over the wound dry cotton wool until an ulcerated cauterized wound is formed.
And if any cause of wounds and cauterized blood occurs and you fear an ulcerated wound, then let the wound be and cure that ulcer with what eases that ulcer, and then repeat your operation on it until it is healed, and similarly do to the flesh which you find in the wound of this type.
However you must be careful about removing all cure of the wound by natural or accidental way, working with iron, and not putting your hand in any of these operations until you see that that member has endured that operation.
Chapter .xviii.
Of the collection of pus in the wound.
Pus are red veins which are knotted on the wound and forbid the opening of its operation, and they discharge the wound over the course of days.
Therefore it is necessary at the beginning for you to consider if the wound in which there is pus is strong and there is not another sickness in it other than pus, then gather up that pus.
And you should command the patient to rest his head in your lap, and then suspend those veins with a thread or two according to your prudence; and that thread should be of subtle double thickness according to this form:
or two threads grading into one body according to this form:
And then gather up those veins with strong subtle threads, and wipe away the blood hour by hour, until you see that those veins are expelled from the wound and are turned around.
And be careful that you do not hurt the wound with the end of the spatula; and if your operation is on the right side in front of the sun, then be firm in your operation so that you insert only those veins.
And when you have completed it, then you distill into the wound wine or rosemary so that with its sharpness it corrodes what is expelled from the pus.
But if it is not possible for you to gather it all in that hour, then you apply a plaster on everything so that it eases his pain, and let him be for several days until his pain is eased and he is guarded from an ulcerated wound.
Then repeat your operation according to the same manner so that it is healed.
And this is the form of the scissors:
Chapter .xix.
Of the reduction of a herniated testicle to the nose.
When you cure a herniated testicle with cauterization or with burning medicine according to how it is described and is not healed, then do not place anything on it except that you make an incision over the ulcer due to its maturity, and extract all the humidity which is in it and the pus until the bone is uncovered.
And therefore when the bone is uncovered and you see in it corruption or blackness, then scrape it with an instrument of which this is the form:
And it is named a sharp head, and it is made of iron, and the head should be round like an awl of which the tip is made pointed by drilling or sharpened subtlety (just as in the following form).
And place that over the corroded part of the bone, and then turn it between your fingers, and press your hand gently little by little until you know that the corruption is scraped.
And this should be done several times, then restore the place with drying and constricting causes.
Therefore if the place is consolidated and there is good flesh born in it and the body has separated from the sickness and it has been for 40 days, and it is not renewed and there is no ulcer formed and an accident does not occur on it, then you know that it is healed.
But if not, then do not place anything on it except to reduce the fissure to the form of the nose, and according to this manner: and you uncover the bone with iron or with sharp medicine, and when the bone is uncovered, then take a thread according to this form:
Let the end of it be triangular, and the stalk of it should be bent inward at the end just as you see there.
Then place that over the bone, and let it be near the tear gland; and lengthen your hand a little from the wound, and then turn your hand with the thread until you penetrate all the bone, and he feels the patient through the ass that blocks wind emission because of it.
Then restore the place with drying and constricting medicines just as I have taught you.
Therefore when the flesh and the place are hardened, then the matter which flows to the openings on the sides returns to the nose; therefore that is pus easier on the patient.
Chapter .xx.
Of the reduction of the prominence of the wound.
When the wound swells in its entirety and there is no occurrence of pain nor decrease, then know that you should loosen the patient, then the following, and then pause vents on the neck during the scarification and sucking for a good sucked; then pause over the wound liniment which is made from aloes and aloe and myrrh, and then strengthen the plaster over the wound with moist powders.
And the manner of the powders is that you take pieces of linen cloth, and each piece is folded in four; and make those folds.
Then place those one on top of the other according to the quantity that he has need of. Then bind tightly over them with a strong bandage, and repeat the cupping with suction without scarification; then remove the cups and let him be bound tightly day and night.
But if in the meantime the ligament softens, then let it be looser.
Then remove the bandage day and night as we have said.
And if you see that he is reduced, good; but if not, then repeat the ointment with the powders and the bandage and the cupping until he is healed.
Chapter 21.
Of the beginning of the swelling of the tunica uberia.
When there is a disruption in the tunica uberia and it becomes prominent and protrudes outside the eyelids like a grain of rice, and assumes a form like that of a man's nail, and you want to operate on it, then the operation is performed as we have described: You insert a needle into the root of the uberia at the lower part, and you place another needle in which there is a thread doubled in the lacrimal part, and make that penetrate and let the first needle follow its course; then you pierce the site of the double thread and lift with it the part of the uberia in the circuit of the needle, and bind that tightly.
Then remove the needle and place over it wool infused with white vinegar and let it stay until the thread comes away with the uberia.
And then cure him with that which comforts it until the wound is healed.
And sometimes one gathers all the parts with a circle of cloth around the affected area, and let it be pierced by the spatula through the white humor, and let the moisture flow, and let the eye go down and recover at once.
Then bind it until it is healed.
Chapter 22.
Of the cure of hawks.
This disease which is called alconati is nothing but an inflammation which is located in the eye, resembling water and not pus.
But the manner of treating it is that you make the patient sit on a raised and straight seat, and you take hold of his head in your hands from both sides, and keep him there until you see the inflammation come to the lower parts; then let it be dried up and not go down, and let the light be seen, and let the patient see the causes as he used to.
And if it does not go down below, you know that it is water.
But if the inflammation is not prepared to go down with what we have said, then let the patient sit between your hands and take a spatula and rub it on the membrane covering a little from the continuation of the conjunctiva into the cornea in the rim (in that very place), until the inflammation goes away.
Then when it is gone, you distill into the eye water mixed with honey in which you have boiled fenugreek and honey.
And let him be cured of the other causes until he is healed.
Chapter 22.
Of the cure of water coming down from the eye.
We have already said about the qualities of the water in the division and which one is suitable for piercing with a needle according to the condition; then let that be done according to his health.
Then you see that you make him sit between your hands over a pitcher and open his eye wide, he pulls his eye up.
Then place your left hand near the eyelid of his eye, if the eye in which there is water is the left one; or with your right hand, if it is the right one.
Then take the palm of your right hand, if the eye is left; or with the palm of your left hand, if it is right.
Then place the end of your palm near the rim because of the thickness of the membrane in the white of the eye in the part of the tear gland, and press your hand with that.
Then penetrate into the white of the eye and feel that your palm has already reached to the cause seen.
And let the distance of the path of your palm to the rim be the measure of the space which is from the pupil into the end of the darkness, and it is the rim of the eye; for you will see with that pupil by means of the vision of the eye because of the brightness of the tunica cornea.
Then place your palm in the site where there is water; then you lift it up a little and again, and so if the water goes down at once, let the patient look immediately upon that on which he opened his sight, and your palm is in his eye.
Then rest a little; then if the water has gone down, let you lift it up another time before your palm is pushed away.
And so when it is dried up and does not go down, then you remove your palm with ease, and move it a little over the eye; and dissolve in the water a little of clear salt of gemma and wash the inside of the eye with it; and then place on the eye cotton or a pad or wool infused in rosewater and vinegar and let him hold his eye shut.
But we do not do this now, but they who are of our time put it on with cotton infused in rosewater.
And if he does not submit to your palm in the instrument of the eye because of its hardness — for it is hard of men whose eye is very hard —, then you see that you take the spatula which is called albarido, of which this is the form:
Then pierce it with that the conjunctive membrane, and do not press your hand into the cut, and do not force your way to a subtle place.
Then insert your palm according to what we have said.
And after you have completed your work, let the patient be prepared for sleep in a dark room where he sleeps on his back in a dark room, and all movements are prohibited.
And let him lie still so that his nature may be quieted, and do not move his head to the right or left in any way.
And let him rest according to his condition on the third day.
And let him go back to that dark room and open his eyes wide, and let him see some causes, and then let the condition return on the seventh day.
And do not do this in the time of the baths or at once but also after the infusion. After you have removed it so that the water can run freely and violently for a long time.
But if suppuration occurs, then let you open the eye on the seventh day and cleanse it with that which eases suppuration.
Then you open his eyes wide and place your hand over his face so that he sees nothing for several days, lying in the dark room.
And let him go to that dark room gradually and converse about his causes.
And you know that it is not permissible for the disciple to see some things, and then you will be anxious about the operation.
And it has already come to us from some of those whose names are in the book of Artach, and some say that fire was made in Ayrac magma which is sucked out, the water.
However, I have not seen anyone in our land who has perfected this, nor is it written in any of the books of the ancients; and it is possible that it is new.
These are the ways to prepare the various kinds of magdaad, so that one who is ignorant of them can prepare them.
And they are made from either copper or iron specifically, and the ends of them must have this triangular subtlety, the pointed end just as it is described.
Chapter 24.
Of the cure for a nosebleed.
When there are various meats growing inside the nose, of which some cause is found, which is like a scorpion sting, or a polyp, and this disease is called polypus, because it resembles that pe. And in it there is cancerous, lumpy meat of a dark color; and from it comes the non-dark colored lion meat.
Therefore in that which is not fraudulent or cancerous in the lion meat, cause the patient to sneeze between his fingers and be exposed to the sun, open the nostrils of him, and prick his thumb into that meat. And then draw it out into the split foreskin, and cut off what you have understood from that with a pointed spathe of the one side between which you know that all the meat has been removed; because if anything is left in it of the cause of the separation, then you will easily cut that away with one of the subtle tools. But if there is bleeding or an ulcerated pustule, then you pause it that sneezing; or if they are from the malignant pustules, then you cut and cauterize them that the pus bleeds and all the cavities are exposed.
And then it is put into the nose near the incision with vinegar or water or wine. But if the nose is open and from it there comes moisture into the palate, then know that it has healed.
But if the moisture does not penetrate as it sneezes, then know that inside him is meat growing in pus over bones of the nostrils to which there has been no separation.
Therefore then cause him to sneeze and put into him the bile of which there is any thickness, and let fall into him nuts, nut-sized, and place between each nut the quantity of the tip of your finger or less, and cause the patient to sneeze and put one end of the bile into the nostril with the ray or with another cause that it is possible for.
And then that this has been done, that he breathe out his odorant into the canals of the nostrils, and spit it out over his throat, for troops watching him do this action make children in schools, and it is a lighter cause to whoever wants to do so.
And then place the two ends of the bile, one end that goes over the nose and the other that goes into the nose, and then administer the cutting of meat with the nuts that are in the bile, and do this until you know that the meats have been cut by the nuts of the bile.
And then pull out the bile and place in the nose the abstraction of the blood a cauterization, and do this for three days or more until the paint corrodes everything that is left of the meat.
And then at the end of the cure, place in the nose a lead tube for several days until it has healed.
But if you find that the cure is dried out, use that one.
And this is the form of the instrument of a purging cupping-glass with which oils and medicines are distilled into the nostrils.
And do this from silver or copper, which is like a small open lamp, just like a small hole, and the meat similarly.
And if you want, make a closed tube just like a cane, and the cup of the purging cupping-glass be flat and uncovered; to which is handled at its end, with which you have that when you heat it in it oil or water that you want from the juices and the sucking causes.
Chapter 25.
Of ulcers in the ends of the nose.
Many times an ulcer is born in the ends of the nose, and it is magnified and swollen for several days until it comes to a head.
And for this cause you pierce that in the beginning of its appearance, and drain all of that. And then place on the spot a cauterization or burning medicine which is placed in the location of it.
But if its piercing is delayed until it has become magnified, then consider that it has suppurated, has become hard, of a dark color and of little feeling, then do not touch that with iron which is the cranky ulcer; because many times when you pierce this ulcer in that way great malice comes upon him who.
And if the ulcer is of lion touch and not of dark color, and its piercing is possible in all of that, then discharge the patient and pierce it with fearlessness, and heal the spot with what drips out and constrict it until it has healed.
Chapter 26.
Of the sewing of the nose and of the lips and of the auricle when the continuity is dissolved by a ulcer or similar.
Know that when solution happens in one of these cartilage, few confer in that operation except in some men.
Therefore, when for any cause of those, you consider that it is fresh blood with your blood, then sew the two lips of the ulcer with sewing, and then heal it until it has healed.
And if the lips of solution of continuity are already separated, and each is healed, then cause that you cut each part of its apparent tendon until blood comes out. And then sew the two lips with sewing and strengthen those, and on top of them pulverize blood of dragon and unmixed ashes, and place on the powder a piece of emplaster diafinicon, or of any other of the consolidating plasters, and let that lie for two days or three, and then remove that and change that plaster and let it lie until the sores are healed.
But the manner of sewing is that you add the solution of continuity or with needles just as we have mentioned in the sewing of the belly, or add the solution of continuity with bile just as I have told.
Chapter 27.
Of the extraction of those causes that come in the two lips in the parts inside.
Many times in some men in the parts inside of their lips there are some hard ulcers like grass of worms, and some are small and some are large.
Therefore cause that you turn the lips and split each of those duress from all parts, and then the piercing fill up the place with ground sage within that the blood is restricted, and then wash it with vinegar and let it be healed by what has been constricted, until it has healed.
Chapter 28.
On the beginning of meat being chewed on the gums.
There are blisters on the gums which the ancient ones called albus, then you should suspend that with tweezers or what you have, and pinch its root, and let the pus flow out or the blood.
Then place on the spot sage that has been cut up into pieces or another powdery astringent or caustic.
And if the meat comes back, then you should cut it again secondarily and cauterize it, for then the cautery will not come back.
Chapter 29.
On the reason for teeth with iron.
When in the surface of the teeth of the molars and of the incisors, and between the gums are found rough scabs, callouses, and some blisters that are blackened and are made citrine or green within which causes corruption to the gum, and these callouses are made thus.
And so you should make the patient open his mouth between your hands and place his head in your lap, and rub the teeth in which these scabs appear, and cause them to become like sand, so that no other cause remains within them, and this is what makes the blackness and citrinity and others within so they are cleansed.
So if this is left as in the beginning of the process, it is good; and if not then you should repeat the process over them another day, or on the second or third within which it comes to its final state in what you will.
And know that teeth have need of many резоры of diverse forms and of many figures according to how they are prepared for your operation. And thus the rasp used for the tooth to be rasped on its molars side is another than that used for rasping between the teeth according to other forms, and these forms of rasps you should prepare them immediately as you will see.
Chapter 30.
On the removal of teeth.
You should cure the tooth of its pain with every remedy and delay in its total removal as there is not any cause that prevents the growth of it when removed, for this is a sublime substance that is excused in its removal.
But when the patient is forced to have that tooth removed you should be certain which is the painful tooth, for many times pain deceives the patient and it seems as if it is in a healthy tooth, and you remove that one and the pain does not cease until the diseased and painful tooth is removed, for we have already seen this through operation of the gums.
So when you are certain which is the painful tooth and that you know well, then you should scrape around the circuit of the tooth with a spathe in which there is some virtue so it is dissolved from the gum all around, and then cut that with your fingers or with thin forceps little by little until you concavitate it.
And then grab it firmly with strong tweezers for good speech or stupor strongly, and place the head of the patient between your thumbs which you hold well so he does not move, and then pull the tooth according to rectitude in a manner that you do not break it, nor give greater pain to the patient.
And so if it is not loose, then take one of those instruments and place it beneath all around with ease and force the removal of it thus as it was done at the beginning.
But if the tooth is split or rotten then you should cover that split with a cloth and press it with the end of a thin ray so that it is not broken in the hour of your constriction on it as you hold it with tweezers.
And you should open completely by scraping all around the gum and guard much of your strength that you do not break it or cause a split to form from it, and return upon the patient for the wickedness he has done to him.
And guard yourself that you do not do as unskilful barbers do in their foolishness and audacity on the removal of them, who do not administer what we have recommended; for many times they bring upon men great diseases which are more difficult than to be broken, or that you extract those with some bones of the jaw thus as we have testified.
And then the removal of it is washed in the mouth with wine or vinegar and salt.
And if it still flows blood from there then take some quantity of chalk and sprinkle on the wound, and if that chalk does not help then cauterize.
The form of the forceps and tweezers which are used to pull out the tooth at the beginning is of long length, short handle and thick, so that they are not bent when you operate with them.
And let it be thus as the gross handle within that when you stretch with them they are not bent and are short lengths.
And let it be made of iron from India descendingly made from right angles and in the angles of those there are teeth of which some enter into each other and stretch by strong constriction, and sometimes the angles of those are in the form of a goose beak which has the name ciconia, it is hooked, and they are of strong constriction.
Chapter 31.
On the removal of teeth and of the extraction of the bones from the jaws that are broken.
When you need the removal of a tooth which is broken then let there be placed on the spot a poultice with boiled water for one or two days until it becomes soft; and then insert your fingers or tweezers at the angles of which some are like the beak of a goose called ciconia, or hooked, the form of the forceps:
The angles of them are made like teeth as with lime or file.
And if it does not obey you with these forceps or tweezers then let there be dug into the root and cut away all the meat and insert the instrument which is called atile, it is a small lever of which the form is thus:
And let it be of short length thick in the end and not bent so that it is not broken.
So if by this the root is loose then it is good and if not help yourself with these other instruments of which these are their forms, the form of the first instrument is triangularly angled in which there is some thickness: the form of the second instrument is of a half circle within which there is some grossness:
The form of the second instrument is that it be triangular and more thinly ended.
And now help yourself with this instrument having two ramps of which this is the form, then follow thus: and with other instruments which are used in rasuring of teeth for youth is made by this instrument which is assembled to great oncis and this is its form:
Of the triangularly twisted or short end, which there is some thickness, and it is not bent so that it is not broken.
And know that the instruments of teeth move and likewise similarly to other instruments.
But the cunning and subtle artesian in the art, attains by himself the materials according to what he means is the operation and diverse diseases, for there are diseases of which the ancients did not tell or give proper instruments, through forms of diverse species.
But if the jaw bone or other bones of the mouth are broken, or if you have sprains then let it be pressed in its place with what is convenient to that of the instruments and of the forceps which we have said in the extraction of the roots of the teeth, and help yourself with the gesture of which this is the form:
And if there is any swelling, let it be reduced little by little, and bound or held with a bandage so that it does not escape or leak until the bone has been punctured; then treat the area with appropriate medicines.
But if there is a small pustule on the bone, then open that pustule and draw out its darkness, and cure it until it is healed.
Chapter 32.
Of the cure of teeth that protrude above the others.
When teeth are prominent, not according to their natural form, and especially when this occurs in women, and most especially in elderly women; therefore you should consider: if a tooth is adjacent to another tooth, and it is not possible to cut or file it down, then extract that tooth. But if it is attached to another tooth, then you insert into that tooth an instrument of which this is the shape, and it is similar to a pig's jaw, and it should be made of very acute Indian iron.
And you should make your incision in such a way that you insert it into the tooth for several days according to the hardness of the tooth, and so that no other tooth is affected.
And if there is an prominent tooth exposed to filing, then file it with Indian iron file of which this is the shape:
And it should all be made of Indian iron, both the edge and the handle; and it should have very fine points like a file with which needles are made, with which the tooth is filed little by little over several days with ease, so that no other tooth is affected and falls out. Then smooth it at the end, and shave it with a very sharp razor.
And if there is a tooth of which one part is broken and cuts the tongue, then you should smooth that so that the sharpness of that fracture is removed and blunted, and it is flattened so that the tongue is not cut nor speech impaired.
Chapter 33.
Of the restoration of broken teeth with gold or silver foil.
When there is a concussion and displacement of the teeth due to a blow or falling, and the patient cannot bear to bite down on it, and your treatment with astringent medicines has not worked, then so that they do not fall out, it is useful to strengthen them with gold foil rather than silver, for silver turns black and rots after a few days, but gold never changes.
And the foil should be of such thinness and thickness according to the quantity that can fit between the teeth; and the technique of this is that you take the foil and place twice as much between two healthy teeth, and then let it grow with two twists of the foil between two broken teeth, or if one or several, until the material reaches the healthy tooth on the other side. Then repeat the twisting between the part from which you began, and strengthen your hand with ease and skill so that it is not broken.
And your twist with which you strengthen the foil should be between the roots of the teeth so that it does not escape.
Then cut off the excess foil with tweezers or tongs, and join those ends together with wax, and conceal them between the healthy tooth and the broken tooth, so that they do not hurt the tongue. Then let it set tightly like Roman cement.
But if it is loose or broken, strengthen it or those with other foil in the same way at all times.
And this is the form of the teeth and the figure of the twist between two healthy and two broken teeth, as follows:
And when one or two teeth are pushed back into their sockets due to a blow, and they have grown back as we have described, and they break again:
And it is not done except by skilled and wise artisans.
And some people use cow bones for this purpose, and make it in the shape of a tooth, and place it in the place where the tooth is missing, and strengthen it as we have said, and they remain and serve with it for a long time.
Chapter 34.
Of the incision of the membrane which comes in the tongue and prohibits speech.
This membrane which comes underneath the tongue sometimes occurs naturally or accidentally and happens due to a wound that has already healed.
And the operation on it is that the patient opens his mouth, and you raise his tongue, and then cut that nervous membrane according to the width so that the tongue is loosened from its attachment.
But if there is any hardness or knotting, and it has been caused by the hardening of a wound, then you heat oil and cut that according to the width through which you cut the membrane so that the knot is dissolved.
And be careful that there is not a tear in the flesh of the lip and that you split the membrane and cause blood to flow.
Then wash the area of the incision with wine or vinegar or water rubbed with vinegar, and then place the tongue in a relaxed position; this is what the patient should do every night so that it does not harden again.
But if blood flows from it, place powdered vitriol on the spot; but if the blood clings to it, then cauterize the area with a red-hot cautery that is appropriate for this. Then treat it with the other causes so that it heals.
Chapter 35.
Of the extraction of a ranula under the tongue.
Sometimes there occurs underneath the tongue an apostema similar to a small onion that prohibits the tongue from its natural movement, and it is enlarged when it fills the mouth.
And the operation on it is that the patient opens his mouth widely and you examine the apostema.
And if you see it of a dusky or black color, hard, and the patient feels nothing, then do not touch it because it is rotten.
And if it is inclined toward whiteness and there is moisture in it, then you put oil on it, and cut it with very thin spatulas, and cut it all around; and if blood flows when you operate on it, then you place powdered vitriol on it, so that the blood is constricted.
Then return to your work so that it has been treated with wine and salt, and treat it with the other treatment so that it heals.
Chapter 36.
Of the extraction of an apostema from two ears and that which is nothing in the gullet, and of other apostemas.
When pus occurs in the gullet and they are glands which are attached to each other like almonds, and they come out from the ears, and when you treat them with what we have said in the division and it is not healed, then consider if the apostema is hard, dusky-colored, with little sensation, then do not touch it with iron.
And if it is red-colored and the root is thick, then do not touch that with iron because of the flowing blood; before you let it set so that it hardens, then either you will pull it out or break it up itself.
And if it is white-colored and the root is thin, then that is what should be cut.
And the operation on it is that you consider, before your operation, if the apostema has rested due to being cauterized with complete rest or if it has diminished due to any diminution; and then let the patient open his mouth in front of the sun, and his head be in the usual position, and the servant place his hands between their knees, and the server press the tongue of the patient away from below with a noble instrument of which this is the shape:
Let it be made of silver or of bronze, and let it be thin as a needle.
Therefore, when you press upon it with your finger and the ulcer is revealed to you, and you put upon it your medicine, then take a needle and pierce that into the wound, and draw out from there as much of the humor as you can. Another thing is that you should withdraw some cause from the membranes, and then cut into that with an instrument in the form of which this is.
Another thing is that you should withdraw some cause from the membranes, and then cut into that with an instrument in the form of which this is. and is like a pair of tongs, except that the ends of it are bent, so that the aperture of each one is facing that of the other, very sharp, and made from iron which has been tempered.
But if this instrument is not available to you, then cut into it with a spatula, of which the shape of this is: and let it be sharp on one side, but not on the other.
And then after you have cut one slit, cut the other according to this manner of cutting, and then let the patient be healed from water which has been rubbed.
But if there is bleeding instead, then heal it with water of the cooking of the husk of a pomegranate or of the leaf of a myrtle and similar to that of the causes which constrict within so that the flow of blood is restricted, and then cure that until it is healed.
And sometimes it is seen in the gullet other ulcers other than those two ears, and cut into those according to what I have said about the cutting of two slits evenly.
And I have already treated a woman of an ulcer which had come in her throat, that ulcer extending to the color brown, with little feeling, and which had already closed her throat, and the woman was breathing with difficulty, and had already prohibited eating and drinking water, and she had already been brought to death if not for one day or two.
And the ulcer had pushed so much that it had caused two bumps where pus came out through two holes.
Therefore I cut into it skillfully and put my finger in one of them, and I drew out that, and a great portion came out of him, and then I cut into that where I understood the other hole to be, and then I bound his mouth, and pressed his tongue, and then I put my finger in that ulcer.
And then I cut away a great portion of it, and not much blood ran from him but a little. And then the throat of that woman was freed, and she began immediately to drink water, and then took food, therefore I did not cease cutting into that ulcer many times over a long time, and another ulcer came in place of that one which I cut while it was prolonged.
Therefore I cut and cauterized her throat again, therefore after a few days; and then I wandered and did not know what God had done to that, therefore I am astonished.
Chapter .xxxvii.
Of cutting of the veil when it is ulcerated.
When there is discharge from the membrane and it is ulcerated and long, then it is called a perpendicular ulcer; and if it is in the part below thick and round, then it is called a bubo.
But when it is healed with the water which we have said in the division, and does not yield to your treatment, and you see that the ulcer cauterizes there and is thin, then beware that you cut into that which is added around round; and if it is to that length, and is bloody, of brown color or black, and there is no feeling in it, then beware that you do not cut into it, for there is fear over the patient.
And when you see that according to the manner which I have said of its whiteness and length, that you make the patient fast and press his tongue with an instrument in the form of which is the process of it, and then put your finger into the new one, and draw out that one downward and cut into that with one of two instruments of which I have spoken about the cutting of two slits.
And beware that you do not cut into that except what is set over the natural term by addition, for if you cut more of it, you will injure his speech.
And after the cutting, use that which we have recommended in the cutting of two slits, and heal that until it is healed.
But if the patient is frightened by the cutting of it, beware that you use the cautery on it without fear, and the manner of the cautery in him is not but with acute water, and it is that you hold the head of the patient in your lap, and then press his tongue with the instrument which we have said, and then take the water which we have spoken about in the chapter of cauterization, and apply with that cause alive, and pause that not thick nor thin, and from that fill the cavity of the instrument of which this is the form:
Let the end of it be concavitated in which is paused the medicine thus with the concavity of spoon, and pause the instrument with the medicine over the ulcer, and let the patient lie on his side so that run saliva or mucous from the mouth of him so that not descend any cause upon the throat of him and that flow that.
And then hold your hand over the medicine, and express that over the uvula over the space of about half an hour until you see that become blackened and sedated by the biting of the medicine.
And if you want, take thread and wrap that around the end of the rod, and submerge the thread in the medicine, and insert the rod with the thread in a tube of above so that the thread adheres in that tube, and do that as many times until you accomplish what you want from the cauterization of the uva, and then let it fall when it is dried and after three or four days.
And if you see that it iterates the medicine, iterate that, and then after the cauterization wash off in the circle of the uva with a rod which is dipped in vinegar, and cleanse with that what is in the circle of him from the medicine, and let it be washed with water which has been rubbed, and let it be healed outside with embrocation, and within with ointments until it is healed.
And this kind of treatment is more safe than cutting and also less frightening.
Sometimes the uvula is healed with that which is more thin than cauterization and cutting, for it is healed by sub-fumigation in this manner: take calamen, hyssop, origano, ruda, arabic scinche, camomilla, and bruised and similar to those of the herbs, and mix all those causes, or some of them, in a wave, and let them be dipped in vinegar water, and boil; and let the wave be washed with decent lye, and let there be in the middle of the wave a hole, upon which is paused an instrument which is made of silver or bronze.
And let the end be inserted in the mouth of the patient so that the vapor goes to the uvula over the quantula, until the uvula is very fogged.
And then iterate over that many times until it is dried, and beware that you do not do this treatment at the beginning of the aliment of ulcers, for too much would constrict in the ulcer, and not beware that you do that unless after the declaration of cautery of the ulcer.
But if that instrument is not available to you, then take a cane and put at the end of it a plug of wood, so that the mouth of the patient be bent, for the plug of wood prohibits the vapor from burning the mouth.
And this treatment is beneficial for health.
Here is the text with the translation you requested:
Here is the translation for the provided text:
Here is the translation:
Here is the translation:
Here is the translation: Here is the translation:
Here is the translation:
Here is the translation:
Here is the translation:
Here is the translation:
Here is the text with the translation you requested:
Here is the translation:
Here is the translation:
Here is the translation:
Here is the translation:
Here is the translation:
Here is the translation:
Here is the translation:
Here is the translation:
Here is the translation:
Here is the translation: Here is the translation:
Chapter 40.
Here is the translation of the text:
Abscesses are many kinds, from many sources, as one will see in this book.
And they differ in their opening and section by two ways, one of which is through the nature of the abscess itself; the other is through the moisture that is contained within it.
And the second way is according to the location in which they occur, for an abscess on the head is different from one that occurs on the bottom; and an abscess at a muscular site is different from one that occurs at a joint; and each of these has its own treatment through operation.
And among abscesses there are some which should not be opened, but rather allowed to mature until the pus is discharged from them or they are completed.
And there are other abscesses which should be opened when they are cross; and they are not matured according to their nature, such as abscesses that are near joints, for an abscess when it approaches a joint, its essence is prolonged into the pores of its surroundings, and strongly corrupts the tendons or nerves of that joint, through which there occurs contraction of that member; or it is an abscess near a principal member, and if you delay its opening until it matures, it will harm the principal member; or it is near the bottom, therefore open it so that it does not mature, but rather one that is near the bottom, so that its pressure may not increase, lengthen into the parts within the bottom, and a fistula be made, or that there be made in the end of it what may not heal. But you should know the time of opening an abscess, and that is when it has matured.
And you should know that it is matured when there is a decrease in pain and fever, and an approprate decrease in heat and pulse, and the sharpening of the head of the abscess, and other signs.
And because you should know the opening to be made in the most low part of the abscess and from pus coming from the healing of the eminence.
And the opening is always to be made through the length of the flesh or the body, if the abscesses are in parts of the hands or feet, and at places of the veins, of the cords of the nerves, of the tendons; and, finally, in all places alike from which there is reflection; for those in which there is reflection, use opening according to that member.
But when the abscess is at a muscular site, it is better that you delay its opening until its digestion is confirmed according to its nature; for if you open it before this, there will be lengthening of the pore of it and much filthiness, and strongly the lips of it will be hardened and its depth.
But some abscesses are opened according to the breadth of the flesh or the body through necessity, or according to that of which the member is in need.
And you should administer small opening in small abscesses, and large opening and ample or many incisions in great abscesses according to the diversity of their size.
And others are of abscesses in which the membrane is hollowed out and incised when it has been made in such a way that bread is done to it, and it is done in term that it was already, as well as that which occurs in trops of doubt and of blisters.
And of those there are that are cut with three angles; and of those in which it is cut in the figure of a bay-leaf, as well as the abscesses of the angles.
And there are some in which round section and lunar section is administered, and similar to those.
But that at which there is not head as of superficial abscesses, you should open it with superficial opening or plain incisions only.
And when the abscess is great and has collected much pus, you should open it and not be afraid to extract all of its pore in that hour; after having extracted some from it, you should then pack the abscess so that there is a filling within it for another day, and again after having extracted a greater part, you should do this many times according to degree until it is foro-getat.
And especially if the patient is of weak nature or a pregnant woman, or small child, or old in decrepitude, for the animal spirit is many times resolved by the exit of pus, and strongly the patient dies, and you operate on them.
Therefore guard this chapter with great caution, and when you open the abscesses in which you operate on these abscesses, after having washed the wound consider if there is little pus or the section is flat, then administer leeches of larch or oak-tree; but if the abscess is great, and the fissures of the opening are many, then you should pause a hook in each piercing until they come together.
And if in the abscess there is a part of the membrane cut or hollowed out at its perimeter, then you should complete it with old linen or thread made of linen-yarn, as well as when you have extracted pus or roots, without moisture; and strengthen it on the third day; and then process it and heal it with that which one of the ointments within until it is healed.
But if blood occurs in the hour of your operation, then you should administer water mixed with vinegar in which one of linen is, and pause it upon the place of the flow of the blood many times.
But if the flow of blood persists, then you should administer regime and cure, and powders which I have recommended in many places of this book and of division.
But if it is in the time of winter, and the location of the abscess is a place of many nerves, then you should mix powder with wine and oil, and pause them upon the locations.
And if it is in the summer, and the locations are muscular, then you should pause powders dampened with water and oil or wine and oil, and all of this should be rubbed until the third day as we have said, then you should dissolve the abscess and wash it and administer in its cure that which to it convenes until it is healed.
And this is that which is necessary of the knowledge of the cure of abscesses universally, but according to the way of distinction I have said of every abscess in what manner is its way of cure by chapters singularly.
Chapter 41.
Of section of abscesses which occur in the membrane of the head.
In the membrane of the head there are small abscesses, and they are of species of nodes which contain membranes that are to them made; and their species is many.
And from them there are pustules, and from those one contains moisture similar to lime. And from those are ones that contain moisture similar to powder, and resembling it; and there are some that are scaly, hard.
And in the section of all, and in the extraction of these there is not fear, as one must the extension of those does not contradict artery.
And the operation in section of these is that you express those with an instrument the form of which see there, the which is called entromes, so that you know that it contains.
For if that which is contained is moisture, then cut this with section according to length by superficial section according to this form:
And he begins at the section of the line of B. into the line of G. Therefore when the moisture is evacuated, then you scrape that which contains that moisture, and do not seek any cause from that, for many experienced physicians return, if something remains from that cause.
And then immerse the wound in Egyptian ointment, if available, and if not, in water and salt; and fill it with that, and leave it until the next day, for with that you will dissolve all that is broken of that membrane.
And then apply Egyptian ointment a second and third time on the wound if you are confident that there is no cause from that membrane; then heal the wound with ointment until it is cured.
And if an abscess contains a hard nodule, then you cut into that according to this form: with a cross-shaped incision, and cut between the two lips of the incision and scrape that entirely out from the membrane that contains it, and exert your strength in extracting the lining which contains that.
But if your arrow causes you trouble, then do what I told you first.
And similarly do for an abscess which is suppurating with an incision and treatment as we have said before; and an incision on a suppurating abscess is easier, because it contains little pus and little moisture.
And sometimes there are some of these abscesses which are on the head in some people, for whom there is not any moisture; and the cause is that I incised an abscess on the head of an old woman and found the abscess like a hard, rough, white stone, which could not be broken up, and if someone hit it, it hurt.
But in the other abscesses which occur on the head, it is not like this, as with the abscesses which come to the heads of children and because of the roots of the ears; but the incision for these should be superficial.
And pause at the penetration of those in the lower part of them, so that the body is relieved from the sanies to the lower parts.
Then treat those with what is appropriate for that type of treatment.
Chapter .XLVII.
Of an incision on scrofula which occurs in the neck.
Often these abscesses occur in the neck and armpits and in the groin; and sometimes they occur in other parts of the body.
And those which occur in the neck, and many of them are engendered among themselves; and all scrofula of these is within its own membrane, and so with the nodules and abscesses of the head, as we have described.
And the species of these scrofula are many; for some are stony, and some contain moisture, and some are malignant and do not submit to treatment.
Therefore in that which you see with a good disposition in the touch, of which the color of what is seen is close to the color of the skin, and is swollen to all parts, and is not attached to the nerves of the neck, or the veins, or the artery, and is not deep, then you cut into that with a superficial incision from above to below the body along the line of G. into the line of B., and scrape that entirely out, and cut between its two lips with an incision, or with many incisions if you have need of those, as we said in the abscesses of the head; and extract that little by little.
And it is more cautious that the vein or nerve not be cut.
And be careful that the spatulum not strike suddenly, so that it does not hit your hand with an incision, or upset the patient, and cut into what is not necessary to be cut; for if you incised a vein or artery and prohibited yourself from your operation, then stop in the wound vinegar mixed with trass or other powders which stop the flow of blood, and close the wound, and leave it until that subsides the acuteness of the abscess, and becomes soft, and begins to become suppurating. When the blood is stopped.
Then return to your operation until you have finished.
Then inquire with your finger if any cause remains of the other little scrofula; then incise those and clean them.
And if there is a great vein in the root of the scrofula, then you should not incise that scrofula at its roots. But if you see that it falls by itself without harm, then leave that alone.
Then fill the wound with old ointment which you have already immersed in Egyptian ointment, and then heal that.
And if you incised that scrofula entirely, then you should attach the two lips of the wound and cauterize it so that no suppuration remains.
But if you see that there is suppuration because of the greatness of the scrofula, then you should understand how to incise its root, and drain that and administer a poultice and what is said.
And those of the scrofula which contain moisture, pierce that with a superficial incision where you see the place of its maturity to be, and pause an incision so that it drains the pus from below the body, as we have said.
Then administer an incision, poultices with ointment and similarly to those, so that it dissolves what is broken in the corrosion. Then when you see the wound already cleaned, then heal that with ointment of generative flesh until it is cured.
Chapter .XLVIII.
Of an incision on a boil which occurs in the gullet.
Others before us made this incision in the pilhot, and I have not seen anyone in our land who had that done.
And that is the inscription of their name.
But in men who have a hernia, then the extraction of the pilhot should be avoided, so that all the veins and the greater nerves of the patient are not cut.
But in those who have abscesses cauterized in the mouth or gullet or two ears, when the illness is not in the neck, then they should avoid an incision of the pilhot so that they avoid the danger which is done by penetration.
Then when we want that, let us incise the pilhot below three circles of the circles of the pilhot, or four with small incision for the width in that which is between two circles for quantity; and the incision should be in the pharynx, not in the cartilage, and that place is convenient for incision, because it is deprived of flesh, and the vessels of blood from him are long.
And if the patient is timid, then let the doctor stretch the gullet with an incision, and then cut the gullet so that it penetrates into the canal, but avoid the vessels of blood if he sees from those any cause.
Then incise the pharynx according to what we have recommended; and it is understood from the incision of the gullet by the flame which comes from him who is broken, and from the incision of the voice.
And leave the wound open for some time.
Then when the hour is swollen in which the penetration is seen, unite the two lips of the wound of the pharynx, and cut that only to the cartilage.
And then administer medicines that promote the growth of new flesh where it is needed.
And Al-Bukhari says that the meaning of this discourse which we have narrated is merely this: sometimes some of these abscesses have forced open the gullet of the patient; the patient has died, his bowels are protruded and some people cut into the epiglottis so that the patient can breathe on the spot where the plague is located and thus be saved from death.
And for this reason I command the opening of the pustule to be left open until the poison of the illness is expelled; and this poison lasts for three days; and then when the pustule is opened and treated in this manner, it will heal.
And what I have seen with my own eyes is that a servant held a pillow to his mouth and inserted the end of a pulmonary tube into his gullet; I was called to treat him, and when I discovered the pustule, I found blood coming out of it in small quantities.
And then he was made to confess that he had not punctured a vein or a nerve, and the wind escaped from the pustule and it healed.
And nothing happened to the servant unless he breathed through his mouth; then, after a few days, he returned to his usual condition.
And now I say that there is no fear in puncturing the epiglottis.
Chapter 44.
Of an incision on an abscess which occurs outside the gullet and is called a gullet hernia.
This hernia of the gullet is called a great abscess depending on the colour of the body, and it occurs in women.
And it happens in two ways: either naturally or accidentally.
And the natural one is incurable.
And the accidental one happens in two ways: the first is like fatty nodes and the other is like an abscess which occurs due to a knotted artery, and there is danger in that. And one should not make an incision on it with an iron instrument except in the case of a small one. And you should probe it and examine it with your finger; and if you find it like a fatty node and not attached to any vein, then you should open it in the same way as nodes, and extract all that the skin and bursa contain; otherwise, you should probe its whole substance, and treat the place with something suitable for healing until it is cured.
Chapter 45.
Of the sections of nodal tumours.
There are various kinds of nodes, and I have already described all their types in Division.
And what I will now account for is the difference between a node and an exit wound which causes doubt.
And I say that an exit wound is accompanied by heat, fever and violent pains until the ebullition of the superfluous matter ceases; and there is complete putrefaction when the fever, pain and heat subside.
But a node is not accompanied by heat, fever or pain; it contains its own sac.
And it depends on the colour of the body; its beginning is like a cyst and it occurs due to vacuousness, being either greater or lesser in size, and they are of two kinds: either fatty and containing moisture whose colours I have described in Division.
Therefore, when you come to treat a nodal tumour, you should probe it and examine its beginning with an instrument called an intrometer, depending on the form which will be described in the following chapter.
And this is the manner of examining an abscess and any node: you should take this instrument and insert it into the most moist part of the abscess which you find, and turn the instrument with a small movement until you know that it has penetrated the membrane.
Then stop your hand according to the size of the abscess, extract the instrument and consider what has come out through its orifice.
And if the moist matter has run out, regardless of its colour, then you should open it with a superficial incision as I have said in the case of other abscesses.
And if there is no moist matter coming out through the orifice of the instrument, then you should know that it is fatty.
And dry it with an incision having a cruciform shape according to this shape: cut it in this way and suspend it with hooks, and excise the membrane from all parts with ease, and keep the skin or sac over it, if you can, and extract that pus from the node.
But if it is broken in the operation, it is not possible to extract that pus; it happens many times that you should extract it little by little so that nothing remains inside which could cause any harm.
For if anything remains inside, a little or a lot, the node returns as before.
And if you see that a little remains inside, then complete the pustule with some caustic and corrosive powders, close the pustule and place your hand over it as before, and cure it by another method until it is healed.
And if it is a large node, then cut its two lips and cure it with that which is encrusted.
But if the vein is pulsating or not, then cut and plug the place of the pulsatil vein which is opposite to it with a mixture of quicklime and vinegar and close that for two or three days until the pustule has suppurated and the effusion of blood has ceased; then return to opening what is broken in the node.
Chapter 46.
Of the forms of instruments necessary for incision and piercing.
Those are the forms of the instruments: one is large, another medium, and a third small.
The form of the large instrument is as follows:
The form of the small instrument is as follows:
They are made of iron, of hollowed out bronze, and of pointed ends cut decently, so that the instrument can be inserted into abscesses.
And these are the forms of the instruments which are called albarede and one of them is called beride.
And they are of three kinds: large, medium and small.
The form of the large instrument is as follows:
The form of the medium instrument is as follows:
The form of the small instrument is as follows:
Those are for abscesses and exit wounds and fistulas and boils due to that between the bones and from other causes.
And they are made round, large, like needles, with which the sutures are sewed up, and they are made of ram of citron wood, or of iron, or of silver; and the pins are when they are made of ram of citron wood.
And they are made of black iron, which it is believed that through them the fistulas are opened in the cavities where the reflections are reflected from above by those reflections.
And they are of three kinds: one long, the other medium and the third short, according to the quantity of the width of the fistula and its strictness.
Form of the large instrument of lead:
Form of the medium instrument of lead:
Form of the small instrument of lead:
The shapes of warts are of many kinds, some of which are simple, having only one curve, and they are of three species: large, small, and medium-sized.
And of them some are carnous bodies, and of three species.
And of those some have two curves, and they are of three species.
And of them some have three curves, and they are of three species.
And all of these are necessary in their place.
The form of a small simple wart is thus:
The form of a large wart with two curves is thus: The form of a medium-sized wart with two curves is thus: The form of a small wart with two curves is thus:
The form of a large wart with three curves is thus:
The form of a medium-sized wart with three curves is thus:
And these are the forms of the scalpel with which they cut and scrape the nodules and abscesses, and they are of three species: large, medium-sized, and small.
The form of a large scalpel is thus:
The form of a medium-sized scalpel is thus:
The form of a small scalpel is thus.
The extremities of those with which the cut is made are acute, and the others are not acute, but it is made so that the incisions are done gently in the excision of the nodules to avoid cutting into a vein or nerve, and through them the patient is healed and given rest by the burning which brings about the suppuration of the abscess.
And these are the forms of the poultices, and they are of three species: large, medium-sized, and small, as you will see.
They are made of wool and they are similar to a ball with which it is made.
And it has in its edges a pointed hole covered and on the other side holes to the sides, within and without, as you will see.
The forms of the spatulas, which are used hidden between the fingers for piercing abscesses and do not harm the patient, and they are of three species: large, medium-sized, and small. And these are the forms of those:
The forms of phlebotomy instruments with which the flow of blood is stopped, and they are of three species: large, medium-sized, and small; their forms are thus:
They are made of citron wood, round with no length, and they are thin.
And know that these species of phlebotomy instruments are large, medium-sized, and small, in order that with them you may quickly stop the flow of blood when medicine is not immediately at hand.
However, do not use them to stop the flow of blood in any part of the body, but only in fleshy parts, as in the soles of the feet and the insteps, and in the armpits, and the breasts, and the belly, and the groins, and similar fleshy places.
And some are made of those instruments small and resembling the edges of leaves, according to this form, by which blood is stopped when it is done by phlebotomy, or by cutting a vein or an artery.
And some are made round thus:
Chapter XLVII.
Of the cure of the breasts of men, which are like those of women.
Some men's breasts are swollen because of the act of sleeping with women, and then they become like women's breasts, swollen and pendulous.
And when you have done this, cut into those with a lunar incision according to this form, from the line of B to the line of G, and then remove the swollen flesh completely, and fill the wound with medicated ointment, and sew up the two lips of the wound, and cure that part which is healed.
But if the breast droops towards the armpit and is made soft by its weight, as in women, then it should be cut into two parts on either side with two incisions resembling a lunar figure, of which each part contains the other according to its end, so that the longer line contains the shorter according to this form, from the line of B to the line of G. And then remove the swollen flesh completely, and stitch up the lips of the wound, and administer what we have said about the sewing and the powders, which is necessary in the cure, until it is healed.
And if you do not complete the incision of that which must be cut for the inquietude of the patient and for the flow of blood, then fill the wound with cotton soaked in corrosive ointment and leave that part until it is corroded by the ointment, and then cure that part which is healed.
Chapter XLVIII.
Of the piercing of abscesses which come from beneath the armpits.
These abscesses which come from beneath the armpits are of the species of scrofulae, hard, containing a pus sac.
And some contain moisture; and those which contain moisture should be cut with a lunar incision thus: from the line of G to the line of B. And when all the pus is evacuated from that in the abscess of the armpit, then fill it with yellow ointment and leave it for another day.
And then the wound is healed with a convenient ointment until it is healed.
And if the abscess of the species of nodules and scrofulae, then cut it thus as we have said in the incision about scrofulae, equally.
But if the wound is extended to a hard place so that it causes burning, then administer cauterization on it according to what we have said before.
Chapter XLIX.
Of the incision of abscesses which occur by artery or vein.
When an artery is broken and the vein is closed over it, then many times abscess occurs by artery or vein: for when the abscess is by artery it is long drawn out into the body; and when it is driven in by the veins, it feels in the place as a string does.
And that which is by vein is drawn around the surface of the body.
And the incision upon this abscess is error, and greater in that which is beneath the armpits, and in the angles, and on the neck, and in many parts of the body; and it is greater, therefore, when its cure with the iron is avoided, and that which is in the extremities, or on the head, let it be avoided.
But upon that which is of them by inflammation from the orifice of the artery, cut into the vein in its length; and then open the incision with pincers and then the artery, and free it from the tissues as far as it is uncovered.
Then place an needle on the spot and make it penetrate to the other side, and tighten the artery with a double thread in two places — which causes you to lose your breath due to the constriction of two arteries located in the temples.
Then pierce the area between the two muscles with a spatulum so that all of the blood is drained from it and the boil is dissolved.
Then administer treatment to the area in which pus is formed so that the muscles are released from tension; and cure it with an appropriate ointment until it heals.
And if it is an apostema caused by a cut vein, then you must hold with your hand the area of the apostema with the thread, and insert the needle below the spot where your hand has been holding, and make it penetrate; and have a double thread inside so that you extract it from the other side, and bind the apostema with a good ligament according to what I told you in the ligament of grapes into two parts with two ends of the thread.
But if you are afraid of pulling out the thread, then insert the thread with that needle below all the apostema towards the incision of the first needle, and tighten your threads in four places.
Then dry the apostema in the middle of it so that when it is dried out you insert the superfluity of the thread, and leave what is tied to it.
Then place on it a powder which you have soaked in wine and oil, and administer the treatment made with eggs and ointments until it is healed.
Chapter 1 On the apostema which happens due to twisting of nerves.
As it happens with apostemas in arteries and veins, so apostemas happen in nerves when they experience impact or due to excess work and similarly.
And it is mostly formed in the places of the assistants or the ankle, or in any place where joints are injured.
And it is a serious apostema, and is similar in color to the rest of the body, and there are six symptoms of it when it is constricted with vehemence, and the patient experiences a stupor-like sensation.
And it is not an apostema located in the abdomen, and for that reason it has no thread, and it is injured on every side, and does not go to the sides in front or behind.
Therefore for those who have apostemas in their joints do not need to be bound with iron, because they will experience contraction very quickly.
But for the one who has it on the head or forehead, cut the thread with a spatulum. But if it is a small apostema, then grab it with tweezers and pull it out by its roots.
And if it is large, then suspend it with a hook, and cut it open, and draw it out; and stitch the wound closed, and cure it until it heals.
Chapter .ii.
On the section of apostema which happens due to chyle that happens in the abdomen.
This happens to some men a few times in their bellies and in the other parts of their bodies, those whose heads are small and the rest of them are like mushrooms due to similarity to mushrooms, whose roots are thin but their caps are large; and already their lips are twisted, and they are either very petite or highly magnified.
And I have indeed seen one such person, and in his belly there were two things which looked like mushrooms, and there was no difference between them and white ones, with thin roots.
And already their lips were reversed and splitting, and humidity flowed from them all the time.
Therefore I opened them up and found in one of them 15 small stones. And the other six inches.
And the operation at the incision of them is that you consider whether the patient is cold, and if the color of the wound is white, then you open it with a spatulum from the side, and let it be cauterized in the fire, because many times after the section some blood is expelled; and if you stop the blood, cauterize it.
And if you see the patient is fearful and anxious, be cautious about making an incision with iron; but take recent lead thread and tighten it on the wound, in the manner which we have described earlier; and leave it for two days.
Then adjust in the tightening of the lead thread; therefore, do not stop from tightening the large thread greatly on the wound until it is cut off and falls by itself.
But if the wound is of thick roots, then in its incision there is a cause for fear and terror, especially that which is in the abdomen.
But it is possible for you to split the majority of it, and then cauterize it so that it does not return.
Then cure it until the wound is healed.
And beware that you do not assume to incision a wound which is of dusky color, of little feeling, of weak pulse, because this one is certainly cancerous.
And I come with the memory of knowledge.
Chapter .ii.
On the treatment of an outstanding umbilicus.
Eminence of the umbilicus is caused by many reasons; or by fissures of the liver which is over the abdomen, and from it the membrane or intestine according to where other ruptures are; or by blood which flows from a vein or artery as mentioned earlier, or by constricted vasoconstriction in it.
But if it is by fissure of the liver and thickening of the membrane, then the color of the apostema is similar to that of the body; and it has little pain, and appears in various locations. And if it is by prolapse of the intestine, then its location is as we have mentioned earlier, with more violent diversity, and when you push it in with your fingers it conceals itself, and then returns; and quickly it becomes large, and is magnified much due to bathing and violent work.
But if it is by humidity, then it is easy and does not conceal itself when you push with your hand, nor is it constricted nor burned.
And if it is by blood, then with these signs the apostema turns black and declines.
But if it is by pus, then it is a serious apostema, large and hard, and is formed according to an amount.
But if it is by vasoconstriction, then the touch of it is tender.
And the operation on it is that you consider whether the eminence of the umbilicus is by blood of an artery or vein, or by vasoconstriction; then beware of treating it because in that there is fear and terror as I instructed in the chapter about apostemas by artery and vein.
And if the eminence of the umbilicus is by the intestine or membrane, then command the patient to hold his navel, and let him stand extended; then feel with your fingers all around the umbilicus, and then command him to bend towards you between your hands over his navel, and let him circle it with a spatulum from the side where you have felt with your fingers; then extend the majority of the apostema to the sides above it with a large hook; and tie in the circuit with strong thread or with twine in the decent manner.
Then open the middle of the extended apostema over the intestine and insert your finger into that hollow and if you have tied it nor guarded by the intestine, then extract the herniated and push the intestine to the sides inside the abdomen.
And if you have found the hernia, then take it in your hand; and squeeze out the superfluities from it.
But if it is contrary to your archery or vein, then surround that spot, and return to your operation; and take two needles and put them into those two warts very firmly, and pierce through the wart in a cross shape, making sure the needles penetrate; and tightly grab the wart in four places on the needles.
And if you wish, remove the needles and let the flesh extend and fall back by itself; or squeeze out what is being thinned and let it heal with ointment covering the wound so that it may be healed.
And if the protuberance of the navel is filled with flesh or by humidity, then you must hollow out the hernia as we have said and squeeze out the blood or humidity which you find there, and then cure it with ointment covering the wound so that it may be healed and consolidated.
Chapter 53:
Of the cure for a hernia.
We have already said, in the division, about the kind of hernia and how it is cured by medicines, and that it is cured with iron without being ulcerated; and we have also mentioned the generation of a hernia, as well as the caution regarding its cure.
And the ancients said that sometimes a hernia is found in places where its removal is possible, such as in the breast or in the groin and similar places in other parts of the body; they advised to extract all of it, especially when it is starting out small.
But when it is old and large, do not attempt to remove it, for I have never seen one healed by this method nor have I heard of it happening.
And the operation on it, when it is located as we have said, is that you precede and let the patient fast and purge of black bile, and then bleeding is done if a manifest fullness is found.
Then prepare the patient with a preparation in which he is placed for the operation, and then pierce him with hooks that reach into the hernia; and concavely, all around with a good sharp knife, examine thoroughly so that no cause of the hernia remains. Let the blood flow, and do not quickly cut it off; squeeze out the places and wipe away the clotted blood with your hand or with an instrument through which you can easily reach.
But if you find that there is an obstruction of blood from a vein or artery, then cauterize it so that the flow of blood ceases, and then cure it with the other cure so that it may be healed.
Chapter 54:
Of the cure for hydrocephalus.
We have already recommended in the division about the kinds of hydrocephalus from water, and the signs of each kind, as well as the cure for it with medicines.
And that which is cured by iron is only the kind called 'althitas', and it should not be approached with iron as regards the kind of 'timpanistres' nor the kind of 'ypotarcha', for both are mortal.
And when you have medicated this kind of hydrocephalus timpanistre with medicines and it does not respond to your treatment, then consider, for if the patient already has debility or another malady such as another hydrocephalus, just as if there is a cough or intestinal illness and similar to these, then be wary and do not treat it with iron, for fear of this.
But if you see the patient suffering from abundant vertigo and there is no other malady in him except hydrocephalus, and he is not a child nor old, then the manner of operating on him is to elevate the patient between your hands, and the minister should then squeeze his belly with his hand, filling the water up into the part below the navel, and then take a pointed spatula according to this form:
It should be in two pointed parts, with a pointed end just like the spatula; but indeed it should be a little shorter in length so that during the operation you do not pass into the intestine, and then lead him.
Then consider if the generation of hydrocephalus is from parts of the intestines, for then you should lengthen him with the incision from the navel by the amount of three digits below, in his right side over the navel.
But if the generation of hydrocephalus is due to illness of the liver, then your incision should be on the left side of the navel by three digits.
And if its generation is due to a cold, then your incision should be on his right.
And do not let your incision be over the side on which the patient wants to lie so that the superfluities do not flow into that place.
Then pierce with the instrument all around, and insert into that incision, and elevate your hand with the spatula between the membrane and the brain, and you should draw it out; and if it is the amount of a nail or so much.
Then pierce the brain so that the spatula reaches the desired place, which is where the water is. Then extract it and insert an instrument of which this is the form: which is like a slender silver tube; it is made of silver or brass or lead; and in the lowest part of it there is a small incision, and on its sides there are three incisions: two from one side and one from the other side; and its end is split according to the manner of a feather, just like this:
And in the highest end of it is a ring, for when the instrument reaches the water, then that immediately slips over the instrument, thus evacuating the water in the momentary quantity; for if you evacuate more than this, then the patient dies from resolution of his animal spirit, or he experiences an attack which is close to death.
But you should evacuate it according to the quantity of the vertigo and according to what the dispositions of the patient's vertigo, his pulse and health indicate to you.
Then extract the instrument and pour out the water which is causing it, for as soon as you have extracted the instrument, it will pour out just like the water.
Then return the instrument on another day if you see the patient tolerating it, and extract a little water, and do this for several days out of fear, and beware of mistakes so that the water does not remain except a little.
But if you fear for the patient and pour out a great quantity of water, then cure him with a burial in dry sand, and move him to the bath, and let him stay in the sun for a long time; and cure him with drying medicines so that he may be healed.
And cauterize over the stomach, and the liver and gallbladder, and especially the extraction of the water, according to what I have recounted before.
Chapter 55:
Of the cure for children whose places of urine are not perforated.
Sometimes some children are born from the womb of their mother and their head of their mixture is not perforated (or it is pierced tightly or not in its place).
Then it must be treated with the piercing of him as soon as he is born with a pointed, slender instrument just like this:
And then insert a thin lead nail into the wound and bind it, and keep it for three days or for .iiii. three.
And when he wants to urinate, let him be turned over and urinate; then return him.
And if you do not use the lead, it is possible that the urine which goes over the area will not harm this closure.
But he from whom the wound is narrow should be medicated with a lead nail, as we have said, for several days until it is enlarged.
But those in whom the wound is not in its place, are led, the cause of which is that from those, he who is born and the nail is at the end of the penis so that he cannot urinate into the parts inside, by raising the penis with his hand to the parts above; and there is no generation for him because the sperm cannot reach the mother according to rectitude, and it is a very harmful disease.
And the way of the operation in him is that the patient be turned over on his back, and you extend the head of the penis with your left hand by a violent traction, and insert the tip of the foreskin at the location of the perineum with a pointed spatula, as if it were inscribed with a pen, or that you do not scrape any part, so that the glans of him come to resemble the head of the penis, and the nail falls into the middle location according to how it covers.
And beware in your operation of the flow of blood, because many times this happens there; and give to him that with which you will stop the blood, and cure the wound until it is healed.
Chapter .lvi.
Of white leeching which happens in the foreskin on the head of the penis, and of putrefaction, blackness, and adhesion of the foreskin to the head of the penis.
Many times this white leeching happens in the penis and is an eminence of harmful flesh.
And one of them is harmful and the other is not harmful.
Non-harmful, suspend it with a thin thread and cut that off so that that entire world is cut off; and then place on that cut part which is submerged in Egyptian ointment; and then cure that with fine ointment until it is healed.
And if the leeching is harmful, of leg color, then you should administer cauterization near its beginning and its end.
But if the leeching is in the foreskin of the head of the penis not circumcised, and one part of the leeching is inside the foreskin and the other part is outside, then you should cut off the leeching which is inside at its beginning so that it is consolidated; and then you cure that external one, because when you cure that together with the foreskin, it is not certain that it will not return.
And indeed it has happened in the testicles and in the foreskin blackness and putrefaction, therefore you should hollow out all that which is already blackened and about to corrupt or what is already corrupted; and then line that with that ointment with honey, which is crushed with pomegranate peel, and sifted and strained.
And then cure that with the other cure until it is healed.
But if blood flow ensues, then administer lunar cauterization according to this form:
Because the beneficial cautery is in two dispositions together, that is for blood flow and for the wound when it is corrupted.
And if the head of the penis is destroyed and ruined all at once, then you should insert into the middle of the foreskin a lead cannula so that the patient urinates through that.
In the adhesion of the foreskin to the head of the penis (and this adhesion does not happen except in him whose foreskin is loose, and on whom circumcision has not been performed; and when adhesion happens because of a wound or pustule), cut it with an obtuse spatula so that the binding is dissolved and the head of the penis is freed from all parts.
And if it is difficult to separate them cruelly, then you should cut with a spatula some part of the head of the penis and the foreskin, and that is because the foreskin, when it is thin, is easily pierced through its thinness quickly.
And then separate between the foreskin and the head of the penis with a subtle thread, which is already moistened in the water wiped so that they do not adhere again.
And then let it be cured with white vitriol until it is consolidated.
Chapter .lvii.
Of purification of children and the cure of what happens to those who are circumcised.
Circumcision is not a solution for continence like other wounds: but rather because it is of our operation and of our will, and because its cause is properly in children, it is necessary that we assign to her better operation and a shorter way lost less health.
Therefore we say that the ancients did not prescribe circumcision in any of their slaves, because they do not use it in their laws, and it is only because we have acquired through experience, which cause is that we have observed the greater part of the artisans and barbers using to circumcise and purify with a new knife and with torches; and they use binding with pitch and inscription with the nail.
And I have already prohibited all these manners and not found better purification with tweezers, with binding with pitch which is used in purification with the nail, because many times the thread escapes above, because the thread of the foreskin has two tunics, and the loose one falls below, and it is easily forced to another incision and secure pain. And through purification which is done by the apothecaries, and is with the finger, of which the surgeons use, is not secure the incision at the end of the member of a man, because it easily goes into his wound.
But in the operation with the nail, very often iron and corrupts your operation. And the foreskin of a child is short by nature, and many times I have seen that it has not needed purification, and I have seen that.
But of the purification which is done with tweezers and binding with pitch, the goodness I have discovered by experience, because the tweezers are of proportional incision, therefore that the acuteness which is above is also with the acuteness which is below; and therefore when you place your hand so that they are proportioned two acutenesses, and insert it according to a comparison at one time; and compression of the pitch is done in the shape containing the foreskin of the penis from all parts, with which there is no error of all.
And the way of the first operation is that you make the child be completely still if he is one of those who understand a little, and do not do but that you tie the pitch on his penis only slightly, and that you let him for another day.
And then let him rejoice in all those ways which are possible for you who receives his intelligence. And then let him be between your hands positioned preparedly, and do not be frightened; and conceal the tweezers in your hand or under your foot, so that the child does not see those nor any other of the instruments.
And then insert your hand to his penis and blow into the foreskin, and pull that up so that the head of the penis is exited, and then purify that of what is accumulated in it of dirtiness.
The shape of the forceps for cleansing, this is their shape:
Let the tips not be cut and the other ones be cut, so that the stem of the claw is not split, and let the length of both sharp parts be equal to the length of two handles equally.
But the mistake in cleansing is that often the inner scrotum entirely escapes, or a part of it slips out through the incision.
So you should extend that one with your finger in front of the apposition of the spot and cut that one according to equality.
And if you cannot hold it with your finger, then pull it out with forceps and cut it.
But if it has passed three days and the swelling under the testicle remains, then let this remain until the aposteme is dried up, and cut it away with ease, and cut it according to how you are prepared.
And beware of the head of the testicle, for it will not bear that.
And so heal that with what the plague is consolidated from the powders which we have recounted in the treatise on powders.
And if it is cut from the scrotum beyond measure, and obeys the parts above, then that does not matter to it.
But heal that with what we have said until it is cured.
Chapter 58:
Of the healing of urine retained in the bladder.
Retention of urine in the bladder is caused by obstruction caused by a stone, or by congealed blood, or by inflammation or by growths, and resembles those which we have recounted concerning the methods of healing in the division.
And if it is not dissolved with what we have said and the cause made violent upon the patient, then let the stone be extracted from him with an instrument which is called a syringe, of which this is the shape: Let it be of silver and let its tube be thin like a quill pen with a subtle point long in similarity to one and a half inches, to which let there be a subtle tube at its head.
And the manner of the ejection of urine through it is that you take a folded piece of cloth and wind it around the end of it with wool or cotton for good fastening; and insert the ends of the cloth into the part below the syringe, and cut away with forceps any excess wool, but push the rest into the tube with force. And then fill the syringe with water and with egg white of a hen.
And let the patient lie on his back, and plug up the orifice of his bladder and testicles with wool, and olive oil, and egg yolk.
Then insert the syringe with ease until it reaches the root of the testicle; and then bend the testicle above at its base; and then press the syringe into that; and then press it in until it reaches the bladder, and let the patient be bent so that the orifice is empty, and if not done according to this order, but the meatus inclines towards tortuosity.
Then slowly extend the cloth with the wool little by little, for the urine will draw in the wool.
Then pull that out and let the urine be ejected by healing, and use the syringe, do not cease to do this until the bladder is emptied and the patient feels relief.
Chapter 59:
Of the quality of clysterization of the bladder with camphor and with similar instruments which are in accordance with that.
When there occurs in the bladder ulceration or aposteme, or congealed blood in it, or inflammation is constricted, and you wish to distil waters and medicines into it, then let this be done with an instrument which is called a clyster, and this is its shape:
except that in its end there is a hole, so that it is closed. And in that there are three holes: two from one part, thus alternately.
In the beginning there is a hollow space, in which is placed that which is plugged into it, and let its quantity be according to the amount that is pushed by that, without addition, so that when any cause is drawn from the humidities, it is drawn out, and when it is expelled, with what it is expelled, and when it is pushed out a long way, according to how clyster is made with which is burned naphtha in the battles of the sea.
Then when you wish to inject humidities into the bladder, insert the end of clyster into the moisture, and push with that what is pushed into the parts above, for the moisture is drawn into the hollow space of clyster.
Then insert the end of clyster into the testicle according to what we have recounted concerning the syringe; and then press the moisture with that which you press it, for that moisture goes at once to the bladder, and let the patient grip that.
Form of a slender clyster with which the bladder is clysterized, and it is that form:
And let it be made of silver or lead, and its head more round like a little feather, and below let there be a tube within ligament.
Then take the bladder and place in it the moisture which you wish to inject into the bladder, and then tie that between two with a strong ligature with a folded piece of cloth, and warm that moisture over the fire.
Then insert the end of clyster into the testicle.
And then grip your hand over the bladder with that moisture with tension descending, so that the patient feels that moisture has already reached the bladder.
But if you do not have a bladder, then take a piece of parchment and make of it a circle; and pierce that all around its circumference; and then insert a strong ligature with a folded piece of cloth into those holes, so that it revolves within; and then add the circle as it is added also fat, when you place in that what you wish of the moistures, and oils and waters.
Then you tie that in the instrument and do to that as you have done to the bladder, and express with your hand so that the moisture reaches the bladder.
Chapter 60:
Of extraction of a stone.
We have already recounted in the division the kinds of stone and the healing of it with medicines, and the difference between a stone engendered in the kidneys and a stone engendered in the bladder, and their signs.
We have already said that the stone is in the bladder where we perform surgery.
And the stone generated in the bladder itself is that which is lodged in the bladder.
And I will tell you briefly and openly about this.
Therefore, I say that the stone generated in the bladder primarily affects infants; and its signs are that the urine which exits the bladder is similar to water in its subtlety, and it appears as sand; and the patient rubs his penis, and often urinates, and it is almost always caused by this.
And there is a cure for children of that age who have reached the age of 12, and it is difficult to cure in the old. But in the young, it can be cured by this means because it occurs among them.
And if the stone is larger and the cure more distant, then it is contrary to that which is less so.
Therefore, when we come to the cure of this, first we must cleanse the patient with an antiseptic which extracts any wound in his intestines; for that wound sometimes blocks the exit of the stone after examination.
Then let him be placed on his feet and pressed and made to move about so that the stone might descend into the bottom of the bladder, or jump from its place sometimes.
Then make him squat between your knees with his arms under him, so that the bladder might be pushed down into the lower parts.
And then push it out completely.
Therefore, if you feel the stone in the passage, then you must at once cut him there.
And if it does not come out at all from your touch, then place your left index finger in the anus of the patient, if he is a child, or the middle finger if he is grown; and insert that into his anus. And push out the stone which lies beneath your finger. And gradually draw it into the neck of the bladder.
Then squeeze that with your finger, and expel it out the exit from where you cut.
And command the assistant to press on the bladder with his hand; and command another assistant to extend the anus above with his right hand, and with his other hand squeeze the rectum which is below the anus at the site of the incision.
Then insert a spathula, the shape of which is as follows: And cut between the anus and genitals, not in the middle place, towards the left buttock; and let the incision be over the stone, and the finger be in the anus, and let the incision be transverse so that the exit incision is ample and the interior narrow according to the amount that can be extracted of the stone from him, and not greater, for then he will tightly compress the finger which is in the anus with the stone after the incision, and it is forced out without being broken.
And know that there is some stone whose angles and margins make its exit difficult.
And of this there is one resembling a nut, and it is round, and makes easy exit.
Therefore if the stone whose angles and margins fit in the fissure:
And if it is not forced out, then place your finger on it or tighten it decently, and the end of which should be curved with which to tighten on the stone so that it does not escape from him; or insert under it a slender tool with a curved end.
But if you cannot force it out, then increase the cut a little, and if you see bleeding, then bind that tightly with powdered vitriol.
But if the stone is larger than one, then at first push your finger to the mouth of the bladder, and then insert it on that; and then push in a little bit likewise; and do similarly if they are more than two.
And if the stone is very large, then know that it is foolish to insert it with a great incision, for two reasons occur in him: either he dies or acquires continuous urination due to the fact that the site is not fully healed.
But the assistant should extract it once it has been forced out, or use forceps to pull it out in pieces.
Therefore when you have completed the operation, then fill the wound with cotton wool soaked in aloe and dragon's blood, and bind that tightly. And place a cloth on him soaked in oil and wine, or in rosewater and rubbed water, so that the wound heals quickly.
Then rest for three days, and do not loosen the binding until the third day.
And when that has been loosened, wash the site with water and a little oil, and then treat it with an ointment of diaphenicon and an ointment of diabasilicon until it is healed.
But if a wound occurs in the wound, and it is hot and swollen, and that looks like congelation of the blood in the bladder and through it the urine is prohibited (and that is known by the flow of blood with urine), then insert your finger in the wound and extract that blood, for if it remains it provokes corruption of the bladder and putrefaction of it.
Then wash the wound with sweet wine, water and salt, and apply an ointment of all spices to it until it is healed.
And know in the hours of all the cure that you apply both sides of the thighs and adjust the medicines which are laid on the site.
And if the stone is small and lodged in the middle of the penis, and there is a prohibition on urination, then cure it by what you see before making an incision, for troops often come from this cure accused of incision; and indeed you have seen it and tried it, and it is that you take a punch of iron wrapped in velvet, of which this is the shape:
Of triangular shape, pointed, made on an awl. [Illustration 19: Iron punch for removing a stone from the penis]
Then grab it firmly, and hold the penis under the stone so that it does not return to the bladder.
Then insert the iron into the penis, piercing with ease until the punch comes to the stone. And turn the punch with your hand on that small stone little by little, and as you pierce it from one side, make the incision from the other so that the urine is immediately absorbed.
Then squeeze your hand on that which is broken from the stone of the part from which the penis exits, for that is closed and forced out by urine, and the patient is healed.
But if this cure is not equipped for any reason which prohibits it, then grab a bar under the stone and another bar above the stone. Then grip on the stone in that penis between two ligatures. Then extract it. Then loosen the binding and clean the congealed blood which is made in the wound.
And it is not necessary for the bar to be under the stone except that it does not return to the bladder, and the other binding above except that when the bar is loosened the exit of the stone is made, for then the urethra returns to its place and the wound heals.
And for this reason it is necessary when you tie the gallbladder above that you lift up the cord to the parts above or return and do your duty again and heal the plague as we have said.
Chapter 61.
Of the extraction of a stone from women.
A stone in women is rarely generated.
But if you see a stone in any of them, then its cure is difficult and is prohibited by many methods.
One of them is because the woman is very young.
And the second is because you do not find a woman well skilled who discloses if she has had sex with her husband or is a married woman.
The third is because you cannot find a woman well skilled in this art, especially in performing the operation with your hand.
And the fourth is that the site of the incision for a stone in women is distant from the location of the stone, so it requires a long incision, and in that one there is fear.
But if necessity compels you to do this, then you should take a woman doctor who is well skilled, and she is rarely found.
But if you lack that one, then seek a doctor who is quick and subtle or present a midwife well experienced in the affairs of women, or a woman who in this art has partaken in the art.
Then do that presentation, and command him to do everything that you command him, from the inquiry about the stone at the beginning; the cause is that she should examine whether the woman is a virgin, then she should put her finger in her rear end and feel for the stone.
Then if she finds it, withdraw that with your finger, and then command her to insert your finger in that one.
But if she is not a virgin, then command the midwife to insert her finger into the vagina of the patient and feel for the stone, while she places her left hand over the bladder, and press that with good compression.
Then if she finds it, then she should gently push that from the orifice of the bladder to the parts below by the sum of her strength, until it comes to the root of the thigh.
Then insert into that the tip of the vagina over the root of the thigh from whatever part it is stopped at her and center the stone in that part, and his finger should not be withdrawn from the stone by being pressed down on him.
And the incision should be small at the beginning; and then insert the ray over that incision, and if she feels the stone, then adjust the incision according to the quantity which she knows that the stone will be pushed out of her.
And know that the kinds of stones are many: for some of them are small and great, and lean and rough, and long and round, and having horns.
Therefore you know how many kinds there are in her by that which you point out about what you want.
And if you see bleeding, apply in the wound ground vitriol and hold her for an hour until the bleeding is stopped, and then return to your operation until the stone is pushed out.
And have you prepare some of the instruments which are used in the extraction of stones in men, so that you may be helped by those in your operation.
And if you see bleeding and know that the outflow of blood is from the artery that is cut, then you should apply powder over the wound and tighten that with a bandage and not repeat that; and leave the stone and not extract it, for the patient will die quickly. And then heal the plague.
Therefore when the severity of the bleeding has ceased and the wound is healed, then you should return to your operation until the stone is pushed out.
Chapter 62.
Of incision for a hernia that is acute.
An acute hernia is nothing but an accumulation of moisture in the white membrane which is below the diaphragm containing the bowels, and it is named diaphragm.
And in some cases it is in the subcutaneous membrane which nature has prepared for the part of the bowels, while it is another bowel; and it is the diaphragm between the white membrane which we have said, and it is not that but fat.
And the generation of this hernia is due to weakness which occurs in the bowels, for to those it is infused with this material; and some times it occurs due to blow done on the bowels.
And this moisture has many colors; for the color of it is inclining to yellow or to blood-red, or to red, or is black putrid, or is watery white, and that is what is most often.
And the signs by which it is known that this accumulation of moisture is in the white diaphragm which we have said, then the pustule is round declining somewhat to length as the shape of a bowels, and appearing on the bowel; for the moisture contains that in all parts.
And if the moisture is in the subcutaneous membrane, then the pustule is round with the part of the bowels and from that one estimates that it is another bowel.
And if the moisture is between the diaphragm of the bowels and the white diaphragm, then it presses down from the center.
And when you want to know the color of the moisture, then you probe the color of the moisture in the pustule with a thread of which the shape is preceded; and according to that which comes out on the thread, judge what is within it.
Therefore when we come to the cure of it by iron, then we command the patient to be phlebotomized if that is possible for you, and make him lie on his back.
And then let him be reclined over his back for some cause a little higher, and place beneath him several sheets.
And then sit you over the left side of him, and command the assistant to follow him on his right, extending his arm at the angle of two sides to the diaphragm of the bowels and to the part of the navel.
And then take a broad blade and cut the diaphragm of the bowels of that place for length in front, close to the penis.
And let the incision be made according to rightness equally distant from the line which must pass through the membrane of the bowels, so that it comes to the white diaphragm including it.
And cut that, and observe, and beware lest you cut into it; and your incision by which he cuts it according to the part that is suspended by the bowels more and gently probes with the incision according to the quantity as much as possible.
And then pierce the full diaphragm of water with a wide incision, and extract all the water.
And then separate between the two lips of the incision with claws, and extend the diaphragm to the parts above; and do not touch the membrane of the bowels including it, and insert the diaphragm in that manner as much as is possible for you. And insert that with its entirety or in parts, and especially its sides subtly; for if you do not probe carefully the incision of it, there is not made security that the water does not return.
But if the bowels protrude from that out of its diaphragm in the hour of your operation, then when you have completed the incision of the diaphragm, return inside it, and then adjust the two lips of the diaphragm of the bowels with suturing; and then heal that as with other plagues, so that it is healed.
If you find the entrails corrupted by another disease, then cut away the vessels which are above the suspenders, extract the entrails and treat them with that which we have said before.
But if the water is divided into two parts, then understand that there are two hernias; therefore open that part according to how you have done it in the other, likewise; and if it appears to you that there is one operation, then do it.
Then you should cleanse the blood and enter into the incisions with wool soaked in oil or rose oil; and place outside another wool which you have soaked in wine and oil, and expand it over both genitals and the navel of the belly; and place upon it folded cloths and powdery lint, and apply to those upon ointment which is according to this form:
and let two cloths be pressed and stuffed with wool colored red according to this resemblance; and the extremities with which it is pressed be made of wood or of wet wool, and be gathered with tightness in the waistband of the undergarments, and one extremity take hold of the buttocks within the two, and the second take hold at the part of the crotch, and two extremities over two thighs below and two other extremities over two armpits, and all tightness be made secure in the waistband of the undergarments.
And sometimes this hernia is medicated artificially with cautery in place of incision with iron; and you should take thin cauterizing iron and cut into the flesh of the genitals, and it is ignited according to what we have recounted that it be discovered the white membrane containing the water, and then you take cautery according to this form: and it is similar to the Greek letter.
And then pierce through that membrane and it is ignited until all of the moisture is evaporated.
And then extend the membrane with hooks, and scrape it with hooks, and scrape it with thin cauterizing iron that is ignited; and cut into it according to what is possible for you until you eradicate all of it; and be careful that the fire does not touch the entrails.
And understand that this operation is more safe and more distant from flow of blood, and better than operation with incision.
But if it makes opposition pustule in the hour of incision or in the hour of cautery, or flow of blood, then treat that which opposes you according to what has been said with treatment that is appropriate for it according to what has been said.
But if the patient is feeble and does not endure the second operation due to its horror, then you should administer piercing according to that which we have recounted here; and it is when it is certified that you must, through those things which we have said about the significants, that this hernia is watery.
Then let the patient be laid upon some raised bed, then pierce the pustule in its lowest part with a spatulate iron, and make the piercing according to the length of the body.
And the opening should be ample so that all of the water runs out.
And then place over it cotton and apply that and let it stay there until the remainder of the water runs out. And then treat that until the wound is healed.
But if opposition is made to the exit of the water in that hour you pierce that: and that is not done except by that which the white membrane in the orifice of the wound makes opposition and prohibits the exit of the water, then let you put into the wound a needle or instrument with which the water is extracted from the water-pockets, the form of which is preceded; or adjust upon the pressure of the wound a small.
And understand that the water returns and is driven away for an approximate period of months or years; and when it has returned, then let it be pierced according to that same methodical manner, for thus will the patient pass his days.
Chapter 63.
Of incision upon fleshy hernia and its treatment.
Understand that in the incision upon this hernia there is lost fear of danger in the major dispositions; for I have seen its dismissal and being saved by that better.
And you should remember the operation upon that one and the species of the pustules.
Therefore I say that pustules are born in the parts of which the genitals are composed and it is done for several causes; or by acute excessed humidity, which is distributed in the genitals, or by concussion.
And the color of the pustule is according to the color of the body, and it does not hurt in that place, and it is a heavy pustule.
And often it is pustule of scabs, of which the color is dusky, and there is no sensation in it.
And sometimes it is done by nodding of the arteries, and by inflammation of those from which there has already been perceived memory of it, or by inflammation of veins.
But that which is by inflammation of arteries is known by the dispersion of the pustule when you compress it with your fingers; and let not that be touched.
But that which is done by inflammation of a vein is dispersed from it for no cause due to compression with the fingers.
And it is possible that upon this species there is made incision and upon the other flesh; and you cut into the membrane of the genitals, and then extend the fire to the parts above, and extract that from the white membrane, and ligature those, and cut into the suspender more so that when you have extracted that from all of the parts of the fire.
Therefore if the fire has already become consolidated in those flesh, then let you extract the fire and cut into it.
And if there is adhesion for any cause of the membrane, or between that which is between the vessels, then let you loose all of that adhesion and cut into it by a round incision.
But if there is generation of flesh in the place of the adhesion which is behind, then let you cut into all that is of it and extract the fire as we have said before.
Therefore when your operation is completed, then fill the wound with wool soaked in rose oil and wine; and then treat that with the other treatment until it is healed.
Chapter 64.
Of the treatment of hernia which is of veins.
Vein is pustule enveloped by some envelope similar to bud with softening of the testes, and it is done difficult moving exercise and ambulation upon the patient.
And in the treatment of this disease there is fear for that from which is preceded memory.
However let us treat it in that according to how we made the first ones.
And I say that let you lay the patient upon some raised bed; and then pule the suspender of the testes to the parts below; and then take hold of the membrane of the genitals with your fingers by the vessels which have been proved against the beam, and extend those by violent extension.
And then cut into with a spatulate iron that is sharp by a crosswise incision in the right of the vessels so that the vessels are uncovered.
And then scrape all parts as we have said before in cutting of artery which is in the temples.
And then put in those a needle in which there is a double point, and apply that to the first of the places in which vein occurs, and apply the other which has been used before in the last of them. Then insert them into the right side according to the length of the body, and remove what is accumulated from the foul and putrid humors.
And then heal the wound with treatment of the other wounds in which you want health to be generated so that the vessels fall, which blacken one of two genitals, because it is not bad for this.
But if it happens to all the vessels, then the testicles should be extracted or that the testicles by that are cut off from the vessels, so that it is deprived of all nourishment by the cutting off of the vessels, and that they are atrophied, or that they are cut off so that it is not beneficial with those.
Chapter 65.
On the treatment of intestinal hernia.
The occurrence of this hernia is due to a rupture that extends into the chest from the anus of the rectum, so that as a result of this rupture some of the intestines pass out through the opening.
And this rupture is either of the chest or of an effusion from it, and these two types occur for various reasons: either from a blow, or from a fall, or from crying, or from some heavy object being raised, or from similar causes.
And the sign of this, when it is due to an effusion from the chest, is that it occurs little by little over a long period of time, and does not occur suddenly, and it is like an abscess between the lung and the diaphragm because the chest compresses the intestine.
And the sign of it is when it is due to a rupture in the chest, because at the beginning it causes violent pain; and there is a diverse appearance of an abscess below the apparent collarbone, and this is due to the displacement of the intestine, and the body of it appears at the edges of the rupture in the chest.
And sometimes the intestine is torn with the membrane, and this hernia is called intestinal hernia.
And sometimes it is caused by wind, and sometimes a fissure occurs in the intestine, and here it is retained, and it is a great hindrance to the patient, and sometimes it causes wicked pain, especially when it is pressed.
And in the treatment of the kinds of this disease with a needle there is danger, because one must avoid piercing the intestine in it.
And the manner of operating on it is that you command the patient to draw in his intestine with his hand at the edges of its cavity, if he obeys its return, and then he should be turned over onto his back between your hands, and his legs are raised up.
And then tighten the cord which holds back the scrotum at the edges above, and insert the testicles all the way through the opening; and then fix in two lips of the rupture hooks according to what you command to open the rupture with them.
And if it is according to the quantity that is possible for you, then let the intestine be torn out of it.
And then cut away the chest which is under the scrotum, leaving the white tough diaphragm uncovered at each edge.
Then you put your finger into that which holds the testicle, in what is between the white diaphragm and the chest according to, and remove with it the adhesion which is at the edge behind the intestine.
And then hold with your hand the scrotum at the edges out, and with your left hand stretch out the white diaphragm upon it, and lift up the intestine with the chest to the edge of the rupture; and command the assistant to stretch out the intestine towards you, and you dissolve the adhesion behind with completed solution.
And check with your fingers that there is no cause for the intestine to be wrapped up in the tough white diaphragm. But if you find some cause in it, then you pull it down into the belly below.
And then insert at the edge under the scrotum by a rupture from which blood and health flow out as we have recommended in what we have said.
And then administer wool soaked in oil, and apply it to the wound; and administer the sewing which we have recommended (and sometimes the white diaphragm is cauterized, which we have said before the edge of it they fear a flow of blood, because many times it occurs with them), and let the sewing fall so that by itself.
But if the sewing of it is delayed, then let warm water be applied, and apply it to that which falls according to what we have said.
And then heal the wound with the other cure of wounds in which health occurs.
Chapter 66.
On windy hernia.
In this hernia there is no one who has been healed with the cure of it with a needle.
And the first thing that is done as we have recommended in the hernia which is with wine; the which is that you sew the vessels at the edge of it with ease of it; and then dry up in the middle around it by the abscess with what causes that, so that the vessels fall.
And heal the wound according to what we have said so that it is healthy.
Chapter 67.
On the rupture which is made in the anus.
Sometimes a rupture occurs in the anus as we have said, and it protrudes the place.
And do not let any cause of the intestines occur to the anus; and if it occurs, then it is little; and return in all hours.
But if time is prolonged with it, then a fissure is made in the chest through which the intestine extends into the chest; and this occurs due to the extension of the chest which is in the anus as we have said, which cause is that the chest is extended, and then it becomes soft and the place protrudes and is abscessed.
And the cure of it is with cautery as it is preceded by the narration of it.
And sometimes it is healed with a needle according to this manner: and the patient hangs onto his own chest between your hands, and then dry up the place of the rupture of the abscesses protrude by an opening with sewing according to the length of three fingers.
And then strengthen the white diaphragm which is under the scrotum so that it is uncovered.
And then take the needle and apply it to the protruding place of the chest, and press it against the abdomen.
Then cut the two prominent spots on top of the head's crown, and sew one to the other.
Then pull out the end of the bone, and don't cut into the skull at all, nor stretch the nerve, or any other cause as well, as you will learn in the treatment of intestinal hernias.
And then cure that with the treatment of ulcers, and when you insert the needles, cleanse it and restore the ulcer within so that it is consolidated; for the skull is contracted and not adjusted to the突出 of the rupture.
And cautery is better in this place, because it is closer to health.
Chapter 68:
Of the softening of the cords of the testicles.
Many times the cords of the testicles in some men are softened because the flesh that is between them is softened, and the guarding of it is relaxed.
Then it is necessary for the one who is being treated to lie on his back, and to heat all the cords which are softened over the natural cords; then sew two lips together.
And if you want, cut in the beginning of the surplus of the softened cord with three cuts or four and with a firm suture.
And then insert between the sutures, and cure through the treatment of other ulcers within so that it is healed and the needles fall out.
Chapter 69:
Of castration:
You should know that castration in our law is excommunicated, but for two reasons I have been asked to include it in this book; one of which is so that the doctor who is questioned about it knows how to cure it if it happens, and the other reason is that many times we need to castrate other animals for our own purposes, like mules, oxen, pigs, and similar beasts.
And so I say that castration is done in two ways: either by crushing or by cutting through to a section.
But in the one that is done by crushing, the way of the operation is to have the beast cut into cold water until its testicles are softened and loose and hanging. And then take those with your hand so that they are dissolved and do not appear below the touch.
But in castration done by cutting through, catch hold of the beast and press the cords of its testicles with your left hand.
And then cut the suspenders, and insert into each one a section so that two holes are made.
And then insert those after you have scraped off each one. And do not put anything on the skull over them except for the thin skull which is above the vessels.
And this way of castration is better which is done by crushing, because crushing strongly leaves no cause in the testicles so that the beast desires coitus.
And then cure the ulcer within until it is healed.
Chapter 70:
Of the cure of hermaphrodites:
Hermaphrodites in men are according to two ways: one is when they appear to have a space between the cords of the testicles, in that which is between the two testicles there is a figure like a woman’s vulva in which there are hairs.
And sometimes from it urine flows from that which is in the cords of the testicles.
But in women there is one type: and it is that the clitoris of a woman on the foreskin is like two testicles of a man, a little bit of all of them at the beginning of the penis, just like the foreskin of a man and two testicles.
And the cure is of three types: two from men and one type from women. And it is so that you insert those flesh parts joined together so that the impression of them flows out, and then cure those with the treatment of other ulcers.
And in the second type from men from which urine flows and which is in the cords of the testicles, there is no cure or operation for it.
Chapter 71:
Of the hymen and prominent flesh from causes in women:
A strong hymen is firmly attached to natural causes so that it is strained and made tight by the guarding; and sometimes it is enlarged in some women as much as in men, and it comes into coitus.
So then take hold of the surplus of the hymen with your hand or a needle and insert.
And do not pierce all the way through, especially in the root of the vein, so that it does not draw out blood.
And then cure it with the treatment of other ulcers within until it is healed.
But a born flesh is flesh which grows in the womb of the mother so that it fills that place, and often it comes out at the openings in front according to the appearance of the vagina (and for this reason some first called it “tail with a head”); therefore we insert as we insert the hymen, and cure it within until it is healed.
Chapter 72:
Of the cure of anus.
Anus is when the clitoris of a woman is not perforated, or has a small hole. And it is either natural or accidental.
Accidental is by disease which has preceded it, and that one is done, or by flesh grown together, or by a thin skull, or hard.
And it is done, or in the root of the mother, or in its sides, or on top of it, or on the bottom of it, and very much prohibits coitus and impregnation, and very much prohibits menstruation.
And the knowledge of it is done by guarding of the midwife, if the swelling is apparent, the midwife; but if it is not apparent, then you probe it with your fingers or with a needle.
But if the swelling is by a thin skull and is against the two lips, then you cut and tear it apart.
And it is that you pause over the two lips of the vagina, and then pause your fingers indicating both sides from within.
And the woman be on her back, her legs spread out, and then extend the two lips with force within so that that thin skull is broken and the swelling opened.
And then take wool and dip it in oil and pause it over the place, and put on a poultice at night so that the place is not healed up.
But if the skull is thick and hard, then take that with fat of lard or pitch of myrrh.
But if the swelling is by flesh grown together, then suspend it with a needle, and insert it.
And have you the medicines that make the flow of blood stop, like a biting wound, and dragon’s blood, and gum arabic, tied up with white of egg.
And then administer a broad lead cane so that the wound is not healed tightly.
And hold it for several days, and give warm water of linseed.
And then it is healed by the other cure of consolidation within until it is healed.
And sometimes others happen in the womb of mothers, and then take hold of them according to this way. But if it is due to scrofulous sores, do not cause any contraindications with iron in any way for the scrofulous sores that are on the neck.
Chapter 73.
Of the cure for hemorrhoids, and of a tail and red spot that occurs in the genitals of women.
Hemorrhoids are an obstruction of the openings of many veins, from which there flows much blood continuously; and when they are old hemorrhoids, and they are made dry.
And I have already said in the division of them, their species and their signs; thus, I will now say those that receive a cure, and those that do not receive a cure.
I say then, that hemorrhoids and theyls when they are in the anus of the mother, and do not appear to the senses, thus in those do not let there be a cure with iron.
But those which are in the opening of the anus, over which there is sensation, it is those that are cured.
And if you put the woman into warm water and then stretch it out with tweezers, or with rough cloth, and insert them with the roots.
And then sprinkle over them the flow of blood from one of the powdery asps without biting, thus with cassia and like it.
And then pluck her feet for an hour, and then place that in warm water.
And if the flow of blood persists, then do that seat in a decoction of wormwood and of peels of pomegranates, and of aloes, and of like things.
And if you take wheat flour and cook that with honey and sour wine, and make a poultice with it over her back.
And if the blood is abstinent, that is good; and if not, then adhere to it with two leeches, and on the breasts without scarification.
And if you take wool and immerse that with sap of coriander, or with sap of wild garlic, or with sap of geranium with boiled wine, and adhere it to the place until it is healed.
And cure that until it is healed.
Chapter 74.
Of boring a hole in the anus accidentally.
Many species of sores occur in the anus, thus with scrofula and scrofulous sores and ulcerations and phlegmon and erysipelas and hemorrhoids and hernias and tail and other sores. And I have already said these maladies and their species and their signs, and their cures in the division.
And if I speak in this treatise of scrofula which appears in the anus when it is of the sores that collect pus, and if you want to know in what manner its opening is made with iron.
Then consider if the pain of the sore at its commencement is acute with a blow and phlegm and fever, and see that upon it there is swelling, and if there is upon it sensation, then do not pierce it; cure that with what helps over the maturation until the acuteness of the accidents cease.
And then let the woman sit on a stool that has two stools; recline on her back and adjust her feet to the part below the belly, and let her thighs be expanded, and place her arms below her elbows, and hold each with a bandage according to what is convenient.
And the midwife follows on the right side and administers the instrument by which the opening of the anus is made, the form of which will come in those causes that will be made afterwards.
And if you want to administer this instrument, let it be made smooth with the anus of the woman, and that which of the instrument enters into the anus not be more than the anus and lead the patient. But if the instrument is greater than the anus, then let you pause powder on the texture of the anus so that there is prohibited the insertion of any instrument in the anus.
And let you pause the thread that runs along the instrument on the side above, and let him who administers hold the instrument and revolve the thread until it is opened the anus.
And when the opening appears, and is touched with the hand and is hot and moist, then let you dry it with a spatula of lath.
And when the pus is evacuated, then let you pause in the wound a woolen ball immersed in rose oil or oil mixed with some astringent; and place the ball in the section on the anus.
And pause wool of the anus and over the perineum clean wool immersed in water in which there are boiled malva flowers.
And let it be cured for about two days with a poultice that is convenient according to what until it is healed.
And some times the anus and the poultice is washed with water and honey, then with water in which there is boiled root of lily or of aristolochia longifolia; then return to the poultice.
And if the poultice is soft in the anus with pus, then let you be prohibited from its cure with iron; have that cured with what I have said in the division.
Chapter 75.
To teach the midwives in what manner the child is to be treated when it appears according to an unnatural figure.
It is necessary that the midwife know in the beginning the figure of the childbirth by its signs and when you see the woman expressing on the parts below and desiring to smell the air, and upon it she is raised because of what is above her, and hastens the delivery of the child; then know that this part is according to a natural figure, and the delivery of it is over her head, and the second one with it or suspended from or hanging from the umbilical.
Therefore when you see these signs, then let the belly of it be pressed so that the embryo descends gently when she descends over her head; let the second one descend with it or hang from the umbilical.
But he who is in this part is unnatural and not possible; when the child is ejected over his feet and the body of him is ejected before his head and his feet, or under his armpit. or the head of him is ejected and his hand or to his belly, and he is turned strong on his neck; and like the figures of him are not possible.
It is necessary for the midwife to be wise and subtle in all these causes, and that she keep from error and deception.
And I will show you all the figures of them and what cunning is in them so that it be signified by that and is placed upon that.
When the child is ejected upon his head by natural violence, and it is violent over the woman and its part is difficult, and see that the strength of him is already weakened, then let her sit, or that women hold him; and evaporate the womb of him with fenugreek coarsely ground and with oiled herbs.
And if the midwife inserts between his buttocks a little spatula and widens with it the second one, or cuts that with her finger until she touches what is in her of moisture. And press on the abdomen of the woman until you feel the fetus descend.
But if she does not deliver, then it is necessary that the woman be cleansed with poultices of fennel and fenugreek with honey.
Then command him, the provider of the treatment, to make her vomit and cause her to sneeze with that mixture; and hold her mouth and nose for an hour so that the fetus will come out immediately.
And if both hands of the fetus are not exposed at first, then it is necessary to pull them out little by little with ease. But if she does not react to the remedy, then put her on a bed and raise her feet up, and rock the bed back and forth gently on the ground; and make sure that the woman does not fall off the bed because of the rocking.
And if the hands are not turned inside out and the fetus is still dead, then enter them again and draw out the fetus's limb or tie the body to your hand with a cloth and pull it out evenly, for that will come out.
When the fetus is on his feet, then it is necessary to push them up, and gently turn the fetus, and make him cough, and grab one of his feet and stretch them little by little.
But when it has entered the pelvis, then command him to push, and make her vomit with that mixture, for it will come out if God wills it.
And if it is not delivered with what we have described, then return the fetus little by little to where you found it, and place that second figure naturally, for it will come out more easily the second time.
And if all that we have described is prohibited, then take fennel and dissolved gum in the mortar and beat them well together, and line the vagina of the woman with it, at the bottom of her abdomen. And make her sneeze in warm water until she expels the phlegm.
And when the parts below him are softened, then make smoke of myrtle and place that under him. And when she has been in the smoke for an hour, then make her sneeze on a bed and cause her to cough and draw out her mouth, and press the lower part of her abdomen gently, for the fetus will come out immediately.
Descent of the fetus hanging down from one of its hands. Let him be drawn in to reduce the hand, but if you cannot reduce it, then raise the woman and make her walk.
And if she cannot walk, then make her lie on a cloth and rock her thighs violently with strong concussion, and administer to her soothing remedies which are made from mucilaginous substances.
And if the labor has come, then make her sneeze on a bed, and study the reduction of the hand, and gently turn the fetus according to its natural figure, and make the woman cough and command him to push himself while it is delivered.
Descent of the fetus on his neck with his arms expanded and his chest against his mother's back. Let the midwife hold the fetus's hand, and then roll it little by little, and let that be done with ease.
And when he is and as soon as he is bathed, then put on him what we have described of oil and mucilaginous substances.
Then command him to suck little by little, and when you have done that, then make her sneeze on a bed and command him to be inclined on the right side, and then command her to push; and make her cough with that mixture. Exit of the fetus prepared on its side.
When it comes out of the mother's womb in this way, consider and then enter the second one with your finger so that the moisture is evacuated.
And if the fetus is suspended over his face and neck, then enter that with your finger so that it is not retained and delayed.
Then press the fetus to the inside parts so that it is not retained and delayed; and command the woman to push several times, and he will come out with easy exit if God wills it.
Exit of twins or many fetuses. Know that many times twins are born, and sometimes one or two or three or four, but that is strange and rare; but its cause is natural, and they do not live.
Count them, even if they are doubled, a second one, and they are separated by the umbilical cord, distinguish those enter the ligament in the navel of each of them; and sometimes they are delivered so easily as is one fetus with easy exit, and sometimes they are delivered so that we have described.
And if they are difficult to deliver and come to that which we have said of the non-natural figures, then you treat them as we have recorded.
And if the midwife is skillful and does that with ease and skill, and there is delay, let her be treated according to the whole figure as it is prepared by the medicine bringing health.
Remember this which is formed in the womb from embryos and abortions.
Sometimes they are formed in the womb as one, two, three, four, five, six, seven, and even ten, and I have seen that a woman can abort six, and another ten of all shapes, which was caused by a measurement made by the glorious wise men.
And all that is to say that it is in the science of the midwife as strong she goes to that little one resembling that, and then stop to that with what says.
Chapter .lxxvi.
On extracting the fetus when it is dead.
When you treat the dead fetus with what we have said in the division of the medicine and it is not taken out, and you must use compression on the abdomen, then consider if the woman is of sound mind and not one of the accidents by which she is thought to be in danger.
Then let the woman lean back on her heels, with her head inclined down and her thighs raised up.
And the midwife hold that in two parts or she lies on her side so that the body of him does not stretch because of the extraction of the fetus.
And then you moisten the mouth of the patient with moist oils and with mucilage from alder, fenugreek, and their seeds.
And then the midwife anoints her hand with those oils and mucilage, and then inserts her hand gently into the vagina, and then reaches with her hand to the place where the fingernails are in the foot.
And in this place: then you consider if the foot is prepared to descend upon his head, and then you put the fingernails in the heels of him, or in the neck, or in the mouth, or in the palate, or under the beard, or in the furcula of him, or in places near the ribs, or under the armpits.
But if the descent is upon his feet, then in the instep, or in the middle of the back.
And if one has the fingernail with the right hand, then place the curve of it in that place which is between the fingers of the left hand, and insert the hand gently and put the fingernail in some one of those places which we have said, until he reaches the desired effect.
And then place and put in the aperture of him another fingernail, or a third one if it is necessary, so that it is an attraction inward, and not an extension according to his rectitude only.
Let the jaw be opened completely, so that the extraction of him is eased just as it is done in teeth that are pulled out.
And if in him that is between them the extension is softened; and if any part of him is retained, then let the midwife anoint some one of her fingers with oil and insert that skillfully and turn about that which is retained.
Then if the part of the foot is dislocated, then let the fingernails be changed to another place which is higher; and do this until all the foot is dislocated.
But if the hand is dislocated in front of the other, and it is not possible to reduce that by the contraction of him, then let a cloth be wrapped about that; and then extract that until all of it is dislocated, and insert that inside or into the joint of the hand or into the elbow.
And do thus also for the other hand and for the two feet.
But if the head of the foot is large, or there happens to him contraction in the extraction, or there is in his head water collected, then let the midwife insert between the fingers splinters of fir and split the head and extract the water, or uncover that with an instrument which is called "alundat", the form of which will come with the forms of other instruments in the chapter which is aprop this.
And likewise do if the foot is of a large head by nature: and then let her insert that with an instrument, or take that with an awl just as we have said; and then extract the bones with forceps.
And if the head is dislocated and is contracted because of the furcula, then let it be split so that the moisture which is in the feet is poured out.
But if it is not complicated, nor obstinate in dislocation, then you insert the head immediately as soon as to you it seems possible.
And if the lower part of the belly is suppurative or is dropsical, then let you pierce that so that the moisture which is in it runs out.
But if the foot is upon his feet, then the attraction of him is lessened and the direction of him to the mouth of the vagina is lessened.
But if it is contracted because of the belly and the feet, then let you extract that with a cloth which you will have wrapped about your hand, and split the belly and the feet so that runs out that which is in those.
But if the other members are retained and the head turns back, then the midwife inserts her left hand; but if the mouth of the vagina is open, then she inserts her hand into the orifice of air, and reaches with that the head, and pulls him with those fingers into the mouth of the vagina, and then inserts into him a fingernail, or two fingernails, and pulls him with those.
And if the mouth of the vagina is contracted because of suppuration which happens to the v, then let it not be pressed upon him; before, let there be administered emission of causes of moist fats. And administer poultices; and follow the patient in waters that soften and moisten.
And if the foot is upon his side, then if possible it is, let it be twisted; and let there be administered that which we have said in the live foot.
And if that is not possible, then let it be inserted into a bag, and extracted.
And let there be left no cause inside the secondina.
And when you have completed all your operation, then administer that which we have said about the cure in suppurative wounds which happen to the vagina.
And if there happens flow of blood, then let him be washed in astringent waters and administer the other cure.
And I also have seen a woman in the belly of whom was dead fetus, and then over that other fire burning, and then other fire is the other dead fetus. Happened to him also long time suppuration in his navel; and swollen is inside that fire opened, and began to spit out phlegm.
And he was called for the cure of him, and treated for him for long time, and the plague is not consolidated.
Then I paused upon him some causes of poultices of strong attraction, and came out of him a bone, and then after passed some days, and came out another bone; and I was very astonished when in the belly there was no bone.
And then I considered that they were bones of the dead fetus.
Then I continued the suppuration, and extracted from him many bones, the woman existing in her own dispositions, and then she lived in such a way for long time, recovering from him a little of phlegm.
And I did not marvel at that being strange, but wherever in that is known and aid to that which the doctor artifices with his hand for cure administers.
Of the forms of the instruments which are necessary to extract the fetus.
Form of vertigine with which is open the vagina:
This is the form of stricture in which are closed the lips, to that closure are two virtues in two ends of two roots. But this virtue let it be more subtle of stricture, and let it be made either of ebony or of boxwood.
And let the thickness of each wood be two fingers and the edge of either two fingers or one finger, and the length of each is one palm and a little more; and in the middle place of the two woods are two joints of that woods which are already closed, of which the length is the measure of one palm and a little more, and the thickness of each is two fingers, or a little more.
And these two additions are inserted into the mouth of the vagina so that it is open with those when you turn about the two prescribed vertigines.
Other form also similar to that more subtle and more distant:
Let it be made of boxwood or of ebony according to the likeness of forceps. However, at the end of his body there are two additions, and the length of those additions is one palm each, and the width of each is two digits.
And when you want to open the woman's vagina, then you make the woman lean back with her feet hanging down, opening what is between the patient's thighs. Then open your hand with the instrument, just as you would with forceps, according to the amount you want of the opening of the vagina while the midwife does what she wants.
The shape of the cervix which the ancients said was like:
The shape of the birth canal through which the fetus is pushed out:
The shape of amnion, in which the large head is contained.
And it is like forceps in which its teeth are at the end, just as often, and sometimes it is made long like forceps according to this shape, just as often, whose teeth are like horse's teeth with which it is cut into and contained. The shape of the amnion a little:
The shape of an uncia having one spine:
The shape of an uncia having two spines:
The shape of a spatula having two ends by which the head is cut off:
The shape of two spatulas wide:
All of these instruments are exercised, and when more are multiplied and prepared, the artist must be closer to their operation and closer to people because of their quantity.
And it is not necessary for those instruments to be made just anywhere, because the necessity of those cannot be excused.
Of extraction of the second child:
When the second child is retained by childbirth, then you must command the patient to retain their breath, and then make them sneeze with snuff, and stretch your hand over their mouth and nose, and if it comes out with that, it's good.
And if not, then you take a woollen ball and pierce the cloth with a needle and soak that in herbs that open the mouth of the vagina, like hellebore and rue and anise and chamomile and Arabic scilla and cinnamon and frankincense. All of these herbs or some of them are soaked in water in the ball, and place that on the fire.
Then place a straw in the mouth of the vagina, and keep that there until the vapor comes to the cavity of the vagina.
And then make her sneeze as we have said, and the second child will be pushed out with speed.
But if this treatment has not worked and it hasn't come out, then you command the midwife to submerge her left hand in olive oil or in mustard of alder, and then insert that in the vagina and feel for the second child with that, and when she has found it, take it and stretch it little by little according to rectitude so that the mother doesn't cry out because of the strong pulling. Before that is done, let it be turned to the right and left sides with ease.
And if the mouth of the vagina is constricted, we have already recommended the treatment with sneezing and with medication of the ball with herbs.
But if it has not been pushed out with all the causes that we have recommended, then be careful not to tire her with iteration of pulling, but instead let what comes out of her mouth at the vagina lie on the woman' couch; and then let that be sealed with ointment and tetrafarmacon, because that will make it putrefy in a few days and dissolve and be pushed out.
But when it rises, there is a bad smell to the head and stomach, and that makes the patient sick; therefore let balms be administered below the smoke and convenient things to that.
But some of the Ancients have been tested with smoke of nettle and dry figs.
The shape of the instrument by which the woman is smoked because of retention of menstruation and of the second child:
It is made of glass or of horn.
And the slender end be placed in the vagina and the wide end over the fire, and the smoke be stopped over the embers of the fire.
And keep that there until that smoke is consumed and do another one.
Of treatment of the anus not perforated:
Infants born and their anuses are not perforated, which are closed with a slender and opilated instrument. Then let the midwife pierce it with her finger; and if not, pierce that with a pointed spatula, and be careful not to touch the clitoris.
Then place wool soaked in wine and oil over it; and then heal that with ointment so that it is healed.
But if you are afraid it's opilated, then place a straw through the opening for a few days, and wait until the child wants to urinate.
And then let the opilation of the anus happen because of hardening of a fistula or of an abscess; therefore let that hardening be cut into and then be healed with what we have said of the treatment and of the plaster.
Of treatment of fistulas that go down from the anus:
The fistulas which go down in the part of the anus with pus are narrow and thick, which go down close to the anus or into the space of one part.
And it is a fistula or many.
And when that node is old and corroded by the white or yellow pus subtilely, and sometimes some of these fistulas penetrate.
And when they penetrate, they are known by what is coming out of them by their egress and by windiness; and sometimes the patient gets sick from the egress, and a lot comes out of them with wind.
And sometimes those fistulas penetrate into the space into the bladder, and into the meat of the vagina; and sometimes they penetrate the joint of the vagina and into the notch of the womb.
And when the fistula penetrates into the anus and doesn' t penetrate, it is that you put your finger in the anus, and insert a slender instrument of horn or iron in the fistula when it isn't hard.
But if in that there is hardness, then insert a slender instrument of lead or of horse-hair into that so that you feel the instrument or the hair in your finger.
And if you don't feel that at all nor process any cause of exudation or windiness or pus, just as we have said, then know that it is not penetrating, and then cut to the treatment.
And when the fistula penetrates into the bladder or into the meat of the vagina, then its sign is exudation of urine from that and prohibition of it to go out because the place is closed by medicine.
But if it is penetrating into the joint of the vagina or into the bone and feels pain in the circumference, then its sign is that the instrument comes into contact with the bone here if in the joint it isn' t hard; and pain in the circumference of the part; and that from there comes putrefaction sometimes; and that does not work in that medicine, nor is it healed with ointment.
And in all those penetration of ulcers there is no cure for everything, and the cure for them is labor and vanity of foolish doctors about whom they are confident.
But in that which does not penetrate and is not ancient, healing with iron is expected according to what I will tell you, and what I have already tried and tested.
And it is that the patient lies on his back and lifts his legs between them, his thighs are bent towards his stomach, and then the surgeon tries to insert a probe made of lead or copper if there is a tortuous ulcer, into the location where he suspects the fistula is.
And if the patient has pain around his neck, then you must insert your little finger into his neck.
And if you feel with your finger that the probe has already penetrated by itself, then know for certain that it is penetrating; and then do not labor on it, for there is no cure for it, as we have said.
But some say that it is cured in some people who are constipated.
And the medicine by which healing is expected in him is that you apply a subtle cautery according to the size of the fistula, as it is mentioned above, and insert the lit cautery into the fistula until it reaches around the neck; and then repeat this two or three times until you know that all the flesh attached to the fistula that resembles a feather cane have been burnt.
And then treat that with poultices wrapped in cloth until all the flesh that is attached has healed, and then cure that with medicines which generate and solidify flesh, and if it is healed, well; but if not, then it will not be healed at any time by any other treatment.
And if the probe enters but does not penetrate your finger which is in the anus, and between that and the probe there is a thin layer of flesh or membrane, then cut the fistula where it touches the surface of the skin, and dry up the skin from the beginning of the fistula; and you see that it dries by means of the probe until the incision reaches the place where the end of the probe is, and through the probe it is freed and drained.
And then clean out those flesh-like fistulas which are like a quill of a feather, and do not let them remain for any cause.
But if blood flows out between you and your operation when you touch those flesh, then the milker, which is a very useful instrument, must cauterize that with fire or with a sharp medicine; for cautery with fire produces two good results: it is an abscission of those attached flesh, and it dries up the blood by exsiccation.
And then cure that with poultices wrapped in cloth or with soft linen until the place becomes hard, and then cure the wound with ointments which generate and solidify hard flesh.
And these medicines are for constriction and exsiccation; when it is restored, then it is healed and you need not fear a recurrence.
But if the fistula already penetrates inside the rectum and is elongated from there to the surface of the body, then insert your finger into the anus and probe with it.
And so if the probe is touched and between you and it there is a membrane or flesh which is close to penetration, then it is not an operation on him but according to the way of confidence and hope.
And this cause is treated in him by one of three ways: either cauterize that as we have said; or dry up that place until you can reach the cavity so that it may be possible for you to insert the tools and apply the treatment; nor should you cut into the skin containing the neck, and make the patient suffer against his will and without his consent; and then cure that with what we have said, for the vein there will heal quickly. Or lengthen that membrane and clean out that pus which you dry up near the rectum, either with a probe or another instrument with a sharp end, and then clean out those flesh-like fistulas which are in the incision by means of scraping; and strive to make the restoration of the whole wound by cutting into it, and if that outlet is not solidified above, and the fistula remains open at the exit near the rectum, then pus will flow more quickly through the patient. And sometimes the fistula is finished in this way: when you insert the probe into the fistula, and it is on the side of the rectum around the surface of the body with the skin and at the edge of the rectum, then take a probe of a perforated end, which is like a needle for piercing ears according to this form:
and insert it into that vein wrapped in a thread or around those; and then insert the probe with the needle into the fistula until you reach its cavity.
But if it penetrates at the edge of the rectum near the inside, then you extract that needle from there as you insert your finger into the rectum; and pull out the end of the needle and tighten both ends, and keep them tight for a day or two, and when you have pierced the flesh with the needle more deeply, loosen that again so that those flesh are pierced between both ends of the needle and they are pulled in.
And then cure the wound until it is solidified and healed.
But if the outlet of the fistula is not penetrated, then make that penetration by whatever way you are prepared for it, except in the rectum, for it is not for you to do what pierces the skin. And then heal that with which it is healed.
The form of a thorn with which the fistula is split: the curve of which is very acute and the other part is not acute, so that it does not pierce what is not necessary, as it touches.
Of suturing hemorrhoids in which blood flows at the incision of those.
Hemorrhoids are according to two ways, for either they are between the rectum like that which is of veins, or those which are like fat with pus. And they are small and great, and the blood flows from them at any time; they are swollen, and outside the rectum, and at their ends.
But those which are outside the rectum are according to the months of little moisture, of which flows citrine water or a little blood with continuous body, and they are according to the colour of the body.
And the cure for that which is inside the rectum is to command the patient to sit and strain so that the rectum dries up, and the hemorrhoids appear to you. Then you hold it and pull with your nails, and then pierce those deep into their roots.
But if the nails are not in them because of their moisture and softness, then take those with an asp or a ramshorn or with a flap of wool, and pull them out with your fingers, and then pierce them and powder over them some powdered caustics after you have probed them, so that they are as cauterized; or cauterize them according to what is mentioned in the chapter on cauterizing. And then cure those with the other cure until they are healed.
And if the rectum does not obey the ejection, then christen the patient with a small Christ's nail, and let him be washed with that which is in the rectum and that he strain it out gently when the patient defecates.
But if the hemorrhoids protrude from the anus, then the cause of them is laziness, and you should take those with your finger, or take those with ointment, and insert those, and then cure those with what we have said until they are healed.
And whoever wants to treat them, he should administer a suture in the following way: take some wool wrapped in a needle and stick it through the hemorrhoids at their upper parts, and insert the needle into the root of the other part, and wrap both ends of the wool around the part closest to the needle, and then pull the hemorrhoid with strong pressure, and squeeze the wool and take out the needle.
And do this to all of them, and leave one of them uncovered and un-sewed, so that the excess blood can flow out through it.
And then place a cloth soaked in rose oil or ceratum over the anus, and tell him to rest. And let that remain until it is healed, then cure them with ointment or another medicine until they are healed.
And when they are old and medicine does not help them, then you should open them with a spatulum or your finger until they become moist and the pus is drained from above, and you should prevent them from becoming hard; and then cure them until they are healed.
Then you should open them more violently than the first time so that there is more bleeding and they become raw, and then cure them until they are healed.
Know that a hernia is crucial, and it is not unless it is a round knot according to the color of the body resembling the head of a nail, and it occurs all over the body and mostly in the lower parts of the legs and the groin, and due to this you should feel pain.
And so you should insert what is in the loop of the nail, and hold it with forceps or ointment, and remove it from its root; and then cure it.
And if you want, cauterize the second one that is mentioned in the previous chapter.
But a verruca is a small, asperous, round and fistulated protuberance on the surface of the body, and many times it occurs in the hands of children.
And its cure is that you stretch and insert it, or pierce it with a needle until it drains. And if you want, cauterize it, as we have said, with fire or acute medicine.
But a furuncle is a small, fluffy or fistulated protuberance on the surface of the body which occurs frequently in the armpits and the groin, and when it is rubbed it feels like an ant bite, and it occurs all around the body.
And its cure is that you take a feather of an eagle or a vulture, and make it strong, and place the feather over the furuncle so that the circle of the feather contains the furuncle; and then rotate your hand with the feather so that you insert what is in the loop of the furuncle, and place it in the flesh of the skin, and eradicate the furuncle from its root.
And if you want, do it with an iron needle or a needle made of steel according to this form:
Let the end of the needle be drawn out very thinly, blunt (so it is not pierced), wrapped so that above the finger it appears smooth and its revolution is complete.
And if you want, cauterize the furuncle as it is mentioned in the chapter on cautery.
On the form of instruments which are administered to give cautery:
Sometimes cautery is done with silver or brass or melted iron or beaten; and sometimes it is done with small or large instruments according to the treatment they are administered for, because that which is administered in the cure of small children should be small; and for those whose anuses are painful or swollen, their cauteries should be small.
The form of a great and few cauteries:
Let the end of the needle where the bag is tied be wide according to this manner; and let it have distinction where the bag is tied in that way as well.
And the end of it which is inserted into the anus be blunt  (so it is not open), drawn out very thinly; and in one side of it there are two holes, and in the other side a hole, and let the width of the hole be according to the thickness of the rays and plus thick a small one.
And let the bag in which the medicines are placed be made of animal bladder or sheep skin, and let its root be one palm long.
And let it be perforated by many holes so that when it is revolved the space between the holes is the thickness of the finger.
And then insert into those holes strong oil of oil which is made from ten oils, or surround it with that; and adjust with that the bag; and when it is placed in him the bag, let it be squeezed in the end of the cautery between two distinctions with a strong grip, and then cauterize with that each hole: However, the quality of cauterizing with that is that you fill the bag with medicine which has been warmed according to the quantity of the patient's tolerance; and beware that it is not too hot nor too cool.
And then the patient should recline on his back, and raise his legs up and place under him a bed or a plank; and then anoint the end of the cautery with oil or egg white or mucilage of fenugreek or something similar; and then insert it into the anus easily, and then the minister should take the bag and squeeze it with two fingers with strength until everything that is in the cautery is evacuated; and then take out the cautery and let the patient raise his legs to the wall.
And if the medicine forces it out, he should hold it as long as possible; and if he falls asleep from it for a whole night, it is better.
However, if you cauterize him for disorders of a swollen belly and its discharge, then you should repeat the cautery until it is healed.
And if in the anus there are hemorrhoids or painful lumps, then let the cautery be very thin and strong, of cauteries children are cauterized.
On the treatment of warts:
You already said in the division of the cure of warts what suited the member, and I said thus the cure of them with hand and medicines according to their complement.
Therefore, I say that warts are diversified according to what they are made of and according to the place where they occur.
And the causes by which many warts are made are thus with stone, or piercing of a spear, or blow with an arrow, or with a staff, or a similar object to these.
However, the warts which are on the body parts are thus with a wart which falls over the head, or the neck, or the feet, or the belly, or the buttocks, and similarly in these of the members.
I will now explain the treatment for some diseases, through which you can extrapolate this reasoning and rule to other illnesses.
I will begin with simple diseases of the head, since the discussion of composite diseases will come at the beginning of the third chapter.
Therefore, I say that when a simple plague occurs in the head and it is not a fracture, then consider the following: If it is due to the impact of a stone or something similar, and the vein has been ruptured and there is a large wound which you fear might become infected with pus, then immediately cut and bleed the cephalic vein, and do not delay; extract the blood according to the amount indicated by its color if no other cause prohibits phlebotomy, especially if the blood coming out of the wound is scarce.
And let the phlebotomy be on the side opposite to the affected part; and guard against repletion, wine, and heavy foods.
But if some cause prohibits phlebotomy due to weakness, then decrease the food intake and do not come near meat or wine.
And place on the wound, if it happens that there is pus and a boil has formed, a poultice soaked in rose oil or wine in which styptic herbs have been mixed.
But if he is certain of the pus, then place on the wound, if it is recent and his blood has not changed that powder which I will shortly mention.
And if the air has already changed its color, then place a dressing over it until it is healed.
But if the wound is large or caused by a spear or similar object, and its lips are not closed together by stitches, then close them with stitches as I will instruct later on.
But if the wound is uncovered and has exposed bone, and there is no retention except for a small bandage, then insert into it and treat the wound with medicines and restore the flesh by applying poultices in the place of the vein; and command the patient to abstain from foods which are heavy: capers and their likes.
And if you find putrefaction in the vein and it does not adhere to the bone, then cut out all that rottenness and throw it away, and then treat it.
But if in these plagues there is an artery or vein from which blood can flow, and it has not been cut off by medicines, then probe for the artery; and if you find it uncut, then cut it open with a spatulum or ligature it; and if necessity forces you to do what we have said, then cauterize it so that the blood is cut off.
And if these plagues are simple and small, then the cause of them is cold; therefore you should powder those with this powder, because it consolidates them before the air changes them.
And the manner of the powder is this: take olive oil, one part; dragon's blood, two parts; and unburned ash, three parts; mix all together and sift it, then fill the wound with it and compress it with a good bandage so that it adheres to the wound, and let it coagulate with the blood.
And then tighten it above with powder and lye, and do not loosen it while it is like that unless there is pus; for the medicine will not be absorbed as long as it is unhealed.
And sometimes you can do this alone when you do not have dragon's blood at hand.
And indeed this method of operation is suitable for great wounds when you judge that it should be applied and the wounds are tight and recent, and the air has not altered them.
And if the air has altered them, and especially in summer time, then it is not intended to apply this powder; but instead cure them with what we have said, so that you place on them some cooked poultices, or place on them plasters made of barley flour mixed with water and honey so that they draw out the rottenness; and then cure them with the other treatment until they are healed.
But if a fracture in bone occurs with the wound, and it is small, then extract it with a probe.
And I will instruct on the cure for fractures of the head when they are infected.
Of wounds to the neck:
But if a wound occurs in the neck, then it is not different in treatment; and between the wounds of the head when they are simple.
But if the nerve of the neck is cut or an artery, then if it is a nerve, there is no harm in treating it with anything that causes violent contraction, like vinegar and its likes which do not hurt nerves and constrict that. And do not place on the wound any cause of great heat, because the substance of nerves is heat and their continuation is in the brain, which is the source of all the members.
And if it is being treated with cold medicines, like being washed with tepid water, then some oil soaked in rose or non-rose water, and thujia when it is washed with tepid water and the other herbs are applied according to this manner, and moist poultices.
But if the wound is large, then administer stitches, or tie its lips together, and then cure it with powders until it is healed.
But if the wound is deep or there is pus in its bottom part, then bore it in its most depressed spot.
But if the artery is cut and blood flows from it, then separate or dry it out, or ligature it, or cauterize it if necessity forces you to do so.
But if the ligaments of the neck or the whole are cut and the veins of the neck are saved, then you tighten the lips of the vein with stitches on the bone of the neck, and do not touch it; bind that down to its natural shape and compress it with decent tightness, and dress it with poultices in which there is contraction and excitement until it is healed.
But if the wound has caused depression in the bone, then pierce it and if there are pieces of bone in it, extract all that you can; and what you cannot, dress it so that the wound putrefies, and let its separation be eased.
And if the wound is recent, then powder it with the powder which I have instructed you. But if a fistula has formed in the wound, then cure it with that which its recollection will come to you later in this chapter.
If it is a wound from a spear or knife, and you see its depth, then consider that if the patient has fever; then know that this wound is deadly.
And if it is not deep and the wound is recent with its blood, then you place on it in the first hour a powder, and do not tighten it so that the blood is not retained in the depth of it and returns to the heart and that it weakens the patient; but apply an attractive poultice, and loosen it twice a day.
And if the poultice is not at hand, then you bore a hole in the wound and insert a cotton swab so that it sucks out what there is in its humidity; and let the patient sleep on the wound so that what is inside it runs out.
But if the plague has passed for three days or more and no spasms occur in the patient, nor trembling of the heart, nor stricture of the bowels, and you see other good signs in him, then know that the plague is over; and then heal it with leeches and with other treatment until it is healed.
But if the healing of him is prevented and the opening remains for a long time, then know that a fistula has formed; therefore heal it through its own channel.
And if the plague is from an incision of a vein or artery and is simple in appearance on the surface of the foot or leg, then heal it with what has been said about stitching, if it is large, or with powder, if it is small.
But if there has been an impression in the bone and you see that it incises pieces of bone, then twist the plague and cut to extract those pieces, if they are separated. But if they are not separated, then close the opening so that the plague may be cured; for the extraction of them is painful.
And in other plagues that occur in other members, the healing method is the same as what we have said before.
Of plagues of the belly:
The disposition that occurs in the belly is either great or small or intermediate.
And a small disruption is made difficult in another way, and one finds that the reduction of them is more difficult if you do not close the penetration of them into their place immediately, for it opens and swells so that the insertion of it is made difficult.
And therefore the best disruption is intermediate, for in that one the reduction of the intestine is not difficult, just as it is difficult in the two species mentioned above.
And know that stitching of the belly is according to four methods, but two stitches are common in stitching of the other plagues of the body.
And two other stitches are specific to other plagues but nonetheless more proper in the stitching of the belly.
I will return to you each one with exposition and declaration.
Therefore I say that when the plague is small and there has been caused some injury of the intestine because of it, and it is made difficult to reduce it, then it is in one of two ways: either by smallness of the disruption as we have said, or when the intestine has received inflammation from the chill of the air.
And therefore when that is so, then you should warm it so that you submerge a sponge or damp cloth in only tepid water, or that you gather in squinant water, and cyperum, and spic, and embed with that the intestine until the inflammation is resolved.
And sometimes it does this in wine in which there is stricture, and it is better than water alone for resolution of the inflammation.
And therefore when you see the inflammation resolved, then you dampen the intestine with water in which is mixed aloe and mallows, for by that the insertion of it is made easier with little pain.
But if the insertion of it is prevented by this cure, then you split the disruption a little with an instrument by which there are incised hemorrhoids.
And the first cure is better when it is not cut and there is no need for a bandage to dry up and deflate.
Of the instrument, know its form:
One side of it is bent acute, and the other side not acute, and the extremity subtle, and let its subtlety not be like a spathe but rather obtuse a little.
And therefore when the plague is amplified and sees outside the intestine, then you should ensure that its reduction is according to its natural form in its proper place, if it is possible; for that is better.
But when the disruption is large and it is in the lower part of the belly, then you should have the patient lie on his back and place his legs above; and if it is in the upper part of the belly, then you should have him lie on his side with his head and higher leg up.
And likewise if the disruption is in one of the two parts of the belly, then pay your attention and your consideration always to that so that the part in which there is the plague be higher than the other.
And therefore you should administer that in great plagues and in intermediate plagues.
And in small plagues, pause what is prepared for you and let the minister be between your fingers, who has the disruption all under his hand and adjust the lips of it, and let him uncover that to which there occurs stitching from any cause whatever.
And this is the way of common stitching: take the needle, or count of needles according to the amount of the amplitude of the plague; and let there be left from the extremity of the disruption of the finger, and tighten the needle one, or else put thread in both extremities of the cord, with two extremities of the ciphac that is below the cord of the fingers, into which you make penetration of that party; and you have added two extremities of the cord and two extremities of the ciphac, and so they are made four turns.
And let there be tightening with double thread around the circuit of the needle, and sometimes from two parts together, and let you add both lips and the plague by decent aggregation; and let there be left the thickness of the finger and put another needle in that, and let it be tied with thread as it is tied with the first needle; and do not cease to do this if there is a need for needles until all the contraction of the plague is tied.
And let the needles be intermediate between thickness and subtlety, for subtle needles pierce easily into the flesh; and thick ones are difficult to insert into the cord, therefore let them be more subtle in thickness and grossness.
And let the needle not be put in two extremities of the cord that is near, lest the flesh be pierced deeply and the plague open before its consolidation.
And let them not be prolonged so that the plague is prohibited from consolidation.
And let the extremities of the needles be inserted so that they do not lead the patient out of his sleep; and pause over the stitching powdered herbs expanded from every part, which have the extremities of the needles; and let them remain until you know that the plague is consolidated.
And these spices of stitching with needles in cold manner are more convenient in small plagues, for they have in their stitching one needle or two or around them.
But the second stitching is common: and it is that you administer with stitching of the four extremities, of the cord and two extremities of the ciphac, in one go, with a needle in which there is thread wrapped in subtlety and thickness.
And let there be reduction of the needle from that penetrated party from which you began, so that the thread drawn back goes from the upper part to the plague, so that the stitching is according to stitching of cloth with which the clothes are tightened.
And pause between each stitch the amount of the thickness of a little finger.
And this suturing heals men.
And with such a suturing I healed a plague that had afflicted a man in his belly, and he had been plagued by it for seven days, and the rupture of the plague was about a palm's width, and it had come out around two palms from the intestine at the middle of the abdomen, and there was disruption in the middle of the abdomen; then I reduced it after the intestine had been torn open by the plague for 24 hours.
And the plague was consolidated within a space of 15 days or thereabouts, and I cured it, and he is healed; and then he lived for many years, and returned to his natural state.
And other doctors had judged that he would not be healed; and by God's miracle I cured him with ointment, for it was in a place where ointment and any medicine were ineffective, but I applied it to the plague twice daily, and washed it frequently with honey water until he was healed.
But I will tell of two kinds of suturing that are proper according to the narrative of the Word.
And you should begin with the thread's suture, and insert the needle from outside into inside at the beginning.
And when the needle penetrates the thread and the tissue according to the straightness and in the length of all the body, leave the end of the thread in which you have inserted the needle; and make the needle penetrate in the other end from inside to outside at the other end of the wound.
And when you have made that penetration, then do it again on the other side of that meteyssed end of the wound from outside to inside; and leave the end of the thread which is in this side, and make the needle penetrate at the other end from inside to outside.
And make that penetration with which you make that penetration in the wound' end in the middle of the abdomen, so that all that penetrates inside.
Then begin on this side of the wound and sew that with the end which is of the thread in the other side, and draw out the needle from the thread through which you have made penetration, and then reduce that to that thread and sew the end of the thread which is in the other side with this end of the abdomen; and draw out that from the thread on the part of him.
And do this once and again, and do this another time within that you sew all that is outside according to that example.
And the sum of this way of suturing is that you sew with a thread of skin, in such a way that you sew the abdomen one side from the end of the thread, and draw out that other side so that it is complete.
But the second kind of proper suturing which I narrate is from Gualia' s word, and it is of a man' s speech and by him recommended; it is that you sew that according to the similarity with which someone sews another thing, in such a way that they join all part to its comparable part conveniently by nature; and apply the end of one of his parts and the end of the wound to the other end of him, and that is done according to how I recommend to you.
Because you put the needle in the end of the wound near to the outside, and make it penetrate inside at that sole, and draw out two ends of the abdomen; then you revolve the needle and make it penetrate from outside to inside in two ends of the abdomen.
Then revolve those again and make some of the ends penetrate from inside to outside in two ends of the wound that are in the contrary side.
And this way of suturing is better than the common simple suture, and it is the suture of which I preceded the memory.
This is Gualia' s word.
And others say, the suture of the abdomen is rectified with two needles; it is that you put in these some twine, and begin with penetration of the needle from what is below you, and make it penetrate inside at the other side according to the suturing of those who sew bodies together.
And know that when disruption is in the middle of the abdomen, then its suture is more difficult than of other places of the abdomen.
But the judgement of medicine for plague is the judgement of other plagues.
The cause of which is that when you know the plague recently with its blood before the air changes it, and reduce the intestine and sew it and adapt it decently, then pause over it powdery flesh-like matter.
And if the air has already changed the plague, then pause over it some ointments which are to you present so that they make hard stone and enclose the threads, and be consolidated abdomen and wound; and cure it thus as is the cure of other plagues so that it is healed.
But if you do not have the medicines, then pause over it at once, for when it begins to fester, cut it much and change that twice a day, thus as you teach and instruct, until it is healed, for you do not need any other medicine in many conditions when the plagues are simple.
But if you fear that the plague communicates in damage to the principal members, then know that you submerge lion wool in oil of excellent quality, or in rose oil, and pause that in the circuit of the places that are between the angles and below the ankles.
And if you feel pain or putrefaction in your intestines from how many times it should be, then baptize that with black astringent wine, and especially if the putrefaction is come by the intestine and there is made an exit through its cavity.
And know that that which is of the large intestine is a more difficult cure than that which is in the subtle intestines.
And it is of difficult cure because the intestine which is called "gegunu" does not receive the cure of plague that boxes in it from all; and that is because of the great multitude of veins that are in it, and because of its magnitude that is in those, and because of the subtlety of that one, and because of its proximity to nature of nerves.
But if that which proceeds from the plague is the membrane, and you obtain that recently, reduce that according to your straightness with which you reduce intestines equally.
But if it has passed to the space and is already made green or black, then you should tighten that with thread over the place that is blackened of it, for there to come flows of blood, for in the membrane there are veins and arteries.
And then insert that which is another one of it and pause two ends of the thread hanging from the part below the plague out of it, so that on you be elevated the attraction of it because of the weight of the membrane and emission of the pus of the plague.
Memory of the plagues when they happen in the intestine.
When disruption happens in the intestine and it is small, then it is possible that it be restored in some men, because I saw him who was plagued in his abdomen by blow of spear, and the plague was on the right part of the stomach, and the plague was old and made fistula, and exuded from it and ventosity.
Then I followed the cure of him so that he not be confident in the cure of it, but continued to subtilize that until it was healed and the place is consolidated.
And after I saw the site already consolidated, I applied medicine on the patient that had a bad accident in his belly; and he did not experience any discomfort from this bad accident, and he maintained his normal habits of eating and drinking, and also bathed and exercised as usual.
And some experienced people have said that when there is a small wound in the intestine, it should be treated as follows: you take a large leaf; and then you press the two lips of the wound and place one of those leaves which has an open mouth over the two lips of the wound; thus when it grabs onto those and tightens its mouth, cut off its head, because it will adhere and not come undone.
And then place another leaf near the first one, and do not cease to do this with leaves one after the other according to the size of the entire wound.
And then return that one and sew up the wound; and let those leaves remain attached to the intestine until it is healed, and do not harm the patient in any way.
And it is possible that the intestine be tied with a thin thread made from an animal's intestine, as it is easier to put on a needle; and you take one end of this intestinal thread, which is quite bare, and then tie the end of it with the thread, wrapping it around, and then insert that thread through needles and sew up with that the intestine, and return it to its cavity.
And this method of sewing with leaves is not certain but rather a matter of hope and expectation.
But if the wound is large and wide, especially if it is in one of the thin intestines, then there is no other way but to cut it out, for there is no complete healing of it at all.
On the treatment of ulcers and fistulas:
Know that any wound and pustule which becomes inflamed and old, and is turned into an ulcer, and does not heal and keeps draining pus all the time and does not come to a head, then, in whatever part of the body it may be, universally it is named a fistula, and we call it by this name.
And a fistula according to the truth is a hollow nodule, hard, white, without pain and having a cavity like a hole of a bird; and because of this some call it a nodule, that is, a lump.
And in some men it is moist, and the moisture is discharged in a few hours. And sometimes this moisture is thick, and sometimes scanty, and sometimes thin.
I have already shown all these causes, and their signs, and the treatment of them with medicines in that division.
Now let me inform you about the treatment of a fistula which is done by means of an operation with the hand.
Know that fistulas occur in all parts of the body: for some reach into large veins or arteries, or nerves, or the brain, or intestines, or bladder, or any of the ribs, or one of the vertebrae of the back, or into any of the joints composed by composition like that of the hand and foot; and some go near to the main part of a similar nature.
And therefore those of these fistulas which are in this way are among the most difficult diseases to heal, and do not receive treatment, and their occupation is labor and ignorance.
And if there is any fistula whose depth does not reach those places which I have mentioned, and you wait and trust in its healing, and wish to obtain knowledge of it, then take a needle or an awl, and if the fistula goes straight, probe it with that.
But if the fistula is winding, then investigate it with a probe made of thin lead, because lead, by the lightness of its body, is drawn away and bent according to the winding.
And if the fistula has horrifying depths, it is not possible for you to indicate it with a probe.
Then, Christianize the orifices by your orifices, for the moisture by which you Christianize it comes from the other orifices and flows from them.
And then investigate carefully, according to which way you are able to know whether there is a bone or nerve, and whether the fistula' s cavity is distant or near, or whether it is a fistula whose many orifices are above all by the use of your strength, by your investigation with the hand on the site, and like the signs and causes of the ulcer.
And when you have understood all these causes with certain knowledge, then go to the treatment according to confidence: and consider whether it is an apparent fistula near or in a salty place, distant from a joint, or of a nerve, or artery, or vein, or one of those sites which I have mentioned.
Then dry up the fistula according to what has been said about its origin, and stay that which is in that filtration and of rotten flesh, and that which is born in the orifice of flesh, or of thistle and like things, and heal that within as it is healed.
But if the fistula is of great depth and straight, then it is necessary that you probe it with an awl as far as it is possible for you to go, and then cleanse it of all its rotten flesh; and then administer hot poultices wrapped in sharp medicines, and insert those into the cavity of the fistula, which you have understood by means of the iron.
And do that some times within so that the sharp medicine corrodes all that is rotted in the cavity of the fistula from corruption.
And then restore it with ointments which generate healthy flesh within as it is healed.
But if it is not healed by that, then cauterize it according to what we have recommended.
But if the cause of the fistula is bone and it is because you have certified that, then probe it and dry up that according to what we have recommended, unless you prohibit any cause of vein or nerve or main member as we have said.
But if the bone is revealed to you and there is corruption and blackness in it, then cut out that corruption entirely; and then heal it with that which will flesh it within as it is healed.
And if it is not healed and continues to discharge pus as before, then know that you have not attained the complete eradication of corruption; and then uncover it again and investigate it carefully and do the reason for it and the cleansing of it with your greatest strength, and then restore it.
And if it is healthy, then it is good; and if not, then know that this corruption is in the distant depths of the body, which has not been achieved, so you should not attempt to treat it.
If the bones are rotten or broken, and you can extract them with delicate forceps, then proceed to do so.
If they are loose bones, then carefully extract them all without leaving any trace behind with your strength.
But if you encounter any resistance from the moisture and find no fear or error in its source, then cut into those ligaments or meats as they are here, and free the bones.
But if you are not prepared to remove the bones at this time, then place over the wound something that will fester and leave that wound open so that the flesh and ligaments surrounding the bones may suppurate, and keep the wound from healing so that the incision you have made in your operation is not closed.
However, if you are afraid of this, place over it a poultice soaked in vinegar, or a poultice soaked in Egyptian ointment, or one of the green ointments; for when those ligaments fester and the bones are separated from each other by suppuration, then their attraction is lessened.
But if it is a large bone like the shinbone or thighbone or one similar to those, and what is rotten in it is only its fascia, then cut away that corruption with the resection only as far back as the rottenness extends, and close up the wound.
But if what is rotten in it is a large portion of bone, and the corruption has already reached into the marrow of the bone, then it is necessary to close that up and cut away all around where the corruption is located, and then heal that wound so that it may be consolidated.
And know this: that you should apply something to the patient's thigh for a while as an example and aid in your operation.
A young man of about 30 years had pain in his thigh, and from the affected parts within was matter in the body which reached the thigh, and it was suppurative matter with large abscess, and there was not to him an external cause.
And so the time was prolonged by the error of the doctors until the abscess opened up, and many matters gathered there, and its cure was delayed because the thigh had been fistulated, and there were in him many orifices all of which discharged pus and the moisture of the body.
And so he was treated by many doctors for about two years, and there was no improvement but rather worsening in the leg where I had been called to treat him.
And so I saw his thigh and the matters that came from him through those orifices as a great flow; and indeed the man' s body was totally swollen and his color was yellowish.
And so I inserted the probe into one of those orifices and reached the bone.
And then I probed and searched thoroughly all the orifices and found that they led to all parts of the thigh.
And so I cut and opened up one of those orifices where I discovered a portion of the bone, and found it rotten, and indeed it was earthly and blackened, and a portion of the thigh had become rotten because it had penetrated into the membrane.
And then I cut away what was revealed to me and prepared from the uncovered bone.
And so I found that it was not in the bone but rather that corruption which I cut away and removed, and indeed I had already removed it.
And then I applied the restoration of the wound with consolidating medicine for a long time, and it was not consolidated.
And then I repeated this and uncovered the bone again on the second discovery, and found continued corruption with the bone.
And so I removed what appeared to me from that corruption, and then I found it necessary to do the cure of it and restoration, and it was not restored.
And so I uncovered it again and did not cease to probe the bone little by little particularly and perforate the restoration of it, and it was not restored until I had probed around an inch of it, and I extracted that with its marrow, and then I restored it with medicines, and it was more consolidated and healed.
And it was not necessary to repeat the operation on him or to cut him again except according to the disposition of his condition and due to the weakness of his body and his fear of death, for he suffered in all hours from excess of discharge and a bad syncope.
And so he is healed entirely, and there is nothing in the place of hard bone; and his disposition is good in his body and he has recovered his strength; and he is returned to his former dispositions and did not encounter any difficulty in walking or damage from any cause.
But if the bone is protruding from the body and has been cut, then you should proceed thus: take ligament and strengthen that at the extremity of that prominent bone, and command someone to stretch that while you apply the other ligament of wool which is thicker over the meat that is below the bone, and extend the extremity of it so that you pull the meat away from the parts below, and uncover the meat over the place where you want to cut so that the saw does not damage the meat.
And place a post or board below the bone decently, for when you do this it is not prohibited that the saw cuts into the rotten meat.
And know that the cutting is on the rotten place little by little, for if it is in the concavity of the bone and does not appear to the sense, then force the saw another time.
And if the bone is rotten and not prominent, then the one part is continued with the other, and the corruption is in the middle or in a part of it, then uncover the meat from all parts entirely; and then place a post below, and then cut that from the first part where the corruption is so that the sawing continues to the other part.
And let the sawing be according to the place of the corruption a little, as we have said.
And if the corruption is in the joint, insert that corrupt joint, and cut the bone where it continues to the other part.
And if the corruption is in the continuation of two joints, then there is no ratio but skill.
And if the corruption is in the breast of the hand or foot, it is very difficult; however know that you probe the corruption in whatever way it appears to you, and open that up according to each disposition which is possible for you, and with each skill be directed to you, when it does not go against you vein or nerve.
And know which are the saws and the probes to cut these bones according to their situation, and the preparation of them, and their thickness, and subtlety and greatness, and smallness, and hardness, and softness; so that you may be prepared for all kinds of operations conveniently for that operation.
And know that this operation indicates to you about the kind of instrument of which you have experience; when with you is great study and long and understanding of the ways of this art, and testimony of ways of diseases, for then you already had through your masters what is convenient to them of instruments to every disease.
And I shall leave to you at the end of this chapter, the number of instruments which you will place with simples, by means of which you will proceed in your treatment according to what you have found works for other patients. The shape of a saw:
The shape of another saw:
The shape of another large saw:
The shape of a razor: Let the head of this razor be shaped like a star-shaped key, and its points according to the shape of the points on a stapler.
And it is not advisable that these be rubbed on the heads of the joints when they are infected or on a large open wound.
The shape of a smaller razor:
The shape of a wide razor:
The shape of another saw decently made: let it have an arch on its upper part and the acuity of iron, and the blade of it decently made. Its shape:
The shape of a razor in which there is a cavity:
The shape of another subtle razor:
The shape of another razor with a curved extremity:
The shape of a small razor resembling a tent:
The shape of another smaller incision tool:
The shape of another incision tool; this one resembling a razor, and its extremity is like a saw, and it is displayed in many places on the bones:
The shape of a razor which is suitable for cutting into those bones that are perforated:
And its extremity is triangular and acute.
And it is made of Indian iron, and similarly to all the causes that we have given for razors and incision tools and saws.
Of incision extremities and of the jointing of bones.
The extremities may be affected either by an intrinsic or extrinsic cause, or as you have medicated that corruption for the sake of cure with those medicines and the cure does not confer, or else the corruption goes away from the member in which case you did not perceive any cause, then when you insert that member into that place where the corruption used to be, so that the patient escapes from death or from some greater harm to the member.
And the sign of that to which it happens is that the member becomes black as if it had been burned, or it may happen near the blackness that that corruption entered into that member and spread throughout the entire body; and then cut off with an incision at that place.
And similarly if the cause of the corruption is a poisonous strike from some venomous creature like that of the sea scorpion or of the viper or of the adder or of their likes.
And if the corruption or strike is on the extremity of the finger, then you shall insert the finger and not give space to the corruption so that it enters into the hand.
And similarly if it happens to the hand, then you shall insert it at the joint of the arm, and not give space to the corruption so that it enters into the arm.
And if instead it is the other one, then insert the arm within the elbow at the joint.
And if the corruption passes further and goes around the elbow, then in that is the death of the patient; and to impart another cause for cure in addition to this is a quantity of virtue.
And similarly do the foot when corruption happens to the toe, then you shall insert that within one of the toes.
And if it affects the heel of the foot, then you shall insert all of the foot. But if it enters into the toe, then you shall insert the instep at the joint of the toe.
And if the corruption is already past onto the toe, then in it there is not healing but dismissal, and let the patient go to his death.
And the manner of inserting the member or of cutting it is that you tighten the ligament at the part which is lowest and which you want to insert, and tighten another ligament over the place; and extend the minister one ligament to the parts below, and extend the other minister over it; and you separate the flesh which is between two ligaments as far down as possible so that all the flesh is uncovered; and then let it be cut or cut into.
And so that a bandage of linen is placed over all the parts so that it does not touch the wound, and that the patient come healed and bound up.
But if it happens bleeding of blood when they are opened, then you cauterize the place burnt-wise, or pause over there some powders that constrict the bleeding; and then return to your medicine until it is complete.
And then bind the member bandaged with a ligament in a convenient way, and cure that until it is healed.
And I return to you that which happened to a man on his foot, this wound which accident I and you recommended, which is when he became blackened on his foot by scorching that was like the burning of fire.
And that corruption happened first on his toe before it extended over all the foot.
And then that man prepared for himself remedies more than once that the cure might go to the member with the force of it, and he struck that foot until it hurt and burned, and he cauterized that foot at the joint, and healed it with fire.
Long time ago that corruption happened on the toe of the hand as mentioned.
And then it went to me, and so I perceived that superfluity with that which was paused over the hand of the remedies, then the cleansing of its body; and the superfluity is not repelled and began going to the other toe before it began in the hand.
And he led me to insert the hand into it, and I did not want to expect anything about the result of that superfluity, and yet that I feared would be the death of the patient if the virtue of the medicine was over powerful.
And since he left me it returned to his land and it was perceived that that man prepared and inserted his entire hand, and it healed.
And I have not added this narration except that it be aid to what is added to this illness, and that it be significance by which it was signified and according to which it was turned.
Of cure of sores and quality of cauterization with medicines.
When it happens to apostema on some members of the flesh and the space of the apostema is prolonged so that there is collection of pus, and then it is broken and perforated, and the pus comes out from it, and the wound is cleansed as if it were washed, and the stringy part which is above it as if it were a veil, and it does not come to a deeper corruption, and not impresses into the bone or on the nerves or on the ligaments, it is called sinus, and it is not named fistula.
But if the space is prolonged so that the corruption infects in some member, then it is called sinus and not fistula.
And the cure of it is that you insert that stringy part all around as it is unwound, and more so when it is cut with a razor, and compressions are made so that it does not adhere to the place because of its corruption.
But if you expect that the stringy part adheres and that corruption has not happened because of deeper cauterization, and in the stringy part there is swelling from the face, then you cure that by cautery.
Consider the armpit, and if it is large, and the arm that you see has an offensive odor, then cleanse that with Egyptian medicine which is made of oil and wine, mixed with rosemary, received in equal parts, and placed in a vessel, and cooked over fire until the medicine becomes hot and reaches the consistency of honey.
Then take from him what is necessary and dissolve it with water and honey; and cleanse the armpit with that medicine, and strengthen the opening of it, and leave the medicine in there for the amount of two hours.
Then remove that with a sponge; and do this for so many days until the armpit is cleansed and the odor is removed.
And sometimes it is cleansed with water of ashes when that medicine is not present to you; and take the ashes of wood and place water on it, and then boil that and cleanse the armpit with it until you are certain that the armpit is cleaned.
And if the patient does not tolerate the Egyptian medicine nor the water of ashes, then cleanse that with water and honey in which is mixed ground rosemary, and also cleanse it with wine and honey mixed, for the property of honey is to clean and wash, and the wine causes adhesion of the armpit, and especially when there is excess of dryness and tightness in the wine.
And when you do this some times and are convinced that the armpit is cleaned, then cleanse that with water that causes the flesh to grow in it.
And take a thin ointment and dissolve it with rose oil and astringent wine, or cleanse that with some medicines and other ointments that have the properties which I have already written about in the treatise on ointments.
And if the opening of the armpit is narrow and does not receive the catheter of the clyster, then expand that little by little with a small iron rod and place a heated sponge wrapped in Egyptian ointment or basilicon ointment on it until it is expanded.
And similarly if the opening is wide, then sew up its edges and leave in it a quantity that the clyster can enter without addition.
And if the opening of the armpit from which the arm hangs is elevated to the parts above it, then dry that in the place that is below for the arm to hang down into it, for when the arm is constricted in the depth of the armpit flesh is generated in it.
And if it is not possible for you to dry the armpit within the bone below according to what you want, then it is necessary that you prepare the member with preparation so that the arm runs from it slightly according to what seems appropriate to you and that no cause of the arm be retained in it.
But that which is over the opening of the armpit, and cleansed at every hour so that what is inserted in it of the arm dries. And so that you know if what runs from it of the arm is little or much, or is digested, or not digested.
And with this you consider the place of that armpit, if in it the patient feels pain or not, and if there is an ulcer in it.
And when your medicine is prolonged in such a manner and you see the matter that is formed over the opening of the armpit already dry or having dried up, then loosen it on the third day, and when you loosen the plaster, then change the cloth for another and renew the ointment.
But if from the armpit a subtle virus is seen to run long spaces, then do not despair of its adhesion for it, for its healing is proper, for some men in whom generation of flesh in their plasters is slow, and of those so whose contrary is done.
And if from the armpit after many days an indigest arm is issued, then know that the armpit does not adhere; and if adhesion of the armpit is delayed and the cause prolonged, then you reduce in dryness of the medicines, and if the medicines are moist in their substance and in their power, they are dried as with thin ointment when there is in it excess of addition of wax.
And the last with which it is cured, is that you take thin ointment and dissolve it in rose oil, and over it pour old wine equal in its substance, and then be convinced of that, and use it.
And then do likewise in that action when there is no arm, take thin ointment and honey when it is cooked until it is thickened, and use it; or take myrrh and aloe and aloes wood, and grind all and pulverize over the honey when it is over fire, and then line that over cloth and strengthen it over the armpit; and line that with the honey which you have cooked until it is thickened, and pulverize over cloth and strengthen that.
And sometimes they are administered to it with long aristology and radishes of celestial lily (and is celestial lily) and farina of oats and centaurea, and use of those simples or adjusted, grind all and sift over the honey which you have recommended; and use it.
And if the armpit is prolonged and is not healed by this treatment, then know that corruption is in its depth, and then make incision into the bones or in the other hard members or the ligaments; then you cure it with tubular treatment as above is said.
Of treatment of ulcer and nail worn down and addition of finger cut and section.
Ulcer is an ulcer which arises below the nail of the finger on the hand or foot, and strongly affects the other fingers and when it is prolonged and its healing is long delayed, or is an ulcer of an ulcerous wound, or is corrupted, and issues arm within that corrodes the radicle of the nail, and strongly corrupts all that, and strongly permeates to the bone within which there is an offensive odor, and its end is made black.
And so when you have that with what we have said in the division and do not confer your treatment then know that you cut out all the excess which is rotted from the nail and then cauterize the wound therefore, for cautery of motion is beneficial in this.
But if the bone is whole and the nail is healed, and the additions of the nail become compact, and begin to prick and stab that, then know that you place fine thread below the edge of the nail which pricks the flesh, and drive that up and insert that flesh with ease, and place over that which comes from the flesh of scorching medicines within until it is all cleansed; and then cure that with ointments so that it is healed.
But if the corruption is already in the bone, then you must cut into that bone and extract it, for there is no hope of healing as long as the bone remains corrupted.
And if you see corrosion and corruption in the finger, then cut into it at one of its joints according to how you remember it, and dress the wound so that it may heal.
But if there is a blow or injury to the fingernail, and consequently great pain in it, then at the beginning you must bleed the patient, and then dry the nail with a sharp spatula by making a transverse cut across it, being careful that the cut does not extend into the flesh below the nail, for you will cause great pain to the patient, and will prevent the superfluous flesh from growing back in that place; and dress the wound to ease the pain.
But this tissue, which is born in the hands of some men, has very little flesh and very few bones, or very little nail.
And some are born in the web of the joint, or their origin is in some joints of the fingers. But that which is born in some joints of the finger does not harm, and that which is born in the joints is very harmful.
And with those that are born fleshy, the cut is easier, and you must cut into it at its root with a broad spatula.
But that which is born in the root of the joint, its treatment is difficult; and so beware of cutting it off.
But in that which is born on a finger at the joint, you must cut into the flesh of it with a round incision into the bone, and then cut with one of those appropriate saws for this purpose, and dress the wound so that it may heal.
But consolidation which happens to the fingers among their joints, either by habit of the person who was born like that, or by consolidation of a plague, or by burning with fire, or by similar means, then you must dry up that consolidation so that the fingers return to their natural shape.
And then place between them pieces of linen soaked in rose oil so that they are not consolidated quickly, and separate those pieces, or place between them a thin sheet of lead so that it is consolidated according to how you wish.
And likewise if consolidation happens in some fingers with the palm, then you must dry up that consolidation according to how it is prepared and convenient for the figure of the member.
Of incisions of veins, thus are varicose.
Varicose veins and grossly swollen full of melancholy superfluities which come in parts of the body, and their greatest occurrence is in the legs, and most commonly in the legs of travellers and labourers and carriers.
Then you must administer purgation of the body from black bile several times with strong expulsion, and then bleed the patient from the basilic vein.
But their treatment with iron is according to two methods: the one is that it is cut and that black blood is drawn, and the other method is that the vein is elevated and all of it is extracted.
The cutting of it is according to this method: at the beginning moisten the leg with warm water so that the gross blood which is feculent from the leg is resolved, and then tightly press the leg of the patient at the part above the highest part of the thigh into the part below the groin with a bandage, and then dry up the vein in one place or two or three with a broad cut, and then elevate the black blood by your hand from the part below the leg upwards into itself, and from there downwards, so that the amount which you wish to and can bear is expelled, and which the strength of the patient permits.
And then ligate it, and command him to abstain from foods engendering black bile.
And repeat the treatment by phlebotomy when the veins are full and this is noticed by the patient.
But the elevation of them is according to this method: you raise the leg of the patient if there are pains in it, and then place him in a bath and moisten his leg with warm water so that it swells up and the veins are expanded; or let him be exercised by vigorous exercise, if a bath is not available, so that the member is warmed.
And then dry up the vein on the right side of it by a cut in its length or in its thickness, or at the bottom of it above the ankle.
And then open up the vein with nails and gouge out the vein from every part so that it appears to him, and you must examine it so that he perceives that darkness is inclining towards blackness.
And therefore when you open up and draw out from the vein, then you will see that it is white like a chord.
And then you must place below it the ray so that it is elevated and let blood out of the vein, and suspend it with a lion's tooth.
And then make another cut just above that cut for three fingers, and gouge out the vein from the part above the vein so that it appears.
And then elevate it and cut into it in the back just above the ankle, and then extract that and elevate it so that it is expelled by the second cut, and then extract it from the cut which is above that.
And do this so that you extract it from the cut which is highest or highest of all the cuts, so that all of it is expelled; and then cut into it.
And if he does not obey you to be extracted and elevated, then insert a strong bent needle into it and tie it up and extract it, or insert below it the ray and revolve your hand all around so that it is expelled. And beware of cutting it; for if it is broken, it is made difficult for you to elevate that part and it has come upon the patient through that harm.
And when all of it has been expelled, then place over the part of the plague wool soaked in wine and rose oil and not-rose oil, and dress that so that it may heal.
And if the part is contracted having tortuousness to which there is envelopment in its parts, and it is not according to rectitude as we have said, then you must split that at every part of tortuosity of it and at places of envelopment of it, and then suspend that with nails so that you elevate it all.
And beware of your cutting that you do not cut the vein and that you do not plague it, for it will be difficult for you to elevate it; and exercise your prudence in it.
Form of the incision by which it is dried out:
It is not to be used in this way with nails nor is it of acute extremity so that it does not plague the vein; and it is of gross flexibility, for if it were subtle, it would cut into the vein through its subtlety; there are in it superfluous thicknesses, as we have said.
Of extraction of vein of leg:
This vein is engendered in the legs in warm lands like Atak in the land of Arabs and in warm and arid lands of little tenderness, and in those where there is no grass or tree.
And it is very rarely engendered in other parts of the body besides the legs.
And its gestation is of putrefaction which comes from below the vein like venom inside the body of serpents and worms and scars and worms engendered between the vein and flesh.
And the sign of the occurrence of this disease is that a violent inflammation occurs in the leg, and the site becomes blistered; and then the vein begins to flow from the site of that blister, which looks like it has been burned by a plant.
And then when his feet appear, you should wrap around them a piece of lead weighing two drachms, and tie it and let the lead hang from his leg.
And as many times as you see something coming out of it from outside, wrap that in lead and cut it. And if it is prolonged, then you insert a piece of it and wrap the rest; but do not insert the part that has been cut off, because when it is inserted it contracts and goes into the flesh causing an abscess and pus in the site and a bad ulcer.
So it should be treated gently and extracted little by little, while being pushed out from the back of it, so that it does not pull anything else into the body.
And from this vein some people have had it coming out to be the length of 5 or 10 palms, and I myself have seen one that was 20 palms long.
And if it is cut in the time of its treatment, then you insert a needle into the hole of it and perforate it with a long needle into the body, so that everything that is in the matter is evacuated, and bring about putrefaction of the site for several days with medicines; and then cure it by the cure for abscesses.
And this vein sometimes has bumps, and mostly when it appears at the junction of the leg or in the leg, and there come to it many openings, and it flows from every opening like a ram.
And so you cure that as we have said above, and with what is said above.
Of the cutting of worms generated under the skin and it is called the sickness of cattle.
This disease is called in some lands by the name of "bovine disease" because many times it affects oxen and it is a worm that is born between the skin and the flesh, and goes through all the body pushing and falling, and is made manifest to the sense by moving from one member to another until it breaks the skin and comes out.
And its generation is by putrefaction of some humor so that worms and serpents and roundworms and ascariasis occur in the belly.
And it is feared for its malice, because when it goes into the body and is elevated to the head, and it reaches the heart, then it suddenly pierces in there and destroys the heart, and from there many times.
And so when you want to cure that and extract it, then do not do it unless by the movement of it and its appearance to the sense, and then you tightly press what is above it and what is below it with strong constriction, and then dry over it and extract it.
And if it is hidden in the flesh and you do not touch it, then you put cautery with fire over the site where it resides, and the greater cause that is feared is corruption of it by which the site is corrupted as we have said.
But if you see it having reached the head close to the heart, then press tightly over the forehead with a strong constriction, and then dry over it, and extract it; and let the patient use purification of his body with medicaments that evacuate bad putrid humors, and guard against foods that generate putrefaction.
Of the cutting of the sickness of children.
This disease is called in our land "nafir", and it is a pain that comes in some members, and then it is moved from member to member.
And I have seen it according to what you will tell me. I was called to a sick woman in a village, and I discovered her arm and saw a small inflammation in the vein of the arm, and pus that had come out for an hour, I saw that inflammation going like a worm pushing from one site to another, but more quickly than it could move, like silver when it is drawn from one place to another.
And then it went into the pain of that site and pierced the muscle, and then it stuck there for a while.
And then it went into the other arm as far as the other leg.
And then I saw it revolving throughout his body according to what I saw; and it was too marvelous of the change of it and its speed from member to member. And I had already seen this before in my eyes according to that manner, but I have seen many which carry the pain being moved from member to member. But I did not see it with the arms as with the woman.
And I did not think it was that unless that the woman was of old age, one of whose body and veins were withered away, and in which appeared to the sense that winding movement.
And it is necessary that it does not appear according to this back-cure in those who are delicate and have bodies with hidden veins.
And when you want to cure it and the patient feels that pain, then do not appear to the heart as we have said, but press tightly over that and move below it slightly and dry over it so that the winding contraction is evacuated, and cauterize the site.
But if you do not see it with your eyes, then cure that by excising the body and by evacuating the windings, and cauterize those with smelly pustules and pustules of serapi and similar ones.
Of extracting arrows.
Arrows are diversified according to the species, and according to the parts of the body where they are stuck, because their diversity is that some have great points, and small ones, and concave ones, and smooth ones, and solid ones; and some have three angles, and others have tongues, and still others are astral.
And the signs of the brain are when it sticks into it an arrow and pierces the bone, and there occurs in the head a violent headache, and scotomia, and vertigo, and heat in the eyes, and inflammation and heat in the tongue, and spasms and confusion of mind, and vomiting of bile, and the words are cut off and the voice is destroyed, and pus comes out from the site of the wound moist like milk, and there appear from it marks like drops of blood.
And so if these signs appear to you, then abstain from the cure and extracting of the arrow unless it is out.
But the signs of the arrow when it sticks into the heart are that it is near the left milk vein, and it feels as if it were stuck in a hard cause, and it is not a soft cause; and then the movement of the arrow is like the movement of the pulse, and it runs from the wound black blood, and there appears freezing of the extremities, and fainting, and syncopes; and then you will know that death is coming upon him.
When the arrow has pierced the lung, foam-like blood flows from the wound and the vessels near the neck are swollen; the patient's color changes, he exhales with great effort, and asks for air to breathe.
And if the arrow pierces the membrane in the foot, and the pain is near the small ribs, a great wound with intense pain and sighing occur, and not all the members of the muscles are affected.
And if the arrow pierces the stomach, then a little blood flows from the wound with some indigestible food.
And if the arrow pierces the belly and is stuck in it, blood flows from a wound in the membrane or intestine which has been ruptured, and there is no hope for a cure unless the arrow is removed.
And if the arrow pierces the bladder and urine flows out, and some cause proceeds from it to the genitals, and great pain occurs in the patient, then know that it is fatal.
But the other members such as the face, neck, jaw, shoulders, spine, breastbone, groin, thigh and their like in the members are saved according to the greatest dispositions when the arrow does not hit a vein or artery, and it is not a venomous arrow.
And I will recount to you what I have seen of the nature of these arrows, so that you may understand through this about your treatment.
The cause is that once an arrow pierced the tear duct in the corner of his eye near the nose, and I extracted it from him through the other opening without hurting the eye, and he was healed.
And I extracted another arrow from a Jew who had it in the corner of his eye below the eyelid; the arrow was already concealed and he had only a small end protruding to which some fur stuck, and it was a large arrow of the acute arrows of the Turks with an iron tip shaped like a lion's claw, and there were no eyelids.
And the Jew was saved, and his eye did not suffer any ill effect.
And I extracted another arrow from a Christian man which had pierced his jaw and was an Arabic arrow to which eyelids were attached; then I inserted it between two fingers and it was already submerged in his jaw, and I pulled it out gently and the Christian was healed.
And I extracted another arrow from a man which had pierced his belly, and I thought he would die from it; but then since thirty days passed without any change in his condition according to his dispositions, I inserted my finger into the wound and probed around, and he was healed, and no ill effect occurred to him.
And I saw a man in whom an arrow had pierced his back and the wound was closed over him; but then after fire burned him for seven years, the arrow emerged from the root of his thigh.
And I saw a woman in whom an arrow had pierced her belly and the wound was closed inside her, and she did not change in any of her natural operations for three years, and the woman did not suffer any harm in any of her natural operations.
And I saw another man in whom an arrow had pierced his face and the wound was closed, and the arrow broke but he did not feel pain, and similar things happened to him.
And I extracted an arrow from the prince of the king's son who had it in the bridge of his nose and it had turned slightly to the right; the entire arrow was concealed.
And I was called to heal him when the arrow was extracted after three days.
Then I probed the wound of the arrow gently and he did not feel it, but he felt a pricking under his right eyelid, and then I perceived that this pricking was from the tip of the arrow.
And I applied ointment to the wound with an astringent and digestive mixture, believing that the location would become apparent to me where the arrow was, so it would heal over it.
And no significant incident occurred to the location where the arrow had pierced; and I continued applying the ointment for several days, and no incident occurred; but then the wound closed up, and the piercing was healed over the course of several days until one day he felt the arrow within his nose and notified me.
Then I applied sharp corrosive medicine to the wound for several days until pus opened up; and through probing gently, I discovered the tip of the arrow which was sticking to the bone.
Then I applied that sharp medicine to the wound until it appeared to me visibly, and I waited with it for a period of four months.
Then when the wound was enlarged and I could insert the forceps into it without resistance, and it did not yield to pulling, then I ceased probing gently and began using methods of traction with instruments made for this purpose until one day while working on the wound with these instruments, I extracted the arrow; and then I restored that wound.
And some doctors judged that the cartilage of the nose was not restored, but I restored it and the wound healed over, and the patient was entirely healthy and did not suffer in any way.
And I recommend to you the quality of extracting some arrows so that you understand the rule and significance of what I have not said, for the parts of this article and its definitions are not comprehended by narration nor understood by the mind.
And the wise craftsman compares a little with much; and from that which is present to that which is absent, and finds a new operation and an unknown instrument, he infers the descent of strange causes when it happens.
Therefore I say that arrows are not extracted from the parts in which they are stuck, but according to two methods: either by attraction of the location where they pierce, or by repulsion from the other side.
And that which is stuck by the location it enters is an arrow proceeding from a fleshy location and is pulled and extracted.
And if it does not yield to being pulled at the hour in which it pierces, then cover it for several days until the flesh around it becomes swollen and the entrance of it is pushed out and its exit.
And similarly if it is stuck in bones and does not yield to you, then leave it for several days and repeat pulling and motion on each day, and it is extracted.
And if it does not yield to you after several days, then cover that you pierce around the arrow in that bone on all sides with a subtle bore until the location is enlarged by the arrow, and then extract it.
But if the arrow is deeply lodged in the body and feels sensitive, then you should probe it with a thin instrument suitable for extraction.
And if you cannot access it due to the tightness of the flesh and the length of the arrowhead, and there are no bones or nerves or veins in the way, then you should cut through the flesh around the arrowhead so that it is loose enough for extraction.
And if there are nails holding it in place, then you should loosen the flesh around them with any instrument you can find; and if you cannot access the nail itself due to the swelling of the flesh or the torque on the nail, then cut through the swollen flesh around the nail so that it can be removed.
And when you are extracting the arrow from any part of the body, use your hand and forceps with all your strength to pull it out; and if it is difficult to remove due to its position, then cut through the flesh around it with a sharp instrument so that it can be removed easily without breaking.
And if you cannot reach it at that moment, then leave it for a few days until the swelling around it goes down, and then try again when it is less difficult to reach. But if you are facing a flow of blood, then treat it as we have described in the relevant chapter.
And be careful not to cut any veins or nerves, or damage any internal organs; use all the methods we have described to you with caution, and do so slowly, calmly, and firmly, as we have instructed.
And when you are pulling out the arrow, make sure that the patient is in a position that allows for easy removal of the arrow, as this will be more beneficial for them. But if this is not possible for you, then do what you can according to the figures provided.
But arrows that are shot in the opposite direction, or those that have already exited one side and entered another, or those that cause pain when they are pulled from the upper part of the body, then you should cut off their tip; and you will know where to cut according to how much space there is between the jaws of your forceps; and then pull it out, as this will make extraction easier.
But if it is lodged in the bone, then you should twist a wire in the opposite direction to how the arrow is embedded in the bone, and increase the pressure until it becomes loose, and then pull it out.
And if not, then leave it for a few days, and then try again when it has become looser.
And if the shaft of the arrow is inside him, then you should push it out.
But if the shaft is broken and you want to administer an injection, then insert it into the hollow shaft of the arrow and push it through so that it exits through the tip.
But if the arrow is hollow, then push it out with a strong instrument inserted into it, as the arrow will be pushed out by this action.
And if the arrow is poisoned, then you must cut away all the flesh around it that has been infected by the poison, as far as you can; and then treat it with what is appropriate.
And if the arrow pierces the foot, or stomach, or bladder, or side, and you can touch it with your fingers, then cut through the flesh around it so that you can reach it; be careful not to cut any veins or nerves, and then pull it out, and close the wound if necessary, and treat it until it is healed.
The shape of the forceps used for pulling out arrows:
If you are unable to remove the arrow due to some contrary cause, then leave it for a few days or weeks, and then try again when it has become looser. The ends of the forceps should be shaped like an owl's beak, with teeth that grip the arrow so that it does not slip out.
And they should be made in different sizes, large and small, depending on the size of the arrow, the thickness of the flesh, the width of the wound, and the tightness of the area.
It should be shaped like a ray so that it pushes against the arrow inside the hollow shaft and is pushed out by this action.
From phlebitis of the veins.
The veins of phlebitis from which blood usually flows are . which are in the head . There are two pulsating veins which are near the eyes, called alhasisain; two herbs that appear on both temples; and two veins on the two lacrimal bones of the two sockets which are called aspicientz; and a vein in the middle of the forehead; and a vein on the tip of the nose; and two guids that are on the neck; and two veins on the upper lip; and two veins on the lower lip; and — these are the veins that are called algelic —; and two veins below the tongue. But the veins that are phlebitic in the arms are 5. But one of those is cephalica, and it is derived from the basilic vein; and the people call it “the vein of the head”, and it is hollow, and is a small vein, and it is composed of one branch of the basilic vein, and another branch of the cephalica; and the people call it “the vein of the whole body”, and basilic is the vein that is paused on the domestic side, and it is called “citellar”, and the vulgarians call it “the vein of the belly”; and funis of the arm, and it is paused above the elbow, and it is the one through which phlebitis appears, and it is the one that appears on the hand by obvious manifestation; and salvatella, and it is the vein between the small finger and the little finger, and there are two branches.
And in the foot and leg there are three veins; one of them is below the curve of the jaw on the side of the jaw; and the second is sophena, and its location is below the calf of the domestic side; and the sciatic vein, and its location is below the calf of the side of the jaw; and in the calf there are other similar veins.
The healing of the veins that are near the eyes is from old catarrh and migraine and bad old ulcers of the head.
And the way to make them bleed is according to what you recommend: it is to wash the head of the patient, and to rub the head of the patient in the occipital region where both veins are with a large cloth with good friction; then tighten the patient's neck with a bandage so that the two spots appear on either side of the head; and feel them with your fingers, and if you feel their pulses with your fingers, here is a sign with the touch.
Then you take the scalpel that is appropriate, and it is that one which is inserted below the vein in the groin where the phlebotomy comes to the bone. And then you raise your hand with the vein and the groin towards the parts above, and cut the vein with an appropriate incision. And let the length of the incision be as much as two fingers, more or less, according to this; and let the blood flow out as much as you want.
And then strengthen it with powdered styptic and let that one be healed.
And I have already described in the beginning of the book the incision of these and their cautery.
But from the two veins of arteries that are in the temples, the youthfulness of phlebotomy is ancient, and it is an old evil and persistent eye disease and a sharp body of acute superfluous fluids flowing into the eyes.
And the quality of phlebotomies of these is according to what the eye shows you: tighten the patient's neck in such a way that the two veins appear to the sense by manifest appearance, and let there be demonstrated their pulse below your finger; then you touch with your needle.
And then you raise the groin above the vein towards the parts above with your index finger, and insert phlebotomy below, cutting in, and raise the vein upwards; and cut that one as well as you have done for the other two veins; and let the blood flow out according to the quantity of your need.
And then loosen the constriction of the patient, and place your finger on the vein for one hour, and then place on that one a little cut and styptic and strengthen that above with strong constriction, and let that be healed.
And the remembrance of them, and of those the incision, and the attraction are already described in the beginning of the book.
And therefore the youthfulness of phlebotomy of the vein of the forehead is appropriately phlebotomy of the cephalic one for ancient diseases of the face, and for emigration and redness and festering ulcers.
And the quality of its phlebotomy is according to what the eye shows you; it is that the patient tightens his neck with a bandage in such a way that the vein appears, and then take the instrument which is named "fossory", of which this is the form:
Place the tip which is at the head of the fossory on that vein and punch it with a needle or other cause in its manner, and let the blood flow out according to the quantity you want; then loosen the perforation of the patient and strengthen that so it is healed.
And sometimes it is opened with phlebotomy on the side, however, do not believe that phlebotomy should be of acute extremity like other phlebotomies; but let it be of lateral extremity, and cut that according to its cross-section because the bone is near and would break it into it when it is subtile.
But the youthfulness of the two veins which are in the tear-glands of the two eyes for roughness of the eye, redness and discharge from the eyes, and for diseases of the face.
And the quality of its phlebotomy is that the patient tightens his neck with a bandage; then phlebotomize those, and you stand over him.
And let phlebotomy be done according to its cross-section in length with a little bit of phlebotomy, because there is no flesh at that place; and if the phlebotomy is subtile, its extremity is easily broken.
And then let the blood flow out as much as it is necessary to you, and place on those a little cut, and strengthen them for one night; then loosen them.
But the phlebotomy of the vein of the nose is appropriate for acute fever and vehement pain, and diseases of the face, emigration, redness that happens in the face, especially when it is old.
And the quality of its phlebotomy is that the patient tightens his neck and then hold his nose with your left hand, and take the phlebotomy subtile and long, and insert it into the middle place of the head of the nose according to straightness, because the vein does not appear here to the sense, and because the blood begins to flow immediately.
Believe that you finish your hand with the phlebotomy little by little and let the blood flow out according to your need; then tie that for one night, because that is restored quickly.
But the youthfulness of phlebotomy of the two ears is for constriction of ale and for beginning of leprosy, and for many diseases, and impetigo, and bad festering corrosive ulcers like with hydropathy.
And the quality of phlebotomies of these is that the patient tightens each one in his neck with a bandage; then let the artisan stand over him, and the patient sit on a stool.
And then phlebotomize the vein in length with wide and little phlebotomy; then draw blood according to the amount of temperature or according to what you see is needed, and then do likewise for the other vein.
And then loosen the bandage and strengthen these two veins with mild constriction so that the patient is not suffocated, and let it be until the wound is healed.
And the youthfulness of phlebotomy of the veins of the ears, confers to small abscesses and pustules of the mouth and corruption of the gums and bad ulcers, and to bad ulcers which are in the nose and its circumference.
And the quality of phlebotomies of these is that the patient opens his mouth in front of you, and tighten his neck with a bandage, and then turn back his lips and look at two veins from which one is on the right side of the lip and the second is on the left; and its demonstration is by the darkness of both of them, and it is more so because in the circumference of those are small black veins; then cut each one with an appropriate incision.
But if doubt is under you, and you do not know which one it is, then pay attention to the incision of the largest one of them, and to the pus that is manifest from them.
And do likewise for the two veins that are in the lips below.
But for two veins that are under the tongue its youthfulness is appropriately phlebotomy of the cephalic one for constrictions which are in the gullet, for disease of the uvula, and diseases of the mouth.
And the quality of phlebotomies of these is that you follow the patient between your fingers in front of the sun, and raise his tongue, and look under his tongue, from one side of him there is a vein, and from the other side there is a vein, and the color of each one declines to black.
And then phlebotomize each one; and pay attention that you do not finish your hand in phlebotomizing them because below those are arteries.
And your veins which are phlebotomized in the head are those which flow in all men, and phlebotomy of them is done according to two manners, either by putting on the phlebotomy myrtilat or olive at declining subtility; or cut with a pointed scalpel, and it is called if it is not fast, and this is its form:
It is better to open those veins that are on the side of his body, and it is fitting to open those concave veins that contain thick blood.
And this bloodletting is of lesser width and more subtle extremity, and it is fitting to open the more delicate veins that contain less thick blood.
But the advantage of bloodletting from the basilic vein, which is one of three veins: because it draws out the blood of maladies that are beneath the throat and neck, and that affect the feet and belly.
And it is fitting for the bloodletter, when he performs that bloodletting, to guard well against that artery and be very careful, because beneath it there is an artery, and if he err and pierce into the puncturing of the bloodletting, it will cut into that artery and cause a flow of blood, so that one must not perform that bloodletting with a piercing instrument, but rather with a cutting instrument.
And if the basilic vein does not appear through a manifest appearance, then one should leave it and move to the other, or seek out its branch; or that one should bloodlet in the end of the arm, for that is manifest. And one should cut that with a cutting instrument as we have said.
But if you wish to perform the bloodletting from the vein of the forearm, then one should touch the location between the wrist and the location of the pulse, and one should press hard upon it with a ligature; and one should tie off the arm and cut the vein with a concave cut with a piercing instrument as we have said, and be careful that you do not pierce into the artery in any space within the location of the artery.
And when you see, while tightening the ligature, that there is a swelling in the location which you have pressed with the ligature, then that swelling is of the artery and therefore you should avoid it.
And if you see the blood flowing in the bloodletting as though it were an infant's urine, and the blood is a thick red, then know that it is of the artery; and therefore you should stop it and place your finger over it for a long space, and one should press hard with the finger, and if the blood is stopped, even after several pressings, then one should tighten the arm and leave it.
And one must guard against the movement of the patient, and be very careful with him and not harm him for several days until he is healed.
But if the blood is not stopped and you see that there is no medicine for it, then one should cut into the artery if it appears to you; because its extremity is contracted and the blood is stopped; or take a piece of linen and bind it around the location of the vein with a descending binding with a ligature between the days.
And if the blood is stopped then it is good, and if not, then one should cure that with what it came from, to the reminder of the location of the powders that stop the flow of blood.
And the stopping of the blood is difficult in many dispositions because of the small location of the vein and the possibility of binding of the arm.
But from the dark vein bloodletting is advantageous in that it draws out the blood from the superior part of the head and the inferior parts of the body; because it is composed of a branch of the basilic vein and a branch of the cephalic vein as we have said.
And one must be careful in the bloodletting of the arm, for beneath it is a nerve; and therefore if you pierce into the puncturing of the bloodletting and cut the nerve, stupor will occur to him, and it is difficult for him to heal, and sometimes he does not heal at all. And this nerve sometimes appears to certain men and is subtle and not manifest, then one should pause in the bloodletting with the instrument by which one bloodlets with a cut, and avoid the nerve with one's strength.
And if the vein is between two nerves, then one should cut the vein in its length.
The advantage of bloodletting from the cephalic vein is that it draws out the blood from the head and aids in maladies of the eyes.
And one must be careful in this, if you wish to bloodlet with a piercing instrument or with an olive instrument; for it is the safest of all veins because it does not contain any artery or nerve beneath it.
But nevertheless it rarely occurs in some men when it is not bloodlet over the first piercing, but rather one notes that apostema over it.
The first of these is that one must know that bloodletting is not administered save in the conservation of health and for hope of it and precaution against occurrence of maladies, and that bloodletting be made in one of the veins which are in the head: cephalic, dark and basilic; and that bloodletting be made at the commencement of spring, over breakfast in spring and autumn, and in winter near to the eating, when signs of fullness appear.
And it be made bloodletting and the third day or the first more that three hours of the day have passed.
But bloodletting which is administered, but when it provokes convenience and necessity for it, or at night or by day, at any hour and at any time.
And let the infant not be bloodlet until he has reached twelve years, and a woman who is pregnant not be bloodlet except in her fourth month between the seventh month; and the aged should not be bloodlet who have passed sixty years.
And when someone wishes to be bloodlet for any reason, one must cleanse the intestines before bloodletting with a lion clister, if in them there is a deep split, so that the veins do not push out the superfluities in the bloodletting of the intestines which are cleared and that they do not harm the principal members.
And let the bloodlet not be made for patients who are new sick with a fever and vomiting, nor from any malady or drunkenness unless it has been removed from them, nor from bad breath nor from an ache in which there is a pain of the colon and vomiting, nor from a headache or colic, nor from throwing up, nor from a bellyache, nor from multiplication of cough or of work or of watching over meals or of vigils, or from any cause that dissolves the virtue, nor from a body or animal.
And consider in the subtlety of humors before that if the blood is thick with food and drink, with medicines if it is possible for it.
And enter into a bath if any cause does not prohibit it, or be exercised by some exercise so that the blood is sottilized.
And pause the bloodletting of him in the afternoon, so it is around the hour of terce, as we have said.
And let the foot of him be guarded in that day from all accidents of bodily things, as though it were anguish, anger, fear, and from all accidents of members, as though it were travail and excessive pain and cough and appearance to them.
And in his service let the causes be present, in the use of which men usually have aromaticity and odorant, and balsams and likenesses according to the quantity of possibility.
And follow the bloodletting person on a cushion that is placed higher than the cushion of the one who should be bled.
Then pull out his arm, and the bloodletting person rubs it with his hand two or three times; then tighten the bandage and wrap the patient two times.
And the constriction should be moderate, because when the constriction is uneven, or the constriction is due to superfluity, then blood flow is prohibited; or it is due to softening, and then the body's blood-letting is prohibited.
And for the constriction, let the one who is to be bled rub his hands together between which the veins are swollen and are made clear by feeling.
And let the bloodletting person anoint his blade with a little ancient oil properly; and then place his finger of the left hand over that vein, below the place from which he wants the phlebotomy, so that the vein escapes a little, and the pulse is quieted because some veins are compressed like cords when they flee from the phlebotomy, and from those is full of windiness, and when you pause the phlebotomy over that one it is contracted due to the phlebotomy, and is revealed the bloodletting person; and the phlebotomy does not open the vein, and if it opens that one is constricted.
And therefore, let the bloodletting person be stopped and be solicitous in all these causes.
And then pause the phlebotomy, but if the vein is opened in one go, then good; and if not, you iterate that or another go below that place a little, or on it with compression, if the place is not apoplectic.
And if the place is apoplectic, or the patient becomes frightened, then you leave it for one or two days, and do not tighten the bandage, because soon the apoplexy will be cauterized, nor enter the bath.
And then iterate the phlebotomy if it is needed.
And if the incision is small and the blood flows subtley, and you fear that it will not draw blood in the quantity that you want, then you iterate the phlebotomy in that wound according to rectitude and adjust in the incision a little, and do that with compression before the place is apoplectic, because the place is apoplectic in most men due to small incisions.
But if you have already apoplectic that one, then do not iterate on it, because it does not excuse you for any cause; and pause over that some part of the wound-oil, because it stimulates the body's blood. And it is better in that place than other oils.
And similarly administer the wound-oil in all phlebotomies by which phlebotomize the veins due to the prohibition of the body' blood, and they do that theriac and almandine when it is paused of one of those over the place, because the blood is subtilized and is rolled when it is thick.
And if in the place of phlebotomy a large apoplexy is engendered, because many goings-over happen, and more so to that one which has not been bled but that going-over, or in the incision of the vein little, then you cut it, and pause over the place sponge infused in water and salt, a little scorched, and tighten that for one hour, because it is dissolved.
And let him do that who makes the letting of the blood from that vein with completion of it or another vein.
And if there remains in the place for several days some blackness or green, do not mark that; and if you want, pause over that some cause of aloe and myrrh dissolved, or some cause of juice of mallow or of galangal or similar to it.
And many times happen apoplexies and eminences due to phlebotomy of the basilic.
And therefore pause your hand over that, and if you then cause softness due to your compression over that, then that eminence is wicked and bad; and so guard yourself from pausing over that any cause of what we have said, because it will soon flow blood from the artery.
And do plaster with that in which is stipitated, so that the place be hardened, and then cure that with the other cure until it is healed.
And let him withdraw blood from all men according to the quantity of his strength and according to the colour prevailing over the blood according as it appears.
For if the blood is black, then let it be let out until it is red; and similarly if you see it thick, then let it be let out until it is subtilized; and similarly if it is sharp, let it be let out until the acuteness of it is eased.
And let him to whom it is full and strong and has need of withdrawal of blood in one go that the phlebotomy of the vein be amplified and the phlebotomy be long.
And in him who is feeble, let the contrary of that be done, and let him withdraw that in several goings-over, and let the incision be tight.
And the best that is administered in phlebotomy of vein is that it be the transverse section, not puncture.
And this manner of phlebotomy is safe from flow of blood and incision of nerve, and it is more possible and safer than phlebotomy according to length and breadth.
And to whom is accustomed to occur syncope due to phlebotomy, and let you cure that before the phlebotomy with a little bread infused in wine of grains or of simple unheated oxymel; and withdraw from him blood in three or four goings-over.
And if it is paleness of complexion, then take before the phlebotomy bread infused in myrrh syrup or in aromatic syrup and many spices thus with pepper, cinnamon, ginger and similar, or in aromatic syrup and many odorous things.
And if there occurs syncope due to phlebotomy and it is cause of it withdrawal of much blood, then let him take drinking water of meat and syrup odorous subtle; and use of aromatization with alder-tree, and may his feet be wrapped in that.
And use the other causes that we have said in the division in the chapter of syncope for evacuation.
And who wants to vent his arms and dissolve his blood second going-over, let him of whom the phlebotomy is for great evacuation, and whose strength is feeble, let him evacuate blood little by little according to the quantity of his strength in the continuing days.
But who wants to vent his arms and let his blood second time, and whose body is strong, then do that properly seven or nine hours or ten from the first phlebotomy.
But who wants to withdraw blood from his body contrary to the part to which he declines, let him be vented on the second day or third.
But the body in which there is much blood already scorched and is acute and fever occurs, let him be bled once going-over and may great quantity be taken from him and the incision be amplified where syncope happens, because you have preserved all the conditions of phlebotomy; and let your hand pause over his pulse due to the body's blood, so that it does not fall into death in place of syncope, for many times this happens when the phlebotomist is ignorant and negligent.
When you want to release the arm and evacuate the blood a second time, when the opening of the vein is already closed and the flow of blood has become difficult, you should press firmly on it with your hand, and its extension should be bent slightly, for this is very bad.
If the bleeding has not stopped completely, and there remains some quickness of the flow due to coagulated blood in the opening of the vein, put on it a little teriaca or sageneum, and press gently over that until the blood has been extracted.
And if the vein is inflamed, then leave it untouched until the inflammation has subsided.
And if you are compelled to evacuate the blood a second time, and there is no excuse, then you should open it in that place or on the other arm into another vein.
And the vein called "sleeve of the arm" is opened near the crease or the basilic, when they are not found or are hidden, for it consists of these.
And the quality of the phlebotomy for him is that he immerses his hand in warm water until the vein becomes distended and appears visibly.
Then it is pressed tightly over that with a ligature, not longitudinally but according to its small cross-section.
And the opening should be ample, and your phlebotomy should be at the junction of the hand, a little one.
And if the flow of blood is prohibited, then you should immerse his hand in the warm water and let the blood run into the water until you achieve your need.
But if you are in the days of summer, then you are excused from immersing his hand in warm water; and the blood is put into warm water in wintertime.
And the phlebotomy of this vein is safer than all other veins, for beneath it there is no pulsating vein nor nerve.
And the phlebotomy of the crook of the right hand is related to diseases of the liver.
And the quality of the phlebotomy for him is that you should press his hand with a ligature or your hand, after immersing it in warm water, until the vein becomes distended and appears visibly; and phlebotomize it transversely; and if you cut into it it will not harm it in any way.
And beware of not completing the phlebotomy with your hand, for beneath are the nerves of the teeth, bared of flesh.
And you should immerse his hand in the warm water and let the blood run into that, for if you do not immerse his hand in the warm water, the blood will coagulate at the opening of the vein, and flow is prohibited.
And when the blood has been extracted according to the quantity of need, then you should put oil and salt over the vein so that it is not congealed tightly; and similarly, do this in every branch that is cut.
But the youthfulness of the phlebotomy of that of the left hand is related to diseases of the brain.
And do similarly in the phlebotomy for him as you have done in the other.
And the youthfulness of the vein sephena of the phlebotomy is to diseases that are in the lower part of the body, as well as diseases of the mother, and to retention of menses, and to diseases of the lungs and ulcers of thighs and legs, and their like of diseases.
And the quality of the phlebotomy for him is that he immerses his foot in warm water and makes friction over it until the veins appear; and tie over the crease of the foot with a ribbon; and the location of the vein is indicated by the tip of your finger, and from that it branches into the facia of the foot.
And therefore phlebotomize the most ample branch, or beneath the leg just below the ankle, for that is better and more useful.
And if you phlebotomize that in the facia of the foot, then beware of the nerves which are beneath it on the facia of the foot; and put your phlebotomy at the place where you would phlebotomize it across, as if you were cutting into it.
And let the phlebotomies be mild.
But if the flow of blood is prohibited, then you should immerse his foot in the warm water and let the blood run into that until it has been evacuated.
And if the phlebotomizer has erred in the first time, then repeat with the phlebotomy a little lower, for the location is safe; and do not fear him at all, but beware of the nerves as we have said before.
And similarly do to the sophena of the other foot likewise.
And for the sciatic vein, the location is as we have said before, just below the ankle of the hind part.
And the youthfulness of the phlebotomy for him is to pain in the hip when it is from blood-heat.
And the quality of the phlebotomy for him is that he should enter into a bath, and hasten to strike the head of his toe of the broad side underneath four nails in one slender band, for it does not appear except by this.
And when it appears, then phlebotomize that according to whatever angle is possible to you and according to the transverse; and it is better; or cut into it with an incision or pierce it by piercing, for the location of him is safe.
And it is in most men hidden; and if you cut into that, and it does not appear at all to your feeling, then phlebotomize some branch of him, and it is that which appears on the top of the foot between the little finger and the ring finger.
And beware of the nerves; and let the blood run in the quantity that you want.
And then loosen the ligature and put a bandage over the location of the phlebotomy tightly, for usually it heals quickly.
Of wind-making and of the qualities of using those.
Wounds are of horns, or of nails, or of a stone.
And wound-making is done according to two methods; one of them is with scarification and drawing out blood, and the other is wound-making without scarification.
And this wound-making that is without scarification is according to two methods, for there is with fire or without fire.
And to the wounds that are administered with scarification and drawing out blood there are xii locations of the body, one of which is where ventozas are paused on the forehead, and it is the hindmost part of the head; and the middle location of them is between two parts of the neck, and the front location of the face below the jawbone just below the mouth; and ventozas of two spatulas; and ventozas of alohoster, and it is over the end of the throat; and ventozas of two fingernails, and they are on two arms; and ventozas of two cavilhas.
And wound-making without drawing out blood is only of the veins slender and scattered in the flesh, and for that there is no virtue by them, as it is cauterization; nor should wound-making be done with fire or without fire in any disease made from repletion until the whole body has been evacuated.
But if necessity provokes wound-making for disease or for continuous, administer it at the beginning of the month and in the end of him, and in the middle location of him and in whatever time it is.
And therefore, whenever it happens due to one of these causes, and especially if it occurs on the third or fifteenth day of the month, then they command that a bloodletting should be performed after two or three hours have passed during the day.
And it is helpful to let blood from the nape of the neck when there is heaviness in the head and when it sinks into the eyes; but make sure that it is a complete evacuation of the entire body.
And this bleeding is in the place of phlebotomy of the cephalic vein.
And it is not recommended to use bloodletting on someone who has a complicated fever or catarrh, as it will cause great harm to them.
And because of this, one should not use bloodletting on the elderly and on those with cool diseases.
But if someone is experiencing continuous fainting due to it, then you should command the bloodletter to place his hand lightly on the wound with the cup, fearing the occurrence of fainting.
But bloodletting from the elbow is in the place of phlebotomy of the basilic vein and the cephalic vein: and because of this, it helps with asthma, and with the constriction of the larynx and the split of the instrument of the larynx, and with coughing, and with fullness.
And it should be applied lightly to the elbow, because if it is applied too low, it generates weakness in the body and in the stomach.
And bloodletting from the temples helps with accidental pains in the head and with ophthalmia, and emigration, and pre-fainting, and pains in the roots of the teeth; and it is in the place of phlebotomy of the basilic vein.
And you should command the bloodletter not to press his hand after scarification so that he does not cut the artery and cause excessive bleeding.
And bloodletting below the chin helps with a cough in the mouth, and corruption of the gums, and appearances of diseases that are in the mouth, and they stand in the place of phlebotomy of Aliheric which are on both lips.
But bloodletting that is performed above the two spatulas helps with headache, which is caused by fullness of heat.
And bloodletting from the two sides of the inside of the lips provides relief from phlebotomy of three veins, namely the basilic vein, the cephalic vein, and the small veins in between that bring blood to those three veins.
And command the bloodletter not to cut too deeply in scarification, because the place is deprived of flesh, and below it are nerves and arteries.
And it is a bloodletting performed above the anus, and it helps with hemorrhoids of the buttocks, and with ulcers that are lower down.
And you should command the bloodletter to make a large cupping glass, and that it be of earth, because the place needs strong incision; and strongly draw with subtle cupping glasses, and let it be scarified with scarification.
But cupping glasses of the legs should be made smaller for obvious reasons, because they will draw blood from throughout the body, and help with old pains in the knees and the hip, and the bladder; and they provoke menstruation, and help with constipation and diarrhea; and they stand in place of phlebotomy of two saphenous veins, and the groin vein, and two small veins.
However, they weaken the entire body and can cause syncope in many people.
And the benefit of cupping glasses on the groin is similar to the benefit of cupping glasses on the two legs.
And the quality of the position of the cupping glasses is that you should apply the cupping glass at the beginning while the skin is dry and suck with a gentle suction, and not prolong the position of the cupping glasses, but apply them gently, and let the humors come to the surface evenly. And do not cease to repeat this and continue until he sees the place already turning red and inflated, and appearing with redness of blood.
Then you should scarify and gently apply suction little by little, and then consider the disposition of the body.
Because a person who has tender skin in few places, you should scarify him once and not more, so that the place is not ulcerated.
And command the bloodletter to deepen the scarification and take a little, and moderate the suction with ease.
And if the blood is thick, then let him scarify two cupping glasses, because in the first cupping glass, he opens the way to the flow of blood and moisture within it. But in the second, he pursues the extraction of thick blood.
And if the blood is very foul, then let a third cupping glass be performed so that he achieves the end.
Finally, when we want to extract the blood little by little or a little at a time, it is enough to have one scarification.
And if we want an extraction of much blood, let us scarify with many cupping glasses; and if we know that the blood is thick, then let us scarify with deep scarification.
And the term of scarification in which it is the depth of the incision so little only.
And if that of which the skin is thick, tough, dark, and its pores are narrow, let the places of the cupping glasses be anointed gently, opened widely, and resolved; if it is in summer time, also with oil of aloe or oil of violets, or oil of bitter almonds, or oil of cedar wood; and if it is in winter time, then oil of nutmeg, or oil of larkspur, or oil of camomile, or blood, and to those similar.
And if the superfluity is thick, tough, then let the oil be of myrrh, or oil of balsamita, or oil of aloe, or oil of anise, and to those similar.
But if the bloodletter has ample pores of tender skin, then let oil be prohibited from him, and let the places of cupping glasses to which the cupping is applied be washed with water or warm water of saltpeter, or water of cedar wood, or water of camomile, or water of borage, and similar.
And for the one whose blood is of great humidity, wash their cupping glasses with sharp wine, or water of myrrh and sumach, and similar to those.
And for the one whose superfluities are thick, wash their cupping glasses with old wine, or water of sage, which is marjoram, or of fennel, or of camomile, and to those similar.
And let the cupping be kept before bathing; having them let it be administered close to taking a bath for one hour or two, and let him sleep after the cupping.
What is it that must be regulated, the wind or phlebotomy before windsucking?
Now consider at the beginning: if the windsucker or he who is to bleed is choleric and has hot blood and inflammation on him, then take causes of cooling, such as with milky acetic things, and endive in wine, and lettuce, and sesame, and julep, and like things.
And serve him foods such as poultry, and meat from birds that are served whole, and seasoned foods with vinegar, and like things.
And for one whose complexion is hot, take in drinking honeyed water or water of sesame seeds with hemp seed, and sumach, and wine with a little scent between vinegar and oil; and let him be commended to use restraint in drinking and eating, and serve his food poultry and meat and peppers and small birds and pigeons.
And let him drink more than he eats on the day of windsucking and bleeding.
And let him be given to drink at certain hours by some men thyme, or medicine of musk, as it is musked, or alcelite before windsucking or bleeding, so that the principal members are comforted and the blood is subtleized; and do not take what wounds them.
But the wounds that are made without scarification are those placed upon the liver, and on the gallbladder, and on the umbilical region, and at the joints of the bones, and on the navel, because these members do not suffer scarification.
And it is not desired for those but attraction of blood from members, as they put a cupping glass on the breast in a sickness of flux of blood of the blood of the nose; and they use that so that subtleized windiness viscous inside the member, as they place it upon the belly and navel; because that rarefies the member and cuts it and removes pain because it resolves windiness.
And it is also placed on the testicles when they grow in their swelling or pimple, because by virtue of strong attraction, their hernia is quickly reduced and the pimple is eradicated from its place.
And similarly it does when it is placed on the liver and gallbladder, it removes windiness in those who are enclosed.
And these wounds are administered dry with only sucking; and some are administered with fire.
And some are administered full of water in illnesses of the gallbladder.
And this is why the cupping glass is filled and that there is great pus, it is water with herbs in which are cut according to what is convenient.
Form of a cupping glass administered with fire: let the aperture be the width of two fingers, according to how we have formed it; and let the quantity of the wound be the size of the palm; and let it be on its side, in the place where there is circuit, the size of itself, the cut be small according to the quantity that goes into it a needle.
Let it be made of copper or citrine, with thick margins, lion, enemas and tertian fever so that it does not harm the member over which it is placed.
And let there be at its center a transverse wedge of copper or iron, where is placed a candle with fire.
And let this cupping glass be greater than that which we have recommended; and the little less of it according to illnesses and the state of him who uses it.
And the cupping glasses for children and weakened ones are smaller than those for the young and large-bodied ones.
And the quality of placing this cupping glass with fire on a member is that it extends the heat with fire from wood decently before a little candle of wax, and place that over the center of the transverse wedge in the middle place of the cupping glass, so that the fire is lit around the bottom part so that the patient's body is not burned.
And then it is placed on the member of the patient, and the finger is over the cut we have said, as long as when we hold the cupping glasses and do not feel the finger and that the vapor rises over that cut, then the cupping glass dissolves immediately.
And propine the heat according to his manner, and repeat that if he feels need of it.
But in a cupping glass that is administered in the illness of pleurisy with water, in which there is no transverse wedge or cut, and it is not administered unless it is filled with water, and it is placed on the member only.
And this is its form: And this cupping glass when it is greater, so much the better, because it can receive great quantity of water.
Chapter .xcvii.
Leechwort is not administered in small members but in members in which it is not possible to place cupping glasses, because of the smallness of those, as with the finger and gingiva and like things; or in a member stripped of flesh, as with the toe and nose and like things.
And the quality of using those that if you have found leeches that are in the doubled waters of boiling and cleaning.
And then they are left the day and night in water doubled so that they become fat, and that no cause is broken in their bellies from those; and then the body is evacuated at the beginning with bleeding and with cupping glasses; and then the member of the patient is rubbed so that it reddens; and then they are placed on it.
And when they are full and closed.
And if it is possible to suck the place with a cupping glass, it is better afterwards in youth.
And if not, then wash the place with wine and then with warm water; and let it be rubbed and squeezed.
And if the course of the blood is prolonged by the placement of leeches and that is oozing out, then you pour a cloth of linen in warm water, and place it over so that it covers the oozing; and let this be done repeatedly until it is stopped.
And if the blood is profuse, then powder is sprinkled over it vitriol bruised, or gallnuts and like things of the causes astringent, so that the blood is stopped; or they are placed on the place the greatest pods of beans roasted, and they are left so that the beans adhere to the place, and the blood is stopped.
And if it is necessary, repetition of leeches is possible when it can be moved.
And if the leeches are prohibited from suspension, then let the place be rubbed with fresh blood or stick a needle in the places where blood oozes out; and then they are placed, for those when I feel some blood it is stopped immediately.
And when you want them to stop, powder over them a little aloe bruised, or salt, or ashes, and stop immediately.
Thus begins the treatment of the third part: of restoration. This chapter is many times necessary in the art of medicine; and it is restoration of fracture and of dislocation accidental in the bones.
Or, son, wise ones that know themselves of this chapter the foolish physicians and the vulgar ones and those who some time did not guard the books of the Ancients nor read from them a letter.
And for this cause is made that this manner of the wise ones in our land is private; and I have not obliged it at any time by anyone; and I have not used it except through length of reading of the books of the Ancients and study on the understanding of those, so that I extracted the science from them.
And I have directed my attention towards experience and study throughout the length of my life.
I have already described in this chapter all that my knowledge and experience tell me about this subject; for I have now shortened it for you and relieved you of the trouble of reading a long passage, and clarified it by summing up its meaning, just as I have done in the two preceding chapters.
Chapter One:
Summary and collection of the things that must be known beforehand about fractures of bones, from which precedes the discussion of the healing of broken members, each according to its kind. Let us therefore take up in the proemium of this chapter those things pertaining to speech, and those chapters that are necessary for understanding the truth about these matters; you and those who are skilled in this noble art will be able to understand them promptly, as well as others who may be learning it.
And so I say that when a fracture or dislocation or twisting or displacement occurs, you must first consider using cauterization, or bandaging it, or any other treatment, unless some other condition prohibits it, as well as considering the debility of the patient's strength, or whether the injury is to an infant, or an elderly person, or whether it happens during a period of intense heat or intense cold.
Then the patient should eat a diet of fresh herbs and bird flesh and crab meat; and he should abstain from fatty meats and starchy foods, and from all foods that fill the veins with blood, as long as you can be sure that there will be no pus forming in cauterized wounds, and unless you fear the effusion of matter into the affected limb.
Then return the patient to his usual diet, from which he deviated because of his illness.
And so when the broken bone begins to heal, then let the patient be fed with nourishing and substantial foods that are moist and heavy, such as those made from wheat flour cooked in water, rice, peas, beef, mutton, chicken, fresh fish, wine, and similar drinks; and by following this regimen, the fracture will heal sooner and better.
And know that the bones of old people and children will never completely heal and be consolidated according to their nature due to the drying out of their limbs.
But Nature adjusts and brings together the broken bone from every side by a kind of glue that adheres and binds it together until it reaches the end of its strength and firmness, just as fire does at first, unless some condition prohibits it from doing so.
And for this reason, it is necessary to feed the patient foods that are heavy and viscous and thick, as we have said.
And know that the kinds of fractures are different according to the difference in limbs, for a fracture of the bone in the leg is different from a fracture of the bone in the head; and a fracture of the bone in the foot is different from a fracture of the bone in the hand; and likewise all the other limbs differ among themselves.
And I have covered the recollection of every kind of fracture, expounded in its own distinct chapter from the others.
There is a difference among fractures according to where they occur. And the kinds of fractures of bones differ according to their locations; for some occur in an arched manner and others in stars; and there are fractures according to the length of the bone, such as those that happen in the fingers, and these are the fractures of the metatarsus and phalanges, whether proceeding or not proceeding from another, just as they are when writing is prepared on a pen, and there are fractures with splitting and disruption in the head, and fissure-like fractures.
And each kind has its own inherent pain or torment during healing according to the location that will be recounted later, distinct from others in their locations.
There is a sign of bone fracture. And by this is bone fracture known; there is crookedness of it, and an appearance and sensation of it to the touch, and also when you press on it with your hand.
And therefore when there is no crookedness in the location nor an appearance or sensation when you touch it with your hand and the patient does not feel great pain when you press on it, then there is no fracture.
But it is possible that there is crookedness or a small fissure, and yet you do not feel pain when you touch it with your hand nor when you press on it; then pause over it the medicines about which I will make mention later at this moment, and appropriate for that location; and let there be tightness by subtle compression.
And know that the location when it is arched and not split into two or otherwise that has occurred in the metatarsus, as a whole part of its bone is torn off, then you must begin to straighten it by cauterizing the wound; then let there be strictness by subtle compression.
And if it has cauterized the wound, then leave off that for several days until the cautery stops; and appropriate according to whatever manner you can lift it up and move it around.
And know that the healing of it and its setting is more gradual than in the bone where the metatarsus occurred.
And let there be tightness according to what will be recounted later.
But if in the bone of the metatarsus, then extension of this broken limb from two parts is necessary, whether it is the hand or the foot; or with your hand if the limb is small; or with two strings or one string and the hand.
And let your position be such that you hold the limb in its natural posture while the parts are extended from the broken limb, then press that you may force them to return to their original state and according to whatever manner you can in their locations.
And beware according to your strength that you do not apply too much force over the patient through your operation of them nor harm him; and press according to your power that you apply one bone against another according to their various forms.
And let you touch it with your hand in that hour profitably and if you see any diverse cause, straighten it and equalize it according to the amount of your strength.
And avoid violent extension and compression, just as some foolish doctors cause cauterization of the wound through their operation or cause contraction in the limb just as we have seen this happen through their operation many times.
And the quality of the constriction of the limb is that which I have described, so that you may know that broken limbs are distinguished by their smallness and their bigness and the shape of them.
And those that are small like the arm and the elbow and the wrist, let the wrapping be of a very thin cloth.
But those that are large like the thigh or the leg, let the wrapping be of hard, leaden cloth, for the tight binding of the heavy cloth connects and strengthens the large limb all around, so that no mark will enter it.
Then, after your own evacuation, put a convenient bandage on it over the site of that fracture with three or four wrappings according to how the limb deserves it; and tighten your hand a little with the bandage.
Then go to that at the highest point of the site of the fracture and tighten so that your tightening with which you have tightened the site of the fracture is not slackened. Then loosen it a little with the wrapping at the site of the fracture and loosen the tightness little by little as you take a large part from the site.
Then take another bandage and wrap the other side of the broken site with it, then go to the bottom part of the bandages at the fracture; and your operation should be in tightening the bandage and loosening it little by little as we said above about the first bandage.
Then place between the bandages a piece of cloth or a bandage with which the crookedness of the fracture is equalized if there is crookedness; but if not, then do not put anything there for any reason.
Then put another bandage over that and tighten it over these decently-wrapped bandages as soon as possible if there is no inflammation or abscess at the site, but if there is, then put on what stops the abscess and eliminates the inflammation; leave it for a few days, and then you can tighten the bandages.
And the bandages should be made of thin leaded cloth and skillfully formed, or of wood, or of palm-tree bark; and each bandage's width should be according to that shape and form.
However, the bandage that is put on at the fracture should be thicker and a little harder than the others; and the length of it according to how long the limb is in size and smallness. And tighten above it with another bandage as we said about tightening, and tie above it decently as we said about tying, and let your tightening be according to the site of the fracture more, and as much as the fracture is farther away from the fracture, the less the tightness should be.
And the threads should be medium-sized in thickness and subtlety, and they should be made of strong linen; and if the threads are thick, then as I have seen some foolish people doing their operations by tying their threads with rope, there is a great error when the tightness is not equal.
And thin threads are not convenient, for you will not achieve through tightness with them what you want, and there should not be more than a finger's width between bandages.
And if the patient is hurt by the ends of the bandages when they are tight on the limbs, then put underneath them lead or wool that has been smeared with something to prevent injury.
Sometimes a fracture is accompanied by a plague and disruption in the tendon, and I have come to remember that one in the chapter according to its uniqueness.
And know that not every broken limb is tight with bandages on the first day; the cause of this is because when it is large, you should not put bandages over it except after a few days or seven or more, according to your confidence about the occurrence of an abscess.
And this is the manner of the plasters with which the Ancients restored, which were put on fractures and dislocations and twists.
Manner of plaster as a means of restoring fractures, suitable for many complications and especially for women and children, because it is that which does not come heat or rub: and you take from the powder of milling, and it is the meal's pith that comes out with the motion of the mill on the walls of the mill.
And prepare that as it is, unless you sieve it with egg white, and do not make the preparation thick or subtle; then use that.
Another method of restorative ointment for fracture, dislocation and twisting: take assafetida, myrrh, acacia, enula, and mastic which is made from wild mastic trees, of all of these ingredients take one drachm each; of myrrh and aloe, take five drachms each; of garlic juice, take twenty drachms; mix them all together with honey water or with egg white if the patient's complexion is scorched; and use this ointment, for it is of good composition and quickly restores broken bones, and benefits many people.
Another method of ointment which benefits fractures and twisting: take mastic and white madder, both one drachm each; myrrh and aloe, five drachms each; acacia, six drachms; balsam of Armenia, twenty drachms.
All of these are to be pounded in a mortar with a pestle, and sifted, and mixed with water or egg white, and administered.
Manner of plaster for joints and bones separated from their sockets, and sore pain accidentally in those, and also for splits and fractures: take wool that is plucked and let it be soaked in wine that has been cut with oil, and let it be put on the site.
But in this plaster there is not virtue of restoration, nor of an abscess, but it eliminates pains properly.
Another manner of plaster which restores a broken bone: take figs' leaves and wild poppy leaves; pound them all together and make a plaster from them.
Manner of plaster applied after the restoration of a bone fracture and when you want resolution of the residue of an abscess: take pounded white poplar bark, camomille and violets' flowers, and bran, all pounded .i. parts. All of these are to be pounded and soaked in wine if the limb is not scorched.
But if it is scorched, then prepare that with water of henna or with water and use it.
Another stronger plaster in resolution than that first one, when an abscess occurs after the restoration of a limb: take pounded white poplar bark and linseed, and myrrh, marjoram, violets' flowers, camomille, all pounded i alike; all of these are to be pounded and soaked in water according to the quality of the limb and its rest.
But Ipocras does not dry in his own juice when it is put on a broken limb after its restoration unless it is made of wax and oil and nothing else; and let it be thinner between thickness and thinness.
But it has been seen that they are put on a broken limb after its restoration and the causes in which there is dryness with little heat are like myrrh, anise and similar to those causes that we have mentioned.
A method of plaster that confers ease and relief from injury and pain: take a mixture of honey, sesame seeds, human hair or bird feathers, and aloe, and salt, all ground to a powder; strain and sift them, and mold them into a paste, and make a plaster.
However, the amount of time it takes for the healing process to complete will vary depending on how severe the injury is; so you must consider whether there is still pain or swelling or if the bone is broken or displaced. If not, then do not remove the plaster for several days. And if there is intense pain or swelling or inflammation in the area, then you must cut or remove the plaster from it immediately.
And take a piece of linen and marine sponge, wet it in tepid water, and with that wash the area until the swelling and pain are reduced; then let the limb rest for an hour; then apply lanolin saturated with sweet wine or oil, and leave it on overnight so that the wound is protected from infection and the swelling of the limb subsides, and its pain is relieved.
And then repeat this gentle compression with a small plaster, but do not tighten it too much with your initial binding; do this gently so that it heals.
And if all the swelling and heat and pain and inflammation and all the other symptoms have subsided completely, and you no longer need plasters or bandages, then repeat what you did at the beginning in the same way.
And if none of the aforementioned causes occur in the limb, then do not remove it but rather leave it on for three or four or five or seven days. And sometimes it is left on for twenty days, depending on how well the limb responds to having the plaster removed, as we have said, so that the fracture can heal and the flesh can adhere to it.
And then tighten the bandage more than your initial bandaging, according to how well the patient remembers it, and adjust the padding around the patient,
But if you see that the fracture is dried out and weakened more than it should be, then know that nutrition is prohibited from reaching it; so soak it with tepid water every day for three days; loosen the bandage a little, and through this operation, nourish the limb, and it will heal quickly.
But what fools do when they restore a broken limb is another way when it is not restored at the beginning as it should be, and it is restored according to crookedness, is an error according to their operation, and great harm; and if this were known to the Ancients in their books, they would have used it.
And I have not seen any of them do this, so it is more reasonable that it not be done.
Chapter 2: On fractures when they occur in the head.
The types of fractures are many, and the shapes of them are diverse, and the causes are distinct; for some fractures are made by the impact of a club, and the impact strikes all the bone within the skull, which is below the brain, just as it happens in an axe, and through this that type of fracture is named concussion; or the club strikes a part of the bone and penetrates into the flesh but does not go beyond its outer edge; and this type of fracture is named absolute elevation.
And the wound of these two fractures may be large or small, and they are either compressive or tensile; and the cause of them is impact with a fist or a hard object on stone, and similar objects.
And this fracture is either penetrating that it approaches the membrane which is below the bone, or in the surface of the bone, and the wound of these two fractures may be large or small.
And another fracture is when it is hidden in the bone, in the sottlety of the hair, and through this that type of fracture is named capillary fracture.
And another fracture is made either by impact or by the blow of a stone and similar objects, causing one of the bone's thin layers to enter into its hollows; and this occurs in the fingers when they are hit with a blow and are split from within.
And it most often occurs in the bodies of wet nurses, just as their breasts' nipples crack when they wean infants.
And all these types of fractures are bloodless, just as they are separated by membranes. And I will come with the memory of all this in my mind.
And we know all these types of fractures by their detection over there and by the inquiry into them through touch and the appearance of corrupted flesh that is over them.
And capillary fracture is known by what appears after it is uncovered on the bone; when it is wiped and oiled, for the fracture then appears black.
But in the treatment of fractures, you must first consider the patient's conditions; and then if you see through these conditions that something signifies by manifest indication regarding fear, just as it happens with vomiting in cholera, and extension, and loss of understanding, and lack of speech, and fainting, and acute fever, and heat and redness in those, and appearance like theirs in the more serious dispositions, then it will not heal.
And if you see that these conditions are not present, then you may begin its treatment.
The reason for this is that if the wound comes to you in the beginning as it is wounded, and it is in the winter days, then you must study the appearance of the bone before the fourteenth day according to every disposition.
And if it is in the summer days, then you must cut off the bone before the seventh day, having seen that what is below the membrane is corrupted, and that the conditions we have recounted occur.
And if the fracture has reached the membrane covering the brain and is in small pieces with tension, then you must insert the fractured piece, according to what I will recount to you.
And it is that you cut open the head of the patient who has been wounded, and uncover the bone according to custom and method known to you according to the appearance of the wound, and let it be easy on the patient.
And if it happens to you that you must make the detection of the bone, and there is blood or pus, then you must stop it with what comes over it, and it is that you apply a poultice of cloths soaked in wine and oil to the wound, and let it rest so that the pus is reduced; and then begin the circuit of the bone and its removal.
And it shall be according to one of two methods of operation.
And one way is that you insert the bone with a tight and narrow chisel, and this is its shape: And then administer another chisel, a little wider than the first; and this is its shape:
And then apply the chisel wider than the first.
And it must be that you have a number of various chisels, some of which are wider than others; and some of them are sharper than others and are in the shape of aiguilles, and they are of iron or steel.
And you must use them with ease when hitting the incision so that it does not bruise the head or lead to that.
And if the bone is strong and hard, then you must drill through it before administering the incisions with the chisels, which are called non-penetrating chisels.
And they are not called that because they do not reach the end of the bone but remain above it; for the chisel is round at its tip or edge below the sharp point, which prevents it from being submerged and passing through the thickness of the bone.
And it is convenient that you take many of these chisels, each suited to the thickness of a different bone, while keeping in mind, in all parts of the skull, that its extremity should be sharp, and its quantity in length and breadth should be according to the quantity of thickness of that part.
And this is the form of three kinds of chisels: The quality of drilling through the broken bone is that you place the chisel on the bone and turn it with your fingers while knowing that the bone has been penetrated; then change the chisel to another place, and place what is between all traces of the quantity of thickness of the thread or around that.
Then insert with chisels what is between each crack of the bone, and make that as subtle as you can, in the end of lightness, thus as we have said, while you radiate the bone, or with your hand, or by some other means for which you have prepared tools, such as forceps and subtle tongs.
And you must be careful that the chisels do not touch any part of the brain.
And when you have drilled through the bone and separated it from the brain if it is still attached to it, and have extracted that, then scrape and gnaw at that in the asperity of it with another tool resembling a chisel, but however make sure that it is more thin and more subtle than the other chisels.
And if any small bones and fragments remain, then pick those up carefully with the tools you have prepared for that purpose; then cure the wound with poultices and ointments as we have said.
And the other manner of operation is lighter and more distant from fear, which Guiana praises and washes with great praise; and this is its speech: it is necessary for you at the beginning to begin to expose the part of the bone in the location in which there is the most violent and most manifest fracture, while when you have exposed that part and placed below it the extremity of this chisel, slow and gentle, of which this is the form:
And the lenticular part is lion-like and does not enter anything, and the acute part is of it in two sides in length, thus as a wedge; let the lenticular part be applied to the brain with the acute face of it drilling into the bone.
Then strike upon the chisel with a small mallet while you drill into all of the bone with ease as it is turned, and be secure about the membrane not happening to him accidentally in any manner whatsoever, and if the patient was the most foolish of all men and the most ignorant of them; certainly, and if he were sleeping.
Then if there remains any cause attached to the bone of the membrane in some places of the bone, cut that off from it with the extremity of that lenticular chisel, and deliver him from it with ease, for it is delivered from it without harm and without fear.
And if the fracture of the bone does not penetrate into the membrane, and that which is cut off or remains of the bone is its face, and there remain in it asperity and subtle fragments, then scrape that asperity and pluck those fragments with subtle razors for which you have prepared a number, of diverse quantities so that it may be possible for you to administer those most conveniently in every place and most rightly according to where you wander in your operation on that broken bone.
And it is convenient that you apply in your reason with which you scrape the bone at the beginning the most edge of those razors, and then use that most subtilely, and do not cease doing that according to continuity until you come to administer the most thin and the most subtle of all those.
But in any of the other little hairline fractures and subtle fractures, let you apply cure according to what you have wandered into its correction.
And it is a cause that is not diminished over all those who have studied in that art. And we have written about what we have shown in great fractures.
And if the membrane is stretched when you drill into the bone, then take cloth according to the quantity of the poultice, and soak that in rosewater, and place that over the orifice of the poultice; then take another cloth folded or doubled and soak it in wine and rosewater and place that over the first cloth and do that as gently as you can so that you do not weigh down the brain; then apply to that liniment, and do not strain that except for the quantity that the poultice has only as much.
And leave that with this cure for a day or two until you are sure of cauterized pus; then dislodge that and then administer medicines with which there is superfluous dryness, such as linseed oil and bran, and powder of onions and of aristology, and of similar things to those.
And it is that you make of these medicines powder which is powdered over the poultice, thus as they are dried; and universally, apply to that all medicine of a property of which there is that it cleanses and does not bite.
And be careful according to your skill that the poultice in your cure is clean; and there is not in it thickness of ointment or other; nor do you leave virulence in it; for when it is applied over the membrane of the brain, it corrupts that and injures that, and there happens about the patient an evil malicious malice.
And it injures the brain of the head when the bone is cleansed and chiefly when the cure of that is diminished, and there is blackness on the surface of it; then consider therefore if there happen to the patient the accidents which we have said, know that there are dangerous omens in all directions.
And if blackness does not occur except from the medicine that is placed above it, and there is in virtue of that medicine that makes that blackness, then it is convenient that you take a portion of honey and portions .iii. of rosewater and with those lines a cloth, and then place that over the membrane; then cure that with the spices of cure which are convenient so that it is healed.
Chapter .iii.
Of restoration of the nose when it is broken.
Know that the nose is not broken except in two parts altogether most sovereign, or one of those some few times, because in it are two bones, for the part below is cartilage, and is not broken, and nothing happens to it except compression and crookedness and narrowness.
But if one of the two parts of it is broken, then it is convenient that you put your finger in your nose and gnash that fracture between with your index finger and with your thumb outside, while you return the nose according to its natural figure. And let that be done by you with ease, and be careful that it does not bruise the patient through that your operation.
And if the fracture is in the uppermost part of the nose, and the bone does not project out to that point, then it should be made even with the extremity of the bone in which there is a small protuberance.
And if the fracture is in two parts, then you should make it like that.
And apply the plaster on him in the first day of the fracture if it is possible; and if not, then let him have the warm bath or the hot bath with the rest of the poultice cauterized.
Then insert into the extremity of the nose a piece of linen if there is one fracture, or put two splints if there are two fractures; and let the splints have thickness of such quantity that it fills up the hole in the nose.
And some of the old healers say that the splints be dipped in wax, and changed every day, but I have not seen it; it is better that the piece of linen is dipped in egg white cooked with honey like powder; then let the splint be placed inside so that the bone is secured and the cartilage is hardened.
And sometimes instead of the splints, put in the nose a feather of an owl wrapped with linen; and let there be the most violent fracture of the nose and that the patient is not prohibited from inspiration.
And this cause is not necessary for you; and if you want, do it, and if you want, do splints.
And if another poultice cautery happens again, plaster the nose with cerotom or with cotton dipped in sweet wine and rose oil, or with daryol.
But if the poultice cautery does not happen, then let you plaster that defect with sesame flour and powder of anise cooked with egg white; and place on it a piece of linen, and do not touch the nose for any reason.
But if the bones of the nose are broken with a small fracture or are crushed, then let you split them and extract them with instruments that are convenient for them; and close the split and cure it with something that carnifies and consolidates, and plaster them with something convenient.
And if there is pus inside the nose, then let you cure it with splints and administer lead tubes so that it is completely healed.
Chapter .iiii.
Of restoration of the jaw when it is dislocated.
When the jaw is broken and there is no pus in it, then examine if the fracture is only outward and not broken into two and bent inward in its parts, then its understanding is easy.
And therefore, if the fracture is on the right side, then you insert your left index finger in the patient's mouth; and likewise if the fracture is on the left jaw, then insert that left index finger; and displace with that the displacement of the fracture inside with ease to its parts outward with your other hand on the outward part of the bone; with that decently equal it.
And if the fracture of the jaw is already separated into two, then let you administer extension of its two parts according to straightness so that its equalization is possible.
And if there is commotion of teeth to disruption, then strengthen those from which you expect that they will break with thread of gold or silver or silk; and plaster on the broken jaw cerotom, and place over it doubled linen, and place on the linen a great star decently made, or a weight of only lead at the length of the jaw; and tie that above according to how the fastening of it is equipped to you and convenient to its application, so that it is not destroyed.
And command the patient that he uses rest and tranquility, and feed him with a soft diet.
And if you think that the figure is already altered in some way, then you untie and loosen it on the third day; and correct what has already been altered from him and plaster him with powder of anise, with egg white, or with sesame flour, after having taken off his plaster, and place over the plaster linen wool.
And once you have stood and tightened that plaster over it, and the disposition of the bone is not altered, leave it, so that you do not loosen it until it is healed and the fracture is strengthened; for many times this fracture is tightened in three weeks.
And if another poultice cautery happens again, then administer what we have said many times in the healing of it so that the pus is evacuated from it.
And if the fracture is with pus, then consider whether the bone mass is separated or shattered; then you subtilize and remove those shatters with what is convenient for it in the removal of them with instruments.
And if the hole of the pus is narrow, then you amplify it with phlebotomy according to the quantity of your need.
And when you have removed those shatters and from them no pus has been evacuated, then close the hole of the pus if it is wide; and if not, place over it one of the plasters that are convenient for it and carnify it, so that it is healed.
Chapter .v.
Of restoration of the collarbone when it is dislocated.
Many times the collarbone is broken from in front of the muscle, and that fracture is done in one of three ways.
For it is broken or separated, or is separated into two parts other than the shatters do not happen; and its restoration is easy; or it happens that the fracture is with pus, and its restoration is difficult; or the fracture is with pus.
And the operation in it, when the fracture is with pus, is that you have two ministers present, so that one has an assistant and follows the collarbone broken, and the other extends its collar to that broken part.
Then join the fracture with your fingers so that it is made in its form according to how it should be, and do not leave in it a little prominence or concavity.
And if you need more extension, then let you place below the chin of the patient a pillow of linen or wool, and let the size of it be according to the quantity of your need; and extend and raise the collarbone and contract the pillow with your hand so that you join the fracture according to how it should be.
And if you cannot bring the extremity of the collarbone to its parts outward because it is reached at the breast, then let the patient recline on his neck, and place over his chest a pillow on which he leans with his right shoulder, and place on his left shoulder a pillow in size.
And the minister presses the muscle of it to its parts downward so that the bone of the collarbone is elevated that it is in the breast below, and then you correct the fracture and join it with your fingers.
But if you feel shatters of the collarbone and swollen, then let you split over it and evacuate those shatters with ease.
And if it is retained in the bone, then you make an incision of it with one of the knives which you have equipped for it, after having placed below the collarbone the instrument that serves the saw; and the instrument is of wood or of iron of which this is its form:
And it is similar to an awl of which this is the concavity; and let its length be according to what you need from it, according to the size of the bone or the weakness of it.
May the length of the patient be according to what is possible for the operation; let there be two extremities as well as times, and one extremity be ample and the other tight.
And if the wound you have cut is wide after you have extracted the dead bone tissue, and it is certain that pus will collect, then you should close the two lips of the wound with a stitch.
And if the wound is small, or you fear pus will collect, then fill the wound with cotton and powdered drugs according to the amount of the cut wound.
And if pus does occur, then moisten a cloth in warm wine, rose oil and wine, and place it over the area.
And all of this should not be applied to the broken bone; and so that you can see the patient every day, if the binding becomes loose or you see the rod has become loose, then correct it and tighten the binding.
And then place the patient's pillow under his neck, and place another small cushion under his chest when he lies down at night so that with that his helper on that side is elevated, and therefore the broken clavicle is elevated due to the elevation of the muscle; or his arm is bent around his neck.
And don't loosen the binding unless pus occurs in the spot or it becomes swollen, for up to twelve days.
And then renew the plaster if you have seen his face turn that way, and adjust it in the constriction and restore him and leave it be until it is restored and the clavicle fracture has coagulated.
And it is strengthened and comforted according to the moon in 28 days, and in some people it is done in less time than that.
Chapter 6.
Of the restoration of a shoulder fracture.
The spatula is broken on the lateral side and not from him but from the margins.
And therefore when it is broken — and it is broken in the middle of him — and it is not known except by touch, then according to how the fracture is spread out you prepare it and reduce it according to its natural figure in every way that is possible for you.
And then place over the spot powdered wheat flour with egg white and lion's tooth; and then sprinkle cloth powder doubled over it; and then place over him a thin wooden rod according to the amount of the spatula or more.
But if under the rod there is a concavity in any of the places of the spatula, then you fill that concavity with lion's tooth, and then push the rod according to equality.
And then strengthen it above with a long ice pack with decent constriction and the firmness of the rod so that it is not loosened from its place.
And consider the binding every day; and if it is loosened, then bind another looseness and tighten it and adjust the rod if it has loosened from its place.
And keep the patient on his right side.
And the spatula is restored in 20 days or in .XXV.
And therefore when that number is completed, then you dissolve the binding, and know that of those bones whose beginning is not feared nor their dissolution.
And if the spot of the bone weighs down and puts pressure underneath the collarbone, then you cut it there, and stop it, and act according to what we have said in the clavicle fracture about pus collection if it occurs here.
Chapter 7.
Of the restoration of a leg fracture.
The leg sometimes breaks in the middle and that is usually how it ends up; but its ends are very often crushed and broken.
And of its accidents when it is broken in the middle there is decline to the inside parts and occurs in him great pain, and difficulty in walking, and cough, and strong fever and vomiting of blood; and it is declared in the cavity in the broken bone and is not hidden from sensation.
And its restoration is that the patient is laid on his back, and a cushion placed between his shoulders, and then press against his muscles, and adjust his ribs with two hands, and act subtly in his operation and according to all ways that are possible for you and convenient to him, until he returns the bone' s figure according to how it should be.
And then place over him plaster and a towel, and place under it a thin wooden rod of ash or linden or similar in thickness, which you wrap in cloth; and then act subtly on it over the broken bone so that it is not loosened; and go around him with binding according to roundness at his back sometimes, and tighten it with decent constriction; and consider the binding at all times, and when it is loosened, tighten it.
And if necessity requires that it be loosened because of swelling or pain, or pus occurs in the spot, then you cut and loosen it and eradicate the plaster and correct what occurs to him by way of his cure; and then tighten the binding, if it occurs, according to his face; and adjust the constriction so that he is healed.
Chapter 8.
Of the restoration of ribs when they are cracked.
Know that rib fractures do not occur except in large places that follow the chest; and of their ends from the front part, no contriction occurs to them except by that which they are cartilaginous. And its sensation is not dulled in feeling because of the inquiry into it with fingers.
And its restoration is that you join the fracture with fingers according to the possible way, so that it is swallowed according to how it should be, and then plaster and tighten the broken bone with a rod if it occurs.
And if the rib fracture inclines to the inside parts, then occurs to him violent pain and piercing, as well as piercing that occurs to him who has wept, and because of it that puts difficulty in breathing, and cough, and vomiting of much blood; and this is of difficult cure.
And now the Antychus are born in him with many warts.
And from them you will say: let the patient who engenders inflammation and swelling abstain from foods that cause flatulence and distention, so that his belly is distended and the fracture is driven to the inside parts.
But we abstain from it so that it is not the cause of producing pus collection, if it has not occurred; and if it has already occurred, then help it.
And some of them say that it should be stopped above the vent and then sucked with strength; and it seems like a good idea, but it is feared that the wind may push out the superfluities to the location because of the weakness.
And some of them say: that the location should be covered with wool that is already dipped in hot oil, and there should be powder placed between the ribs where it is filled, so that the binding is equal to the roundness; and then the patient should be treated with a pleurisy poultice of food and medicine.
And if there is violent constriction that the patient cannot tolerate, and the bones puncture the membrane with their points, we fear for the patient; then we open the location above the broken rib, uncover it, and then place an instrument that conserves the pharynx on top of it, whose memory is preceded by incision of the bone with ease, and extract it.
And then we should sew both lips of the wound, if it is large, with a stitch, and treat it with poultices until it is healed.
And if blisters arise inside, then you cut and pour powder into rose oil and place it on the location, and the patient should be treated with what is appropriate for the blister inside.
And it should be re-bandaged on the side on which he sleeps, so that it may heal.
Chapter 9.
Of the restoration of a broken spine and collarbone.
Sometimes there is fracture of the bones of the neck, and they hurt in their traction, and similarly the vertebrae of the spine. And when it happens to someone and you want to know if it will heal or not, then consider that if you see the fingers soft, numb, and dead, and they cannot move those or stretch them, and when you press on them with your fingernails or puncture them with a needle and there is no pain in them, then you will know that it will not heal, and in most cases, this is fatal.
And if there is constriction in them with the fingers and puncture, then you will know that the bone's neck is saved and that the patient will recover with treatment.
And if you see the vertebrae of the collarbone like this and want to know if it will heal or not, then consider his feet.
Now if you see that they are already soft and what happens to the fingers happens in his feet, and when he lies on his back, he has wind and involuntary defecation, and sometimes he is re-bandaged on his back and wants to urinate but cannot, then you will know it is fatal, so do not treat him.
But if none of those happen, the cause is better and it will heal more quickly.
And the treatment for him is to pierce the blisters with a needle and pour into them rose oil only, or with mallow leaves; place it on the broken vertebra some time during the day when the blister is settled.
Then place one of the comforting and soothing poultices on it and strengthen it with a bandage; and command the patient to take rest and tranquility, and not to sleep on the side that gives him pain until he is healed.
And if it happens because of the traction of the bone, or for some other reason that it is already separated from him, then dry over the wound and tie that bone; then sew both lips of the wound if it is large, and treat it with some ointment of the gums, so that it may heal.
But if the end of the bone of the hip is broken and it is the end of the socket, then you should insert your left finger into the anus, and grip the broken bone with your other hand as much as possible by second force; then place a poultice on him and splint him, if he has indigestion from them, and strengthen it.
And if you feel broken splinters in him, then open that and tie it up, and treat the wound with the treatment that is preceded so that it may heal.
Chapter 10.
Of the restoration of the shoulder.
The bones of the shoulders are usually broken, and if they are broken, then their fracture is not but communication in their extremities and they are inserted into the length and decline to the parts within; and it happens to the patient that there is pain in the location and puncturing, and the arm is numbed when it is broken.
And its restoration is that you extend your hand over it so that it is above the fracture which is the figure of it.
And if the fracture is only in its extremity, then grip it according to how it appears to you by second force so that it is assembled into its natural figure.
But if the fracture is in the length and inclines to the parts below, then you make the patient lie on his belly so that you may prepare for its restoration. And when you have gripped it, place a poultice on it, and then place a splint of wood or of cord on it, and strengthen it by compression over which you should not fear puncturing of the fracture nor removal of the splint.
And grip the hollow with whatever fills it so that it takes the compression according to equality, and command the patient to sleep on his back or on his side.
But if blister arises, then cease from extension of it and its restoration until the blister is settled, and place on it what settles that according to what precedes; then return to its restoration, and strengthen it thus as well.
And if they happen in the bones or are crushed, then you treat them.
Chapter 11.
Of the restoration of the fracture of the helper.
The helper is what is between the neck and goes to the head of the shoulder.
And if it is broken, then its restoration is in one of two ways, of which the first is that you take wood of sea pine according to this form:
And let them be tied at both ends with two cords, and then it should be suspended from the raised location.
And let the patient lean on a crutch, and then bend his broken arm outward over the wood so that it reaches the tip of him in the middle location to which the curve of the wood is attached.
And then let him lean on it for some reason heavy, or the servant extend that to the parts below; and then the bone grip with their fingers, so that the fracture returns as it should.
And the other way is that the patient lies on his neck and suspends the hand of his collarbone with a bandage, and then command two servants so that one of them holds what is above the fracture with their fingers, and the other holds the feet below him; and each of them extends to his party.
And if you want the extension to be stronger, then strengthen over the fracture with a bandage and over that with another bandage, and each of the two servants extends to their two parties.
And if the fracture is close to the extremity of the muscle, then let half of the bandage be placed over the tip and the other below the fracture, near the neck.
And similarly if the fracture is close to the collarbone, then let the bandage be placed over that location and over the collarbone.
Swallow it easily and without effort, and then when the throat is swallowed according to how each person is, and is applied with a good application, then strengthen it if an abscess does not occur.
But if an abscess occurs, then loosen the stricture within seven days, and place on it soft wool soaked in warm vinegar and rose water until the abscess heals, and then you strengthen it.
And the way to strengthen it is to place a plaster over the fracture, and then place a new cloth wrap over the plaster; and then adjust the arm to that support, and place your open hand over his muscles.
And place the cloth and strengthen it over the support of the arm so that the arm is in its place unless prohibited by any cause of the broken bone.
And then use splints.
And it is that you place over the fracture that splint which is wider and stronger than the other splints; and place between each splint the width of a finger, and let the length of the splints be according to the break with an addition of three fingers all around.
And then strengthen the splints with the stricture which was described at the beginning of the chapter.
And it is that your stricture over the site of the fracture be tighter. And when the fracture has healed, let the stricture be less.
And so if you see the arrangement of the splints and the stricture as we have said in the time in which you are restoring the limb to its setting, then you do.
And if you fear an abscess will form, then you loosen the stricture and the splints within seven days as we have said.
And then consider the ligament in all parts for three days so that no inflammation or swelling occurs at the site, or food is prohibited from coming to the limb due to the disposition of excess stricture; and then rectify all this as we have said.
But if you are certain that none of this will occur, then do not loosen the ligament but wait three days or more.
And let his sleep be on his back, and let his hands be over his stomach.
And place over the support a full poultice of wool which is moistened, and consider throughout the night or day that it not be loosed nor dissolved the figure of the broken limb, or that the ligament be softened, therefore rectify all this with your skill.
And give the patient food according to the order which we have given before, so that the food is subtle at the beginning until it is strengthened; and then increase the food for him.
For the custom of the support and his bed is that they are tightened for 40 days, and then let them be loosed and a bath administered to him and he is medicated with ointments which rectify this.
And if the fracture is dry, then you do not loosen from it the ligament and splints within two months or 60 days.
Chapter .xii.
Of restoration of a broken arm.
An arm is made of two bones which are called two ulnas; of which the one is small and is that which supports the little finger, and the other is large and is that which is placed below the small one, from the part more below.
And often only the larger ulna is broken, or the smaller, and often they are both broken together.
And when the smaller ulna is broken above, then its restoration is easier, and its healing is even easier.
And when it is broken below the fracture is difficult to restore, and its healing is difficult.
And worse than this is when both bones are broken together.
Therefore if the bone which is broken is the smaller ulna above, then it is convenient for the doctor, during its restoration, to place a small extension with ease so that it be moistened.
But if the larger ulna is broken, then let him place an extension more vehemently.
And if both ulnas are broken together, then let you place the extension even stronger.
And let you place the figure of the hand in its restoration and extension stretched out over a pillow, and let the wrist of the hand be above the parts more up, more than all the other fingers, and let the auricular finger be more below than all the others, and let the patient be lying on one side.
And let one pillow be under him in the height or bend of him, so that he does not fall to one side.
And then the servant extends the arm from below with his own hand or with a ligament, and another servant extends above similarly.
And then the doctor moistens the bone so that he reduces it according to the best figure that he can.
And if in the setting of the bone there are bumps, then pierce through all the bumps at its site with your skill.
And if a separate bump appears that pricks the tendon and is not to your hope in its restoration, then you file it away and stop it according to the way which we have said above.
But if the fracture is with a splinter, then I have already written about that particular chapter, and therefore take its cure.
And if an abscess occurs at the beginning of your restoration, then you line a cloth with cerate made of rose oil and white wax, and let it be between specitute and subtlety, and strengthen the cloth over that with gentle stricture so that the abscess yields; and then remove the cerate and place a poultice prepared from powder of moly with honey, and then place splints; and let the splint which is placed over that fracture be wider and stronger.
And know that the number of the splints of the arm is seen in the major dispositions, or it is the fracture in one ulna or in both ulnas together.
And then strengthen your stricture over the site of the fracture even more vehemently, and when it is loosed at the parts above the fracture or at the parts more below him, loosen the stricture a little more gently according to how it was preceded in the beginning of the chapter.
And the cloths which are wrapped over the fracture be moist soft cloths, and not hard or rough, and the thread with which it is tightened be of linen properly wetted between subtle and coarse, as we have recommended.
And consider the limb and the ligament after a few days. And if there occurs any cause for which rectification is necessary, then as it happens to the limb, and then let you wind the limb with wet water so that it cease that swelling.
And loosen the limb not tightly while it rests, and then tighten the stricture again.
And if the stricture is already softened and the bone is washed and similar to those, then rectify all this with your skill.
And consider if the food is prohibited from coming to the limb due to excess of stricture, then let you soften it a little and leave it for a few days so that it comes to it the food, and then strengthen it.
But if to the patient does not occur any cause of those which we have said, then do not let it be loosed for more than 20 days or from that time.
And then let the hand of the patient be suspended by his skill of moving, and let him sleep on his back.
And know that this fracture is restored in 30 days or in 32 days, or very soon it is restored in 28 days, and all of this is according to the disposition of the complications and dispositions of virtue.
[Chapter 13]
On the restoration of a fracture of the finger of the hand and of the teeth.
Know that in the finger of the hand and the nails of the teeth there should be few fractures, and they do not occur unless through great violence.
And if a fracture or sprain occurs in the hand, then you should have the patient lie down and lean forward, and then place his hand over that [injured] area which is extended.
Then the minister should extend the broken bones and the doctor should put together those parts that are dislocated with good conjunction.
And then he should apply plaster and bandages if there is no pustule, cauterized; and then put a poultice over it according to the quantity of the area, and you have wrapped that [area] in linen cloth.
But if the cut is on the edges inside the palm of the hand, and then make a spear-like shape out of cloth, and command the patient to stretch that  [area] with his palm which is cut; then it should be stretched with long cloth.
And the poultice of meat with cloth in which it is lifted, so that the meat is applied to the palm; and stretch it according to how it should be.
But if the fracture is on the outside edges, then you should put a poultice over it and another poultice under that   [area] on the palm so that the hand is open and straight; and then apply the compression, as the hand is rolled around between the teeth with laments.
And if a fracture occurs in one of the nails of the teeth, then if it is on the toe, it should be joined according to how it should be and then be bound with the palm; and if you wish, put a small staff over it straight so that the fracture is elevated and not bruised.
But if the fracture is on one of the other teeth, as well as in that of the middle finger or the index finger or the auricular finger or the little finger, then it should be joined and tied with the finger to which it belongs; or they are all tied according to continuity, and that is better; or put a small staff over it, as we have said for the toe.
And in your restoration, consider and oppose that, the disposition of pustule cauterization — by your operation — with that which occurs when any cause of those happens, according to how it is iterated in his narration of him.
[Chapter 14]
On the restoration of a fracture of the bone of the thigh.
The bone of the thigh is many times broken and it is declared to the feeling according to how it is converted to the front party and the superior pus.
And its restoration is done in that the ligament is bound over the fracture and another ligament under the fracture; and the patient should be prostrate on his belly and on his face.
Then the minister should extend all the ligament to its party according to quality when the fracture is in the middle part of the bone.
But if it is near the root of the thigh, then the ligament should be near to the bottom at the party of the pubic bone, so that the extension box on him; and the other ligament under the fracture.
And likewise if the break is near the bottom, then the ligament should be made near the bottom, and the extension at the bottom parties.
And then the doctor should join the bone with both of his hands until he reduces it according to the natural appearance and the bone is conjoined by good conjunction; and then he should apply plaster and compression if there is no pustule in the member. But if a pustule occurs on it, then you should leave it for some days until the pustule cauterization is ceased; and then return to your cure.
The compression of it should be done thus: you should wrap a hard bandage over the fracture and fold that two or three times, and remove from him superfluous moisture; and then wrap the leg so that it reaches to the ankle and to the root of the thigh.
And insert long wool between the thigh and the leg near to the bottom at the bottom parties; and let the ends of the wool come from the top part of both parts, and then revolve over the leg and the thigh that which superfluously comes from the bandage.
And then put over the thigh in the place of that fracture ash-wood, and put one staff over the bone of the leg.
And then fill the emptiness between the leg and the thigh with soft cloths so that the compression is coagulated.
And then begin with strong compression over the place of the fracture with three or four wrappings; and as you are longer with ligament of the place of the fracture, your compression should be lesser and looser and moister.
And then extend to two ends of the wool at the bottom parties so that it reaches to the ankle of the foot; and strengthen both ends of the staffs on the other party so that the ligament is not removed from its place.
And then leave the compression over him as it is so that no pustule or cauterization or inflammation occurs on him nor emaciation and likewise to those; and if any of those happens then you should know yourself by dismembering him, and rectify what happens altogether, according to how we have said many times.
But if in the bone is a piece of bone which you put, then know that you join that according to what it is possible for you; and if not, then go over him and remove that and cure with that by which it is preceded so that he is healed.
And sometimes this fracture of the thigh is bound with another so that they are adjusted to him staffs, as we have said in the helper and the arms.
But in its restoration made in such a manner let no limp occur on him; and if it is restored alone, then let the other leg be applied to it, then it is necessary that he limps from which it is affected.
And know that the thigh is bound for 40 days or a little month or a little more than a month, and all of this is according to the diversity of the complications and other dispositions.
[Chapter 15]
On the restoration of the fracture of the knee of the bottom.
Know that fracture of the knee happens many times, but it occurs on him many times with sprain.
But if fracture occurs on him, then it is not but fissure or crack in its parts, and that is with wound or wounds, and over all is placed with feeling.
And its restoration is thus that it is joined what is broken of its parts with the fingers so that it is added and conjoined according to what is possible by equation and facility and fabrication.
And then put plaster and put over it a round staff if it oozes from that; and strengthen over him with compression as is convenient.
And then consider all the dispositions which we have recommended in other fractures, as well as pustule cauterization and likewise to those on which a staff is opposed to all accident with that which to him is convenient so that he is healed.
[Chapter 16]
Of the restoration of a broken leg.
Know that in the leg there are two bones of which one is thick, and is named after the name of the leg; and the other is thin, and is called the shank.
And it happens in both kinds of fractures that happen to the two bones of the arm, and for this reason, the restoration of it is also the same as the restoration of the arm, and the operation of it is one and the same.
And if two bones are broken together, then the leg is turned completely inside out.
And if only the thinner bone is broken, then the leg is turned inside out.
And if only the thicker bone is broken, you will see this from below, and it is of those causes that are not to you hidden.
Then administer extension and alignment and ligation of the bones according to what is mentioned above.
However, if the fracture of the leg is narrow having few gaps, then let the extension be less and shorter, and draw near with your skill.
And in the leg there is some cause of operation on the arm, and it is when you equalize the bones and complete all your operation, then you shall take weights of wood which is placed below the causes which are placed in soles, and they are made into fingers of palm-widths; align those to which there is a small thickness, and let them not be of the fingernails, and let the length of those be according to the length of the leg, and of the inner part within the most lowly.
Then wrap around each weight in two wraps according to the length of it, and place one over the gap of the leg from one side and the other from the other side, and let them be within the most lowly place of the foot.
Then tie the two splints in three places of two ends and in the middle place, for with this constriction the leg is prohibited from tilting to either side, and stands in good position.
And a brace of wood has been administered according to the length of the leg; and let it be placed in it so that it conserves that of movement.
And especially if you make this in fracture, and when with that is plague properly.
And consider in each day the leg and study it with that by final study, and you keep it from pustule and inflammation or other similar causes; and when any of those causes happens, then cease to do so until it is healed.
Chapter .xvii.
Of the fracture of the ankle and the bones of the foot and the toes.
To the ankle does not happen fracture at all; but to the bones of the foot happen fractures some times; and to the toes of the foot happen little fractures, and do not happen to them but atrophy in the months of disposition.
And if to the bones of the foot indeed fracture and see those bones being raised upon each other, then let the patient place his foot on the ground prepared in that way.
Then let him place one foot over that which is raised of those bones, and step on them, and press, and equalize them within until they return to their places.
Then let him apply plaster and a stopper over it, and place below the belly of the foot a small board to which are two heads placed.
Then strengthen that with the foot with gentle pressure, because you have wrapped it in bandages and other things of which you are ignorant.
And when three or four days have passed, then loosen the binding, for you will find the bones equalized, or broken, or displaced, and the operation in those is thus known.
But if any toes are broken, then restore those, and equalize them thus as you were taught in the restoration of the fingers of the hand. Then place to the broken toe a splint according to the length of the toe, and let it be more bent towards it; then below the foot place this board which is told to you, and strengthen that with gentle pressure.
But if that which is broken of the bones are two or three or more, then you shall place over each toe a splint of its quantity wrapped in linen bandage, and strengthen the board below the foot, and let it stand upon one of the heads of the board so that it has good retention.
And it is convenient for you that you do not forget that you do not consider all the causes which I have told you in the other fractures of the accidents that we have said; and apply to every accident what is appropriate.
Chapter .xviii.
Of fracture of the knee-pan and the shinbone and the ankle of a man.
When the knee-pan is broken, then let her sit in a chair, and let her lean forward a little, and let her be held back.
And the midwife fills the knee with cotton, and let it be done in the knee thus with sperm; and let the woman be bent down, and raise up her knees little by little, for all that is forgotten within when it is bent forward with sperm and the broken bone returns.
And let them put powder on the knees, and when she wants to urinate, let her loosen the crotch with facility, and let it urinate, and reduce and return that according to the manner in which you measured it at the beginning, and let it return to its first powder.
And do thus for seven days or turn those, for that is restored.
And if you want, take a bag of wool and strengthen over the crack of it a cannula of a reed-bed; and insert the whole bag in the knee, and let them insufflate in the cannula with skill until the bag is inflated within the knee, for the fracture returns.
And let it be filled with cotton and stay for some days according to what we have recommended, until it is healed.
And when the shinbone of a man or woman is broken, then administer in its restoration and healing of it what we have recommended in the bone of the hip.
And that which is straight is not hidden in these close fractures and which hardly turns out, most especially to that to which there is some study and understanding to this my free thought; for that fracture indicates to you in the major dispositions the straight way in the restoration and in the constriction of it, therefore understand well.
But in the ankle of a man when it is broken, take a cow’s penis, and insert it into that; then let him apply plaster over it, and let it be wrapped up, and let it be left for three days or turn those, and let it be healed.
Chapter .xix.
Of restoration of the bones when they are swollen.
Convenient is to that to which fracture happens with swelling, and especially if the bone is large as is the bone of the jaw or of the shoulder, or similar to that, that you treat it and fleabots that as soon as the conditions of fleabits to you testify to us thus.
And if the swelling and pain cease, then it is convenient that you apply to the retention of it in that way that you pulverize over it chalk ground with vinegar, if another cause is not present.
Then begin to restore the fracture on that same day, and do not prolong it, if inflammation does not happen.
But if an abscess occurs and you don't see its restoration within nine days, then the abscess has to be lanced by the third or fourth day at the latest, otherwise you will bring about harmful accidents.
But if the broken bone is prominent above the uncovered skin, then you have to pierce and reduce it with your hands with ease and little extension.
But if extension is not prepared for you and the adjustment by your hands, then you reduce it with this instrument; and this instrument is made of iron, whose length is seven or eight digits, and its width according to the quantity of the wound; therefore it is necessary for the doctor to use these three or four according to the quantity that he needs for that in all kinds of fractures.
And it should be round and not have much thickness so that it is not bent because of the pressure on it during the operation.
And its tip should be sharp and its edges smooth; and the upper part of it should have a thick edge, and the lower half into the parts.
And this is the shape of it:
And it is named in Greek "labre volentz atelarem", that is, a little palette.
So that the tip of it may be placed elevated on the prominent end of the bone.
And push it into a hollow until the bone returns, and let it be adjusted by some position.
And therefore try to adjust the ends of the fracture between them, and if the broken end of the bone is thin, and does not take the instrument by a good exception, then you have to insert the end of that bone so that the instrument can do it.
But if you cannot reduce the bone at all with what we have advised, then cut it with one of the cutting instruments which we have mentioned; or saw it with one of the saws in whatever way is possible for you.
Then smooth the part that remains in the bone, and of roughnesses and small scars.
And when the bone is reduced, and if the patient feels strong pain during the reduction, then know that the bone has not returned to its natural place; and therefore do what you confer on the patient great benefit.
When you have completed the restoration which you do to the bone, then soak cloth in black styptic vinegar, and especially if it is summer, and don't apply ointment or anything else on the wound that has oil, so that no putrefaction and corruption occur in it.
And especially administer stars in the hour of your completion of the restoration of the bone, and let the wound remain uncovered unless you insert the trauma with forceps and use bandages according to the quantity of the wound.
And guard yourself with all caution that you do not strain the wound with the fracture, for many times foolish doctors have done this and caused death or harmful corrosion or putrefaction on their patients, it is a matter of life. And if your tightness is loose, soft, different from the tightness of the other fractures.
And if the wound is great or it is bad, and you fear some harmful accidents which we have mentioned, and you feel pain in that place, then do not put stars on it, but make an envelopure of hard cloths in the place of stars and tighten it with those.
And when about a day or two has passed and the wound begins to mend, and in it is engendered pus, then remove above the cloth which you had placed on it with vinegar, and especially administer cauteries, of which according to our custom we medicine wounds, thus with cauteries of tetrafarmacon and alike.
And it is convenient for you to loosen the ligature and consider the wound every day morning and evening until it is consolidated and closed, and that the member be prepared in such a way that the putrefaction runs from it to its parts below with ease.
If after several days the wound is not consolidated or the pus is not discharged from it, then know that here are signs of the little ones because you touch the wound with a tent. And of those signs which are separated and removed, those from whom the member is not separated and they cause pain, pierce them according to what you can do it.
And if it happens to the wound that it suppurates or becomes light, so is stiomenia, or another kind of corruption and putrefaction, then do what convenes to its cure, of which a precedent is given in its chapter.
And of that in which you have to stay the same word and make known your opinion: when a large bone is broken, raise it above the member thus with the bone of the thigh and of the support and alike of those of the great members, and do not presume traction on it, nor its extraction for many times death happens because of that; leave it so that pus runs from it, for if it is strong by itself it will fall after about xx days or .xxx.; And then cure the wound if you see it, and if not leave that.
Chapter .XX.
Of the cure of nodation which happens in the track of any fracture.
Many times this nodation happens in the track of healing fracture, and especially it is near to the joints, and its figure of the member is affected; and usually the member is prohibited from its natural operation.
Then consider if the nodation is recent and administer in that medicines which have tightened as aloe, and milk thistle, and marjoram, and wild thyme, and alike; so take some or all of those, and mix them with vinegar, or with egg white, or with wine, and apply that on the nodation on wool, and constrict that on it by good compression.
And let the compression which do not remove that for several days; and then loosen it and repeat another, until the nodation is soft; or tighten on it a leaf of lead descending, because lead has property of softening all that is swollen in members.
But if the nodation is already turned into stone and it is hard and necessary causes to bear that bandage on it tightly, then cut that by the part of pus which has risen from it, and insert the superfluity and prominent, or smooth that with some cauteries until it is soft; and cure that as it is healed.
Chapter .XXI.
Of restoration of fracture when it is restored and especially if that has happened to the member thin and frail, not according to its nature.
When bone fracture is restored, and especially if that happens to the member thin and frail, then that is not done but for several causes: of which one is multitude of solution of the ligature and of its binding made not according as it should; or by superfluity of compression of the ligaments within which the nourishment is prohibited from running to the member; or by multitude of effusion; or by superfluous movement, not in its hour; or by lack of blood in the body of the patient and by debility of it.
And cure of that is to make the patient eat and make his heart tender within which blood is multiplied in him; and administer bath; and insert gaultheria and licorice on it.
And then apply plaster to the affected limb, so that the plaster draws out moisture and continues to foment it with warm water until the swelling goes down and returns to its natural state.
Here is the next sentence:
Translation:
Translation:
Translation:
If the limp and the nodule are recent, then they should be bathed in warm water containing soft herbs such as comfrey leaves and roots, sweet basil, and similar; or a liniment should be made with linseed oil, or a poultice of marshmallow root should be applied, either with woolen cloth or olive oil, and then bandaged with that; or fatty figures should be made and bound with dove droppings, and similar to those medicines named "brothers' consolidation."
And sometimes it is dissolved by continuous gentle friction with the moistened hands, and motion of the limb in all directions at all times.
But if tortuosity has already gone too far and become strong and turned to stone, and requires treatment with iron, then let the pus above be dried up, and the continuation of the bone be dissolved, and let that which is superfluous of the nodule be cut away from the bone with thin instruments, and ease be administered in that by solicitation and study.
Chapter 23.
Of speech in dislocation.
Dislocation is the displacement of one of the joints of its place, by which it is prohibited from moving, and the figure of the limb is altered, and brings great pain and injury to the patient.
Therefore, when dislocation occurs, let it be immediately forced back into place, and not delayed in being reduced, for if it is delayed, the joint will be inflamed and very strong, and the reduction of the dislocation will be difficult.
And for that reason, one should not be bled or stretched during the hour of inflammation, because many times it brings on spasms and pain to the patient.
But when this happens, let you resort to phlebotomy on the patient, and let him be laid flat so that he may rest the inflammation; and let the limb be bathed with warm water and oil, and let it be reduced with ease.
And every limb shall be cured by what its memory will return to its place.
And now we have ordered the chapters on dislocation according to what was preceded in fractures, from the highest part of the body down to the lowest.
Chapter 24.
Of the cure for dislocation of the lower jaw.
The two mandibles are dislocated if not bitten; and the dislocation of both is done in one of two ways: they are either dislocated from their places by a small movement and slightly softened, or they are fully dislocated and completed, so that they are softened at the joint where saliva runs down the patient's throat, and he cannot hold it in his mouth or close his mouth, and his tongue is wrapped around his words.
But when the dislocation of him is slight, then in the greatest dispositions it returns by itself for a slight cause.
But if the dislocation is entire and completed, then let the reduction of it be administered gently, and not delayed at all.
And let the minister hold the patient' head, and let the doctor put one of his fingers in the root of the dislocation of the mandible inside the patient's mouth, if the dislocation is on one side; or that he put both fingers in together, if the dislocation is on both sides, and the others outside with which he grips; and command the patient to cease moving his mandibles and relax those everywhere; and let the doctor grip the mandible and press it in until it returns to its place.
And if the reduction of it is difficult, and especially if both mandibles are fully dislocated, then administer evaporation with warm water and oil, so that the reduction of both is made gentle, and do not delay the reduction of both at all, as we have said.
And therefore when they are returned and are closed, and the mouth of the patient is not softened, then pause upon them with a powder of linen with cerot, and let it be made of wax and rozat oil; and let it be bound with ease by mild bonds.
And let the patient sleep on his back, and let his head stand between two pillows, so that he does not bite to the right or left; and do not force him to chew for any reason; having his food be lion's paw, so that when the pains are increased and the mandibles are swollen, then let him bite what he will.
And that shall be administered with ease, and do not work upon the opening of the mouth after eating and drinking and waking, so that the mandible may be swollen and healed.
And if the reduction of two mandibles is difficult when they are dislocated at any time and not returned to their places, then many times it happens that fevers and continuous fever occur, and very strongly the belly of the patient is swollen, and very strongly he vomits pure cholera.
And when you see that, then know that it is a loss; and many times the one to whom that happens dies within ten days.
Chapter 25.
Of the reduction of the dislocation of the collarbone and the extremity of the muscle.
The collarbone is not dislocated from the side within by its continuation with the shoulder; and sometimes it is dislocated at the outer part, and that is declared by feeling.
And its restoration is that the patient hangs over his head and extends his arms. And let it be pressed into place with your palm with strong compression, for it will return.
And let plaster and powder be paused upon that and strengthened there.
But the extremity of that which is connected to the collarbone and continued with it, is not dislocated in any day; then let it be reduced and closed as we have said and according to what is your apparatus.
And let plaster and powder and tightness be paused upon that, and command the patient to adhere in tranquility and rest until it is healed.
And with this medicine of cure, the extremity of the muscle is reduced when it is separated from its place.
Chapter 26.
Of the reduction of the dislocation of the muscle.
Know that the muscle is not dislocated except in three ways, of which one is that it is dislocated at the tip of the tittil at the lower part.
And the second is that it is dislocated at the top of the muscle, and that is done quickly; and it is not dislocated at the sides by the shoulder; and it is not dislocated at the front by the nerves.
And most of all it is dislocated and out from the lower parts beneath the tittil, and most of all in those whose flesh is thin, it is dislocated quickly; but in those in which there is much flesh, it is forced out with difficulty.
And very often it happens to some men by blow or fall, and the muscle of him is inflamed with inflammation from inflammation, and it is healed by that which has already been dislocated.
Therefore, let you inquire about that while you are on top of him, and let the process be in his cure.
And it is known that the dislocation of him is when it is at the lower parts beneath the tittil; so that you distinguish between the dislocated muscle and the uninjured muscle, for you press upon them with manifest difference; and you press in the head of the muscle concavity and beneath the tittil from the touch of the head of the muscle just as a nail, and let the patient not be able to reduce his hand to its shoulder, nor move that by any movements.
If it is dislocated, you must obviously feel a click and it cannot be hidden.
And from this dislocation, there is an easy reduction when it is fresh and the patient is young.
And the reduction of this is that the minister lifts the patient's hand to his shoulder; and then places his fingers under the patient's chin, and lifts the joint with strength back into its place; and the minister lifts the patient's hand, and stretches it upward; and then he places it underneath so that it returns more easily.
But if it does not return after what we have said, and because of the beginning of how the dislocation occurred, many days later, the patient should be bathed in hot water and given an ointment that softens and lubricates like a mixture of oil from tall plants, fenugreek, and melilot in water, and it should be applied.
And then the patient should be reclined on his back and a pillow placed under his chin, held between elevation and compression, and the doctor should place his thumb on the globe, and lift the head of the muscle with strength, and pull the patient's hand so that it is not caught at the top; and another minister should hold the head of the patient so that it is not caught at the bottom as this returns to its place.
And if you want, reduce this second way: and it is that you ensure the presence of a man who is taller than the patient, and he should stand on the same side as the dislocation, and insert his arm underneath the patient's chin and lift the patient's chin upward to the top while the patient is suspended in air; and another minister should pull the patient's hand from the bottom of his abdomen. But if the patient is thin, then it returns right away due to the cause of suspension, because of gravity.
And it is reduced in the same way: and it is that a long post is placed on the ground, the top of which is rounded in shape, like a mortar, neither thick nor slender; and then cushions are placed underneath the patient; and the patient stands according to the length of the post, and his hand is stretched out to the bottom on the other side; and his body is stretched on the other side with strength, because the joint returns to its place with speed.
And if the reduction is difficult due to all of the causes we have mentioned, then use this treatment: and it is that you take a post two yards long, four inches wide, and one inch thick; and its thickness should be removed in the area under the chin according to this form:
And then soft cushions are placed on top of the round head so that the post does not hurt the patient.
And then the patient's chin is placed underneath, and his hand or arm is stretched out over the post to the bottom; and the post is tied around the elbow and arm and fingertips.
Then the arm is placed on a step of stairs according to its width; and the hand is stretched out to the bottom; and his body is suspended on the other side as the joint returns immediately.
And when the instrument is completed according to any method that is possible for you; and then a bandage is placed underneath the chin, evenly as much; and then an ointment prepared from ground moly with honey is applied over the entire muscle, just like it is rolled over; and the area around the chin is compressed with decent tightness; and the bandage is rolled over the ointment, and his hand is connected to his neck, and it is left, and his hand is not caught for seven days.
And let the food of the patient be little, until the member is comforted, because it is easier for his healing.
And then food is given more frequently after seven or eight days, and exercise is done; and if it is firm and not soft, then it is healed.
But if the joint is dislocated many times due to humidity that happens to it or due to another cause, then in that case, cautery should be administered with three punctures as mentioned earlier in the chapter on cautery.
And if all of this is done and then after seven days the bandage is removed and the joint is not firm, and the ointment and compression are applied to it several times, and it is not firm, and there is a cat, or he cannot lift his arm upward to the top; then know that the nerves of him, which are at the head of the muscle, are cut or extended or soft; and know that the joint will never return to its place.
From the dislocation that is done to the feet and the breast or the parts behind, the reduction is done with thrusting and extension by hand, as it returns.
And let the other compression and cure be applied to it as it is healed.
And if the healing happens slowly in the member and there is slowness in its movement, then the patient should take baths several times as that heaviness is relieved and he returns to his first nature.
Chapter .XXVII.
Of the cure of dislocation of the neck.
Know that the joint of the neck is dislocated with difficulty and returns with difficulty; and it is dislocated to all parts, and most to the front from the back, and its dislocation is not hidden from you because it is evident, when you adjust the neck dislocated by the throat, then it is declared to you manifestly, because the joint is concavely and cannot bend the arm or touch with that his own muscle.
And know that your neck joints are dislocated as soon as it comes to you with an abscess cauterized, because if it comes to you with an abscess cauterized, the reduction is difficult, and most of all when it is at the back parts, because above all the other species of dislocation, it has greater pain, and many times it ends in death.
And the restoration of it, when it is possible to reduce, is that his hand is stretched with two hands, and his arm is expanded, and the doctor's hands are on the neck and underneath him; and he pushes the joint with his fingertips or the edge of his palm inward so that it returns to its place.
But if the dislocation is at the front parts, then it returns as he bends his hand with his own hand, as he thrusts the neck with the edge of his palm.
And if the dislocation does not obey reduction, then administer violent extension and a strong blow.
And two ministers should expand his arm, and hold that joint so that it is not caught due to the extension.
And then his arm is rolled over all parts, because it is wrapped in a long folded cloth over his hand, or bandage.
And when the doctor touches the joint with his hand, he should smear it with some oil so that it aids in lubricating the joint with ease; and then he pushes the joint with violent thrust inward as it returns.
And then its reduction should be that it is placed over that ointment in which it was bound and tightened with liniment, and let it dry with a gentle heat; and his arm is suspended from the neck and left for several days.
And he should be unbound; and if the joint is formed in its place, then you should loosen his ligament and leave it there.
And if you see the joint is not strained, then you should repeat the plaster and the ligament, and leave it for a few days until it is relaxed; and then loosen it.
But if it happens to him gravity in the reduction of the joint, and his disposition is in movement, then administer moisture in bath and subtle friction, and compression, while he is moved away; or pause over the joint ointment, if it is a joint of moving fat; and then it should be bound, and leave it on the bone for day and night. And then stop that, and put him in a bath; and when he is warm, then you should rub the joint with tempered friction, and then repeat over it ointment, if it is a joint of moving, once, and the second, and the third,. Corruption has already occurred in the brain through the instrument of bathing, so it should be treated with liniment.
And if you want, put on that wound of cow's milk and calve it with a string over that; and do this several times, because that is moist and returns to its disposition.
Chapter .XXVIII.
Of the cure of dislocation of the elbow, if it is of the joint that is between the arm and the hand.
The elbow of the hand is sometimes displaced, and its reduction from dislocation is easier, and it is the contrary in other joints, but nevertheless there must be velocity in its reduction in the hour in which it is displaced, lest the place should become apoplectic or apoplexy occur in it.
And the reduction of its dislocation is that you put the joint of the hand of the patient on a table and have the minister extend his hand, and the doctor puts his hand or the palm of his hand on the prominence of the joint, and push it in until it returns to its place.
But nevertheless there must be considered if the palm is already turned to the belly of the hand, then the patient should put his fist on a table opposite to the extension and reduction; and if the dislocation is previous to the fist, then the position of the hand of the patient should be intrinically upon the table, so that the hand of the doctor lies over that prominence of the joint.
And therefore if he returns immediately, it is good; and if not, then tighten that with plaster, yielding the apoplexy and leave it; and do not repeat this, because if you do not suffer or cannot bear the reduction of it until several days have passed.
But nevertheless the joint is bent according to its tortuosity; and do not cause any pain to the patient, unless his hand is softened and cannot tighten anything; then you should know that the nerves are torn or cut, and there is no skill in it except that it is tightened with cautery near its joint and tightly bound to it.
Therefore when the elbow is returned, then put over it plaster which we have recommended, and let it be left and bound for several days; and then loosen it and let it be left and the hand of him exercised.
But if its movement is impeded and any heaviness occurs in it, then loosen that with warm water and friction several times, until it is relaxed.
Chapter .XXIX.
Of the cure of dislocation of the fingers.
Sometimes the fingers are completely dislocated.
And when any finger is dislocated on the back of the palm or belly, then press the finger and push its dislocation with your fingers, until it returns.
And then support the head of the finger, and suspend that depending on the part to which it is dislocated, and leave it for two days.
And then suspend that and extend that until it is straight in that its day.
And when it is night, loosen that according to that narration, and do not cease to loosen it during the day and exercise with movement, and do this in the night; and do this for several days until it is tight.
And do this if it is dislocated to the belly of the hand; and loosen that to that part and do with that your first operation, until it is healed.
And likewise do with that when it is dislocated to other parts.
Chapter .XXX.
Of the cure of dislocation of the vertebrae of the back.
When it happens to any of the vertebrae of the back or neck complete dislocation, and only a few vertebrae remain in their places, then there is no cure for that, because death approaches the patient.
And the sign of that is that the excretion of the patient is outside his will, and he cannot retain it; and often some members of him are softened or both legs or two arms, or one of those; or a vertebra is torn from its place, because often it is torn and often the removal of those to four parts.
Then that is torn to the parts behind and is called hernia.
But the cure of it is that then you consider if the hernia occurs from infancy, because then there is no cure for it nor of that is there no healing at all.
But in that which comes from falling or by beating or by similar to those, then the Ancients have described their ways of curing with long speech, of which the most returns with profit; but I and I have abbreviated that of which the excess of it, by its nearness to my intention has exposed me to that, on which I have expounded and formed various instruments.
And of those none is cured except that which occurs on the back precisely with that which I have described.
And let the patient be extended upon his face upon a flat pillow, and let him be extended below a wet cloth so that his feet are not cold.
And then a straight staff should be placed, fixt in the earth at the end of the pillow around his head; and another staff in the air beneath his feet at the other end of the pillow.
And one minister should hold the staff, and it should not be fixed in a pit; and another minister should hold the other according to that form.
And then wrap around the head of the patient and under the armpits let the lion's tongue be stretched; and extend the end of the tongue to the staff which is opposite his head, and loosen that in him; and then tighten the other ligament over his loins with his fingers, and let it be bound over his feet; and then adjust all the ligaments and loosen those in the other staff which is opposite his feet.
And then the ministers each extend the ligament to the end of the staff, and let not the two staffs be torn and the ligaments of their places in which they are fixt, but nevertheless do not fix them as I have said.
And the doctor put his palms over the vertebra with strength until it returns, or that he lie on a table, and then let him adjust his feet upon the table until he returns.
But if he does not return by this form, then take a table of which the width or length is in the air for three arms, and hollow in the wall of which we have said that it is opposite to the patient a place into which enters the end of the table. Then place the smaller part of the board over the spine, and the doctor places his feet on the other end, and stretch well so that the spine is straightened and returns to its place.
And if you want, open the anus with your hand; and you should put the patient's head on the ground in front of his feet, the length of which is one arm, and his head in front of his heels, two feet; and the length between each post is a palm, and now there is made on each post a hole through which the rope runs, and each is very firmly fixed to the ground so that it is not moved.
And there should be placed a round post in which is the pulley, and it is wound around the two pegs of the two posts.
And on its end is a hole in which the post is formed, the length of which is a palm where it is wound; and on the other two posts there is similar to that.
Then stretch the ligaments that you have tightened on the patient's feet in the hole that is under his head, and the ligaments that you have tightened on his thighs in the pulley that is under his feet.
And then fix each pulley and have an assistant twist the pulley with his hand, and the doctor straightens the spine as we have said.
And when the spine is returned and the place is healed, then cover it with a paste of oil and wax, and stop it up; and then place over the paste a board whose width is three fingers or so, and the length of it is the quantity that covers the area of the hunchbackness, and over the top of the spine.
And then let it be bound with a ligament as we have said, and feed the patient subtle food while he is healing.
And if any swelling remains in the area at the end of the healing, then cover that with medicines that soften and smoothen by application of the board for a long time, which we have recounted; and now it is applied to that place lead sheet.
And sometimes there is swelling in the rear of the spine's two bones, and it is healed by that dislocation; and it is the bone which already swells so that it will not cover him with this medicine, for it will soon cause death to him.
Chapter .xxxi.
Of cure for a dislocated hip.
Know that the joint of the hip and the joint of the muscle do not bend but only dislocate, and do not happen to those which happen to other joints of little removal and concavity.
And the joint of the hip is dislocated according to four ways, for it is dislocated at the inner parts, or at the outer parts, or at the front parts, or at the back parts.
And mostly it is dislocated at the inner parts, and few at the front or back parts.
And the sign of its dislocation at the inner parts is that when you straighten the patient's leg, it is longer and the joint is more prominent than of the healthy one, and the patient cannot bend his foot because of the lengthening, and there is a place which lengthens the joint by an aposteme cauterized, so that the head of the thighbone has come here.
And the sign of that which it happens to dislocate at the outer parts is that its accidents are contrary to those above.
And the sign of that which it happens to dislocate at the front parts is that it extends his leg according to its complement, but indeed does not bend that joint without pain which is in the joint, and if it forces itself to walk and cannot go forward over that towards the front parts; and his urine is retained and his joint is apostematized, and he should walk on his heel.
And the sign of that which it happens to dislocate at the back parts is that it does not extend the joint, nor can bend that joint towards the front which bends the joint, and his leg is shorter than the other one, and his joint is softened, and the head of the thighbone is at that place.
But the reduction of the species of this dislocation is that you consider, then, if the dislocation is old and antique, which has already been healed by you administering its reduction and remaining according to its disposition, then there should not be done a prosthesis on it.
But in that one of which the dislocation is recent, and it is one of the four species of dislocation, then you go to that one you want to turn the joint and extend it at the inner parts and the outer parts, and then to the right and left, for it will soon return and not need another cure.
But if it does not return in this way, then you should prepare a strong minister and extend the leg of him from the bottommost part, or with his fingers, or with a ligament which is tied over the leg below the joint; and another minister extends his hand over that below in such a way as to put his fingers below the nipples of him; and then tighten with a ligament lion over the root of the thighbone, and let another minister press the end of the ligament.
And it should be extended either from the inner part to the antingling of the collarbone, or from the back part to the part of the shoulder blade.
And it should be extended in one go while the patient is raised up by his body from the earth and hangs bent.
And this species of extension is common to all four.
And so if the dislocation returns by what we have said, then all is well; and otherwise, it is necessary for every species that I say about its own cure.
In its own reduction, when it is dislocated, and the dislocation is at the inner parts, let the patient be laid on his back; and then place the ligaments over the root of the thighbone in that place between the head of the thighbone and the part which is below the joint; and then extend the ligament above from the part of the antingling to the highest part of the collarbone.
And then another strong minister should take the armpits of him, and hold up the large place of the patient's thighbone and extend to the outer parts by violent extension, for that returns in its place.
And this species is of further lengthier cure by which this member is reduced than the other species.
But if it is excused from you and does not obey the treatment by this species of cure of all, then let his two legs be bound together with a strong ligament, lengthier, over both heels and over both joints.
And let the length of each of his parts be the quantity of four fingers, and let the leg of him be extended more than the other by a quantity of two fingers.
And then let the patient be suspended over the head of the post, and let it be in the middle; and let its length from the earth be the quantity of two arms.
And then command a strong youth to shorten the head of the thighbone, and let it be suspended by another youth, and that other youth shorten the thighbone with strength, for the joint will return to its place with speed.
But in the true reduction when it is a dislocation to the outside, let the patient lie on his side as we have recommended with the elbow bent; and let the ligament be stretched properly over the patient's chest and over their feet.
And let two poles be placed, one at the patient's feet and the other at their head; and let poles be placed under their buttocks, with a cloth moistened in vinegar wrapped around the pole so that the patient is not harmed by the pole being between their thighs, so that the extension to the lower parts is not drawn.
And let each minister extend to their side, and the doctor have his hand on the reduction according to the art.
And when the dislocation is to the front parts, then let the chest be stretched slightly, and it is according to this narrative on the elbow; and let the doctor place the palm of his right hand over the painful shoulder, and let him tightly hold that with his other hand, and with this tight grip he extends that to the lower parts to the tip of the toe.
And if the dislocation is to the back parts, then let the patient not be extended to the lower parts, and they are elevated above the earth; unless it is placed on a hard surface, as well as how we have said about the placement of it on two arms; and they are on their face and their ligaments are stretched, according to what we have said, there is no harm.
And let compression be administered with a table over the place to which you turn the joint.
And when the reduction is done according to what you see — and the sign of the reduction is not hidden from you, and it is that you extend the patient's two arms, and when you see those bent and the patient stretches his arm and expands without any excuse, then you know that the joint according to what it is returned — and then you adjust both thighs and apply plaster and stretch with a bandage so that the joint is not damaged in any of the parts; and let the patient rest for three or four days.
And then loosen the ligament and the plaster, and compare one arm to the other.
Then, if you see those bent in truth, then you know that the dislocation is already closed, and then let the patient walk.
And if you see any cause of softening, then return and plaster that, and stretch it according to your first stretching, and let that be for three days.
And then loosen that, and have that delay in walking on any day, until it is comforted.
Chapter .xxxii.
Of the treatment of dislocation of the shoulder joint.
The shoulder joint is dislocated in three ways, for it is dislocated to the outside parts, and to the inside parts, and to the lower parts but not to the front parts.
And the sign of dislocation of it is that you command the patient to apply their arm to their thigh; then you know that the shoulder joint is dislocated.
And the restoration of all its ways is that you make the patient lie straight, so that they already extend their arm, if they can on that; adhere to the patient's two cheeks with your hands, and place the patient's foot between your feet; then let another minister extend the patient's arm while you hold their shoulder with your palms, and another minister extends the patient's leg while the doctor applies reduction to the shoulder joint with strength.
And the sign of its reduction is that their arm adheres to their thigh without laborious lifting.
And then plaster that and have the arm adhere to the thigh, and then bind those together with a bandage for three or four days, and then loosen them.
And do not let the patient walk for several days, until it is healed and comforted.
But if its reduction to you is excused, then administer strong extension with the ligaments from which in the treatment of the hip joint there is preceding narrative.
Chapter .xxxiii.
Of the treatment of dislocation of the ankle joint.
The ankle joint is sometimes dislocated by small removal, and sometimes it is dislocated according to completion, and its dislocation is made either to the inside parts or to the outside parts.
And the sign of its dislocation is that you see the ankle swollen proceeding from the part to which it is dislocated.
But the treatment of its removal is of slight reduction, and it is extended with facility by hands and bent while it returns.
But in its treatment when it is dislocated according to completion, let the patient lie straight, and have a strong and valiant minister from behind their back in the middle location of them.
And then you with your right hand take the ankle from the highest part, and with your left hand from the lowest part of the ankle in the location of the ankle bone.
And then pull the ankle to you with your right hand, and then with the left twice, and then extend with the left; and press the foot of the ankle to you with the right behind the arm in its labor.
And do that two times according to what we have counted.
And then press the foot of the ankle to the calf the third time, and you are at the ankle bone.
Therefore if it returns in one time or two according to this way, and if you see the ankle bent, it is good; and if not, then repeat the operation on it, for it will return.
But if to you the reduction of it is prohibited according to what we have recommended, then let the patient lie on their back on earth, and stretch a wooden stake in firm earth, and that it be placed between the patient's thighs, and you already wrapped a cloth around it so that the patient does not slip.
And then the minister of it has his thighs, and then another minister extends the arm with their hands or with the ligament that lies on the neck of the ankle; and then each minister extends against the extension of their fellow, and the stake is extended between the patient's thighs holding them so that the body of him is not drawn to the lower parts because of his extension.
And then the doctor applies reduction with their hands, and another minister has the healthy thigh to the lower parts, for the dislocation returns with facility.
And then when the dislocation returns and you are informed of its reduction, then apply plaster and stretch it firmly with ligaments, and tie the ankle to the calf.
And let you beware or keep watch on the nerves which are behind on the ankle, so that the ligament over it is not vehement and that one does not lead it strongly.
And then let him lie for two or three days; and if the ligament is softened, stretch it.
And then loosen that on the third day or on the fourth, and prohibit the patient from walking for 40 days. But if it is forced to go in front of that space, then there is no guarantee that the dislocation is not dissolved and corrupted in it, and so it receives no cure.
And if it happens that the wound turns bad, then you must apply in the treatment of it that which we described earlier, in another place of cure and of bandaging, until it is healed.
Chapter 34.
Of the cure of dislocation of the big toe of the foot.
Let him who is dislocated be anointed with a little oil, and that which is not difficult, rather let it be lighter.
But if the dislocation is in one of the joints of the big toe of the foot, then let him have his foot cut off from under him and lie on the ground or a table, and remain there as if he were walking.
Then you stand on your feet and place your foot over what is causing the pain from the joints, and then press that with your foot with strength until it returns, and see if it has been anointed and there is no lump.
Then place under his foot a board that supports the whole foot, which has two ends, and then stretch it with decent and firm tension for three days; and then loosen it and let him rest from walking for several days, until he is restored and his healing is assured.
Chapter 35.
Of the kinds of dislocation that are done by plague or by fracture or by any other cause.
When one of those causes occurs, and you persevere in the cure and restoration of him, many times death ensues.
And so you must not presume upon the cure of him, but let him who is wise in the art, with great skill, compassion, and pity, be slow, not hasty or presumptuous, and use at the beginning of medicines that soothe bad wounds only slightly, and let the patient depend on divine judgment, unless you hope for salvation from loss, from the alleviation of illness, and see some hope in it. And then immediately strive to reduce him at the beginning of the cause, before he develops a bad wound.
And then if the member returns as we want, then administer treatment that soothes bad wounds and cures the plague with what is suitable for him of the dry ointments.
And if the dislocation is by fracture and the bones are separated, then you must persevere in the treatment of them, and do in those what we have said earlier about the simple illnesses of those.
And guard and avoid, according to your ability, that from the instrument in the ways of fear as it is foretold to you in my prophecy; for that is better for you, and more beneficial to your true glory, and more healthful for your real body, those in your time. Thus ends the words of Al-Bukasi perfectly, of which God be praised. Amen.
