O sons, if I have fulfilled this book for you, which is the last of the science of medicine, through its completion in me, and through its expositions and declarations by me, it seems to me that you will complete it with this treatise, which is part of the operation with the hand, and that is surgery.
For the operation with the hand is deprived in our time and age of all its strength, while the science of it is lost and its traces are left behind; and there remain of it only a few small descriptions in the books of the Ancients, which they have changed and directed to error and confusion, so that their understandings of it are closed off and its art is prolonged and stretched out.
And it seems to me that you will enliven this through the ordering of this treatise according to the way of exposition and declaration and abbreviation; and so that you may come to the forms of the tools of cautery and of the other instruments of the work as is fitting, through addition of declaration and through preparation for it, which is necessary.
But the cause why there is no good artificer with his hand in our time is that the art of medicine is long, and that one has to be exercised before it in the science of anatomy, which was known to the Gauls as they knew the parts of the members and their forms; and the connection and separation of them; and had knowledge of the bones, the nerves, and the tendons, and the number of these, and their outgoing.
And for this Hypocras says that with a name is much, but in the work little, and most especially in the art of the hand.
But we have already said this in the introduction to this book; for whoever is not learned in what we have said of anatomy is evacuated and will fall into error by which men will die, as I have seen many of those, for some are formed in this science and throw themselves from it without experience.
For I saw a foolish and inexperienced physician make an ulcer of scrofula in the neck of a woman, and incise some arteries of the neck so that much blood flowed and the woman died under his hand.
And I saw another physician who had to swallow a stone of a man who had a process in his state; and the stone was large, and he came to him and pulled out that stone with a piece of the bladder, and the man on the third day died.
And I called to draw out that one, and saw that by the size of the stone and the disposition of the patient, who lay over him, he would die.
And I saw another physician who took stipends from a duke of our land for surgery, and treated a broken bone of a black person; and through his ignorance he drew out the fracture on the wound with poultices and bandages with strong tightness, and did not leave the wound to breathe.
And he drew it out according to his desires, and bound it up, and left it for several days, and commanded that we loosen the bandage; and he did this so that the leg and thigh became ulcerated, and came to harm.
And I was called to him, and prepared to loosen the bandage, and peace came to him, and he grew calm of his pains.
But indeed the corruption was confirmed in the member, so that I could not restrain it, and the corruption did not cease to wander in the member until the patient died.
And I saw another physician who made an ulcer of a malignant cancer, and it was ulcerated for several days, until the wickedness of it grew great with its lord.
The cause of this is that the malignant humour is pure in its nature; but it does not come to it through iron, unless there is a member which suffers from it altogether.
And for this, sons, it is necessary for you that the operation with the hand be considered in two ways; one is an operation associated with health, and the other an act with which are associated the greatest dispositions.
And I have already exhorted this in every place of this book in which occurs an operation in which there is error and fear; so that it is necessary for you to guard against this and leave that, so that the foolish do not obstruct your way and dissuade you.
And therefore take up your weapons with solicitude and with protection of God, and your patients with facility and firmness.
And use the best way through the grace of God, to lead to health and praiseworthy success; and lay aside the terrible illnesses of difficult cure, and take up your arms against what causes you fear, so that solicitude in your faith and in your name does not fail: for it will remain for your glory, and more in the world and beyond to your sanctities.
Gaulish already said in some of his own words: “Do not treat illnesses with evil, so that bad physicians are not named.”
And I have composed this book according to three chapters.
Begins the division of the book, and first of the first part. The first chapter ordered from the head into the feet, in the forms of the instruments and in the tools of cautery, and of what is necessary in the operation.
The division of the second part. The second chapter, of bleeding and piercing, and of cupping, and of bandages, and of extraction of thorns and their like, all chaptered and ordered according to the forms of the instruments.
The third chapter, of restoration and dislocation, and of cure for twisting and their like; a chapter ordered from the head into the feet, and of the forms of the instruments.
May I declare the quality of the parts of that cautery and the pains of it, and in what disposition cautery is prohibited.
Therefore I say that the word of the quality of the part of cautery and of the pain of it is long and prolix, and subtle through science, and secret hidden; and many wise men have spoken much of it, and they disagree on it, and for me a little of their words suffices, fearing prolixity.
And therefore I say that cautery brings forth universally in all complections, except two complecions, which are complictions of cold without matter.
In the compliction cold and dry with matter they disagree; for some say that cautery is beneficial to it, and others say the contrary of that, that cautery is not convenient in illness which is by quality and dryness, for the nature of fire is quality and dryness, and inconvenient that illness cold and dry is cauted and dry be healed.
And he says the contrary of that, that by cautery is made benefit in all illness cold and dry which one sees in the bodies of men; for when you compare the body of man and his humours to the compliction of fire, one feels the body of man hot.
And I say through the word of that, that I have discovered this experiment many times.
However, one should not come to this topic unless he is experienced and practiced in the chapter of cauteries through his knowledge of the diversity of human complexions and the dispositions of illnesses in their bodies, and the causes of those, and their accidents, and the space of time of those.
But in the other complexions, there is no fear of harm, especially with cold and damp illnesses; all doctors have agreed on this, and they are not disagreed upon when cauterization is done on them.
And know, children, that the secret of healing through cautery with fire and its goodness is that it is a simple action that only affects the part that is cauterized and does not affect any other part except with little harm.
But the action of a burning medicine spreads to the other parts of the body and makes it difficult to heal them and causes great harm.
But fire, through its subtlety and the goodness of its substance, only affects the part that is cauterized and not any other parts except with little harm. And we know this from experience and from a long time serving as a student in the study of the true causes; and so I am excused from speaking at length about it. And if it were not for the fact that I was not reading from a book, but rather a secret hidden in my mind, that the heat of fire and the quality of its action in the body and how one expels illnesses through it, demonstrated through philosophical reasoning, would be sharper in your minds.
And know, children, that they disagree on the time when it is convenient to do cauterization and stop, choosing the best time in springtime.
And I say that cauterization is convenient at all times because the harm caused by the accidental time is submerged in the benefit of it that is drawn from cauterization, especially if the cauterization is for pains or necessary wounds, strong and festering, which do not endure delay due to the fear of their coming, which is greater than the little harm caused by the timing.
And so do not fear in your hearts, o children, that this is not believed except by the common people and foolish doctors; it is that to that illness that is healed through cauterization, there is no reduction of time, and they pause the consequence of that.
And the cause is not as they think because cauterization is only in place of medicine that alters the complexion and dries the humidity which causes pain to come.
But cauterization surpasses medicine through the will of its strength and power of its action, and the greatness of its lord.
And it is possible that the illness returns at some time of the year, depending on the complexion of the patient and the location of their illness, and the strength of it, and what has been prepared in the body from the accumulation of excesses in it, and what has come to them through food intake and similar causes; but if the illness in which cauterization is administered is a subtle illness in a part with few excesses and humidity, just like tooth pain and its likes, then it is possible that the pain does not return, but this happens in small amounts.
But the common speech is that cauterization is the last resort of medicine; and this speech is true, not to say that they understand it, because they believe that it is not healing that benefits from medicine or any other cause except cauterization.
And the cause is in contrast to that; and the intention that cauterization is the last resort of medicine is only when we administer methods of healing on certain illnesses, and those medicines do not confer it, and especially at the end of the cause, they administer cauterization, and it benefits from that. And so from here we see that cauterization is the last resort of medicine, not according to the intention that the commoners and foolish doctors understand it.
And the ancients said that cauterization with gold is better than cauterization with iron; and they did not say this except for the equality of gold and subtlety of its substance.
And they said that the location of cauterization does not make a difference except when it is absolutely true; for we have already proven that it only makes a difference in some bodies without the others, and cauterization with gold is good and better than with iron just as they said; but when you do cauterization with fire with gold, it is not clear to you because it is heated according to the quantity that you want due to the thickness of the gold, and because it prepares to receive friction; and if you place it over the fire, some thin layers are formed so that the artisan can see through that.
And for this reason, cauterization with gold must be done more gently and closer to the operation.
And we have already ordered this chapter on cauterization according to chapters, and I have ordered those of the head between the feet, so that I may ask you what you want from it.
The first chapter.
This cauterization confers with humidity and coldness the servant accident of which there are two causes; it is a cause of soda and multitude of fluxes, called rhinitis, from the head to the parts of the ears and from the eyes flowing, and multitude of sleeping, and of tooth pain and of the gullet, and generally of all illnesses that come through coldness, just as paralysis, stroke, and their likes in those illnesses.
The form of this cauterization is as follows: first of all, command the patient to be evacuated with laxative medicine for three or four days, according to the strength of the patient and their age and habit.
And then command that they shave their head with a razor; and then let him lie between your legs on a low bed and let them place their hands on their feet.
And then pause the edge of your palm, then let it rest on the edge of the nose between your eyes. But when the place of your middle finger is reached, mark that place with a tent, and then light the cauterization olive, of which this is the form:
And then place it on the marked location, in such a way that it descends, and your hand be pressed little by little, and you revolve it.
And then lift your hand gently and look at the location; if you see that any amount of the head is uncovered with bone, just as with the amount of grain, then lift your hand and if it does not return with that iron, with another one, if it is cooled down, until that is seen by the eye what we have said to you.
And then take a little salt and dissolve it on the location and let it be for three days.
And then place over it cotton soaked in oil and let it be over it until the char of the fire is destroyed. And then heal the location with tetramedication ointment once it has healed.
And so they say that when the Roman plaster becomes wet, as many times you throw a cloth over it, it is better and more beneficial.
And some of them say that the bone should be cauterized within the eye, and to have the cauterization within it until a part of the substance of the eye is destroyed.
And then scrape away what is dry from the bone, and then heal it.
And others say that with the cautery one must go to the end, until they press on the strong bones within which are found the bones, and this is the form of small alpecat. They think that from that place the vapors of the head expire.
And if the ulcer is open for a long time, it should be healed until it is consolidated.
But I have not seen these two species of cautery at all, except in some men according to the path of fear; and leaving that aside, for me it is better for health when it is; because the head is devitalized by solution of continuity in him just as we have testified in other members, and especially when the patient's head has a phlegmatic nature.
And the species of cautery first is more safe and better for me; and of that house and with that work I am saved.
Chapter second.
Of cautery of the head.
When in the whole head there occurs a chronic and long pain and this is prolonged in the patient, and he uses leeches and cupping glasses and caput medusae and poultices and cataplasms and bandages and cauteries and similar remedies, and especially if he has already been cauterized with a cautery which we relate and does not benefit him at all from those causes, then consider that if the patient's head is of strong creation in its nature; and it is phlegmatic and finds great friction, then cauterize it after that with another cautery below that one a little. Then cauterize that above the horn of his head with a cautery until the scum is broken. The scum having been cut away and the quantity we have related discovered and cauterized, then cauterize that with a cautery in the rear part of the head in the place which is called a vessel — and that is the place in which the windsock is placed. And loosen your hand over it, and do not discover the bones, because by that the patient experiences great pain different from the pain of all other cauteries of the head.
And I say that this cautery is in its place, because the cautery with which you cauterize the horns of the head and the occipital is a more subtle cautery than that with which the middle part of the head is cauterized; and this is its form.
Chapter third.
Of cauterization of not ancient migration.
When in the front part of the head there is a hard pain, or a stinging pain goes into the eye, then evacuate with medicated shampoos, and administer the other treatment which I have written about in the beginnings of illnesses; and if all does not benefit, then cauterization in it is in two ways: either cauterization with an acute burning medicine, or with iron.
But cauterization with a burning medicine is that you take a piece of alder wood and cut it up and mix the ends of it with both ends of the cautery. Then pierce the location of the pain in the temple with a pointed lance until it is in the place below the scum, and hidden.
Then bind it tightly over it with a descending constriction, and let that be for the space of three hours; and then loosen the ligature and treat it with water poured on it until the place makes a blister.
Then cure that with an ointment until it is healed.
And if you wish, do this with some burning medicines which I have written about in the second treatise on burning medicines.
But the cauterization with iron is according to this manner: ignite the cautery of which this is the form:
and it is called a nail claw because its head has the form of a claw in which there is some curvature, and in the middle part of it is a small protuberance.
Then pause over the location of the pain, and hold your hand  — so that it is not heated by the iron which is below  — and turn the iron little by little with speed.
And if the quantity of it which is heated by the specificity of the scum as far as its depth, and raise your hand so that the artery is not heated which is below, so that there does not come a flow of blood.
Then moisten the cautery in salt water and pause it over the location, and let that be for three days; then pause a moistened cloth with vinegar on it, and cure it with an ointment until it is healed.
And if you wish, cauterize with the end of the scalpel according to cautery, and beware of incision of artery in this not ancient migration particularly.
Chapter fourth.
Of cauterization of ancient migration.
When you cure a migration with what we have said about the treatment preceding, and what we have said in the divisions of illnesses, and the treatment does not benefit, and you see for the illness that it does not suffice to it what we have said about the first cautery with medicine or with fire, then if you ignite the cautery cut into the scum until it is whitened, and when you have done this, then pause your hand over it for a while, and tighten it so that you cut the artery and it comes within to the bone.
However it is necessary for you to guard against the continuance of the mandible which is damaged because of mastication, and that the ligament not be heated and the nerve which hurts that, and that there not come from it a spasm.
And if it is over the custody and precaution of flow of blood from the artery that is cut, because in the cutting of it there is danger, and especially to him who ignores what he does and is not practiced and experienced; and let the operation be in him at the beginning.
And I will come with reminder of the regiment of flow of blood accidentally from the artery according to its way, in your location of this book.
And if you see of this illness that it does not suffice to that cautery and you see the patient's body tolerable, then cauterize that in the middle part of the head just as we have related, and cure the ulcer until it is healed.
And if you wish, administer the cautery which we have said in the chapter on stretching of artery with cautery having two ends, and that cauterization is better and more fitting.
Chapter fifth.
Of cauterization of pains of ears.
When in the ear there is pain from friction and it is cured with lacerative causes and with the other treatment which we have said in the division, and the pain is not alleviated, then ignite the cautery, and that is the one called puncta of which this is its form:
Then pause the cautery and let it be directed toward all of the ear just as the wheel is turned, or in the circuit of either eardrum if the pain is in one. Draw you out with the cautery of the edge of the ear little by little, so that you feel the location with your hand.
And if the cautery of many points in all the ears, and that is it, then cure the locations until they are healed.
Chapter sixth.
Of cauterization of torture.
Torture which is cured and has cauterization not but of the spices which come by phlegm, according to what we have said in the divisions of illnesses.
Avoid cauterization of the affected area due to dryness or nerve spasm.
When you treat this type of torture with blisters and scabs and wounds, and your cure is not effective, then you should cauterize the patient in three places: first, at the root of the ear; second, a little below his temple; and third, at the junction of two lips.
And apply your cautery opposite the affected area, for softening only occurs in the part that appears healthy.
And the way of cauterization is that you cauterize the ear at the highest point of its extremity, and on the temple another one, whose length should be according to the length of the fingernail; and apply your hand with the cautery until half of the size of a grain of cummin is burnt.
And this is the form of the cautery, and it is made by the cutler, its shape being that of a table. But it is more subtle if you make it a little smaller; and one should cut away the excess thickness a little.
Then treat the area with what has been described before, until it is healed.
Chapter 7.
Of cauterization for ancient apoplexy.
When apoplexy is ancient, and you treat it as we have said, but your cure is not effective, and the patient has no fever, then cauterize him in four places: on all the corners of his head; with a cautery, also on the middle of his head, as we have said; and with a cautery on his neck. And the manner of the cautery is done as it has been said above.
And it is cauterized on the mouth of the stomach; and it is more effective behind; and it should be treated with what has been described.
Chapter 8.
Of cauterization for oblivion caused by a flame.
Let the patient be given at the beginning large blisters and pills of the purgative.
Then scrape the head all over, and apply to his neck a plaster of vinegar described in the treatise on plasters.
And apply it several times; for that is the way of cauterization. And do that according to the order which medicine has given, which I have already said.
And if it heals well because of that, but if not, then do to him three cauteries in the back part of his head, which descend from the highest part of the head to the lowest part of the neck. And let the distance between each cautery be the thickness of a fingernail, and treat the cautery with what it proceeds from.
But if you wish to increase the number and the patient can tolerate it, then do to him cauteries in the middle part; and if you wish to increase even more, then do them on the two corners.
Then treat that until it is healed; and let the cautery be olive-shaped according to the form which has been given above.
Chapter 9.
Of cauterization of parasites and of softening of all the body.
Let the patient be purged in his head with blisters and what we have said; then scrape the head of the patient, and cauterize him with a cautery on the middle part of his head, and with a cautery on all the corners of his head, and with a cautery on his neck, and with three cauteries on the back part of his neck.
And if it is necessary in the softening of the body's parasites, and the patients tolerate it, and the illness is strong, then cauterize him with four cauteries on the back part of his neck, and lastly with a cautery on the place where half of a grain of cummin has been burnt, and lift up your hand. Then treat that until it is healed; and let this be an olive-shaped cautery.
Chapter 10.
Of cauterization for epilepsy.
The epileptic should not be cauterized unless the epilepsy is caused by phlegm.
And so, let the brain of him be purged at the beginning with herbs and with the other cure which we have said in the division when the patient is large and tolerates the exception of medicines.
And if he is a child who does not tolerate medicines, then administer to him purgatives and masticables, before which for several days there should be an abstinence from food.
Then scrape the head of the patient, and cauterize him with a cautery on the middle part of his head according to the previous manner, and with another cautery on the back of his head, and on each corner of his head. And if the patient is strong and tolerates it, then cauterize him with cauteries which I have described, having paralysis and softening of the body on the back part of his neck and the back part of his back.
And let the cautery be olive-shaped according to what has preceded it.
But if the patient is a child, then apply a subtle cautery according to this manner.
Chapter 11.
Of cauterization for melancholy.
When the causes of melancholy are corrupted humours and gross phlegm, then cauterize him with cauteries which we have said to cause paralysis.
And if the cause of melancholy is an excess which inclines to melancholy, and the patient's body is moist, then give him something which purges his brain according to what has preceded in the division.
Then scrape the head of the patient, and properly make a bandage of linen over his skull, and apply that to the middle part of his head.
And let the patient be seated, and let him be held in every part.
Then apply liniment; and it is more worthy of old wine of sheep. And warm that over the fire with a moderate heat, the amount which he can tolerate when it is on him. Then put that on the middle part of his head in the circle, and let him lie down until it is cold.
And do that to the patient every day for a week with one application, while he keeps his other regimen until it is healed; or if you wish, cauterize him making small points according to his strength, unless you have your hand over a cautery thus ordered: this is a cautery which moistens the brain in equality.
Then apply that cloth steeped in wine or in woolen rags.
Chapter 12.
Of cauterization for water which descends into the hole.
When you have been told of the coming of water into the hole through the passages which you have described in the division, then begin and give to the patient something which purges his brain, and guard that from all moistness.
And let him sweat in a bath for several days.
Then command that he wash his head, and cauterize him with a cautery on the middle part of his head; and then cauterize him with two cauteries on two temples if there is the coming of water into two holes, or from one side if there is the coming of water from one hole.
Penetrate with a cautery all the veins and arteries which are under the skin; and let the cauteries be long in that length of the temples.
Be careful of bleeding when cauterizing; and if you see bleeding from him, stop it with some medicine which is possible for you.
And let there come to you wisdom, which is in extraction of arteries and abstention from those, and caution regarding bleeding.
And sometimes it is cauterized in the neck below the bones with two cauteries recently produced.
Chapter 13.
On cauterization of old tears.
When tears of the holes are old and thickly gathered, and through the veins and arteries which are in the manifest place of the head, and it is verified that this is superfluous, then cauterize that with a cautery which we have recounted in the chapter on the beginning of water falling into the holes, and with a cautery in the middle place of the head, and with two cauteries in the neck below the temples, and with two cauteries in the neck below the bones. And if there is a need for addition, then cauterize that in all parts of the hole of the eye above the extremity of the eyebrow with a small cautery.
Chapter 14.
On cauterization for foul odor of the nose.
When you are treating someone with that which we have said in the division, and your treatment does not help, then prepare and give the patient enemas for three nights; then cut his hair, and cauterize him with a cautery made of olive oil. Then cauterize that with a cautery of clove on both eyebrows below the hair, one small cautery on each.
And be careful not to ignite the artery.
And this is the form of the cautery of clove:
Chapter 15.
On cauterization for softening of eyelids of the holes.
When the eyelid of the eye is made soft by illness or by moisture, then cauterize that eyelid with a cautery with this lunar cautery; and this is its form:
And if you treat it, cauterize that on both eyebrows a little with two cauteries all around, and let them be extended from the temples. Let the length of each cautery depend on the size of the eyebrow.
And do not press your hand with the cautery too much, but according to the amount that the upper part of the eyelid is adhered.
Chapter 16.
On cauterization for the eyelid of the eye when the hairs have turned to the parts inside and close the eye.
When the hairs of the eye have turned to the parts inside and close the eye, there are two ways to cauterize them: one way is with fire, and one way is with burning medicine.
If you cauterize him with fire, order the patient to open his eyes in such a way that he spreads out those hairs which are growing inwards, and let them be prolonged and curved; and if he closes his eye, then you strengthen his eyelids for him with a bandage so that he does not rub it while the hairs are growing.
Then when they are growing and curling, then put the head of the patient in your lap, and press on the eyelid of the eye with your finger, with a sign that is according to the shape of a dead leaf, and let the beginning of the sign be near the hairs.
Then put cotton dipped in egg white or in mullein tea on the eye.
Then heat up the cautery, of which this is the form:
Then cauterize over the figure which you have marked, little by little, in small spots, until the surface of the skin is burnt up, as though it were a leaf of myrtle; let it appear wholly as it should.
And a sign of health from your work is that you see the eyelid of the eye already contracted, and its hairs raised above the punctured place of the eye.
Then raise your hand and loosen it for three days, then put cotton on it with a bandage until the scar is healed. Then treat that with ointment until it is healed.
But if the hairs return for any cause, and the eyelid is made soft again, then do the cautery on that place again all over as you did at first.
But if the hairs are in the eyelid, then cauterize that until it is elevated to its natural place and is curved, and let the hairs not poke the eye.
But the cautery with burning medicine is that you order the patient to open his eyes in such a way that the hairs are prolonged and curved; then let the sign be made of linen according to the shape of a leaf of myrtle.
Then take of sage, one ounce, and of live coals, half an ounce. .I., Take that and mix it with honey, and make it into a poultice so that it is not cold; then spread that over the linen which is made according to the shape of a leaf of myrtle, and put that on one eye or both; then put cotton dipped in egg white on the eye, and let the head of the patient be in your lap.
Then hold the finger on the medicine and press that a little and do not rub it while the patient feels the biting of the medicine, for the biting is in him as though it were fire.
Then when he perceives that the biting has ceased, let him loosen the medicine and wash it off with water; then consider if you see the eyelid already lifted up as though it were washed after cauterization with fire or with incision, for then it is well; and if it returns to that of the medicine on the place in which the medicine did not take effect and is not blackened until your operation has been curved and the eye drawn together.
Then put a bandage on it so that the skin of the swelling is eradicated, and treat that with ointment of diascordium or another one until it is healed.
And it is necessary for you, after your operation to guard against the falling in of the medicine, and if the eyelid within a few days is made soft and some cause makes the hairs poke into the eye, then repeat your medicine on that place from which the eyelid is made soft, and altogether as you did at the beginning, and cover it so that it is healed.
And this is the form of a leaf of myrtle.
And know that the eyes of men are various according to magnitude and smallness, therefore according to that is made your contraction.
And do not be amazed at the way of rettitude for him who studies this art.
Chapter 17.
On cauterization for a fistula which is in the tear duct of the eye.
When you cure a fistula with that which we have said in the divisions of illnesses and your treatment does not confer, then know that you cauterize it according to this manner: order the patient to put his head in your lap, and let him hold his head by some servant in such a way that it is not rubbed or moved with his head.
Then put cotton dipped in egg white or in mullein tea on the eye of him.
Then heat up the cautery, of which this is the form:
Which is hollow, as it is shaped like a reed or a feather, from one extremity on which the cautery is made.
And if you wish, let it be penetrated into the other extremity. And if you want to let it come out like this with a tent.
But however, what is convenient is best for your work.
Then compress the fistula if it is open and draw out from him pus and dry that up. And if it is not open, then open it and extract the rottenness from him.
Then place upon him the cautery which should be well ignited and have your hand a little below the cautery at the start of the nose so that your hand does not err or the patient be disturbed, then place the cautery in the grommet and corrupt that.
And therefore if at the beginning of your cautery it pierces into the bone, that is good; and if not, then repeat the cautery once or twice, if necessary; and leave that as it is for three days, and then place upon that spot a plaster and surround it with an ointment which is drying until it is healed.
But if eleven days have passed and it is not healed, then place upon him an acute corrosive medicine so that the bone is uncovered and scrape according to what is convenient in his case.
And there is another manner of cautery for a fistula which some first said: enter into the place of the fistula and close it up and then pause in that fissure a subtle thread of which the form of it is; and pour into that the quantity of one ounce of molten lead; and hold your hand with good retention, and let not the patient be disturbed so that the molten lead does not reach the grommet of that; and cover where you pause upon the grommet of the patient with white linen or with water, for the lead adheres to the place of the fistula and heals it by a wonderful healing.
And if the fistula is healed with what we have said of the cautery and the cure, that is good; and if not, then it is necessary to administer an incision of the nose and reduce the fistula into the cavity of the nose according to where it will come in its proper place.
Chapter 18.
Of cautery of the fissure of the nose.
Many times fissures happen in the lips and especially in the lips of children.
Therefore when you cure those fissures with what we have said in the divisions and your cure is not profiting, then ignite the cautery of a small scalpel according to this form that it is set:
And let its cavity be according to the subtlety of the blade.
Then pause that gently in those fissures so that the cautery reaches the bottom of the fissures.
And then cure that with ointment until it is healed.
Chapter 19.
Of cautery of a fistula in the mouth.
When in the root of the uvula or in the palate or in the roots of the teeth there is an ulcer and then it comes to a head, and then it is broken, and then it is old, and then it becomes rotten and there is made a fistula, and then you cure that and your cure is not profiting, then where you ignite cautery according to the quantity that is received in the fistula, and then place that ignited iron into the opening of the fistula, and have your hand so that the hot iron reaches the bottom of it, and at the end of it do that one or two times; and then cure that with what we have said about the cure until it is healed.
And therefore if the pus is discharged and it is healed, that is good; and if not, then it is necessary to uncover the place and scrape away the rotten bone according to what will come in its chapter.
Chapter 20.
Of cautery of teeth and of softening of gums.
When the gums are softened by moisture and the teeth ache, and you cure those with medicines and it does not confer, then place the head of the patient in your lap, and then ignite the cautery of which the form will come hereafter, so that you pause the quanula on the tooth and insert into that the ignited cautery quickly, and have your hand a little so that the patient feels the heat of the fire at the root of the tooth where it is pierced.
And then lift up your hand, and then repeat the cautery several times according to what you want.
And then the patient will hold his mouth open with water of salt and hold that for one hour, and then stop that, for the aching tooth is bound and the softened gum is tightened and the corrupted moisture is dried up.
Chapter 21.
Of cautery of toothache.
When toothache is by frigidity, or in it is cold or wormy, or does not confer the cure with medicine, then cautery in that is according to two manners: or cautery with a cow's udder, or cautery with fire.
Cautery with udder is that you take the udder of a cow and boil that in horn of iron, and then take hold and wrap that around the end of the tent, and then immerse that in boiled udder and pause that over the aching tooth quickly so that it is frigid.
And then repeat that several times until the virtue of the fire reaches the root of the teeth.
And if you wish, immerse wool or hold in the said udder above, and pause that over the aching tooth, and place upon that hot iron so that the iron reaches the bottom of the cavity of the tooth.
However the cautery with fire is that you attend to the needle of brass or iron, and let there be in it some thickness and the acuity of the fire not reach the mouth of the patient.
And then ignite the cautery of which the form will come, and pause that over the tooth and have your hand so that the cautery is frigid; and do that several times because the pain still remains or on that day or on another day.
And where by impress of that cautery that the patient fills his mouth with good udder and holds that for one hour and then spits it out; and this is the form of the cautery.
And cauterize with which you wish extremity according to what is possible for you.
And this is the form of the needle:
Chapter 22.
Of cautery of hernia.
When hernia is of phlegm and of cold humors and they are not obeying digestion by medicines and you wish the digestion of those slightly, then you ignite the cautery which the form of which is this following, having two extremities bent so that the smoke of the cautery goes through the hernia from one side, and pause that ignited over the ulcer once, and if it does not discharge of that, then do that over the hernia.
And if the hernia is small, then pause the cautery according to the quantity of the hernia, and then let it be for three days and pause over that hold in udder so that what the fire has burned is softened.
And then cure that with ointment and poultices and bandages until it is healed.
Chapter 23.
Of cautery of wound and of contraction of Ale.
When moisture comes upon the top of the lungs and especially when that is by frigidity of constitution, then where the patient is evacuated at the beginning with laxative medicines, and then cautery that after the root of the gullet in the place which is pierced.
And be careful that you do not reach the cautery to his gullet, nor burn his throat, but only a little.
And cauterize that with another cautery at the junction of the neck at his last vertebra. And let the cautery be a red-hot iron in the manner described previously.
Then treat that with what has been described before, so that it may heal.
Chapter 24.
Of the cautery for diseases of the lung and of coughing.
When coughing and lung disease come from moist humors infiltrating, and the patient does not have a fever or consumption and it is an old disease, then cauterize that with two cauteries above the furcula in the places just beneath the collar bones, and with another cautery in the middle of the chest between the two nipples; and let the cauteries be red-hot according to the form described previously.
And if you wish, let your cautery be puncturing with the cautery that is called puncta, the form of which is given in the puncturing for earache.
And let there be small punctures under those; and then treat that with what has been described before, so that it may heal.
And if you have the cautery with three spikes, this cautery is for that: with one view you can make three cauteries according to this form:
Chapter 25.
Of the cautery for tics that are in the head of the helper.
When the head of the helper is dislocated by moist and slippery humors that is not returned in its return hour due to his dislocation within so that it may be to him what usually happens, and if he has been displaced because of a slight movement as it should be, then first of all reduce the dislocation, and let the patient be turned onto his back or on his side; and then elevate the windpipe which is in the upper part of the tic into the upper parts by your left-hand fingers if the joint is dislocated at its upper part.
And let the cautery have two heads; and this is the form of it:
And then cauterize the windpipe so that it penetrates to the other side; and then the figure of cautery will come when from two-headed cauteries.
And sometimes it is adjusted according to that count for which there are eight cauteries.
And then place powdered salt on the cautery and then make the patient adhere to tranquillity, and let the limb not be disturbed for some time so that it may be comforted.
And if the dislocation is at the upper parts and it is made thus, then cauterize over the muscle with a red-hot cautery or with pointed cauteries, for the joint is confirmed and the moisture is burnt up and the patient is healed.
Chapter 26.
Of cautery for the stomach.
When there is movement and moisture infiltrates in the stomach so that it distends from its natural condition and they are multiplied within him, and if you continue the methods of treatment and do not agree with them, then let the patient be lying on his back with his arms stretched out and his head extended, and cauterize that with three cauteries: one cautery below the chest by the amount of a finger with a red-hot cautery, and two cauteries below the rib cage on both sides so that the figure of the cautery comes as a triangle; and lengthen them so that they are not close together and will make heat.
And if the depth of the cautery is the quantity of two-thirds of the thickness of the windpipe.
And let the figure of the cautery be according to this form, and if you wish, cauterize with a large cautery in the middle of the stomach according to this form; and this is a cautery according to the form of a circle according to this form:
And let the stomach be punctured to that which is frightened by this cautery: and it is that you sense on the stomach punctured according to the quantity that you wish with tent, and then cauterize that with a cautery in the punctures; and then treat that with the cure which is given before so that it may heal.
Chapter 27.
Of cautery for a painful liver.
When there is pain in the liver from coldness or moisture or from gross flatulence so that from its natural condition it is thrown by excessive egression, and it is treated with what has been said and does not agree, then let the patient be turned onto his back with his arms stretched out and his head extended, and sense on the liver punctured according to the quantity that you wish with tent, and cauterize that with three cauteries according to this form and this quantity pressed over the liver below the hypochondrium from which comes the decubitus of a man.
And let the space between each cautery be according to the thickness of a finger, and let the cauteries be according to the length of the body right.
And do not press it with the cautery too much.
And if the quantity of what is burnt is equal to the thickness of the width of the windpipe, and it is not pushed too close together; and if the patient stands on his feet, let him then sit down, for he has already extended himself, and raise his arms.
And it is possible for you to cauterize these cauteries with a cautery-spoon when you have subtlety and prudence in the art.
And beware that you do not go too far in the cauterization, and let the windpipe of all the chest be burnt so that it may reach into the intestines, for the windpipe here is subtle; and know this.
Chapter 28.
Of piercing an abscess of the liver with a cautery.
When there is inflammation or an abscess in the liver and you wish to know whether that abscess is in the flesh of the liver or in its tunic, then if it is in the flesh of the liver, the patient has heavy breath and the pain has become acute.
And if it is in the tunic of the liver, with the pain being made acute and when the doctors have become weary with the cure for him.
So let the patient be turned onto his back, and then sense the location of the abscess with tent, and then heat the cautery which is formed like a needle, the form of which has been given on the previous page. And cauterize with that hot cautery so that all the chest may be burnt so that it may reach into the diaphragm, so that in it there is burning phlegm.
And then treat that by the cure for other abscesses so that it may heal.
And do not use this form of cautery except that from which the one who studies in the art of medicine has become experienced and in whose hands many diseases have been known; but however that is tried by us it should be burned on this operation, for it is better.
Chapter 29.
Of cautery for pleurisy.
Remove the old cauteries from the roots of the pleurisy by friction according to this way that you take them from the roots of the pleurisy a long dry root that is found, and let it be of the thickness of a finger.
And then submerge it in oil and iron it with fire, and cauterize with a cautery at the location between the collarbone and the furcula; and with two small cauteries guided downward, one slightly inclining towards the area below the beard, and with two cauteries inclining towards the area between the fifth rib and the armpit, inclining slightly towards the back; and with another cautery in the middle of the foot; and another over the stomach; and with three cauteries on the back; and with a cautery in the location between the two shoulders; and with two cauteries on the sides of the foot, below the cautery between the two shoulders.
And do not wrap your hand with the cautery, but let it be in the open air.
And some ancient people said that they used cauteries of iron similar to a spear, and heated it, and placed it in the location between the ribs, until we reached that ulcer and it became a healthy wound, just as we have said about the ulcer of the lung.
But in this piercing with a cautery, there is no fear, because it will happen immediately in the location of the fistula to which there is no cure.
Chapter 30.
Of the cauterization of the melt.
When you are treating the sickness of the melt with what we have said about treatment in division and do not apply your cure, then cauterization in it is according to three manners, all of which are correct, and one of them is that you make three or four lines according to the length of the melt according to the figure of the cauteries of the lung, the figure of which has preceded.
And the other way is that the cautery be round and not make a line around the melt but only cauterize the central location of the foot; so if the melt is made at the top of the foot, around the ankle, if the melt is made at the heel of the foot, at the bottom, if the melt is made in the middle, around the fascia, and if the melt is made at the neck of the foot, then cauterize with a round cautery according to the figure of the gout which we have said.
And the third way is that the cautery be in the shape of a sword, and if the melt is made at the heel of the foot or around the ankle, then cauterize according to the figure which we have said in the cauterization of the foot; so if the melt is made at the top or bottom of the foot, then cauterize according to the figure of the cautery of the neck of the foot.
And it is another way to cauterize, which is that you ignite the cautery having two garments, the cause of which we have said in the chapter on dislocation of the muscle, and elevate the tendon which is in the direction of the melt where the left side of the patient lies.
And then cauterize the location of the foot according to the way which we have said with the cautery of a sword, and if the melt is made around the ankle or at the heel of the foot, then cauterize according to the figure of the round cautery.
And then immerse the two garments, heated up, into that end through which you penetrate the tendon from the other side.
And then extract the cautery; and thus are made four cauteries.
And if you wish, cauterize with a cautery having three garments.
And then you cure the cautery when it has lain for many days, because the other causes precede in the cure.
Chapter 31.
Of the cauterization of water-gout.
Cautery does not cut in gout but properly in hernia.
When you are treating the gout with the manners of cure which we have said in division and do not apply your cure, then cauterize it with four cauteries in the circuit of the hernia and with a cautery over the stomach, and with another cautery over the lung, and with another cautery over the melt, and with two cauteries between the spurs of the two shoulders, and with a cautery on the right side of the foot, and with another cautery over the stomach. And the quantity of the depth of the cautery should be proportionate to the thickness of the tendon.
And then let the cautery lie open so that it lies for a long time.
And do not evacuate the patient from cure when you are cauterizing him so that two tendons be added to it, and let him lie in it with help of cure.
The form of the cautery with which the belly is cauterized should be clave-shaped according to that which precedes it above, and that with which the back is cauterized should be olive-shaped according to that which precedes it.
Chapter 32.
Of the cauterization of the lung and of its causes.
When the feet are pustules with gout and are filled with yellow water, then cauterize the feet above the heel of the foot in the location which is between the auricular and the ring finger, and elevate your hand with the cautery and do not twist it; and then elevate your hand and do not return it at all, because the yellow water will ooze out.
The cautery is according to this form: and then make two cauteries on each thigh, and in each thigh let the cautery be made with the tip of the sword-shaped cautery. And let the cautery be according to the length of the thigh: one below the groin and the other above the middle location of the thigh; and on each thigh two cauteries.
And let the wound lie open without cure for a long time so that some water oozes from it.
And then cure the causes which we have mentioned.
Chapter 33.
On cauterization of the abdomen.
When the body is affected by cold and moisture which weaken the digestive and retentive faculties, which are located in the stomach and intestines, it is treated with healing remedies rather than bleeding, and sometimes the patient endures cauterization to restore the virtue of digestion, then cauterize that area with a large cautery over his stomach as has been described in the chapter on cauterization of the stomach, using the circular cautery and four cauteries around the omphalus with a slender cautery; or cauterize the alcatena over oiled cotton wool, or with two cauteries.
And if the moisture is excessive and the patient can tolerate it, then cauterize that area over the penis and intestines, and apply two cauteries near the groin on either side; this is a perfect cure for sexual dysfunction and you will not err.
Chapter 34.
On cauterization of ancient hemorrhoids.
When in nature there are ancient hemorrhoids from thick humors or corrupted moisture, and they are cured by the method we have described in the division without bleeding, then cauterize them with three cauteries on the lower part of the small spine of the coccyx in a small triangular shape, and with a cautery above the navel where two tendons cross.
And if his stomach is swollen and his food undigested, and his face sometimes pustular, then cauterize that area over the stomach with a large cautery as has been described; and with one cautery on the anus, and another cautery on his navel with a slender cautery; let the cautery remain open for some time, then cure him until he is healed.
Chapter 35.
On cauterization of athlete's foot near the incision.
When you make an incision on athlete's foot, then ignite the cautery which is similar to a ray. Then place that ignited cautery into the incision, and close your hand over it until the cautery reaches the orifice of the vein from which the blood comes.
Do this once or twice, for if they are too numerous, then cauterize each one according to what we have recounted, and cure them with that which you use for their wounds until it is healed.
And if you cauterize with a large cautery over oiled cotton wool, it is more effective in healing.
Chapter 36.
On cauterization of fistulas which are caused naturally in the parts of the body.
When nature does not obey the method we have described in its place, and the patient is terrified by that, let it be healed with cauterization.
Therefore, when you see a fistula in nature which is ancient, and it emits foul matter and corrupted moisture, then probe that with a slender probe, and thus know the quantity of its depth with the aforementioned slender probe.
Then ignite the cautery which is similar to a ray. Then place that ignited cautery into this fistula according to the quantity where you inserted the probe.
And repeat the cautery on that area until those corrupted humors are burnt once or twice or three times according to the quantity of your need.
And beware of cauterizing nerve or vein; or if the fistula goes to the bladder or intestine, then beware of all those places; and do not do this unless the fistula is in a fleshy place and you are certain that it does not penetrate.
Then cure that area until it is healed.
And if the place is sealed and those matters are discharged from him for a long time, then know that it is completely healed.
And if those matters are not discharged from him, then know that they are penetrating into his bone or have corrupted it there, or that cause will return in that place.
Chapter 37.
On cauterization of warts.
When in warts there is pain from cold or from grossness of wind, and the skin of the patient is withered, then know that you should cauterize those warts with a cautery on each wart with a slender cautery of which you have the recollection.
And apply them very quickly with the second one small below, so that there will be three linear cauteries, and thus they will be more effective in healing.
Chapter 38.
On cauterization of the bladder.
When there is debility and softening of the bladder from cold and moisture so that the patient cannot retain urine, then cauterize that area in the lower part of the bladder, where the hairs of the penis begin, and cauterize with one cautery on the right side of him, and another on his left.
And let the length of each cautery be according to the amount of the hairs; and cauterize that area with a cautery in the lowest part of the abdomen, or with two cauteries if it is necessary.
And let the cautery be slender according to what has been described.
Chapter 39.
On cauterization of the mother's milk.
When there is cold and moisture in the mother, and she is prohibited from conceiving, and her menstruation is corrupted, and there is delay in provoking it, and pain comes from the retention of it, then let that area be cauterized with three cauteries around the navel as we have described in the cautery of the bladder; and with a cautery on the lowest part of the abdomen, or with two cauteries, and let the cautery be slender.
Chapter 40.
On cauterization of the dislocation of the ankle.
When moist humors are infused into the ankle and are the cause of the displacement of its joint, and the sign of it is that the leg is prolonged over the other when compared between them. And the place of the dislocation is pressed in where the bone juts out.
Therefore let the patient be cauterized over the ankle of him with a circular cautery similar to a ring, more than you have probed with the probe in the circuit of that part as it is turned, and because the part falls the middle of the circle.
And let the cautery be the same as the one described in the cauterization of the stomach.
And if that cautery is not at hand, then cauterize that area with three cauteries with a large olive-shaped cautery.
And let the cautery be done according to the amount of the thickness of all the tendons; and cure that area until it is healed.
Chapter 41.
On cauterization of the sciatic nerve.
When pain comes in the ankle and it is caused by cold and moisture, the patient is cured by that which we have described and does not bleed, and if it is ancient, then let the patient be bled from gross humors with suppurating pills or artificial ones similar to them; and cauterize that area.
And the manner of the cautery in that place is according to two manners: or cautery with burning medicines, or cautery with fire.
There are two known ways to do this, one of which is to cauterize the area above the patient's hip with three triangular cauteries in this shape; and make sure to go deep enough with these cauteries. And the space between each cautery should be the width of the finger or thumb, depending on whether the cautery tool is small or large.
In some cases, the cauteries are placed in a cross shape over the top of the hip, so there are four cauteries total.
And if you wish, you can cauterize the circle of which the shape is preceded in the cauterization of the dislocation of the hip; and it should be a containing circle that burns away the sharpness of the entire tendon.
And this is how you cauterize a sciatica, when there is pain adherent to the hip that does not extend into the thigh.
But if the pain extends into the thigh, then you should cauterize it with two cauteries on the thigh, at the location where you direct the patient's gaze, which is where the pain resides; and also with one cautery on the ankle, four fingers' worth, on the wild side.
And if you are using a knife for cauterization, then the depth of the cautery should be according to the thickness of the tendon.
And if you direct the patient's gaze such that the pain extends down to the location between their toes, then cauterize this area with three or four cauteries, or more if necessary.
And if you direct the patient's gaze such that the pain goes down the front of the thigh to the knee, then cauterize this area with a knife.
And in all cauterizations, be careful not to burn nerves or large arteries; and for this reason, you should place your hand over the patient's chest in order to prevent harm or contraction.
And you have seen one or another of those who cauterize on the ankle and finish in cauterization, and then the fire inflames inside the foot, and the foot becomes perforated and rotten all throughout. Then he experiences a strong pain in his belly, and there he dies.
And if the pain is in two places at once, then cauterize each one according to this method.
And the wise say that in cauterization of the hip, this is how you should do it: make a circle out of iron whose circuit is half a palm; and its opening should be according to the thickness of a finger or less.
And inside that circle, there should be another third; and the space between them should be the width of a finger joint; and those circles should open on two sides; and the length of the nails in those circles should be one or two joints, and make decently bent edges in the circles; and this is its shape:
This is how you cauterize the hip when it is dislocated: first, ignite a fire inside that it becomes red-hot and gives off sparks; then place it on the top of the hip, with the patient lying on his side. And then cauterize that area with three round cauteries at once.
And then let it rest for three days; and then dress that wound with a bandage and leave the plaster open for several days; and then heal that wound with ointment until it is well.
Albucasis says: O sons, we have used this type of cauterization sparingly out of fear for the life of the patient, and because few have been found who practice it.
But from those who suffer from these diseases, find out where they hurt him and examine that location.
But when you administer cauteries with medicines that burn, make two circles with a tool that has a perforated door in which the handle of the iron door is placed; let the length of its sides be two joints or as much.
And let the space between each one be the width of a finger joint; and let them be open below and above, and let them contain themselves according to this shape:
And then place the patient on his side, and press your hand against the top of the hip; and then take water-tail and dip it between the two circles, and let its quality be small by little with fire, and hold that for an hour, and let the patient suffer the biting and squeezing of it — for there will be biting as from fire — until the biting ceases.
And then lift your hand with the tool and wipe away the water-tail from the entire hip with warm water.
And then let it rest for three days and place a bandage over the bite mark until the blackness of the squeezed mark is removed, and let him rest like that for several days, and a swelling will go away.
And then heal that wound with ointment until it is well.
And if the pain extends into the thigh or the leg, make him stand in such a way that he contains water according to how it is done in the hip equally.
And this is the method of water-tail, and I have already written that in the treatise on the refinement of medicines. Take one part of alkali and one part of non-extinguished ash from both ends, and mix them together and place them in a new bowl whose bottom is perforated with a small hole, according to the amount that goes into him.
And place the bottom of the other bowl on top of it upside down, and pour over that alkali and live ash from warm water which covers those by one finger, and then compress them with your hand, and let the bowl that hangs from him pour sharp water into the area below the bowl.
And then adjust all that water and pour it over the other live ash and another renewed alkali, because that hour makes strong fire which is administered in many medical procedures and in cauterization of the other limbs, because that operation makes fire.
And some medicines are cauterized with broad tools, like tweezers and honey and ash with soap that have been mixed together.
And Gualia recorded from an ancient man the operation and the cure by which is cured pain of hip and sciatic nerve, and magnifies much that body part because of it, and says that he did not need any other cure, and that it was healed by one method with a bath and ointment that he made himself.
And let it be pressed with a certain wine, and if it is not pressed, then take the fig juice; and let the body part be twisted by a little with grays, and let it be placed over the hip where there is pain, or in the thigh, or in the leg, and let it be bound.
And let it rest for the amount of three hours or for the quantity that the patient feels the biting of the squeeze.
And then put him in a bath and then when his body is heated, put him in the sun, because the pain will cease and he will be well.
And know that it is not good for anyone to use cauterization with these medicines except after the evacuation of the body.
But Ja Escorides says that when the vein is stretched with a goat's skin, it should be cauterized, he makes him go; and let the cautery be done according to this method: take wool and dip it in old oil, and place it between the toes of the foot and between the bone.
And then take dry goat skin and blow it with fire until it is made into charcoal; and then place it over the wool and let it hang until it is dry. And repeat this, and do not stop doing this until the sensation of the bite reaches the elbow and the pain subsides.
And this method of cauterization is called cow's-tongue cautery.
Chapter 42.
On the cauterization for joint pain.
At times, pain occurs in the back for various reasons, such as bruising or puncture, or excessive discharge, and due to similar causes, from the infiltration of moist and irritating matter.
And cauterization should not be performed except in this one case, which is caused by the infiltration of moist and irritating matter.
Therefore, once you have made a poultice with fomentation and similar ingredients on the back where the pain is located, draw three lines according to its width across the back, and then pierce each line with ten or more cauteries, depending on the patient's tolerance and the strength of his constitution.
And the cauterization should be performed with a pointed cautery.
And if you want, cauterize with three or four cauteries using a nail-shaped cautery according to this form:
Chapter 43.
On cauterization for the beginning of gangrene.
At times this disease affects young children, and the sign of its onset in infants is that they experience constriction in their gut, which causes elevation and movement.
And you should also target the lower spine and the knots on it that are beginning to rise above the others.
And so when you see this and want to prevent it, then cauterize that area with a circular cautery according to the following form: that the cautery should cover the entire joint evenly.
And if you want, cauterize around the joint with a pointed cautery, making two or three lines. And the points should be close to each other.
Then return and treat the area that was cauterized according to what we have described above.
But be careful not to administer cauterization in cases of gangrene caused by nerve spasm.
Chapter 44.
On the cauterization for gout and joint pain.
When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
And therefore when gout caused by moist matter has been treated in the way described above and the pains have not been relieved, then apply cauterization.
And you should cauterize that area around the joint of the foot with many cauteries.
And the cautery should be olive-shaped, and this is its form:
And if it is necessary to make points on the surface of the foot, then do so with a pointed cautery. And if the pains shoot up into the knees or other joints, and this happens frequently, then cauterize each knee with three or four cauteries using this olive-shaped cautery across its entire width.
And if you find that these cauteries are necessary for you, then apply them and do not press too hard with the cautery beforehand, but simply touch the skin lightly with its tip.
And if the pains shoot up into the knee and back, then administer the cautery we described in its chapter above.
And if the pain is only in the hands and is called sciatica, then while rotating them, prick around their joints with two lines.
And if the pain remains in the fingers, then prick around their joints and over the knuckles of the hand.
And if the pain shoots into the shins or muscles, then cauterize all of their joints evenly.
And do not discharge the patient from good treatment and the taking of medicines, for if good treatment is given and phlegm is discharged by this cautery, God willing, she will be healed.
Chapter 45.
On the cauterization for fractures.
When a fracture occurs in the angles and joints, cutting through the skin to the soft tissue underneath, and this is evident immediately, then you must command the patient to stop eating for that day and to fast for several days so that the wound can heal.
Then return the patient to his bed and command him to keep his leg elevated so that it is either bent or straightened out at the hip.
Then return the patient with his arms and indicate to him that he should press on the fracture at the tip of the bone, which is similar in appearance to the bottom of an inverted cup over the upper parts of the body.
Then apply the cautery, and this is its form:
until it becomes red and bloated. Then return the intestine or hernia to its cavity, and place your hand over the area to prevent the intestine from coming out.
You have already opened the space between the patient' s thighs, placed a cushion under them, another servant on their legs, and another on their chest, holding their hands.
Then apply the cautery to that sign with your hand using a straight cautery, and apply it again with another application if you have not achieved anything in the first application on the bone.
And be careful to observe whether the intestine is hot when you cauterize it so that it does not burn and cause death or some other great harm.
And know that when you apply the cautery, do not press down on the bone because then your operation will be ineffective.
And see that the cautery for children is subtle according to their age and size.
Then dress the wound of the cautery after three days when the scar of the fire has healed over.
Then treat that with other remedies according to what ails it.
And the patient should lie on his back for 40 days so that the wound is sealed and healed.
And see that he is fed according to the length of time it takes to heal him, for which his belly is bound so that the intestine does not come out when he tries to move.
Then after he wants to get up after 40 days, then treat him decently, and have that for another 40 days.
And let him be fatigued by work and the taking of food and drink, and of violent movements because when he uses this method of healing, she will be healed.
And it can also be used to heal fractures in other parts of the belly, and when you start, and you want that they do not draw each other, then cauterize the fracture with a red-hot cautery according to its amount; and return and treat that according to what we have said above, and it is not closed.
And now I will say the first which should be cauterized with a triangular cautery according to this form, for it is marked with trying:
And a line is drawn from the eye to the side most opposite to where the rupture is, and another line above it; and your hand is placed with a cautery pin, but the first cautery is farther away and better.
Chapter 46.
On cauterization for torticollis.
When there is pain in any part due to a dislocation or blow, and the pain persists for a long time and does not respond to medicines, then you must cauterize with a pointed cautery.
And the cautery of every member should be according to its size and smallness, nature, and location of the torticollis and its pain.
Therefore, if he is healed by the first cautery, it is good; but if not, then do the cautery again; for usually such pains are punctured into that member which is nearest to the patient, so that you may achieve the healing of the patient through the cautery.
Chapter 47.
On cauterization for leprosy.
Lepers sometimes are cauterized with great benefit, especially if the type of leprosy is due to putrefaction of phlegm and melancholy.
And so when you want to cauterize him, consider if the leprosy is dry and has been healed as we have said in the division, or if it is moist and rotting, and fear that the corruption affects his whole body and all its parts; then cauterize him on the head with five cauteries: one in the middle of the head, another lower down, avoiding the forehead at the end of the hairline; two more cauteries on the sides, behind, on the nape or neck.
And with the last cautery, press your hand a little onto the bone, so that the skin is displaced and the expiration of thick vapors is driven out from him; then cauterize over the wound according to what has been prescribed.
And if the leprosy is already spread over the patient and appears manifestly, then you must cauterize him with those cauteries we have mentioned for the head; and with a cautery on the end of the nose, and two cauteries on both knees, and two cauteries on both shoulders, and six cauteries on the back, one large cautery on the spine near the tailbone, and one cautery on the coccyx, and two cauteries on the hips, and one cautery on each hip, and two cauteries on the heels, and two cauteries on the muscles, and cauterize all the joints of the fingers and toes, and on each talon of the feet, and on the sockets of his hands.
And beware of the nerves which are above the talus that you do not burn them.
And sometimes it is cauterized with one cautery over the bone of the little toe and another over the mouth of the stomach, and another over the anus.
And know that the more cauteries you apply, the greater the benefit and effect will be; and know that the patient does not feel pain in the cautery as the unhealed do, because his body is already stupified.
And let the cauteries be great or few according to the members and joints, as it is preceded by the species of the tools.
Then treat the cautery with flour of bran cooked with honey and with other healing remedies until he is healed.
Chapter 48.
On cauterization for stupor.
When a member is numb or asleep and is not healed by medicines, oils, and plasters, then you must cauterize that numb member with cauteries according to the size of the member or its smallness.
And let your cautery go a little into the thickness of the tendon. Then treat it with ointment until it is healed.
And sometimes a stupor is cauterized which also involves the hands and feet, and the shoulder blades and also the movement of the nerves that move that member, and the stupor is refreshed.
But do not presume on this without being wise in anatomy of the members and the going out of nerves that move all the body.
Chapter 49.
On cauterization for scale-like leprosy.
When the scales are ancient and do not respond to any of the healing ointments, then you must cauterize them with a cautery slightly according to the quantity of the thickness of the tendon so that the whiteness and color of it is refreshed and the color changed.
Then treat it with flour of bran and lentils with roasted oil and with leaves of arnagrosa, and with pigeon blood or with blood of a young hen; let each be a portion and all be mixed together; then let it be bound up in a cloth and placed on the spot until it is healed.
Chapter 50.
On cauterization for scrofula.
When the scrofula is coming out and you want it to go away, then cauterize it with a circular cautery around it as it is being turned over.
The wise say that it should be cauterized with the last cautery in the middle; but I have not seen this, because I fear that it would be ulcerated, and I have seen this happen some times.
And it is much more direct that it should be cauterized around it with a circle as we have said, or with many cauteries.
Chapter 51.
On cauterization for adubilated.
When any adubilated one is slow in ripening, and also because of the superfluity they make that, or because of the state of the patient, for he is old in decrepitude, of little blood, or because of the season, and you want to hasten in the ripening of the adubilated; then cauterize around it with many small puncturing cauteries; then let it be bound up so that it will hasten in ripening.
But if you want to pierce it with a cautery, then heat the cautery of which this is the form of it: and place it in the middle of the adubilated so that the tendon penetrates.
And if the cautery in that place that is lower down, so that the arm of the body is driven out; then treat it until it is healed.
Chapter 52.
On cauterization for corrodent.
Corrodent is a walking corruption in the member, which corrodes it as if by fire eating dry wood.
Therefore, if you see the corrodent in a place that suffers cautery by fire, then heat small pin-like cauteries, and large ones according to what is suitable in that place where the corrodent is.
Then cauterize it completely all around so that you remove all the corrosion and not let any cause remain in it.
Then bind it up for three days, and place over the cauterized spots a compress with a soft cloth that is dipped in oil mixed within which all the scars are eradicated and all the corruption.
Then treat it with generative ointments.
But if after three days the flesh does not grow and is healed in which there is no corruption, then it is good; but if not, then do the cautery again over that which is rotten in the places that are corrupted.
And sometimes a medicine is applied to the sores, which serves as a kind of caustic. But cautery with fire is a swifter remedy.
And I have already spoken of the treatment for this disease using caustic medicine in the section on division, so take that remedy when you see fit.
Chapter 53.
On cauterization of sores and similar maladies.
Many times one finds in the affected parts of a sick person a sore called a claw, and it is a serious, deep malady that penetrates the foot; and there are two methods of cauterizing them: with fire or with boiling water.
But cauterization with fire is done by lighting the cautery tool, which should be shaped like a vulture's beak and made of iron according to the size of the sore; its edges must be thin.
Then hold the lit cautery tool over the sore and, while doing so, move your hand in a circular motion around the sore until the cautery reaches the depth of the sore. Let this be done for three days until pus begins to discharge. Then apply a plaster made of crushed marsh mallows and salt over the sore for one night; this will pull out the roots of the malady.
And then treat the wound with generative ointment until it is healed.
And if it does not heal and often occurs on the surface of the body, especially in the hands and feet, then you must administer cauterization with water to those sores; take a pipette made of bronze or iron or shaped like a vulture's beak, and hold it over the sore. Draw some boiling water into the pipette, close your hand around it, and move your hand in a circular motion around the sore so that the water penetrates the depth of the sore. Wait for an hour while the water bites into the sore; then remove the pipette, for the claw with its roots will have been pulled out by the boiling water.
And do this to all of them that appear on his body.
And then treat the sores from which the roots of the claws have been pulled with ointments that promote the growth of new flesh.
Chapter 54.
On cauterization for tremors.
When you see someone with tremors caused by cold or feverishness or for some similar cause, then you must cauterize those sores with four cauteries or five on the vertebrae of his back, one cautery between each vertebra; and cauterize the soles of his feet and over his stomach with a olive-shaped cautery.
And his tremors cease and the sickness from cold is quickly healed.
Chapter 55.
On cauterization for white sores on the body.
When white sores appear on the body and pustules break open to release matter that is corrupt and thick, then at the beginning, when they first appear, those sores should be cauterized at the head of the fistula with a fine-pointed cautery made from a branch of myrtle, the end of which has been heated; or with long rasps of erysipelas; or with a lenticular cautery.
And sometimes it is done when the pus has not yet been expelled in this way: you break up and burst open the superficial matter by cauterizing them, and they heal after that.
But it must be done with phlebotomy first.
Chapter 56.
On cauterization for accidents of blood flux caused by incision of an artery.
Sometimes a flux of blood occurs after incision of an artery that has been cut or because of a wound or cauterization on the affected limb; and similar accidents occur, and it is difficult to stop that.
Therefore, when this happens to anyone, you must grip the orifice of the artery with your hand and place your thumb over that hole, pressing it firmly to stop the blood flow; and sometimes you must push in with your thumb inside that hole until it is stopped.
And then place the olive-shaped cauteries, which are few and large, over those holes; and blow on them until there are many embers.
And then take one small or large cautery according to the site and the wound in which the artery was cut; and press it firmly over that vein, hastening the pus that you have stopped with your thumb, and hold the cautery there until the blood flow is completely stopped.
And if blood flows from the orifice of the artery when you remove your thumb and loosen the cautery, then take another cautery that has been prepared in the fire, and do this repeatedly until the blood flow is stopped.
And beware of burning the nerve that is here, lest another malady come upon the patient.
And know that when blood flows from an artery, it is not possible to stop the flow in those cases unless by one of four methods: either by cauterization as I have said, or by extraction if it has not been extracted; for when it has been extracted, its extremities are burned and the blood flow is stopped, or by binding with a ligature or by a strong constriction, or by medicine whose virtue is to stop the blood flow; and they are tightened with a bandage by decent compression.
But he who applies decent constriction with a bandage or by compression with rags or by causing burns and similar effects does not achieve anything but harm.
But if it occurs in someone and the doctor is not present nor medicine available, then open your finger over that orifice of the vein as I have said, and apply great constriction to him until the blood flow stops from the main part of the wound; and on the artery let there be no biting by the finger; and if on the artery there should be cauterization or need for medicine.
On incision and puncturing, on phlebotomy, on wounds, on causes, on bandages and their kinds.
I have already said in the first chapter about all illnesses for which cauterization with fire is convenient and about their occasions and causes, and about the instruments that are necessary for them, and I have arranged the chapters concerning the parts of the head above the feet.
And now I will go through this chapter in that order so that it may be helpful to the reader, and on whatever he has requested.
And before I begin it, let there be, sons, that we may learn what is in this chapter that is in the first chapter on cauterization.
And let there be great caution in it, for in the operation that is in this chapter there is often a need to stop bleeding, which comes from the vein or incision on an abscess or puncturing an ulcer or opening of a wound or piercing with a stone or similar objects. And they are all accompanied by fear and trembling, and in their legs the fear of death.
And I warn you that this should not happen to you, for it often occurs because of the bad habits of men with evil habits. And among them are those who are sent away with their illness and are temporarily spared death, due to the severity of their ailment, and because of the longevity of their illness, and through fear of the disease that signifies death.
And among them is the one who gives you their goods and tells you, while you wait for their health, and their illness is lethal.
And so you should not consent to anyone who comes to you with this disease; and your caution should be greater than greed and your rapacity; and you should not assume any cause for it except through certain knowledge which verifies it to you, and to whom praiseworthy success comes.
And you should use in the cure of all your illnesses, prediction and indication of him to whom health is converted, for in him you will have aid in acquiring fame and memory, praise and glory.
O children, may God inspire you with his understanding and not withhold from you direction and protection, for he is in his hand.
And I have ordered this chapter distinguished by chapters according to what precedes in the chapter of cauteries, of the cure of the head into the feet, so that it is lightened from you that which you demand of that and of which you have need.
Chapter first.
Of the cure of water that is contained in the head of infants.
Know that this illness often strikes infants after childbirth, and when the nurse tilts the infant's head sideways.
And sometimes because of a hidden cause, which is not washed away.
But I have not seen this illness except in infants, and in all of them towards whom I saw was death, and for that reason is to me left work on those.
And I have seen an infant whose head was full of water, and the infant's head was always so swollen that a nurse could not carry him around due to the size of his head, and yet that the moisture increased so much within that it killed him.
And this humidity is either aggregated between the cord and the bone, or it is aggregated below the bone onto the brain.
Because if the operation on that is little if the humidity is between the cord and the bone and the abscess is that you should cut in the middle part of the head with one fissure in width, and let the length of the fissure be four notches so that the humidity runs out, and this is the form of the spatula:
And therefore if the humidity is more increased and the abscess is greater, then here are two fissures according to this way:
And if the humidity is below the bone, a sign of it is that you will see the comissures of the head swollen and soft all over, and the water is squeezed out when you compress that with your hand against the openings inside, and this is not hidden from you. So that you cut in the middle part of the head with three fissures according to this way:
And then extract all the humidity from it; and tightly close the fissures with bandages and plasters; and pour on it wine and oil beginning on the fifth day, and loosen the dressing and cure the wound with poultices and ointments, and strengthen the head with moderation; and feed the patient dry food with little humidity so that the member is comforted and healed.
And there is another way of cutting, which you consider where the magnitude of the abscess and the collection of water appears, for sometimes it is more in the occipital, or in the front part, or on the right, or on the left; and therefore pay attention to the incision where the abscess and the collection of water appear, and cut that according to what is best possible for you.
And observe that you do not cut the artery and cause a flow of blood and kill the patient through that flow of blood with an evacuation of humidity.
Chapter second.
When something occurs to someone catars or raumas in the ears or the feet, and it is old, and the cure of medicines does not work on that, then the latter cure for this is incision of those two arteries.
And therefore when you want to cut those which the patient's head goes through, and then rub the place with an astringent cloth so that the arteries appear, and then tightly tie the neck of the patient with some cloth; and consider where the pulse is; and the locations of each over the locations which are near the ears pressed down, and they are hidden except in some men.
And then sign over the artery with a tent, and then cut each one with the spatula of each part cutting into the bone, and let that be through the width of the head.
And if you want, insert the spatula below the artery and pierce that to the parts beneath.
And let the length of the incision be four digits adjusted, for when some vein is cut, the blood is ejected with a pulsating exit, which jumps out frequently.
But if the artery does not appear with the touch, then measure from the ear the quantity of space of three digits, and then sign with a tent, and cut into the bone.
And that which is bled out is quantity of wine ounces, and stop the bleeding from it more or less, and all that is according to the quantity which appears of the virtue of the patient and the collection of the artery in him.
And then consider the wound, and therefore if anything remains on the bone causing the headache, then cut that so that it does not cause an abscess.
And then tightly close the wound with plasters and bandages of linen cloth, and then cure that with ointments until it is healed.
Chapter iii.
Of extraction of the arteries which are in the temples.
When something happens to someone with ancient migraine or catars, because of humorional humors and because of quality in the eyes, or old vehement and similar to those, and it is medicated with methods of cure of medicine, and that does not confer with it, then we have demonstrated in these illnesses extraction of the arteries in the temples, or cauterization of those thus as I have shown.
And the way of the operation and extraction of those is that the patient touches the temples with them; and feel the artery appearing in the temple because it is revealed by the pulse, and it is hidden except in a few men by strength of touch.
And if it is hidden from you, then the neck of the patient should be tied with some cloth; and then rub the place with an astringent cloth or evaporate the place with warm water until the artery appears to you manifestly. And then you take the spatula, of which this is its form: And then you scorch the cord with that easily so that you reach the artery; and then pierce it and extract that from the parts above so that you pull it from the cord and uncover those which are below it, from all parts.
But if the artery is subtle, then wrap it at its extremity with a thread, and then cut one part according to its quantity so that the ends of it are lengthened and contracted, and there will be no flow of blood, for if they are not cut, the blood will not flow from them.
And then evacuate the blood of wine. Enter at three.
And if the artery is large, then you must ligature it in two places with strong double catgut or with long cords, and do not allow putrefaction to happen before the consolidation of the plague and it should produce a flow of blood.
Then cut away the superfluity that is between two tendons; do this at that moment or some other time.
And if you wish, cauterize it with a cautery knife within the bone at those places where the ends have been cut off and will remain in place of that mutilated part.
And it is better that the patient does not have fever or be of heated complexion; for cautery is one of those things which help to dry up moisture, and therefore is better in healing.
And then the extraction of the arteries which spread to the site of the old wound should be applied with powders made decently and then let it be healed by dry medicines which make flesh grow and by poultices on top which heal the wound.
And if while you are working another vein opens and produces a flow of blood from the artery, then you must constrict that blood with a ligature or cautery, or by pressing on the site of the cut, and press your hand to restrict the blood. And if none of these reasons are present to you, then place your finger on the site where the blood has congealed and wet the site with water of violent coldness so that the acuteness is relieved, and constrict it according to what is necessary.
And what is easier in the extraction of an artery is that you cauterize the vein with this cautery having two points, since you have sensed the two sites with a probe and touch each one, with burning fire, until they reach the bone and split the vein in two places, so that what is between its ends may be elongated, for it is not consolidated by this cautery.
And this is the form of the cautery::
And let the keenness of the two edges be equal. But if they are less keen than two edges then it is better, for if they are acute on both sides they will come near to each other and not cut through the flesh with speed.
Therefore, since there is some thickness in those, the heat of the fire is held in them and the flesh is cut more easily.
And this action is better in every action and easier.
And let the space which is between two edges be the quantity of the thickness of a finger.
Chapter four.
Of the cure of acute and acidic wounds of the bowels.
When they are acidic wounds and the veins which are above the forehead, and there is no use of medicinal cure in that medicine, and the face of the patient becomes red and he feels in his forehead as if there were a procession of ants, and the bowels of him are exhausted, moistened like this so that the hair of them is known, and the eyelids are scorched by the keenness of tears, the ancient remedies in the cure of those from this operation, and I will name that cure with spassa.
And it is that you command the patient to shave the hair which are on his forehead, and then cut into the forehead three fissures evenly distant according to the length of the forehead. And if the length of the fissure is two fingers: let the first fissure be evenly distant to the length of the nose at the middle place of the forehead, and the second according to the length of a little movement of the tear which are in the tear gland, and the third from the other part.
And beware of the incision of the arteries which are on both sides, and lengthen your hand from the continuation of both mandibles. And if the space of each incision is the quantity of three fingers joined together.
And if you have a sponge equipped with or dry rags wet with which to dry the blood.
Then interpose the spatula between two acute extremities, of which this is the form of its incision: that is from the part of the temples into the second incision. Excise with that whole cord which is between two incisions by the ciphac which is above the bone, and then do this of the mid incision into the second incision. And then press on that spatula and insert it into the first incision another time with another instrument which is called a scalpel, sharp on one side and not sharp on the other.
And place the side of that sharp against the flesh annexed to the cord, and the side of it against the tooth against the bone, and use that so that it comes to the fissure mid, and cut with it all the vessels which descend from the head to the bowels.
But let the incision be continued until it comes to the appearance of the cord, and then do this in the mid fissure into the other fissure.
And when blood flows in equal quantity, squeeze those places of congealed blood.
And then place in each fissure a piece of old bone, and place upon them powders soaked in wine and oil and sour wine, and let there be no pus.
And on the third day loosen the bandage and administer a great infusion of warm water or tea, and then cure that with unguent of basil with rose oil and others so that the pla
Chapter five.
Of the cure of wounds by cauterization and of the bowels which descend from parts within the head.
When then cauteries are done and continued, and the bowels of the patient exhausted feeble, and the eyelids ulcerated and their hair fallen out, and in the forehead is acute pain and intense tension consequent, then know by these accidents that the materials and cauteries do not come but from few veins which proceed from parts within.
And the best cure in those is this: command the patient to wash his forehead, and then cut into that a fissure at the middle place of the forehead, a little by length (and begin with the fissure of the left temple into the right temple; let it be an incision into the bone; and lengthen your hand from the tear glands of the temples which are bitten because of mastication), so that the bone is uncovered.
Dry up all the blood with sponge or with dry cloth and then fill between the two lips of the fissure with old bone or with strips of linen. And then bind it up with bandages soaked in wine and oil so that there be no pus.
And when you have removed that and see that the apostema is diminished, then know that the cauterization of the bone begins where the new flesh begins, and then cure that with an astringent regimen which makes the flesh, like this as if you took flour of wheat two parts and of resin four parts and mix them together, and of their mixture make a plaster and administer it to these wounds of the native flesh.
Chapter six.
Of the cure of what is cauterized in the ears.
The whole cause that cauterizes in the ears is one of four species, for it may be mineral stone or cause similar to stone, like iron and vinegar, or it may be plant like celery or bean, or it may be volatile cause like water and sour wine and their similars, or any animal.
And when you see a stone in the ear or other similar cause that does not go away or grow in the ear, and you hold the ear towards the sun, and if you see the stone, then distill it with some oil of violets or sesame, and then administer its extraction, and make the person sneeze with snuff, and close the nostrils after the sneezing. And then place some pieces of cloth or wool in the ear canal, and extend the ear upwards, for it is often cured by these means.
And if it is not cured, then administer its extraction with the instrument called a subtle epicyclet, of which this is the form:
And if it is cured by the epicyclet, that is good; and if not, then administer its extraction with a thin needle of slight thickness, made with few turns.
And if it is not cured by that, then make a tube of brass and insert the end of the tube into the hole of the ear, and close around the tube with wax and softened oil, so that nothing goes inside except the tube. Then pull it out with your thumb with a strong吸引力, for it often comes out with this method that we have described.
But if it is not cured in this manner, then take a little bit of alumbated wool or of wax prepared with which birds' nests are taken, and place that on the end of the ray, and then wrap that part decently placed. Then insert that into the hole of the ear with ease, and then dry the ear from humidity.
And if it is not cured by all the causes we have described, then you cut it before it becomes an abscess or spasm.
And the way to cut it is that you first bleed the patient from the vein on the side of the ear and stop the bleeding according to the nature of the wound, and then you close your hand over the wound and turn the ear upwards, and make a small incision at the root of the ear, where you have previously pricked it. And let the incision be moon-shaped so that it reaches the stone; and if the stone is found, remove it with appropriate instruments; and then close the incision at once, and cure it until it is healed.
And if the cause is a growth in the ear that has become swollen and inflated, then administer its cure and extraction; but if it does not obey your treatment, then you take a thin spatulum according to this form: and with that administer the incision of that growth which is fallen into the ear.
And do not do that when you think it is already moistened by the vapor of the ear; and place it in some pieces, and then extract those with needles or a thin instrument, or with an incision as we have described, for its extraction is thus made easier.
But in the water which has entered the ear because of sneezing with snuff at the beginning, and fill your own ear with some old cloth, and spit on that ear in which is the water, and if it is cured by that, good; and if not, then take thin stones the size of fingers according to their length, and heat those in the fire a little, and let the patient insert one of those into the hole of his ear, and suck on the other stone with his mouth from that end and strike with the other stone on the stone which is in the ear. So do not cease that until all the water is extracted.
So do not cease that until all the water is extracted. And when the water is extracted so that you take out paper or wax, and place one end of it in the ear and extend the other end with fire until its thread is burned.
Then put in another piece and do that as many times until all the water is extracted; and then tie that with a tube as we have described for the stone extractor.
But in the extraction of a foreign body entering that ear, if it is a small thing like pus and similar to it, cure it as we have said in the division; but if it is a large thing causing a wound on the eardrum, then administer its extraction with instruments and needles, and the cause of it is a long-standing disease longer than all other diseases that affect the ear.
But in the extraction of a worm generated in the ear, when you cure it as we have said in the division and in the treatise on distillation, and do not trust your cure, then look at the ear towards the sun.
And if you see some cause of the worms, then extract that with instruments or thin needles; but if you see no cause, then take a tube which is narrow at the bottom and wide on top, of which this is the form: And insert the thin end in the ear according to the amount which the patient can endure; and then suck it strongly with that many times until all the worms are extracted.
But if it does not obey your treatment, then plug and close the tube all around with wax as we have said; then administer distillations which have already been tried by the ancients in the cure of worms, and you will find that in the treatise on distillation.
And let your effusion with which you pour the medicinal oils into the ear be with that instrument of which this is the form: And make that of silver or brass, narrow at the bottom and wide on top, in which there is a small hole, and flat on top.
And let it be as if it were in the cavity of the tube that contains what is necessary here. And if you want, take the spatulum and wrap its end decently with a cloth, and then pour oil into the cavity of the instrument, or squeeze some herb, or whatever you want of these medicines in the tube — and that is in the ear —, and then insert the spatulum with the cloth on top and press it with your hand until the oil is forced out of the cavity and the patient feels the oil within.
And whatever is put in the ear, let it be heated by fire a little. And beware that the cause which you distill in the ear is not too hot, for the medicines of the ear cannot endure that.
Chapter 7.
On the cure of pain in the ears.
Sometimes some children are born with pain in their ears, and that happens in some adults as well, opilacio in the middle of the ear by pus or by nothing at all in that spot; and this opilacio sometimes occurs in the middle of the ear canal which does not affect the eardrum, and sometimes it is on the outside.
And that which happens in the middle of it, which does not affect the eardrum, is in the most difficult dispositions for curing.
And when you achieve that, look at the ear towards the sun. And if you see an abscess, open it with a thin spatulum of which this is the form:
If its end is narrow and one side is sharp while the other is not, and the spatulum is of two edges so that it does not hurt the ear.
And if the swelling is due to flesh grown in the ear or in his head, then cut it away with sharp knives, carefully and gently, until all the flesh is removed.
And if the swelling is in the ear canal, then take a thin rod and heat it in fire a little, and then put it into the ear canal.
And if you have felt the swelling with water that the patient drinks easily, due to the difficulty of breathing, relieve his oppression easily; and beware lest you irritate the nerves of the ear.
Then put into the ear a cloth of the size of the wound that you have wrapped in Egyptian ointment; and do this for several days until you are sure that the ulcer is healing; or take some of it and dissolve it in water, and spray it on the patient's mouth, using a sprayer, and use it; and if you see that the ear is already suppurating, then cut away the dead flesh and replace it with fresh flesh, which you will wrap in cerated ointment made from rose oil, until the suppuration stops; and then heal it.
But if blood flows, then soak a sponge or cloth in water and place it over the ear; and use the other cure which restricts the flow of blood, as is described in the treatise on distillation.
Chapter 8.
Of the treatment of athezia, which occurs in the eyelids.
Athezia occurs in the eyelids due to some humidity, sometimes it is dry.
Therefore, you should have them cut with tweezers or a sharp knife, and remove them from their roots; and place the cut end of the piece on the affected area, using a pointed instrument.
But if pain comes with the flow of blood, then you should cauterize them with a very fine pointed cautery.
And the best cauterization is when the cuts are made and the roots are pulled out, after some cause has returned them to their roots; and when they are cauterized with fire, those roots are burned and do not return.
Chapter 9.
The cure for granulation that occurs in the eyelids of people.
Often it occurs in the eyelids of people due to some cause which resembles granulation in its strength and hardness; and therefore granulation is called.
And it is an accumulation of thick humidity in the eyelid, both below and above.
Therefore, the operation on it is that you should consider whether the granulation comes from something that appeared under or above the eyelid and has spread everywhere; and the cause of it is ulceration.
Therefore, cut it open with a wide slit, and then scrape away the granulation all around with ease, until it is eliminated; and suspend it with a knife and excise it.
And if the size of it is large, then you should stitch it up; and cure it until it is healed.
And if it is small, you will not suffer harm from it because the eye's moisture restores it and incorporates it.
And if the granulation is declining towards the inner edges of the eyelid, then you should eviscerate the eyelid and lift up the granulation with a knife; cut away any other cause of it that you find there, and press down on it from all sides, and if the eyelid is elongated by the incision, then this will not be noticed in any way.
Then wash the eye with salted water, and cure the wound so that it incorporates into the skin until it is healed.
Chapter 10.
Of the cure of a cyst in the eyelid, above the eye.
A cyst is a grayle growth which is generated in the eyelids, above the eye, and mostly occurs in children; it damages the eyes of those who experience it, and they cannot bear to look at the brightness of the sun because tears are drawn towards them.
And so you will see them hanging down over their faces all the time, and sleeping over their faces; and so, under their eyebrows, the eyelids are moistened with cystic swelling, which appears as a protuberance in the eye; and when you press the spot with your finger, you feel that protuberance within.
And another method of operation is that the patient places his head in your lap, and then you place a cloth over him and make a poultice, and make a circle according to the amount that contains arternach all around, and then place it over the cyst and press with your fingers all around so that the cystic swelling is aggregated within; and then cut out that humidity with cauterizing with fire through a slit, and let the slit not be larger than the slit made in phlebectomies.
But in the front, you should cut all the way through so that you reach the cystic swelling, for in most cases the cystic swelling appears through a slit according to the shape of white grayness.
Therefore, extract it with poultices which you have wrapped between your fingers at the parts outside and revolve between the right and left hands so that it is dispersed.
And beware lest you cut into the slit with the cautery so that, when you use the cautery, you do not reach the eye and burn it.
But if you do not reach arternach at the beginning of the slit, but only touch it slightly so that arternach processes; and then extract it as we have said; and then soak poultices in water and wine and place them over the spot and press down on those with powder.
And then let salt and bread remain there in the cavity of the slit, so that what remains of that humidity.
Then cure it until it is healed.
But if an ulcer occurs on the spot, then cure it with cauterized plaster so that it is healed.
Chapter 11.
Of methods of touching the eye.
When the eyelids of people are touched by foreign objects, and then they are irritated, then these cause the eye to cry profusely and soften the eyelids and membrane so that this results in the destruction of the eye, and it is called tactimi of the eye; and it is cured in four ways: either by cauterization with fire; or with sharp medicine as described in the chapter on cauterization; or it is done with an incision and suturing; or with cannulas as we will say below.
Then place the patient's head in your lap; then lift up the eyelid of the eye with your left hand, and if it is lifted, good; but if not, insert an awl into that where there is a pus pocket below the eyelid, and let the awl penetrate above, and let it be – near the margin of the eyelid at which the lashes grow – near the lashes, and draw out the pus from above towards the eyelid, and convert that with fire.
Then cut into the inner part of the eyelid where the lashes are inserted with cauterizing with fire from the lacrimal major towards the lacrimal minor; and then extract the pus and place below the eyelid small pieces of cotton or cloth, and then bind over the eyelid with a tent, and let it be thus as a sign of mirt.
However, it is necessary to consider the shape according to the amount of swelling of the eyelid, since this differs among people; some require that a large quantity be excised from the eyelid according to the amount by which the eyelid is softened.
Then use the spatula along the two lines you drew, beginning from the larger tear duct and moving towards the smaller one. And if the incision is near the natural hairline, make it as thick as the width of a king's hair.
Then place the needle in one of the two corners of the wound, and excise all of it; then sew together the two lips with a thread made from fine wool or gut, wipe away any blood, and adhere the excess skin on the eyelids with some viscous substance if you want to do so, but if not, don't worry about it.
Then let the stitching heal within three or four days, and take care of it.
And if you wish, let the wound remain unsutured and heal it with something that dries and constricts, for the eyelid will be raised due to the sealing of the wound and the addition of ointment; but suturing is better. And so say those who know about these things.
However, there should be no hurry in operating on the patient; it is a good operation and there is no danger involved.
There is another method of operating, and it involves marking a figure on the eyelid like a leaf of a myrtle tree; then elevate the eyelid using three curved and clustered hooks according to this shape:
However, if that is not possible, and the hooks are not available, take a needle with thread and insert it at the center of the figure; then pass the other end of the thread near the larger tear duct, and the second end near the smaller one, and tie the threads between your fingers equally, and using those, elevate your hand with an even elevation, thus lifting the entire eyelid as we have described.
Then sew together the two lips of the wound and let it heal.
However, if an abscess occurs due to your incision or your cut, dry up that abscess with cerot and similar substances, and with ointment.
And if the hair on the eyelid has turned inwards, then you should use what we have said about incision; but suturing is more artificial.
Operating with canes is done as follows: and it is that you convert the eyelid and split the figure within it as I have described; then with skill, make two thin canes or asteles, of which their length should be according to the length of the eyelid and their width narrower than the width of the spatula. And you have already cut into at the ends of some of these sections, where you hold the threads.
Then adhere each one with subtlety beneath what protrudes from the eyelid; and tie the canes in some places with a strong constriction, and let it be for several days, for the eyelid will die and turn black due to the constriction and fall off on its own.
However, if it is delayed, then break it with tweezers, and let the wound heal as it should.
Then, when it is healed, the eyelid is elevated and the hairs do not poke out.
And this is the form of two canes which you will make as follows: and have their quantity in length and width neither more nor less.
Chapter .xii.
Of the elevation of hairs poking out from the eyelid with a needle when the hair is thick.
When the hairs are unnatural, thick and coarse, and poke out from the eyelids, then the operation on it is that you take a thin needle and pass it through a thread made of fine silk and linen; then tie its ends in a very subtle manner. And let the length of the threads be the amount of one palm.
Then you place another thread beneath it briefly, and tie its ends if you wish.
And let the patient hold his head towards you, and be facing the sun so that your work is revealed, for it is a subtle and delicate operation.
And then insert the needle at the root of the hair which needs it, and let it pierce the eyelid swiftly as you extract the unnatural hair above.
And then pull out the hair from beneath and insert the needle again into the eyelid, and let them be one or two or three hairs but no more.
And then pull out your hand as the hair is extracted by the needle from the eyelid with the natural hair.
However, if it is extracted by the needle but not removed from the eyelid, then you will pull out that thread from the parts where you have placed it, as the hair is extracted from the eyelid with the natural hair above it.
And you will dress it with ointment after the extraction of the hair, for you will bandage each and close up the eyelid for two or three days, as the hair adhere to its place and grow new healthy skin.
And if the hair is longer, then you will attach a long hair of those which are natural, and it will be elevated by that, or you will let it hang freely after it has been lengthen to some space, and then you will elevate it.
Chapter .xiii.
Of the cure of echacratir which appears in the eyelid above.
When there appears in the eyelid echacratir, and it is a contraction of the eyelid when it is pulled to one side or the other, due to poor healing of the wound or the scar or the cautery, and it is called leporina, and this inflammation or is natural or accidental, and it is caused by healing of the wound or scars or cauteries, or by similar things to their diseases.
The manner of the operation on it is that you split that consolidation and separate its lips, and place in it something that is between a cloth made of linen, and tie those so they are healed.
And do not use for the cure of it any causes which dry out and constrict, for if you do that it returns achacratir worse than before.
Use for it causes which soften as fenugreek does, and mix with water in which are soaked the flowers of broad beans and seeds of linseed, or with unguent of rose, which has been liquefied by one of the oils, and immerse in that the cloth, and cure it with that.
And the basis of your cure is that you pierce with total skill so that nothing is consolidated according to its beginning.
And this operation which we have described is not other than some rectification of achalixacti which does not return the shape of its location according to how it was before.
Chapter .xiiii.
Of the cure of achalixacti which is made in the eyelid beneath.
This achalixacti which is made in the eyelid beneath, which is named veridieramente achalixacti; and it can be natural or accidental.
But accidental is caused by a wound or by a scar or by cautery or by similar things.
And the way of the operation on it is that you take a needle with which there are double threads, and insert it into the flesh, and let it pass from the tear duct of the left side to the tear duct of the right, as the thread comes out at both ends of the flesh.
And then stretch out the meat at the parts above with the needle and sew that up with the needle, and insert it with a wide spatula. And then return the shape of the eyelid according to what is appropriate; and if not, take the thread and place it in the split figure, and with that, convert the eyelid, and split the two fissures on the side of the eyelid below.
And let the extremes of the two slits be at the two angles of the incision which you have made so that they meet; and an angle should be made from them so that when they come together, a figure is formed from them.
And this figure is the Greek letter: lambda.
Then hold that meat up by the amount that is the width of his eye under him, which cuts off the eyelid.
Then bring together the separated parts and sew those up with the thread of wool; and then treat those with what we have said about the softening medicines, and the poultices until he is healed.
And if it becomes infected through the slit or stitch or cautery, then make a flat slit with the slit on the skin of the eyelid as has been described. Then separate them with the poultice between two lips as we have said.
In the summary of the speech of the cure for infection whether it is above or below, let the operation run on him according to how he was prepared in the form of infection; and that has many different forms.
And the skilled doctors always prepare their plans in every way that is possible for them so that they can return the figure to its natural shape, or close to it; and the patient according to what he needs from the operation and the instruments in the most suitable conditions.
Chapter 15
Of the adhesion of the eyelid with the conjunctiva or with the cornea.
When this consolidation happens to many people that the eyelid is glued to the white of the eye, and it is prohibited from the facility of movement and its natural works, then you must insert the end of the thread under the eyelid, and lift it up there; or stretch it with the ointment.
Then you insert the adhesion with a thin spatula, which is not sharp on the edges, having been made blunt a little so that the patient is not disturbed by the operation, and let the spatula not cut the eye with its sharpness.
And let your incision cut through that adhesion with ease so that the eyelid is returned to its natural shape and that the whole adhesion is healed.
Then put in the eye salt water with which you wash it; or distil in it vinegar dissolved in water.
Then separate between the eyelid and the eye with the poultice of it, and put on the eye wool infused in white of egg; and then use it for three days with healing causes so that it is healed.
Chapter 16
Of incision of nail and prominence of meat of the tear ducts.
Know that the nail is according to two ways; one is nervous, and it is like a thin hard cipack; or it is not-nervous, like white humidity congealed, which when the iron touches it, it either takes up the ointment, or it is cut off and the ointment is not put in it.
And both kinds do not heal except by the large tear duct which goes little by little to cover the sight and prohibits the light and the movement of the eye.
But the way of operating in the incision of it is that the patient leans his head to you; then open his eyes, and lift up the eyelid with your hand, and then gather the nail with ointment of little doubling, and stretch it to the parts above. Then take a needle and insert in it one hair of horse or ox or cow, or similar, or of strong pitch, or double the end of the needle little by little and put that into the edge of the nail; then pierce it with the needle, and attach it with pitch; stretch it to the parts above, and cut out with the hair the side of the nail which covers the pupil. And so you follow that with the hair until it reaches the back of it.
Then you insert the remainder in the roots of the tear duct with a thin spatula or with small forceps; and cut the meat of the natural tear duct so that through the incision of it, there are not continuous flows of tears.
And sometimes the nail with only ointment stretched or with pitch as we have said; and then it is cut out with lion's spatula of which this is the shape of it:
And be careful that with the spatula you do not touch the corneal tunic and that there is rupture in it; and that the pupil is perforated.
Then put in the eye a little of ground salt or ash made from vinegar, and let it be until the next day; then cure that with what is appropriate so that it heals.
And if the nail is not nervous and you cannot put the needle in it or it is not stuck in it, then many times this kind of nail is cured with medicines, and is healed thus with the eye and composed in the division.
And if you want to cut it, then open the eye of the patient and take lion' s spatula of sharp iron according to this form: with thinness. And if you see that it is dried and closed up and it has taken root, then distil from your eye vinegar made of vinegar or with fine rosin or salt ground; and close the eye until the next day.
Then repeat the operation on it until everything that is of it has been healed; unless the opposite pustule cauterize in the eye, because then you cut it and cure the pustule at the beginning so that it is healed.
Then repeat your operation on it with wisdom until it is healed.
The prominence of the meat of the tear duct, if noted in the eye with great damage, is suspended by ointment; and insert it at one end, and do not complete the incision so that you do not cause flows of tears.
Then distil in the tear duct vinegar made from vinegar until it is healed.
Chapter 17
Of incision of alar-sack and what has come from meat pressed in the eye.
Sometimes in the eyes of some is born meat like rope, and it is pressed in so that it covers the pupil, or it approaches or narrows on the eyelids, and it strongly presses the eyelids to the front and it assembles to the rope of a bowstring.
But the operation on it is that the patient leans his head to you; then open its eyes and gather all that meat with convenient pins towards that, and have that a forceps or a basket; then cut the meat at the beginning so that everything is finished by the scissors, and be careful of the eye that it does not get cut by your operation.
And let your incision be with which you cut those or with the spatula by which we have recommended in the incision of the nail, or with small forceps with which it is gathered according to that comes the shape of it then this chapter.
Then when your incision is completed and the meat has been cut off, then fill the eye with ground salt or distil in it vinegar powder and similar to it of the medicines that cause scorching, and put on the eye from the front cotto with white of egg so that it is secured from pustule cauterize.
And if you find any cause of ulceration and there is pus and fear of abscess, then open the wound and treat that abscess with something that will drain that abscess, and then repeat on that wound until it is healed, and do the same for the flesh around which has become infected due to that type of wound.
However, you must avoid all treatment of the wound through natural or accidental means, using tools made of iron, and do not put your hand in any of these operations until you see that member suffering from that operation.
Chapter 18.
On the collection of pus in the wound.
Pus is red veins that are hardened on the wound and prevent healing; they open the wound for a long time.
Therefore, it is necessary at the beginning for you to consider whether the wound in which there is pus is strong and does not have any other disease than pus; then collect that pus.
And command the patient to lean their head on you, and then suspend those veins with a needle or two depending on your discretion; that needle should be of a subtle double thread according to this form:
or two needles gradiently in one body according to this form:
And collect those veins with subtle threads, with subtlety, and wipe the blood hour by hour, until you see those veins being sucked into the wound and being rolled up.
And be careful not to cut the wound with the edge of the spatula; and if your operation is in the middle of the sole, and remain motionless during your operation so that you do not insert anything except those veins.
And when you are finished, then you distill on the wound chief vinegar or red wine so that with its acuity it corrodes what has been sucked from the pus.
But if it is not possible for you to collect all in that hour, then dress the whole with something that relieves its pain, and let it be for a few days until its pain is relieved and it is secured from abscess.
And repeat on it according to the former manner until it is healed.
And this is the form of the tweezers:
Chapter 19.
On the reduction of hernia in the nose.
When you treat hernia with cautery or with a sharp medicine according to what is preceded in its narration and it is not healed, then there is nothing in it but that you split on the abscess according to the maturity of it, and draw out all the moisture which is in it and the pus until the bone is exposed.
And therefore when the bone is exposed and you see corruption or blackness in it, then you scrape it with an instrument of which this is the form:
And it is named from rough head, and let it be made of hard iron, and let the head be round like a file which is made pointed by filing or polished with a subtle file (just as in the following form).
And place that on the corrupted part of the bone, and then roll it between your fingers, and press your hand little by little until you know that corruption is scraped.
And that should be done several times, and then heal the place with astringent and styptic causes.
Therefore if the place is consolidated and good flesh has grown on it and the body is cut off from the wound and there is no abscess and no incident happens in it and it does not become inflamed, then you know that it is healed.
But if not, then there is nothing in it except to reduce the fracture to the form of the nose, and according to this manner: and it is that you uncover from the bone with iron or sharp medicine, and when the bone is exposed, then you take ash according to this form:
Let its outer end be triangular, and let its shaft be cut straight to the outer end just as it is seen.
And then place that on the bone, and let it be close to the tear duct; and lengthen your hand a little from the wound, and then roll your hand with the tribe until it penetrates all the bone, and that feels the patient through breath coming out of him when you press his hand.
Therefore then heal the place with astringent and drying medicines just as you have dried it.
And when the flesh and the place are hardened, then the matter which oozed to the edges of the hole returns to the nose; therefore that is pus coming out on the patient.
Chapter 20.
On the reduction of the prominence of the wound.
When the wound protrudes with its entirety and there is no incident of harm or diminution in it, then you should loosen the patient, and then that he breathes and sucks through good sucking; and then place liniment which is made of myrrh and aloe and oil and mastic over the wound, and then strengthen the bandage over the wound with strong powdery bandages.
And the manner of the powdery bandages is that you take linen cloths thin, and each cloth be folded into four folds; and make those plies.
And then place those one over the other according to the quantity of which the wound has need. And then tighten over those with a hard cloth with strong compression; and repeat the cupping with sucking without scarification; and then place the cups and let the wound be tight during the day and the night.
But if in between the ligament is softened, then you should make it strong.
And then place the ligature during the day and the night just as we have said.
And if you see that the wound is already reduced, well then; but if not, then repeat the bandage with the powdery bandages and the compression and the cupping until it is healed.
Chapter 21.
On the incision of the prominence of the venous membrane.
When there is disruption in the venous membrane, and then it is prominent and proceeds out of the eyelids just as with a grain of sand, and its shape is man-like for that, and you want to incise it, then the operation on it is just as we have prescribed, that you insert the needle into the root of the vein from the lower part towards the upper part, and then insert the other needle in which there is a double thread of the tear duct, and make that penetrate and let the first needle according to its disposition; and then incise the place of the double thread and lift with it the membrane of the vein around the needle, and tighten that.
And then pull out the needle and place over the wound wool infused in white wine and let it until the thread falls off with the vein.
And then heal the wound with that which comforts that until the ulcer is healed.
And several times gather from all parts with a circle of cloth around the wound, and then let it be penetrated by the spatula subtly so that the white moisture comes out, and the wound goes down and as long as it has not healed.
And then tighten until it is healed.
Chapter 22.
On the cure of alconitis.
This disease which is called alconitis is not but an ulcer which is formed in the wound like water descending, and it is not that.
But the manner of working on it is that you make the patient sit upright on the chair with his head held up by both hands and look down; and then take the head in your hands from two parts and hold him so that you see the ulcer coming to the lower parts, and then let it be dried and not go down, and let there be light, and the patient sees the causes just as he looks.
And if it will not come down, know that it is water.
But if the discharge is not prepared to come out in the way that we have said, then make the patient cough between his hands and then take a sharp stick and poke it into the skin surface over the panniculus carnosus about a small distance from the continuation of the conjunctiva into the tunica cornea at the crown (into the place where one wants), until the discharge comes out.
Once it is discharged, then you distil into the wound water in which you have mixed honey or water in which you have boiled fenugreek and honey.
And let it be cured with the other remedies until it is healed.
Chapter 22.
Of the cure for a wound from which water discharges.
We have already said about the types of water in the division and according to the health condition, then it is necessary to pierce with a needle, describing it as follows:
Then you should make the patient cough between his hands over a container and collect the water that discharges from him, then bind it tightly.
Then place your left hand near the eyelid of his eye, if the eye from which the water discharges is on the left side; or with your right hand, if it is on the right side.
And then take alum with your right hand, if the eye is on the left side; or with your left hand, if the eye is on the right side.
And then place the end of the alum near the edge of the cornea over the thickness of the membrane in the white part of the eye at the smaller tear duct, and push the alum with strength and rotate your hand with it.
And then penetrate into the membrane of the eye and feel that the alum has already reached the cause of the vision.
And when it is the distance of the path of the alum to the pupil the measurement of the space that is from the pupil to the edge of the blackness, and it is the cornea of the eye; for you will see with it the pupil with the vision of the eye through the clarity of the tunica cornea.
And then place the alum into the place where the water is, and then you draw it down another time, and thus if the water descends immediately, then you see the patient above on which he opens his sight immediately, and the alum in his eye.
And then rest a little; therefore if the water has discharged, then you remove that other compression before the alum is applied.
And then when it is dry and does not discharge, then you extract the alum with ease, and rotate your hand a little by little with it; and then dissolve in the water a little of white clear salt of gemma and wash the eye inside; and then place over the eye a cotton or stop or wool soaked in rose oil and egg white with that which is the eye.
But we and those who are of our time place over it cooked rice with egg white.
But if it does not obey you, the alum to the instrument of the eye because of its hardness — for it is one of those men of which the eye is very hard —, then take the stick which is named “alberid,” of which this is the form:
And then pierce with it that conjunctiva, and do not pierce your hand in the hole, and do not cease until you have made way for the alum to a subtle place.
And then insert the alum as we have said.
And after you have finished your work, let the patient be prepared for sleep in a dark room in which he sleeps on his back in darkness, and all movements are prohibited.
And place over his head that which makes the nature of him to be cool, and do not turn his head to either the right or left at all.
And let there be the poultice according to his disposition on the third day.
And then take off that in the morning darkness and let him see some things, and then return the poultice on the seventh day.
And do not do this in the hour of the poultices or immediately after that; also let there be an infusion. Let it be until you remove that so that the water can flow freely and vehement from retention.
But if pustules happen, then let there be poultice until the seventh day, and rectify that with water that softens pustules.
Then you open the sight of him and place over his face oil that he may regulate his gaze below him for several days, existing in darkness.
And then let there be poultice gently and conversation with him about some things.
And know that in cataract it is not excused the disciple of sight some views, and then you feel ardor over the operation.
And it has come to us from some of those who are in the Artach , and someone said that when fire was made in Ayrac a magdaam was perforated with which is sucked water.
But nevertheless I have not seen that in our land which he has performed it, nor is it read in any of the books of the ancients; and it is possible that this is new.
And these are the forms of magdaam so that it is over those who do not know them:
And they are made of gold or of iron properly, and they are the extremities of them with this subtle triangular shape, the acute extremity as well; that is the form.
Chapter 24.
Of the cure of a swelling in the nose.
When in the nose there are various swellings of which is some cause which is attached to scorpio of hair feet, or to polyps of hair; and this illness is called polypus because it is of the appearance of that hair represented. And from him there is swollen flesh, flaccid, of dusky color; and from him there is that is not leon not of dusky color.
Therefore in that which is in these flesh not fraudulent or cancerous, let there be the patient lying between your hands and exposed to the sun, and open his nose, and rub the eye of him in that flesh. And then extract that to the foramen, and then pierce with that which you have understood with a sharp stick from the foramen, and if when you have drawn it there is no cause from which the abscission is possible, then rub that with one of the subtle instruments with ease from which there is no cause. But if it oozes blood or pustules form, then let there be placed to him that which you have; or they are of the malignant pustules, then cut and cauterize that from which the blood has been discharged and all the cavities are completely open.
And then let there be placed in the nose also after the incision oil and water or vinegar. But if the nose is open and from it proceeds humidity into the palate, then know that it is healed.
But if the humidity does not penetrate according as it should, then you know that within him there is swollen flesh in the nose bones of which there has been no discharge.
Therefore let there be placed in the nose also after the incision oil of which there is some thickness, and rub in it hair of needles, and place between each joint the quantity of the finger or more, and open the sight and insert one end of the needle into the nose with the ray or other cause from which it is possible.
And once this is done, let them take their incense and hold it until it reaches the nostrils, and let it be burned over their throat; for many experienced soldiers do this action when they want to.
Then pause the two ends of the gallbladder; one end comes out through the nose and the other goes into the nose. Administer cauterization of flesh with the nails that are in the gallbladder, and do this until you taste that the flesh is cauterized by the nails.
Then remove the gallbladder and place in the nose a cauterization of blood, and do this for three days or more until the ointment corrode all that is rotten in the flesh.
And at the end of the cause, place a lead pipe in the nose for several days until it is healed.
But if the wound starts to bleed again, use that one. [i.e., the cauterization]
And this is the form of the instrument for the head purging by which oils and medicines are distilled into the nose.
And do this with silver or gold, which should be like a small open lamp, also with a small hole, and the wick similarly.
And if you want, make a closed canal like a reed, and the canal of the instrument for head purging should be flat and open; to which there is a handle on it, with which you have that when you pour into it oil or water that you want from the juices and suction causes.
Chapter 25.
Of holes in the ends of the nose.
Many times it happens that a hole occurs in the ends of the nose, and it becomes swollen and enlarged within several days if one does not observe the guard of it.
And because of this, insert that into the beginning of its appearance, and remove all that. Then place over it a cautery or burning medicine which stays in its place.
But if its eruption is delayed until it becomes swollen, then consider if it has become hard, of dusky color and with little feeling, then do not touch that with iron because it is a pustular abscess; for many times when you insert this abscess through it great harm comes to the one in whom it was.
And if the abscess is of a soft touch and not of dusky color, and it is possible to insert into it without fear, then empty out the patient and insert that without fear, and cure the place with something that corrode and constrict until it is healed.
Chapter 26.
Of suturing of the nose and lips and ears when their continuity is dissolved by ulcer or similar.
Know that when there is a solution of continuity in one of these cartilages, few perform the operation except for some men.
Therefore, whenever because of some cause, you consider that it is a fresh ulcer with its blood, then adjust the two lips of the ulcer with a suture, and then cure it until it is healed.
And if the lips of solution of continuity are already separated, and each is made healthy, then cut off each part of its visible cord until blood comes out. Then adjust the two lips with a suture and strengthen them, and over them pulverize dragon blood and sprinkle thrisat on it, and place over the powder a piece of emplaster of diafinicon, or of some other of the consolidating plasters, and let that be bound for two days or three, and then remove that plaster and change that emplaustre and let it be bound until the scabs are separated, and then cure it with ointment until it is healed.
But the way of suturing is that you add the solution of continuity or with needles as we have recommended in the suturing of the belly, or add the solution of continuity with thread just as we have taught you.
Chapter 27.
Of extraction of those causes that come in the two lips in their parts inside.
Many times in some men in the parts inside of their lips there are certain hard abscesses which resemble grit of err, and some of them are minor and some are major.
Therefore cut open the lips and split each of those hard spots throughout its parts, then fill in the wound with sage thrisat until the blood is restricted, and then wash it out with wine vinegar and cure the spot with something that constricts it until it is healed.
Chapter 28.
Of incision of the flesh pressed against the gums.
Great care should be taken over the gum of flesh pressed against it which the ancients called albulus, therefore suspend that with an incision or what you have it with forceps and insert it above its root, and let the pus flow out or the blood.
Then place over it sage thrisat or other astringent or cauterizing powders.
And if that flesh returns, then insert it secondly and cauterize it, for the cautery will not return.
Chapter 29.
Of extraction of teeth with iron.
When on the surface of the teeth in the parts inside and outside and between the gums are adjusted rough scars, scabs, and some are blackened and are made citrines or green because of the gum coming through that corruption, and the teeth are bound.
Therefore cut the patient between your fingers and let him hold his head down, and scrape the teeth in which appear those scars and causes looking like sand so that no root of any cause remains, and that will be made of the blackness and of the citrineness and of the others until they are cleansed.
Therefore if it is left over what is in those of the beginning of the root, well; and if not, then you iterate the root over those on another day and again and again until the final result that you want.
And know that teeth have need of many kinds of instruments, of diverse forms and figures according to the preparation for your operation. And because the teeth that are pulled out of the gums have another shape than those that are cut between the teeth, and these shapes of instruments you should prepare right away, which you will see immediately:
Chapter 30.
Of tooth extraction.
Because you should treat the tooth of its pain with every art and delay in any extraction of it, because there is no cause that prevents its growth when it is extracted, for it is a sublimated substance inside which is an obstacle to its extraction.
But when the patient is forced to have that tooth extracted, you must be certain which is the painful tooth, because many times the pain deceives the patient and it appears in a healthy tooth, and you extract that one and the pain does not cease until the sick and painful tooth is extracted, for we have seen this through the operation of the teeth.
Therefore when you are certain which is the painful tooth and know it well, then you should scarify the gum around the tooth with a spatulum in which there is some virtue, until it is dissolved from the tooth of the gum of all division, and then masticate it with your teeth, or with fine forceps little by little as you concuss it.
And then hold it firmly with strong fingers by good speech or strong stupor, and place the head of the patient between your teeth which you hold well so that he does not bite you, and then treat the tooth according to rectitude in a way that you do not break it nor give the patient greater pain.
And therefore if it is not forgotten, then take one of those instruments and place that underneath him from every part with facility and exert the removal of him as well as he can be done at the beginning.
But if the tooth is cracked or rotten, then you should cover that crack with a cloth and tighten that with the end of a fine thread so that it is not squeezed in the hour of your constriction upon that with your fingers.
And if you have any instrument which could be made of the root of a tree with the virtue of scarification, and it is necessary to extract the tooth by the head of the patient according to this way: And then open wide with scarification around the gum in every part and guard your strength that you do not break it and break a part from him, and return over the patient so that he is better than the first pain.
And if the tooth is extracted from the gum by the head of the patient and it cannot be done by the head of the patient, then it is necessary to extract it by another way which you will be certain by which it is extracted. And guard yourself that you do not do what some ignorant barbers do in their foolhardiness and audacity about extraction, without administering what we have recommended; for many times they bring upon men great sicknesses which are more difficult than they were squeezed, and the roots of them all wriggled, or some of those, or that you extract that with some bones of the jaw as we have testified.
And then the extraction of it is washed the mouth with warm wine or sour wine with salt.
And if blood flows from that, thus as it should, then take some quantity of vitriol and sprinkle over the wound, and if it does not work that vitriol, cauterize.
The form of the forceps and fine tweezers with which the tooth is masticated at the beginning are of long extremity, of short handle and thick, so that they are not bent when you work with them.
And be thus with handles of thick extremity so that when you stretch with those they are not bent, let them be short extremities.
And be made of iron of India descended from straight extremities, and in the extremities of those are teeth of which the one enters into the other and stretch by strong constriction, and some times the extremities of those are the form of a beak of a stork whose name is Ciconia, it is hooked, and are of strong constriction.
Chapter 31.
Of extraction of teeth and of dislocation of the bones of the jaws bitten.
When you should extract a tooth which is bitten for some cause, then you should pause over the place cut with a bandage for one or two days until the place is softened; and then insert your finger or tweezers the extremities of which are like the beak of a stork called Ciconia or hooked, the form of forceps:
The extremities of them be made inside as with file or chisel.
And if it does not obey you by these forceps or tweezers, then you should dig over the root and remove all the flesh and insert the instrument which is called atalium, it is a little lever of which the form is thus:
And be of short extremity thick a little, and not be bent so that it is not squeezed.
Thus if the cause of this is forgotten by you, it is good; and if not, aid yourself with these other instruments of which these are the forms. The form of the first instrument is triangular with a pointed end in which there is some thickness:
The shape of the second instrument is that it be triangular and of a very thin extremity.
And you are aided by this instrument having two spikes, the shape of which is to follow: and with other instruments which precede in tooth extraction; for there is made with this instrument which is assimilated to a large needle, and this is the shape:
of the twisted or short triangular extremity, which has some thickness, and is not bent so that it is not snapped.
And another thing to know about the instruments of moving teeth are similar and akin to the other instruments.
But the wise and subtle artisans in the art find for themselves many ways according to what they understand of the operation and the diverse illnesses; for there are diverse illnesses which the ancients did not name or put into proper instruments by their forms of diverse species.
But if the bone of the jaw or of the other bones of the mouth is cracked, then it must be cured on that in its place with what is convenient to him of the instruments and forceps which we have said in the extraction of the roots of the teeth, and aid yourself by the gesture of which this is the shape:
And there must be some thickness in it little by little, and it must be bound or held by the mouth so that it does not escape or leak until all of the bone is forgotten; and then restore the place with appropriate medicines to that.
But if there is a small breaking in the bone, then scrape that of that breaking and of its blackness, and cure it within until it is healed.
Chapter .xxxii.
Of the cure of teeth which are prominent above the others.
When teeth are prominent not according to their natural form by those the shape is lacking, and especially when it happens in women, and especially in elderly women; therefore you must consider: if the tooth is next to another tooth, and it is not possible for there to be a lancing or lining of it, then remove that one; but if it is not attached to another tooth, then you insert that one with this instrument of which this is the shape; and it is similar to pig's tooth, and it must be made of Indian iron with an extremely sharp end.
And your incision should be such that you insert it into the tooth in several days because of the hardness of the tooth, and not cut another of the teeth.
And if it is a prominent tooth exposed to grinding, then you grind that one with an Indian iron file of which this is the shape:
And let it all be of Indian iron and the margin evenly; and let it have small points like a file with which needles are made, and with which the tooth is ground little by little in several days with facility, so that no other tooth is cut or broken. And then you line it at its end, and scrape it with a sharp razor.
And if it is a tooth of which one part is cracked and cuts the tongue, then you must grind it within until the sharp edge of that fracture is worn down and flattened so that the tongue is not cut nor speech impaired.
Chapter .xxxiii.
Of the restoration of broken teeth with gold or silver wire.
When it happens to the teeth that there is concussion and removal by striking or falling, and the patient cannot hold onto what they chew, and you have cured them with astringent medicines, and your cure has not helped, then so that they do not rot, it is useful that they are bound with gold wire and not silver, for silver becomes black and soon rots after several days, but gold does not change at all.
And let the wire be of such thinness and thickness according to the quantity that can enter between the teeth; and the shape of the binding is that you take the wire and place twice its length between two healthy teeth, and then let it grow with two tortuosities of the wire between two broken ones, or if one or more, within so that the thread comes to the healthy tooth from the other part. And then repeat the binding within to the part from which you began, and strengthen your hand with facility and skill within so that it is not broken.
And let your binding be such that you bind the wire over the roots of the teeth so that it does not leak.
And then you insert the wire’s excess ends with forceps or tweezers, and draw those to each other in every place with gestures, and convert them and hide them between the healthy tooth and the broken one, so that it does not harm the tongue. And then let her tightly close it thus with Roman wax.
But if it is loose or broken, strengthen that or those with another wire in the same way at all times.
And this is the form of teeth and the figure of the binding of two healthy teeth and two broken ones, thus with their threads bound:
And when it happens that one tooth or two return to their places of origin, and they are regrown thus as we have recommended, and that they rot again.
And it does not do anything but good artisans and the wise.
And sometimes it is apt for some cause of the bones of a cow, and it is made in the shape of teeth, and placed in the place where the tooth fails, and is strengthened as we have said, and remains and serves with him for a long time.
Chapter .xxxiv.
Of the incision of the thread which appears in the tongue and it prohibits speech.
This ligament which appears under the tongue some times, or is natural to him, or it happens accidentally and occurs because of a wound that is already consolidated.
And the operation on it is that you open the mouth of the patient, the jaw being held in your hand; and elevate the tongue, and then insert the nervous thread according to its length so that the tongue is released from its binding.
But if there is any hardness or knottiness in it, and that is standing because of consolidation of the wound, then you cut a notch and split it according to its length so that you have split the thread and the knot is dissolved.
And beware that there is not made a fissure in the lip of meat, and you split here the artery and blood flows out.
And then it is washed with vinegar or wine or vinegar and water, and then the patient spits out; so that the tongue be not bound up by another wound.
But if blood flows out, place on the spot vinegar triphled; but if blood vents, then cauterize the spot with a burning cautery appropriate to that. And then it is cured by the other causes until it is healed.
Chapter .xxxv.
Of the extraction of ranula under the tongue.
Sometimes it happens under the tongue an apostema resembling a small nut which prohibits speech, and strong is enlarged within so that it fills the mouth.
And the operation on it is that you open the mouth of the patient facing the sun and consider the apostema.
And if you see it of a dusky or black color, hard, to which the patient does not respond with feeling, then do not touch that because it is rotten.
And if it is turned white and humid, then you put the ointment on it, and insert that subtle sponge, and insert the whole thing; and if blood comes out during your operation, then you stop above with a trussed bandage, so that the blood is restricted.
Then return to your work while it is still wet with the ointment, and wash it with sweet wine and salt; and heal it with another healing until it is healed.
Chapter 36.
Of the extraction of an abscess from both ears, and of that which is in the throat, and of other abscesses.
When an abscess appears in the throat, it is like glands which are clustered together, which are cut open and are called both ears, which when you treat them with what we have said in the division, and they are not healed, then you should consider whether the abscess is hard, of a dusky color, with little feeling; then do not touch that with iron.
And if it is of a red color and the root is thick, then do not touch that with iron for fear of bleeding; unless you let that one remain until it is ripe, and either you will cut it out or it will burst on its own.
And if it is of a white color, soft, and the root of it is fine, then that one should be cut into.
And the operation on it is that you consider, before your operation, whether the abscess has rested completely or has diminished by any diminution; and then have the patient lie down facing the sun, and his head be in your lap, and open the mouth of him, and the servant holding his hands press the tongue of him downward with a noble instrument, of which this is the shape:
And it should be made of silver or bronze, and be fine like a needle.
And when you press with that the tongue and it is shown to you the abscess, and you put over that your thumb, then take ointment and insert that into the hollow, and draw that out to the outside parts as much as you can. Another way is that you draw some cause from the membranes; then insert that with an instrument of which this is the shape:
Another way is that you draw some cause from the membranes; then insert that with an instrument of which this is the shape: It is like a pair of forceps, except that its ends are bent so that the aperture of each of those is in the direction of the other, very sharp, and it should be made of iron coated in wax.
But if this instrument is not available to you, then insert that with a sponge of which this is the shape: and it should be sharp on one side and blunt on the other side.
And after you have inserted one hole, insert the other according to this method of insertion, and then let the patient gargle with water.
But if blood comes out, then gargle with water of cooking liquid from the rind of pomegranate or leaf of myrtle, and similar to that of the causes of constriction so that the flow of blood is restricted, and then heal that until it is healed.
And sometimes in the throat there are other abscesses besides those two ears; and insert those according to what has been said about the insertion of two holes equally.
And I have once treated a woman of an abscess which was in her throat, and that abscess had turned dusky in color, with little feeling; it had closed up her throat, and the woman could breathe only through a narrow opening, and she had prohibited herself from eating and drinking water, and she was on the verge of death if she had not taken any food or drink for one or two days.
And that abscess had pushed so much that it had made two bumps within which fluid would drip through two openings.
So I cut her throat with a scalpel and put in one of them the ointment, and drew that out, and it came out from her a great portion; then I cut into where I understood was the other opening, and then I closed her mouth, pressed her tongue, and then I put the ointment on that abscess.
And then I cut off a great portion of it, and only a little blood flowed from it. So absolutely her throat was closed, and she began to drink water at once, and then took food; therefore I did not cease cutting that abscess many times for a long time, and the abscess returned in the place of it, which cut into it again and again as long as it was prolonged.
So I had iron and cauterized her throat, therefore she was in great distress; and then I walked around and did not know what God had done to that; therefore I believed.
Chapter 37.
Of the incision of a hernia when it is abscessed.
When pus comes out of the hernia and it is abscessed and long, then that is called a perpendicular hernia; and if it is swollen and round at the bottom, then it is called a buba.
But when it is healed with what has been said in the division and does not conform to your cure, and the abscess cauterized is already old and thin, then you should insert that which is swelled around and round; and if it is long and blood comes out of it, dusky or black in color, and there is no feeling in it, then beware of cutting into it, for fear over the patient.
And when you see that according to the manner that I have said of its whiteness and length, that you make the patient lie down and press his tongue with an instrument of which you process its shape, then put ointment in the new one, and draw that out from above and insert it with one of the two instruments which I said about the insertion of two holes.
And beware that you do not insert that unless it is drawn up over the natural term by addition, for if you cut into it more, you will draw out its speech.
And then after the incision, use that which we have recommended in the insertion of two holes, and heal that until it is healed.
But if the patient is frightened by the incision of it, then use the iron in cauterizing it without fear, and the manner of cauterizing in it is not but with sharp water; and let the patient's head be in your lap, and then press his tongue with the instrument which we have said, and then take that water which we said in the chapter on cauterization, and conform to living cause, and put that not thick nor thin, and of that fill the hollow of the instrument of which this is the shape:
Let the end of it be hollow in which the medicine is paused as with the concavity of a spoon; and put the instrument over the hernia, and let the patient lie on his side so that saliva or spittle drips from the mouth of him due to the intrinsic medicine, so that nothing goes down into the throat of him and let it drip.
And then hold your hand over the medicine, and express that onto the uvula for a space of half an hour until you see it blackened and soothed by the biting of the medicine.
And if you want, take a cloth and wrap that over the end of the iron, and immerse the iron in the medicine, and insert the end into a tube of wax so that the iron adheres to that tube; and do that as many times until you accomplish what you want from cauterizing the grape, then let it dry and fall off after three or four days.
And if you feel that the medicine needs to be repeated, repeat it, and then cauterize the area around the ulcer with a cotton swab dipped in wine, and cleanse the area around the ulcer with the water from the medicine, and wash it with rubbing alcohol, and treat the inside of the ulcer with ointments until it heals.
And this type of treatment is more safe than surgery and less painful and terrifying.
Sometimes the ulcer is healed with a liquid that is thinner than cauterization and incision, for it is healed by sublimation in this way: take calamine, hyssop, oregano, rue, Arabic scordium, camomile, bruised plants and similar to these herbs, and put all those causes, or some of them, in a vessel, and let them be steeped in mild wine; and the vessel should be warm with decent heat, and there should be a hole in the middle of the vessel, on which an appropriate hollow instrument made of silver or bronze is placed; it should be made of silver or bronze.
And the end of this instrument is inserted into the mouth of the patient so that the steam reaches the ulcer on the glottis, until the ulcer is very foggy.
And then repeat this several times until it is dry, and beware of performing this treatment at the beginning of an inflammation of an ulcer, for it would make the inflammation worse; rather, you should wait for the declaration of the ulcer's cautery.
But if you do not have this instrument, then take a cane and attach a piece of holly at its end, so that the mouth of the patient is protected, for the holly's close prevents the steam from burning the mouth.
And this treatment is good for health.
Chapter 38.
On the extraction of thorns and of what adheres in the throat, and of other causes.
Sometimes there is adhesion in the throat or a thorn in the foot or some other cause.
Then you should extract what is visible from these, by looking at it with an instrument in front of the sun, so that you can see what is in the throat.
And what is hidden and concealed in the throat, you should make the patient vomit before the food has digested in the stomach, for often the cause of the throat lies hidden by vomiting; or let the patient swallow a piece of napkin or a leaf of lettuce or a piece of dry bread; or let him swallow a piece of dried sponge, and then apply vinegar to it strongly, and then let the patient swallow it, for when it reaches the place where the thorns are, they will be dislodged. And if you take an eel and apply vinegar to it, and let it be inside and applied, it will be extracted; or take a needle and push it in and push it out.
But if they are not dislodged by those causes which we have mentioned, then use an instrument made of lead according to this form:
And it should be thicker than a small needle, and at its end there should be a hollow which you can insert into the patient's throat easily.
And let the patient' head be elevated, and beware of touching his bones in the throat, so that he does not cough or vomit, or that the doctor holds his hand over his mouth.
But if the patient himself inserts it, because of his knowledge of the location of the cause and pulls the instrument upwards, all this according to the amount for which he is prepared until it is dislodged.
Chapter 39.
On the extraction of blood-letting annexed to the throat.
When blood-letting has been administered with what we have said in the division of treatment by medicines, and it does not help, then consider the throat of the patient towards the sun, for you should have applied his tongue with an instrument which we have recommended.
Therefore if you see blood, extract it gently with a small needle or with decently thin tweezers.
And if you are unable to extract it, then take a hollow tube and insert it into the throat of the patient, and then place a hot iron in the hollow of the tube, and do this as many times as necessary (until the blood-letting is stopped and it ceases from the throat), and let the patient abstain from water all day.
And then take a sponge saturated with rubbing alcohol, and open the patient's mouth with it, and wash his mouth with it; and do not let any cause enter into his throat, and do not let him drink anything for an hour or more with his hand, for the blood-letting will soon cease when he drinks.
But if it is not stopped by what we have recommended, then subliminate the throat with camphor or asafetida using the instrument which we have recommended for sublimination of the ulcer.
Do this, so that in whatever way it falls.
And there is another way of operating in sublimination of it: take a vessel in which are burning coals and the vessel should be covered with a cover on top of which there is a hole, and the end of the instrument should be placed in that hole; then apply the sublimation; and let the patient open his mouth over the end of the tube, and close his mouth so that the sublimation is not wasted until you know that the sublimation has reached the blood-letting, for the blood-letting will soon cease.
And if it does not cease, then repeat the sublimation several times, and let the patient abstain from drinking, and eat salt and alder wood, and do not drink water, and so by this regimen it will be stopped.
And this is the form of the instrument with which blood-letting from the throat is extracted when it is seen; and it is similar to forceps except for having some curvature: which is applied to the throat, and its end is similar to a wooden beak of a stork, which is smooth, in which there is a cut with lime, so that when it grasps something, it does not slip.
Chapter 40.
In which is the sum of the tongue in perception of ulcers and in section of them.
Ulcers are of various kinds, from various causes, according to which we remember them, each in this book.
And they are diverse in penetration and section of them by two ways: one is by the nature of ulcers themselves; and by what we perceive from humidity.
And the second way is by the places in which they occur, for the accidental ulcer on the head is different from the accidental ulcer on the heel; and the ulcer in a fleshy place is different from the ulcer in a joint; and each of them has its own treatment by operation.
And there are also some ulcers which do not need to be penetrated, but rather require maturation of the pus in them or completion of them.
And there are other ulcers which are not cut but rather have成熟(maturation) of the pus in them or completion of them. And there are also some ulcers which are near joints, for when there is an ulcer on a joint, its matter is prolonged to the parts around it, and very often the ligaments or nerves of that joint are corrupted, for this is the cause of contraction of that member; or it is near a main member, and if you delay penetration of it until it becomes mature, it will corrupt the main member; or it is near the anus, so penetrate it when it is not mature; and do not cut into a crux, unless there is complete digestion, but rather that which is near the anus, so that it does not corrupt the front of it and is prolonged to the parts around it, and there has been made a fistula, or that which is at the end of it and has not healed. You should know when to pierce the pustule, and that time is when it has matured.
You should know that it has matured when there is a decrease in pain and fever, as well as a decrease in redness and pulsation, and the head of the pustule becomes pointed, along with other signs.
You should also know that piercing should be done in the lowest part of the pustule and where pus is coming from the healing of the eminence.
And piercing should always be done through the length of the skin or body, if the pustules are on the hands or feet, and in the places of the veins, nerves, and arteries; and in all places alike where there is no reflection; for in those where there is a reflection, use piercing according to that member.
But when the pustule is in a fleshy place, it is better to pierce it after digestion has been confirmed according to what we have said; for if you pierce it before that, the body of the pus and dirt are prolonged, as well as the lips of it being hardened and its depth.
But some pustules are pierced according to the width of the skin or body due to necessity, or according to that of which the member is in need.
And you should administer a small piercing for small pustules, a large and ample piercing for large pustules, or many piercings according to the diversity of the size of the pustules.
And there are others of pustules in which the membrane is hollowed out and cut, when it is done so that bread is made, as it happens with those on the scrotum and testicles.
And there are those that are cut with a section having three angles; and there is one that is cut in the shape of a leaf of bay laurel, as are the pustules on the elbows.
And there are those in which round and lunar sections are administered, and similar to those.
But that which is not tipped as are superficial pustules, you should pierce it with a superficial piercing, or simply a flat one.
And when the pustule is large and has collected a lot of pus, you should pierce it and not be afraid to extract all the pus at that time; having extracted a part of it, then plug the pustule again on the next day, then extract a larger portion, and do this repeatedly until it is completely drained.
And especially if the patient is of a cold nature, or a woman in labor, or a small child, or an old person in decline; for the animal spirit is often resolved by the discharge of pus, and it rarely harms them, and you should operate on them.
Therefore take great care with this chapter, and when you pierce these pustules, cleanse the wounds and consider if the wound of the pustule is small or a flat section, then you should administer the cauterizations of old wine or vinegar; but if the pustule is large and the fissures of the piercing are many, then you should place a plug in each crack as they appear.
And if a part of the membrane is torn off or you have hollowed it out in the circuit, then you should complete it with old wine or a thread made of linen cloth, just as when you treat wounds or roots, without moisture; and strengthen it on the third day; and then process and cure it as you would any other wound.
But if bleeding occurs at the time of your operation, then you should administer water mixed with vinegar and wine in which a linen cloth has been soaked, and place it over the site of the bleeding many times.
But if the bleeding persists, then you should administer regimens and curettages, and powders which I have recommended in other places of this book.
But if it is in the winter time, and the site of the pustule is a place of many nerves, then you should soak cotton in wine and oil mixed with cauterizations, and apply them to those places.
And if it is in the summer, and the sites are fleshy, then you should place cotton soaked in water and oil or wine and oil, and let it be for three days as we have said; then pierce the pustule, cleanse it, and administer whatever suits it according to what has been said until it is healed.
And this is what is necessary to know about the cure of pustules universally, but according to the way of distinction I have said before, so I have spoken particularly about each pustule in its own chapter.
Chapter 41.
Of the section of pustules that come in the membrane of the head.
In the membrane of the head there are small pustules, and they contain nodules which are formed from them; and their species are many.
And from them are blisters, and from those containing moisture similar to lime. And from those there are which contain moisture similar to ash, and also similar to them; and from those there are which are scaly and hard.
And in the section of all of them, and in the extraction of those there is no fear, although you should be careful not to cut the arteries.
And the operation in the section of those is that you express them with an instrument the form of which you will see below, the one which is called a probe, so that you know what it contains.
For if what is contained is moisture, then you should split it with a section according to its length by a superficial section in this form:
And you should begin the section from line .B to line .G; so that when the moisture is evacuated, then you should scrape off that in which the moisture was contained, and not leave any of it behind, for repeatedly returning, if there is any cause remaining.
And then immerse the wound in Egyptian ointment, if it is available, or else in water and salt; and fill it with that, and let it sit overnight, for by that you will corrode everything that remains of that membrane.
And then apply ointment to it again secondly and thirdly if it needs it, while you are confident that no cause of that membrane remains; then cure the wound with ointment until it is healed.
And if the pustule contains a nodule of fat, then you should split it according to this form: by making a section having the shape of a cross, and cut the edges between the two lips of the section and scrape it entirely from every part, and use your strength in extracting the membrane which contains that.
But if an artery causes a contradiction to you, then do what I have told you primarily.
And similarly do in the pustule which is lapidified by section and cure as I have said to you; and section on a lapidified pustule is pus-like, for it is of little blood and little moisture.
And sometimes some of these pustules are in the head in some people in whom there is not moisture at all; that cause is that they split one on the head of an old woman and plug up the pustule with a piece of hard, rough, white pebble, which could not be moved, and if anyone hit it, it bled.
But in other pustules which are accidental in the head, this is not that chapter; except for those which come on the heads of children and from the roots of the ears, but the section of all of them should be a superficial section.
And make the incision at the lower end of them, so that the body is relieved from illness to its lower parts.
Then cure these with what you consider appropriate for healing.
Chapter 42.
Of the cutting of scrofula which happens in the neck.
These bumps often appear on the neck, armpits and angles of the joints, and sometimes elsewhere in the body.
And those that happen in the neck are some that are engendered among them and all scrofula of these is within its own envelope, as we have already described, as well as with nodes and bumps on the head.
And there are different kinds of scrofula: some are hard, some contain moisture and some are malignant and resistant to treatment.
Therefore in one where you see a good disposition in the touch, of which the color that is apparent approaches the color of the skin, and it is swollen to all parts, and is not annexed to the nerves of the neck, or to the veins, or to the arteries, and is not deep, you ought to cut into this with a superficial incision from above the body to below the line of 10 between the lines of GI and GB and scrape off all around it, and extend two lips of the skin with pincers or with small forceps if you have need of those, as we have said in the bumps on the head, and extract this little by little.
And it is more important that the vein or nerve not be cut.
And the spatula must not be sharp, so that you do not touch with it or hurt the patient, and you ought to cut only what is necessary to cut, for if you cut a vein or artery and stop your operation, then put on the wound vitriol in powder or other powders that stop blood flow, close the wound, and leave there that which causes the acuity of the bump to cease and the wound to soften and begin to be suppurative. When the blood is abstained.
Therefore return to your operation until you have finished it.
And then inquire with your finger if there is any cause of the other small scrofula, therefore cut into those and clean them.
And if in the root of the large scrofula there is a vein, then you ought not to cut that scrofula from its root. And so that it falls by itself without harm, you ought to press this with a folded cloth and let it drop until it falls down of itself.
Then fill the wound with old wine in which you have already soaked Egyptian ointment and cure this.
And if you cut the scrofula entirely then you ought to press together the two lips of the wound and stop immediately any pus that has not run out.
But if you see that there is pus running out due to the size of the scrofula then you ought to understand cutting into its root and opening it up and administering cauterization and what is said.
And those of the scrofula which contain moisture, pierce this with a superficial incision where you see the site of maturation of it to be, and make an incision so that the pus runs out from the bottom of the body as we have said.
And then administer an incision, apply a cautery and plasters to these that the suppuration is stopped. And then when you see the wound already cleaned, cure this with ointment of generative flesh until it is healed.
Chapter 43.
Of the cutting of the pus of bumps in the gullet.
The ancients wrote about this incision in the pilhot and I have not seen any person in our land who has had it done.
And this is the inscription of their language.
But in men who have a constriction, if the extraction of the pilhot is avoided for fear that all the veins and the major nerves of the patient are there.
But in those who have bumps cauterized in the mouth or gullet or two ears, when the patient is not in the throat, then it is useful to do the incision of the pilhot to avoid the harm that happens by piercing.
Therefore when we want this then let us cut the pilhot below three circles of the circles of the pilhot or four with small incision for the breadth in that which is between two circles for quantity, and the incision should be in pharynx not in the cartilage and that place is convenient to incision because it is deprived of flesh and the vessels of blood are there.
And if the doctor is fearful then let him extend the skin of the gullet with pincers and then split the skin so that it reaches the canal but avoid the vessels of blood if you see any cause for that.
And then cut the larynx according to what we have described, and it is indicated about the incision of the canal by the flame which is of that which has exited from that which is of him broken apart and by the piercing of the voice.
And let the wound remain open for some time.
Therefore when the time is healed in which the piercing is feared, draw together two lips of the skin of the wound and split only that which is the cartilage.
And then administer medicines which make flesh grow so that it may be healed.
And Abucasis said that the sum of their language, the exposure is only that some of these bumps have been cauterized in the gullet of the patient and the patient has come to death and his throat is cut through and some go to cut the epiglottis so that the patient can breathe through the site of the wound by any breathing and he is saved from death.
And for that they commanded to leave the wound open until the malice of the illness is consumed and the malice of it is for three days then afterwards he commanded to close the wound and cure this so that it may be healed.
And that which I have seen by my doctors is that it serves for a woman to press one breast and moisten it in the gullet of the patient and cut into there one part of the canal of the lung, and he was called to the cure of him and discovered the wound and found the blood which had run out from the wound.
Therefore he confessed that this had not cut vein nor artery and the wound bled out from it and he cured this so that the fire was healed.
And did not consent to the servant unless she had applied in the voice and then after some days he returned to the examination of his dispositions.
And now I say that in the incision of the pilhot there is no fear.
Chapter 44.
Of the cutting on bumps which happen in the gullet outward and is called hernia of the gullet.
This hernia of the gullet is a great hernia according to the color of the body and it happens in women.
And it is according to two manners because either it is natural or accidental.
And the natural one is not difficult to cure.
And the accidental is according to two manners of which one is like nodal bumps and the other manner is like a hernia which is caused by piercing of an artery and in that one there is fear. And do not let anyone touch him with an iron except for a small one. And you investigate him and if you find anything like a nodule of fat that is not suspended by any vein then you cut into it with something that contains the fat and pus; and if not then examine all of his body, and treat the area with something for healing until he is cured.
De le podrague e de los podraguers.
Of the gout and gouty nodes.
There are many types of nodes, and I have already described them all in the division above.
And whoever wishes to know the difference between a node and an ulcer, let him ponder this.
And I say that with an ulcer there is heat and fever and violent pains until the ebullition of the superfluous matter is stopped; and there is a completed putrefaction when the fever, pain and heat cease.
But if there are pains and heat without it being necessary to call it gout then it should be cauterized in order to be cured.
And it is according to the color of the body and the origin of it is like a cyst and it happens in this way with a vacuole, whether it is greater or smaller, and they are according to two species, either fatty or containing humidity, and the colors of the humidity are many, as I described in the division.
And whoever, when he comes to the cure of a nodule, cuts it and probes it at the beginning with an instrument called an intromens, according to its form which will come in the chapter which is next.
And it is the way of examining pustules and all nodes, and it is that you take this instrument and put it into the moist place which you find in the pustule, and turn your fingers with it little by little until you know that the instrument has penetrated the membrane.
And then close your hand according to the size of the pustule and take out the instrument and consider what has come out through its orifice.
And if the humidity has drained away of whatever color it is then you cut into it superficially as I have said in other pustules.
And if there is no humidity coming out through the orifice of the instrument then you know it is fatty.
And dry over it by cutting into it in the form of a cross according to this form: And you cut into it as I have taught you and suspend it by pins and excise the membrane from all sides with ease and keep the skin or sac over it and draw out that pus with the nodule.
But if it is broken in the operation and it is not possible to draw out that pus then you take it away by pieces so that nothing remains within it that could cause its rupture again.
For if something remains within it then the nodule will return according to the more or less.
And if you see that a small part remains within it then complete the poultice with some sharp and corrosive powders and strengthen the poultice and put it over where the pustule is cauterized and cure it with another cure until it is healed.
And if it is a large nodule then you split its two lips and cure it with that which it incarnates.
But if there is no pulse or a weak pulse then you cut and fill the place with ground vitriol which is powdered and let it rest for two days or three until the poultice hardens, and then return to cutting what has broken of the nodule.
De le podrague e de los podraguers.
Of the gout and of the gouty nodes. Of the forms of the instruments necessary for cutting and piercing.
And it is not necessary for anyone to touch him with an iron except for a small one. And there are three species of them, some of which are great and some medium and some small.
The form of the large intromens is this:
The form of the small intromens is this:
And let them be made of iron, of alfuld, of extreme tips cut decently, so that they are sharp for use in pustules.
And these are the forms of the experiments and one of them is called albered and another berid.
And they are of three species, some of which are great, medium and small.
It is a great experiment, and it happens to him:
It is a great experiment, and it happens to him:
It is a small experiment, and it happens to him:
These are caused by apoplexy, effusions, fistulas, and tumors, among other causes, and they occur between the bones and from other causes as well.
And they make round, large, and pointed ones, with great needles with which the membranes are sewn, and they are made of copper, or of iron, or of silver, and the best ones are when they are made of copper.
And they make the experiment with black feathers, which are used to open up the fistulas in the cavity where they are reflected, that they may be reflected by their lightness with those reflections.
And they are of three types: some are long, others are small, and others are short, according to the amount of the width of the fistula and its constriction.
The form of the great experiment with lead:
The form of the small experiment with lead:
The form of the small experiment with lead:
The forms of the hunchbacks are of many types, for some are simple, having only one curve, and they are of three types: large, small, and medium.
And their bodies are curved, and they are of three types.
And some are curved with two curvatures, and they are of three types.
And some have three curvatures, and they are of three types.
And all of these are necessary in their place.
The form of a simple hunchback, small, is:
The form of a large hunchback with two curvatures is: The form of a medium hunchback with two curvatures is: The form of a small hunchback with two curvatures is:
The form of a large hunchback with three curvatures is:
The form of a medium hunchback with three curvatures is:
And these are the forms of the scalpel with which they are dried and cut, the nodes and the apoplexy, and they are of three types: large, medium, and small.
The form of a large scalpel is:
The form of a medium scalpel is:
The form of a small scalpel is:
The ends of those with which the incision is made are sharp, and the other ends are not sharp, but it is done gently in the excising of the nodes to avoid the fear of cutting a vein or nerve, and for that one should cure the patient and return tranquility a little by the burning of which the excoriation of the apoplexy.
And these are the forms of poultices, and they are of three types: large, medium, and small, with verities.
They are made of wax and they are similar to a needle with which it is made alcohol.
And its end is pointed with a hollow point and in the other it is pointed to the sides, inside and out, whenever you want, also as needed.
The forms of the spatulas, which are hidden between the fingers due to the puncturing of the apoplexy and do not perceive the patients, and they are of three types: large, medium, and small. And these are the forms of those:
The forms of syringes with which the flow of blood is stopped, and they are of three types: large, medium, and small; their forms are:
They are made of citron wax, round with no length, and are thin.
And so that these types of syringes may be great, medium, and small, so that through them you may stop the flow of blood with swiftness in necessity, and also when at first there is no medicine.
However, do not use them to stop blood in any part of the body, and do not use them except in fleshy parts, just like the joints of the limbs, and of the hips, and of the elbows, and of the breasts and of the abdomen and armpits, and similar to the fleshy joints.
And some are made of those instruments also small, similar to the scours of phlegmon, through which blood is stopped when it is done by phlebotomy, or because of an incision of a vein or artery.
And some are made round like this:
Chapter 47.
Of the cure of the breasts of men which are resembling those of women.
Some men's breasts are inflated because of the accompaniment of sleep as they begin to be covered in skin, and also the breasts are inflated, and they resemble women's breasts, and Roman apoplexy, leeches.
And to that which you pour it in, see that you incise those with lunar section according to this form, from the line of B. into the line of G., and then excise the thickness entirely, and then fill the wound with medicated ointment, and then stitch together the two lips of the wound, and cure what is inside that is healed.
But if the breast declines to the sides and is softened by its weight also like women's breasts, then cut it in two edges down, with two sections resembling a lunar figure, of which each one is contained in the other according to the end of the major line into the minor line according to this form from the line of B. into the line of G. And then excise the codicil which is between the two lips of the wound, and remove the pus, and administer what we have said about the suture and the powders that are necessary in the cure until it is healed.
And if you do not complete the incision of that which see to be incised by the inquietude of the patient, and by the flow of blood, then see that you fill the wound with a cut piece of wood submerged in corrosive ointment, and let it lie there until it is healed.
Chapter 48.
Of the puncturing of apoplexy that comes from below, the twitching.
Apoplexy that comes from below, the twitching is of the species of scrophulas, tough, which contain a membrane that is dry.
And of those some contain moisture; and of those which contain moisture see that they are incised with lunar section according to this figure: from the line of G. into the line of B. And when it is all evacuated what is in the apoplexy of the phlegm, then you fill it with a cut piece of wood, and let it lie there during the day.
And then the cut is dried up and healed with appropriate ointment, until it is healed.
And if the apoplexy of the species of the joints and of the scrophulas is, then you cut above that just as we have said in the section about the scrophulas engualment.
If the wound is extended so that it causes bleeding, then administer cautery to him as we have already said before.
Chapter 49.
On the cutting of abscesses that happen through an artery or a vein.
And the signs by which you can tell that inflammation and abscess are caused by an artery or vein: and when an abscess is caused by an artery it occurs deep inside the body; and when you press on the abscess, if you feel a pulse in it, this indicates a stridor.
And that which is caused by a vein is round at the surface of the body.
And cutting into this abscess is dangerous, especially in those that are beneath the armpits, and in the angles, and on the neck, and in many other parts of the body; and it is very great, so it should be avoided.
But if they are caused by inflammation of the opening of an artery, cut into the artery in the long axis; and once you have opened the artery with pincers, and have uncovered the tunics inside,
And then put an awl into it and force it to penetrate to the other side, and constrict the artery with a double thread in two places — which will cause you to tie it off in extraction of two arteries which are in the temples.
And then plug up the place between the two ligaments with sputum so that all the blood in it is dried up and the abscess is dissolved.
And then administer treatment so that pus is produced inside it until the ligaments fall away, and then cure that with a suitable ointment until it is healed.
And if it is an abscess caused by cutting of a vein, then you must hold what is above the abscess with your hand as firmly as you can, and then thrust in the awl underneath that place which you are holding with your hand, and force it to penetrate; and let there be a double thread in it so that you extract it from the other side, and then tie off the abscess with a good ligament according to what I have told you before about the ligament of the grape in two parts with two ends of the thread.
But if you fear that the thread will be extracted, then put in the awl underneath the whole abscess behind the first incision of the awl and constrict your double threads in four places.
Then dry up the abscess in its middle place so that when it has drained out what is inside it, you insert your instrument into the superfluity of the artery and leave behind what is tied to it.
And then place on it a powder which you have submerged in wine and oil, and then administer the treatment which is made with leeches and ointments until it is healed.
Chapter 50: Of the abscess which happens from the twisting of nerves.
Just as abscesses can happen in arteries and veins, so also can they happen in nerves when they happen from a blow or happen because of some other similar thing.
And it is most often done in the places of the auxiliaries or of the talus, or in any place where there are joints in the body.
And it is a grave abscess and is the same colour as the rest of the body, and there are many veins in it, and when it is constricted with violence, the patient feels a stupor throughout his body.
And it is not an abscess located in the cavity of the body, and therefore it is beneath the artery, and it is beaten at all parts and does not go to the parts in front or behind.
So it is not necessary for those which are in the joints to be cauterized with iron, because they will quickly develop a contraction.
But that which is on the head or forehead, open the artery with sputum. But if it is a small abscess, then cut it out with forceps and cut off its roots.
But if it is large, then suspend it with a hook and cut it out, and then put a patch over it; and stitch together the wound, and cure that until it is healed.
Chapter 51.
On the cutting of an abscess which happens in the jaw which happens in the belly.
Many people experience in their bellies and in other parts of their bodies a certain kind of abscesses which are called by a likeness to mushrooms because their roots are thin but the top is large; and they have twisted lips, and they are either small or very large.
And I myself have seen one, and in his belly were two which were like mushroom-like, and there was no difference between them white, of very thin roots.
And the lips of these were turned inside out and torn, and moisture ran from it all the time.
So I cut into them and found in one of them stones weighing 15 ounces. And the other 6 ounces.
And the operation at the incision of these is that you should consider whether the patient is moist, and if the colour of the wound is white, moist, of thin roots, then you cut into it with sputum lengthwise, and they will be cauterized in the fire, because many times blood is expelled from the incision; and if you see blood, cauterize that.
And if the patient is timid and fearful, be careful not to cut into him with iron; but take some new lead wire and constrict that wound, in the manner which we have said before; and leave it for two days.
And then tighten the lead wire in the constriction; so do not cease to constrict it with the large lead, until it is cut off and falls away by itself.
But if the wound is of thick roots, then in its incision there is some cause for fear and horror, especially in that which is in the belly.
But it is possible that you cut out the matrix of it, and then cauterize that so that it does not return.
And then cure that until the wound is healed.
And be careful not to assume that you will cut out a wound which is of dusky colour, of little feeling, of regular guard, because that is an abscess.
And I came by memory to the skull.
Chapter 52.
On the treatment of an abscess in the navel.
Abscess in the navel is caused by many causes; or by fissures of the diaphragm which is above the belly, and from it the membrane or bowels slip inside according to other ruptures; or by blood which flows from a vein or artery as has been said before, or by constriction of the intestines.
But if it is from a fissure of the diaphragm and a slip of the membrane, then the colour of the abscess is like that of the body; and there is little pain in it, and it appears in various places. And if it is from a rupture of the bowels, then its location according to what we have said before, with more violent diversity, and when you press that with your fingers, it is concealed, and then returns; and it is very large inside, and is magnified by the taking in of food and violent labour.
But if it is from moisture, then it is easy to feel and is not concealed when you press with your hand, nor constricted, nor cut.
And if it is due to blood, then with these signs the abscess will decline towards blackness.
But if it is due to flesh, then the abscess is heavy, large and hard, and it is located according to a certain amount.
But if it is due to windiness, then its touch is leonine.
And the operation on it is that you consider whether the prominence of the navel is due to arterial blood, or venous blood, or windiness; then you must abstain from the cure of it, for in that there is fear and dread as I instructed in the chapter where I discussed abscesses from arteries and veins.
And if the prominence of the navel is due to the intestine or hernia, then you must command the patient to hold his breath and be standing extended; and then sign with your hand around the entire navel, and then command him to breathe in towards your palm on his chest, and then circle with your finger around the navel over the area which you have marked with your hand; and then extend the majority of the abscess upwards with a large needle; and then bind around the area with strong thread or twine, and the manner of binding decent.
And then open the middle of the extended abscess over the ligament and insert your finger into that opening and seek out the intestine; and if you have caught it or retained it by the ligament, then you extract it and push the intestine back inside the belly.
And if you have caught the hernia, then take that with a needle; and incise the excess of it.
But if it is contrary to your artery or vein, then surround that mark, and then return to your operation; and take two needles and put on them strong threads, and insert the two needles into the circuit which you have made around the abscess in a crosswise manner, so that they may penetrate; and then tighten the abscess in four places over the needles.
And if you want, remove the needles and allow the extended flesh to fall back in and heal by itself; or incise what is sottile and will heal, and then cure that with water which is good for wounds.
And if the prominence of the navel is due to flesh in it or humidity, then you must hollow out the abscess as we have said and extract the blood or humidity which you find in it, and then cure that with water which covers it and consolidates the area.
Chapter 53:
On the cure of a hernia.
We have already said, in the division, about the kind of hernia and in what way there is a path to its cure by medicines, and that it is different in it the cure by iron so that it not be ulcerated; and we have said about hernias engendered in the mother and caution in the cure of them.
And the ancients said that in some cases hernias are in a place where their eradication is possible, as with those in the breasts or the groin and their similar parts assigned to be extracted from, especially when they begin small.
But when it is old and large, you must not approach it, for I have not seen that any such one has healed from it nor that one has come to that.
And the operation on it when it is allocated as we have said, is that you precede and let the patient and purge from black bile in some cases, and then bleed that one if a manifest fullness is found.
And then prepare the patient with preparation in which he will be located for operation, and then prohibit in the wound hooked tools which go there; and then hollow out all parts with good cutting until no cause of the hernia remains. And let the blood flow, and do not cut that loosely, and squeeze out the places, and wipe away all the clotted blood with your hand or with an instrument by which it is possible for you from among instruments.
But if it causes contrary from clotted blood flowing from a vein or artery, then cauterize that one until the flow of blood is ceased, and then cure that with the other cure until it is healed.
Chapter 54:
On the cure of hydropsy.
We have already recommended, in the division, about the kinds of hydropsy from water, and the signs of each kind, about the cure of it by medicines.
And that one which is cured by iron is only the kind of solitus, and it is not approached by iron to the kind of tympany or to the kind of hiposarca, for that one is deadly.
And when you have treated this kind of hydropsy tympany with medicines and it does not respond to your medicine, then consider, for if the patient already has acquired debility, or is with another malady, another hydropsy, as if it is in him coughing or an ache in the belly and similar to those, then guard yourself that you do not treat him with iron, for fear is over that.
But if you see the patient of healthy exuberance, and with him there is not another malady but hydropsy only, and not a child or old person, then the manner of the operation on him is that you elevate the patient between your palms, and then he will press his belly with his palm, pushing the water to the part below the navel, and then take spatha spiny according to this form:
It should have two acute parts long, with an acute extremity as spatha; but nevertheless it must be in him some shortness little by little, so that in the operation with it you do not pass into the intestine, and lead that one.
And then consider if the generation of hydropsy is from parts of the intestines, for then you must with the section lengthen the navel to the amount of three fingers to the parts below, in the right of him over the navel.
But if the generation of hydropsy is from malady of the liver, then your section must be left of the navel by three fingers.
And if the generation of it is from the spleen, then your section must be in the right.
And do not let your section be over the side over which the patient wants to lie so that the excesses do not flow to that place.
And then pierce with the instrument all of that one, and insert into that section, and elevate your palm with spatha between the navel and the diaphragm, and you squeeze that one; and if the amount of a fingernail or more.
And then pierce the diaphragm until the spatha reaches the desired place, and it is a location of water. And then extract that one and insert an instrument of which this is the form: and is similar to a cannula of subtle silver; it is made of silver or of ram or of lion horn, and in the low end of it there is a small opening, and on its sides are three openings: two from one end and one from the other end; and its end is split according to the manner of a feather, as follows:
And in the superior end of it is a ring, for when the instrument reaches the water, then that one immediately comes off from the instrument, therefore it evacuates from the water in an immediate quantity, for if you evacuate from that one more than you should at once, strongly harm the patient by resolution of his animal spirit, or approach him to death.
But evacuate from that one according to the quantity of his virtue and according to what signify to you the dispositions of the patient's pulse and of its goodness.
And then remove the instrument and release the water which is causing the pain; it will be retained by the cord that binds the wound on the head, and you should pierce it in that manner.
And then return the instrument on the next day if the patient can tolerate it, and release a small amount of water each day for fear of errors, and be careful not to break the water except in small amounts.
But if you are afraid for the patient and release a great quantity of water, then treat it with a poultice in sand, move him to a bath, and expose him to the sun for a long time; and treat it with drying medicines until it is healed.
And cauterize the stomach, and the wound and the vein from which the water is being released, according to what I have related before.
Chapter 55.
Of the cure of children who are born with the orifice for urine not perforated.
Sometimes, one of the children is born from the belly of his mother and the orifice of his mixture is not perforated (or it is a tight crack or it is not in its place).
Therefore, you should pierce it immediately after he is born with a very sharp spatulum in the following manner:
And then insert a subtle nail of lead into the crack and ligature it, and let it remain for three days or for 4 days.
And when he wants to urinate, let him be held and urinate; and then return it.
And if you do not insert the lead, it is possible that the urine which goes to that place will not harm this closure.
But that which is a tight crack should be treated with a nail of lead, as we have said, for several days until it is enlarged.
But those in which the orifice is not in its place, they are blind, and the cause of this is that when he was born the head of the penis was placed at the end so that he cannot urinate into the parts above; and it does not have generation because the semen cannot reach the mother according to the rule, and it is a very serious illness.
And the manner of the operation on him is that the patient be turned over onto his back, and then extend the head of his penis with your left hand with a forceful pull, and insert the head of the penis at the place of the foreskin with a sharp spatulum, as if it were split like a feather, or so that you may split a part of it, so that the end of his penis will come to resemble the head of the penis and that the crack falls into its proper place according to how you wish.
And be careful that in your operation you do not cause bleeding, for this often happens; and bind it with something that will stop the bleeding, and heal the wound until it is healed.
Chapter 56.
Of whitlow which occurs in the foreskin at the head of the penis and of callosity, blackness, and adhesion of the foreskin to the head of the penis.
Often this whitlow occurs in the penis and is an eminence of flesh which is painful.
And one of them is malignant and the other is not malignant.
Non-malignant, where you suspend it with a subtle needle and cut it entirely; and then place that which is cut under the milk of Egyptian onions; and then heal it with ointment dayfinicon until it is healed.
And if the whitlow is malignant, and it has a white color, then you should administer cauterization near its beginning and its cause.
But if the whitlow is in the foreskin of the head of the penis and not circumcised, and one part of the whitlow is inside the foreskin and the other part is outside, then you should cut off that which is inside at its beginning until it is healed; and then heal that hole, because when you heal both the foreskin, it is not certain that it will not happen again.
And you have seen that it also occurs in the testicles and in the foreskin blackness and callosity, therefore you should cut away all that which is already blackened or about to be corrupted or which has been corrupted; and then line it with honey, which has been ground with flour of walnut husks and sieved.
And then heal it with the other cure until it is healed.
But if bleeding occurs, then administer lunar cauterization in the following manner:
Because the hot cauterization is to two dispositions at once, it is to bleeding and to the wound when it is corrupted.
And if the head of the penis is eaten away and destroyed entirely at once, then you should insert into the hollow of the foreskin a lead cannula so that the patient may urinate through it.
In the adhesion of the foreskin to the head of the penis  (and this adhesion does not occur except in that one of whom the foreskin is not circumcised, and on him circumcision is not required; and when it occurs due to a wound or ulcer) you should scrape with an obtuse spatulum until the binding is dissolved and the head of the penis is freed from all parts.
And if it is difficult to withdraw them gently, then you should cut with a spatula some of the foreskin of the penis and of the prepuce, and this is because the prepuce, when it is thin, is easily pierced by the thinness of the skin.
Then separate the foreskin from the head of the penis with a wet sponge so that they do not adhere again.
And then let it be treated with a styptic to stop the bleeding and to allow it to heal.
Chapter 57.
Of the purification of children and the cure for those who are circumcised.
Circumcision is not a cure for continence like other diseases; but since it comes from our action and our will, and its cause is particularly in children, we must choose the best operation and shortest way to restore them to health.
Therefore I say that the ancient people did not order circumcision for any of their freemen, because they do not use it in their laws; but we have acquired it through experience, and the cause is that I have seen the majority of artisans and barbers use circumcision and purification with a razor and with cauterization with the nail.
And I have prohibited all these ways and found no better purification with forceps, or with cauterization with the nail that is used in purification; because many times the foreskin has escaped above, because the foreskin of the prepuce has two tunics, and the inner one remains below, and it is easily forced to another incision and certain pain. And the purification which is done by aphecatium, and is digital, which is used by surgeons, does not secure the incision of the extremity of the virile member, because it easily goes into the orifice of the penis.
But in the operation with the nail, it easily damages iron and corrupts your operation. And the foreskin of the child is short by nature, and many times it has been in such a way that there was no need for purification, and I have seen this myself.
But of the purification which is done with forceps and cauterization with a nail, I discovered its goodness through experience, because the forceps are of proportional incision, so that the sharpness which is above is like the sharpness which is below; and therefore when you press your fingers in proportionate measure and incision according to a comparison at one time, there is compression of the nail with a form containing the foreskin of the penis from every part, with which no error can occur.
And the manner of the first operation is that you make the child stand mostly if he is one of those who understand a little, and do not do but that you apply the nail to his penis only so much, and that you leave it until the next day.
And then make him happy in all those ways which are possible for you to receive his intelligence. And then make him stand between your hands in a position prepared, and do not be frightened; and hide the forceps in your hand or under your foot, so that the child does not see those or any other of the instruments.
And then introduce your hand into the penis and breathe into the foreskin, and draw it out so that the head of the penis is exposed, and then purify it of what is aggregated in it from dirt.
The form of the forceps for purification, this is its form:
Let the ends not be cut and the others cut, so that the point of the claw is not raised; and let the length of both sides be like the length of two handles equally.
But the error in purification is that the foreskin which is inside entirely escapes or is torn from it by the incision.
Therefore see that you stretch it with your finger before the application of the cauterization, and that you insert it according to equality.
And if you cannot hold it with your finger, then draw it out with tweezers and insert it.
But if three days have passed and what is swollen below the penis has not subsided, then let you insert that which has ceased the aposteme cauterization, and cauterize it with ease, and insert it according to how you are prepared.
And beware of the head of the penis, because nothing will hurt him.
And therefore cure it with that which the disease is consolidated from powders of which we have spoken in the treatise on powders.
And if it is cauterized from the foreskin beyond measure, and it adheres above it, that does not harm him.
But cure it with what we have said earlier so that it is healed.
Chapter 58.
Of the cure for urine retained in the bladder.
Retention of urine in the bladder is done by oppulacion made by stone or by blood clotting, or phlegm or similar to those of which we have spoken about the ways of cure in the division.
And if it is not dissolved with that which we have said, and the cause is made over the patient, then see that administration of extraction from him with an instrument which is called syringe, of which this is its form: Let it be of silver and let it be thin lion’s claw, also with reed of ash with thin needle in similarity of a ray long in similarity of half palm, to which is thin cane at the tip of it.
And the manner of the emission of urine through it is that you take the nail bent and place it in the extremity of him wool or cloth with good binding; and insert the extremities of the nail in the part below the syringe, and insert it with forceps if any cause of the wool exceeds, but insert it into the cane with strength. And then grip the syringe with strength and with egg white of hen.
And let the patient lie on his back, and close the bladder of him and the penis with olive oil and rosewater.
And then insert the syringe with ease into that from which it comes to the root of the penis; and then bend the penis above to the part of the emblic; and then press the syringe in that; and then press that until it comes to the bladder, and let it be centring the patient from the cause hollowed, and not do the heat according to this order, but go in which he goes to tortuosity.
Then slowly stretch out the gallbladder using wool, because urine dries up the wool.
Then extract that and make a catheter using urine, and do not stop doing this until the bladder is emptied and the patient is relieved.
Chapter 59
Of the quality of enema of the bladder with camphor and similar instruments which are appropriate for this.
When ulcers or blisters occur in the bladder, or clotted blood, and you want to distill water and medicines into it, then an instrument called camphor should be used, and this is how it is made:
unless its end is closed. And in the end there are three holes: two on one side, thus as many as you like.
In the beginning there is a concave space, in which something is placed to be filled, and it should be according to quantity that pushes that object, with its addition, so that when for any reason that object is pulled out of the dampness, it is pulled out, and when expelled, it is expelled with that, and when expelled, long, as clampcedra makes naphtha in the battles of the sea.
Therefore, when you want to introduce moisture into the bladder, insert the end of clapcedra into the moisture, and pull with that which is pushed into the parts above, because moisture is pulled into the concavity of clapcedra.
Then insert the end of clapcedra into the urethra as we have recommended in the catheter; and push the moisture with what you push it with, because that moisture immediately reaches the bladder, and the patient feels it.
Subtle form of enema with which the bladder is enemaed, and this is its form:
And it should be made of silver or brass, the tip being like a small feather, and below it a tube.
Then grab the bladder with your hand, and put into it the moisture you want to use as an enema in the bladder, and then tie that moisture between two with a strong ligature using double gallbladder, and heat that moisture over the fire.
Then insert the end of the enema into the urethra.
And then squeeze your hand over the bladder with that moisture with a descending motion until the patient feels that moisture has already reached the bladder.
But if you don't have a bladder, then take a piece of lamb's leather and make a circle out of it; and pierce that all around its circumference; and then insert gallbladder firmly into those holes, so that they turn inside out, and then add the circle as you would alsofatur, because when you put into that what you want of moisture, oils and waters.
And then you hold that in the instrument and do with that as you did with the bladder, and express with your hand until moisture reaches the bladder.
Chapter 60
Of stone extraction.
We have already said in the division of the types of stone and its cure with medicines, and the difference between stone generated in the kidneys and stone generated in the bladder, and their signs.
And we have said that stone which requires operation by hand, and incision.
And the stone generated in the bladder itself is that which is lodged in the bladder.
And I will now describe it with clear exposition and summary.
Therefore I say that stone generated in the bladder mostly affects infants; and its signs are that the urine which exits from the bladder is like water in its thinness, and there is sand in it; and the patient rubs his urethra, and hurts many times, and then it is relieved; and with this there is a hole in the glans of those.
And its cure is easier for infants who have reached 14 years, and it is difficult to cure in the old. But in the young, it is milder because of that which exists among them.
And if the stone is larger and its cure is easier, then it is contrary to that.
Therefore, when we come to the cure of that, let us first begin by cleansing the patient with an enema which extracts all the humors which are in his intestines; because that fathom sometimes prohibits the expulsion of stone through inquiry.
Then let the patient stand on his feet and be pressed and squeezed from behind so that the stone descends to the bottom of the bladder, or that he jumps up in place.
Then do this procedure between your hands, and let his arms be behind him, so that the bladder is completely bent downward.
Then push it out entirely.
Therefore, if you feel the stone in that space, then you cut him immediately with incision on him.
And if it does not come out with your touch at all, then put your left index finger into the urethra of an infant, or the middle finger of a young person who is complete, and insert that into his urethra. Then push out the stone so that it goes down your finger. Then gradually push that into the bottom of the bladder.
Then press on that with your finger, and expel that out through the hole which you made with your incision.
And command the assistant to press the bladder with his hand; and command another assistant that with his right hand extends the scrotum upwards, and with his other hand squeeze the chord which is below the scrotum in the part where you made the incision.
Then insert the probe bent into which this is the form of it: and cut into him whatever is between the anus and the scrotum, not in the middle location, but towards the left side of the scrotum; and let the incision be made across, so that the opening be wide and the cut narrow according to the quantity by which the stone can exit to him, and not more, because you strongly press his finger which is in the anus from where the stone exits through the incision, and it is pushed out.
And know that there is some stone which has angles and margins, so that its exit from him is made difficult by that.
And of that there is some like a glans, and it is round, and it makes easy exit.
Therefore, if it is that to which there are angles and margins, then adjust in the crack.
And if it is not so hole-gotten, then let you push on that or squeeze it with decent gesture, the end of which be like file with which you squeeze on the stone, and do not loosen from him; or insert below him subtle instrument bent at the end.
But if you cannot on that, then let you increase the cut a little, and if you see flow of blood, bind it tightly on that with vitriol.
But if the stone is more than one, then at the beginning push your hand to the mouth of the bladder, and then insert it; and then push a little, and do similarly if there are more than two.
And if the stone is very large, then it is ignorance that you insert that with great incision, because it happens to the patient two causes: or that he is slow or that there occurs to him continuous distillation of urine, because that place is not completely consolidated.
May they administer an expulsion from him while he is unconscious, or use forceps on the fracture to extract it in pieces.
Therefore, when you have completed your operation, fill the wound with aloe and dragon's blood, and bind it tightly. And place over that a cloth soaked in oil and wine, or in rosewater and water, so that the boil is reduced.
Then return the patient to their back, and do not loosen the bandage until the third day.
And when you have loosened it, wash the area with water and warm oil, and treat that place daily with ointment of diafenicon and ointment of diabasilicum until it is healed.
But if in the wound there is a boil, and it is hot and swollen, and it looks like the blood is congealed in the bladder, and because of this the urination is prohibited (and this is known as the exit of blood with urine), then cut into the wound and draw out that blood, for if the bladder is damaged it will cause decay in the bladder and the patient will rot.
Then wash the wound with sour wine, water and salt, and apply any ointment that is suitable for it, until it is healed.
During the course of the treatment, you must wash both thighs and apply the medicines that are placed on the area.
And if the stone is small and it is in the middle of the penis, and urination is prohibited, then treat that with what you learned before coming to this section; for many have been accused of causing gangrene through this treatment. And now I will explain it to you, and it is that you take an iron tool wrapped in felt, of which this is its shape:
It has a pointed triangular end, inserted into the shaft.
Then take some pitch, and apply it to the penis under the stone with a piece of wool, so that it does not return to the bladder.
Then insert the iron into the penis, piercing easily until the tool reaches the stone. And turn the tool with your hand on that stone little by little, and you pierce it from the other side; for the urine is immediately expelled.
Then press your hand over where the stone was broken off from the shaft of the penis, for that is closed, and it is blocked by urine, and the patient is healed.
But if this treatment is not prepared for any reason which prohibits it, then apply pitch under the stone, and another piece of pitch above the stone. Then tighten around the stone in that shaft between two ligatures. Then pull it out. Then loosen the ligature and cleanse the congealed blood which is made in the wound.
And it is not necessary to have pitch under the stone, except so that it does not return to the bladder; and the other ligature above, except that when the pitch is loosened the exit of the stone is caused, the urethra returns to its place and the wound heals.
And for that it is necessary when you tie the pitch above that you lift the urethra to the parts above, or that it returns after your treatment, and the wound heals in this way as we have said.
Chapter .lxi.
On the extraction of a stone from women.
A stone in women is rarely generated.
But if you see a stone in any of them, then the treatment for it is difficult, and is prohibited by many methods.
One of them is because the woman is very young.
And the second is because you do not find a wise woman who discovers if the midwife told the truth when she was chaste, or it is of women who have been married.
The third is because you do not find a woman who is skilled in this art, especially the operation with the hand.
And the fourth is that the place of the incision on a stone in women is distant from the place of the stone, because it causes deep gangrene, and in that there is fear.
But if necessity compels you to do this, then take a woman midwife who is wise, and she is rarely found.
But if you are deprived of that, then seek a midwife who is astute and subtle, or present a woman midwife who is experienced in the nature of women, or a woman who has given birth to children in this art.
Therefore let her present, and command her to do everything you instruct, from the inquiry into the stone at the beginning; the cause is that she guards whether the woman is chaste, then place your finger in her vulva and seek the stone.
Therefore if she finds it, seize that beneath your finger, and then command her to press on that.
But if she is not chaste, then command the midwife to insert her finger into the vagina of the patient and seek the stone, for she places her left hand over the bladder, and seize that with a good grip.
Therefore if she finds it, then gradually press that beneath the opening of the bladder to the parts below with the force of her hand until it comes to the root of the vagina.
Then insert the tip of the instrument into the opening of the vagina beyond the root of the vagina from whatever side it is stopped at and hold the stone in that place; and the patient's finger should not be twisted by the stone, blocking it.
And the incision should be small at the beginning; and then insert the knife over that incision, and if she feels the stone, then make another incision according to the amount she knows the stone is extended from there.
And know that the species of stones are many; for some are small and great, sharp and smooth, long and round, and having horns.
Therefore you know how many species there are according to what you intend to say about what you want.
And if you see blood flow, bind it in the place with triturated vitriol and hold that for an hour until the blood is expelled, then return to your operation until the stone is extracted.
And prepare with you tools which are used in the extraction of stones in men, so that you are helped by them in your operation.
And if you see blood flow and know that the expulsion of blood is from the urethra which is broken, then you place powder on the spot and tighten it with a bandage and do not loosen it; and let go of the stone and do not extract it, for certainly the patient will die. Then treat the wound.
Then when the flow of blood is stopped and the place becomes quiet, then return to your operation until the stone is extracted.
Chapter lxii.
On incision on a hernia that is acute.
Hernia that is not except for the accumulation of moisture in the white fold which is beneath the diaphragm containing the bowels, and it is called diaphragm.
And some are in the proper membrane which naturally prepares in the part of the bowels, so that it is seen that there is another bowels; and it is the diaphragm between the white fold which we have said, and it is not that except for the skin.
And the generation of this hernia is through weakness which occurs to the bowels, for it is poured out to those bowels; and some occur due to pressure made on the bowels.
And this moisture having various colours, for the colour of it either inclines towards citron-yellow or to blood-red, or red, or is black and fetid, or watery white, and that is what is most common.
And the signs by which one can tell that this accumulation of water exists are these: for if it is in the white head which we have described, then the pustule is round, declining a little in length like a fig, and the genitals become visible, because the moisture contains them on all sides.
And if the moisture is in the skin itself, then the pustule is round with a split in the middle and one assumes that it is another hole.
And if the moisture is between the skin of the genitals and the white head, then cut below the feeling.
And when you wish to know the colour of the moisture, then you probe the colour of the moisture in the pustule with a cautery of which the tip is made red-hot; and according to what comes out on the trail of the cautery, judge of what exists within it.
Therefore when we come to the cure of it with iron, then we command that the patient be made phlebotomized if this is possible for you, and see the body of him full.
And let him be reclined on his back on account of some cause a little higher, and place under him several folded cloths.
And let you sit on the left side of him, and command the assistant to stand on the right side of him, and let him extend his finger on one side to the area of the genitals and at the end of the navel.
And take a broad spatula and split the skin of the genitals in that middle place for the length between the two testicles.
And let the incision be made according to a straight line equally distant from the hairline which divides the hair of the genitals, arriving at the white head encompassing it.
And cut that, and observe it, and guard against it so that you do not cut yourself; and your incision with which you cut it by the hole let it be suspended by the most red and thin part and scrutinize carefully through the incision according to how much is possible for you.
And pierce the head full of water with a broad piercing, and extract all the water.
And separate between the two lips of the incision with your nails, and extend the head upwards to the parts above; and do not touch the skin of the genitals encompassing it, and cut the head in that manner which is possible for you. And cut it with its entirety or in pieces, and especially its side very thinly, for if you do not scrutinize the incision of it exquisite ly, there is not certainty that the water will not return.
But if the blood proceeds from that hole in the skin at the time of your operation, then when you have finished the incision of the head return it within, and let the two lips of the skin of the genitals be joined with a suture, and cure that just as the other wounds, until it is healed.
And if you find the blood corrupted on account of another illness, then let the vessels which are sore on the suspender be tied, and extract the blood, and cure that just as we have said.
But if the water is accumulated in two places, then know that there are two hernias; therefore cut that part just as you have done in the other similarly; and if it is seen to be one operation, then do it.
And you shall wash the wound and insert into the incisions wool dipped in oil or rose oil; and place outside another wool which you have dipped in wine and oil, and spread it over the two genitals and the navel; and place on top folded cloths and apply to them a poultice made according to this form:
and let two cloths be pressed and filled with wool coloured according to this resemblance; and let the extremities by which it is pressed be made of linen or of dampened wool, and let them be tied with tightness around the waistband of the breeches, and one extremity press the anus into the two, and the second press at the end of the foreskin, and two extremities over two thighs and two other extremities on two angles, and all tightness be tied in the waistband of the breeches.
And sometimes this hernia is treated artificially by cauterisation instead of incision with iron; and it is that you take a thin cutlass and cut with it the skin of the genitals, and it is ignited according to what we have recommended until the white head containing the water is uncovered, and then you take cautery according to this form: and is arranged like Greek letters.
And pierce with that head, and it is ignited until all the moisture is driven out.
And extend the head with your nails, and cut it with hot cautery, and scrutinize it carefully until you have eradicated all of it; and guard against the blood not being touched by the fire.
And know that this operation is much safer and much further removed from bleeding of blood, and better than operation with incision.
But if you find that cautery is applied in the hour of incision or in the hour of cautery, or bleeding of blood, then let you cure which contradiction it does to you according to what it is said by that cure.
But if the patient is fearful and does not expect the second operation on account of his horror, then administer piercing according to that which we have said, and it is when you are certain through the signs that we have said that the hernia is watery.
Then let you raise the patient on some high support, then pierce the pustule in its lowest part with a broad spatula, and make the piercing according to the length of his body.
And let the piercing be broad so that all the water is driven out.
And let the cut be tied and the poultice applied and left on so that it drives out the remainder of the water. And cure that just as the poultice is healed.
But if contradiction is to the egress of the water in that hour you pierce that: and this is not done except because the white skin around the wound makes contradiction and prohibits the egress of the water, then let you put into the wound a pebble or instrument by which the water is extracted from the pustules, the shape of which is preceded; or tighten in the oppression of the wound a small pebble.
And know that the water returns and is retained for several months or around that time; and when it is accumulated, then let him be pierced according to that same manner mentioned, for the patient will thus pass his days.
Chapter .lxxxiii.
Of incision upon fleshy hernia and its cure.
Know that in incision upon this hernia is lost fear for the greater dispositions; for it has seemed to me that there was discharge of it and saved by that better.
And you shall remember the operation in that and the spices of the pustules.
Therefore, we say that the pustules are born in the parts of which the genitals are composed and it is done by many causes: or by acute acute superfluity, which is poured out upon the genitals, or by percussion.
And its color follows that of the body, and there is no pain in it, and it is a hard pustule.
And soon after is the pustule lapidified, whose color is dark, and there is no feeling in it.
And sometimes it is caused by a nodule in the arteries, and by inflammation of those through which the memory of pain is perceived, or by inflammation of the veins.
But that which is caused by inflammation of the arteries is known by the dispersion of the pustule when one presses it with his fingers; and it does not hurt if one touches it.
But that which is caused by inflammation of a vein is not dispersed by pressure with the fingers for any reason.
And it is possible that in this species section is performed and on the other meats; and you should insert the needle into the genitals, and stretch out the tissue above them, and extract that of the white head, and loosen the suspensory of the vessels, and tie them, and loosen the suspensory after you have extracted it from all parts of the head.
Therefore, if the head is already consolidated with those meats, then it is necessary to extract the head and insert that.
And if there is adhesion for some reason between the head and that which is between the vessels, then it is necessary to loosen all of that adhesion and insert it by a circular incision.
But if there is meat growing in the place of the adhesion which is at the back, then it is necessary to insert all that is in it and extract the head as we have said.
Therefore, when your operation is completed, then fill the wound with wool dipped in rose oil and wine; and then treat it with the other treatment until it is healed.
Chapter .lxiv.
Of the treatment of hernia that is from the bowels.
It is a pustule wrapped in some wrapper like a bud with moistening of the testicles, and it makes difficult movement exercise and walking for the patient.
And in the treatment of this disease, there is fear from that from which memory precedes.
However, we should act according to what they do first.
And he says that you should lift the patient up on a high bed; and then tighten the suspensory of the testicles at the lower parts; and insert the needle into the genitals with the fingers at the veins which are proven to be connected to the scrotum; and hold those others with your hand, and stretch them with violent extension.
And then insert the needle with a sharp, wide point through a transversal incision in the right of the vessels so that the vessels are uncovered.
And then scrape off all the tissue as we have said in extraction of the arteries which are in the temples.
And then insert a needle into those in which there is a double fold, and bind that in the first of the places in which the hernia occurs, and bind that other again in the last of them. And then insert those in the middle place by a straight incision according to the length of the body, and extract that which is aggregated from the putrid and corrupt humors.
And then cure the wound with the treatment of other wounds in which you want sanative to be generated so that they fall the vessels which blackened one or both testicles, for that is not bad for it.
But if the hernia occurs in all the vessels, then either extract the testicles or that the testicles are privated from their food by the incision of the vessels so that there is no benefit to them, or that they are withered because of it.
Chapter .lxv.
Of the cure of intestinal hernia.
The occurrence of this hernia is from an incision that extends into the head over the belly from the parts of the angles of the navel of the belly so that the intestines are pushed out through that rupture in some intestines.
And this rupture is either of the head or from an incision there, and both species occur for many causes: either from a blow, or from saucing, or from crying, or from the elevation of some heavy cause, or from the like.
And the sign of this, when it is from an extension of the head, is that it occurs little by little over a long time and does not occur suddenly, and it is a hard pustule between the veil and the skin because the head compresses the intestine.
And the sign of it is when it is from an incision in the head, for at the beginning it causes violent pain suddenly; and there are divers appearances beneath the skin near the genitals, and that is from thrusting out of the intestine, and the body of it appears at the parts below the navel of the belly.
And sometimes the membrane is thrust out with the intestine, and this hernia is called intestinal hernia of the bowels.
And sometimes it is caused by windiness, and sometimes there is a fissure in the intestine, and here it is retained, and it is very harmful for the patient, and sometimes it causes bad pain and most when it is pressed.
And in the treatment of these species of this disease with iron there is fear, for it is necessary to avoid the cautery in that.
And the manner of the operation for this is to command the patient to reduce the intestine with his hand at its parts inside its cavity if he obeys its returnment, and then have him bent over so that his chest is between your hands, and lift his legs.
And then tighten the one which covers the genitals at its parts above, and insert the needle of the genitals all through its length; and then fix in two lips of the incision hooks according to how you open it with those.
And if the incision according to the amount that for you is possible, then from that the head is pushed out.
And then scrape those chaps which are beneath the genitals, so that the white head of the head is uncovered in all its parts.
Then you insert your finger in that which covers the testicle, where there is between the white head and the head according to the second one, and release with that the adhesion which is behind the head.
And then hold with your hand the one which covers the genitals at its parts outside, and extend the white head in him with your left hand, and lift up the head with the head at the place of the incision; and command the servant to extend the intestine within you and you dissolve that adhesion behind with completed solucio.
And approach with your fingers so that there is no cause of the intestine being wrapped in the white head. But if you press on it for any cause, then you insert that into the belly below.
And then incise in the part below the scrotum by section, of which blood and pus will flow out just as we have commanded in what we have said.
And then administer wool submerged in oil and place it on the wound; and administer the bandage which we have commanded (and some times the scrotum is cauterized, which we have said near the incision of it they fear from a flow of blood, for many times this happens) and let the bandage fall within so that by itself it may drop.
But if the healing of it is delayed, then let there be applied warm water, and place it over that within which falls according to what we have said.
And then heal the wound with the other healing of wounds until it is healed.
Chapter 66:
Of the hernial hernia.
In this hernia I have not seen anyone who has been burned on the cure of it with iron.
And the first said that it is done thus as we have commanded in the hernia which is with wine; which is that you tie the vessels near the section over that with ease of it; and then dry up the middle place around the abscess with that which caused it, while the vessels fall.
And heal the wound according to what we have said until it is healed.
Chapter 67:
Of the disruption which is made in the angles.
Sometimes there is a rupture in the angles as we have said and the place protrudes.
And the genitalia should not be any cause of the intestines to the genitalia; and if they are, that is few; and return to it in all hours.
But if the time of that is prolonged, a fissure is made in the scrotum from which the intestine descends into the scrotum; and this happens by the extension of the scrotum which is in the angles as we have said, the cause being that the scrotum is stretched, and then it softens and the place is abscessed and protrudes.
And the cure of it is with cauterization thus as is preceded by the narration of it.
And sometimes it is cured with iron thus: and the patient hangs over his head between your hands, and then dries up the place of the rupture of the abscesses protrude by section to the breadth according to the quantity of three fingers.
And then strengthen the white scrotum which is below the scrotum so that it is uncovered.
And then take the thread and place it over the prominent place of the scrotum, and press it to the pressure of the belly.
And then sew together the two prominent places on the end of the thread of the scrotum and join them with each other.
And then pull out the end of the thread and do not incise of the scrotum at all, nor extend the heat, nor other cause just as you will know in the cure of intestinal hernia.
And then heal that with the healing of wounds and when you have incised the testicles, cleanse it and restore the wound so that it is consolidated; for the scrotum is contracted and the eminence of the rupture is not adjusted.
And cauterization is better in this place because it is closer to health.
Chapter 68:
Of the softening of the scrotum of the testicles.
Many times the scrotum of the testicles in some men is softened because the flesh that is between it is softened and the guarding of it is lost.
Therefore it is necessary that he who is practiced in the cure of it makes the patient lie according to his head and incise all the scrotum which is softened over the natural scrotum, and then sew two lips together.
And if you wish, cut off in the beginning the superfluity of the softened scrotum with three or four cuts and with firm suturing.
And then incise between the sutures, and then heal by the healing of the other wounds until it is healed and the testicles fall down.
Chapter 69:
Of castration.
Know that castration in our law is excommunicated, but for the cause it is read to me that I remember it in this book; and the remembrance of it is not necessary except by two ways, of which one is that it be in the science of the doctor when he is questioned about it, so that he knows the cure of it from which happens; and the other way is that we many times have had the necessity of castration of other beasts for our young ones because of them, just as of horses, and of oxen, and of pigs, and of beasts similar to the beasts.
And therefore I say that castration is done in two ways: or by tearing, or by incision to section.
But in that which is done by tearing, the way of the operation is that we cause the beast to lie in warm water so that its testicles are softened and hang down and that they are cut off. And then take them with your hand so that they are resolved and do not appear underneath the touch.
But in castration done by incision and section, see that you have the beast and press the scrotum of its testicles with your left hand.
And then ligate the suspensory ligament, and incise over each eye with one section so that two eyes are processed.
And then incise those which you will have bled. And do not cause over those of the scrotum any cause except the subtle scrotum which is over the veins.
And this way of castration is better which is done by tearing because tearing leaves no cause of the testicles so that the beast desires coitus.
And then heal the wound until it is healed.
Chapter 70:
Of the cure of hermaphroditism.
Hermaphroditism in men is according to two ways: one is when or appears the space between the scrotum of the testicles, in that which is between two testicles figure that clitoris of woman in which there are hairs.
And sometimes from it urine the one which is in the scrotum of the testicles.
But in women it is one species: and it is that the clitoris of woman over the penis is like two testicles of man a little bit of all and foreskin of man and two testicles.
And the cure is of three species: of two of men and of one species of women. And it is that see that you incise those tightened flesh so that the impression of it flow out, and then heal those with the healing of the other wounds.
And in the second species of men of which it flows urine which is in the scrotum of the testicles there is no cure or operation in it.
Chapter 71:
Of hernia and of prominent flesh by causes of women.
Strong hernia is tightened over natural causes so that it is stressed and made tight the guarding, and sometimes it is enlarged in some women so that it is split just as in men and pierces during coitus.
And then you who have the superfluity of linen with your hand or with a cloth and insert it.
And do not finish the incision, especially in the root of the vein, so that there is no flow of blood.
Then cure with ointment the wounds inside until they are healed.
Meat born from the orifice of the mother's womb and filling it, and quickly exit outside according to the appearance of a tail (and therefore some call this "tailed disease"); therefore we should cut in such a way as we do with linen, and cure it inside until it is healed.
Chapter 72:
On the cure of an inguinal hernia.
A hernia is when the vagina of a woman is not perforated or the hole is small. It can be natural or accidental.
An accidental hernia is caused by gout which preceded it, and it is made either by a membrane that is too tight or by a thin or hard cyst.
And it happens either in the opening of the mother's womb, or in her ribs, or in the upper part of her belly, or in the lower part, and it prohibits coitus and pregnancy, and strongly prohibits menstruation.
And the knowledge of it is gained by observation of the midwife, if the pregnancy is apparent, it is a premature delivery; but if not apparent, then you examine it with your fingers or with your hand.
But if the pregnancy is by a thin cyst and it is close to both labia, then you cut and rupture it.
And you place on both labia some powder, and you place your fingers indicating in both hands.
And the woman should be on her back, with her thighs stretched out, and you stretch both labia with force so that the thin cyst is broken and the pregnancy is opened.
And then take wool and dip it in oil and place it on the wound, and let him go for a walk during the day so that the cut is not healed closed.
But if the cyst is large and thick, then you should cut it with a spatule or with a blade of myrrh.
But if the pregnancy is by membrane, then suspend it with oil and cut it.
And you should have the medicines that stop bleeding without biting, such as aconite, dragon's blood, and gum arabic, adjusted with egg white of an eagle owl.
And then administer a wide lead cane so that the wound is not closed too quickly.
And hold it for several days and administer cold water.
And then it should be cured with the other cure of consolidation until it is healed.
And sometimes accidents happen in the mother's birth of other meats, and then you should cut according to this manner. But if it is by a crust, then there should be no contradiction to the crust with iron in any way.
Chapter 73:
On the cure of hemorrhoids, and of tail, and of red botch that happens in the vagina of women.
Hemorrhoids are an appearance of openings of many veins from which flow much blood continuously; and when they are old hemorrhoids and are swollen.
And I have already said in the division of these their kinds and their signs, and say thus those that receive cure and those that do not receive cure.
Therefore I say that hemorrhoids and theyls when they are in the opening of the mother's womb and do not appear in sensation, then in those there should be no cure with iron.
But those which are in the opening of the mother's womb over which there is sensation, these are the ones that are cured.
And you should put the woman in a bath and stretch them with tweezers or with rough cloth, and cut them with blades.
And then sprinkle over them the flow of blood of one of the powdery medicines without biting, thus with aconite and similar to these.
And then let her walk for an hour, and then place her in cold water.
And if the flow of blood persists, then do it again with a poultice made of sumac and husks of pomegranates and walnut shells and similar.
And then take flour of wheat and cook it in a bath with honey and sour wine and make a poultice with this over its back.
And if the blood is dried up, it is good; and if not, do the sticking with two leeches, and to the nipples its escarification.
And then take wool and soak it in juice of colander or in juice of wild basil or in juice of wild garlic with red wine and place it on the wound; and then cure the wound with ointments until it is healed.
And cure it until it is healed.
Chapter 74:
On the accidental piercing of the eardrum in the mother's womb.
Many kinds of crusts happen in the mother's womb, thus with crust and crusty ulcer and suppuration and red botch and fistula and hemorrhoids and rattle and tail and other crusts. And I have already said these diseases and their kinds and their signs, and their cures in the division.
And you should know in this treatment of crust cauterization which appears in the mother's womb when it is of the crusts that are connected to the blood vessels, and if you want to know in what manner its cauterization is done with iron.
Therefore you should consider if the pain of the crust in its origin is acute with percussion and phlegm and fever, and it throbbs and there is sensation over it, then do not cauterize it, and cure it with that which helps over the maturity until the acuteness of the accidents cease.
And then you should make the woman to lie on her back over a board that has two boards; and recline on its back and adjust her feet at the bottom of the belly, and let her thighs be spread out, and place her arms under her ears, and lie each one on what is convenient.
And then the midwife should hold the instrument straight and administer it to open the opening of the mother's womb, the form of which will come into those causes that are fitting.
And when you want to administer this instrument, you should dip it in the water of the mother's womb, and that which is entered into the mother's womb is not more than the opening of the mother's womb and lead the patient. But if the instrument is larger than the opening of the mother's womb, then you should place powder over the texture of the opening of the mother's womb so that there is prohibited entry of any instrument into the opening of the mother's womb.
And you should place the water that runs in the instrument of the womb above, and let the midwife hold the instrument and rotate the water inside so that it is opened the opening of the mother's womb.
And when there appears the effusion and it is touched by the hand and is cold and moist, then you should dry it with a spatule.
And when the blood is drained, then you should apply to the wound a sponge soaked in rose oil or green oil with some styptic in it; and place the bandage on the incision over the vein of the arm.
And place wool, clean and soaked in water with malva flowers, outside the arm and over the elbow.
Then it should be healed within two days by applying a ointment suitable for this purpose.
And sometimes the arm and wound are washed with water in which is dissolved honey, and then with water in which is ground rhubarb or long pepper, and then return to the ointment.
And if the wound is inside the arm which has been cut, then you should abstain from treating it with iron, but treat that one as we have said in the previous section.
Chapter 75:
To instruct midwives on how to treat stillborn children, when their shape is not natural.
It is necessary that the midwife recognize in the beginning the shape of a natural childbirth by its signs, and it is when you see the woman expressing her breasts, and desiring to breathe the air, and feeling relaxed over what is above her, and hastening the birth of the child, then you know that this position is according to a natural shape, and it is the delivery of it over their head, and the second one with it suspended or hanging from the umbilical cord.
Therefore, when you see those signs, then the belly should be compressed so that the embryo descends gently, and when it is over their head, they deliver the second one, and the placenta is removed with a good cleansing.
But when this childbirth is not natural and laudable, because the child is born on its feet, and their body comes out before their head and their feet, or when one of their hands or feet is born first, or when their head and hand are born, or when the belly is delivered first, and very soon it is returned to their neck, and resembling one of these non-laudable shapes.
It is necessary that the midwife be wise and subtle in all those causes, and guard against error and deception.
And I will show you all the figures of them, and what cunning is in them so that it may be understood by this and be established upon it.
When the child is born over their head through natural exertion, and it is violent on the woman and a difficult delivery for them, and you see the strength of her already weakened, then make that incision, or if the women are holding onto it, evaporate their grip with fenugreek powder and with oiled rags.
And the midwife should insert her finger between their teeth gently and push with it the second one, or dry it up with her fingernail in between so that she removes what is inside it of moisture. And press the woman's belly so that the child goes down.
But if it does not come out, then the woman should be anointed with a mixture of styrax and fenugreek with honey.
And the midwife, who is anointing it, should compress and make that sneeze with seasoning; and hold their mouth and nose for an hour, because the child will be forced out immediately.
And if both of the child' hands are born first at the beginning, then you should draw them back little by little gently. But if she does not obey the instrument, then place the woman on a plank and raise their feet up, and the plank should be tilted towards the ground; and the woman should be held so that she does not fall from the tilt.
And if the hands are not turned inside out and the child is stillborn, then insert those and pull the child's arm or tie the body to their hand with a cloth and pull it equally, because that will be forced out.
When the child is born on their feet, then you should push those up, and the child will turn little by little, and when you have taken one of their feet, extend those little by little.
But when it is born between their thighs, then you command them to push out, and make that sneeze with seasoning, because it will be forced out if God wills it.
And if it is not forced out with what we have recommended, then return the child little by little to where they should be according to the natural shape, because it will be forced out later with easier delivery.
And if it is prohibited by all that we have recommended, then take of a mixture of aloe and dissolved gum, and beat them both in the mortar with good beating, and line with that the inside of the woman' vagina, the lowest part of the belly. And then make her sweat in lukewarm water, so that she gets rid of phlegm.
And when you see that the breasts are softened, then make fumigation of myrrh and apply to it what is below. And when you have made fumigation for an hour, then make her sneeze on a plank, and then make that sneeze and open the mouth of it, and lift up from there, and press the lowest part of the belly gently, because the child will be forced out immediately.
Delivery of the child hanging from one of their hands. It should be understood as reduction of the hand, but if you cannot reduce it, then lift the woman and make her bend.
And if she cannot bend, then make her lie on the bed, and press their thighs with violent pressing, and administer to them what they have been prescribed of mucilages.
And if the delivery has come, then make her sneeze on the plank, and then study on reduction of the hand, and turn the child according to the natural shape, and make the woman sneeze and command them to push so that it is forced out.
Delivery of the child on their neck with their arms and belly expanded towards their mother's back. It should be that the midwife holds the hand of the child and then turns it little by little, and it will be with ease.
And when it is out and the umbilical cord is cut, then apply to it what we have recommended of oil and mucilages.
And then command the mother to suckle it little by little, and when she has done that, then make her sneeze on a plank and command them to be tilted to the right side, and then command them to compress it; and make that sneeze with seasoning. The preparation of the fetus is placed on its side.
When you see that the mother is giving birth according to this manner, consider and then insert your finger inside so that the humidity is evacuated.
And if the child is suspended above its face and neck, then insert that of the umbilical cord, so that it is not retained and dies.
Then pull the child to its limbs inside so that you pause that according to what covers it, and command the woman to compress herself in several places, and let it be extracted easily if God wills it.
The exit of twins or multiple fetuses. Know that twins are often born in many places, and sometimes three or four, but this is strange and rare; but there are several causes of nature, and not life.
And count those, that they may be multiplied, a second one, and are separated by the umbilical cord, distinguish those within the ligament in the umbilical of each of them. And sometimes they are extracted like a single fetus with a natural easy delivery, and sometimes some are delivered with an un-laudable delivery as we have mentioned above.
And if they are difficult to deliver and reach that which we have said about the unnatural shapes, then you cure those as we have related.
And if the midwife acts sutilly and does that which she does with facilitaion and subtlety, and delay, and is ingenious according to every shape according to how it is prepared in her womb leading to health.
The remembrance of that which forms in the matrix from embryos and abortions.
Sometimes they are formed in the womb one, two, three, four, five, six, seven, and up to ten, and I have indeed seen a woman miscarry six times, while another had ten, all formed, due to the wise men measuring them out.
And all that is hidden from that which is in the science of the midwife how powerful she goes to that small one resembling it and therefore pause over there.
Chapter .lxxvi.
Of the extraction of the child when it is dead.
When you cure the dead child with that which we have said in the division of medicine and is not extracted out, and you are forced to use cauterization with your hand, then consider if the woman is of healthy nature and does not have any of the accidents by which over her there is feared loss.
Then let the woman be laid down on her back, and her head be inclined downward and her thighs elevated.
And the attendant hold that of two parts or be laid in bed so that the body of it does not extend due to the extraction of the fetus.
And then you moisten the mouth of the mother with oiled water and with mucilage of alder and fenugreek and of linseed.
And then the midwife apply her hand with those oils and mucilage, and then insert her hand with facilitation in the mother, and then surround with her hand the place where the claws are in the fetus.
And convenient places in that: then consider if the fetus is prepared to descend over its head, and then insert the claws in the hollows of it, or in the neck, or in the mouth, or on the palate, or below the beard, or in the armpit of it, or in the close places of the ribs, or below the hypochondrium.
But if the descent is over its feet, then in the instep, or in the middle of the ribs.
And let it have the claw with its right hand, and pause the curvature of it in that place which is between the fingers of the left hand, and insert the hand with facilitation and insert the claw in some of those places which we have mentioned, until it reaches the desired cause.
And then pause and place in the opposition of it another claw, or the third if necessary, so that there is an attraction together, and not an extension according to its rectitude only.
And let the hand be bent in every part, so that the extraction of it is separated as it is done in teeth due to its removal.
And let that in it which is between them that the extension be softened; and if any part of it is retained, then let the midwife anoint some of its fingers with oil and insert those expertment and revolve that which is retained.
Therefore if the part of the fetus is extracted, then the claws be moved into the place which is most out; and do this so that all the fetus is extracted.
But if the hand is extracted in front of the other and it is not possible to reduce that by the contraction of it, then let cloth be wrapped around that; and then extract that until all is extracted, and insert that or in the joint of the hand or in the elbow.
And do the same with the other hand and with the two feet.
But if the head of the fetus is large, or it happens to it contraction in the extraction, or there is water in its head tightly attached, then let the midwife insert between the fingers spatula with thorns and split the head and extract the water, or uncover that with an instrument which is named “alundat”, the shape of which will come with the shapes of other instruments in the chapter which is next to this.
And do likewise if the fetus is of a large head by nature: and then insert that with compression, or grasp it with forceps as we have said above; and then extract the bones with forceps.
And if the head is extracted and is contracted due to the armpit, then let it be split so that the humidity which is in its feet is poured out.
But if it is not complicated or resistant to extraction, then you insert the head as much as possible to you.
And if the abdomen is swollen or there is water in it, then let you pierce that so that the humidity that is in it runs out.
But if the fetus is over its feet, then the attraction of it is easier and the direction of it to the mouth of the mother is easier.
But if it is contracted due to the abdomen and feet, then let you extract that with cloth which you have wrapped around your hand and split the abdomen and feet so that that which is in them runs out.
But if the other members stand out and turn the head, then let the midwife insert the left hand; but if the mouth of the mother is opened, then insert the hand in the pubis, and surround with that the head, and draw it with those fingers into the mouth of the mother, and then insert into it a claw or two claws, and draw it with those.
And if the mouth of the mother is contracted by an ulcer which happens to the u, then let it not be pressed upon it; rather let there be administered a diffusion of causes of moist heat. And administer poultices; and follow the patient with waters which soften and moisten.
And if the fetus is on its side, then if possible it should be turned over; and let that which we have said about the living fetus be administered.
If this is not possible, then it should be cut into pieces and extracted.
And whoever leaves any cause inside the second stomach,
And when you have completed all your operations, then administer what we have said about the cure of ulcers caused by cold humors.
And if there is bleeding, let it flow into astringent waters and administer the other cure.
And I have seen a woman whose belly was pregnant with a dead fetus; and on that fire another fire was lit, and the dead child fell out. It happened to her that for a long time an ulcer developed on her navel; and when the fire opened, she began to spit up fire.
And I was called to cure him, and I treated him for a long time, but the plague did not heal.
Then I placed on him some plaster with strong attraction, and a bone came out of him, and after a few days another bone; and I was very amazed because there were bones in his belly.
And then I thought that they were the bones of the dead fetus.
Then I opened the wound and pulled out many bones; the woman was in the same condition for a long time and had a small fire coming out of her.
And I did not fear anything strange, but only that in this there is science and help to what the doctor does with his hand for curing.
Of the forms of instruments which are necessary to extract the fetus.
Form of the incision by which the uterus is opened:
This is the form of the string with which the ligaments are tied, with a knot at each end of two threads. But this thread must be very thin and made of linen or cotton.
And the thickness of each rod is two fingers and the margin on both sides is one finger, and the length of each is half a palm; and in the middle of the two rods are two fastenings of that same rod, whose length is about half a palm and their thickness is about two fingers.
And these two attachments are inserted into the mouth of the uterus so that when you turn those two threads, it opens.
Other form resembling that one but thinner and longer:
It is made of linen or cotton according to the likeness of a pair of tongs. But at the end of it are two attachments like a pair of pliers; and the length of those attachments is about half a palm, and the thickness of each is two fingers.
And when you want to open the uterus with those, then let the woman lie on her back, opening that which is between her thighs. And open your hand with the instrument as you do with tongs, according to how much of the mouth of the uterus the midwife wants to do what you want.
The form of incision which the ancients said:
Form of incision by which the fetus is pushed out:
Form of incision by which the large head is contained:
And it is like tongs whose ends are in the extreme, and some times it is made long like tongs, whose ends are like a pair of pliers, with which it is cut and contained. Form of incision few:
Form of an inch having a spine:
Form of an inch having two spines:
Form of spatula having two extremities by which the head is cut:
Form of two wide spatulas:
All those instruments are practiced, and when they are more refined and prepared by the artisans, then it is easier for the operator and better for men because of its quantity.
And if there are not any instruments, then you must prepare them, for the need of them is inexcusable.
Of extraction of the secundine.
When the secundine is retained after childbirth, then let the midwife retain her own milk, and then let her vomit with herbs, and strengthen your hand over the mouth and nose of it, and if through that it is expelled, good.
And if not, then take a woolen cloth and pierce it in the covering with a hole, and put into that herbs which open the mouth of the uterus, like hellebore and rue and anise and camomile and scachola arabica and cassia lignea and santal wood. All those herbs or some of them are to be soaked in water in the cloth, and then let that hang over the fire.
And then place a hollow reed in the mouth of the uterus, and hold it so that the vapor goes to the cavity of the uterus.
And then let her vomit as we have said, and the secundine will be expelled very quickly.
But if this cure is applied and the secundine is not expelled, then let the midwife soak her left hand in sesame oil or in mallow milk, and then insert that into the uterus and seek out the secundine with it, and when it has been found, pull it out little by little according to its length so that the uterus does not receive violent force. Before let it be turned right and left with ease.
And if the mouth of the uterus is constricted, we have already recommended the cure with a syringe and herbs soaked in water.
But if it is not expelled with all the causes we have recommended, then beware that you do not tire on it with too much force, but rather let what comes out of the mouth of the uterus flow to the woman's thigh, and then strengthen that with ointment and tetrafarmacon; for it will make it boil in a few days and be dissolved and expelled.
But when it boils, there is a bad smell to the head and stomach, and then let the medicines be administered according to that.
But some of the Ancients have already tried sub-fuming with hellebore and dry figs.
Form of an instrument by which the woman is sub-smoked because of the retention of menstruation and secundine:
It is made of brass or iron.
And the end be made thin in the cavity and the end wide over the fire, and the sub-fuming be done over the embers of the fire.
And hold that so that the sub-fuming is consumed and alternate it with another.
Of cure of the child's anus not perforated.
Infants who are not yet weaned and whose anuses are not perforated, for whom the tongue is very thin and swollen. And then let the midwife pierce with her finger that swelling; and if not, pierce it with a sharp spatula, and beware that it does not touch the tendon.
And then apply wool soaked in wine and oil over that area; and let that wound heal naturally.
But if you fear it has become infected, then insert a cannula into the wound for several days and leave it in place until the patient feels the urge to urinate.
And it sometimes happens that the anus becomes obstructed by a blood clot or abscess; then when this obstruction has been removed, let it be treated with the medicine and lead plaster as we have said above.
Regarding the treatment of fistulas which develop subsequently:
Fistulas which occur near the anus and produce pus and a thick discharge are found near the anus or in the space between the buttocks.
There is either one fistula or several.
And when this nodule becomes old and discharges thick, white or yellow pus, sometimes these fistulas penetrate deep into the body.
And those that penetrate are known by what comes out of them through the exit and by their flatulence; and sometimes the patient suffers from an exit, and often worms come out of them.
And sometimes these fistulas penetrate into the bladder and into the vagina; and sometimes they penetrate into the joint of the thigh and into the knee.
And the way to know whether a fistula has penetrated into the anus or not is to put your finger into the anus and try to gently push a needle or piece of iron into the fistula when there is no pain.
But if it hurts when you do this, then gently push in a needle or a piece of lead or horsehair until you feel the needle or hair against your finger.
And if you don't feel anything at all and there is no discharge of pus or worms or flatulence as we have said, then know that it has not penetrated, and then proceed with the treatment.
And when the fistula has penetrated into the bladder or vagina, then the sign of this is the discharge of urine from it and the prohibition of this from that, so that the wound is allowed to heal.
But if it has penetrated into the joint of the thigh or into the bone and causes pain in that area, then the sign is that when you push a needle into it, there is no pain in the bone, but pain in the circuit of the joint; and that pus comes out of it occasionally; and that this is not helped by medicine nor healed by ointment.
And in all these penetrating fistulas, there is no cure at all, and their treatment is a laborious and vain task for foolish doctors who talk about it.
But in the one that is not penetrating and not ancient, healing with iron is expected according to what I have told you and what has already happened.
And it is that the patient should lie on his back with his head elevated and his legs raised up against him, with his thighs bent towards his stomach, and then gently push a needle or piece of iron into the fistula until you feel where the needle goes in.
And if he feels pain around his neck, then gently put your finger into his neck.
And if you feel the needle going in by itself without pain, or you feel something soft under your finger, then know for certain that it is penetrating; so do not work on this, because there is no healing in this as we have said.
But some say that it is healed in some people with vinegar.
And the medicine by which this is expected to heal quickly is that you apply a gentle cautery according to the size of the fistula, as it was preceded, and insert that hot iron into the fistula until it comes out around the neck; then repeat this two or three times until you know for sure that all those flesh-colored, fistula-like tissues which resemble a feather cane have been dried up.
Then cure that with water wrapped in wool until all those dried-up tissues are healed, and then cure it with medicines that generate and consolidate flesh, and if it is healed, well; but if not, then it will never be healed by any other treatment.
And if the needle goes in and doesn't penetrate your finger which is in the anus, and between that and the needle there is a hard, flesh-like substance or swelling, and you see the fistula where it breaks through the surface of the skin, then dry up the skin from the beginning of the fistula, and you will see that it dries up as the needle goes in and out at the place where the tip of the needle comes out; and so the flesh is freed and cut.
Then cleanse those flesh-like tissues which are similar to a goose feather cane, from which nothing comes out.
But if blood flows out of it when you press on those tissues, then the millstone that is and the pus that comes out should be cauterized with fire or sharp medicine, for cautery with fire dries up those flesh-like tissues and stops the flow of blood by drying up the humors.
Then cure that with water wrapped in wool or in clean linen until the spot turns black, and then cure the wound with a hard ointment that generates and consolidates tough flesh.
And so are medicines which have astringency and drying power; when it is restored, it is healed and you need not fear relapse.
But if the fistula has already broken through into the perineum and is prolonged from there across the surface of the body, then put your finger in the anus and examine it.
And so if you feel the needle and between you and it there is a hard substance or flesh, and it is close to penetration, then it is not an operation on it but according to the way of trust and hope.
This can be done in one of three ways: by cauterizing it as we have said; by drying it up so that you can make the opening in the anus smaller and the cure more effective; or by not cutting into the rectum so that you do not pierce the membrane containing the rectum, but let the patient go about his business naturally; then cure him with what we have said for the wound will surely heal quickly; or by prolonging the swelling and draining out the pus which has accumulated under the skin as we have said, or with a needle or another sharp instrument, then cleanse those flesh-like tissues which are in the incision near where you can pierce it with pressure; then force open the wound so that the entire wound is healed, and if the fistula which breaks through into the anus has not been consolidated, and the pus drains out of the anus, and the patient suffers from a discharge, let him be cured with what we have said. And sometimes the fistula ends like this: when you insert the needle into the fistula, it is on the side of the anus around the surface of the body with the skin and at the margin of the anus, then take a needle of piercing extremity which is prepared in the shape of a needle as follows:
and insert it into that with its wrapper or around it; and then insert the needle into the fistula until you reach the opening in him.
But if it has penetrated into the margin of the anus near inside, then pull out the needle from that hole as you put your finger in the anus; and when you have pulled out the end of the needle, press both ends together, and tie them together for a day or two, and when you have also inserted the needle into the flesh, press it until those flesh-like tissues are pressed in between the two ends of the needle which are tied together.
And then treat the wound until it is healed and closed.
But if the opening of the fistula is not penetrating, then make it penetrate in any way you have prepared, unless there is motion in the wound, for it is not up to you to do so as not to injure the skin; and then treat it until it is healed.
The shape of the spathe is spiny where the fistula is split: its curvature is very acute and the other side is not acute, so as not to injure anything that is not necessary, as well as the skin.
On the stitching of hemorrhoids in which blood runs in the incision of those.
Hemorrhoids are of two types, for some are between the anus like charcoal, or others that are like fat with hair. And those are small and large, and the blood runs from them constantly and is one, and some are inside, and outside the anus, and at its ends.
But those that are outside the anus are according to the months of little humidity, of which yellow water or a little blood runs with a continuous body, and they are according to the color of the body.
And the treatment of that which is inside the anus is that you command the patient to sit and be compressed until the anus dries and the hemorrhoids appear to you. Then you cut and suspend them with your nails or what you have those by your fingernail, and then cut those according to their roots.
But if the nails are not held in those by their moisture and softening of them, then take those with rough cloth or a stick or woolen thread, and extract those with your fingers, and then cut those and powder some powders over them near the incision so that they are like cautery; or cauterize those according to what is preceded in the chapter on cauterization. And then treat those with the other treatment until they are healed.
And if the anus does not obey defecation, then anoint the patient with ointment in which there is a little biting, and let him be washed with that water that is in the anus and let him be compressed gently when he excretes.
But if the hemorrhoids are outside the anus, then the cause of them is slight, and it is that you take those with your nail or that you take them with a stick and cut those, and then treat those as we have said until they are healed.
And whoever does the incision, keep in mind that you administer suturing of them according to this way: take wax wrapped and insert that into a needle and then extract the hemorrhoids at their tops, and make the needle penetrate with the other part of the wax into the root of the other part, and wrap both ends of the wax in the part lower than the needle and tightly; and narrow the hemorrhoid with a strong compression, and tie off the wax and extract the needle.
And do that to all, and leave one and not sew it, so that the excess of blood runs from it.
And then place over the anus cloth soaked in rose oil or cerate; and place that on the anus and command the patient to rest. And then leave it until it scabs; and when it is healed, treat those with ointment or other treatment until they are healed.
And if they are old and not healed with that medicine, then you should cut those with the point of a spathe or your nail until they become moist and let the scabs be above, which prevents them from healing; and then treat those until they are healed.
Then you wound them more violently than the first time so that blood flows and they become excoriated; and then treat those until they are healed.
Know that an ulcer, it is a key, and it is not unless there is a round spot according to the color of the body resembling a head of a nail, and it occurs all over the body and mainly in the parts below the feet and on the fingers, and from there you should have pain.
And then let it be cut what is in the circuit of the nail, and let it be held with forceps or a stick, and let it be uprooted from its root; and then treat that.
And if you want, cauterize the second as is preceded in its own chapter.
But a wart is a small, rough, round, fistulated eminence on the surface of the body, and many times it comes in the hands of children.
And its treatment is that you stretch and cut it, or narrow it with wax or hair so that it falls off. And if you want, cauterize it as we have said, with fire or acute medicine.
But a mole is a small, felted or fistulated eminence on the surface of the body, which occurs around the anus, and when it is rubbed, it is centered in it like a bite of an ant, and it is made all over the body.
And its treatment is that you take a reed of peacock feather or of bird of prey, and let it be strong, and place it on the mole so that it contains the circle of the reed from the parts around it; and then turn your hand with the reed so that you cut what is in the circuit of the mole, and let him narrow the mole at its root.
And if you want, do it with an eraser or iron according to this form:
Let the part above the reed be drawn out to thinness, soft (so that it is not perforated), wrapped so that over the finger the appearance of it is abraded and the revolution of it.
And if you want to cauterize the mole according to what is said before in the cauterization of atoms in the chapter on cautery.
Of the form of the instruments that are administered to give cautery.
Some are made of silver or brass or melted lead or hammered, and some are made from those instruments small and large according to the ones that are administered, for that which is administered in the treatment of small children is small; and of those whose anuses are sore or painful, their cauteries are small.
The form of a large and few cautery:
The tip of the reed above in which the pouch is tied be wide according to this way; and let the distinction where the pouch is tied as well, thus many times.
And the tip below it, which is inserted into the anus, be soft  (so that it is not open), drawing out to thinness; and in one side of it there are two slits, and in the other side a slit, and let the width of the slit according to the thickness of the veins and more thick a little.
Let there be a bag in which are placed the medicines of animal bladder or sheep's wool, and its size should be a palm.
And let it be pierced with small holes as it is rolled up; and if the space between the threads, make it the thickness of the said finger.
And then insert into those threads strong gall of raw gall which is of the galls; and apply with that bag to it; and when the bag is applied to it, let it be tightly bound at the top of the chest between two fingers with a strong constriction, and then cauterize each thread with it: But the quality of cauterizing with it is that you fill the bag with medicine, which should be warmed according to the amount of the patient's tolerance; and beware that it is not too hot nor too cold.
And then the patient should be reclined on his back, and his legs raised up and place under them a board on which there are men or a plank; and then anoint the end of the cautery with oil or egg white or mucilage of fenugreek or similar; and then insert that into the anus with ease, and the minister should squeeze the bag and press with two fingers and empty with force into the intestine everything that is in the chest; and then pull out the cautery and let the patient raise his legs to the wall.
And if the medicine forces that to come out, let it as much as possible; and if it sleeps with that for a whole night, it is better for healing.
But if you cauterize that in the illnesses of a swollen belly and its output is bloody, then repeat the cautery until it is healed.
And if in the anus there are hemorrhoids or painful sores, then let the cautery be very subtle and thin, of those cauteries with which children are cauterized.
Of treatment of sores:
You have already said in the division of the treatment of sores what was convenient for the book, and I say thus the treatment of those with hand and medicines according to their kind.
Therefore I say that sores are varied according to that by which the sores were made and according to the place on which they occurred.
And the causes for which many times sores are made are thus with stone, or incision of a sword or dagger, or blow from a spear, or staff, or arrow, or similar to those of many causes.
But the sores that are in parts of the body are thus with sore which falls on the head, or neck, or feet, or belly, or thigh, and similar to those of the limbs.
And I have recounted the treatment of some sores so that you pause on that reasoning and rule for other sores.
And I will begin with simple sores of the head, because the recollection of the composite ones will come to the beginning of the third chapter.
Therefore I say that when it happens in the head a simple sore and there is no fracture, then consider: if it is by blow of stone or similar, and the nerve has only slightly been struck and it is a large wound and you fear on that patient development of an ulcer, cauterize and flebotomize the cephalic vein immediately, and do not delay that; and draw from that blood according to the amount of the strength of him if there is no other prohibiting cause of phlebotomy, especially if the blood which comes out of the wound is little.
And let the phlebotomy be on the opposite side from the wounded part; and keep the patient from repletion and from wine and heavy foods.
But if any cause of diminishment prohibits you, then let it be diminished in food and not come near to meat nor wine.
And apply over the wound, if it happens on him ulceration, cut garlic infusing it in rose oil or wine in which it is made stiff.
But if he is certain of ulceration, then apply over the wound, if it is fresh with its blood and the air has not changed that powder which I will soon recount below.
And if the air has already changed that, then apply some ointment until it is healed.
But if the wound is large or it is from incision of sword or similar, and its lips are not brought together by pus, then bring those together with suture according to that which I will recount about their suture.
But if the wound is already uncovered of bone and pen, and there is no retention in it except for a little suspension, then insert into that and treat the wound with medicines and restore the flesh by applying on the nerve, and command the patient to abstain from foods in which there is heaviness: garlic and leeks and similar to them, until he is healed.
And if you see in the nerve putrefaction and it does not adhere to the bone, then insert all that rotten thing and cut it out, and treat that.
But if in these sores there is an artery or vein from which blood might flow and it has not been stopped by medicines, then press on the artery; and if you find that not-incised, then insert into it with spatum or ligature; and if necessity compels you that what we have said does not suffice, then cauterize until the blood is stopped.
And if these sores are simple and small, then the cause of them is a wound; therefore you powder over those this powder, because it solidifies that before the air changes those.
And the manner of the powder is this: take oil of unripe dates one part, blood of dragon tree two parts, gum not-extinguished three parts; let all be pounded and sifted, and of that let the wound be filled up, and let it be bound with good constriction so that it adheres to that, and let the blood coagulate.
And then bind that above with powders and let it be licked by the tongue, and do not loosen it while it is thus until it is ulcerated, because the medicine does not work for it to be healed.
And sometimes you make that alone with cautery when there is no dragon tree at hand or its blood.
And you make this operation on large sores when it seems that it should be applied to them and they are bound up, and they are recent wounds with their blood which the air has not changed.
And if the air has changed them, and especially when it is in summer time, then there is no need for the position of this powder, but then treat those with what we have said, therefore you apply over those some ointments that are digested, or you apply over those poultices made of flour of the seed of wheat with water and honey until they are soft; and then treat those with the other treatment until they are healed.
But if it happens with a wound of fracture in bone, and it is small, then you draw that out with a probe.
And I will say the treatment for fractures of the head where it is pierced.
Of sores in the neck:
But if the wound happens in the neck, then there is no difference in treatment, and it is between the wounds of the head when it is simple.
But if the nerves of the neck are cut or an artery, then if it is nerve let it not be bound tightly with anything that makes vehement strictness, as with cinchona and cinchona-tree which is verjuice and similar to them because they hurt the nerves and contract that. And do not put any pressure on the plague at all, because the substance of the nerves is fragile and its continuation goes to the brain, which is the source of all the members.
And if it is healed by light medicines, such as when the wound is washed with warm water, or when there is an infusion of red or white oil, and when it is washed with warm water and the other stones are applied according to this manner, then let it be moistened.
But if the plague is large, then administer a suture or a bandage, and let it be cured with powders until it is healed.
But if there is a depth or an abscess in the lowest part of the pus, then pierce it in the most depressed location.
But if an artery is cut in the plague and bleeding ensues, then ligate or coagulate it, or cauterize it if need demands it.
But if the vertebrae of the neck or all of it is cut, and the veins of the throat are spared, then you adjust the wound of the neck with a suture over the cane of the neck and do not touch it; before doing this, equalize that and reduce it to its natural figure, and then tightly bind it with a decent bandage; let it be treated with ointments in which there is stiffness and excitation until it is healed.
But if the bone has been fractured, then pierce it and extract all of the fragments that you can; let what is not apparent heal within, and separate it and the efflux from it be alleviated.
And if the plague is recent, then powder it with a powder for which you have been prescribed. But if a fistula is formed in the plague, then cure it with that which its recollection will come to you in due time.
If it is a blow from a lance or spear, and you see the depth of it, then consider that if there is windiness from the wound, then know that the plague is mortal.
And if there is no depth to it and the plague is recent with its blood, then you put on a powder for the first hour and do not bind it so that the blood is not retained in the depth of it and that it returns to the heart and the patient is saved; instead, put on an attractive ointment twice a day.
And if the ointment is not available to you, then put on the orifice of the plague a piece of wool so that it sucks up what there is of humidity; and let the patient sleep on the plague so that what is in it flows out.
But if three days or more have passed and no spasms or tremors of the heart nor mal-stricture occur to him, and you see the other dispositions as good, then know that the plague is saved; then cure it with cauterization and with the other cure until it is healed.
But if its healing is delayed and the wound stays open for a long time, then know that a fistula has been done; cure it therefore according to its chapter.
And if the plague is done by a spear or lance and is simple on the surface of the foot or leg, then cure it with that which is preceded by a suture if it is large, or powder if it is small.
But if the bone has been fractured and there are only a few fragments in it, then you twist the wound and cut to extract those fragments, if they are separated. But if they are not separated, then let them be until the plague is healed, for their extraction is alleviated.
And of the other plagues of accidents in the other members the cure is the same as that which we have said before.
Of plagues of the belly:
The disposition by which it happens in the belly is either great or small or middling.
And a small disruption is done difficultly in another way, and you see that the reduction of them is more difficult if you do not cut off the intrusion of them to their place at once, for it opens and is swollen because the insertion of it is made difficult.
And therefore the best disruption is middling, for in it the reduction of the intestine is not difficult, as it is difficult in both species mentioned before.
And know that the suture of the belly is according to four manners, but two sutures are common which are used in sutures of the other plagues of the body.
And two other sutures are proper to the other plagues, but indeed more proper in the suture of the belly.
And I will count for you each one with exposition and declaration.
Therefore I say that when the plague is small and some cause of the intestine comes out through it, and it is made difficult to reduce it, then it is in one of two manners: or by smallness of the disruption as we have said, or when there is inflation of the intestine by the coldness of the air.
And therefore when that is so, then you must warm it so that you soak a sponge or cloth in tepid water only by itself, or boil in squinant water, and cyperum, and spic, and embrocations with it the intestine until the inflammation is resolved.
And sometimes it does this in the thing which has been made stiff, and it is better than water only in resolution of the inflammation.
And therefore when you see the inflammation resolved, then you moisten the intestine with water in which is mixed honey and mallows, for it eases the insertion of it with a little cause.
But if the insertion of it is excused by this cure, then split the disruption a little with an instrument by which the hemorrhoids are split.
And the primary cure is better when it is proper and not dry, and there is no occupation to dry near necessity and defalimentation.
Of the instrument, know its form:
One part of it is crooked acute, and the other part not-acute, and its extremity subtle, and may not be with the subtlety of a spatula, but rather obtuse a little.
And therefore when the plague is enlarged and goes out of the intestine, then you must make its reduction according to the form of it natural, in its proper place, if it is possible, for it is better.
But when the disruption is ample and it is in the lower part of the belly, then let the patient lie on his back, and put his feet above; and if it is in the upper part, then let him lie on his stomach and raise his head and feet.
And likewise if the disruption is in one of the two parts of the belly, then pay your attention and your consideration equally on both sides so that the part in which there is the plague be higher than the other.
And thus you must administer this in great plagues and middling plagues.
And in small wounds, apply what you have prepared, and ensure that the surgeon is between your thighs, holding the wound with his hand and closing its lips, and uncover from one to another any cause of the wound, or other.
And this is the common manner of suturing: you take the needle, or count of needles according to the quantity of the amplitude of the wound; and leave from the extremity of the disruption of the ring finger, and tighten the needle one, other that you put thread in both ends of the cord, with both ends of the thong which is below the cord of the parts within, so that you make it penetrate from that part; and you have already tied both ends of the cord and two ends of the thong, and there are four orders.
And then tighten with double thread around the needle, and some times from two parts together, and then tie both lips and the wound by decent tying; and leave the thickness of the finger, and take another needle in that, and tie that with thread as is tied with the first needle; and do not cease to do this if it is necessary with needles until you have completed all the contraction of the wound.
And the needles should be between thickness and thinness, because thin needles easily pierce the flesh; and thick ones are difficult to enter into the cord, and therefore that they may be easier in subtlety and thickness.
And it should not be that the needle is tied in two ends of the cord near to each other, because the flesh would be pierced easily and the wound would open before its healing.
And they should not be prolonged so that the wound is not prohibited from healing.
And then pierce the ends of the needles so that they do not hurt the patient while sleeping; and you shall put over the sutures powdered herbs spread from all parts, which have the ends of the needles; and leave them until you know that the wound is healed.
And these species of suturing with needles in whatever manner are more convenient for small wounds, because they have in their suturing one needle or two or around them.
But the second suturing is common: and it is that you administer suturing with the four ends, of the cord and two ends of the thong, in one go, with a needle in which thread is wrapped equal in thinness and thickness.
And then when with the needle you have penetrated these four ends, reduce the needle from that meting part from which you started, so that the thread drawn box of the uppermost part to the wound, so that the suturing is according to suturing of cloth with which the cloths are tied tightly.
And put between each suturing the quantity of the thickness of the little finger.
And this suturing is known to men.
And with such suturing I healed the wound which was inflicted on a man in his belly, and it was wounded with a dagger, and the rupture of the wound was more than a palm, and it had come out from the intestines around two palms from the intestine of the middle place, and it was the disruption in the middle of the member; and then I reduced it after the intestine had been pierced by the wound for twenty-four hours.
And the wound was healed in the space of fifteen days or around, and he recovered and is well; and then he lived for many years, and is in his dispositions.
And other doctors had judged that he would not be healed; and by miracle it was healed, because I did not cure him with ointment, but put on the wound cut wine twice a day and frequent washing with honey water until he was healed.
But I will say two kinds of suturing proper according to the account of the Word.
And it is that you start with suturing of the cord, and interlace needle from the outside part to the inside part.
And so when the needle penetrates in the cord and in that part within according to straightness and in length of all the body, leave the end of the thong in which you have interlaced the needle; and make the needle penetrate in the other end from the inside part to the outside in the other end of the finger.
And when you have done that penetration, then do it another time in that meting end of the finger from the outside part to the inside; and leave the end of the thong which is in this side, and make the needle penetrate in the other end of the inside part to the outside.
And make the needle penetrate with which you are making it penetrate in the thong in the end of the finger which is in the part of him so that all that penetrates.
And then start from that meting side and sew it with the end which is of the thong in the other side, and pull out the needle of the cord which penetrates, and then reduce it to that cord and sew the end of the thong which is in the other side with this end of the finger; and pull out it of the cord which is on the part of him.
And do that once and another time, and do it one time after the other so that you sew all that is outside according to that example.
And the sum of this manner of suturing is that you sew with suturing of hides with which hide is sewn, so that you sew the thong one time from the end of the cord, and leave it another time so that you have completed it.
But the second proper species which I say is the command of him and for him recomposed, is that you sew it according to semilitude with which all medicines are sewn, so that the ends of him are joined to each other in convenient nature; and apply the end of another of him and the end of the finger to the other end of him, and that is done according as I have recomposed it.
Because you put the needle in the end of the finger at your side from the outside part, and make it penetrate to the inside in that sole, and leave two ends of the thong; and then turn the needle and make it penetrate from the outside to the inside in two ends of the thong.
And then turn those ones, and make some of the inside part penetrate to the outside in two ends of the finger which are in the contrary side.
And this manner of suturing is better than common suturing, and it is suturing of which prior memory precedes.
This is the command of Gualia
And then they said some one, the suturing of the belly is straightened with two needles, so that you interlace in these ones a thread, and start with penetration of needle from what is on you, and make it penetrate within to the other side according to suturing of those whom hide is sewn equally.
And know that when rupture is in the middle place of the belly, then the suturing of it is more difficult than in other places of the belly.
But the judgment of medicine of wound is judgment of other wounds.
The which cause is that when you know the wound recent with its blood before that air alters it, and reduce the intestine and sew it and adapt it decently, then put over it powdery incarnative.
And if the air has already altered the wound, then apply some alum to that area so that it makes a hard stone and traps the bile, and let it solidify and heal; and treat it as you would any other wound until it is healed.
But if you do not have the medicines with you, then apply it immediately as soon as the wound starts to discharge pus, and change the poultice twice a day, morning and evening, as I have taught you, until it is healed, for you need no other treatment in various conditions when wounds are simple.
But if you fear that the wound might spread to the main limbs, then soak lamb's wool in warm oil of good quality, or rose oil, and apply it around the areas between the angles and below the ankles.
And if he feels pain or putrefaction in his intestines, where many times it happens, then anoint that with black styptic vinegar, especially if the putrefaction is in the intestine and there is an open wound inside its cavity.
And know that a wound in the large intestine has a slower healing process than one in the small intestines.
And it is difficult to heal because the intestine called "gut" does not receive healing from a wound that occurs in it at all; and this is due to the great multitude of veins that are in it, and because of its size compared to those, and because of the subtlety of that organ, and because of its proximity to nerve nature.
But if what proceeds from the wound is the intestine, and you manage to get it out, return that according to your skill by which you reduce the intestines with equal measure.
But if it has passed into space and is already green or black, then that you strengthen that with bile on the spot where it has turned black, so that a flow of blood comes out, for there are veins and arteries in the tissue.
Then insert what is the other end of that intestine, and apply two ends of the bile hanging from the opening below the wound, so that on your side is relieved the attraction of it due to the cutting of the tissue and the emission of pus from the wound.
Remembrance of wounds when they happen in the intestine.
When disruption happens in the intestine and it is small, then it is possible that it be restored in some people; thus I saw a man who had been wounded in his belly with a spear thrust, and the wound was on the right side of the stomach, and the wound was old and had become a fistula, and he vomited and belched.
Then I followed his treatment so that he was not confident in his healing, but continued to apply it gently until it was healed and the spot consolidated.
And I saw the spot already consolidated, and I directed that he eat on top of it foods suitable for him who had suffered an injury in his belly; and he did not suffer from any ill effects and remained in good health eating and drinking, and he bathed and exercised his limbs.
And some experienced people have said that when a wound occurs in the intestine and it is small, then it should be bound according to this manner: you take the leaves of large pods; and then close both lips of the wound and place one of those leaves whose mouth is open over both lips of the wound; then when he takes hold of those and tightens his mouth, cut off the pod, for it will adhere and not dissolve.
Then place another pod next to the first one, and do not cease to do this with pods one after another according to the quantity of the whole wound.
Then return that and close the wound; and let those pods remain in the intestine until it is healed; and do not hurt the patient at all.
And it is possible that the intestine be bound with thin bile which is made from the intestine of an animal tied to it, since it is more flexible; and you take the end of those intestines and it is somewhat stripped, and then bind the end of it with bile, wrapped around, and insert that bile into needles and sew up the intestine with it, and return that disruption.
And this manner of sewing with pods is not anything other than according to way of trust and hope.
But if the wound is large and wide, especially if it is in one of the small intestines, for then it is only a subtlety and not its complete healing.
Of the healing of ulcer and fistula.
Know that any wound and abscess when it becomes infected and is old, and an ulcer forms, and is not consolidated and discharges pus all the time and is not healed, then in whatever part of the body it may be, universally it is named fistula and we call it a ulcer.
And fistula according to truth is nodulated, hard, white with which there is no pain and to which is cavity as it is cavity of bone; and for that reason we name that some knob, i.e. nodule.
And it is in some people moist, which discharges pus; and strongly the moisture is discharged in some hours. And sometimes this humidity is increased, and it is little, and it is thick, and it is subtle.
And I have shown all those causes, and their signs and the healing of them with medicines in the division.
And thus it is necessary that I make you know the healing of fistula which is made by way of operation with the hand.
Know that fistula happens in all the parts of the body; for from them there are fistulas which come to large veins and arteries, or nerves, or the brain, or the intestine, or the bladder, or any of the ribs, or some of the joints of the hand, or foot; and they give proximity to the main member and its likes.
And thus those of these fistulas which are according to this manner are of illnesses of difficult healing, and do not receive healing, and occupation with it is labor and ignorance.
And if there is any fistula whose depth does not come to these spots which I have said, and you wait for it and believe in its healing, and wish to come to knowledge of it, then take a test of lead or iron, and if the fistula goes according to skill, then examine it with him.
But if the fistula is tortuous, then investigate it with a test of subtle lead, for lead by the lightness of its body is drawn away and bent from the tortuosity.
If the fistula has horrifying words, it is not possible for you to say anything about it with a tent.
Therefore, christen the horrifying orifices for them, as the moisture by which you cleanse that one comes from the others and flows from them.
And then inquire closely, according to whatever manner it is possible for you to know whether here you have bones or nerves, and whether the fistula's cavity is distant or near, or whether it is a fistula whose horrifying words are above all at the top of your strength, with your tenting, and the invention of the pain comes from your compression with your hand over the place, and of the significants and of the accidental causes.
And when you have considered all those causes with true knowledge, then go to the cure according to confidence: and it is that you consider if the fistula appears nearby or in a salty place, distant from a joint, or of nerves, or of an artery, or of a vein, or of one of the places which you know.
Then dry the fistula according to what is said before of its description, and stop up that which is in that filtration and of rotten flesh, and that which is born in the orifice of the flesh, or of thorns and of resemblance, and cure that within which is to be healed.
But if the fistula is of great depth and is according to rectitude, then you must understand that you immerse it in the preon as much as you can, and then cleanse it of all its rotten flesh; and then administer hot waters wrapped in sharp medicines, and insert them into the cavity of the fistula which you have understood with iron.
And do this several times until the sharp medicine corrodes all that is rotten in the cavity of the fistula.
And then restore it with ointments which beget healthy flesh within that is to be healed.
But if it is not healed by that, then you cauterize it according to what we have recommended.
But if the cause of the fistula is bones and you have certified that, then you inquire and dry it according to what we have recommended, unless you prohibit any cause of vein or nerve or main member as we have said.
But if the bone is revealed to you and there is corruption and blackness in it, then cut that away until all the corruption is stopped; and then cure that with that which will cause flesh to grow within that is healed.
And if it is not healed and the flesh grows as it did before, then know that you have not attained to the total eradication of the corruption; and then uncover it again and do the reason for it and the purification of it with your greatest strength, and then restore it.
And so if it is healed, well then; but if not, then know that the corruption is in the distant depth of the body, which has not been conquered, and then to you it is not possible to do anything with that.
And if the rotten bone is small or it is possible for you to pull it out, then you pull it out with subtle forceps which are suitable for that.
And if there are many bones, then you do the extraction of all of them with your greatest strength and of none do you leave any cause.
But if you are opposed by any cause of the moistures and in them there is no fear nor error, then cut away those limbs or flesh if they are here, and release the bones.
But if you are not prepared to stop the bones of your hour, then pause over the wound that it may suppurate, and leave that within so that it is in the environment of those bones of flesh and of limbs, and keep the wound from being consolidated, and the section which you have cut in your operation be constricted.
Habbants, if you fear, pause over it a cloth dipped in oil, or a cloth dipped in Egyptian ointment, or in one of the green ointments, for when those limbs suppurate and the bones are separated from their cavity, and from that attraction is driven away.
But if it is a large bone like the bone of the leg or the thigh or like that, and that which is rotten is only its face, then cut away that only behind so that the blackness and corruption are stopped, and then restore the wound.
But if that which is rotten is a great part and the corruption has already conquered the marrow of the bone, then it is necessary to close that and to cut all into that place where the corruption has come, and then cure that within so that it is consolidated.
And I have recommended to you that one who lies on his back so that he pauses as an example and helper over your operation.
A young man about 30 years of age, to whom happened pain in his head, and from the parts within maugula is upon the matter within the body within which the matter has come to the head, and it is matter of pustule with great pustule, and there was not to him extrinsic cause.
And then the time was extended by that through the error of the doctors until the pustule was opened, and many matters arose from it, and his cure was then paused within so that the leg was fistulated, and he had in him many orifices which all discharged pus and the moistures of the body.
And then he was cured by many doctors for about two years, and there was not in those wisdom but in the art within which I was called.
And I saw his leg and the matters which ran from him those orifices through great pain; and indeed that man's body was totally emaciated and his color was yellow.
And then I inserted the tent into one of those orifices and it came to the bone.
And then I probed all the orifices and found that they came from all parts of the leg.
And then I cut and entered into one of those orifices within which I discovered a part of the bone, and found it rotten, and indeed it was earthy and rotten and black; and a part of the leg was already rotten where it had penetrated within the membrane.
And then I stopped that which to me was revealed and prepared of the uncovered bone.
And I found that it was not in the bone but that corruption which I had cut and stopped, and indeed I had already removed it.
And then I paused the restoration of the wound with consolidaing medicine for a long time, and it was not consolidated.
And then I iterated and discovered upon the bone secondarily over the first discovery, and found continued corruption with the bone.
And I stopped that which to me appeared from that corruption, and indeed I had performed the cure of it and restoration, and it was not restored.
And then I discovered upon him another time and did not cease to enter the bone little by little particularly and to probe the restoration of it, and it was not restored until I had cut around a palm from it, and that extracted with its marrow, and then I restored it with medicines, and it was lightly consolidated and healed.
And it was not necessary to iterate in the operation of it and section of it except for the disposition of its fever and because of the scantiness of his toleration and fear of death, for he suffered at all times from excess of evacuation and syncope ill.
And so he is healed completely, and there is nothing in place of his hard flesh; and the disposition of him in his body is made good and the virtue of him returned; and he is conversed in his dispositions and does not make contrary to him in walking nor harm in any cause.
But if the bones prominent in the place of the body are drawn out, then it is necessary that you succeed according to this manner: and it is that you take a ligament and strengthen that at the extremity of that prominent bone, and command someone to extend that upon him; and pause that ligament of wool thicker than the first ligament; and apply that upon the flesh which is below the bone, and extend the extremity of it so as to draw the flesh to the parts below, and you uncover the flesh over the place which you wish to sew up so that the needle does not harm the flesh.
And pause the wood or table below the bone decently, for when you do that it is not prohibited that the needle does not cut the corrupted flesh.
And it is necessary that the sewing be over the corrupted place little by little, for if there is corruption in the cavity of the bone and does not appear in its appearance to sensation, and force to sew another way.
And if the bone is corrupted and not prominent, before it is one party continued with the other, and the corruption is in all of its place or in part of it, then you uncover the flesh from all parts entirely; and then pause wood below, and then sew that of the first party where the corruption is so that the sewing of the other party be continued.
And the sewing be according to the place of the corruption small, according as we have said.
And if the corruption is in the joint, cut that corrupted joint, and sew the bone where it is continued from the other part.
And if the corruption is in the continuation of two joints, then it is not in it reason but skill.
And if the corruption is in the palm of the hand or the foot, it is very difficult; however it is necessary that you inquire into the corruption in what manner it appears to you, and that you open that, and mend that according to every disposition which is possible to you, and with every skill be rectified to you, when not doing to you contrary coming or nerve.
And know that the cutters and the saws to cut these bones are very according to the situation of the bones, and the preparation of those, and the thickness of those, and the subtlety and the greatness and the smallness of those, and the hardness and their rarity; so that you prepare for every kind of operation convenient instrument for that operation.
And know that that operation signifies to you on the kind of instrument of which you were in need; when with you is great study and long and knowledge of the ways of this art, and witness of ways of illnesses, for then you already had through your methods that which is convenient to it of the instruments to every illness.
And you see to you forming at the end of this chapter the number of the instruments which you will pause with simples with which you will proceed to your prohibition which you will experiment upon the others. Form of saw:
Form of another saw:
Form of another great saw:
Form of a chisel: Let the head of this chisel be according to the shape of a star-shaped key, and its points according to the shape of the points of a claw hammer.
And it is not convenient except that with that are rubbed the heads of the joints when they are corrupted, or is the great mouth ample.
Form of a smaller razor:
Form of a broad razor:
Form of another saw decently made: let it be made of iron and the sharpness of it of steel, and the handle of it of wooden staves decently made. Its form:
Form of a razor in which there is a concavity:
Form of another subtle razor:
Form of another razor with a curved extremity:
Form of a small razor resembling a tent:
Form of another smaller incisioner:
Form of another incisioner; this one resembling a saw, and the extremity of it is like a saw, and it is used in many places in the reason of the bones:
Form of a chisel which is convenient to reason of that which is perforated of the bones:
And the extremity of it is triangular and of acute extremity.
And it is made of Indian iron, and similarly let all the causes which we have said of razors and of incisioners and of saws.
Of incisioning extremities and of the sewing of bones.
The extremities can be affected by either an intrinsic or extrinsic cause, or after you have treated that corruption with cure of those medicines and the cure does not confer, or when the corruption is in the member which does not bear any cause, then let you incise that member within where lies the corruption so that the patient may escape from it by death or by evil which is greater defect of the member.
And the sign of that to which it happens is that the member is made black within as though fire had burned it, or it becomes black within as though that burning had entered that member and had entered all the body; and therefore cut at it with incision of that.
And similarly if the cause of the corruption is percussion from certain venomous causes such as from sea scorpion or from viper or from adder or from similar.
And if the corruption or the percussion is in the extremity of the finger, then let you incise the finger and do not give space to the corruption so that it enter into the hand.
And similarly if it has accessed the hand, then let you incise that of the joint of the fire-stick and do not give space to the corruption so that it enter into the fire-stick of the arm.
And if you have it, then let you incise the arm within in the joint.
And if another the corruption and it turns around the head, then in that is the death of the patient; and administer other cause in cure is quantity of virtue.
And similarly make of the foot when corruption instead of the finger of the foot, then let you incise that within one of the toes.
And if it takes in the sole of the foot, then let you incise all the foot. But if it enters into the tooth, then let you incise the gum within at the joint of the tooth.
If corruption has already occurred in the brain, then there is no remedy but to release the patient and let him die.
And the manner of cutting off a limb or of tying it is that you should tighten the ligament in the area where it is desired to be cut, and tighten another ligament above the site; and extend one ligament towards the lower parts, and extend the other over it; and you separate the flesh which is between two ligaments so that it may be completely exposed, and then let it be cut or tied.
And make sure that a cloth is placed under all parts so that it does not touch the wound, and that the patient receives an appropriate bandage and poultice.
But if blood flows from the wound, then cauterize the site with cautery, or apply some powders which will constrict the flow of blood; and return to your treatment until it is complete.
And then bind the infected limb with a bandage in a suitable way, and treat it until it is healed.
And then he told you that once a man had a dark spot on his foot, and you and he agreed to treat it with a burn which resembled the charred remains of a fire.
And this corruption first occurred in his toe, then spread to the rest of his foot.
And then that man prepared remedies himself as the treatment progressed and his foot became more swollen with pain and the burn, so he cut off the foot at the joint, and it healed.
A long time ago that man had that corruptive disease in his left toe.
And then it came to me and I was forced to remove that surplus with the medicine which I applied to his hand, so that the cleansing of his body would occur; but the surplus was not reduced and started to go to the other toe as it began in the hand.
And he asked me to cut off his hand, but I did not want to do this hoping for the reduction of that surplus, and fearing the cutting off of his hand which would result in death, because the strength of the patient was great.
And when he lost hope in me, he returned to his land and found that this man prepared and cut off his entire hand, and it healed.
And I have not written this narrative except to be an aid for those who suffer from this disease, and that it be a sign by which it is understood and according to which it occurs.
Of the treatment of ulcers and the quality of enemas with medicines.
When an ulcer occurs in the fleshy parts and the space of the ulcer is prolonged so that it makes a collection of pus, and then it is broken and perforated, and the pus is discharged from it, and the site becomes hollow as if it were a vessel, and the cord which is above it is like a veil with a thin cloth, and there has been no subsequent corruption, and it does not impress upon the bone or nerve or ligament, it is called an ulcer, and is not named a fistula.
But if the space is prolonged so that corruption occurs in some member, then it is called a fistula and not an ulcer.
And the treatment of it is that you cut off the whole cord as it is turned over and most especially when it is thinned out and made with a cloth, and bandages which do not adhere to the site by its corruption.
But if you expect the cord to adhere and that corruption has not been accomplished by subsequent consequence, and there is passage in the cord of pus, then you should treat it with an enema.
And consider the ulcer, and if it is great and the arm which you see gives off a fetid odor, then enema that with an Egyptian medicine which is of oil and sharp wine and linseed received in parts equalized in a vessel, and let them be heated over fire until the medicine becomes thick as honey.
And then take from it that which is necessary and dissolve it with water and honey; and enema with it the ulcer, and tighten the orifice of it, and let the medicine remain in it for the quantity of two hours.
And then remove that with discretion; and do this for so many days until the ulcer is cleansed and the pain abated.
And in some cases it is enema with water of ashes when that medicine is not available to you; and take the ashes of wood and put on it water, and then boil that and strain it, and enema that with it until you are certain that the ulcer has been relieved.
And if the patient has no tolerance for the Egyptian medicine or water of ashes, then enema that with water and honey mixed with linseed pounded into powder, and enema that with wine and honey mixed because of the nature of honey is to cleanse and wash, and wine makes the ulcer adhere especially when in the wine there is surplus of astringency and dryness.
And when you have done this several times and you are certain that the ulcer has abated, then enema that with that which makes the flesh grow on it.
And take the ointment of daphnoides and dissolve it with rose oil and astringent wine, or enema that with some other medicines and unguents which I have written about in the treatise on unguents.
And if the orifice of the ulcer is narrow so that the cannula of the enema cannot be received, then you should enlarge it with a small iron little by little, and put on it cotton wrapped in Egyptian ointment or in balsamic ointment until it is enlarged.
And likewise if the orifice is wide, then you should close it with a stitch and put on it quantity in which between the enema is added.
And if the orifice from which the arm hangs is elevated to the parts above, then dry that in the pus base of it so that the arm does not run into it below because when the arm is constricted in the depth of the ulcer the flesh engendered in it.
And if it is not possible for you to dry the ulcer in the surrounding of the bone of pus base according as you wish, then be assured that you prepare the member with preparation so that from it the arm runs longer according as it appears to you and that there is no cause for the arm in it.
But that which is on the orifice of the ulcer, which abates in every hour because it draws what is constricted in it of the arm. And so that you know whether what runs from it of the arm is pus or little, or is digested, or is undigested.
And you consider the site of that ulcer if in it the patient feels pain or not, and if there is pus in it.
And when your medication is prolonged in this manner, and you see the matter that has exuded through the orifices of the sinus already adhered, or with its own adhesion, then on the third day, loosen it with a poultice, and when you loosen the plague, then change the dressing with another one and renew the ointment.
But if from the sinus there exudes a subtle humor, then do not despair of its adhesion, because its healing is proper, for there are some men in whom the generation of flesh occurs in their plagues, and of those in whom the contrary occurs as well.
And if a bad indigestion has exited from the sinus for several days, then know that the sinus is not adhered; and if its adhesion is delayed and its cause prolonged, then you should reduce the quantity of medicines, and if the medicines are wet in their substance and in their efficacy, they are dried as well as a defying poultice when there is excess addition of zegi.
And the most posterior one that is treated is to take a defying poultice and dissolve it in rose oil, and over it apply honey wine equal in its substance, and then comfort him with that and use it.
And already make a demonstration in that action when there is no humor, by taking a defying poultice and honey when it is cut into that it becomes thickened, and use it; or take myrrh and aloe and mix them together, and grind everything and pulverize it over the honey as it is over the fire, and then line it over the fabric and press that over the sinus; and line with the honey which you have cut into so that it becomes thickened, and pulverize it over the fabric and press that.
And sometimes they are administered with it a long aristology and roots of the heavenly lily (and that is the heavenly lily) and farina of err and centaurea, and use those simples or adjust them, grind them and sift them and pulverize them over the honey I have recommended; and use it.
And if the sinus is prolonged and not healed by this cure, then know that the corruption is in its preon, and already make inquiry into the bones or other hard members or into the ligaments; then you should cure it with a fistular cure as has been said above.
Of the cure of panaricus and nail abrasion and digit addition incision and section.
Panaricus is an apostema that occurs under the nail of the toe of the hand or foot, and seldom under the other toes, and as it is prolonged and its cure is less valued, it becomes apostematized from cauterization, or it becomes corrupted, and it exudes humor within that corrodes the roots of the nail, and it corrupts all of that, and its corruption very much pervades the bone within which has a fetid odor, and its extremity becomes lumpy, and its color becomes dusky.
And therefore when you have that from which we have spoken in the division and do not comfort your cure, then know that you must cut away with iron all of the excess that is rotted from the nail and then cauterize the wound accordingly, for the cautery is beneficial in this.
But if the bone is sound and the nail is healthy, and the additions of the nail are pushing inwards on the flesh between the parts of the nails, and it begins to sting and irritate that, then know that you should pause a fine needle beneath the angle of the nail which is pricking the flesh, and dislodge that upwards and insert that flesh with ease, and apply upon that which rises from the flesh medicaments that burn and corrode within so that everything is cleaned; and then cure it with ointments once it is healed.
But if the corruption is already within the bone, then know that you must cut out the bone and extract it, for it will not be healed as long as the rotten bone remains in it.
And if the corruption and rot extend into the finger, then you should insert it into one of the knuckles according to which is preselected by its memory, and then cure that once it is healed.
But if there is percussion or abrasion upon the nail and subsequently violent pain in that, then know that you must at the beginning bleed the patient, and then dry the nail with a pointed spatula with a transversal section above it, and beware that the section does not pervade into the flesh that is beneath the nail, for you will cause violent pain to the patient, and its cause will be the generation of excess flesh in the place; and then cure that place with what relieves the pain.
But a finger that is born in the hands of some men is very seldom all flesh, and rarely within it bones, or rarely within it nails.
And some of it are born from the root of the joint, or its generation is from some knuckles of the fingers. But that which is born in some knuckles of the finger does not become sick, and that which is born from the joints is very much sickened.
And of those which are born fleshy, its section is easier, and you should insert that behind its roots with a broad spatula.
But of that which is born from the root of the joint, its cure is difficult; and therefore beware of its incision.
But in that which is born in a finger from the knuckles, know that you must at the beginning insert the flesh of it with a round incision into the bone, and then cut with one of those convenient saws for that, and then cure it once it is healed.
But consolidation which occurs in the fingers between their motions many times or from generation of the person who has it, or from consolidation of plague, or from burn of fire, or from similar things, therefore know that you should dry that consolidation so that the fingers return to their natural form.
And then place between their bands of them soaks in rose oil so that they are not consolidated too easily, and separate those or place between them a thin sheet of lead within which is consolidated according to what it should be.
And similarly if consolidation occurs in some fingers with the palm, then you should dry that consolidation according to how it is prepared and convenient for the form of the member.
Of incision of veins, these are varicose.
Varicose are veins, and they are grossly rolled vessels full of melancholy humors which flow in the motions of the members of the body, and their greatest occurrence is in the legs, and mostly in the legs of travelers and laborers and carriers.
Therefore know that you should administer purgation of the body from black cholera several times with strong expulsion, and then bleed the patient from the basilic vein.
But their cure by iron is according to two methods: one is that it be cut and that the black blood be drawn out, and the other method is that the vein be raised up and all of it drawn out.
Its incision is according to this method: at the beginning moisten the leg with warm water so that the gross blood is dissolved which is feculent of the leg, and then press the leg from above on the part pus uppermost of the thigh into the part below the groin with a bandage, and then dry the vein in one place, or two, or three with broad incision, and then raise up the black blood with the sole of the hand from the part below the leg within upwards so that of the blood is expelled the quantity which you desire and which the strength of the patient will bear.
And then lead them away, and command that they abstain from foods engendering black bile.
And repeat the treatment by phlebotomy when the veins are full and this is noticed in the patient.
But the elevation of them is according to this manner: you raise the leg of the patient if in it there are veins, and then put him into a bath and rub his leg with warm water until it reddens and the veins are dilated; or he be exercised by vigorous exercise, if a bath is not available, so that the limb is heated.
And then cut the tendon in the direction of the vein either along its length or behind him below the pain, or at the very bottom of him near the ankle.
And then open the tendon with nails and gouge out the vein in every part where it appears to the sense, and one must observe the appearance of it that turns black at times.
And so when you have evacuated and from the tendon you see it white like a cord.
And then put that under the leg so that it is elevated and is supported by the tendon, and suspend it with a silk thread from an iron hook.
And then cut another section just above that section by three fingers, and gouge out the tendon from the part above the vein where it appears.
And then elevate that and insert it into the posterior section below the ankle, and then extract it from the second section above it, and then extract it from the section above it.
And do this until you extract it from the section that is most superior or highest of all the sections, so that all is evacuated; and then insert it.
And if he does not obey you and does not allow himself to be extracted and elevated, then insert a strong bent needle into him and ligature it, or put under him the edge of your hand and move your hand around to every part where there is an abundance. And beware that it is not incised; for if it is cut then it has become difficult for you to elevate the part and it has come upon the patient through that injury.
And when all of it has been evacuated out, then place on the site of the wound wool soaked in wine and rose oil, and cure it until it is healed.
And if the vein is contracted having tortuosity in which there is an envelope of its parts, and it is not according to rectitude as we have said, then you must split that at every part of its tortuosity and the sites of its envelope, and then suspend it with nails so that you elevate all of it.
And beware that you do not incision the vein and that you do not harm it, for it will be difficult for you to elevate it; and exercise your prudence in that.
Form of the incision with which the vein is dried:
It is not made of iron nor is it of acute extremity so that it does not harm the vein; and it has great flexibility of the thread, for if it were subtle it would cut the vein through its subtlety; there is in it superfluous thickness just as we have said.
Of extraction of the leg vein.
This vein is engendered in the legs in hot lands just like Al-Ateji in the land of the Arabs and in hot and arid lands of little tenderness, and in which there is no herb or grass.
And it is engendered strongly in other parts of the body besides the legs.
And its gestation is from putrefaction that comes beneath the tendon just as venomous snakes and worms and insects and worms engendered between the tendon and flesh.
And sign of the occurrence of its coming is that vein which inflames violently in the leg, and then the site becomes blistered; and then the vein begins to emerge from the site of that blister as if cut from a plant.
And then when you see the end of it coming out, you must wrap around it a piece of lead weighing two drachmas, and hang it suspended from the leg.
And as many times as you see it go forth for some cause to its parts, wrap that around it in lead and suspend it. And if the vein is prolonged, then you insert a part of it and wrap around the remainder; and do not incision that from cut so that it is drawn out, for if you incision it it is contracted and goes into the flesh and causes an abscess and swelling in the site and bad ulceration.
Because it must be drawn out slowly and extracted little by little so that it is evacuated from its end and does not draw back into the body for any cause.
And from this vein it emerges in some men who are in its length of five or ten palms, and I have seen one emerge twenty-palms.
And if it is incised at the hour of its treatment then insert your finger into the hole in him and bore it with a long hole through his body so that everything that is in the matter is evacuated, and administer putrefaction of the site for several days with medicines; and then cure that by the cure of abscesses.
And this vein sometimes has wounds, and especially when it appears at the junction of the leg or in the leg, and comes to him wounds of orifices, and is emerged from each orifice.
And so cure that as we have said in the division and with what is above it.
Of the section of worms generated under the skin, and it is called bovinine disease.
This disease is named in some land due to bovine disease because it sometimes attacks oxen and is a worm few of which is born between the tendon and flesh, and goes throughout all the body pushing and pulling and is revealed to the sense due to its movement from member to member so that it tears the tendon and goes out.
And its generation is by putrefaction of some humor just as occurs to worms and snakes and roundworms and tapeworms in the belly.
And it is dreaded for its malice, for when it goes through the body and is elevated to the head, then it strongly pierces him and goes inside and destroys the brain, and this while it moves many times.
And so when you want to cure it and extract it, then it is not done if there is no movement of him and appearance to the sense, and then you must tighten what is above it and what is below it with ligature and strong constriction, and then cut what is above it and extract that.
And if it is sunken in the flesh and not open then you must pause cautery with fire over the site where it remains, and the main cause that is dreaded is putrefaction of him by which he corrupts the site as we have said.
And if you see him pervening to the head near the brain then tighten around the forehead with a strong constriction and cut what is above it, and extract that; and let the patient use cleansing of his body with medicines evacuating putrid bad humors, and beware of foods engendering putrefaction.
Of the section for the disease of children.
This disease is named in our land nafir, and it is pain that comes in some members, and then is transferred from member to member.
And you know well and see that according as you relate. I was called to a sick woman in a village, and I discovered her arm and saw a small inflammation in the vein of the arm, and since it was broken for an hour, I saw that inflammation go like worms pushing towards this, but more lightly than being afraid, as if it were living silver when it flows from place to place.
And then he went into the pain of that place and pierced in the muscle, and there he stayed for an hour.
And then it ran through the rest of the body until it reached the other arm.
And I was astonished that it was winding through all her body, as I saw; and I was very amazed at its change and the speed from member to member. And I had seen this before in my own eyes, although I have seen pains which cause the pain to be transferred from limb to limb. But I did not see it with my own eyes as I did in the woman.
And I did not think that it was because the woman was old, from her being of two bodies and of exposed veins, and in this she appeared to me that windiness transferred.
And it is necessary that it does not appear according to this back-cure in those who are delicate and have moist bodies with hidden veins.
And when you want to cure it, and the patient feels that pain, then it is not up to you to appear in this way as we have said, then you press strongly on that and release it lightly and dry it over that area where that windiness constricted, and cauterize the location.
But if you do not see it with your own eyes, then you cure that with expulsion of the body and with that which expels windiness, and those carminatives with foul pills and serapium-like pills and similar.
Of extraction of arrows.
Arrows are diverse according to their species, and according to the parts of the body in which they are found, for their diversity is that some have great points, and small, and concave, and blunt, some are solid; and of them there are those that have three angles, and of those that have tongues, and of those that are stars.
And the signs of the soul are when an arrow pierces it, and breaks the bone, and is lodged in the cyphac which is above the brain, for then occurs violent soddening, and scotomia, and vertigo, and heat in the holes, and inflammation and heat of the tongue, and spasm and mixture of understanding, and vomiting of bile, and strong pain is abscinded, and the word is destroyed, and the voice broken, and moisture white like powder exits from that spot, and the eyes are like water.
And therefore if these signs appear to you, then refrain from curing and extracting the arrow if it is not outside.
But the signs of the arrow when it pierces the heart are that it is near the left nipple, and that its point is lodged in a hard cause, and it is not a hollow cause; and very quickly the movement of the arrow is like the movement of the pulse, and flows from the wound black blood, and causes chilling of the extremities, and sweating chill, and fainting; and therefore know that death descends with certainty.
And the signs when the arrow has wounded the lung are spuming of blood from the wound, and the vessels that are near the throat are swollen, and the color of the patient is changed, and he exhales great spirit, and demands drawing in of air quickly.
And if the arrow pierces the membrane which is in the feet, then the pain will be near the little ribs, and it is made great by violent pain and by sighing, and all the limbs of the muscles are not weakened.
And if the arrow pierces the stomach, then quickly you will see from the wound some undigested food.
And if the arrow pierces the belly and is lodged in it, then you will see some opening of the wound or the membrane or intestine which is broken, and there is no hope for curing it by extraction of the arrow.
And if the arrow pierces the bladder and exits urine outside, and processes from it some cause to the parts outside, and very quickly there is pain upon the patient, then know that it is mortal.
But the other limbs such as the face, the neck, and the throat, and the shoulders and the helper, and the spine of the back, and the breastbone, and the groin, and the hip, and their likes of the limbs, are saved according to the greatest dispositions when the arrow does not hit a vein or artery, and is not a poisonous arrow.
And I will recount this to you that I have seen of the nature of these arrows so that you may know about your own cure.
The reason for this is that in one man an arrow pierced the lacrimal of his eye in the root of his nose, and I extracted that from him to the other side, leaving the bones of his ear, and he was healed, and did not suffer harm in his eye.
And I extracted another arrow from a Judean who it pierced in his in the bones of his eye, leaving the eyelid underneath, and the arrow was already concealed and had not reached it except for a little end with which it adhered to its stalk, and it was a great arrow of the sharp arrows of the Turks, with lion iron in which there were no eyelids.
And the Judean was healed, and did not suffer harm in his eye badly.
And I extracted another arrow from a Christian who it pierced in the throat, and it was an Arabic arrow, and it was that to which there were eyelids; and therefore I entered into that between two guides, and it was already submerged in his throat, and I made it thin with that, and then extracted it, and the Christian was healed.
And I extracted another arrow from a man who it pierced in his belly, and I thought that he would die from it; and therefore, since xxx days had passed and there was not changed upon him any cause of his dispositions, I entered into the arrow and I felt around it, and it was healed, and did not suffer harm badly.
And I saw a man in whom an arrow pierced his back, and the wound was consolidated upon him, and since proper fire seven years, exited the arrow from the root of the groin.
And I saw a woman in whom an arrow pierced her belly, and the wound was consolidated within her, and was not changed in any of her natural dispositions, and the woman did not suffer harm in any of her parts.
And I saw another man in whom an arrow pierced his face and the wound was consolidated, and the arrow exited, not causing any pain here, and similar things to these.
And I extracted the arrow from the man's head of the king who was stuck in his nose and had already tilted towards the right a little, and all the arrow was hidden.
And I was called to cure him after the arrow was taken out within three days.
And then I discovered the wound of the arrow very tightly; and then I inquired that with a subtle probe, and did not feel anything; but he felt a prick under the right ear, and then I perceived that this prick was from the end of the arrow.
And I plastered the area with an ointment in which there is attractive and digestive virtue, believing from myself that the location is put for me the location of the arrow, for it dries over that.
And I did not see in the location an accident that the arrow had achieved that location; and I continued with the ointment over him for several days, and no accident happened; and the wound consolidated meanwhile, and he recovered from the extraction of him within a period of several days until one day he felt the arrow inside his nose and informed me about it.
And then I paused on the wound an acute corrosive medicine for several days until fire opened, and with a probe I probed that, and discovered the end of the arrow subtly, which was adhered to the wood.
And then I continued with the appearance of the wound by that acute medicine until the end of the arrow appeared to me visibly, and it took me time with it for a period of four months.
And then after the wound was enlarged, and it was possible for me to insert the tongs in him, and grab that without resistance, I did not cease to probe and work on that with methods of skill until one day about that with methods of skills taking it by forceps downward-facing as the form of those in the end of the chapter, and I extracted that; and then I restored that wound.
And some doctors judged that the cartilage of the nose was not restored, and I restored that and the wound is consolidated, and the patient healed with complete health, and he did not suffer in him on any cause.
And I recommend to you the quality of extraction of some arrows that you pause this rule and significance over what I have not said because the parts of this art and the definitions of that are not comprehended by narration nor understand those the book.
And the wise artisans compare a few about motion; and to that which is present about that which is absent, and discover new action and new instrument they depend on the descent of strange causes of the art when it happens.
And therefore I say that arrows are not cast out of the members in which they are stuck but according to two ways, either by attraction of the location in which they enter or by the contrary of the other part.
And that which is cast out from the location where it enters is an arrow proceeding in a fleshly location, and it is thrown out and cast out.
And if it does not obey the exit of the hour in which he catches, then you must leave it for some days until the meat that is around him swells and be separated the attraction from him and his exit.
And similarly if it is stuck in bones and does not obey you to exit, then leave that for some days and repeat that with attraction and motion on each day, and it will be cast out.
And if it does not obey you after some days, then you must perforate in the circuit of the arrow in that bone of every part with a subtle bore until the location is enlarged by the arrow and then extract that.
But if the arrow is already hidden in the location of the body and it is hidden from feeling, then you probe that with a probe, and if you feel that then you throw that with some tools which are convenient to the attraction of that.
And if you cannot over that by the constriction of the wound and by the length of the arrow, and here there is no bone nor nerve nor vein, then you work on the wound until it is enlarged and it is possible to extract the arrow.
And if it is held by the ears in which he is held, then you loosen the meat in which it is stuck from every part with all that you can do; and work on that if you cannot over the exit of the meat in the fracture of the ears and in twisting those until it obeys.
And when you administer the extraction of the arrow in whatever location it is, then you use with twisting your hand with forceps at all parts until he makes that obey; and probe with a subtle probe that the arrow is not broken and that it is difficult to make you attract and extract that.
And if you cannot over that from your hour, then leave that for some days until the parts which are around him swell and then repeat that because by the hour it is separated. But if you have contrary flow of blood then you administer that which we said about cure in his chapter.
And guard your virtue of incision of vein or nerve, or of string, and work skill in every way to you possible for the exit of the arrow; and do that with facility and tranquility and slowness and firmness as I and to you recommended.
And therefore that you contract the arrow so that the patient is according to the form according to which there must be the setting of the arrow in him because it is more useful. But if that is not possible for you, then you minister that which is possible for you by the figures.
But the arrows which are cast out by the contrary of the other part or that he has already proceeded from some part to the parts outside or makes gileziness the extremity of the arrow by feeling of the part above the tendon membrane and touches that eminently then you touch that, and let the section be according to the quantity in which they take the forceps and then pull that because it is easier to exit.
But if it is retained in the bone then you twist the saw according to contrary way until the arrow presses into the bone and widens itself and then extract that.
And if not leave that for some days and then repeat that until it is soaked in the vinegar.
And if the shaft of the arrow is in that then you push that against him.
But if the shaft is broken and you want to administer impulse then you enter that and that in such a way that between the concavity of it in the hole of the arrow and then push that against him.
But if the arrow is hollow, then you should push it in with a strong instrument, because the arrow is eased by that.
And if the arrow is poisoned, then you should draw out all the flesh in which the poison is, if it is possible for you to do so, and then heal that part with whatever is appropriate.
And if the arrow pierces the foot, or the belly, or the bladder, or the side, and is close enough for you to touch it with your finger, and it is possible for you to incise over that part, then cut over it and be careful not to cut into a vein or nerve, and take out the arrow, and if necessary stitch up the wound so that it may heal.
Form of forceps with which arrows are pulled out:
Its ends are like the beak of an osprey, serrated when they grip the arrow so it does not slip away.
And from these are made various kinds of forceps: large and small, few or many, according to the size of the arrow and its depth, and the width of the wound and the tightness of it.
like a reed, in order that the instrument may be eased out of it and pushed in by that.
Of phlebotomy of veins:
The veins from which phlebotomy is usually performed are .xxx., of which there are in the head .xvi., there are two pulsating veins which appear close to the ears, some call them alhasisain; two veins that appear on both temples; and two veins that are in the two tear ducts of the eyes that are called aspicientz; and a vein in the middle of the forehead; and a vein in the tip of the nose; and two guidegi that are on the neck; and two veins that are in the upper lip; and two veins that are in the lower lip; and — these are the veins that are called algelic —; and there are two veins below the tongue. But the veins which are phlebotomized in the arms are 5; because one of those is a cephalica vein, and it comes from the wild side, and the people call it “the vein of the head”; and it is hollow; and it is a small vein, and it consists of one branch of the basilica, and another of the cephalic; and they call that the people “vein of the whole body”, and the basilica is the vein which is found on the domestic side, and is called “citillar”, and the commoners call it “the vein of the belly”; and it is the funis of the arm, and is found above the elbow, and it is the one that appears prominently; and salvatella, and it is the vein between the small ear and the little finger, and in it are two branches.
And in the foot and leg there are three veins: one of these is below the curve of the jaw on the wild side; and the second is sophena, and its location is below the ankle of the domestic side; and sciatic vein, and its location is below the ankle of the wild side; and in the leg are other veins similar to those.
The phlebotomy of the veins which are close to the ears is for ancient cataracts and for old-age migraines and for bad ulcers of the head.
And the quality of bleeding them is according to how you see: it is that blood should be drawn from the head of the patient, and his head should be rubbed on the occiput in the places of both veins with a broad cloth with good friction; then tighten the neck of the patient with a bandage so that they appear the two and their locations are close to the ears at two depressed spots on the head; and feel those with your finger, and if you feel the pulses of them with your finger, here is the sign with the tent.
Then you take the lance cutlass, and it is that which is inserted; then you immerse it below the vein in the codina so that the phlebotomy comes to the bone. And then lift your hand with the vein and the codina up to the parts above, and insert the vein with an incision that is inserted. And the length of the incision should be the amount of two finger joints or around that; and let blood out as much as you want.
Then tighten it with a ligature and let that heal.
And so I have preceded in the beginning of the book, the incision of those and their cauterization.
But the phlebotomy of the two arterial veins which are in the temples is for old-age migraines and bad blood, and for eye pain that is always present, and sharp pains in the eyes.
And the quality of bleeding them is according to how you see: tighten the neck of the patient so that they appear the two veins at the feeling by appearance, and let the pulses of them be felt below your finger; then you sign with a tent.
Then you raise the codina above the vein to the parts above with your finger, and insert the phlebotomy below it, and raise the vein above it; and insert that as you have done in the other two veins; and let blood out according to the amount of your need.
Then loosen the constriction of the patient, and place your finger on the vein for an hour; then place cotton and ligature over it, and tighten that above with strong constriction, and let that heal.
And so I have preceded the remembrance of them, and their incision and attraction in the beginning of the book.
And so the phlebotomy of the vein in the forehead is for old-age pain in the face, and for migraines and heat and bad ulcers.
And the quality of bleeding it is according to how you see: it is that the patient tightens his neck with a bandage so that the vein appears, and then take the instrument which is named fossor, and this is its form:
Place the prominent point which is at the end of the fossor over the vein, and pierce it with a needle or with another instrument in the manner of it, and let blood out according to the amount you want; then loosen the perforation of the patient and tighten that so that it may heal.
And sometimes it is opened by phlebotomy at the side; but do not let the phlebotomy be of acute end as well as the other phlebotomies, before it is of the lateral end, and phlebotomize that according to the transverse, because the bone is close and would break it in it if it were subtle.
But the phlebotomy of the two veins that are in the tear ducts for pain in the eye, and heat and weeping in the eyes, and for the ailments of the face.
And the quality of bleeding them is that the patient tightens his neck with a bandage, and then phlebotomize those; and you should stand over him while doing it.
And the phlebotomy should be done according to the transverse at length a little with few phlebotomies, because there is no flesh in the place; and if the phlebotomy is subtle, then its end will be broken.
And then let the blood flow as much as is necessary, and tie those [veins] and tighten them for one night, and then untie them.
But the bloodletting of the vein in the nose is applicable to acute fever and violent headache, and facial disorders and migration of the eyes and redness that occur in the face, especially when it is chronic.
And the nature of this bloodletting is that the patient should tighten his neck and then hold his nose with your left hand, and take the bloodletting instrument and insert it in the appropriate place on the head of the nose according to its exact location, because the vein does not appear sensitive here, and because the blood will begin flowing immediately.
Then you finish by using the bloodletting instrument little by little and make the blood flow according to your need; then tie that [vein] for one night, because it is restored quickly.
But the bloodletting of the veins in the ears leads to constriction of the throat and the beginning of leprosy, and many disorders, impetigo, and malignant corrosive ulcers like herpes.
And the nature of this bloodletting is that the patient should tighten each one in his neck with a ligature; and the operator stands above the head of the patient, who sits on a stool.
Then bloodlet the vein along its length with a small, broad bloodletting instrument little by little; and extract blood according to a moderate quantity or according to what you see is needed, doing the same for the other vein.
Then untie the ligature and tighten both veins with a moderate ligature so that the patient is not suffocated, and lay him on his back when the plague has been healed.
And the bloodletting of the veins in the ears, like those of the tongue, brings about small blisters and pustules in the mouth, corruption of the gums, and bad ulcers and fissures, and bad ulcers that are around the nose and the whole face.
And the nature of this bloodletting is that you make the patient bend his head towards you, and tighten his neck with a bandage, then open his lips and look at two veins, one on each side: their demonstration is by the darkness of both of them, and more so because in the circuit of these there are small black veins; therefore cut into each of them.
But if there is doubt in you and you do not know which one it is, then proceed with the incision of the largest of them, and of the most obvious pus.
And do the same for the two veins that are in the upper lip.
But the bloodletting of the two veins that are below the tongue is applicable to diseases of the head that are in the throat, to disorders of the uvula, and to disorders of the mouth.
And the nature of bloodletting them is that you follow the patient's nose with your eyes in front of the sun, and lift up his tongue, and look beneath the tongue, from one side to the other: the color of both of them is declining towards blackness.
Then bloodlet each one: and be careful that you do not cut into your hand in bloodletting them, because beneath these are arteries.
And the veins that are bled in the back are those in which blood usually flows in all men, and the bloodletting of them is done according to two methods: either with the mirtilat or olive-wood at a declining subtlety; or they are cut with a scalpel, and it is called if anessil, and this is its form:
Be it the side of him as with what happens, and it leads to opening concave veins that are full and appear thick, and to those that contain gross, tortured blood.
And this bloodletting is of lesser width and more subtle extremity, and it leads to bloodletting of subtle veins that contain subtle, citric blood.
But the bloodletting of the basilic vein, which is one of three veins: because by extracting blood from disorders that are below the head and neck, and that affect the feet and belly.
And it leads the bloodletting operator to guard well against this, and to be very careful in this, because beneath is an artery; and if he err and adjust in the puncturing of the bloodletting, he will cut that artery and cause flows of blood, therefore let him not bloodlet that with a sharp bloodletting instrument, but rather cut it with anessil.
And if the basilic does not appear by manifest appearance, then let him leave it and move to the other, or seek some branch of it; or bloodlet in the end of the arm, because that is manifest; and cut it with anessil as we have said.
But if you want the bloodletting of the arm, then let him strike in front of the tightness of the arm that he touches the place between which he knows the location of the pulse, and let him press upon it with a bandage; and let him tie the arm and cut the vein with a concave incision with anessil as we have said, and be careful that the percussion does not hit any space in the location of the artery.
And when you see, as you tighten the ligature, swelling in the place that you have pressed with a bandage, then that swelling is of the artery, and therefore untie it.
And if you see the blood flow in the bloodletting as with a flow of child's milk, and the blood is subtle red, then know that it is of arterial blood; therefore you press and place your finger over it for a long space, and then let him cut off his hand, and if the blood is stopped, because many branches are stopped, then you tighten the arm and leave him.
And watch over the patient of the sick for several days until he is healed.
But if the blood is not stopped and you see that there is no medicine present to it, then let him cut the artery, if it appears to you; because its extremity is contracted and the blood is stopped: or take a sharp blade, and open it, and take the one hand and tighten it over the location of the vein with a descent pressure using a bandage and powder between the other day.
Then if the blood is stopped, well and good; but if not, then heal him with that of which he has preceded in the remembering of the location of the powders: flow of blood.
And the stopping of the blood from him is difficult in many dispositions because of the small location of the plague and the possibility of the arm's ligature.
But of the dark vein is bloodletting that extracts blood from the superior part of the head and from the inferior part of the body: because it is composed of a branch of the basilic and of the cephalic as we have said.
And let him be wary in bloodletting it because beneath it is a nerve; and then if he adjusts in the puncturing of the bloodletting and hurts the nerve, stupor will come to him, and it is difficult for him to be healed at all: and this nerve many times appears in sensation; and if it is hidden in some men and is subtle and not shown, then let him pause the bloodletting with the one by which he bloodlets with a concave incision, and avoid the nerve with his strength.
And if the vein is between two nerves, then you cut the vein in length.
The benefit of phlebotomy on the cephalic vein is that it draws out the blood from the head and alleviates maladies of the brain.
And in this regard, if you want to phlebotomize with olive or myrtle, for it is the safest of all veins because there are neither arteries nor nerves underneath it.
However, very rarely does this happen in some people when it is not phlebotomized on the first tap, but do not worry about that aposteme.
The first of these is that you know phlebotomy is not administered only in the preservation of health and for hope, and precaution against the advent of maladies; and that phlebotomy be done at the beginning of spring, after breakfast in spring and autumn, and in winter after dinner when there are signs of fullness.
And phlebotomy be done on the third day or the first that three hours have passed since dawn.
However, phlebotomy that is administered, if it provokes convenience and necessity at that time, or night or day, at any hour and at all times.
And children should not be phlebotomized until they are 12 years old; and pregnant women should not be phlebotomized except from the fourth month to the seventh; and the elderly who have passed 60 years should not be phlebotomized.
And when someone wants to be phlebotomized for any reason, it is necessary that they cleanse their bowels before phlebotomy with a lion's enema, so that if there is any retained split in them, the veins do not push out the superfluities into the phlebotomy of the bowels, which are purified and do not harm the main members.
And those who are nauseous and sick from drunkenness or sickness that has just passed, or from the heat of illness or from excessive vomiting, or a body that is weak or animalish; and phlebotomy be avoided when colic pain or vomiting occurs, or a belly ache or multiplication of cough or fever, and any cause that dissolves strength.
And consider subtle exudation of humors before it if the blood is thick, with foods and drinks and medicines if that is possible for it.
And enter into a bath if there are no causes to prohibit it, or it is exercised by some exercise so that the blood is subtleized.
And pause phlebotomy on him during the third hour of the day, for as we have said before.
And be sure that the feet of him are guarded during that day from all evil accidents in animals, for as there is distress, anger, fear, and all bodily accidents, for as there is cough and excessive pain and like accidents to them.
And in its own way, make the causes in the use of which they usually use aromaticity and odor and balms and like to them according to the amount of possibility.
And follow the phlebotomist on a cushion that is higher than the cushion of him who must be phlebotomized.
And then pull out his arms, and the phlebotomist rubs him with his hand two or three times; and then tighten the bandage around it two times.
And the compression be moderate, for when the compression is not equal, or the compression is on superfluity, then phlebotomy of blood is prohibited; or it is on softening, and then phlebotomy of the body is prohibited.
And then compression, so that him who must be phlebotomized rubs his hands in between them while the veins are swollen and declared to feeling.
And then the phlebotomist smears the phlebotomy with a little old olive oil properly; and then pauses his right hand's finger on that vein from which he wants the phlebotomy, so that the vein escapes a little, and the compression is relaxed because from those veins from which you press as with a string, phlebotomy should be done, and from those that are full of windiness when you pause the phlebotomy over it, and it is pressed down by the phlebotomist; and if the phlebotomy opens the vein, then that vein is squeezed.
And so, for this reason, it is necessary that the phlebotomist be firm and be solicitous in all of these causes.
And then pause the phlebotomy, but if the vein is open in one go, it is well; and if not, you iterate that again another go over that spot a little, or over it with compression, if the spot is sensitive.
And if the spot is sensitive or the patient feels discomfort, then you leave it for a day or two, and do not tighten the bandage, for fear that it will certainly attract an aposteme cauter, nor enter into a bath.
And then iterate the phlebotomy if she has no love.
And if the impression is small and the blood flows subtly, and you fear that it will not draw the amount of blood you want, then you iterate the phlebotomy in that vein according to rectitude and adjust a little in the impression, for fear that the spot be sensitive in many people there should be a small impression.
But if he is sensitive, then do not iterate over him, for there is no cause to you; and pause over him any part of the split of oil, for it soothes the body of blood. And this is better in that spot than other oils.
And similarly administer split of oil in all phlebotomy by which phlebotomizes the veins must be the prohibition of body of blood, and do it tyriaca alfadoc and sagzenea when it is paused over the spot, for the blood is subtle and is agitated when it is thick.
And if in the spot of phlebotomy a great aposteme is engendered when many goings occur, and especially to him who has not been bled except that go, or in the impression of the vein little, and then you cut, and pause over the spot sponge infused with water and salt, a little scorched, for it is dissolved.
And so that he does that then phlebotomize the blood of that vein with compliment to him or another vein.
And if it turns black or green in the spot for several days, do not worry about that; and if you want, pause over that any cause of aloes and dissolved myrrh, or any cause of juice of mallows or of powder or like to it.
And many times so apostemes and eminences must be phlebotomized on the basilic vein.
And then pause your hand over it, and if you press suavity then over it, then that eminence is ill and bad; and therefore be sure to pause over it any cause of what we have said, for fear that the blood of the artery flows out strongly.
And make an ointment with which it is stiffened, so that the place is hardened, and then cure it with another cure until it is healed.
And you should draw out blood from everyone according to the quantity of its virtue and according to the color prevailing over the blood, according to what appears.
For if the blood is black, then you must let it out until it becomes red; and similarly, if you see that it is thick, then you must let it out until it becomes thinner; and similarly, if it is sharp, then you should stop the acuteness of it.
And for those who are full and strong and need bloodletting in one session, the phlebotomy of the vein should be enlarged and the phlebotomies should be wide.
And for those who are weak, it should be done in the contrary way; and if blood is to be extracted from them in many sessions, then the incision should be narrow.
And the best method for phlebotomy of a vein is that the section be transverse and not a puncture.
And this method of phlebotomy is safe from blood flow and from cutting of nerves, and it is more praiseworthy and safer than phlebotomy according to width and length.
And to those who are accustomed to having syncopes due to phlebotomy, you should cure it before the phlebotomy with a piece of bread soaked in wine of pomegranates or of simple oxymel warmed up; and extract from them blood in three or four sessions.
And if it is a fainting of the complexion, then before the phlebotomy take bread soaked in myrrh syrup or in scented honey syrup with spices like pepper, cinnamon, ginger and the like, or in scented syrup and very odorous.
And if syncopes occur due to phlebotomy and the cause of it is loss of a lot of blood, then one should take a drink of wine and scented syrup very subtly; and use aromatics like aloe, and tie around their feet with that.
And use the other causes which we have spoken of in the division in the chapter on syncopes due to evacuation.
And he who wants to open his veins and dissolve his blood in the second vein, from which phlebotomy is due to great evacuation, and whose nature is cold, should evacuate blood little by little according to the quantity of its virtue on consecutive days.
But he who wants to open his veins and extract blood for the second time, and whose body is strong, should do so at seven or nine hours after the first phlebotomy.
But he who wants to draw blood from his body in the contrary direction of that to which it inclines, should be phlebotomized on the second or third day.
But a body in which blood has been extracted and which is acrid and causes fever, should have blood taken from it in one session and have a large quantity extracted and the opening should be enlarged so that syncopes occur, because you will have kept all the conditions of phlebotomy; and hold your hand over the pulse of him because of the flow of blood, lest he die due to syncopes when the phlebotomist is ignorant and negligent.
And when you want to open the veins and extract blood in the second session, if the orifice of the vein is already closed and it is difficult for the blood to flow, do not press on it with vehemence and have the extended arm slightly bent, for that is very bad.
And you should not let it be phlebotomized a second time unless the orifice of the vein is open; or else if the blood coagulates in the incision of the vein, pause over that with alfarach terychium, or with sagzenea, and compress it lightly until the blood flows out.
And if the vein is inflamed, then do not touch it until the inflammation has subsided.
And if you are compelled to evacuate blood a second time and there is no excuse, then phlebotomize it over that spot or on the other arm in another vein.
And the vein called "the strings of the arm" is phlebotomized in place of the cubital or basilic vein when they are not found or hidden, for that is composed of them.
And the quality of its phlebotomy is that the patient immerses his hand in warm water so that the vein swells and appears clearly.
And then it is tightened over that with a ligature with a small string; and phlebotomize according to the small transverse, not longitudinally or according to length.
And let the incision be wide and phlebotomize that over the joint of the hand a little.
And if the flow of blood is prohibited, then you should immerse the hand in warm water and let the blood flow in the water until you know your need.
But if you are in the summer days, then you will be excused from immersing your hand in water, and it is sufficient to have the body of blood immersed in warm water during winter time.
And phlebotomy of this vein is safer than of all other veins, because there is no pulsating vein or nerve beneath it.
And phlebotomy of the crook of the right hand corresponds to diseases of the liver.
And the quality of its phlebotomy is that you tighten the hand with a string or with your hand, because you have placed it in warm water, so that the vein is inflamed and it is evident with movement; and phlebotomize it transversely; and if you insert it from all sides, then it will harm it.
And take care not to finish the phlebotomy with the incision, for beneath there are nerves of the teeth, stripped of flesh.
And then immerse the hand in warm water and let blood flow out of that, for if you do not immerse that in warm water, blood will coagulate in the incision of the vein and flow is prohibited.
And when blood has been extracted according to the quantity of need, then you should anoint the vein with olive oil and salt so that it is not congealed firmly; and similarly, if you make an incision in any limb.
But the youth of phlebotomy of that of the left hand corresponds to diseases of the brain.
And do similarly in phlebotomy as you have done in the other.
And the youth of the vein septum of phlebotomy corresponds to diseases which are below in the body, like diseases of the mother, and to retention of menstruation, and to diseases of the knees and ulcers of thighs and arms, and to their likes.
And the quality of its phlebotomy is that the patient immerses his foot in warm water and makes friction over it so that veins appear clearly; and he ties a band around the ankle; and the location of the vein appears below the toe, and from there it branches into the fascia of the foot.
And then phlebotomize the wider branch or below the leg from where the ankle is, for it is better and safer.
And if you phlebotomize it in the fascia of the foot, then be careful of nerves which are below that on the fascia of the foot, and make your incision according to how you want to make it.
Let there be a phlebotomy.
But if blood-letting is prohibited, then you should repeat the foot bath and let the blood run into that area which has been evacuated.
And if the phlebotomist makes a mistake in the first attempt, then repeat the phlebotomy in another vein, for the site is salty; and do not worry about maliciousness in him, but rather be careful of nerves as we have said.
And similarly do with the other foot, identically.
And of the sciatic vein, the site as we have said is due below the ankle of the wild party.
And the youth of phlebotomy to him is to pain in the hip when it is from blood cauterization.
And the quality of phlebotomy to him is that the patient enters a bath, and hastens and stretches his neck from the side of the broad space above the ankle above four fingers in one long slender bandage, for it does not appear except through it.
And therefore when it appears, then you phlebotomize that according to each device that is possible to you and according to the cross, and it is better; or insert that through incision or cut that through section, for the site of him is salty.
And it is in most men very hidden; and if you find that, and it does not appear to the sense of touch at all, then phlebotomize some ram of him, and it is he who appears on the back of the foot opposite the little finger and the ring finger.
And beware of nerves, and let run of blood the quantity that you wish.
Then loosen the tightness and place a bandage over the site of phlebotomy tightly and strengthen the site, for quickly it is healed.
Of wind-making and of the qualities of use of those.
Vents are of horns, or of ram, or of skin.
And wind-making is done according to two methods: one of them is with scarification and extraction of blood, and the other is wind-making without scarification.
And this wind-making which is without scarification is according to two methods, for it is with fire or without fire.
And the vents which are administered with scarification and extraction of blood are xii sites of the body, of which one in which vents are paused is alnocrati, and it is the hinder part of the head; and the middle location of him from two parts of the neck together; and vents of the chin below the mandible further down from the mouth; and vents of two spatulas; and vents of alo-hoster, and it is upon the end of the breastbone; and vents of two little holes, and they are of two arms; and vents of two ankles; and vents of two buttocks.
And wind-making does not extract blood except from the small veins scattered in the flesh, and for that it does not have the virtue through them as cauterization through phlebotomy; nor believe that wind-making be done with fire or without fire upon any sickness made by repletion within which the whole body is evacuated.
But if necessity prompts to wind-making for sickness or for continued, administer that in every hour at the beginning of the month and in its end, and in the middle location of it and in whatever time it is.
And therefore when you see any cause of those, and particularly if it is in the third or middle of the month, then command wind-making be done after that two or three hours have passed of the day.
And youth of wind-making at the nape is that when it confers weight in the head and to that which is bent down into the eyes; but beware that that be proper evacuation of the whole body.
And this wind-making is at the site of phlebotomy at the head.
And it is not lawful to use that which is of sharp complexation, or in whom there is catarrh, for it gives to him great harm.
And for that do not use that by the elderly, and in the heads of which there are cool sicknesses.
But to him upon whom that is continually done there is made oblivion; and for that do not command the wind-maker that he pause his hand a little with the ventouse at the parts below, fearing the generation of oblivion.
But wind-making of alkehel is at the site of phlebotomy of the vein fusca and of the basilica: and for that it confers asthma, and to the constriction of ale and to the splitting of ale-making instrument, and to coughing, and to repletion.
But beware that the ventouse of alkehel be wrapped a little, for if it is paused below it breeds weakness in the body and in the stomach.
And wind-making of alhagdahan confers accidental pains in the head and to ophthalmia, and hemorrhoidal bleeding, and prepuce, and to pains in the roots of the teeth; and it is at the site of phlebotomy of the basilica.
But command the wind-maker that he not press his hand with scarification so that it does not insert the artery and ignite blood flow.
And wind-making below the chin confers halitosis in the mouth, and corruption of the gums, and similarly to them of the sicknesses that are in the mouth, and they stand in the site of phlebotomy of aliheric which is in the two lips.
But wind-making that is done upon the two spatulas confers caps, which is made by repletion of heat.
And wind-making of the two parts within the little holes of the fingers confers youth of phlebotomy of three veins, namely of the basilica, fusca and cephalica, for it draws blood from all those veins more slender than are in the flesh, and those veins more slender from the other veins more gross within which comes attraction to the three veins.
And command the wind-maker that he does not overdo in scarification, for the site is stripped of flesh, and below it are nerves and arteries.
And it is a wind-making with which is wound around the hip and confers to hemorrhoids of the anus and to ulcers further below.
But command the wind-maker that it be a large wind-making, and that it is of ram, for the site indigests of strong section; and strongly he has had wound wind-makings slender and let him be scarified by scarification.
But wind-makings of the thighs are made smaller by diminished manifestation, for they draw blood from all the body, and confer to ancient pains in the hips and in the uterus, and in the bladder; and they provoke menstruation, and confer to bothors and ademils; and they stand at the site of phlebotomy of two sophenas, and armpits, and of two ankles.
Nevertheless, they weaken the whole body and cause fainting in many men.
And from the armpits to the groin is near to the groin to the armpits on both sides.
And the quality of the position of the wounds is that you stop the wound at the beginning bleeding and sucking by a tempered suction, and do not prolong the position of the wounds, but rather pause them lightly, and let those remain tightly, and let the humors come to the place by accident equally. And do not cease to iterate this and continue until you see the place already reddened and inflated, and that the blood appears.
And then you scrape and iterate the suction little by little, and then consider in the disposition of the body.
Because that man who is of tender flesh of few parts, beware that you scrape him once and not more, so that the place is not ulcers.
And command the wound-maker to enlarge the incision and take a little, and temper the suction with ease.
And if in the blood there is thickness, then beware that you scrape twice, because in the first incision the way of subtlety to the blood and its moisture is opened. But in the second one, to the examination acquired from the extraction of the thick blood.
And if the blood is very foul, then let the third incision be done so that the dregs are achieved.
And finally, when we want to extract the blood little by little or a little, it is enough for us with one incision.
And if we want to extract a lot of blood, we scarify with a shallow incision; and if we know that the blood is thick, then beware that we scarify with a deep incision.
And the term of scarification in which is the depth of the vein just so much.
And if the one of whom the vein is thick, tough, dark and its parts are tight, let the places of the wounds be anointed gently, widely, liberally; if it is in the summer season, like so with oil of aloe or violet oil, or almond oil, or camphor oil; and if it is in the winter season, then oil of nard, or lily oil, or camomile oil, or blood, and to those similar.
And if the superfluity is thick, rough, then let the oil be of myrrh, or oil of balsam, or oil of aloe, or oil of anise, and to their similar.
But if the wound-maker is of ample parts of tender flesh, then beware that there be no oil, and beware that to them the places of wounds of their woundings are washed with water or with warm water of salt, or with water of camphor, or with water of aloes, or with similar.
And that one of whom the blood is of great humidity, wash his wounds with sharp wine, or with water of myrtle and sumach, and similar to those.
And of that one of whom the superfluities are thick, wash his wounds with old wine, or with water of sage, which is marjoram, or of fennel, or of camomile, and similar to those.
And beware that the wound is guarded against bathing; have beware that it be administered close to bathing for one hour or for two, and beware that he sleeps close to the wound.
What is necessary in order to be bled after being bled before bleeding?
Beware that you consider at the beginning: if the wound-maker or one who is to be bled is choleric and his blood hot and inflammation, then beware that he take causes of frigidity, thus with milky acetic milk thistles, and endivia in sharp wine and leeks, and sesamum, and juice, and similar.
And let him eat foods thus with pulses, and meats of birds served, and seasoned foods with acids, and to them similar.
And of that one of whom the complexion is rough, let him take in drinking essarabon of mallow, or essarabon of sesame seeds, and sumach, and very odorous wine between Viel and Noel; and that he be commanded to use little in drinking and eating, and let his foods be pulses and cabbage, and pigeons, and small birds and colombat.
And beware that in the day of bleeding and phlebotomy his drink is greater than his food.
And beware that he be given in drinking at certain hours to some men theriaca alpharac, or medicines of musk, so it is muscade, or alcelita before bleeding or phlebotomy or afterwards, so that the principal members are comforted and that the blood is subtilized; and let no one take those scalds.
But the wounds that are after scarification let them be wounds that are paused on the liver, and on the navel and the podagra, and on the umbilical area, and on the areas of the joints, and the pixida of the broad one, because these members do not suffer scarification on themselves.
And it is not desired by those but attraction of blood of member, thus with pause wound on the breast in flux of blood from the nose; and use that to dissolve thick roughness of member, thus with pause over belly and navel; for that rarifies the member and scrapes it and eases the pain as it resolves the thickness.
And then it is paused over the eyelids when they happen in their opening or poultice, because by force of attraction strong their eye is opened and eradicates the poultice from its place.
And similarly it does when it is paused over the liver and navel if there is need of wound in those inclosed.
And these wounds are administered seen with suction just so; and some wounds are administered with fire.
And some wounds are administered full of tepid water in the illnesses of the navel.
And this is why the wound is filled and pus great, so it is water tail alone or water in which herbs are boiled to that which is convenient.
Form of wound administered with fire: let the aperture of two fingers, according to that which we have formed; and the quantity of the cup be the measure of a palm; and be in its breadth, in the place that it is in the circuit, the measure of him, the burn be small according to the quantity that enters into him an awl.
Let it be made of oil of rose or citron, of thick margins, lion, galls and thorns so that it does not lead the member let its position over him.
And be at the middle of him a crossbar of oils or of iron, on which is paused candle with fire.
And this wound be great major of that which we have recommended; and the small less of that according to the illnesses and the condition of him who uses it.
And the wounds of children and exhausted others be different from the wounds of youths and great bodied ones.
And the quality of pausing that wound with fire over the member is that it extends the arm with fire of wood decently before a little candle of wax, and pause that over the middle of the crossbar in the middle place of the wound, so that the fire be kindled around the bottom of the member so that the body of him not be burnt.
And then be paused over the member of him, and the finger be over that trauc which we have said, between that when we hold the wounds and do not touch the finger and that the vapor rises over that trauc, then the wound melts so fast dissolved.
And then light the candle according to its nature, and repeat that if you need to.
However, in cupping therapy which is administered for the illness of pleurisy, with water, there is no cross vein or wound, and it is not administered unless it is filled with water, and it is placed on the affected part only.
And this is the shape of it: And this cupping vessel, the larger it is, the better, so that it can receive a large quantity of water.
Chapter .xcvii.
Leeching is not administered on small parts of the body unless it is possible to place cupping vessels there due to their size, as well as on the tongue, gums, and similar areas; or on bare flesh, such as the fingers, nose, and similar areas.
And you shall use those leeches that are found in clean water ponds.
And they shall be left in the water for one day and night, until they become hungry, and nothing else shall happen to them in that time; and the body shall be evacuated at the beginning through phlebotomy and cupping; and then the affected parts of the patient shall be rubbed until they turn red; and then they shall be placed on him.
And when they are filled, and it is done.
And if it is possible to suction the affected area with cupping vessels, it is better to do so afterwards in order to draw out the humor.
And if not, then wash the affected area with pleasant wine and then with warm water; and it shall be rubbed and squeezed.
And if the flow of blood is prolonged due to the action of the leeches, and it sweats, then you shall dip a cloth in warm water and place it over the affected area so that the sweating is absorbed.
And if the blood is profuse, then you shall sprinkle powdered vitriol, or gallnuts and similar astringent substances over the affected area so that the bleeding stops; or place cooked broad beans over the wound and leave them there until the beans adhere to the wound, thus stopping the bleeding.
And indeed, if it is necessary to repeat the use of leeches, when possible change them.
And if the leeches are prohibited from being suspended, then rub the affected area with fresh blood or insert a needle into the affected areas so that it draws out blood; and then they shall be placed over those areas, for when they feel some blood they will immediately adhere.
And when you want them to fall off, sprinkle a little powdered aloe, or salt, or ashes over them, and they will soon do so.
Thus begins the third part: on restoration. This chapter is many times necessary in the art of medicine; and it is about the restoration of fractures and accidental dislocations of bones.
Oh son, you will understand that this chapter is mocked by foolish doctors and the vulgar, and those who have not read the works of the Ancients nor understood a letter from them.
And for this reason, the manner of science in our land is hidden; and I have not been obliged to do so at any time up until now; and I have not used what I learned, but rather through long study of the works of the Ancients and understanding their wisdom, from which I extracted their knowledge.
And indeed, I have added to it through experimentation and study throughout my life.
And I have already described in this chapter everything that my knowledge and experience have taught me, and I have shortened it for you as much as possible so that it does not tire you out; and I have simplified it at the end of its explanation; and shown it at the end of its demonstration; and formed many forms of instruments which are administered in it, as has been done through the addition of explanations, just as I did in two previous chapters.
First chapter.
Summary and collections from the existence of fractures of bones, from which their premise is necessary, before we begin to address the healing of broken and diverse members. And therefore, we shall begin this chapter with summaries of speech; and the chapters at the understanding of which in the beginning are perhaps the artisans, and they stand on the truth of those who speak them; so may you and those who understand or learn this noble art from you.
And therefore I say that when there is a fracture or dislocation or twist or hernia, then you shall first apply phlebotomy or poultice to it, or any other treatment if no counterindication exists, as well as in debility of strength, or if it happens to an infant, or elderly person, or during hot weather or excessive rubbing.
And indeed, let them eat a meal of fresh herbs and poultry and crab, and avoid fatty meats and anything that fills the veins with blood, so as to guard against the occurrence of pus in the affected member; and if you do not fear effusion of matter into the member.
And then return the patient to their usual diet.
And indeed, when the broken bone begins to be restored, then let the patient eat nourishing foods that are light and easy to digest, such as meals made from wheat cooked with water, rice, and peas, and fish, and fresh meat, and gross foods, and anything similar which is easy to digest; and with this diet, the healing of fractures occurs more easily and gently.
And indeed, you shall know that broken bones when they are in elderly or weakened men, it is not possible for them to be continued and consolidated according to their nature due to the drying of their members.
But indeed nature adjusts and connects the broken bone of any part, similar to glue which adheres and binds together, until it comes to an end in strength and firmness, just as fire does at the beginning, so that no counterindication exists for it from its works.
And for this reason, it is necessary to restrict the patient's diet, and let them eat foods which are heavy and viscous and fatty, just as we have said.
And indeed you shall know that the species of fractures are diverse according to the variety of members, for a fracture of the bone of the leg is different from a fracture of the bone of the head; and a fracture of the bone of the foot is different from a fracture of the bone of the toe; and likewise all other members are diverse among themselves.
And indeed I have remembered all species of fractures, explained in their own distinct chapters from others.
Many varieties of fractures within themselves. And the species of fractures of bones are diverse in their joints; for an arched fracture is different from one which occurs in the stars; and some times there are fractures according to the length of the bone: and indeed they are fractures of the satagium and astragali and adjacent parts, just as it happens when writing is prepared, and a fracture is fissure small.
And indeed each species has its own pain or discomfort in its healing according to the distinctness of its location.
This indicates a fracture in the bone. And by this it is known that there is a fracture of the bone; namely, when you feel its crookedness and appearance with your hand and when you press on it with your hand.
And if there is no crookedness evident in the spot, nor any discomfort when you touch it with your hand and move it, and the patient does not feel much pain, then it is not a fracture.
Sometimes it is possible that there is crookedness or a slight crack, but you should not worry about this if when you press on it with your hand and move it, the patient does not feel much pain; instead, place over it some medicines of which you have a reminder that is appropriate for the spot; and then it will be tight because of a subtle constriction.
And know that if the spot is bent and not split in two or otherwise affected so that it does not become gangrenous throughout its entire surface, then you should begin to correct it with cauterization after an hour has passed; and if anything happens to it, then a cautery should be used.
And if gangrene does occur, then let it remain for several days until the gangrene subsides; and then heal it in whatever manner you can that is suitable and effective.
And know that the restoration and piercing of it is more dangerous than the bone in which gangrene occurs.
And strengthen it according to what will be remembered about it.
But if in the bone gangrene occurs, then extension of the broken member from two parts is necessary: if it is the hand or the foot; or with your hand if the member is small; or with two cords or one cord and the hand.
And hold the member in its natural position while the broken parts are extended, then you will have to return them by artifice and in whatever manner you can in their places.
And beware according to your strength that you do not cause pain or injury to the patient through your operation; and according to your ability apply one bone to another in their best forms.
And so that in that hour you may beneficially touch it with your hand, and if you see any different cause, correct it and heal it according to the amount of your skill.
And avoid violent extension and compression, for there are foolish doctors who often cause gangrene cauterization through their operation or cause contraction in the member as we have seen it many times because of their operation.
And the quality of constriction of the broken member is that which you see; for you should know that broken members are different in their smallness and in their greatness and in the shape of them.
And of those that are small like the arm and the finger and the wrist and their like, then let the wrapping be of very soft cloth.
But those that are large like the thigh or the leg, then let the wrapping be hard and laced, for the laced binding connects the large member and strengthens it all around with even constriction, so that no ulcer occurs in it.
And then begin, and then your operation of equaling, pause binding convenient to that, over the spot of that fracture with three or four wrappings according to how much the member deserves; and strengthen your hand a little with the binding.
And then go to that at the highest part of the spot of the fracture, and strengthen your hand so that you do not loosen the constriction with which you have strengthened the spot of the fracture. And then lengthen it with wrapping of the spot of the fracture a little, and loosen the constriction a little by little, while you take from it one great part.
And then take another bandage and wrap that other part over the broken spot with wrapping, and then go to the wrappings at the lowest part of the fracture; and let your operation be in the constriction of the wrapping and in loosening it according as we have said above in the first wrapping.
And then pause between the wrappings of hemp or cloth with which the crookedness of the fracture is evened out, if there is crookedness in it; and if not, then do not pause for any cause.
And then pause another bandage over those wrappings decently done as much, if in the spot there is no inflammation or gangrene cauterization, and then pause over it that which soothes the gangrene and stops the inflammation; and let it remain for several days; and then strengthen over it the splints.
And let the splints be of the thickness of a split cane that is well formed, or be of wood, or of reed, and let the width of each splint be according to this form and figure:
However, let the splint that is paused over that fracture be thicker and a little longer than the other splints, and the length of the splint according to how long it has been over the member in greatness and smallness; and then strengthen over the splints with another bandage according to your first constriction; and then lace over it with decent wire according as we have said about constriction, and let your constriction be less, and how much longer is the fracture, so much less is the constriction.
And let the threads be middling in thickness and fineness, and be of soft wire; and if the threads are thick, as we have seen by the operation of some foolish doctors who tie their threads with strings of linen, and it is a great error when the constriction is not equal.
And very thin threads are not convenient, for you will not achieve by constriction with them what you want, and let there not be the space of a finger between splint and splint.
And if the patient is hurt by the ends of the splints, then pause under those hemp or wool that does not harm it.
Some times the fracture is in a vein, and occurs rupture in the sinew, and we come to remember it in that in the head according to its singularity.
And know that not every broken member is tightened by splints on the first day; and the cause of it is when the member is large, then you should not pause over it splints unless after several days or a week or more according to your certainty of the occurrence of gangrene cauterization.
And this is the manner of the bandages with which the Ancients used to heal, which were paused over fracture and dislocation and twist.
Way of bandage as a bath for healing of fracture, convenient to many complexities and especially to women and children, for it is that over which there does not go heat nor friction: and take from powdered bran, and it is the meal of the wheat that remains after the movement of the mill in the walls of the mill.
And cook it as it is, but strain the liquid through a cloth and let it thicken; then use it.
Another method of healing fractures and dislocations: take assafetida, ladanum, acacia, enula, and myrrh, which is ground from wild pomegranates, all in equal amounts of one drachma; also five drachmas each of myrrh and aloe; twenty drachmas of aloes, all to be mixed together with honey or egg white if the patient's complexion is cold; and then use this plaster, for it has a good composition and quickly restores broken bones, and confers health to many people.
Another method of plaster which confers health to fractures and dislocations: take myrrh and met with white poplar in equal amounts of one drachma each, also five drachmas each of myrrh and aloe, six drachmas of acacia, and twenty drachmas of armenian bole.
Let all be ground in a mortar with a pestle, then strained and thickened with wine or white wine, and let it be applied.
Method of a plaster for joints and bones separated from their sockets, and for pain in them, and also for cracks and fractures: let fine wool be saturated with sweet wine and oil, and let it be applied to the affected area.
Perhaps in this plaster there is no virtue of restoration, nor of pustules or boils, but it does indeed expel pains properly.
Another method of a plaster which restores broken bones: take leaves of the fig tree and leaves of wild poppies; grind them all and make a plaster from them.
Method of a plaster which aids in the restoration of broken bones and when you want resolution of the residue of pustules: take ground myrrh, chamomile and violet flowers, and flour of linseed, of all these an equal part .i. Let all be strained and thickened with wine, if the member is not damaged.
But if it is damaged, then cook it in water scented with coriander or water and use it.
Another method of a very strong plaster in resolution, when pustules occur with the restoration of a member: take ground myrrh and licorice root, and caraway seeds, and melilot, marjoram, violet flowers, chamomile, all these in equal parts i drachms; let all be strained and thickened with water or wine, all according to the quality of the member and its color.
But Hypocras does not dry on its own, it should be applied to the broken member for its restoration unless a poultice is made of wax and oil and nothing else; and let it be between thickness and thinness.
But it is seen that they are applied to the broken member for its restoration and the causes in which there is dryness with little heat are similarly as myrrh, onions and their likenesses of those causes which we have recounted.
Method of a plaster which is beneficial for injury and pain: take ground mace, and nuts, and human hair or bird feathers, and myrrh, and salt, all in equal parts; let them be strained and thickened, and let a plaster be made from it.
But the amount according to the quality which covers the ligature and let it be bound, is that you consider if there is no pain nor swelling nor the bone broken not drawn from its place, then do not loosen for several days. And if there occurs at the location violent pain or swelling or inflammation, then you cut it or loosen it in that hour and stop the plaster from it.
And take a ligature of linen and sponge the sea-lion which is moistened, and let that be soaked in tepid water, and with that wash the location until that swelling and the pain are stopped; and then let the member rest for an hour; and then apply to it fine wool which is saturated with sweet wine and oil or rose oil, and let it lie upon it for a night unless you are certain of pustules cauterized, and that the member's inflammation is abated and its pain relieved.
And then repeat that subtle binding and small plaster and do not tighten it by your first constriction, and let it be subtle with that until it is healed.
And if the pustules and heat and pain and inflammation and all the accidents are now abated entirely, and you have stopped using the plaster and binding, then do so as you did at the beginning equally.
And if no cause occurs in the member of those which we have mentioned, then do not loosen it but let it be bound for three or four days or five or six. and some times let it be bound for 20 days according to what you appear by the loosening of the member, as we have said, until the fracture adheres and the flesh comes together over that.
And then tighten the binding but not as in your first constriction entirely, and let there be less thickness of the bandage of the patient's body, according to what precedes its memory.
But if you see the location of the fracture dry and exhausted but not closed, then know that nourishment is prohibited from coming to it; and therefore soak it with tepid water for three days in total, and loosen the binding a little, and through this operation the member will receive nourishment, and it will be healed little by little.
But that which the restorer of the broken member does another inspection when it is not healed at the beginning according to how it was, and is healed according to crookedness, is error according to their operation and great fear, and if they were right in their free limbs and bent upon them.
And I have not seen any of them do that, because it is more reasonable that it does not happen.
Chapter according to: Of fracture when it occurs in the head.
The kinds of fractures are many, and their shapes are diverse, and the causes are distinct; for some fractures are done by blow with a club, and the blow strikes all the bone within the head, and that is under the skull, as it would be in the trunk, and through this this kind of fracture is named asial; or the blow goes into any part of the bone, and goes into the flesh of it and does not go inside to its end; and this kind of fracture is named absolute elevation.
And the amount of these two fractures is great or small, and the cause of it is blow with club or stone, and to their likenesses.
And this fracture is penetrating so that it approaches the membrane which is under the bone; or it is in the membrane of the bone, and the amount of these two fractures is great or small.
And in fracture it is split in the bone, in the thinness of the hair small, and because of that this kind of fracture is named capillary fracture.
And it is fracture that is done or by blow with stone or by blow of club, and which makes inside any lamina of the bone to its splits fingers, and it is done in the location bent so that it happens to the nails when there occurs to them blow and it is split of their splits fingers.
And this happens mostly in bodies with wet humors, as well as in children's heads.
And after all these kinds of fractures have been set, they are bound like separated stars. And then he will have a memory of everything in its place.
And know all these kinds of fractures through detection on them and through inquiry with feelers and the appearance of rotten flesh that is upon them.
And hairline fracture is known by what is uncovered on the bone, and cleaned, and felt with feelers, for the fracture appears black.
In the treatment of fractures, consider first the accidents of the patient, and then if you see through the accidents that indicate by obvious sign over fear, as in vomiting of cholera, extension, loss of reason, loss of speech, fainting, acute fever, discharge from orifices, and redness of these, and their likeness to them in the major dispositions, it is not healed.
And if you see non-current accidents you expect health, then you begin his treatment.
The reason is that if the sick person came to you in the beginning as he was sick and it is in the days of winter, then consider that you study in the appearance of the bone before the day fourteen according to all dispositions.
And if it is in the days of summer, then consider that you cut off the bone before the seventh day, having that which is below the bone be rotted by the pannicle, and that the accidents we have counted occur.
And if the fracture has already reached the cerebrum, and is in small pieces and crushed, then consider that you cut off the crushed and ground-up piece, according to what I will count for you.
And it is that you raise the head of the sick person and uncover over the bone according to your custom and manner possible according to the figure of the plague, and that he is lighter on the sick person.
And if it happens to you to do the detection of the bone, blood flow or cauterized pus, then you oppose it with what is appropriate, and it is that you apply the place with cloths infused in wine and rose oil, and let the plague rest until the aposteme is calmed, and be secure from the blood flow; and then begin in the circulation of the bone and in its ablation.
And it is according to one of two manners of operation.
And the one manner is that you cut into the bone with a narrow scalpel, and this is its form: And then administer another scalpel this, a little wider than that; and this is its form:
And then administer the scalpel wider than the second.
And consider that it must be due to you a number of different scalpels, of which some are wider than others; and some of them are shorter than others and are in the last of acuity of their extremities, and they are of iron or steel.
And use them with ease in percussion on the scalpel so that it does not disturb the head and lead that one.
And if the bone is strong and hard, then consider that you bore into its circulation before you administer the scalpels with the trepans, which are named non-deepening trepans.
And they are not named thus but because those do not stop the end of the bone from it that is under it, for so that to the trepan there is a rounded extremity or margin on that which is below the head of it pointed like margin or small circle, which prohibits being submerged and passing the thickness of the bone.
And it is convenient that you take of these trepans great number of which each one suits the thickness of each bone, while it is present to you in all heads of the brain, the extremity of which is acute, the quantity in length and brevity is according to the quantity of thickness of this head.
And this is the form of three species of trepans: The quality of boring into the circulation of the broken bone is that you pause the trepan over the bone and turn it with your fingers while you know that the bone has been penetrated; and then replace the trepan at another location, and pause what is between all trauma the quantity of the thickness of the groove or environment that.
And then insert with scalpels what is between each break of the bone, and do that more subtly that you can upon its end in thinness, as we have said, while you irradiate the bone or by your hand or by any other cause by any tools which you will have apparelled for that, as tweezers and subtle forceps.
And consider that you keep with all precaution that the scalpel does not touch any cause of the brain.
And when you have circulated the bone and saw it separated from the brain if it is continued with it, and you have extracted that, consider that you raise and gnaw that in the asperity of it of what is in the bone by other instrument similar to scalpel, but however consider that it is more thin and more subtle than the other scalpels.
And if a little piece of the small bones and fragments are raised, then take that with ease by what is due to you of the instruments; and then cure the plague with poultices and ointments which we have said.
And the other manner of operation is lighter, farther from fear, which says Gualia and is praised by great praise; and this is its speech: it is necessary for you in the beginning that you begin to uncover the piece of the bone of the place in which is the fracture most violent and most manifest, while you have uncovered that piece and you have paused below it the extremity of this scalpel sluggish and gentle of which this is the form:
And that the lenticular piece is lion and does not insert any cause, and the acute piece is of it in two sides forward in length, as you see; let the lenticular piece be adjusted to the brain with the membrane of it incident acute into the bone.
And then percute upon the scalpel of one piece with a small mallet while you insert all the bone with ease as it is turned, and you are secure of the membrane that does not occur in it accident which you fear in any manner, and if the patient was the most foolish of all men and the most ignorant of them; certainly, and if he was sleeping.
Then if it raised any cause annexed to the bone of the membrane in some places of bone, insert that of it with the extremity of the scalpel that lenticular, and loosen that of it with ease, for it is loosened from it its harm and its fear.
And if the fracture of the bone does not penetrate within the membrane, and what is cut off or remains of the bone is the membrane of it, and raised in it asperity and small fragments, then consider that you raise that asperity and loosen those fragments with subtle razors by which you have prepared their number, of diverse quantities so that it is convenient for you to administer them in every place most conveniently and rightly according to what you become involved in your operation on the broken bone and the figure of it.
And consider that you administer in your reason with which you raise the bone at the beginning the widest of those razors, and then use it of the most subtle one, and do not cease doing that according to continuity while you come to administer the most thin and the most subtle of all those.
May each of the other small capillary fractures and subtle fractures, that you administer care according to what you have lost for his correction.
And it is a cause that is not wiped away above all those who have studied in that art. And this on that which we written have shown in great fractures.
And if the skin is stretched when you draw out the bone, then take cloth according to the amount of the wound and soak it in rose oil and place it over the opening of the wound; and take another piece of folded or doubled cloth and soak it in wine and rose oil and place it over the first cloth and do this gently on the pus so that you do not harm the head; and then administer on it lard, and do not tighten it but according to the amount that the wound has so much only.
And let him have this treatment for a day or two until you are sure of the cauterized wound; and then loosen it and administer medicines with which there is superficial dryness, as well as lint root and wheat flour, and powder of onions and of aristology, and of like things to those.
And it is that you make of these medicines powder that is sprinkled over the wound, as they are dried; and universally, administer in that all medicine of property of which is that it cleanses and does not bite.
And beware according to your virtue that the wound in your cure be clean; and let there not be in it surdiness of ointment or other; nor let you leave to aggregate virulence in it; for when it is applied to the skin of the brain, it corrupts it and poisons it, and malignancy occurs on the patient accordingly.
And it occurs in the head, as of it is cleansed the bone and mostly when the cure of it is diminished, and there is blackness on its surface; and therefore consider then if it happens to the patient the accidents which we have said, know that they are all deadly.
And if blackness does not occur but of the medicine which is applied to it and it is in virtue of that medicine that makes that blackness, then take honey one part and rose oil parts 3. and soak those lines in cloth, and then place it on the head; and then cure that with the spices of cure which are convenient until it is healed.
Chapter .iii.
Of restoration of the nose when it is broken.
Know that the nose is not broken except in two places, the upper and lower, or one of those which are seen, because there are two bones in it, as the lower part is cartilaginous, and is not broken and does not occur to it except contraction and tortuosity and sinuitat.
But if one of the two parts of it is broken, then take your thumb and stick it in your nose, and hold that fracture with your index finger and with the tip of your thumb, within until the nose returns to its natural figure. And let this be done by you with ease, and beware that pain does not occur to the patient through your operation.
And if the fracture is in the upper part of the nose, and the finger does not reach it, then let it be made equal with the tip of the bone in which there is a small thickness.
And if the fracture is in two parts, then you do likewise.
And cure it with restoration on the first day of the fracture, if possible; and if not, then let him have rest for the cauterized wound.
And then insert into the tip of the nose a piece of cloth if the fracture is in one part, or put in two calques if the fracture is in two parts, and let there be thickness in the calque of so much quantity that it fills the crack in the nose.
And some of the old restorators say that the calques be lined in wax, and changed every day, but I have not seen this; they have let the cloth be lined in honey comfit with powder of millings; and then leave it as the bone is firmed and the cartilage hardened.
And sometimes let the nose be inserted into it, instead of the calques, a reed of hollow reed more than it is wrapped in cloth of lion; and let the fracture of the nose be more violent, and that the patient not be prohibited from inspiration.
And this cause is not necessary to you; and if you want, do it, and if you want, do calques.
And if another wound occurs, cauterize the nose with cerate or with a plaster infused in wine and rose oil, or with diaquilon.
But if it does not occur to the cauterized wound, then let you plaster that on the outside with sesame flour and onion powder mixed with honey; and then place over it a piece of lion skin, and do not tie the nose for any cause.
But if the bones of the nose are broken with a small fracture or are crushed, then cut them and pull them out with instruments appropriate to them; then sew up the wound, and cure it with that which causes flesh and makes firm, and plaster it with that which is convenient.
And if a wound occurs within the nose, then let you cure that with calques and administer lead canula so that it is entirely healed.
Chapter .iv.
Of restoration of the mandible when it is broken.
When the mandible is broken and its fracture does not have pus, beware then if the fracture is only outward and is not broken in two and bent inward at the parts within, then its understanding is easier.
And therefore, if the fracture is on the right part, let you insert your left index finger into the mouth of the patient; and likewise if the fracture is in the mandible on the left side, then insert your right index finger; and press it with that at the flexibility of the fracture within by your other hand from the outside of the bone; by that decently equal it.
And if the fracture of the mandible is already separated in two, then let you administer extension of two parts according to rightness so that its equalization is possible.
And if it occurs knocking of teeth with destruction, then strengthen those of which you hope will break with wire of gold or silver or silk; and then place cerate over the broken mandible and then place doubled cloth over it, and place over the cloth great star decently made, or a piece of wood alone to the length of the mandible; and then tie that above according to how you are equipped with its application so that it is not destroyed.
And command the patient that he have rest and quietness, and give him food of him sorbing cool drinks.
And if you judge that the figure is already changed in some manner, then let you hold and loosen it on the third day; then rectify what has been changed of it and plaster it with powder of millings, with honey, or sesame flour, after you have removed its cerate, and place over the plaster lion skin.
And when you have seen that and adjusted the plaster over it, and the disposition of the bone is not changed, let it be, that you do not loosen it until it is healed and the fracture made firm; for many times this fracture is tight in three weeks.
And if another boil occurs in a different place, then administer what we have said many times in the sedative while he is sleeping so that it heals and that boil goes away.
And if the fracture is with a wound, then consider whether it is a separated bone or crushed bones, then you subtly put those crushed bones in place with what is convenient for that in removing them from the tools.
And if the opening of the wound is narrow, then you widen it with bloodletting according to the quantity of your need.
Then, when you have put those crushed bones in place and if they do not heal by themselves, then you cover the opening of the wound if it is wide; and if not, place one of the dressings that are convenient for that over it until it heals.
Chapter 5.
Of the restoration of the collarbone when it is broken.
Many times the collarbone is broken from in front of the chest, and that fracture is done in one of three ways.
Because it is either broken, separated or separated into two parts without crushed bones; and it is easier to restore it; or it happens that there are crushed bones in it, and its restoration is difficult; or the fracture is with a wound.
And the operation on it, when the fracture is without a wound, is that you have two ministers present, so that one holds the helper and follows the broken collarbone, and the other stretches the neck towards that broken part.
Then, align the fracture with your fingers while it is done in the shape of it according to how it used to be, and there should be no small protuberance or hollow in it.
And if you need more extension, then put a pillow made of cloth or wool under the patient's shoulder, and its size should be according to the quantity of your need; and extend and elevate the collarbone and hold the pillow with your hand while you align the fracture as it used to be.
And if you cannot pull the end of the collarbone to the outside parts because it has come to the chest, then let the patient lean back on his neck, and place a cushion half in size over the muscle of it.
And the minister presses the muscle of it to the outside parts while the bone of the collarbone is elevated up towards the chest, and then you straighten the fracture and align it with your fingers.
But if you feel crushed bones in the collarbone that are not healed, then split it open and pull out those crushed bones easily.
And if it is retained in the bone, then you invent an incision of it with one of the knives that you have prepared for that purpose, after you have placed under the collarbone the tool that serves the head; and it is a wooden or iron tool of which this is the shape of it:
And if the fracture is with a wound, then invent an incision of it according to the edge of the wound, and place over it a dressing that is convenient for that; and if the wound is made in one of the parts of the bone, then you split that part with the tool.
But the length of it should be according to what is possible for you in the operation; let it have two ends, one end broad and the other narrow.
And if the opening of the wound that you have split when you have pulled out the crushed bone is wide, and there is no danger of an abscess, then you close the two lips of the wound with stitches.
And if the opening is small, or you fear an abscess, then you fill the wound with cloth and powder according to the quantity of the split in the wound.
And if an abscess occurs, then soak a cloth in warm vinegar and rose oil and place it over that.
And all of this, that the stake is not healed over the broken bone; and therefore see the patient every day, because when the binding is softened or you see the stake already healed, then you straighten that and tighten the binding.
And then place the pillow under the neck of him, and place under the shoulder on which he lies a small cushion; so that with that the helper of it is elevated from that side, and therefore the fracture of the collarbone is elevated to elevation of the muscle; or his arm is bound around the neck of him.
And do not loosen the binding unless an abscess occurs in the site or pus, within twelve days.
And then renew the dressing if you have seen the face of it to that, and adjust in the constriction and restore that and leave it until it is restored and the fracture of the collarbone is coagulated.
And it is strengthened and comforted according to the month in 28 days, and sometimes in some people it is done in less time than that.
Chapter 6.
Of the restoration of a fracture of the shoulder.
The spatula is broken at the broad end of it and not broken of it except at the edges.
And therefore when it is broken at the site of it — and it is broken in the middle end of it — and it is not healed except by touch, then according to how it is the figure of the fracture split you prepare it and reduce that according to the natural figure in every way of skill which is possible for you.
And then place over the site powder of flour with white of egg and stopa of linen; and then place doubled cloth; and then place over it a slender stake of wood according to the quantity of the spatula or more.
But if under the stake is hollow in any of the sites of the spatula, then you align that hollow with stopa of linen, and then place the stake according to equality.
And then tighten above it with a long humamate with decent constriction and with firmness of the stake until it is not healed in its site.
And consider the binding every day; and all times that it is softened, bind another time and tighten it and wind the stake if it is healed in its site.
And watch the patient on his side.
And the spatula is restored in 20 days or in .25.
And when you have completed this count, then dissolve the ligament; and know that it is of the bones whose beginning is not feared nor is their dissolution.
And if you proceed to the spot of the bone's weight and place below it the chain, then split it there, and ostler it, and do according to what we have said in the fracture of the furcula of suppuration of an abscess if it happens here.
Chapter .VII.
Of restoration of the fracture of the foot.
The foot is sometimes broken in its middle part and that hurts there; but its ends are more painful because they are crushed and broken.
And of its accidents when its middle is broken it declines to the parts within and there happens to it great pain, and difficulty in breathing, and cough, and strong vomiting and blood; and a cavity is revealed in the broken bone and not concealed from sensation.
And its restoration is that the patient is laid on his back, and place under him a cushion; and press upon his muscles, and adjust his ribs by the hands of two men, and apply to the operation and to the adjustment according to all manner that it is possible and convenient, until he returns the figure of the bone according as it should be.
And then place upon it plaster and wadding, and pause over it a board of subtle deal or of cypress, or of a wood similar to them in lightness, after you have enveloped that in cloth; and then subtilise in binding that over the broken bone so that it is not hurt; and go with lacing according to roundness to the back sometimes, and strengthen that with decent stricture; and consider the lacing every hour, and when it has been loosened, strengthen it.
And if necessity requires that the bandage be loosened or pricking, or pain, or suppuration happens in the place, then you cut and loosen that and remove the plaster, and rectify what happens for that by means of cure of it; and then reduce the plaster if you see to it the face; and adjust stricture upon him until he is healed.
Chapter .VIII.
Of restoration of the ribs when they are cracked.
Know that fracture of the ribs does not happen except in large spots which follow the back; and of their ends of the part before, it does not happen to those a contraction except by reason that they are cartilaginous. And cognition of it is not concealed from sensation on account of the inquiry of it with the fingers.
And the restoration is that you grip the fracture with the fingers according to possible manner, until he is swallowed according as it should be, and then plaster and strengthen the cracked bone with a board, if it is needed by him.
And if the fracture of the ribs is declining to the parts within, then there happens to the patient vehement pain and pricking, as well as pricking that happens to that which has been punctured, and by reason of that the bone places the veilment; and there happens to him difficulty in handling, and cough, and vomiting blood; and this is of difficult cure.
And then the phlegm is generated within it by cold things.
And of them is that which I say: place upon him viands which generate inflammation and bloating, so that the belly be swollen and be extended, and the fracture be driven to the parts without.
But we ought to avoid that it be cause to generate an abscess by suppuration, if it does not happen; and if it has happened, then help it.
And some of them say that wind should be poured upon him and that it suck with strength; and this is similar to reasoning, but indeed it is feared that the wind will throw the superfluities to the spot by weakness.
And some of them say: cover the spot with wool which has been already submerged in hot oil, and place powders between the ribs until it is filled, that the bandage be made round when you envelop it according to roundness; and then let the patient be cured for pleurisy of viand and medicine.
And if it causes vehement constriction to the patient which he does not endure, and the bone punctures him painfully, fear for the patient; then cover the spot, uncover the cracked rib, and then place upon it an instrument which conserves the head, the remembrance of which precedes; and pierce the bone with ease, and extract that.
And then adjust the two lips of the wound if it is large by sewing, and cure it with plasters until it is healed.
And if suppuration happens within, then you cut and pour powders in rose oil and place over the spot, and let the patient be cured for that by what is said about suppuration within.
And let him be laid on his side upon which he sleeps until it is healed.
Chapter .IX.
Of restoration of fracture of the spine of the back and of the neck.
Sometimes fracture happens to the bones of the neck, and they hurt there at their attachment, and similarly to the spines of the back. And if it happens to someone and you want to know if he will be healed or not, then consider, for if you see that his hands are already loosened and stupified and dead and he cannot move those nor extend nor strengthen them when you pinch them with your fingers or pierce them with a needle, and he does not feel pain in them, then know that it is not healed, and in the midst of dispositions it is mortal.
And if he feels constriction in them with the fingers and piercing, then know that the bone's nut is saved and that the patient will be cured.
And if you see the spines of the neck like that and want to know if it will be healed or not, then consider his feet.
Then if you see that they are already loosened and it happens to them what happened in the hands, and then when he lies on his back he feels windiness and urination against his will, and sometimes is laid upon his back and wants to urinate but cannot, then know that it is mortal, and so do not trouble yourself in its cure.
But if none of those happens to him, the cause is better and less distant.
And its cure is that you pierce with a syringe the suppuration of abscess which you place over the cracked spine with hot rose oil, or with balls of hellebore prepared; place upon it sometimes during the day as long as the abscess lasts.
And then place upon it one of the comforting and dry plasters, and strengthen over it with lacing; and command the patient that he take rest and tranquility and not sleep on the part from which he receives pain until he is healed.
And if suppuration happens on account of the bone's attachment or for any cause that it has been separated from him, then cover that with a bandage and hold that bone; and then adjust the two lips of the wound with sewing if it is large; and then cure it with something incarnating from the gums, until it is healed.
But if the tip of the bone of the bones is cracked and it is the end of the coccyx, then place your left finger in the hole, and grip the cracked bone with the other hand according to what is possible by second adjustment; and then place upon him plaster and a board if it needs that; and then strengthen that.
If you feel broken bones in him, then you put a splint on it and bandage it, and treat the wound with the medicine that is prescribed until it heals.
Here is the translation of the provided text:
Here is the translation:
Here is the translation:
Here is the translation:
Here is the translation:
Here is the translation: Here is the translation:
Here is the translation:
Here is the translation:
Here is the translation:
Here is the translation:
Here is the translation:
Here is the translation:
Here is the translation:
Here is the translation:
Here is the translation:
Here is the translation:
Here is the translation:
Here is the translation:
Here is the translation:
Here is the translation:
Here is the translation:
Here is the translation:
Here is the translation:
Here is the translation:
Here is the translation:
Here is the translation:
Here is the translation:
Here is the translation: Here is the translation:
Here is the translation:
Here is the translation:
And then consider the ligament in all parts for three days so that no inflammation or swelling occurs; or food is prohibited from coming to the limb due to an excess of tightness; and thus rectify all that according to what we have said.
But if you are confident that nothing will happen, then do not loosen the ligament but rather wait for three or more days.
And let the patient's sleep be on his back, and his hands be on his stomach.
And place on the buttock a poultice full of wool, and examine throughout the night or day that the shape of the broken limb is not changed, or that the ligament becomes soft; thus rectify all with your skill.
And give food to the patient according to the order we mentioned earlier, so that the food is thin at first and then gradually made thicker; and then let him swallow it.
Because it is customary for the buttock and leg to be bound up for forty days, then let them be loosened and a bath administered, and medicine applied with ointments that rectify this.
And if the fracture is weak, then you must not loosen that ligament and the splints for one month or two months.
Chapter 12.
On the restoration of a broken arm.
An arm is made up of two bones, which are called two rays; the first is small and is that which supports the finger, and the other is large and is that which is placed below the smaller one, at the part lower down.
And usually the larger ray is broken alone, or the smaller one, and seldom are they both broken together.
And when the smaller ray is broken on top, then its restoration is easier, and its healing is even more so.
And when it is broken on the bottom, the fracture is worse, and its healing is difficult.
Worse than that is when both bones are broken together.
Therefore, if the bone that is broken is the smaller ray on top, then it is convenient for the doctor, in order to restore it, to apply a small extension with ease so that it may be splinted.
But if it is the larger ray that is broken, then one must apply a more forceful extension.
And if both rays are broken together, then you must apply an even stronger extension.
And you must apply the shape of the hand for its restoration and extension spread out over a cushion, with the palm at the parts on top, above all the others, and the finger joint be lower than the others, and the patient lying on his back on a raised pillow.
And there should be a cushion beneath him for height or leaning, so that the patient does not strain himself.
Then the assistant extends the arm at its lower part with his hand or a ligament, and another assistant extends it similarly above.
And then the doctor splints the bone so that it is reduced according to the best shape possible.
And if in the setting of the bone there are protrusions, then you must push back all swelling into its place with your skill.
And if there appears in it a separate protrusion that pushes against the tendon and you do not have hope in its restoration, then you must cut it off and treat it according to what we said earlier.
But if the fracture is with gangrene, I have already written about that in this chapter, and thus take its cure.
And if there occurs an abscess after the beginning of your restoration, then you must cut a cloth with a cerate made of rose oil and white wax, and let it be in between medium and thin, and strengthen the cloth over that with subtle tightness so that the abscess gives way; then remove the cerate and apply an ointment prepared from powdered mullet with honey, and then apply splints; and let the splint that is placed over that fracture be more firm and strong.
And know that the number of arm splints are seen in greater dispositions, or let it be in one ray or both rays together.
Then apply your extension over the site of the fracture more firmly and strongly, and when you are more relaxed at the parts on top of the fracture or at its lower parts, relax the extension a little according to how it was preceded in the beginning of the chapter.
And the cloths that are wrapped over the fracture should be soft and moistened with water, not hard or rough; and the thread by which it is tied should be between medium and thick, just as we have recommended.
And then examine the limb and the ligament after a few days. And if there occurs some cause for which rectification is necessary, just as it happened to the limb, and then let you bathe the limb with warm water so that that swelling ceases.
Let the limb not be bound while resting, and then return the extension.
And if the extension is already loosened and the bone is healed and similar, then rectify all that with your skill.
And consider if the food is prohibited from coming to the limb due to an excess of tightness, then loosen it a little and leave it for several days so that food comes to it; then strengthen it again.
But if the patient does not have any cause for which we mentioned earlier, then do not loosen it until after about 20 days or around that time.
Then let the patient's hand be suspended by its strength of active movement, and let him sleep on his back.
And know that this fracture is restored in 30 or 32 days, or most often it is restored in 28 days, and all that is according to the disposition of the complications and the dispositions of the skill.
Chapter 13.
On the restoration of a fracture in the palm and the fingers.
Know that the palm and the knuckles of the fingers often have a fracture there, but nothing happens to them except for many protrusions.
And when there is a fracture or a tendon in the palm, then let the patient lie on his back and let him be inclined according to equality, and then apply the hand over that extended.
Then the assistant extends the broken bones, and the doctor splints them so that they are brought together with good joining.
Then let you apply ointment and bandages; if there is no abscess, then loosen that and place a splint above according to the quantity of the site, and you have already wrapped that in a cloth.
But if the fracture is in the parts of the fingers below the belly of the palm, then do likewise as for a torn cloth, and command the patient to strengthen that with his palm which is torn; then let it be strengthened with a long cloth.
And let the finger splint be with a cloth that is elevated so that the finger is applied to the palm; then strengthen it according to how you can.
But if the fracture is to the outer parts, then let you place above it a splint and another splint from the part below in the palm so that the hand may be opened and straight; then apply the extension, just as the hand is turned around between the fingers with ligaments.
And if there is a fracture to one of the finger joints, then if it is the finger joint that pushes, let it be splinted according to how you can; and then let it be strengthened with the palm, and if it wants, place on it a small straight splint so that the fracture is elevated and not bent.
If the fracture is in one of the other fingers, such as the middle, index, auricular, or little finger, then it should be wrapped and bound with the said finger; or they should all be bound according to continuity, and that is better; or place a small splint over it, as we have said regarding the toes.
And in your restoration and approach to that, consider the disposition of suppuration and opposition — through your operation — to whatever causes those, according to what is repeated in its narrative.
Chapter 14.
On the restoration of a fracture of the thighbone.
The thighbone is often broken and is revealed to the senses according to what it converts into the front and the highest pus.
And its restoration is done in such a way that the ligature is strengthened over the fracture and another ligature below the fracture, and the patient lies on his stomach and on his back.
And then the minister extends all the ligature to its end according to its quality, when the fracture is in the middle part of the bone.
But if it is near the root of the thigh, then let the ligature be near the buttock at the end of the hip, so that the extension goes up over it, and the other ligature below the fracture.
And similarly, if the break is near the buttock, then let the ligature be made near the buttock, and the extension to the parts below.
And then the doctor should join the bone with both hands until it is reduced according to its natural appearance and the bone is joined by a good conjunction; then when the member has paused plaster and constriction, if suppuration does not occur in it. But if suppuration occurs in it, then you should leave it for several days until the suppuration has subsided, and then return to your cure.
The constriction of it should be done thus: have a bandage wrapped over the fracture, a hard one, and fold it two or three times, and remove the superfluity from it; then wrap the leg so that it extends to the heel and to the root of the thigh.
And insert a long needle between the thigh and the leg near the buttock at the ends below, and let the extremities of the needle come from the highest part of both parts; then roll over the leg and the thigh whatever superfluity there is in the bandage.
And then place a splint over the thigh at the site of that fracture, and of those, place a splint over the shinbone.
And then fill the vacuities between the leg and the thigh with soft rags, so that the constriction is coagulated.
And then begin with strong constriction over the site of the fracture with three or four wrappings; and as you go further away from the ligature at the site of the fracture, your constriction should be lesser and looser and more moist.
And then extend the two extremities of the needle to the ends below so that it reaches the ankle of the foot; and strengthen both extremities of the splints on the other side so that the ligature is not loosen from its place.
And then leave the constriction over it, where it is in such a way that suppuration or apoplexy does not occur in the member or inflammation and similar to those; and if any of those things occur, then treat it with removal of the ligature, and rectify what has occurred altogether, according to what we have said many times.
But if in the bone there is a piece of the bone which has pushed out, then let you join it according to what is possible for you; and if not, then open it and remove it, and cure with that from which its memory is preceded until it is healed.
And some times this fracture of the thigh is strengthened with splints in addition to being bound as we have said regarding the leg and arm.
But however in its restoration if it is made in such a way that suppuration does not occur in the patient; and if it is restored alone, or the other leg is also bound, then it is necessary for him to limp from which it has always been.
And know that the thigh is strengthened in 40 days or a few months, or a few weeks, and all of that is according to the variety of complications and other dispositions.
Chapter 15.
On the restoration of the fracture of the hip joint.
Know that the fracture of the hip joint is painful, but it occurs in many ways with tension.
But if suppuration occurs in it, then it is not just a fracture or crack in its parts, and that is with pus or blood, and over that all is felt by the senses.
And its restoration is done in such a way that what is broken in its parts is joined with the fingers within so that it is aggregated and conjoined according to what is possible by position and facility and fabrication.
And then place plaster and place over it a round splint if suppuration occurs from that; and strengthen it with constriction as is convenient.
And then consider all the dispositions which we have mentioned in other fractures, as suppuration and similar to those in which you oppose any cause of them with what is suitable for it until it is healed.
Chapter 16.
On the restoration of a fracture of the leg.
Know that in the leg there are two bones of which one is thick and is called by the name of the leg; and the other is slender, and is called the shinbone.
And suppuration occurs in each of the kinds of fracture as it occurs in both bones of the arm, and for that reason its restoration is done in such a way, and its operation is one.
And if they are both broken, then the leg is converted into all parts.
And if only the more slender bone is broken, then the leg is converted into the front parts.
And if only the thicker bone is broken, then it is converted below; and it is from those causes that they are not bound to you.
And then administer extension and position and binding of the splints according to that joining.
But however if the fracture of the leg is a crack having many splinters, then let its extension be lesser and looser, and draw it away with your strength.
And in the leg there is some cause of operation on the arm, and it is when you join the splints and complete all your operation, then you will take pieces of wood of the poplar tree which is paused below the causes which are paused alone, and they are made a binding of white palm fibers; gather them to those to which there is a small thickness, and let it not be of the fingers, and let its length be according to the length of the leg from the buttock to the most below.
And then wrap over each one a bandage in two layers according to the length of it, and place one over the part of the leg on one side and the other on the other side, and let them be of the hip from the most below to the ankle of the foot.
And then join the two splints in three places of the two extremities and at the middle place; by which with this constriction the leg is prohibited from bending to the right and left side, and stands in good position.
And a board has already been administered according to the length of the bed, and the bed should be placed on it so that it maintains its position.
And most importantly, you must do this in a fracture, and when there is an infection as well.
And carefully consider the bed each day and study it from behind as well, and you should protect it from pustules and inflammation or other similar causes; and when one of those causes happens, then apply to it that which is appropriate for healing.
Chapter XVII.
Of the fracture of the talus and bones of the foot and toes.
The talus does not often suffer a fracture; but fractures of the bones of the foot are quite common; and fractures of the toes of the foot are rare, and they usually only suffer dislocation in the joints of their phalanges.
And if there is a fracture of the bones of the foot and you see those bones protruding upwards, then the patient should place his foot on the ground prepared in this way.
Then put your weight on that which is elevated by those bones, and press and wring them until they return to their places.
And apply plaster and a pad on top of that, and place beneath the arch of the foot a small board with two edges.
And strengthen that by applying pressure on the foot with traction, as you have wrapped it in bandages and other remedies.
And when three or four days have passed, then you can loosen the bandage, for you will find that the bones are set, or they are cracked or dislocated, and the operation in those cases is as follows.
But if any toe is cracked, then restore it, and wring it in the same way as you were instructed to restore the fingers of the hand. And put a splint on the cracked toe according to its length, and have it slightly higher than the others; then place beneath the foot that board which was recommended to you, and strengthen that by applying pressure with traction.
But if that which is cracked of the bones is two or three or more, then you put on each toe a splint of its own quantity wrapped in lion's skin, and strengthen the board at the bottom of the foot, and let it stand on one of the edges of the board so that it has good retention.
And it is convenient for you not to forget that you do not consider all the causes which we have told you about in the other fractures of accidents which we have mentioned; but apply to every accident that which is appropriate.
Chapter XVIII.
Of the fracture of the bone of the thigh and of the os of the patella and of the pubic bone of a man.
When the bone of the thigh is cracked, then make that drop into a small hole, and then tilt it towards the front at the top of the thigh, and let it be held behind.
And the midwife fills the crotch with cotton, and let it be done in the bone of him just as he hopes; and then let the woman be cut, and elevate the small thigh gradually, for all that is forgotten about when the bone is before the crotch just as he hopes and the cracked bone returns.
And then put powder on the thigh, and when he wants to urinate, let him move the crotch with ease and urinate, and reduce it and return it according to the manner in which he measured it at the beginning, and then let him return to his first powder.
And do this for seven days or around that, for that is restored.
And if you want, take an ovine bladder and strengthen it over the fracture with a straw of reed; and insert the whole bladder into his bone, and then inflate the bladder within the bone by breathing through the straw, for the fracture will return.
And then let it be filled with cotton and stay like that for a few days as we recommended so that it is healed.
And when the patellar bone of a man or woman is cracked, then administer in its restoration and piercing what we recommended for the bone of the hip.
And that which is straight is not hidden in these nearby fractures and which hardly happens to anyone, especially to one who has some study and knowledge of this my book; for that fracture indicates to you in the major dispositions the way that is direct in its restoration and in its stricture, and therefore understand well.
But in the pubic bone of a man when it is cracked, take the membrane of an ox, and put the bone in that; then put on it a covering of linen, and let it be wrapped, and then let it be left for three days or around that, and let it be healed.
Chapter XIX.
Of the restoration of the bones when they are infected.
It is convenient for him to whom a fracture occurs with infection, and especially if the bone is large like that of the thigh or of the adjutor, or similar to that, that you take care and phlebotomize it as soon as the conditions of phlebotomy testify to you as we have said.
And if the infection and swelling bleed, then you must take care to retain it in that way as you pulverize over it powdered triphytum, unless another cause is present.
And then begin the restoration of the fracture in that same day, and do not prolong it if there is no infection.
But if an abscess occurs, then you should cease the restoration of it until the ninth day, while the abscess has subsided, and do not approach it on the third day or the fourth of all, for you will cause evil accidents.
But if the cracked bone is prominent over the exposed tendon, then you must see that you reduce it and wring it with your hands with ease and with little extension.
But if extension is not prepared for you and the position of it with your hands, then you reduce that with your hands with this instrument; and this instrument is made of iron, the length of which is seven or eight digits, and the width according to the amount of the infection; and it is necessary for the physician to take three or four of these according to the amount that he requires for the cure in every kind of fracture.
And let it be round and smooth with little roughness so that it is not bent because of the compression upon that in the hour of operation.
And let it be of acute extremity whose margin is in its extremities; and let the top of it be thick, and the middle of it within the splits.
And this is its shape: [illustration]
And the top of the instrument of iron according to the shape of the bone.
So that its acute extremity be elevated and placed on the prominent extremity of the bone.
And press it into a slit so that the bone returns, and let it be wrung with some extension.
And therefore force you to wring the ends of the fracture between them, and if the end of the cracked bone is thin, and it does not take that instrument with good extension, then see that you insert the extremity of that bone so that the instrument has power of that.
But if you cannot reduce the bone at all with what we have recommended, then insert it with whatever is convenient to him of the tools of which we have spoken; or saw that with one of the saws in whatever way it is possible for you.
And then rub in that which is written on the bones of roughness and minute scars.
And when the bone is reduced, and then the patient feels great pain from being bent, then you should know that the bone has not returned to its natural place; and so do that which will bring great relief to the patient.
When you have finished the restoration which you do to the bone, then immerse a bandage in black styptic wine, and particularly if it is summer; and do not apply to the wound plaster or any other thing in which there is oil, so that no putrefaction and corruption should arise therein.
And then administer stars in the hour of your completion of the restoration of the bone, and let the wound remain uncovered until you have inserted the splinter with forceps and used bandages according to the amount of the wound.
And take all care that you do not tighten the wound with the fracture; for many times foolish doctors have done this and brought about death or illness by corrosion or putrefaction in their patients. And if its tightness is lighter, softer, and different from the tightness of other fractures.
And if the wound is large or bad, and you fear those evil accidents which we have recounted, and feel pain in the spot, then do not put stars on that, but apply a bandage of tough cloth there instead of stars and tighten it with those.
And when about a day or two days have passed and the wound has begun to heal, and pus has been engendered therein, then remove above the bandage which you had applied over that with wine, and then administer poultices, with which according to our custom we medicate wounds, thus with tetrafarmacon and similar things.
And it is fitting for you to loosen the bandage and consider the wound every day morning and evening until it is consolidated and closed, and that the member be prepared in such a manner that the putrefaction runs from it into the parts below with ease.
If many days have passed and the wound is not consolidated nor has the pus been discharged from it, then know that here are small wounds for which you should probe the wound with a tent. And of those small wounds those which are separated and removed, those from which the member is not separated and cause pain, pierce these according to what you can do.
And if pusches or blisters occur to the wound, thus is it a phlegmon, or another kind of corruption and putrefaction; then do for each of these what befits its cure, of which there is description in its chapter.
And of that in which you should place your hope and do for yourself: when a bone is broken, it protrudes over the member thus as the bone of the thigh and of the helper, and likewise of those of the great members; and do not presume to draw it out, nor to extract it, since many times death has occurred thereby; leave that until it putrefies, for often it will fall off by itself after about 20 or 30 days. And then cure the wound if you see it; but if not, leave it.
Chapter .XX.
Of the cure of a nodule which occurs in the track of a fracture.
This nodule often occurs in the track of healing of a fracture, and more commonly it is found near joints, and it disfigures the member; and very often it prevents the member from its natural action.
Then consider if the nodule is recent and administer to that medicines which have dried thus as aloe, and fennel, and mithridate, and ser�קק, and acrasium, and similar things; in such a way that you take of those some or all, and apply them to the nodule in a poultice, and bind those around it with good tightness.
And let the tightness not be loosened for several days; and then loosen it and repeat another, until the nodule is soaked; or tighten over that a lamina of lead descendingly, since lead has property to soak up all which is swollen in the members.
But if the nodule is already turned to stone and tight, and necessitates causes osting it, then split that through the part which rises above it, and insert the superfluity and prominent, or cut that with some resors within until it is soaked; and cure that within until it is healed.
Chapter .XXI.
Of restoration of a fracture when it is restored and then that occurs to the member subtle and frail, not according to its nature.
When a bone fracture is restored, and then that occurs to the member subtle and frail, then that is not done except for several causes: one of which is excess of soluation of the ligament and of its binding not according as it should; or by superfluity of tightness of the ligaments within which the nourishment is prohibited from running to the member; or by excess of embrocation superfluous; or by superfluous movement not in its time; or by lack of blood in the body of the patient, and by debility of him.
And cure of that is to make the patient eat and to make his heart tender within until the blood is multiplied in him; and then administer a bath, and apply warm water and leechdoms over him.
And then apply plaster over the member, so that the plaster draws to it much nourishment; or continue embrocation of it with lukewarm water, until the nourishment runs and returns to its natural figure.
Chapter .XXII.
Of cure of broken bones when they are restored tortuously and prevent the action of them from what should be.
When it occurs to the member already restored that in its healing of tortuosity and eminence of the broken bone and nodule, and it is thus deformed in figure of the member; but yet the member is not prohibited from its natural action, then do not receive the word of him who examines that member that it is newly broken.
But already there are many foolish doctors and restorers who have done this in our land; and that operation is very blameworthy, presenting great fear the sign of which is mortal.
But if the claudication and nodule are recent, then let them be embrocated with lukewarm water in which are infused herbs which soften, thus as the leaves of alder and its bark, and mallow, and similar things; and let a poultice be made on it with mollifying emollient, thus with dill-seed oil well prepared; or that it be smeared with mucilage of alder-bark and let it be bound up with lint of linen, or with oil of ceruse, and let it be plastered with that; or that they are made into fat figures and let them be bound on with woolen threads, and similar things to the medicines which are named amerman's consolidations.
And sometimes it is dissolved by frequent gentle friction which should be with the moistened hands, and let the member have motion to every part in all hours.
But if the tortuosity is increased before and is made strong and turned to stone, and necessitates cure of it with iron, then let the pus be above dried up and the continuity of the bone be dissolved, and that which superabounds of nodule of that members by means of subtle instruments, and let facility be administered in that by solicitude and study.
Chapter 23.
Of speech in dislocation.
Dislocation is the displacement of one of the joints of its place, by which it is prohibited from moving, and the shape of the member is distorted, and it causes great pain and injuries to the patient.
Therefore, when dislocation occurs, one should immediately attempt to reduce it and not delay in doing so, for if it is delayed, the place will become inflamed and much more difficult to reduce.
And for this reason, one should not allow the patient to be angry or tense during the inflammation, for many times it causes spasms and pain.
But when this happens, one should apply the flebotomy to the patient's body, and let him lie down so that he may rest the inflammation; and the member should be rubbed with warm water and oil, and then reduced with ease.
And every member should be cured with that which will bring memory back to its place.
And now I have arranged the chapters on dislocation according to what is preceded in fracture: from the upper part of the body to the lower.
Chapter 24.
Of the cure for the dislocation of the lower jaw.
So dislocated are the two jaws if they do not grind; and the dislocation of both is done in one of two ways: either they are pushed out of their places by a little movement and are slightly softened, or they are completely dislocated and filled out, so that they are softened at the joint where saliva flows from the patient's mouth and he cannot hold it closed nor can he close his mouth, and his tongue is wrapped in his speech.
But when the dislocation of him is little, then in the major dispositions it returns by itself for a little cause.
But if the dislocation is entire and complete, then it must be administered reduction of him quickly, and not delayed at all.
And it is that the minister hold the patient's head, and the doctor put his finger of one hand into the root of the dislocation of the jaw within the patient's mouth if the dislocation is on one side; or he puts his two fingers together, if the dislocation is on both sides, and the other fingers outside with which he grips; and he commands the patient to stop his jaws and relax those from any side; and the doctor grips the jaw and slides it back into its place.
And if the reduction is difficult for him, and especially if both jaws are completely dislocated, then administer evaporation with warm water and oil, so that the reduction of both is made easier and do not delay the reduction of both at all, as we have said.
And so when they return and are gripped, and the patient's mouth is closed and not softened, then pause upon it powdery linen with cerotum, and let it be made of wax and rozated oil; and then bind it with ease with mild ligatures.
And let the patient sleep on his back, and his head be standing between two pillows, so that he does not grind to the right or left; and do not force him for any cause to chew anything; let his food be lean meat, so that when the pains are pushed back and the jaws are numbed, then he may chew what he will.
And that should be administered with ease, and do not work on the opening of the mouth after eating and drinking and waking, so that the jaw is numbed and healed.
And if the reduction of two jaws is difficult when they are dislocated at any time and not returned to their places, then many times it happens that fever and constant soddeness occur, and very often the patient's belly is irritated, and very often he vomits pure cholera.
And when you see this, then know that it is perilous; and many times he dies who experiences this within seven days.
Chapter 25.
Of the reduction of the dislocation of the collarbone and of the extremity of the muscle.
The collarbone is not dislocated from within through its continuation with the shoulder; and sometimes it is dislocated outward at its outer end, and that is declared by feeling.
And the restoration of it is that the patient holds his head down and extends his arms. And then grip the place with your palm with strong compression, for it will return.
And then pause upon it plaster and powdery linen and strengthen that.
But the extremity of that which has its head and is continued with that, is not dislocated on any day; then it must be reduced and gripped according to what we have said and according to what your apparatus is prepared.
And then pause upon it plaster and powdery linen and compression, and command the patient to adhere to tranquility and rest until he is healed.
And with this medicine the extremity of the muscle is reduced when it is separated from its place.
Chapter 26.
Of the reduction of the dislocation of the muscle.
Know that the muscle is not dislocated except in three ways, of which one is that it is dislocated at the end of the tendon at the lower part.
And the second is that it is dislocated at the upper part of the muscle, and that is done quickly; and it is not dislocated at the sides behind the shoulder; and it is not dislocated at the front by the nerves.
And mostly it is dislocated and outside at the lower parts after the tendon, and mostly in those of which there are few meats, it is dislocated quickly; but in those in which there are many meats, it is pushed out with difficulty.
And soon after some men experience impact or injury, and their muscles become inflamed with an inflammatory swelling, and are believed to be dislocated by this.
Then when you examine him lying on his back, and then proceed with the treatment for him.
And you know that the dislocation is in the limbs when, after you touch it, it feels ticklish; so that you distinguish between the dislocated muscle and the healthy one, for you will find a clear difference between them; and you will find a hollow in the head of the dislocated muscle and it feels ticklish when you touch its head like an egg, and the patient cannot bring his hand to his ear on that side, nor move it at all.
If it is dislocated in the foot or ankle and you feel this clearly by touching, and it isn't hidden.
And this dislocation has an easier reduction when it is fresh and the patient is a child.
And the reduction of it is that the minister raises the patient's hand above him; and he places his fingers below the ticklish spot, and lifts the joint with strength to its place, and the minister raises the patient's hand, and stretches it above, and he places it below because it returns more easily.
But if it doesn't return after what we've said, and so from the beginning that the dislocation occurred, many days later, then the patient should be bathed in warm water and a poultice should be administered to soften and open it as if his feet were frostbitten, with aniseed, fenugreek, and mallows in water, and it is applied.
And then the patient should be laid on his back and placed below the ticklish spot he should have a pad of wool that is halfway between being loose and tight, and then the doctor puts his heel on the sphere, and lifts the head of the muscle with strength, and pulls the patient's hand so that it isn' t pulled to the sides, and another minister holds the head of the patient so that it isn't pulled to the sides, for then it will return to its place immediately.
And if you want, reduce it in this way: and it is that you have a man present who is taller than the patient, and he stands on that side, and inserts his finger below the ticklish spot of the patient and lifts the ticklish spot of him to the sides above while the patient is suspended in air, and another minister pulls the patient's hand from the sides of his belly. But if the patient is light, then it should be suspended by another cause, to weigh it down, for the dislocation returns immediately.
And it is reduced in the same way: and it is that a long pole is placed on the ground, the tip of which is round in shape, like mortar, neither thick nor thin, and then the patient is placed below it; after he's placed on top of the tip of the pole, linen sheets, and the patient stands according to the length of the pole, and then his hand is stretched to the sides from the other side with strength, for the joint returns to its place quickly.
And if it is difficult to reduce it for all the causes we' ve said, then use this treatment: and it is that you take a pole whose length is two yards, and its width is four digits, and its thickness is removed according to the size of the ticklish spot in this way:
And then on the round tip are tied linen sheets so that the patient doesn' t slide down the pole.
And then the ticklish spot of the patient is placed below it, and his hand or arm is stretched above the pole to the sides, and the pole is tied over the assistant's shoulder and arm and the end of his hand.
Then the arm is placed over a rung of a ladder according to its width, and his hand is stretched to the sides, and his other body is suspended on the other side, for the joint enters immediately.
And when the treatment of it is completed according to any manner that is possible for you, and then you place below the ticklish spot a pad of wool in equal quantity; and then apply a plaster prepared from ground moly with egg white over all the muscle, as if it were rolled over it, and then tightly press down on the ticklish spot with decent pressure; and the bandage is rolled over the plaster, and his hand is attached to his neck, and he is left for seven days, and his hand is not pulled.
And it should be abstained from food for a little while, so that the limb is more comfortable, for it is easier to heal.
And then food should be given more frequently, and exercise should be done, and if it is firm and not softened, then it is healed.
But if the joint is dislocated many times due to moisture that occurs with it or for another cause, then cauterization should be done in three spots, as mentioned earlier in the chapter on cauterization.
And if all of that is done and then seven days later the bandage is removed and the joint isn' t firm, and the plaster and pressure are reduced on it several times, and it isn' t firm, and there are cat bites and he can't lift his arm to the sides above him, then know that its nerves, which are at the head of the muscle, are cut or stretched or softened, and know that the joint will never be placed in its place.
The reduction of that which is dislocated at the foot and ankle, and behind, is done with pushing and stretching by hands, so that it returns.
And then the other pressure is administered on it, and that treatment within so that it is healed.
And if after the healing, gravity increases on the limb and delay in its movement, then the patient should use a bath several times so that the gravity is lessened and it returns to its first nature.
Chapter 27.
On the treatment of dislocation of the elbow.
Know that the elbow joint is dislocated with difficulty and returns with difficulty; and it is dislocated to all sides, and most to the front side from the back side, and its dislocation is not hidden from you because when you bend the elbow outward or downward according to whatever shape it is dislocated in, if you adjust it, then it is clearly declared to you that the joint is concaved and can't bend the arm, nor touch with it his muscle.
And know that if you bend your elbow and reduce the dislocation immediately before it comes to an inflammatory swelling, for if it comes to an inflammatory swelling, it is difficult to reduce, and very quickly it isn' t healed at all; and especially when it is behind, for it is worse than any other kind of dislocation, and most painful, and often results in death.
And its restoration, when it is possible to reduce, is that his hand be stretched by two men, and his arm spread out, and the hands of the doctor are on the elbow and below him, and he pushes the joint with the tips of his fingers of his hands inwards, or with the edge of his palm so that it returns to its place.
But if the dislocation is at the front side, then it returns as he bends his hand with his hand, so that he pierces the elbow with the edge of his palm.
If the dislocation does not obey reduction, then administer violent extension and strong motion.
Two ministers should extend the arm, and two ministers should hold that joint so that it is not twisted during extension.
Then the arm should be rotated all around, since it is wrapped in a long folded cloth on their hand or ligament.
And when the doctor touches the joint with his hand, he should anoint it with some oil so that it is made smooth by the cause that helps in lubricating the joint with ease; and then forcefully push the joint until it returns to its place.
And then the reduction of it should be stopped on that plaster in which it was stipitated and exequated with white egg, and tightened with a decent bandage, and the arm suspended from the neck, and left for several days.
And then it should be released; and therefore if the joint is formed in its place, then you should release the ligament of it and leave that.
And if you see the joint is not stronger, then you should iterate the plaster and the ligament, and leave that for several days while it is tightened; and then release that.
But if there is a great difficulty in reducing the joint and its disposition is in motion, then administer moistening in bath and subtle friction, and compression while it is elevated; or pause over the joint all-night, since it is a place of quick movement; and then let it be bound, and leave that over the bone for the day and night. And then stop that, and put that person in a bath; and when he is sweat, then you should rub the joint with temperate friction, and then iterate over that all-night, since it is rosemary of quick movement, one time, and the second, and the third. Corruption has already occurred in the innermost lining of the brain, where there is a membrane.
And if you want, pause over that cow's udder that is wet and heated with a bowl and stretched over that; and do that several times, because that is wet and reduced to its disposition.
Chapter .XXVIII.
Of cure for dislocation of the malasse, which is of the joint that is between the arm and the hand.
Malasse of the hand sometimes is displaced, and the reduction of its dislocation is easy, and the contrary is of the other joints, but however there must be swiftness in the reduction of it in the hour in which it is displaced, lest that the place be apostoematized or that apostemation occur in it.
And the reduction of its dislocation is that you place the joint of the hand of the patient on a table and the minister extends the hand of that one, and the doctor places his hand or the palm of his hand over the eminence of the joint, and pushes it back into its place.
But however one must consider if the palm is already extended to the belly of the hand, then the patient places the back of his hand on a table against extension and reduction; and if the dislocation is previous to the back of the hand, then let the position of the hand of that one be intrinically over the table, so that the hand of the doctor presses over that eminence of the joint.
And therefore if it returns immediately, then it is good; but if not, then strengthen that with plaster yielding to apostemation and leave that; and do not iterate that, for unless one passes several days on the reduction of it.
But however the joint is bent according to its tortuosity; and not know the patient any cause except that the hand is weakened and can't strengthen any cause; then you should know that the nerves are cut or torn, and then there is no use in it except that it be strengthened with cautery near the break of it and strongly do that some cause.
Therefore when the malasse is returned, then pause over it plaster which we have recommended, and let it be left and bound for 5 days; and then let it be released and let his hand be exercised.
But if the movement of it is hindered and any difficulty occurs in it, then moisten that with warm water and with friction several times, while it is elevated.
Chapter .XXIX.
Of the cure for dislocation of the fingers.
Sometimes the fingers are dislocated completely apart.
And when any of those fingers is dislocated from the back of the palm or from its belly, then stretch the finger and push the dislocation of it with your fingers, while it returns to its place.
And then hold the tip of the finger, and suspend that from the part to which it is dislocated, and leave that for two days.
And then suspend that and extend that until straight while it is greased in that its day.
And when evening comes, loosen that according to that narration, and do not stop releasing that in the day and exercising with movement, and loosen that at night; and do that for several days until it is tight.
And make it seem like that if it is dislocated from the belly of the hand, and loosen that to that part and do with that the first operation, while it is healed.
And similarly do with that when it is dislocated at the other parts.
Chapter .XXX.
Of the cure for dislocation of the spine of the shoulder.
When it occurs to any of the spine of the shoulder or neck complete dislocation and only the spines remain in their places, then there is no cure in that, because death approaches the patient.
And sign of that is that the excretion of the patient is outside without his will, and he can't retain that; and sometimes some members of him are weakened or two arms or two legs, or one of those; or it is weakened one spine from its place, because sometimes it is weakened and sometimes the removal of those is to four parts.
Then that is already weakened at the back parts and is named dislocation.
But the cure of it is that you consider if the dislocation occurs from puerperal fever, because then in that there is no cure nor of that there is healing of all.
But in that which comes from settlement or from percussion or similarly to those, the Ancients already stated their ways of cure with prolix speech, of which the most returns with profit; but I and abbreviated that which is not excused by the amount of it, because of its proximity to my intention expose, I have expounded and formed that with diverse instrument from that by which I showed that.
And those are not healed except that which occurs in the shoulder properly by that I recommend.
And it is that the patient is extended over his face on the ground, and is extended under him instrument moist so that he isn't stretched the feet of him.
And then a straight staff is placed, fixed in the ground at the end of the wall around the head of him, and another staff in air under his feet at the other extremity of the wall.
And the minister holds the staff, and it is not stopped in a pit; and another minister holds the other according to that form.
And then wrap a bandage around the patient's head and let the servants pull firmly on it; and extend the end of the bandage to the staff, which is placed behind the patient's head, and tie that around him; and then tighten the other bandage around his hips and the servants' hands, and tie those around his legs; and then adjust all the bandages and tie them to the other staff, which is placed by his feet.
And then each servant should extend the bandage to the end of the staff, and the two staffs and the bandages in their places where they are tied should not be loosen, but rather tightened as we have said.
And the doctor should place his palms on the patient's spine and press firmly down as he returns, or he may also lie on a table with his feet elevated above him.
But if he does not return in this way, then take a table whose length and breadth is about three yards, and cut into the wall near where we said the patient was lying, a space big enough for the end of the table to fit through. Then place half of the table on the patient's spine, and have the doctor stand on the other end, and press firmly down as the spine is straightened and forced back into its proper place.
And if you wish, open the turn which is wound around his hand; and then place on the ground in front of the patient's head, two staffs whose length is about one yard, and in front of his head, another two staffs, so that there is a palm' s distance between each staff; and there should be a cut in each staff through which a rope can pass, and each staff should be firmly secured to the ground so that it does not loosen.
And there should also be a vertical staff in which the turn is wound around, and it should be secured between the two cuts in the two staffs.
And at its end there is a cut through which the staff passes, the length of which is one palm long where it is wound around; and the other two staffs are similar to this one.
Then tighten the bandages that you have wrapped around the patient' s feet and the ones around his thighs with the turn that is tied to his feet.
And then secure each turn and have a servant twist it with their hand while the doctor bends the spine as we have said.
And when the spine has been straightened and the wound covered, then apply a plaster made of honey and wax; and then place a splint made of wood whose length is three digits or more, depending on the size of the swelling, and its breadth should be as much as it takes to cover the area of the gelbositat and the upper part of the spine.
And then tie it with a bandage as we have said, and let the patient take nourishing foods until he recovers.
And if there is any swelling left in the area after the healing process is complete, then apply medicines that soften and smooth it out through the application of the table for an extended period of time as we have recommended; and a lamina of lead should also be applied to that area.
And sometimes it happens that there is swelling in the back of the spine's joints due to dislocation; and this bone, which causes great pain, does not respond well to this medicine, so be careful when using it.
E si tu voles, obre am torn le qual es revolvut am la ma; e es que tu fiques en terra deves le cap del malaute en le derier del pug dos fustz, la longitut dels quals sia d’un bras, e deves le cap de lu en le derier del pug eyssament dos fustz; e sia la longitut que es entre quascun fust un palm, e ja es fayt en quascun fust trauc en le qual corr torn, e quascun sia mot fermat en terra per so que no sia maugut.
On the treatment of a dislocated hip.
Know that the joint of the hip and the joint of the muscle do not become dislocated except by complete dislocation, and it does not happen to them what happens to other joints of small displacement and concavity.
And the joint of the hip is dislocated in four ways, for it is dislocated at the inner parts, or at the outer parts, or at the front parts, or at the back parts.
And most often it is dislocated at the inner parts, and seldom at the front or back parts.
And the sign of its dislocation at the inner parts is that when you move the patient's healthy leg with the sick one, it is longer and the heel is higher than the healthy one, and the patient cannot bend their foot because the joint of the hip is dislocated, and there is a swelling in front of the hip joint due to cauterization, so that the head of the hip has already come here.
And the sign of dislocation at the outer parts is that its accidents are contrary to those mentioned above.
And the sign of dislocation at the front parts is that when they try to extend their leg, it does not bend at all without pain, and if they force themselves to walk, they cannot put any weight on the front part of the foot; and their urine is retained and there is swelling in front of the hip joint.
And the sign of dislocation at the back parts is that they cannot extend their leg or bend it forward due to pain; and their leg is shorter than the other one, and there is swelling in front of the hip joint.
But the reduction of this dislocation is that you consider, then, if the dislocation is old and ancient, having already been treated with the proper reduction, then it does not need treatment at all; so there should be no cauterization performed on it.
But if the dislocation is recent and one of the four types of dislocation, then you may proceed to return the joint by extending it at its inner and outer parts, and also to the right and left side, for it will quickly return on its own without needing any further treatment.
But if it does not return in this way, then you should prepare a strong servant and extend the patient's leg from its lowest part, or by his hands, or by a bandage tied around the leg above the heel; and another servant should hold the patient's hand up high so that they can press down on the heel; and another servant should tighten a pointed cautery against the root of the hip joint.
And its extension is either from the inner part to the outer part, or from the back part to the front part.
And they are all extended in one motion while the patient is lifted up by their body from the ground and hangs down.
And this type of extension is common to all four types.
And so if the dislocation returns as we have said, then all is well; but if not, then it is necessary to use any of the following remedies for its treatment.
In the reduction of dislocation, when it is located in the joints within, the patient should be laid on their side; then pause the ligaments over the root of the hip at that spot between the head of the hip and where the psoas muscle is located below; and extend the ligament upwards from the part of the iliac bone to the highest part of the furcula.
Then another assistant should strongly pull the patient's arms, press on the large part of the hip joint and extend outwards with great force, for this will return to its place.
And this species is the quickest cure through which this member is reduced compared to other species.
But if you are excused and do not obey this species of cure completely, then the two feet of the patient should be bound together with a strong ligature, lightly, around both heels and both toes.
And the length of each of its pairs should be the quantity of four fingers, and the ill leg should be extended more than the other by a quantity of two fingers.
Then let the ill leg be suspended over the head of the bed, and let it be in the middle; and its length from the ground should be the quantity of two arms.
Then command a strong young man to push down on the head of the hip joint, and let another young man suspend the ill leg, while the other young man, pushing with strength, pulls up on the hip, for the joint will return to its place quickly.
But in the reduction of dislocation, when it is located on the outside, let the patient lie on his back as we have recommended for those who have stiffness; and tighten the ligament over the ill leg properly and over its foot.
Then two beams should be placed, one under the patient's feet and another under his head; and beams that are adjusted to the middle of the beam should be placed on which dampened cloths are wrapped, so that the ill leg is not damaged by the beam being between the patient's thighs, for when the extension is made downwards, it should not be pulled.
Then each assistant should extend to his part, and the doctor with his hand will guide the reduction according to the article.
And when the dislocation is in front, then let the ill leg be extended lightly, and it is according to this narrative on the psoas muscle; and the doctor pauses the palm of his right hand over the iliac bone of the ill leg, and then tightens that with his other hand, and with that tightening, he extends that to the parts below to the part of the toe.
And if the dislocation is in the back, then let the ill leg not be extended to the parts below and it is elevated above the ground; but let it be paused on a hard cause, just as it would be if the ankle of the ill leg were dislocated outwards, according to what we have said about its setting upon two axes; and it lies on its side and the ligaments are extended, according to what we have said, not much.
And let compression be administered with a board over the place where the joint is dislocated.
Thus, when the reduction is done according to what you have — and the sign of the reduction of the leg is not hidden from you, and it is that you extend both legs from the ill leg, and when you see those equalizations and the ill leg extending its leg and expanding without excuse, then know that the member according to which it has returned — and then you adjust two thighs and pause plaster and tighten with bandage so that the joint is not damaged in either part; and let the ill leg rest for three or four days.
Then release the ligament and the plaster, and compare one leg to the other.
Then, if you see those equalizations in appearance, then know that the dislocation is already closed, and then let the ill leg go.
And if you see any cause of softening, then return and plaster that, and tighten that according to your first tightening, and leave it for three days.
Then release that and make that delay in walking on each leg for several days, while it is comforted.
Chapter .xxxii.
Of the cure of dislocation of the toe.
The toe is dislocated according to three manners, for it is dislocated on the outside, and within, and at the bottom most towards the back; and in front it is not dislocated.
And the sign of its dislocation is that you command the ill leg to apply its leg against the hip; then know that the toe is dislocated.
And the restoration of all its manners is that you make the ill leg straight, in such a way that it already extends its leg, if it can over that; adhere the toe to the hip, and pause the foot between your feet; then let someone else adhere the toe with their palms, and pull those between your fingers onto the toe with strength, and another assistant extend the foot while the toe returns to its place.
And the sign of its reduction is that its leg adheres to the hip with non-laborious elevation.
Then plaster that and make the leg adhere to the hip, and then tie those together with a bandage for three or four days, and then release those.
And do not use the ill leg for walking for several days while it is healed and comforted.
But if the reduction of the leg to you is excused, then administer strong extension with ligaments of which in the cure of the hip preceding narrative.
Chapter .xxxiii.
Of the cure of the dislocation of the ankle.
The ankle some times is bruised by minor removal, and some times it is dislocated according to compliment, and its dislocation is made either within or outside.
And the sign of its dislocation is that you see the ankle swollen proceeding from the part to which it is dislocated.
But the cure of its removal is of easy reduction, and it is extended with facility with hands and is equalized while it returns.
But in the cure of it when it is dislocated according to compliment, let the ill leg be straightened and a strong and valiant minister of the part behind the two of that in the middle place of it.
Then you with your right hand the foot of the highest part, and with your left hand the part lowest of the foot in the place of the ankle.
Then pull the foot to you with your right hand, and then with the left twice, and then extend with the left; and push the foot of the leg with the right because the leg has its work.
And do that two times according to what we have counted.
Then push the foot of the leg to the leg on the third attempt, and you are at the ankle.
Thus if it returns on one or two according to this manner, and you see the foot equalized, it is good; and if not, then repeat the operation upon it, for it will return.
But if you are prohibited from reducing it with what we have recommended, then let the patient lie on his back on the ground, and spread a cloth on the ground beneath him, and place a pillow between his thighs, and you have already wrapped a cloth around him so that he does not catch cold.
Then the minister should have his thighs, and another minister should extend the foot with his hands or with a bandage that lies on the neck of the foot; and each minister should extend according to the direction of their side, and the pillow should be placed between the patient's thighs so that the body is not pulled towards the lower parts due to its extension.
Then the doctor should dislocate it with his hands, and another minister should hold the healthy thigh at the bottom, for the dislocation returns with ease.
And when the dislocation returns and you are shown the health of its reduction, then place an ointment and tighten it with strong bandages, and bind the foot to the leg.
And beware of the nerves that are behind on the instep, so that the bandage over them is not violent and does not hurt him strongly.
Then leave it for two or three days; and if the bandage softens, tighten it.
Then loosen it on the third day or fourth, and forbid the patient from walking for 40 days. But if he is forced to walk within that space, it is not safe that the dislocation is not dissolved and corrupted, and then that which does not receive cure.
And if an ulcerous wound happens to him, then you should administer in the healing of it that which we preceded in our narration, in another place of cure and brooding, until it is healed.
Chapter 34.
Of the cure of dislocation of the toes of the feet.
Let him who is dislocated be stretched with a little extension without difficulty; and that which is not difficult, before it is easier.
But if the dislocation is in some bones of the instep of the foot, then let him sit with his foot raised above the ground or on a table, and let him remain thus as if he were walking.
Then you stand on your feet, and place your foot over what is beneath the joints, and then press that with your foot with strength until it returns, and see that it is already stretched and there is no prominence in the location.
And then place below the belly of his foot a table that takes up the whole foot, which has two ends, and then tighten it with decent and firm pressure for three days; and then loosen it and let him rest from walking for several days, until he is healed and assured of recovery.
Chapter 35.
Of the kinds of dislocation that are made with a blow or with a fracture, or with any other impingement.
When one of those happens, and you persevere in the cure of it and in the restoration of him, many times death ensues.
And for that, one should not presume on the cure of him, but let him who is wise in the art, with long experience, compassionate and pity, be tardy, not hasty or presumptuous; and let him use in the beginning of medicines that yield ulcerous wounds only so much, and let the patient rely on divine judgement, unless he to whom you hope for salvation from destruction, with relief from sickness, and in which some hope appears. And so endeavor to reduce it at the beginning of the cause, before he incurs an ulcerous wound.
And so if the member returns according to our will, then administer medicine which yields ulcerous wounds and heals the plague with that which is appropriate for him of the dry ointments.
And if the dislocation is with a fracture and the bones are separated, then you persevere in their setting, and do what we have said in the simple sicknesses of that which precedes them in those locations.
And guard and avoid according to your ability that which is within the ways of fear, according to what my prediction precedes you; for that is better for you towards your Creator, and more permanent to your glory, and healthier to your true body than those in your time. Thus end the words of Albucasim perfectly, from which God be blessed. Amen.
