O sons, since I have completed this book for you, which is the last of the science of medicine, through its fulfillment in me, and through its expositions and declarations, it has become clear to me that you will understand this treatise, which is a part of the operation with the hand, i.e., surgery.
For the operation of the hand is nearly unknown in our realm and time, having been deprived of it almost entirely, while those who know something about it have distorted its science, and its procedures are obscured; only a few small descriptions of it remain in the books of the Ancients, which confuse the matter and lead to error and uncertainty, so that the understanding of it is blocked and its force and art diminished.
And it has seemed good to me that I should animate this treatise according to the way of exposition and declaration and abbreviation; and so that it might come with the forms of the tools of cautery and other instruments of the work as they are through the addition of the declaration, and for its preparation, which is necessary.
But the reason why no one is adept with their hand in our time is because the art of medicine is long, and its practitioner must be exercised in the science of anatomy, which knows the parts of the members and their forms, and the conjunction and separation of them; and has knowledge of the bones, the nerves, and the tendons, and the number of them, and their movement; and of the pulsating veins and the quiet ones, and their places of emission.
And so Hypocrites says that though his name is small, in the work he is great, and especially in the art of the hand.
But we have already said this in the introduction to this book; for whoever is not learned in what we have said about anatomy, it has been made clear that he should not fall into error, by which men will die, as I have seen many of them, for some are formed in this science and yet stray from it without experience.
For I saw an experienced fool of a doctor pierce a scrophula on a woman's neck, and pierce some arteries in the neck so that much blood flowed and the woman died under his hand.
And I saw another doctor who pulled out a stone from a man who was in great pain, and the stone was large; he came to him and extracted that stone with a fragment of the bladder, so that the man died on the third day.
And I called for them to stop extracting it, and saw that due to the size of the stone and the condition of the patient, I knew that he would die.
And I saw another doctor who received a stipend from a duke of our land for surgery, and he treated a black slave who had a fracture in his thigh; and preparing with his ignorance, he extracted the fracture over the plague with powders and splints with strong compression, and did not let the plague breathe.
And he healed according to his desires, and he bound it, and let it be for several days, and commanded that I should not loosen the bandage; and so it stayed as it was, and the thigh and the leg became pustular, and it came to ruin.
And I was called to him, and I prepared to loosen the bandage; and after there was tranquility and he was eased of his pains.
But indeed corruption was confirmed in the member, so that I could not restrain it, and the corruption wandered in the member until the patient perished.
And I saw another doctor who perforated a cancerous ulcer, and it festered for some days, until the wickedness of it increased with its lord.
The reason for this is that the black humor is pure in its melancholy, therefore it does not come to it with fire at all, but rather that it is in a member which suffers from everything that is hostile to it.
And so, sons, it is necessary for you that the operation of the hand should be understood in two ways: one is operation which is associated with health, and the other is work with which the greatest dispositions are endangered.
And I have already exhorted this in every place of this book where there is error and fear; so it is necessary for you to guard against this and leave that, so that fools do not hinder the way of speaking and disgracing you.
And therefore take up your weapons with zeal and with the protection of God, and your diseases with facility and with firmness.
And use the better way by the grace of God so that health and laudable success may result, and put aside terrible diseases of difficult cure, and wield your weapons against what makes you fearful, so that idleness in your faith and in your name does not leave you: for it remains to your glory, and more in the world and beyond to your sanctities.
Gaulias already said in some of his maxims: "Do not treat ill diseases ill, so that bad doctors are not named."
And I have composed this book according to three chapters.
Begins the division of the book, and first of the first part. The first chapter ordered on the head, in the forms of the instruments and the tools of cauteries, and of what is necessary in operation.
The division of the second part. The second chapter, of bleeding and piercing, and of cupping, and of plasters, and of extraction of thorns and like things, all chaptered and ordered in the forms of the instruments.
The third chapter, of restoration and of dislocation, and of cure of torque and like things; a chapter ordered on the head, in the forms of the instruments.
I shall say what the quality is of the ingredients of that cautery and of the things in it, and in what condition cautery is prohibited.
Therefore I say that the speech of the quality of the ingredient of cautery and of the thing in it is long and prolix, and subtle by science, and secret hidden; and much has been spoken about it by many wise men, and from it they have disagreed, and for me a little of their speeches is enough, fearing prolixity.
And therefore I say that cautery confers universally on all complections, save two complektions which are caustic complektions without material.
In the caustic and dry complection with material they disagreed; for some said that cautery is beneficial for it, and others said the contrary of that, that cautery is not convenient in disease which is by quality and dryness, for the nature of fire is quality and dryness, and what is convenient is that disease caustic and dry be healed with what is cauted and dry.
And he said the contrary of that, that by cautery is made remedy in all disease caustic and dry which is seen in the bodies of men, for when you compare the body of man and its humidities to the complection of fire, you rub the body of man.
And I say by the speech of that, that experiment that has been discovered to me several times.
But it is not necessary to come upon this anyone who has already been demonstrated and exercised in the chapter of cauterization by former exercise, and has known the diversity of the complexions of men and the disposition of diseases in them, and their causes, and their accidents, and the space of time of them.
But in the other complexions there is no need for fear, especially in damp and moist diseases, for all doctors have agreed on these, and they do not disagree about using cauterization to treat them.
And understand, sons, that the secret of curing by cauterization with fire and its goodness is that it is a simple substance whose action does not extend to the members joined to the one cauterized, and it does not affect any other member except with a slight injury.
But the action of burning medicine extends to other members, and it strongly brings about a difficult-to-cure disease in them, and strongly weakens them.
But fire, by its subtlety and the goodness of its substance, does not do that except to cause it to superfluous. And we have known through experience and through long service in studying the truth of causes, and so I am excused from the length of speech. And if it were not for my not being free to read this hidden secret to you with fire, and the quality of its operation on bodies and its expulsion through which you expel diseases, by philosophical speech demonstrated, which would be acute in your ears.
And understand, sons, that they disagree on the time when it is convenient to do cauterization, and they pause at the best time in spring.
And I say that cauterization is convenient at all times, as long as the harm caused by the accidental time is submerged in the benefit of what is drawn by cauterization, and especially if the cauterization is for pain or necessary pains, strong and violent, which do not tolerate delay for fear of evil, which is greater than slight harm coming through the weather.
And know this, or, sons, that which is not believed except by the common people and foolish doctors, it is that to that disease which is healed by cauterization there is no reduction at all time, and they pause at the consequent one.
And the cause is not as they think through that, for cauterization is only in place of medicine which alters the complexion and dries up the moistnesses which are the cause of the pains coming.
But cauterization surpasses medicine through willingness in its strength and virtue of its operation, and the greatness of its lord.
And it is possible that his disease will return at some time of the year, according to the complexion of the patient and the location of the disease, and its strength, and what has been prepared in his body through the gathering of superfluities in him, and what he has received from him in food and likeness from those causes; but that disease for which cauterization is administered is a subtle disease in members with few superfluities and moistnesses, thus as cauterization for toothache and its like to it, it is possible that this pain will not return in him, but what happens in small amounts.
And the common speech is that cauterization is the last remedy of medicine, and it is a true speech, not that they understand in it, for they believe that there is no cure that benefits from medicine or anything else except cauterization.
And the cause is contrary to that; and the intention that cauterization is the last remedy of medicine is only when we administer the methods of curing in certain diseases, and those medicines do not confer it, and then at the end of the cause, we administer hom cautery, and it benefits from that. And from here we see that cauterization is the last remedy of medicine, not according to the intention which the common people and foolish doctors understand.
And they say that cauterization with gold is better than cauterization with iron, and they do not say this except for the equality of gold and subtlety of its substance.
And they say that the place of cauterization does not matter, even though it is absolutely true, for I have seen and proven that it only happens in some bodies without the others, and cauterization with it is good and better than with iron as they say; but when you do cauterization with fire with gold, it is not declared to you, for it is heated according to the quantity that you want through the roughness of the gold, and prepares to receive heat; and if you put on fire some leaves so that the craftsman sees through the occupation of that.
And for this, cauterization with iron is done to us more lightly and closer to the correctness of operation.
And I have arranged this chapter on cauterization according to chapters, and have arranged those of the head among the feet, so that they may ask him for what they want from him.
The first chapter.
This cauterization confers with moistness and coldness the superficial accident of which it has two causes, it is caused by soda and multitude of fluxes, called corissa, from the parts of the ears and nostrils flowing, and multitude of sleep, and toothache and of the gullet, and universally of all disease that comes through coldness, thus with paralysis, stroke, and its like in those diseases.
The form of this cauterization is as follows: first of all, order the patient to be evacuated by laxative medicine three or four times, depending on the strength of the patient and his age and habit.
And then command that he washes his head with water, and then let him sit between your knees on a low bench, and place his hands over his feet.
And then pause the edge of your palm close to the tip of the nose between your eyebrows. But if after three days it has not arrived, mark that location with ink, and then light the cauterization olive, of which this is the form:
And then place it over the location marked by ink, in such a way that it descends, and your hand be forced little by little, and you turn it.
And then lift your hand lightly and look at the location, and if you see some amount of the head, thus as the amount of grains of sand, then lift your hand again, and if it does not return to your hand with that iron, with another one, if it is cold, between what has been seen by you that I have said to you.
And then take a little salt and dissolve it over the location and leave it for three days.
And then place on it wet cotton in vinegar and let it sit there until the fire ash is destroyed. And then heal the location with tetraceutical ointment once it has healed.
And they say that when the Roman plaster is open, as many miles are added to the distance, for it is better and more beneficial.
And some of them say that the head be cauterized within the eye socket and have the cauterization within the eye socket as it is attached to some part of the brain.
And then it is cut that which is attached to the bone, and then it is healed.
Others say that with the cautery they come to the end, while they press on the strong bone as they enter it, and this is the form of small Alfecat. And they consider that from that location they expel the vapor from the head.
And if the wound is open for a long time, it should be treated until it is healed and consolidated.
But I have not seen these two types of cautery at all, except in some men according to the way of fear; and leaving that aside, for me it is better for health when there is no pain, since the head is relieved through solution of continuity as we have testified in other members, and especially when the nature of the patient's head is of a phlegmatic nature.
And the first type of cautery is safer and better for me, and it is used and works with health.
Chapter second.
Of cautery of the head.
When in all the head there occurs chronic and long-lasting pain and this is prolonged in the patient, using serots and clysters and head-purges and plasters and poultices and bandages and herbs and similar things, and especially if it has already been cauterized with a cautery which we count and does not benefit him from any of those causes, then consider that if the nature of the patient's head is of a strong creation in its nature; and it is phlegmatic and finds great heat in it, then cauterize it with another cautery after that one. Then cauterize it on the crown of his head with a cautery so that the vein is cut. The vein is cut and the quantity which we have counted is revealed and cauterized with a cautery in the back of the head in the place which is called the vessel — and it is that place where a leech is applied. And you put your hand on it, and do not reveal the bone, for the patient will find much greater pain from that than from all the other cauteries of the head.
And I say this cautery in its place, for the cautery with which you cautarize the horns of the head and the occiput is more subtle cautery than that with which the middle part of the head is cauterized; and this is how it is done.
Chapter third.
Of cautery of recent and not antique emigration.
When in the front of the head there is painful swelling, or pain extends to the eye, the head should be evacuated with cleansing medicines, and other treatment should be administered, which I have described in the chapters on diseases; and if all does not help, cautery in it is in two ways: either cautery with an acute burning medicine, or with a hot iron.
But cautery with a burning medicine is that you take a piece of wool and char it, and scrape away its edges and bind the ends of it on both sides of the head. Then cut the place of pain in the temple with a pointed lance so that it is made under the vein and hidden.
Then tighten it with a tight bandage, leaving that aside for the space of three hours; then loosen it and treat the ash, leaving the wound for two or three days, and then put cold water on it until the place becomes swollen.
Then heal it with ointment as it heals.
And if you wish, do this with some burning medicines which I have written in the two treaties of burning medicines.
But the cautery with an iron is done according to this way: heat for cautery, of which this is the form:
and it is called a closed key, for the head of it is thus shaped like a key in which there is some curvature, and in the middle place of it there is a small eminence.
Then pause over the place of pain, and hold your hand — so that it is not burnt by the iron which is below — and move the hot iron little by little with speed.
And if the quantity of it that is burnt by the heat of the vein thus according to its nature and size, and raise your hand so that the artery below is not burnt, so that there comes no flow of blood.
Then soak a bandage in salt water and pause it over the place, leaving that for three days; then pause the bandage moistened with wine, and heal with ointment as it heals.
And if you wish, cauterize with the end of the scalpel according to cautery, and beware of incision of artery in this recent and not antique emigration.
Chapter fourth.
Of cautery of ancient emigration.
When you treat emigration with what we have said of the preceding treatment, and what we have said in the chapters on diseases, and the treatment does not help, and you see that the disease is not satisfied by it according to what we have said of the first cautery with medicine or of cautery with fire, then when you ignite the cautery-scalpel so that it is whitened, push it onto the place of pain with a line of length according to its size, or as much as that; and raise your hand by a pathway and tighten it so that you cut the artery and it comes into the bone.
However it is necessary for you to beware of the continuation of the mandible which is gnawed by chewing, and that the ligament not be burnt and the nerve which gnaws that, and that no spasms come.
And if it is upon the custody and caution of flow of blood from the artery which is cut, for in the cutting of it there is danger, and especially to him who ignores what he does and is not experienced and educated; leave the operation at the beginning.
And I will come with remembrance of the rule of flow of blood from the artery according to his own way, in his own place of this free book.
And if you see of this disease that it does not help that cautery and you see the body of the patient tolerable, cauterize him in the middle place of the head as we have counted, and heal the wound as it heals.
And if you wish, administer the cautery which we have said in the chapter on stretching of artery with cautery having two edges, and this cautery is better and more potent.
Chapter fifth.
Of cautery for pains of ears.
When in the ear there is pain from heat and it is treated with lytic causes and with other treatment which I have said in the division, and the pain is not relieved, then ignite the cautery and this is called puncta, of which this is the form:
Then push the point of ignition and it is carried into the whole ear as it is turned, or in the circuit of whichever part if the pain is in whichever part. Take it away with the cautery of the edge of the ear a little by little as you test the place with touch.
And if the cautery of ten points in all the ears, and whichever part, then heal the places as they are healed.
Chapter sixth.
Of cautery for tetter.
Tetter which is healed and cautery of it is not but of the spices which come through phlegm, according to what we have said in the chapters on diseases.
Beware of cautery of the species that comes through drying or through spasm of the nerve.
When you treat this type of torture with chains and whipings and threats, and your cure does not work, then you should cauterize the patient with three cauteries: you must apply the first one at the root of the ear, the second one below his temple, and the third one at the junction of two lips.
And apply your cautery on the opposite side of the affected area, because softening only occurs in the part that appears healthy.
And the way to perform cauterization is to cauterize the patient on the right side of the upper part of the ear, a little above the horn of the head, and another one on the temple, the length of which should be according to the length of the finger toe, and place your hand with the cautery until half of the amount of the thickness of the skin is burned.
And this is the form of cauterization, and it is the specialty of the surgeon, the shape of his tool being like a table. But in fact, it is more subtle: when you see that there is too much thickness, you should cut a little bit into the patient.
Then treat the wound with what is called the direct process until it heals.
Chapter 7.
On cauterization for old apoplexy.
When apoplexy is old and you treat it with what we have said and your medicine does not work, and the patient does not have fever, then cauterize him with four cauteries: on both horns of his head, as we have said; and with a cautery in the middle part of the head, as we have said; and with a cautery in the neck. And the manner of cauterization is done according to what has been said above.
And it is cauterized on the mouth of the stomach; and it is more behind; and it should be treated with what has already been said.
Chapter 8.
On cauterization for oblivion caused by phlegm.
Give the patient at the beginning large whips and purifying pills.
Then scrape the whole head of the patient and place on his neck a plaster made from cedar resin, as described in the treatise on plasters.
And apply this several times, because this is the way to cauterize. And do that according to the order of medicines which we have already said.
And if he gets better with that, good; and if not, then do to him three cauteries on the back part of his head, which descend from the upper part of the head to the lower part of the neck. And place between each cautery the thickness of a finger, and treat the cauteries with what has been said.
But if you think that he can bear it and the patient can tolerate it, then do to him a cautery in the middle part; and if you see greater tolerance, then cauterize him on both horns.
Then treat that until it is healed; and let the cautery be olive-shaped according to the form given above.
Chapter 9.
On cauterization for paraplegia and on softening all the body.
Give the patient whips and purifying pills in the head as we have said; then scrape his head and cauterize it with a cautery in the middle part of the head, and with a cautery on both horns of the head, and with a cautery on the back part of him, and with three cauteries on the vertebrae of the neck.
And if it is necessary in the softening of the body and the patient can tolerate it, and the disease is strong, then cauterize him with four cauteries on the vertebrae of the back, and lastly with a cautery until half of the thickness of the skin is burned, and raise your hand. Then treat that until it is healed, and let this be an olive-shaped cautery.
Chapter 10.
On cauterization for epilepsy.
The epileptic is not cauterized unless the epilepsy is due to phlegm.
And so give the brain of him at the beginning whips and the other treatment which we have said in the division when the patient is large and can tolerate the exception of medicines.
And if the patient is a child who does not suffer from medicines, then administer healing and masticables, before which for several days there should be benefit from food.
Then scrape the head of the patient, and cauterize him with a cautery in the middle part of the head according to the previous manner, and with another cautery on his occipital bone, and on each horn of his head. And if the patient is strong and can tolerate it, then cauterize him with cauteries as we have said, having paralysis and softening of the body on the vertebrae of the neck and the back.
And let the cautery be olive-shaped according to what has been said before.
But if the patient is a child, then apply a subtle cautery according to this manner.
Chapter 11.
On cauterization for melancholy.
When the causes of melancholy are corrupted humors and phlegm, then cauterize him with cauteries as we have said in having paralysis.
And if the cause of melancholy is excessive decline into melancholy, and the body of the patient is humid, then give him what purifies his brain according to what has preceded in the division.
Then scrape the head of the patient, and properly make a torch made of lye over the circle, and then place it in the middle part of the head.
And let the patient be for sixty days, and let him be held from every side.
Then give him a lining; and it is more worthy to make an old sheep’s udder. And warm that over the fire with moderate heat according to measure, as long as he can tolerate it when it is on him. Then place that in the middle part of his head over the circle, and rub it until it is warm.
And do that with the patient once a week for a month, and let him have his other regime as long as he is better; or if you want, cauterize him making small points according to his age, unless you hold your hand with a cautery in this way: this is a special cautery which moistens the brain equally.
Then give that cut in a bag made of wool or in a towel of flannel.
Chapter 12.
On cauterization for water descending into the navel.
When you see the beginning of water in the navel because of phlegm as we have said in the division, then begin and give the patient what purifies his head, and guard him from all humors.
And make that sweat in a bath made of vinegar for several days.
Then command that he wash his head, and cauterize him with a cautery in the middle part of the head; and then cauterize him with two cauteries on two temples if the beginning is of water in two navels, or on one side if it is the beginning of water in one navel.
Penetrate with a cautery all the veins and arteries which are under the skin; and let the cauteries be long in that length of the temples.
Guard against flows of blood when it is cauterized; and if you see flows of blood from him, stop them with some medicine which is possible for you.
I bring wisdom, which comes from the extraction of arrows and from the cauterization of these wounds and the flow of blood.
And sometimes it is cauterized in the head, under the bones, with two cauteries made recently.
Chapter 13.
On the cauterization of old tears.
When tears from the holes are old and persistent, and flow through veins and arteries in the head, causing a surplus of phlegmatic moisture, then cauterize it with the cautery we described in the chapter on the beginning of water gushing from the holes; apply the cautery in the middle part of the head, and use two cauteries on the neck below the temples, and two cauteries on the neck under the bones. And if there is a need for more cauterization, then cauterize it all over the root of the hole on the upper lip with a small cautery.
Chapter 14.
On the cauterization for the odor of the nose.
When you treat a patient with what we have said in the division and your treatment does not work, then prepare and give the patient enemas for three nights; then shave his head, and cauterize the midline of the head with an olive-oil cautery. Then cauterize the nose with a small cautery at two cauteries above the upper lip under the hair.
And be careful not to burn the artery.
This is the form of the nail cautery.
Chapter 15.
On the cautery for softening the eyelids of the holes.
When the eyelid of the hole is softened due to illness or humidity, then cauterize that eyelid with one cautery using this lunar cautery; and this is its form:
And if you are cauterizing it above the two eyebrows, do so with two small cauteries on each side, and have them extended from the temples. And let the length of each cautery be according to the size of the eyebrow.
And do not press your hand too hard with the cautery, but according to how much the third part of the eyelid is adhere.
Chapter 16.
On the cautery for the eyelid of the hole when the hairs are converted to the inside parts and poke the hole.
When the hairs of the hole are converted inward so that they poke the hole, there are two ways to cauterize them: either by cautery or by burning medicine.
If you cauterize it with fire, command the patient to pull his hairs so that they are straightened out, and while they are prolonged and curly; and if he pokes that, then you strengthen the hole with a bandage so that it does not get worse until the hairs grow back.
Then when they grow back and become curly, then place the patient's head in your lap, and carefully mark the eyelid of the hole with a tent, using a mark that is according to the shape of a dead leaf; and let the beginning of the mark be near the hairs.
Then place a damp cloth in white vinegar or in mullein tea on the hole.
And then light the cautery, of which this is the form:
And then cauterize over the marked area, little by little, in small spots, until the surface of the skin appears like a myrrh leaf, all appearing properly.
And the sign of your work's health is that you see the eyelid of the hole already contracted and the hairs of it elevated from the puncture of the hole.
And then raise your hand and lay him down for three days, and then place a bandage on him so that the scar is healed. And then treat it with ointment until it is healed.
But if the hairs return for any reason and the eyelid is softened, then do the cautery on it again all over as you did at first.
But if the hairs are in the eyelid, then cauterize that so that it is elevated to its natural place and is curly, and the hairs do not poke the hole.
But the cautery with burning medicine is that you command the patient to pull his hairs so that they are prolonged and curly, and then let the mark be made of linen in the shape of a myrrh leaf.
And then take gum mastic and live coals, one ounce. Chapter 17. Take that mixture and spread it on the cloth that was made in the shape of a myrrh leaf, and place it over the hole or both holes; then place the patient' head in your lap.
And hold his finger over the medicine and press it gently so that the patient feels the biting of the medicine, for the biting is in him as if with fire.
And when you perceive that the biting has ceased, then remove the medicine and wash the hole with water; then consider if you see the eyelid already elevated as it is washed after the constriction by fire or incision, for then it is well; and if it returns to the medicine over the place where the medicine did not stick, and do not darken until your operation is healed and the hole contracted.
And then place a bandage on him so that the scar of the constriction is eradicated, and then treat it with an ointment of diascordium or another until it is healed.
And it is necessary for you, after your operation, that you guard against the falling of the medicine into the hole; and if the eyelid, after several days, becomes softened and for some reason the hairs poke the hole, then repeat your medicine on that place of the eyelid which is softened, and especially as you did at the beginning, and bandage it until it is healed.
And this is the shape of myrrh leaf.
And know that men' holes are diverse according to their size and smallness, and therefore according to that is your constriction made.
And do not become experienced in this way to him who has studied this art.
Chapter 17.
On the cauterization of a fistula that is in the tear duct of the hole.
When you treat a fistula with what we have said in the divisions of illnesses and your treatment does not succeed, then know that you cauterize it as follows: command the patient to hold his head in your lap, and let some attendant hold his head so that it is not moved nor shaken by his head.
And then place a damp cloth in white vinegar or in mullein tea on the hole of him.
And then light the cautery, of which this is its form:
Which is hollow, as it is shaped like a reed or a pen, from one end there is made the cautery.
And if you see that it penetrates to the other end. And if you want it to come out as a tent.
But what is hollow is better for your work.
And then press the fistula if it is open, and draw out from it pus and dry that. If it is not open, then open it and extract the hernia.
Then place the cautery, which should be well ignited, over him, and hold your hand a little away from the cautery near the start of the nose so that your hand does not get burned or the patient become disturbed, and then apply the cautery to the openings of the hernia and corrupt that.
And so if at the beginning of your cautery it enters into the bone, that is good; and if not, then repeat the cautery once or twice, if necessary; and leave it like this for three days, and then place a poultice on that spot and surround it with a dry bandage until it is healed.
But if eleven days have passed and it has not healed, then apply an acrid corrosive medicine to the bone so that it is exposed and scrape it according to what is appropriate in its chapter.
And there is another way of cauterizing a fistula which some at first said: enter the place of the fistula and open it up and then in that fissure pour in subtle cement of which its shape is made; And melt into that the quantity of one ounce of molten lead; and hold your hand with good retention so that the patient is not burned because the molten lead does not reach the hernia of that; and cover what you place over the hernia of the patient with linen or water, for the lead clogs the place of the fistula and heals it in a marvelous way.
And if the fistula is healed with what we have said about the cautery and treatment, that is good; and if not, then it is necessary to administer snuff of the nose and reduce the fistula into the body of the nose according to what will come in its proper place.
Chapter .xviii.
Of cautery for the fissure of the anus.
Many times fissures occur in the lips, and mostly in the lips of children.
So then when you treat those fissures with what we have said in the divisions and your treatment does not prove effective, then ignite the cautery with a small knife according to this shape that is described:
And its cavity should be according to the subtlety of the blade.
Then place that gently in those fissures so that the cautery reaches the depth of the fissures.
And then treat that with ointment until it is healed.
Chapter .xix.
Of cautery for a fistula in the mouth.
When in the root of the uvula or in the palate or in the roots of the teeth there is swelling and it then ruptures, and it becomes old, and the swelling becomes corroded and a fistula is made, and you treat that and your treatment does not prove effective, then when you ignite the cautery according to the quantity that is received in the fistula, then place that ignited iron into the hole of the fistula, and hold your hand so that the hot iron reaches the depth of it, and at the end of it do this once or twice; and then treat that with what we have said about treatment until it is healed.
And so if the pus is discharged and it is healed, that is good; and if not, then it is necessary to expose the place and scrape away the corrupted bone according to what will come in its chapter.
Chapter .xx.
Of cautery for teeth and of softening of the gums.
When the gums are softened by moisture and the teeth are burned, and you treat those with medicines and they do not help, then place the head of the patient in your lap, and ignite the cautery the form of which will come next here, so that you place the quanula over the tooth and insert into it the ignited cautery quickly, and hold your hand a little away so that the heat of the fire reaches the root of the tooth.
And then lift up your hand, and repeat the cautery several times according to what you want.
And then the patient should hold his mouth open with salt water for an hour, and then spit it out, for the burned tooth is solidified and the softened gum is strengthened and the corrupted moisture is dried up.
Chapter .xxi.
Of cautery for toothache.
When toothache is by coldness, or in it is frostbitten or rotten, or does not respond to treatment with medicine, then cautery in that is according to two ways: either cautery with a cow's horn, or cautery with fire.
Cautery with a horn is that you take a cow's horn and melt it in the embers of fire, and then take it with tongs and wrap it around the end of the tooth, and then dip that into the melted horn, and place that over the painful tooth quickly so that it is frostbitten.
And then repeat that several times so that the virtue of the fire reaches the root of the tooth.
And if you wish, dip wool or cotton in the horn, and place that over the painful tooth, and place ignited iron over it so that the iron reaches the cavity of the tooth.
However, cautery with fire is that you wait for the iron or needle to be red-hot, and there should be some thickness in it and the acuity of the fire does not reach the mouth of the patient.
And then ignite the cautery the form of which will come, and place that over the tooth and hold your hand so that the cautery is frostbitten; and do this several times because the pain will return again or on that day or the next day.
And if through the pressure of that cautery the patient fills his mouth with good saliva and holds it for an hour and then spits it out, this is the form of the cautery.
And cauterize however you wish according to what is possible for you.
And this is the form of the needle:
Chapter .xxii.
Of cautery for hernias.
When hernias are of phlegm and cold humors and do not respond to digestion with medicines and you see the digestion of those slightly, then ignite the cautery in such a way that the smoke of the cautery passes through both ends, and place that ignited over the hernia once, and if they do not respond to that, then repeat it so that it reaches the depth of the hernia.
And if the hernia is small, then place the cautery according to the quantity of the hernia, and let it rest for three days, and place over it poultice dipped in ointment so that what the fire has burned is softened.
And then treat that with ointment and bandages until it is healed.
Chapter .xxiii.
Of cautery for earache and constriction of the throat.
When moisture comes upon the hollow of the lung, and especially when it is with coldness of complexions, then let the patient be evacuated at the beginning with laxative medicines, and then cauterize that after the root of the gullet in the place which is swollen.
And take care that you do not reach with the cautery to the gullet or burn the cords of it, but a little.
And cauterize that with another cautery after the joint of the throat in its last vertebra. And let the cautery for him be a heated needle according to the previous manner.
Then cure that with what has been mentioned before, until it is healed.
Chapter 24.
Of cautery for lung diseases and coughs.
When cough and lung disease are caused by dampness infiltrating the body, and the patient doesn't have a fever or consumption, and the disease is old, then cauterize that with two cauteries over the furcula in the places just below the collarbones and between the nipples; and with another cautery in the middle of the chest between the breasts; and let the cauteries be heated according to the previous method.
And if you wish, let your cautery be pointed with the cautery that is called "punta", the form of which is described in the puncturing of ear pain.
And let there be points within those; and then cure that with what has been mentioned before, until it is healed.
And now let the cautery have three points; for this cautery you can do three cauteries according to this method:
Chapter 25.
Of cautery for the tickling in the throat.
When the throat is dislocated due to damp and slippery humors, and it does not return to its proper position in the time of its recovery, and instead is displaced by a slight movement as we have witnessed, then first reduce the dislocation, and let the patient be reversed onto his back or onto his side; and then lift the chin which is at the beginning inside the tickling up towards the positions above with the fingers of your left hand if the joint is dislocated in the inner positions.
And then heat the cautery which has two points; and this is its form:
And then cauterize the chin so that it penetrates into the other side; and the figure of the cautery will come then from two-pointed cauteries.
And sometimes it is adjusted according to that account, for which there are eight cauteries.
And then put on the cautery some powder and let the patient adhere to tranquillity, and the limb should not be moved for any length of time until it is comforted.
And if the dislocation is at the top and it is tight there, then cauterize the muscle with a pointed cautery or with some pointed cauteries, for the joint is confirmed and the humidity is broken up and the patient will be healed.
Chapter 26.
Of cautery of the stomach.
When there comes into the stomach a movement and masses of humidity which cause a swelling of its cavity, and if you continue with your methods of treatment and do not give in, then let the patient lie on his back with his head extended, and stretch out his arms and legs, and cauterize that with three cauteries: one cautery below the feet according to the length of a finger with a pointed cautery, and two cauteries below the ribs so that the figure of the cautery comes as a triangle; and let them not be too close together so that they may cause burning.
And if the depth of the cautery is the thickness of two-thirds of a hair.
And let the figure of the cautery be according to this form. And if you wish, cauterize with a large cautery in the middle of the stomach according to this form: and that shall be a cautery according to the form of a circle according to this form:
And let the stomach be punctured at that place from which this cautery is frightened: and you shall sense on the stomach according to the amount of tickling, and then cauterize that with a cautery in the points; and then cure that with the cure that has been mentioned before until it is healed.
Chapter 27.
Of cautery of the fried liver.
When there is pain in the liver from chilling or from humidity or from excessive wind which causes a swelling outside of its normal cavity, and it is cured with what has been said before and not giving in, then let the patient lie on his back on his chest, and sense the tickling with three cauteries according to this form and this amount placed upon the liver just below the hypochondria where the man lies.
And let the space between each cautery be according to the thickness of a finger, and let the cauteries be according to the length of the body rightwards.
And do not press with your hand against the cautery.
And if the amount of that which is burned is the thickness of the thickness of the tip of the chin, and it is not too close together; and if the patient lies on his feet; and if he is not, then let him sit, who has already stretched out his limbs, and lift up his arms.
And you are able to cauterize these cauteries with a scalpel when you have subtlety and prudence in the art.
And beware of going too far in the cauterization, and let all the thickness of the chin be burned so that it reaches into the intestines, for the chin here is thin; and know this.
Chapter 28.
Of puncturing of an abscess on the liver with a cautery.
When there is an ulcer or abscess on the liver and you want to know if that abscess is in the flesh of the liver or in its tunic, then if it is in the flesh of the liver, the patient will feel heavy and the pain will be acute.
And if it is in the tunic of the liver, then there is great pain and many doctors have tired themselves in their cure of him.
And so let the patient lie on his back; and then sense the place of the abscess with tickling; and then heat the cautery which is like a rake, the form of which is preceded in the other page. And cauterize with that cautery into the liver until all the thickness is burnt up, so that it reaches the brain, where a ulcer occurs.
And then cure that by the cure of other abscesses until it is healed.
And do not use this form of cautery unless that person whose study in the art of medicine is prolonged, and who has experienced many illnesses through it; but rather let that be done by us, and it is better.
Chapter 29.
Of cautery of phlegmy humors.
Dried the old cauteries of the roots of aristology for phlegmy humors according to this manner, and let that which you take from the roots of aristology be long and dry, and let it be as thick as a finger.
And then submerge it in oil and heat it over the fire, and then cauterize with one cautery that place which is between the continuation of the furcula with the collar; and with two small cauteries below the guids, one a little declining towards the part where the beard grows, and with two cauteries at what declines between the fifth rib and the breastbone, declining a little to the parts behind; and with another cautery on the middle of the chest; and with three cauteries on the parts behind; and with one cautery in that place which is between the two shoulders, and with two cauteries on the sides of the chest below; and let there be a cautery in that place where it declines between the armpit and the breastbone.
And do not cover your hand with the cautery, but rather in the open air as it is working.
And some ancient writers say that they are some of the men who use cauterization with a piece of red hot iron, and apply it to that place between the ribs, until they reach the aposteme and the pus is discharged, as we have said about the aposteme in the liver.
But with this cauterization one should not be afraid, because there is a fistula in the hole to which there is no cure.
Chapter 30.
Of the cauterization of the melsa.
When you cure the sickness of the melsa with what we have said about the cure in division and do not apply your cure, then the cauterization on it is according to three ways, all of which are right, one of which is that you make three cauteries or four depending on the length of the melsa, according to the shape of the cauteries of the liver, the shape of which has preceded.
And there should be between each cautery the thickness of a finger or a little more, and the manner of the cautery is the same way we have said about the cautery of the liver equally.
And do not cover your hand with the cautery, and let the patient be on his back.
And another way of cauterizing is that you ignite the cautery having two bandages, the cause of which we have said in the chapter about the dislocation of the muscle, and elevate the vein which is in the edge of the melsa where the patient's left side lies without.
And let your elevation with which you elevate the vein be according to the length of the body, so that there are made cauteries according to the width of the body.
And then insert the two bandages, ignited hot, in that place where you penetrate the vein from the other side.
And then withdraw the cautery; and thus there are made four cauteries.
And if you wish, cauterize with a cautery having three bandages.
And then you cure the cautery after it has been laid for several days, because the other causes precede in the cure.
Chapter 31.
Of the cauterization of hydrops.
Cauterize not in hydrops but in an ulcer properly.
When you cure hydrops with the methods of cure which we have said about division and do not apply your cure, then that cauterize it with four cauteries around the omphalus and with one cautery over the stomach, and another cautery over the liver, and another cautery over the melsa, and two cauteries between the vertebrae of the back, and one cautery in the right side of the foot, and another cautery over the stomach. And the quantity of the depth of the cautery should be proportional to the thickness of the vein.
And then withdraw the cautery open so that it bleeds for a long time.
And do not evacuate the patient of cure after the cautery with what covers it so that there are added to him two tensions and he is healed by aid of the cure.
The shape of the cautery with which the belly is cauterized should be key-like according to what its shape is above, and that with which the back is cauterized should be olive-like according to what its shape is above.
Chapter 32.
Of the cauterization of feet and thighs.
When the feet are apostematous in hydrops and filled with yellow water, then that cauterizes the feet on the instep of the foot in the space between the auricular and the annular, and elevate your hand with the cautery and do not twist it; and then elevate your hand, and do not return it at all, because the yellow water oozes out.
It is the cautery according to this form: and then make two cauteries over the two thighs, and in each thigh there should be made cautery with the tip of the cautery knife. And let the cautery be according to the length of the thigh: under the knee and the other under the middle part of the thigh; and over each thigh two cauteries.
And withdraw the wound open without its cure for a long time so that no water oozes from it.
And then cure it with those causes which we have said.
Chapter 33.
Of the cauterization of the body of the belly.
When the body of the belly is because of a stroke and humidity that weakens the vessels, then there are the digestive and retentive vessels, which are in the stomach and in the intestines, and it is cured that with the methods of cure and do not apply, and sometimes the patient suffers cauterization of the vein that appears, then cauterize that with a large cautery over his stomach according to what has preceded in the cauterization of the stomach, with the cautery of the circle and four cauteries around the omphalus subtly, and with cautery key-like subtly; and with cautery over the alcine over the great vein, or two cauteries.
And if you see the humidities exuding and the patient can tolerate it, then cauterize that over the pentacle and over the intestines, and tightly apply two cauteries over the stomach and near the groins, for there is perfect cure of healing of which there is no mistake.
Chapter 34.
Of the cauterization of old hemorrhoids.
When there are in nature lingering hemorrhoids or one of thick humors rubbing or of corrupted humidities, and they are cured with what we have said about division and do not apply their cure, then cauterize it with three cauteries over the pus below the small vertebra of the back and small triangular, and with cautery above the navel.
And if you see that his stomach is swelled and his food is not digested, and sometimes his face is apostematous, then cauterize it over the stomach with a large cautery according to what has preceded; and with one cautery over the liver, and another cautery over the melsa of him with cautery key-like, and withdraw the cautery open for some time, and then cure him so that he is healed.
Chapter 35.
Of the cauterization of a hernia near its incision.
When you excise a hernia, then ignite the cautery which is assembled like a ray. Then insert that ignited in the hernia that is incised, and finish your hand so that it comes to the cautery at the opening of the vein from which the blood flows.
And do it once or twice, because if they are many, then cauterize each of them according to what we have reckoned, and then cure those with what they agree to them so that they are healed.
And if you cauterize with a large cautery over the great vein, there is more healing.
Chapter 36.
Of the cauterization of fistulas which are made in nature in the parts of him.
When nature does not obey the work which we have commanded in its place, and the patient is frightened by it, then let him be healed with cautery.
Therefore when you see a fistula in nature appearing and it is old, and corrupt humidities, then what is better than it covers is that it is applied with a subtle needle, and then know the quantity of its depth with the above-mentioned needle.
Then light the cautery that resembles a rod. And then place that cautery into the fistula, and according to the amount in which it enters, withdraw it.
And repeat with the cautery as many times as is necessary in order for those corrupted humors to be burnt - one or two or three times, depending on the amount that is needed.
And be careful of burning nerves and veins; or if the fistula goes into the bladder or the intestine, then be careful about all those locations; and do not do this unless the fistula is in a fleshy location which you think cannot penetrate.
Then heal the area inside where it is healed.
And if the location is sealed and the matters are removed from it and remain like this for a long time, then know that it is completely healed.
And if the matters are not removed from it, then know that they have penetrated into the flesh and become corrupted there, or that it comes from one of those causes from which a recurrence will come in its place.
Chapter 37:
On cauterization of warts.
When in warts there is pain due to friction or due to a large windiness, and because of this the body of the patient is tormented, then know that you should cauterize those warts with a cautery needle from which you expect recurrence.
And quickly cauterize them again with a small needle, so that there will be three cauterizations, and then the warts will go away little by little in their growth.
Chapter 38:
On cauterization of the bladder.
When there is weakness and softening of the bladder due to friction and humidity so that the patient cannot retain urine, then cauterize that at the pus-like beginning of the bladder where the hairs of the pubic hair start, and cauterize with one cautery on the right side of it, and with another on its left.
And the length of each cautery should be according to the amount of the hairs; and cauterize that at the lowest pus-like part of the navel with one cautery or with two cauteries if necessary.
And let it be a cautery needle according to how it is processed.
Chapter 39:
On cauterization of the hernia.
When there is friction and humidity in the hernia, and because of this impregnation is prohibited, and the menses are corrupted in him, and their provocation is delayed, and pain comes due to the carrying of them, then know that the location should be cauterized with three cauteries around the navel, just as we have said in the cautery of the bladder; and with a cautery on the lowest pus-like part of the navel, or with two cauteries, and let it be a cautery needle.
Chapter 40:
On cauterization of the dislocation of the elbow.
When mucous humors are infused into the part of the elbow, and these are caused by a displacement of its place, and a sign of it is that the joint is prolonged above the other when they are compared to each other. And the location of the dislocation is blocked in which part it is bent.
Therefore you should cauterize the patient on the part of the elbow with a circular cautery needle, because you will have sensed by touch in the circuit of the part as it is turned, and by doing so that the part falls to its proper place in the middle of the circle.
And let it be the cautery of which we spoke about earlier in the cauterization of the stomach.
And if this cautery is not available to you, then cauterize it with three cauteries with a large olive-shaped cautery.
And let the cautery be done according to the quantity of the thickness of all the tendons; and then heal that inside which is healed.
Chapter 41:
On cauterization of the sciatic nerve.
When pain comes in the part of the elbow, and its cause is friction and humidity, and the patient is not cured by what we have said, and that it is chronic, then know that you should let the patient out humors with stinking pills or artificial pills or similar; and then cauterize that.
And the way of the cautery for it is according to two ways: or cautery with burning medicines, or cautery with fire.
They go according to two known ways, one of which is that you cauterize it on the part of the joint with three triangular cauteries according to this form; and make good depth with those. And let the space between each cautery be the quantity of the thickness of the finger, and if the cautery is olive-shaped or large.
Sometimes let the cautery be on the middle part on the head of the elbow so that there are four cauteries.
And if you want, cauterize with the circle of which is preceded the form in the cauterization of the dislocation of the elbow, and that it be a containing circle and burn the thickness of all the tendons.
And this is the way of cauterization in sciatica when pain is adherent to the elbow and it is not extended within the joint.
But if it is extended within the joint, then cauterize that with two cauteries on the thigh over the location to which the pain goes; and with one cautery over the shoulder four fingers away from the hairy part.
And if the cautery cuts it, then let the depth of the cautery be according to the quantity of the thickness of the tendon.
And if the pain goes so that it is extended within the place near to the fingers of the feet, then cauterize that where it goes in with a cautery for three points or four, or more if it demands of that.
And if the pain goes from below the neck towards the joint, then cauterize that there with a cutting cautery.
And beware in all cauterization that you do not end with the cautery when burning nerve or large artery, and so that through this to you it is upon the patient great harm or convulsion.
And some of those cauterized on the shoulder and ended in cauterization, and a bed a fire inflamed within which the tumor was conquered the foot, and fire perforated and corrupted all of the foot. Then strong inflammation of the abdomen occurred, and then death followed.
And if the pain is in two parts simultaneously cauterize each according to this way.
And some wise men said in the cauterization of the elbow that this is the way of the cautery: make it similar to a nail of iron of which its circuit is the length of a palm; and let its orifices be according to the thickness of a finger of date or less.
And within that circle let there be another third; and let the space between them be the quantity of the fingers of the toes; and let those circles be bent in two parts; and let the length of them be a finger or two fingers, and make in those margins of iron decently bent in the circles; and this is the form for it:
Then let it be heated in the fire so that it becomes red hot and let it be placed over the part of the elbow, the patient lying on his side. Then cauterize that with three cauteries around in one day.
And let it lie like this for three days; then cover the wound with a poultice and keep the area open for several days; then heal the wound by applying ointment until it is cured.
Al-Buqaysi : Oh sons, we have used this type of cautery sparingly due to the fear of causing harm and because few of us have been able to practice it successfully.
May God help those who suffer from these cauteries, and may they find relief from their pain.
May cauteries with healing medications help you to make two circles, a hole in the middle of which a key or small iron ring is placed; the length of the needle should be the size of two nuts or hazelnuts.
And the space between them should be equal to the thickness of a finger; and they should be open below and above, and they should fit together like this:
Then place the patient's arm over his side, and press your hand on the part of the armpit; then take a piece of wool and dip it between the two circles, and let its quality be gradually heated by the fire, and hold it for an hour, and let the patient endure the biting and squeezing—for he will feel biting as if by fire—until the biting stops.
And then raise your hand with the instrument and wipe the armpit clean with warm water.
Let it lie like this for three days and place a poultice on it until the swelling of the bite goes down; then let him go about his business after a few days; this is the ultimate cure.
And heal it with ointment until it is cured.
If the pain extends into the thigh or leg, make him lie in a position where he can hold water according to how it is done in the armpit.
And this is how you use warm water, and I have already written about it in the treatise on the preparation of medications. Take a piece of alkali and non-extinguished ashes from both ends, grind them and place them in a new woolen cloth whose bottom has a small hole, according to the amount that goes into him.
Then place another woolen cloth on top of it which has been dipped in cold water, and pour over the alkali and live embers a little warm water, which covers them like a finger; then compress them with your hand with good compression, and let the water that drips from him go into the bottom cloth.
Then gather all the water and pour it over the other live embers and renewed alkali, because this water becomes very strong when heated; it is used in many medical operations and cauterizations of other parts, because this operation produces fire.
And among the medications are some with which wide cauterizations are performed, such as teresium and honey mixed with sulfur, and embers of soap that have been ground.
And Galien relates from an ancient man the operation and cure by which sciatic nerve pain is cured; he says that it does not need any other cure, and that it heals like a wound that is healed by a poultice, because the pain goes away very quickly when treated in this way.
And it should be picked from a certain tree, and if it is not found, then take a fig; the wood should be ground to a powder and placed on the arm, thigh or leg where there is pain, and it should be bound.
Let it lie for three hours or for as long as the patient can tolerate the biting.
And then put him in a bath and when his body is warm, expose him to the sun, for the pain will cease and he will be healed.
Know that it is not advisable for anyone to use these medications with cauteries unless there is an evacuation of the body.
May God help you, Escorides said that when the sciatic vein is cauterized with goat's dung, it helps very much; and the cautery should be done in this way: take wool and soak it in old oil, and place it between the toes of the foot and between the bones.
And then take dry goat's dung and inflame it with fire until it turns into charcoal; then place it on the wool and let it lie until it is cold. Then repeat this, and do not stop doing this until the pain in the armpit goes away and the biting stops.
And this way of cauterizing is called the cow cautery.
Chapter 42.
Of cauterization for pain in two places.
Sometimes back pain occurs for various reasons, such as from a blow or a wound or from excessive evacuation, and for similar reasons, from the infusion of wet and moist matter.
And cauteries are not performed unless in this sole case where it is caused by the infusion of moist matter.
Then, if there is evacuation of the patient with pills that are made over the back where there is pain in three lines according to its width, because three cauteries or more, according to the tolerance of the patient and his strength, are performed on each line.
And cauterization should be done with a pointed cautery.
And if you want, cauterize with three cauteries or four with a nail-like cautery according to this form:
Chapter 43.
Of cauterization at the beginning of gout.
Many times this disease occurs in small children; and the sign of its beginning in children is that they get stiff in their limbs, and there is elevation and movement.
And there is pain in the last vertebra of the back and of the knots that begin to rise above the other vertebrae.
And therefore when you see this and want to prevent it, then cauterize it with a cautery that is a circle according to this form: take the cautery and place it over the entire part of the vertebra evenly.
And if you want, cauterize around the circuit of the vertebra with a pointed cautery in two or three lines. Let the points be close to each other.
And then heal the area until it is cured with what we have said.
Be careful that cauteries are not performed in gout that is caused by nerve spasms.
Chapter 44.
Of cauterization for gout and joint pain.
When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
And therefore when gout caused by wet matter is cured with a poultice and the pains are not relieved, then cauteries are performed.
And you cauterize it around the circuit of the joint of the foot with many cauteries.
And let the cautery be olive-colored; and this is how it should be:
And if it is necessary to make points on the surface of the foot, then do so with a pointed cautery. And if the pains spread to the tendons or other joints, and this often happens, then cauterize each tendon with three cauteries or four in each place with this olive-colored cautery.
And if you need to cauterize the patient, then it is necessary that these cauteries are at your disposal; therefore, cauterize him and do not press too hard with your hand before applying the cautery instrument, but only around the area of the vein.
And if the pain extends into the abdomen and back, then administer the cautery as we have described in its chapter.
And if the pain is only in the hands and is called sciatica, then make points around the fire holes as they revolve; make two lines of points.
And if there is pain in the fingers, then point around the fire holes on each knuckle and on the palm of the hand.
And if the pain goes for a few days into the joints or muscles, then cauterize each of them in every part of the affected area.
And if the patient is not healed after good treatment and reception of medicines, because if good treatment and phlegm are evacuated with this cautery they will be healed, God willing.
Chapter 45.
On the cauterization of broken bones.
When a break occurs in the angles and intestines in front of the aorta in the abdomen, and this is where it begins, then you should order the patient to stop eating for a day and to use mild laxatives so that the swelling goes down from his belly.
Then follow the patient's back with your hands, and command him to hold his breath when the hole is being probed or when the aorta or intestines are appearing.
Then return it with your fingers and examine the break on the bone of the finger, indicating the extremity which is similar to half a circle in the upper parts of the body.
And then light the cautery, of which this is its shape:
until it becomes a red-hot wire. Then return the intestine or hernia to its cavity, and place your hand over the area to prevent the intestine from coming out.
You have already opened the space between the patient' s thighs, placed a cushion under them, another servant on their legs, and another on their chest, holding their hands.
Then place the cautery on that sign with your hand holding the cautery straight, and put it there until you reach the bone of the finger within the joint; and repeat with another application if you have not achieved it in the first application to the bone.
And carefully observe the movement of the intestine at the time of cauterization, so that you do not burn it so that the patient does not die or suffer some other great harm.
And know that when you with the cautery do not touch the bone, your operation will be useless.
And see that the cautery for children is subtle according to their size and age.
Then treat the place of the cautery with ointment for three days, until the scar from the fire has healed.
And then cure it with other remedies until it is healed.
And the patient should lie on his back for 40 days, until the wound and the scar are sealed.
And see that he receives nourishment according to the length of time of his healing, which is determined by how long it takes for his belly to heal, and that the intestine does not come out due to the effort of healing.
And when he wants to get up after 40 days, then administer a gently made sling, and have him wear it for another 40 days.
And let him be spared from work and overindulgence in food and drink, and violent movements, for when he uses this healing regimen completely, he will be healed.
And we have described the cure for broken bones in other parts of the belly, and so at the beginning, and you should not delay, cauterize the break with a round cautery according to its size; and then cure it with what we have said, and if it is not adjusted.
And some first say that a broken bone should be cauterized with a triangular cautery according to this form, because it is probed and felt as follows:
And a line is drawn perpendicular to the length of the bone above and below the break, and your hand is placed with a nail-like cautery, but the first cautery is lighter and better.
Chapter 46.
On the cauterization of a dislocation.
When a pain occurs in any part due to displacement or blow, and the pain persists for a long time and does not yield to any treatment with medicines, then you should cauterize it with a pointed cautery.
And the cautery of every member is according to its size and smallness, and its nature and condition, and location of the dislocation and pain in it.
So if he is healed by the first cautery, well and good; but if not, then repeat it on him, for usually from those pains there are points in a member that approaches the patient, so that you can achieve them with cautery until the patient is healed.
Chapter 47.
On the cauterization of leprosy.
The lepers some times are cauterized for great benefit by the hot cautery, and especially if the leprosy is caused by putrefaction of phlegm and melancholy.
And so when you want to cauterize him, consider if the leprosy is dry and cured with what we have said in the division, and do not touch it, nor this, and beware that the corruption extends throughout his body and all its parts, then cauterize him on the head with 5 cauteries: one in the middle of the head, and the second below him, lifting up the forehead to the end of the hair; and both over the horns, and one behind, on the nape or neck; and both over the ears, on the temples.
And finally your hand with the cautery a little in the bone to make a small impression, and from him the scabs are displaced, so that the expiration of thick vapors is relieved from him; and cauterize on the ulcer according to its need.
And if the leprosy has spread over the body and appears manifestly, then you should cauterize him with those cauteries which we have mentioned in the head; and cauterize on the end of the nose, and two cauteries on both sides of the ears, and two cauteries on the two shoulders, and six cauteries on the spine, and one large cautery on the spine near the chest, and one over the neck, and two over the armpits, and one over each shoulder blade, and two over the hips, and one over each knee, and two over the shins, and two over the heels, and two over the muscles, and two over all the joints of the hands and feet, and over every tendon of the hands and feet.
And beware of the nerves which are on the instep, so that you do not burn them.
And sometimes it is cauterized with one cautery on the bone of the finger, and another on the mouth of the stomach, and another on the throat.
And know that when you draw the cauteries closer, then it is more beneficial and beneficial; and know that if the patient does not have pain in the cautery, then his body is already stupified.
And the cautery should be large or small according to the parts and joints, as it is preceded by the properties of the tools.
Then treat the cautery with wheat flour mixed with honey and other remedies until it is healed.
Chapter 48.
On cauterization for stupor.
When a limb is paralyzed or asleep and is not healed by medicines, oils and plasters, then cauterize the paralyzed limb with cauteries according to the size of the limb or its smallness.
And let your cautery enter the thickness of the vein a little. Then treat that with ointment until it is healed.
And sometimes a paralysis is cauterized which affects the hands and feet, and the vertebrae of the back, and you see the movement of the nerves which move that limb, and the paralysis is improved.
But do not presume about this except for one who is skilled in anatomy of the parts and the exit of the nerves through all the body.
Chapter 49.
On cauterization for white leprosy.
When leprosy is old and does not respond to any of the ointments of medicine, then cauterize it with a cautery made from pitch according to the quantity of the thickness of the vein so that the whiteness and color of it are improved and its color changed.
Then treat that with wheat flour and lentil flour mixed with rose oil and leaves of the arnica rose, and pigeon blood or thrush blood, let each be a part and all be mixed together, then line a cloth and place it on the spot until it is healed.
Chapter 50.
On cauterization for cancer.
When a cancer begins and you want to stop it, then cauterize it with a circular cautery around the edge of it as it is being rolled up.
And the wise say that it should be cauterized with the last cautery in the middle of it; but I have not seen this, for I fear that it will be ulcerated and I have seen this happen a few times.
And it is more direct that it should be cauterized around the edge of it with a circular cautery as we have said, or with many cauteries.
Chapter 51.
On cauterization for dimness of sight.
When dimness of sight is delayed in ripening, and it is because of the excess making it, or because of the state of the patient, for he is old and decrepit, with little blood, or because of time, and you want to hasten the ripening of dimness of sight; then cauterize around the edge of it with many small puncturing cauteries; and then let her hasten in ripening.
But if you want to pierce it with a cautery, then heat the cautery of which this is the form of it: and place that in the middle of dimness of sight so that it penetrates the vein.
And if the cautery is in that place which is lower down, so that the arm of the body is raised; then treat that until it is healed.
Chapter 52.
On cauterization for corrosion.
Corrosion is a rotting walking in the limb, which corrodes it like fire eating dry wood.
Therefore if you see corrosion in a place which can suffer cauterization by fire, then heat small nail cauteries, and large ones according to what is appropriate in that place in which there is corrosion.
Then cauterize that throughout its whole length so that you eradicate all the corrosion and not leave any cause of it remaining.
Then let that be for three days, and place on the cauterized spots a poultice of soft bread with mixed oil so that the scars are all eradicated and all the corrosion.
Then treat that with ointments engendering flesh.
But if after three days you see that the flesh is not growing and is healthy where there is no corrosion, then it is good; but if not, then repeat the cauterization on that which is rotten in the places of corruption.
And corrosion is treated some times with sharp medicine because it is midway between cauterization. But however cauterization by fire is the most dangerous course of action.
And I have already said its treatment with sharp medicine in division, and therefore take that when it has a beginning in growth.
Chapter 53.
On cauterization of sores and of the others like them.
Many times sores come from beneath the foot of a sick person which is called a claw, and it is a great cause, boring into the foot; and cauterization in those sores is according to two methods, namely cauterization by fire and cauterization by water.
But cauterization by fire is that you ignite the cautery made like a lead pencil, which should be made of iron according to the quantity which contains the claw throughout its whole length, and it should be of subtle thickness.
Then place that ignited cautery on the claw and then revolve your hand with the cautery around the edge of the claw so that the cautery reaches the depth of the claw. Let that be for three days until it starts to emit the arm. Then poultice that with malva leaves crushed with salt, and place the poultice on it for one night, for that will eradicate from its roots.
Then treat that spot with ointment engendering flesh until it is healed.
And if it does not convert and often affects the surface of the body, chiefly in the hands and feet, then take that you administer in those cauteries water, and it is that you insert a cannula of iron or lead or bone, and place that on the claw; and let the water enter through the entrance of the root of the claw, and wait for the sick person for an hour, and then remove that, for the claw with its roots will have been eradicated.
And do the same for those the others which come over all of them in the body.
Then treat those sores whose roots have been eradicated with that of the ointments engendering flesh.
Chapter 54.
On cauterization for trembling.
When trembling comes from rubbing on a nerve or from fever caused by rubbing, or from some other cause resembling it, then take that you cauterize that with four cauteries or with V-shaped cauteries between each of the vertebrae; and cauterize on the feet of him, and on his stomach with olive oil.
And the trembling of him is rested and hastened by the sickness caused by rubbing.
Chapter 55.
On cauterization for accidental wounds on the body.
When in the body so are broken blisters and there are large holes which are made from corrupt gross matter; therefore take that at the beginning as it appears, that it is cauterized on all heads of the fistula with a subtle cautery made from myrrh wood, the tip of which is extended with fire; or with long razors; or with a cautery slowly.
And sometimes it is cauterized with a caustic at the beginning of its emission according to this manner; and they are not broken, and the superficiality is split making those wounds heal from them.
But nevertheless it is necessary that this be done with an evacuation by phlebotomy.
Chapter 56.
Of the cauterization of blood flow from an accidental wound by incision of the artery.
Troops seen thereupon flow of artery which is cut under the plague, or under the incision of abscesses or cautery of limb, and others alike, and it is difficult to heal that.
Therefore when it happens to someone, then you·t cover with your hand at the opening of the artery, and place your finger inside narrow that opening so that the flow of blood is stopped under your finger, and that it does not come out.
And then place on the fire the olive cauteries, few and large, by many numbers, and exhale over them so that many embers light.
And then take of those one small or large according to the site and the plague in which the artery is broken, over that vein quickly as you have stopped with your finger, and apply the cautery there until it is bound and stopped that blood.
And if the blood is expelled from the opening of the artery when you release your finger and loosen the cautery, then take another cautery carefully from the cauteries which in the fire are prepared, and then do not cease doing that one after another until the blood is constricted.
And beware that you don't burn the nerve which is here, and that it come over the patient any other evil.
And know that when from the artery flows blood, then it is not possible in those to constrict the blood, and most when the artery is large, if not by one of four ways: or by cautery as we have said, or by incision when it is not extracted, for when it is extracted the ends of it are burned and the blood is constricted, or that it be tied with a ligature or with a bandage by strong constriction, or that medicines whose virtue is to constrict the blood be applied over it; and that they be bound with a bandage with decent compression.
But he who administers a decent constriction of it with a bandage and compression with burning causes and alike does not confer anything except misery.
But if this happens to someone and the doctor is not present nor medicine, then open with your finger on the opening of that vein as we have said, and understand to the great constriction of it until the blood is stopped from the principal part of the plague, and over the artery the finger is not released; and over the artery is sprinkled water mixed with something greatly cold until the blood is congealed and thickened; and according to what need there is for cautery or medicine.
Of incision and piercing and puncturing and phlebotomy and of plagues and of their alike.
We have already said in the first chapter all the diseases in which cautery by fire is convenient and the medicines burning, and their occasions and causes, and the instruments in which necessary are the forms of the cauteries; and we have ordered the chapters from the supra-occipital region of the head until the feet.
And we will proceed in this chapter in that same way, so that the reader of it may be eased in that, then about that for which he has asked.
And before we begin that, know, son, that in this chapter is for terror that which is in the first chapter of cauterization.
And because of that it is in him great caution, for in the operation which is in this chapter many times there is an evacuation that which is with blood with which life is over the sprinkling of the vein or incision upon the abscess or opening of the wound or cleansing of the plague or extraction of arrow or piercing of stone and their alike. And from all those are accompanied by fear and trembling and in the end of them death.
And I warn you that upon you not fall that in which there is danger, for some times it happens by methods of men with many methods of diseases. And from them is one who dies from his disease and is the longer of his disease, and by the severity of what he finds from his disease, and from the length of his disease, and because the disease means death.
And from those is he who gives you hope and word, you hoping in his health, and his disease is perilous.
And therefore not think that you consent in he who comes to you of whom this manner is; and your caution be greater than confidence and your rapacity, and not presume any cause about that except certain science which verifies that over you, and to whose favor laudable succession perishes.
And use in the cure of all your diseases of prognosis and indication of he to whom is converted health, for in him is over you helper in acquisition of fame and memory, of laudation and of glory.
O son, God inspire your understanding and not withhold from you direction and protection, for that is in his hand.
And I have ordered this chapter distinguishing by chapters according to what precedes in the chapter of cauteries, of the cure of the head until the feet, so that it is eased for you that which you ask from that and of which you have need.
First Chapter.
Of the cure of water which is contained in the head of children.
Know that this disease many times happens to children over childbirth and when the nurse shakes the head of the infant he has lightheadedness.
And some times by obscure cause which is not known.
But I have not seen this disease except in children; and to all those for whom I have seen it the death lies in wait, and by that is to me been shown action in them.
And I have seen an infant whose head was full of water, and the head of him was always magnified until he could not stand over his parents because of the bigness of his head, and but that the moisture was increased by fire death.
And this moisture is increased between the scalp and the bone, or it is increased below the bone upon the brain.
For the operation in he if the moisture is between the scalp and the bone and the abscess is small, then know that you split in the middle place of the head with one split in the breadth, and let the length of the split be two notches so that the moisture may run; and this is the form of the spatulum:
And therefore if the moisture is more increased and the abscess is larger, then are here two splits according to this manner:
And if the moisture is below the bone, sign of he is that you see the seams of the head open all over and the water is drawn out when you compress it with your hand to the splits; and this is not to you hidden. Know that you split in the middle place of the head with three splits according to this manner:
And then extract all the moisture, and then tighten the splits with bandages and plasters, and then embed he in wax and oil on the fifth day, and then loosen the binding and cure the wound with tentas and ointments, and strengthen the head with equality; and feed the patient with dry food of little moisture so that the member is comforted and healed.
There is another method of incision that considers the size of the abscess and the collection of pus, as it may be larger in the occipital region, or in the area in front, or on the right or left side; therefore, pay attention to the incision where the abscess appears and the gathering of pus, and do this according to what is best possible for you.
And observe that you do not cut the artery and cause a flow of blood and kill the patient through that flow of blood with the evacuation of moisture.
Chapter II.
When there is a wound or ulcer on the legs or feet, and it becomes old, and the treatment with medicines does not work, then the next best course of action is to make an incision in those two arteries.
And then, when you want to cut the arteries that the patient raises his head, and you have wiped the area with a sharp cloth so that the arteries appear, and you have tightened the neck of the patient with some cloth; and you should look for the pulse in the vein; and these locations are above the locations that are close to the ears, and they are hidden in most people.
And you should press on the artery with your finger, and cut each one with a sharp knife, coming in at an angle towards the bone, and do this around the width of the head.
And if you want, insert the knife below the artery and cut it in relation to the parts above.
And the length of the incision should be about two fingers wide, because when a vein is cut, the blood rushes out with a pulsating exit, which jumps out frequently.
But if the artery does not appear at the neck, then you should measure from the ear the quantity of space of three fingers, and press with your finger, and go into the bone.
And that which flows out is a quantity of wine, one ounce. And the flow is very little or not at all, and all of this depends on the condition of the patient and the fullness of the artery in him.
And you should consider the wound, and if something remains on the bone as a cause of pain, then cut it so that it does not cause an abscess.
And you should stretch the wound with tweezers and with linen cloth, and cure it with ointment inside so that it heals.
Chapter III.
Of the extraction of the arteries which are in the temples.
When someone experiences ancient migration or ulcers, due to humid, hot, and painful humors in the temples, or if there is an old sore that is violent and similar to these, and it is treated with the methods of medicinal healing without success, then we have found that extraction of the arteries in the temples, or cauterization of those places as I have shown, is effective.
And the manner of the operation and extraction of those is that the patient raises his head; and understand the artery which appears in the temple, for it is shown to you by its pulse, and it is hidden in most people due to the intensity of the beating.
And if it is hidden from you, then the neck of the patient should be tightened with some cloth; and you should wipe the area with a sharp cloth or moisten the place with warm water until you see the artery clearly. And then you take the knife, which has this shape: And you cut the skin with it easily so that you reach the artery; and you push into it deeply and extract it from the upper parts so that you pull it out of the skin and discover it from under the membranes which are under it, from every part.
But if the artery is thin, then you wrap it with the tip of your fingers, and cut it from that place in a way that depends on the quantity by which its extremities are extended and contracted, and there will be no flow of blood, because if they are not cut, the blood cannot flow out at all.
And you should draw off an ounce of blood. three to four times.
And if the artery is large, then you must ligate it in two places with strong, double threads of linen or with cords far apart so that there is no decay before the healing of the wound and so that there is no flow of blood.
And you cut off the superfluity which is between two membranes; and do this in that hour or another hour.
And if you want, cauterize it with a cautery into the bone with a cutting cautery so that its extremities are cut off, and it will remain in place instead of that operation.
And it is better to do this when the patient does not have fever or is of cold complexions; because cauterization helps to drive out fine humors, and therefore it is better for youthfulness.
And it is fitting to extract the arteries which appear at the site of an old wound, and have powder decently made laid upon them, and then let it be cured with dry medicines causing the flesh to heal and with poultices so that it becomes healthy.
And if while you operate there happens to be a flow of blood from the artery, then you tie that blood, or with cauterization, or by pressing on the site of the wound, and tighten your hand so that the blood is constricted. And if none of those causes is present to you, then place your finger on the spot where the blood has coagulated, and moisten the place with warm water of strong intensity so that the keenness is relieved, and tighten according to what you can.
And what is more difficult in the extraction of an artery is that you cauterize the vein with this cautery having two points, because you have felt the two places with your finger, and placed them, heated with fire, so that they reach the bone and cut the vein in two places, so that it becomes elongated between its extremities, because it has not been consolidated at all by this cauterization.
And this is the shape of the cautery:
And the keenness of its two points is equal. But if it is more acute than two points, which is better because if they are sharp when they approach each other on both sides and do not cut into the flesh with speed.
Therefore, if there is any thickness in them, it is held that the heat of the fire is less in those and the flesh is cut off more widely.
And this operation is better in all works and more distant.
And let the space between its two points be the quantity of the thickness of a finger.
Chapter IV.
Of the cure of acute and sour wounds of the gulfs.
When they are sour wounds, and the veins of which they are above on the forehead, and there is no cause for the cure with medicine, and the face of the patient becomes red and feels in his forehead as if it were walking with ants, and the ears of that one are exhausted, perspiring so that the hair of them is known, and the eyelids are swollen due to the keenness of tears, the old ones experienced in the cure of those by this operation, and they call that cure with the sponge.
And you command the patient to raise his hair which is on his forehead, and then cut three gashes evenly distant according to the length of the forehead. And if the length of the crack is two fingers wide: one crack should be evenly distant from the length of the nose in the middle of the forehead, and the second according to the length of a little movement of the eyelids which are in the tear duct, and the third on the other side.
And be careful at the beginning of the arches which are on both sides, and lengthen your hand from the continuation of both mandibles. And if the space of each incision is the amount of three fingers wide.
And to you a piece of sponge equipped or dry cloths moved with which you dry the blood.
Then insert the spatula of two acute ends, of which this is the shape of its incision: that is from the part of the temples between to the second incision. Gouge out with that all the gordian which is between two incisions with the chisel which is above the bone, and then do that of the middle incision into the second incision. And then spread that spatula and insert into the first incision again another instrument which is called a cutlass, sharp on one side and blunt on the other.
And pause the side of that sharp against the meat annexed to the gordian, and the side of it against the bone, and use that until it comes to the middle crack, and cut with that all the vessels that descend from the head to the armpits.
Let the incision be continued until it comes to the gordian, and then do that in the middle crack into the other crack.
And after the blood has run equally, squeeze out the places of the congealed blood.
And then put into each crack a cotton wool with old wine vinegar, and put over that powders wetted in wine and oil, and bandages so that it does not develop an ulcerous wound.
And on the third day loosen the bandage and give a great infusion of warm water or tea, and then cure that with basilicon ointment made with rosin oil and others so that the wounds may be healed.
Chapter 5.
Of the cure of warts by cauterization and from the armpits descending from the parts within the head.
When to someone warts come and continue, and you see the armpits of the patient emaciated little, and already the guarding of them is weakened, and the eyelids ulcerated and from there hairless, and in the forehead an acute pain piercing and consequent estrangement result, then know through these accidents that the materials and warts do not come but from certain veins of the parts within proceeding.
And the best cure in those is this: that you command the patient to shave his forehead, and then cut into that a crack in the middle of the forehead, a little by width (and begin with the crack of the left temple into the right temple; and let it be an incision into the bone; and lengthen your hand from the eyelids of the temples which are worn away because of chewing), so that the bone may be uncovered.
Dry all the blood with a sponge or dry cloth, and then fill in between the two lips of the crack with old cotton or dry cloth. And then tighten it above with powders wetted in wine and oil so that it does not develop an ulcerous wound.
And when you loosen that and see that the ulcer is already diminished, then know that it is rubbed on the bone where it begins in him naked meat, and then cure that with an exsiccative regimen which makes the meat wither, just as if you take from wheat flour two parts and of colophony four parts and mix them together, and make a plaster of it and administer it to those wounds of the meat.
Chapter 6.
Of the cure of what bites in the ears.
The whole cause that bites in the ears is one of four species, for it is either mineral stone or a cause similar to stone, like iron and glass, or it is from a plant, like chickpeas or beans, or a volatile cause, like water and wine and their likes, or some animal.
And therefore when stone bites in the ear or another cause similar to those causes which do not fit into it but grow in the ear, and put the ear to the sun, and if you see the stone, then distill from that some cause of violet oil or sesame oil, and then administer its distillation, and make it sneeze with a condiment, and stop up the nostrils by reason of the sneezing. And then put around the ear some pieces of cloth or wool, and stretch out the ear to the sides above it, for many times it is bored through by these causes.
And if it is not bored through, then administer its distillation with the instrument called very sharp curved forceps, of which this is the shape:
And if it is bored through with forceps, let it be; and if not, then administer its extraction with a subtle hook of little bending.
And therefore if it is not bored through by that, then make a cannula of ram and insert the end of the cannula into the hole of the ear and close the end of the cannula with wax and with softened oil so that only the cannula be open. And then extract with your own wind with strong吸引力, for troops have been seen with it.
But if it is not bored through in this manner, then take alum or prepared vetches with which they are pressed the ears a little quantity, and put that into the end of ray, and then wrap around that decently paused cotton. And then insert that into the hole of the ear with ease, and then draw out the ear from moisture.
And therefore if it is not bored through with all the causes which we have recounted, then you cut back such before it develops an ulcerous wound or spasm.
And the manner of cutting it back is that you at first cause the blood vessels of the sephasic vein to be shaken and extracted according to the manner of its nature, and then make that to cease between your hands and turn the ear to the sides above it, and stop with a little crack in the root of the ear by reason of the grey matter in the place where you see it pressed from within. And let the crack be of moon shape so that it may come to the stone, and when the stone is driven in, pull it out with appropriate instruments; and then close up the crack at that time with speed, and cure that so that it may be healed.
And if the cause bites in the ear is one of the fats that grow and become swollen, then administer its cure and extraction; but if it does not obey your command, then you take a very subtle spatula according to this form: and administer with that the incision of that fat which is bitten in the ear.
And do not do that when you think it is already moistened by the vapor of the ear, and put that in many pieces, and then extract those with hooks or with very subtle forceps, or by incision just as we have said, for the extraction of it is made easier.
But in the water which is entered into the ear let the patient sneeze with a condiment at the beginning, and fill his own ear with old cotton, and put that over that ear in which there is the water, and if by that it is bored through, let it be; and if not, then take thin stones and leans according to their length, and heat those in the fire a little, and let the patient insert one of those into the hole of his ear and suck with one of those on that spot and press with another stone upon that stone which is bitten in the ear. So do not stop this until all the water has been discharged.
So do not stop this until all the water has been discharged. And when the water has been discharged, take some paper or linen and place it and put one end in the ear and extend the other end with fire until it is burnt.
And then put in another piece of linen and do this as many times as is necessary until all the water has been discharged, and then tie it with a string like that which was described for the stone extractor.
But for the extraction of an object that has entered the ear, if it is a small object, similar to a bean or pea, treat it as we have said in the previous section; but if it is a large object which is causing pressure on the brain, then administer the extraction using forceps and pincers, and the cause of this is usually a foreign object lodged in the ear.
But in the extraction of a worm that has been generated in the ear, when you treat it as we have said in the previous section and in the treatise on distillations, and do not follow our instructions for your treatment, then you should look at the ear in the sunlight.
And if some cause of the worm appears there, then extract it using forceps or a fine pair of pincers; but if nothing appears, then take a tube that is narrow at one end and broader at the other, like this: And insert the narrow end into the ear according to how much pain the patient can endure; and then suck hard with it, doing this several times, until all the worms are discharged.
But if he does not obey you, then stop up the end of the tube with wax as we have said; and then administer the distillations which were described by the ancients in the treatment of worms, and you will find them in the treatise on distillations.
And let your effusion be that by which you pour the medical oils into the ear with this instrument, of which this is the form: And let it be made of silver or brass; narrow at the bottom and having a small hole in it, and flat on top.
And then let it be fitted with a plug so that it fits into the cavity of the container where it will be necessary. And if you wish, take the reed and wrap its end decently with cotton, and then pour oil into the cavity of the instrument, or juice from any herb, or anything you wish from these medicines, into the tube — and that is inserted in the ear —, and then put in the reed with its end wrapped, and squeeze it with your hand that which is wrapped with a templed compression around it until the oil is expelled into the cavity of the instrument and the patient feels the oil inside.
And what has been poured into the ear should already be made warm with fire a little bit. And take care that the cause which you distill into the ear is not too hot, for the medicines of the ears cannot endure excessive heat.
Chapter 7
On the treatment of ear obstructions.
Some children are born with a membrane blocking the ears of their mothers; and this also happens in some adults, an obstruction in the middle of the ear due to phlegm or a growth there; and this obstruction sometimes occurs in the opening of the ear-drum which does not reach the brain, and sometimes it is in the outer parts.
And that which happens in the middle part, which does not reach the brain, is in the greater dispositions of difficult cure.
And in that which you reach the brain, let the patient's ear be exposed to the sun and look at it. And therefore if you see any inflammation, open that with a subtle spatula of which this is the form:
If its end is small, let one side be pointed and the other not; and the spatula should be of two sides like a lion's claw so that it does not injure the ear.
And if the obstruction is due to a growth in the ear or in the middle part, then open that with fine pincers and cut it easily until all the growth is removed.
And if the obstruction is in the membrane of the ear, then take a fine reed and heat it with fire for just a little while, and then put that into the middle of the ear.
And therefore if you have sensed inflammation with what the patient feels with ease due to the difficulty of breathing, relieve the oppression of it with ease; and take care that you do not injure the nerves of the ear.
And then place over the ear a bandage of linen according to the size of the opening which you have wrapped around the egyptian ointment; and do this for several days until you are sure that the wound is healed; or else take some water and dip it in vinegar and sprinkle it on it, and if you see that the ear is already swollen, then take that off and replace it with another bandage which you have wrapped around cerated oil, until the swelling is reduced; and then treat it until it is cured.
But if blood flows from it, then soak sponge or bandage in warm water and place it over the ear, and use the other treatment which constricts the flow of blood, which is described in the treatise on distillation.
Chapter 8
On the cure for athelis which occurs in the eyelids.
Athelis which appear in the eyelids of some people are wet some days and dry on others.
Therefore let you have those with thong-like instruments or pincers, and split them with a spatula at their roots, and then place over the places thus split with oil.
But if pain comes with a flow of blood, then cauterize those with a small subtle lance.
And the better cautery is when the splits and wounds return as soon as any cause from their roots is removed; and when they are cauterized with fire, those roots are burnt up and do not return.
Chapter 9
On the cure for granulation which appears in the eyelids of people.
Many times it occurs in the eyelids of people some cause which is likened to granulation in its strength and hardness, and because of that granulation is called.
And it is an accumulation of thick moisture in the eyelid above and below.
And its appearance in it is that you should consider if the granulation proceeds from something which appears in the eyelid and is swollen on all sides; and the cause of it is diverse.
Therefore open that with a slit according to its width, and then scrape it from all sides with ease until it discharges, and then stop that up with pincers and cut off those roots.
And if the wound is large, then you should stitch it up; and treat it until it is healed.
And if it is small, you will not do harm to it unless its roots are restored and the flesh grows over it.
And if the granulation is declining at the edges of the eyelid, then cut away its surface and stop it up with pincers; and if you make an incision there, that will not be noticed in any cause.
And then the incision, wash the wound with salted water; and heal the wound with oil until it is healed.
Chapter X.
Of the cure of a ulcer in the eyelid above the eye.
Ulcers are grey in colour and are usually found on the eyelids above, and mainly affect infants. They harm the eyes of those affected, and they cannot bear the brightness of the sun because of this; therefore tears flow from their eyes.
And because of this you will see these people always looking down at the ground, and sleeping with their mouths open; and there is swelling and redness in their eyelids, and when you press on the eyelid, you can feel a lump underneath.
And a certain type of poultice is applied to the patient who rests his head on your lap; and you prepare a cloth and make it warm, and make a circle according to the size that fits the whole ulceration, and you place this over the ulcer and press with your fingers all around so that the pus collects under the poultice.
But in the primary stage, you must split the skin completely so that you reach the pus, for ulcers develop in this way through a fissure according to the shape of a white swelling.
Then extract this with cloths which you have wrapped between your fingers at the edges, and rub between the right and left hands until it is dispersed.
And be careful not to touch the ulcer with your fingers so that you do not hurt the patient while extracting it with the spatula.
But if pus does not appear at the beginning of the fissure, then touch it gently with a spatula so that pus comes out; and then extract it as we have said before; and then moisten cloths in water and vinegar, and place them over the ulcer and bind those with bandages.
And also apply salt to the wound and place it in the cavity of the fissure so that any remaining humidity is absorbed.
And then heal the ulcer until it is cured.
But if a scab forms on the wound, then heal it with soft poultices until it is healed.
Chapter XI.
Of ways of feeling the ulcer.
When the eyelids of the eyes are affected by something which is placed under them and are old, then these cause pain in the eye and make conditions of illness appear as constant tears and softening of the eyelids and tissue until it becomes a cause of destruction of the eye, which is called tactinir of the eye, and it is healed in four ways: either by cauterisation with fire; or with an acute medicine as mentioned earlier in the chapter on cautery; or tactinir is caused by incision and suture; or with cannulas, as I will say.
And so place the patient's head in your lap; and lift up the eyelid of the eye with your left hand, and if it is lifted, that is good; but if not, insert a needle into where the pus is underneath the eyelid, and push the needle upwards towards the eyebrow, and let it be close to the margin of the eyelid where the hairs are — close to the hairs — and pull the needle upwards towards the eyebrow, and convert the eyelid towards the side.
And then pierce the inner part of the eyelid where the hairs are placed with a spatula which is inserted into the tear duct from above; and then extract the pus and place tiny pieces of cotton or cloth underneath the eyelid, and then sign on the eyelid with a tent, and let it be like the shape of a myrtle leaf.
But indeed let the shape be according to the amount of swelling of the eyelid, for this varies among people; for some require a large amount to be inserted into the eyelid according to the amount by which the eyelid is softened.
And then pierce with the spatula over the two lines which you have marked, and start from the tear duct which goes from the larger to the smaller tear duct. And if your incision is close to the natural hairs as it is the thickness of the king's finger.
And then insert the needle into one of the two corners of the ulcer, and then remove all the scabs, and then use sutures with gum or fine wool to attach the two lips together, and wipe away the blood, and let what overflows from the hairs be adhered onto the two eyebrows by some cause, if you wish to do so; but if not, do not heal it.
And then let the suture of the hairs be for three or four days, and then heal it.
And if you wish, remove the bandage after the suturing, and heal the ulcer with something which dries it out and constricts it, for the eyelid is raised by the sealing of the bandage and the gathering of pus; but suturing is better. And so I have said the ways of tactinir.
But indeed let there be diligence on the patient, and it is a good operation, and there is no fear in it.
And there is another way in tactinir, and it is that you mark on the eyelid like a myrtle leaf, and then lift the eyelid with three curved hooks gathered together according to this shape:
But if it is not possible to do this, and the eye is not swollen, then take a needle in which there is thread and place it in the middle of the figure, and insert the other hook close to the tear duct from above, and use your fingers to gather the hairs evenly, and then with these lift up your hand with an even elevation, and lift up all the ulcer over which you have marked as we have recommended.
And then attach the two lips of the wound with sutures, and heal it until it is healed.
But if a scab forms after your incision or fissure, then heal that scab with ointment and something similar to it, and with unguent.
And sometimes the hairs of the eyelid are converted towards it; therefore use in that what we have said about incision; but suturing is more natural.
Tactinir with cannulas is according to this form: And it is that you lift up the eyelid and split the figure which is inside according to what has been described; and then with skill make two cannulas or two thin rods of which their length is according to the length of the eyelid and their width is less than the width of the spatula. And you have already split at the ends of some parts where you hold the threads.
And then gather each one with subtlety under what overflows from the eyelid of the eye, and tighten the cannulas at some parts with strong pressure, and let it be for several days, for the eyelid by the pressure will die and become black and drop out so that a new one comes in its place.
But if it is delayed, then break the scab with tweezers, and then heal the wound until it is healed.
And so when it is solidified, the eyelid is raised and the hairs do not pierce.
And this is the way of two cannulas which you make according to this form: and have the quantity of length and width neither more nor less.
Chapter XII.
Of elevation of warts on the face use the needle when the wart is hard.
When they are non-natural, hard and rough warts on the face, then the operation is that you take a fine needle and place it in that vein of the cedar very gently, and then that you tie off its ends very gently. And let the length of the threads be as much as one palm.
And then you put another fine thread beneath it quickly, and tie off its ends if you wish to.
And then let the patient hold his head in your hand, and be in the sun so that your work is revealed, because it is a subtle operation and delicate.
And then insert the needle into the root of the hair which has need of skill, and make it penetrate the eyelid hurriedly while you pull upwards that which is above the natural hair.
And then pull the hair up and out, and insert it into the ointment, and let there be one or two or three hairs, but not more.
And then pull your hand away so that the hair is plucked out with the ointment on the eyelid by the natural hair.
But if it is pulled out with the ointment and not the hair, pull the ointment to the sides beneath by the thread which you have applied to it, so that in being pulled ointment comes out from above.
And you will see it on the face, because then you will pull out ointment and thread, and each and every one will close up and heal the face, and leave the slits for two or three days so that the hair can adhere to its place and grow back good flesh there.
And if it is shorter, then you take a long hair from the natural hairs and elevate it with that, or you put in something to lengthen it, and then you elevate it.
Chapter .xiii.
Of the cure for a wart that comes on the eyelid above.
When it comes on the eyelid and is caused by contraction of the eyelid when it is drawn up to either side, from bad setting or division or cauterization, and is called leporina, and this wart is either natural or accidental, and is caused by setting of plasma or divisions or cauterization, or similar to them badly cured.
The way of the operation on it is that you split that setting and separate its lips, and put in between them a thread of linen cloth, and tie those so that they may be healed.
And do not believe that you cure it of the causes which dry it out and cause constriction; because if you do that it will return worse than ever before.
Use on it of causes that soften like fenugreek, and broths in which are cooked aniseed and fennel seed, or ointment of diaquilon, which is liquefied with some of the oils, and immerse in it the thread, and cure with it.
And the secret of your cure is that you pierce with all skill which is not consolidated according to its shape at the beginning.
And this operation which we have said, is nothing but a rectification of ehalixacrati which does not return the shape of the place according to what it was before.
Chapter .xiiii.
Of the cure for a wart that comes on the eyelid below.
This alxacrati which is made on the eyelid below, and is properly named alxacrati; and it is either natural or accidental.
But accidental is caused by plasma or division or cauterization, or similar.
And the way of operating on it is that you take a needle which has a double thread, and put that in the flesh, and let it pass from the tear duct on the left into the tear duct on the right, so that the thread comes out at both ends of the flesh.
And then extend the flesh to either side with the needle and push it in with the needle, and stitch it up with wide stitches. And so if it returns the shape of the eyelid according to how it was before, that is good; and if not, take a needle and put it in the split figure, and with that convert the eyelid, and split both slits on the sides of the eyelid below.
And let the ends of both slits be two angles of the incision, which you have made so that they meet, and let an angle be made between them when they meet.
And this figure is Greek letter: the line.
And then stitch up that flesh by the amount which is the side of it below of it, that which draws up the eyelid.
And then stitch up the separated parts and sew them with thread of wool; and then cure those with what we have said of the softening medicines and of the ointments so that it is healed.
And if alxacrati comes from division or cauterization, then you must split with a flat split over the hairs of the eyelid as it was before. And then separate with the blade between two lips as we have said.
In the summary of the speech of the cure for alxacrati when it is above or below, that it runs through operation, according to how it is prepared in the shape of alxacrati, and it is in the shape of many different shapes.
And the wise artisans always prepare skill in every way which is possible for it so that it returns the figure to the natural shape, or near to it, and that ill person according to how it convices him of the operation and of the instruments in the best dispositions.
Chapter .xv.
Of the adhesion of the eyelid to the conjunctiva or to the cornea.
When this setting happens to many people in which the eyelid is more set above than the eyeball, and is prohibited from the facility of movement and of its natural works, then you insert the outer edge below the eyelid, and elevate it up there, or extend it with the finger.
And then you insert the adhesion with thin blade, which is not sharp at the edges, hold it bluntly so that the ill person is not troubled after operation, and keep the blade so that it does not scratch the eye with its edge.
And let your incision split that adhesion with facility so that the eyelid is returned according to its natural shape, and all the adhesion be healed.
And then you put in the eye salted water with which you wash it, or distil in it of zunia dissolved in water.
And then separate between the eyelid and the eyeball with blade of li, and put over the eyeball wool infused in white of egg, and on third day use causes of consolidation so that it is healed.
Chapter .xvi.
Of incision of nail and of prominence of flesh of the tear ducts.
Know that ungla is according to two ways, because it is nervous, and is like hard ciphac, thin and subtle; or it is non-nervous, like white hardness congealed, which when the iron touches it, or it is forced in it, it takes on a color, or it is abscinded and the iron is not placed in it.
And both the kinds do not begin unless from the tear duct which goes little by little that covers the sight and prohibits light and movement of eyeball.
The manner of operating at the eye is that the patient places his head in your lap, and you open his eyelids, and elevate the eyelid with your hand, and you gather up the eyelash with forceps after making several incisions and extend it upwards. Then take a needle and insert into it a horsehair or ox hair or similar, or a strong piece of gut, doubling over the end of the needle slightly and pushing it through the lash, and ligate the lash with gut; then extend it upwards, and scrape away at the side of the lash which is obscuring the pupil. And so you follow this up with the hair into the back of the eye.
And then you incision the rest of the membrane in the root of the tear duct with a fine spatula or small forceps, and cut away the flesh of the natural tear duct so that through this incision there will be no continuous flow of tears.
And sometimes the lash is just extended with forceps or gut as we have said, and then it is scraped away with a lion’s spatula; this is its form.
And sometimes it is doubled over with gut alone, and sometimes with forceps; a lion’s spatula does this, and if you cannot ligate the lash with gut, make the ligature of the lash with strong gut; and sometimes it is ligated with gut alone. And be careful that with the spatula you do not touch the cornea and that there be no rupture in it, and that the pupil is perforated.
Then after the incision, throw into the eye a little salt or a medicine made of vinegar and let it remain for another day; then wash out that medicine with water so that it may heal.
And if the lash is not nervous and you cannot put in the needle, or it is not pierced with the forceps, then this type of lash is cured with medicines, and it is healed like this when the eye is divided.
And if you want to incision it, then open up the eyelid of the patient and take a fine lion’s spatula with its point sharpened according to this form: And draw the spatula towards the root of the tear duct by which the flow of tears is drawn; and sometimes it is cut with the spatula and sometimes it is cut with forceps. And if you find that it is rarefied and drawn into the root, then distill from your eye medicine made of vinegar or red wine or salt mixed with water, and cover up the eyelid for another day.
And then repeat the operation until everything is healed, otherwise a wound cautery will be in the eyelid; therefore you open it up and cure the wound from its beginning until it is healed.
And then repeat your operation over that with reason until it is healed.
The membrane of the tear duct, if it is seen in the eye from great injury, is to be suspended with forceps; and you incision that one part, and do not finish the incision so that there is no flow of tears.
And then distill into the tear duct red wine and vinegar until it is healed.
Chapter .xvii.
Of the operation of the other at the root of the tear duct.
Sometimes in the eyelids of algus there is born red flesh and it is raised up so that it covers the pupil, or it approaches or presses upon the eyelids, and strongly compresses the eyelids to the outer edges and it is attached as though to a stone ball.
But the operation on it is that the patient places his head in your lap and you open up its eyelids and gather up all that flesh with convenient forceps for that purpose, and you hold onto that with a forcep or basket; then you incision the flesh at its beginning so that all is finished with the incision instrument, and be careful of the eye that you do not injure it after your operation.
And it is your incision with which you incision those or with the spatula which we have recommended in the incision of the lash, or with small forceps with which the lash is gathered according to how it comes; consult that chapter.
So when your incision is completed and all that flesh is healed up, then fill the eye with salt mixed with water or red powder and similar things from the corrosive medicines; place over it a cloth which has been soaked in warm vinegar until it is certain there will be no wound cautery.
And if for some cause of algus there is blood cautery and you fear wound cautery, then open up the eye and cure that wound cautery with medicine which yields to that wound cautery; and repeat your operation on it until it is healed; similarly do with the flesh which has occurred in the eye of this type.
But you must guard against all cure of the eye with an instrument either naturally or accidentally; work with iron and do not put your hand into any of these operations until you see that member has suffered that operation.
Chapter .xviii.
Of gathering up of the membrane in the eye.
Red veins which are tested upon the eye and forbid its operation; they reveal the eye with length of days.
Therefore it is necessary at the beginning that you consider if the eye in which there is membrane is strong and in it there is not some other disease than membrane; then you gather up that membrane.
And you command the patient to place his head in your lap and then suspend those veins with one forceps or two according to your prudence; that forceps is of fine doubling over according to this form.
Or by two forceps graded into the body according to this form:
And then let the veins be gathered up with fine forceps, with subtlety, and wipe away the blood from time to time as you see those veins drawn into the eye and turned over; and when they are drawn in and turned over.
And be careful that you do not injure the eye with the end of the spatula; and if your operation is in the middle of the day in front of the sun, and keep firm in your operation so that you incision only those veins.
And when you have completed it then you distill into the eye red wine or vinegar so that with its sharpness it corroses that which is drawn in from the membrane.
But if that is not possible for you to gather up all in that hour then you plaster it all with what yields the pain of it; and let it be for several days until the pain of it is assuaged and there is certain no wound cautery will occur.
And then repeat over it according to how the mother way is healed.
And this is the form of the forceps:
Chapter .xix.
Of the operation of the patient to the tear duct by accident.
When you cure arisati with cautery or sharp medicine according to how it is preceded and is not healed, then there is no pus in it except that you split over the wound following its maturity and draw out all the moisture which is in it and the puss which is under the bone so that it is uncovered.
And when the bone is uncovered and you see in it corruption or blackness then you scrape it with an instrument of which this is the form.
And it is named the aspere cap, and let it be made of iron, and the cap round in such a way as a thistle which is made punctured by puncturing with lime or with aliskalfati by subtle puncturing (as it is in the following form).
And place that on the rotten place of the bone, and roll that between your fingers gently, and press your hand gently while you know that that corruption is smooth.
And let it be done several times, and restore the place with causes drying and astringent.
So if the place is consolidated and there is good flesh born in it, and the body has been cleansed of the pus and stayed for 40 days, and nothing new happens in it nor accident, then you know that it is healed.
And if not, then it is not in it healing but reduce the fissure to the form of the nose, and according to this way: you must uncover according to bone with iron or acute medicine, and when the bone is uncovered, then you take tribe according to this form:
Let the tip of it be triangular, and the shank of it be first extended into the extremity thus as thistle.
And place that on the bone, and let it be close to the lacrimal; lengthen your hand a little from the hole, and roll your hand with the tribe so that it penetrates all the bones, and he feels the patient for pain where the wind comes out of him when you put your hand.
So then restore the place with medicines astringent drying as it is to you.
So when the flesh and the place are hardened, then the matter which poured into the parts of the foramen returns to the nose, therefore the pus is lighter on the patient.
Chapter .20.
Of reduction of the eminence of the hole.
When the hole eminences with its totality and does not happen in the wound damage nor diminution, then you see that the patient relaxes, and then he follows, and then you put wind in his neck after scarification and suck well; and then place over the hole liniment which is made of pitch and aloe and enses and sarcocolla, and then strengthen the bandage over the hole with words powder.
And the way of the powders is that you take clothes of lion hair mots, and each cloth be doubled into four folds; and make from those mots.
And then place those one over another according to the quantity by which it has the hole necessary. And then strengthen over those with tough cloth with strong stricture; and iterate the ventouses with sucking without scarification; and stop the ventouses and let the hole tight during the day and night.
But if in between the ligament is softened, then see that it be loose motion.
And then stop the liament close during the day and night thus as we have said.
And if you see that the hole has been reduced, well is, and if not, then iterate the bandage with the powders and the stricture and the ventouses so that it is healed.
Chapter .21.
Of the beginning of the eminence of the tunica uvea.
When disruption in the tunica uvea, and then it is eminent and processes out the eyelids thus as a grain of sand, and the shape of man for that, and you want to insert it, then the operation in it is thus as we have recommended, that you insert the needle into the root of the uvea from the part below to the part above, and then put the needle another which is thread double of the part of the lacrimal, and make that penetrate and let the first needle according to its disposition; and then insert the place of the thread double and lift with it the part of the uvea in the circuit of the needle, and strengthen that motion.
And then extract the needle and place over the hole wool infused in white of egg and let it so that the thread falls with the uvea.
And then cure the hole with that which comforts that while the wound is healed.
And several times gather from all part with circle of cloth between the hole adjust eminence great, and then be perforated by the spatium subtle which comes to the preon of the hole, and run the humidity albuginous, and descend the hole and as much.
And then strengthen so that it is healed.
Chapter .22.
Of cure of hawkness.
This illness which is called hawkness is not but sickness that is settled in the hole like water descending and it is not that.
But the way of working in it is that you make the patient sit on the seat equipped and straight, and then take his head between your hands of two parts and hold that so that he sees the sickness come to the parts below, and then let be dried and do not descend, and let be obstructed the light, and the patient see the causes thus as he saw.
And if it does not go down, know that it is water.
But if it is not prepared the descent to the sickness with that which we have said, then make the patient sit between your hands and then take spatium subtle and fen over that on the panniculus cernent a little from the continuacion of the conjunctiva by the tunica cornea in the corona (between the hole wet), so that it be driven out the sickness.
So when it is driven out, then you distill in the hole water tail in which you have mixed honey or water in which you have boiled fenugreek and honey.
And then let it be cured by the other causes so that it is healed.
Chapter .23.
Of the cure of the water descending from the hole.
We have already said the spices of the water in the division and which conviene to pierce with sermo declaring, then that according to the health.
Then see that you make sit the patient between your hands over a table and lie his hole up, it motion stringing.
And then place close to the eyelid of the his hole your left hand, if the hole in which is the water is the left hole; or with your right hand, if the hole is the right.
And then with your right hand take almaghda, if the hole is left; or with your left hand, if the hole is right.
And then place the tip of almaghda close to the corona by the thickness of the edge in the white of the hole of party of the minor lacrimal, and then pull almaghda with force and roll your hand with that.
And then penetrate in the white of the hole and feel that almaghda is already come to veined cause.
And see that is the measurement of the path of almaghda to the preon the measurement of the space which is of the pupil between to the end of the darkness, and it is the corona of the hole; where you will see with that pupil with the vision of the hole by the clarity of the tunica cornea.
And then place almaghda into the hole in which it is the water, and then you pull it down a little and another, and therefore if the water goes down as much, then see the patient that over which hole he breaks his view as much, and almaghda in his hole.
And then rest a little; therefore if the water is descended, then you rest that another little before almaghda be driven out.
And then when it is dried and do not go down, then you extract almaghda with facility, and roll your hand a little by a little, and then dissolve in the water a little of salt clear of gemma and with that wash the hole within; and then place outside the hole cot or stop or wool infused in oil roasted and white of egg and tongue over that the hole.
May God and those of our time place upon him a veil of oblivion.
And if you do not obey your soul by following the path of truth because of its hardness – for there are some people who are hard-wired to be resistant to truth – then consider using Alberite, which has this composition:
And so you pierce that joint and do not stop your hand from going deeper into the wound, and only stop when you reach the affected area beneath it.
Then insert the suppository as described above.
And when you have finished your work, prepare the patient's bed by making it lower to the ground in a dark room, and make sure he is prohibited from any movements.
And place something in his nature that will soothe it, and do not hurt his head on the right or left side at all.
And let there be lamentation according to his disposition on the third day.
And then untie him in that dark room and reveal the truth to him, and make him see some causes, and return the lamentation within seven days.
And do not do this during the hours of healing or immediately after the infusion. You must then remove him from there so that the water can gently and quickly return to normal.
But if a boil occurs, then you must untie the wound on the seventh day and rectify it with something that soothes the boil.
Then you must reveal his truth to him and place an oral charm on his face so that he may be ruled by it for several days while he exists in the dark room.
And let there be lamentation as he gradually descends and converses about his causes.
And know that in some instances the disciple of vision is not excused from certain views, and then you must be ardent about the operation.
And now it has reached us from some of those who are in the Artach , and some say that they make fire in Ayrac by punching a hole through which water is sucked out.
But nevertheless I have not seen this done in our land, nor is it described in any of the ancient books; and it may be a novelty.
And these are the forms of the species of Magdaam for those who ignore them:
And they are made from wood or iron specifically, and their ends are with this triangular subtlety, the acute end thus with that is the shape.
Chapter XXIV.
On the healing of a wound in the nose.
When diverse meats are swollen in the nose, of which there is some cause that is connected to a scropion sting or to a polyps stone; and this ailment is called polypus because it resembles that stone represented. And from it is cancerous meat, scaly, of dusky color; and from it is that is not leonine meat of dusky color.
And so in that which is not leonine meat nor cancerous, you must make the patient sweat between your hands and place him in the sun, and open his nostrils, and prick his testicles into those meats. And then extract that to the ends of the foramen, and you must insert something that you have understood from those with a sharp instrument at one end so that you know that all the meat is removed; if something remains in him from any cause for which abscission is possible, then you rate it with one of the subtle instruments with ease so that nothing remains. But if it is seething with blood or there occurs a boil, then you place on him that which you must; or if they are malignant boils, then you cut and cauterize them so that the blood is shed and all the holes are completely exposed.
And let there be spitting in the nose, with a mixture of vinegar and water or wine. But if the nose is open and from it proceeds humidity into the palate, then know that he is healed.
But if the humidity does not penetrate according to how it should, then you know that within him is meat gone in the nostrils of which there has been no abscission.
And so then you must insert gall into him from which there is some thickness, and you see in him that there are pusy bones of the nostrils to which there has been no abscission; and let there be spitting in him of words with an accent on the first or last syllable, and insert between each nut the quantity of the finger or less, and put the patient to sleep and insert one end of the gall into his nostrils with a ray or another cause for which it is possible.
And having done this, let him throw his odorant into the canals of his nostrils so that it reaches the back of his throat, and let him spit onto his forehead, for appearances are like those of children at school, and is a light cause to him who wants to do this.
And then insert the two ends of the gall, one end which hangs over the nose and the other which is inserted in the nose, and administer a clamp of meat with the nostrils that are on the gall, and do this so that you know that the meats are at the nostrils of the gall.
And then extract the gall and place in the nose the abstraction of blood a wooden plug , and do this for three days or more so that the fluid corrodes all that is from the meats.
And then at the end of the cause, place in the nose a lead pipe for several days so that he is healed.
But if you see that there is no improvement, use that.
And this is the form of the instrument to clean out the nose with which oils and medicines are distilled in the nostrils:
And do this from silver or wood, which is like a small open lamp, also with a small cone, and the meat similarly.
And if you want, make a closed tube like a cane, and the end of the instrument to clean out the nose and let it be flat, uncovered; to which you apply at his back, with which you have that when you heat in him oil or that which you want from the sucking and from the causes.
Chapter XXV.
Of the eels in the ends of the nose.
Many times it is seen that there is a growth of an eel in the ends of the nose, and it swells and increases over several days so that it receives its guardant.
And for this you must insert it into his coming of his appearance, and remove all of that. And then place over the area a cautery or burning medicine that is in the location of him.
But if its abscission is delayed so that it swells, consider then if it is hard, dusky in color and of little feeling, do not touch that with iron because there is an ulcerous boil; for many times this happens to one who inserts that.
And if the boil is leonine and not dusky in color, and there is an abscission possible in all of it, then you must withdraw the patient and insert that without fear, and heal the area with something that comes out of it and constrict it so that he is healed.
Chapter 26.
Of the suturing of the nose, and of the lips, and of the ears when the continuity is dissolved by plague or similar.
Know that when there is a dissolution of continuity in one of these cartilages, there is little to be done in that operation except in some men.
Therefore, when for some cause or other, you find that it is a fresh plague with its blood, then you should bring together the two lips of the plague with a suture, and then cure that inside so that it may heal.
And if the lips of the dissolution of continuity are already separated, and each is made healthy, then you should cut off each part of its cord until that it bleeds. And then join the two lips with a suture and strengthen those, and over that pulverize dragon's blood and finely ground herbs, and place over the powder a piece of a diafinicon plaster or one of the other consolidative plasters, and leave it there for two or three days, and then remove that plaster and change the plaster and let it stay there so that the wound may heal by itself, and then cure with ointment until it is healthy.
But the manner of the suture is that you make the dissolution of continuity either with needles as we have recommended in the suture of the belly, or make the dissolution of continuity with a thread as we have said before and let us know.
Chapter 27.
Of the extraction of those causes that come in the two lips on the inside of the parts.
Many times, in many men in the inside of their lips there are certain hard pustules that resemble err-grass, and some of them are smaller and some are larger.
Therefore you should turn the lips inside out and cut each of those hardnesses from all sides, and then close up the incision with finely ground sage so that the blood is constricted, and then wash it with wine vinegar and cure the area with something astringent until it is healthy.
Chapter 28.
Of incision of the flesh joined to the gums.
Frequently there is on the gum a piece of flesh which the ancients called albuginea, and so when you suspend that with an instrument or with your fingers and cut it away from its root, let the pus run out or the blood.
And then place over the area finely ground sage or other astringent or cauterizing powders.
And if that flesh returns, then cut it away again secondarily, and cauterize it, for the cautery will not return.
Chapter 29.
Of removal of teeth with a file.
When in the surface of the teeth of the inside of the parts and of the foramen and between the gums are attached rough, sharp scales, and sometimes they are blackened and are made yellow or green, and corrupt the gum and make the teeth loose.
And so you should make a cut between your fingers and place the head of it in your mouth, and rub the teeth where those scales appear and the causes like sand until no cause remains from them, and that makes the blackness and the yellowing and the others go away so that they are cleansed.
And if that is what is at the beginning of the root, then it is good; and if not, then you should do the cutting over those again on the second or third day until it comes to the final state in whatever you want.
And know that teeth have need of many different types and figures of tools according to how your operation is prepared. And therefore the file with which the tooth is filed from the inside of the part is another type of file than that with which it is filed between the teeth according to other forms, and these forms of files you should prepare them as follows:
Chapter 30.
Of extraction of teeth.
You should cure the tooth of its pain with every trick and delay in completely extracting it, for there is no cause that exceeds the usual one when it is extracted, for it is a sublime substance that causes an excuse in its extraction.
But when the tooth is forced to be extracted, you should certainly be certain which is the painful tooth, for many times the pain deceives the patient and seems to be in a healthy tooth, and then you extract that one and the pain does not cease until the painful tooth is extracted, for we have seen this through the operation of the barbarians.
Therefore when you are certain which is the painful tooth and know it, then you should scarify in the circuit of the tooth with a spatulum on which there is some virtue so that it is dissolved from the tooth into the gum from all sides, and then draw it with tweezers or with subtle forceps bit by bit until you extract it.
And then press it strongly with great forceps for good speech or strong grip, and place the head of the patient between your thighs so that he does not move, and then draw the tooth according to rectitude in a way that you do not break it or give the patient greater pain.
And if it is not loose, then take one of those instruments and place it below it from all sides with ease and force the extraction of it just as it was done at the beginning.
But if the tooth is broken or rotten, then you should fill that crack with cloth and tighten it with the end of a fine wire so that it is not broken at the time of your constriction on it with forceps.
And you should open sufficiently with scarification in the circuit of all parts of the gum and guard your strength so that you do not break it and let the wound come apart from it, and return to the patient because of the malice so that his first pain is less.
And beware that you do not do what some ignorant barbers do in their haste and audacity about the extraction of them, for they do not administer what we have recommended; for many times they bring great illnesses on men which are difficult to extract, and their roots are all wrinkled, or some of them, or that you draw it with some bones from the jaw just as we have often witnessed.
And then the extraction of it should be washed in the mouth with wine vinegar or wine with salt.
And if it flows with blood afterwards, then grind some amount of alum and sprinkled over the wound, and if that alum does not work, cauterize.
The form of the forceps and tweezers with which the tooth is drawn at the beginning should be of long length, short handle and thick, so that they are not bent when you work with them.
And let them also be of thick handle within so that when you stretch them with those they are not bent, let them be short lengths.
And let them be made of iron of India drawn to a point with straight edges, and in the edges of those there are teeth of which some enter into others and stretch by strong constriction, and sometimes the edges of those are the shape of a goose beak which is hooked, it is bent, and they are of strong constriction.
Chapter 31.
Of extraction of teeth and of drawing the bones from the jaws that are bitten.
When you need to extract a tooth that is broken for some reason, then you should put over the affected area a poultice for one or two days until the area becomes soft; and then insert tweezers or tongs whose ends are shaped like the beak of a bird called stork or pliers, the shape of forceps:
The ends of them should be made inside as if they were a file or an axe.
And if you do not obey me in this use of forceps or tongs, then you should cut through the gum and uncover all the flesh and insert the tool that is called "crown", it's a small lever whose shape is as follows:
And let its tip be broad and not pointed so that it does not break.
Thus if through this the gum is torn away, it is good; and if not, use these other tools of which these are the shapes: the shape of the first tool is triangular at its end in which there should be some thickness:
The shape of the second tool is that it has a triangular and very thin end.
And you will be helped by this tool having two prongs, of which this is the shape, namely the following: and other instruments which are used in tooth extraction; for this is done with this tool which is like a large hook, and this is its shape:
of the triangular end bent or short, which should have some thickness, and not be pointed so that it does not break.
And another thing is that the instruments for moving teeth are similar to the other instruments.
But the wise and skillful practitioner in this art finds for himself many methods according to the operations and various diseases; for there are diseases of which the ancients did not speak nor prescribe any proper instruments, because of the forms of the different species.
But if the bone of the jaw or of the other bones in the mouth is broken, or if it is dislocated, then there should be applied to it at its place a weight convenient for the instruments and forceps which we have mentioned in the extraction of tooth roots, and use the tool whose form is as follows:
And let there be some thickness put on it little by little, and let it be bound or held with the mouth so that it does not evade or flee until the bone is completely soft; then restore the place with appropriate medicines for this purpose.
But if there is a slight dislocation in the bone, then cut away that dislocation and its blackness, and cure that until it is healed.
Chapter .xxxii.
Of the cure of teeth that are prominent above the others.
When teeth are prominent not according to their natural form, and especially when this is the case for women, and especially for old women; then you must consider: if a tooth is next to another tooth, and it is not possible to cut it or file it, then pull that tooth out; but if it is not next to another tooth, then you insert that tooth with this tool whose form is as follows; it is like a pig's snout, and should be made of Indian iron with a pointed end.
And you must insert it in such a way that the tooth is inserted into it in two or three days because of the hardness of the tooth, and that no other teeth are affected.
And if it is a prominent tooth exposed to filing, then file that tooth with an Indian-iron file whose form is as follows:
And let it all be of Indian iron, and its edge sharp; and let it have fine points as with the file with which needles are made, and with which the tooth is filed little by little in several days with ease, so that no other teeth are affected or cut. Then smooth it out at its end, and cut away any blackness with a razor blade.
And if a tooth whose side is broken and which hurts the tongue, then you must file it so that the edge of that fracture is blunted and smoothed, and flattened so that the tongue is not hurt nor speech impaired.
Chapter .xxxiii.
Of restoring broken teeth with gold or silver wire.
When teeth have received concussion and loosening through a blow or through falling, and the patient cannot chew on that side, and you have cured it with astringent medicines, and your cure has not been effective, then so that they do not loosen, there should be inserted in them gold wire and not silver wire, for silver will bend and after a few days will dislodge, but gold will remain firm.
And let the wire be of such thinness and thickness according to the quantity that can enter between the teeth; and the form of the binding is that you take the wire and pass it between two healthy teeth, and then let it grow with two curves of the wire between two broken ones, or if one or more, so that the thread comes to the healthy tooth on the other side. Then tighten the binding at the end from which you began, and strengthen your work with ease and skill so that it is not broken.
And let your binding be such that by which you bind the wire so that it does not come out.
Then insert the ends of the wire with forceps or tongs, and apply them in each place with tools, and fold them and conceal them between the healthy tooth and the broken one, so that they do not harm the tongue. Then let it be bound as tightly as possible.
But if it is loose or broken, then tighten it or those with another wire in the same way all the time.
And this is the form of teeth and the figure of the binding of two healthy teeth and two broken ones, bound thus as follows:
And when you cause one tooth or two to return by their fall to their places, and they are grown back as we have recommended, and are broken again:
Then let not this be done except by wise practitioners.
And sometimes it is fitting because of some cause of the bones of cows, and it is made like a tooth in shape, and is placed in its place where the tooth failed, and is bound as we have said, and remains and serves with him for a long time.
Chapter .xxxiv.
Of the cutting of the thread that comes in the tongue and prohibits speech.
This thread which appears under the tongue some times by nature or accidentally and occurs through a wound that has already healed.
And the operation in it is that you open the patient's mouth, and lay his jaw bone aside; and lift up his tongue, and then insert that nerve thread according to its width so that the tongue is loosened from its binding.
But if in it there is any hardness or knotting, and this exists because of a healing from a wound, then you cut it with a sharp instrument and split that according to its width so that you have cut the thread and the knotting is dissolved.
And beware lest there be made a crack in the bone flesh, and you split up here the hard part of the bone and blood flows out.
Then let it be washed with the dregs of wine or with vinegar, or with water in which there has been ground pepper; and then keep the tongue pressed down with a cloth, so that the patient does not speak again until it is healed.
But if there is bleeding, place powdered vitriol on the spot; but if blood comes out, then cauterize the spot with a lanolin cautery that is suitable for this purpose. And then treat that wound with the other remedies until it is healed.
Chapter 35.
On the extraction of a ranula under the tongue.
Sometimes an abscess forms under the tongue, resembling a small lump, which hinders the tongue from performing its natural functions, and it grows larger as it fills the mouth.
And the operation on it is to open the patient's mouth facing the sun and examine the abscess.
And if you see it is dark colored or black, hard, and the patient feels no pain when you touch it, then do not touch that spot because it is a ulcerous sore.
And if it is inclined towards whiteness, and moist, then you should put the needle into it, and pierce it all around; and if blood comes out in the process of your operation, then you must place powdered vitriol on it to stop the bleeding.
And then return to your work until you have finished it, and wash the wound with sharp wine and salt; and treat that wound with other remedies for this purpose until it is healed.
Chapter 36.
On the extraction of an abscess from the ear, and of that which occurs in the gutter, and of other abscesses.
When an abscess occurs in the ear canal due to an obstruction of blood in the hollow of the temple; and if blood does not come out from it, then you should appeal to Podragua and pierce it with a cautery of powdered vitriol.
But if it is of a reddish color and the root is thick, then do not touch it with iron due to the flow of blood; before it has ripened, either you will draw it out or it will rupture on its own.
And if it is of a white color, soft, and the root is thin, then that should be pierced.
And the operation on it is to examine, before your operation, whether the abscess has rested completely or has diminished at all; and then make the patient face the sun, with his head turned towards you, open his mouth, and the servant press the tongue down with his fingers as shown in this figure:
And it should be made of silver or bronze, and be thin with a pointy tip.
Then, when you press the tongue with that instrument and see the abscess before you, place your finger on it and pierce it with the needle, drawing it outwards as far as you can. Another method is to pierce one of the membrane layers; and then cut that with an instrument as shown in this figure:
Another method is to pierce one of the membrane layers; and then cut that with an instrument as shown in this figure: It is like forceps, except that its ends are curved, so that the openings of each pair are facing each other, very sharp, and should be made of iron tempered in vinegar.
But if this instrument is not available to you, then pierce it with a needle as shown in this figure: The needle should be sharp on one side and blunt on the other.
And when you have pierced one spot, pierce the other according to this method, and then the patient should rinse their mouth with warm water.
But if blood comes out, then rinse with water infused with the peel of a pomegranate or a bay leaf, or with something similar to what is used for stiptiqua wounds, so that the flow of blood is stopped; and then treat that wound until it is healed.
And sometimes other abscesses occur in the ear canal besides those of the ears, and they are examined as mentioned in the examination of two spots equally.
And I have treated a woman with an abscess that occurred in her ear canal; the abscess was of a dark color and there was little pain, and it had closed her ear canal, and the woman could only breathe with difficulty, and she had prohibited herself from eating and drinking water, and she was nearing death if she did not drink water for one or two days.
And the abscess had swollen so much that it had formed two bumps for two months before they discharged.
So I treated her thoroughly and placed one of my needles in one of the bumps, and drew it out, and when I pulled it, a large portion came out; and then I examined that spot where I understood the other bump to be, and then I opened her mouth, pressed her tongue, and then I placed the needle in that abscess.
And then I cut out a large piece from it, and there was only a little blood. So that woman's ear canal was completely closed, and she began to drink water immediately, and then she ate food; therefore I did not cease piercing that abscess many times for a long time, and the abscess occurred in the same spot where it had been prolonged.
And then I made an incision and cauterized the vein of him, therefore until now; and then I walked around and did not know what God had done to me at that moment.
Here is the next sentence:
Of the beginning of the ulcer when it is puffed up.
When there is catarrh in the ulcer, and it is puffed up and long, then it is called a furuncle; and if it is thick and round at the beginning, then it is called a boil.
But if it is healed by the water that we have said in the division, and does not agree with your treatment, and you see that the pustule is closed up from it and is subtle, then cover over that which is rounded off; and if it is of that length, and is bloody, of a dusky color or black, and there is no sensation to it, then cover over its incision, for in that is fear over the patient.
And when you see it according to the manner that I have said of its whiteness and length, then make the patient fast and press his tongue with an instrument with which process its form, and fix the needle in the new one, and draw that one down and incision that with one of two instruments, whichever is said in the incision of two melons.
And cover over that one unless it is adjusted on the natural term without addition, for if you incision more of it, you will cut his speaking.
And on the incision, use what we have recommended in the incision of two melons, and heal that within until it is well.
But if the patient is terrified by the incision of it, use in having in the cauterization of it without fear, and the manner of the cautery in it is only with acute water, and it is that you place the head of the patient in your hand, and press his tongue with the instrument which we have said, and draw from the water which we have said in the chapter on cauterization, and apply with that cause while alive, and pause that not thick nor subtle, and of that fill the concavity of the instrument of which this is the form:
Let the extremity of it be concavity in which is placed the medicine as well as the concavity of a spoon, and place the instrument with the medicine over the ulcer; and let the patient jaw over his side so that flow saliva or mucilage of the mouth of that one through the intriscus medicine, so that descend from that any cause upon the vein of it and that it leads that.
And on your hand with the medicine, and squeeze that over the uvula through the space of about an hour until you see that be blackened and subdued by the biting of the medicine.
And if you wish, take a thread and wrap that around the extremity of the vein, and submerge the thread in the medicine, and insert the vein with the thread into a tube of above until the thread adheres in that tube, and do that as many times until you accomplish what you want of the cauterization of the ulcer, and then let it be because it will dry up and fall off after three or four days.
And if you see that the medicine needs to be repeated, repeat that, and after the cauterization, wash off in the circuit of the ulcer with a thread dipped in beer, and cleanse with that which is in the circuit of it from the medicine, and let it be washed with water rubbed, and be cured outside with embrocation, and inside with ointments until it is well.
And this species of treatment is more safe than incision and more long of fear.
Sometimes the uvula is healed by what is more subtle than cautery and incision, for it is healed by sub-smoking in this manner: take calamus, hyssop, origanum, ruda, scichos arabic, camomile, borage and resembling those of the herbs, and adjust all those causes, or some of them, in a wave, and let them be submerged with wine vinegar, and boil; and let the wave be well-luted with decent wax, and let there be in the middle part of the wave a tunnel, on which is paused an instrument made of silver or of iron.
And let the extremity be inserted into the mouth of the patient so that the steam may rise to the uvula over the pharynx, until the uvula is very obscured.
And on that repeat many times until it is dry, and beware so that you do not make this treatment at the beginning of the aliment of pustules, for it would press too much on the pustule, and it is not good that you do that, but wait for the declaration of the pustule to be cauterized.
But if that instrument is not present to you, then take a reed and attach on the extremity of it a hollow of horn, so that the mouth of the patient be scorched, for the hollow of the horn prohibits the steam from scorching the mouth.
And this treatment is good for health.
Here is the next sentence:
Of extraction of thorns and of what adheres in the vein and of the other causes.
Many times adheres in the vein or thorn of a foot or some other cause.
Then cover what of those is apparent, on which falls the sight, more than you press the tongue with instrument in front of the eye, so that to you be declared what is in the throat.
And what is not apparent and is hidden in the vein, then make the patient vomit before the food is digested in the stomach, for strongly the annexed cause draws the vein out through vomiting; or let the patient swallow a piece of bread or a piece of lettuce or a bone of dry bread; or take a piece of sponge marine rock, and rub that firmly with gall, and then the patient swallows that, for it passes to the place in which are thorns and is extracted. And more take an eel and be with gall bound, and let it be inside mouth and sopped out be extracted; or take a pig and sop out the inside and sop out the outside in it.
But if they are not extracted with those causes which we have said, then use of an instrument of lead according to this form:
And let it be thicker than a little needle, and in the extremity of it be concavity which you insert into his throat with ease.
And let him lift his head up, and beware of the touching of his bones of the throat, so that it enters to him vein or the thorn, or that the doctor with his hand.
But however, that the patient who inserts it is better, by his knowledge of the place of the annexed cause and presses down below, and draws his hand up with the instrument on him, all that according to the quantity which is prepared in him until it is extracted.
Here is the next sentence:
Of extraction of blood-sucking annexed to the vein.
When it is bled with what we have said in the division of the treatment with medicines and does not agree, then consider in the vein of the patient on the forehead, for you will have compressed the tongue of him with the instrument which we have recommended.
Then if you see the blood-sucking, extract that with a small needle or with thin threads decently.
And if it is not possible for you to extract it, then take a hollow cane and insert it into the anus of the patient, and place in the cavity of the cane a hot iron, and do this as many times (while the blood flows out and is stopped from the anus) and abstain from giving the patient water all day.
Then take a cloth full of water and work the mouth with it, and wash the mouth with it; and do not let him swallow any of it for any reason, and wipe his mouth with your hand from time to time as the blood flows out when he feels the water.
But if it is not removed with what we have described, then smoke the anus with cumin or assafetida using the instrument which we have described in the suffumigation of the uvula.
Do this, so that he may pass it.
And there is another way of operating on it in the suffumigation, which is that you take an egg in which are hot coals and the egg be covered with a cover in the middle of which is a hole, and the end of the instrument be fitted into that hole; and then let the suffumigation go through, and place the anus over the end of the cane, and close his mouth so that the suffumigation is not lost until you know that the suffumigation has reached the blood, for the blood will soon flow out.
And if it does not come out, then repeat the suffumigation many times, and abstain from drinking, and eat salty food and garlic, and do not drink water, and by this method it must be driven out.
And this is the form of the instrument by which blood is extracted from the anus when it is seen; and it is similar to tongs except that there is some curvature in it: which is placed on the anus and its end is like the beak of a stork, which is broad, in which there is a hole, because, when we press for any reason, it does not slip out.
Chapter 40.
In which is the sum of the speech in the opening of sores and their cutting.
The sores are many species, of many manners, according to which I remember them, each one in this book.
And they are diverse in their piercing and cutting by two manners, of which one is by the species of sores in themselves; and by that we take from moisture.
And the second manner is according to the places in which they occur, for the sore that occurs on the head is different from that which occurs on the buttocks; and the sore that occurs on a fleshy place is different from that which occurs on a joint; and each one of them has its play by operation.
And there are some sores which only need to be成熟了sania in those or filling of them.
And there are other sores which need to be cut when they are crossed, and not mature according to their filling, such as sores that are near joints, for when a sore occurs near a joint, its nature is prolonged while it presses what is in the circuit of it, and strengthens the ligaments or nerves of that joint, so that there is a cause of contraction of that member; or it is near a principal member, and if you delay its piercing until it has become mature it injures the principal member; or it is near the buttocks, then pierce it before it matures; and do not cut it cruelly, because of incomplete digestion, but cut it near the buttocks so that it does not burst the part within the buttocks and is elongated to the parts inside the buttocks, and a fistula is formed, or it occurs in the end of it that it is not healed. But you should know the time of the piercing of the sore, and this is when it has matured.
And you should know that it has matured when there is a decrease in the pain and the cessation of fever, and also the decrease in heat and pulse, and the sharpness of the head of the sore, and the other signs.
And because you should know that the piercing happens in the place closest to the bottom of the sore and from pus coming from the healing of the eminence.
And the piercing should always be through the length of the flesh or body, if the sores are in the parts of the hands or feet, and in the places of the tendons of the nerves, and the strings; and at last, in all equal places where there is no reflection; for in those where it is reflected, use piercing according to that member.
But when the sore is on a fleshy place, then it is better that you pierce it before the digestion of it is confirmed according to its filling, as we have said; for if you pierce it before this, the part within it is prolonged and great dirt, and the lips of it are hardened and its depth.
But some sores are pierced according to the breadth of the flesh or body, depending on the necessity, or according to that by which the member suffers.
And you should administer a small piercing in small sores, and in large sores a great piercing and a wide one or many piercings according to the diversity of the size of the sores.
And there are some sores in which the vein is hollowed out and has been cut, when it has been done so that bread and made is in a term that it already is, as well as that which occurs in pimples and blisters.
And there are some that are cut with three angles; and there is one in which it is cut like the shape of a bay leaf of myrtle, as well as the sores of the angles.
And there are some in which round cutting and lunar cutting is administered, and they are like those.
But that one to which there is no head as are superficial sores, you should pierce that with superficial piercing, or flat only.
And when the sore is large and has collected a lot of sanies, pierce it and do not be afraid to extract all of its pus in that hour; take out some part from it, and then close the sore for another day, and then take out a larger part, and do this many times according to graduation until it is healed.
And especially if the patient is of a cold nature, or female, or child, or old in decrepitude, for the animal spirit is often resolved by the exit of sanies, and often the patient dies, so you operate them.
But keep this chapter with great caution, and then your piercing when you pierce these sores, cleanse the plagues and consider therefore if the plague of the sore is little, or it is a flat section, then you administer oil of lye or old wine; and if the sore is large and the fissures of the piercing are many, then you should stop wax in each hole so that it comes to points.
And if in the sore a part of the vein is cut or hollowed out around it, then you should complete it with old wine or linen thread made of linen, as well as when you have drawn out pans or roots, because of its moisture; and strengthen that within the third day; and then process it and heal it by what means, so that it comes to points.
But if bleeding occurs in the hour of your operation, then you should administer warm water and wine mixed with linen, and place that over the place of the bleeding many times.
But if the flow of blood continues, then you should administer remedies and treatments, and apply powders as I have recommended in many places in this book and in its divisions.
But if it is in the winter time, and the location of the ulcer is in a place with many nerves, then you should mix powders with wine and hot oil, and apply those to the areas.
And if it is in the summer, and the locations are fleshy, then you should apply powders mixed with water and oil or wine and oil, and keep that applied for three days as we have said, and then you should open the ulcer and clean it and administer to it what is suitable for its healing.
And this is what is necessary to know about the cure for ulcers generally, but according to the method of distinction I have already said something about every type of ulcer in a particular way.
Chapter 41.
On the section on ulcers that come in the skin of the head.
In the skin of the head there are small ulcers that contain small nodes made of tissues that belong to them ; and their tissues are made of many things.
And from them there are bumps, and from those are contained moisture similar to lime. And from those are the ones that contain moisture like powder, and they look alike  and from those are the ones that are hard and lapidea-like.
And in the section of all of them, and in the extraction of those there is no fear, even if you must extract them it will not cause an artery to be cut.
And the operation in the section of those is that you probe those with an instrument the form of which you will see below, so long as you know what it contains.
For if what is contained is moisture, then you should cut that according to its length through a superficial section according to this form:
And you should begin the section from line .B. to line .G. Therefore when the moisture is evacuated, then you should scrape that area where that moisture was contained, and you shouldn't leave any cause of all of it there, for if any remains return, they will be caused by something else.
Then you should immerse the wound in Egyptian ointment if available, and if not, then in water and salt  and fill that up with that, and leave it for another day, for by doing that you will soften all that is rotted of that skin.
Then you should repeat the application of Egyptian ointment on that wound second and third time if necessary, so long as you are sure that there is no cause of that rotted skin remaining  then treat the wound with ointment until it is healed.
And if an ulcer contains a fatty node, then you should cut into that according to this form: with a cross-shaped section, and cut between the two lips of the section and slice that in every part, and use your strength in extracting the membrane which contains that.
But if an artery causes you trouble, then do what I told you before.
And similarly do in the case of a lapsified ulcer with section and treatment according to what we have said  and a section on a lapsified ulcer is less painful, for it has little blood and little moisture.
And sometimes some of these ulcers in the head are found in some people in which there is not moisture  and the cause of that is when someone hits an ulcer on the head of an old woman and find the ulcer like hard, rough, white stone which could not be pierced, and if someone hits it, it bleeds.
But in other accidental ulcers in the head, this is not the case, as in the ulcers that come to the heads of children due to teething, and the cause of them are the teeth  but the section of all these should be a superficial section.
And make the piercing of those from their lower parts so that the body can be separated from the sanies in their lower parts.
Then treat those with what is suitable for their cure.
Chapter 42.
On the section of scrofulas that occur in the neck.
Many times these ulcers occur in the neck and armpits and angles  and sometimes they appear in other parts of the body.
And those that occur in the neck, and many are engendered among them  and every scrofula of those is within its own membrane, and thus with the nodes and ulcers of the head, as we have recommended.
And the tissues of these scrofulas are many, for some of those are lapsified, and others contain moisture, and still others are malignant and don't obey cure.
Therefore in that which you see good disposition in the Touchment, of which the color of what is manifest is close to the color of the skin, and is not swollen in any part, and is not annexed by the nerve of the neck or veins or artery, and is not profound  then you should probe that with a superficial section from above to below from the line .G. between the lines .B., and scrape that off of every part, and cut between its two lips with an incision, or with many incisions if you have need of them, as we have said in the ulcers of the head, and extract it little by little.
And it is more careful that a vein or nerve not be cut.
And be careful that your hand not slip when you cut, or else it will hurt the patient, and cut what is not necessary to cut  for if you cut a vein or artery and prohibited from your operation, then apply on the wound vitriol ground or other powders which stop flow of blood, and bind the wound tightly, and leave that until the acuteness of the ulcer subsides and the wound softens and begins to be suppurated. When the blood is cut.
Then return to your operation until you have completed it.
And then inquire with your finger if there is any cause of the other small scrofulas, therefore cut those and clean them.
And if it is in the root of the great scrofula vein, then you should not cut that scrofula from its roots. But before you must lie that down with strong folded cloth and let it be so that it falls by itself without causing harm.
Then fill the wound with old wine which you have already mixed with Egyptian ointment  then treat that.
And if you cut that scrofula completely, then you should bring the two lips of the wound together and bind them so tightly that there is no superfluous discharge.
But if you see that there is superfluous discharge due to the size of the scrofula, then you should understand how to cut its root  and open it up and treat that with suture and what is said.
And those of the scrofulas that contain moisture, pierce that with superficial piercing where it appears to you as the site of its maturation, and pause piercing of what is drawn from the bottom of the body, as we have said.
Then treat that with piercing, cauteries with ointment and similarly to those  so that it softens what is rotted from the corruption. Then when you see the wound already cleaned, then treat that with ointment of generative flesh so that it is healed.
Chapter 43.
Of the incision of the lump of the apothema accidentally within the throat.
The ancients described this incision in the epiglottis, and I have not seen anyone in our land who has performed it.
And this is the inscription of the speech of those men:
But in men who have squint, whoever performs the extraction of the epiglottis, by which all the veins and the main ones of the patient are here, should be avoided.
But in those who have apothemas in the mouth or throat or two ears, when the malady is not in the windpipe, one should use the incision of the epiglottis to avoid the loss that is caused by puncturing.
Therefore when we want to do this, we should cut the epiglottis below three circles of the circles of the epiglottis or four with a small incision for the width in that one which is between two circles for quantity, and the incision should be in the pharynx not in the cartilage, and that place is suitable for incision because it is deprived of flesh and its blood vessels are light.
And if the doctor is fearful, then he should extend the throat with an instrument and cut the membrane until he reaches the windpipe, but avoid the blood vessels if for some reason he sees any of them.
Then cut the membrane according to what we have recommended; and it is signified about the incision of the windpipe by the flame which goes out from that which is split in two, and also by the breathlessness.
And let the wound remain open for some time.
Therefore when the time has passed in which piercing is feared, bring together two lips of the wound's membrane and sew that alone to the cartilage.
Then administer medicines which cause the flesh within to grow so that it may heal.
And Albucasis says that the sum of the speech which we have recommended is that some of those apothemas have oppressed the throat of the patient and the patient has died within, and his breath has become weak, and some want to cut the epiglottis so that the patient may breathe over the wound by some respiration, and be saved from death.
And for that he commands to leave the wound open until the wickedness of the malady is consumed; and its wickedness lasts three days; and then he commands to sew up the wound and heal that which is within.
And that which I have seen by my servants is that a servant placed a stick and touched it in his throat and cut with it a part of the windpipe of the lungs, and he was called to heal him, and he found the breath just as it is breathed by the dead, and he discovered the wound and found the blood which had flowed from the wound small.
Then he confessed that he had not cut any vein or nerve and the breath came out from the wound and he healed that which was within so that it may be healed by fire.
And he did not listen to the servant unless he vomited in his mouth, and after some days he returned to the healing of his own dispositions.
Now he says that in the incision of the epiglottis there is no fear.
Chapter 44.
Of the incision on apothema which occurs in the external throat and is called a hernia of the throat.
This apothema named hernia of the throat is a large apothema according to the color of the body, and it occurs in women.
And it occurs in two ways, for it is either natural or accidental.
And the natural one has no remedy.
And the accidental one is according to two ways, for one of which is like grassy nodes and the other way is like apothema which is caused by constriction of an artery, and in that one there is fear. And let no one make presumption with him unless with an iron needle except in that one which is small. And you probe him and examine him with the needle, and if you find it like a grassy node and not suspended by any of the veins, then you cut that one just as the nodes, and extract that from which the skin and membrane; but if not, then scrape all his being, and heal the place with that which is suitable for healing.
Chapter 45.
Of the incision of the species of nodes.
There are many species of nodes and I have already said all of their species in the division.
And let him who tells you the difference between a node and an exitura with doubt.
Therefore I say that with exitura there is heat and fever and violent pains until the ebullition of the superfluity ceases; and putrefaction is completed when the fever, pain, and heat cease.
But with a node there is no heat or fever or pain, and count that phlegmonic lion which is in the own bag.
And it is according to the color of the body, and its beginning is with a ulcer and it occurs thus with a pustule, whether major or minor, and they are according to two species for one is grassy and contains humidity, and the colors of humidity are many, as I described in the division.
Therefore when you come to the healing of a node, probe that and examine that at its beginning with an instrument which is called intromes according to what its form comes in the chapter which is nearby.
And it is the manner of inquiry of apothemas and of all nodes, and it is that you take this instrument and insert that into the most humid place which you find in the apothema, and you turn your fingers with that little by little until you know that the instrument has penetrated the membrane.
Then close your hand according to the measure of the size of the apothema, and extract the intromes and consider that which is flow out in its trail.
And if the humid matter flows out, of whatever color it is, then you cut that superficially just as I said in the other apothemas.
And if from the trail of the intromes you do not get out humidity, then know that it is grassy.
And dry over it with incision having the form of crosses according to this form: just as you taught him, and suspend that with hooks, and scrape the membrane from all parts with ease, and guard the skin or bag over that if you can, and extract that pus from the node.
But if it is torn in the operation, it is not possible to extract that pus and many times there, then you extract it at intervals until from it nothing leaks out for any cause.
Because if from it no leak out anything for any cause, little or much, the node returns according to the may.
And if you see that from it leaks out a little part, then complete the wound with some strong corrosive powders and close the wound, and pause over that which apothema cauterized, and heal that by another cure until it is healed.
And if it is a large node then you cut the two lips of it and heal that which is flesh.
But if the vein is contrary to it, or not pulsating, then you close and cover the place of zegi trissat which is vetriol and let that lie there for two days or three until its pus becomes thin and the boil of the blood; then return to cut that which is swollen of the node.
Chapter 46.
Of the forms of necessary instruments in incision and piercing.
Those are of three kinds: there is the large one, the moderate one and the small one.
The form of the large instrument is as follows:
The form of the small instrument is thus:
They should be made of iron, or bronze, with sharp edges, in order that the instrument can enter into the abscesses smoothly.
And these are the forms of the instruments of experience, and they are called 'albered', and one of them is named 'berid'.
And they are of three kinds: there is the large one, the moderate one and the small one.
The form of the large instrument is as follows:
The form of the moderate instrument, its form is:
The form of the small instrument, its form is:
It is convenient that they be used for abscesses and openings and fistulas and boils, both when they are caused by bones and other causes.
And they should be made round and large, like a lion's tooth, with which the membranes are sewn together, and they should be made of copper, or iron, or silver; and the best ones are when they are made of copper.
And they make instruments of black feather, which are used to open up fistulas in the cavities where they are reflected and their reflections are seen by those reflections.
And they are of three kinds: there is the long one, and the moderate one, and the short one; according to the size of the fistula and its narrowness.
The form of the large instrument made of lead:
The form of the moderate instrument made of lead:
The form of the small instrument made of lead:
The forms of the hooks are of many kinds; some are simple, with only one curve, and they are of three kinds: large, small and moderate.
And their bodies are hooked, and they are of three kinds.
And some of them have two curves, and they are of three kinds.
And some of them have three curves, and they are of three kinds.
And all of these are necessary in their place.
The form of the simple hook which is small, its form is:
The form of the hook which is large and has two curves: The form of the hook which is moderate and has two curves: The form of the hook which is small and has two curves:
The form of the hook which is large and has three curves:
The form of the hook which is moderate and has three curves:
And these are the forms of the knives with which they cut and scrape the knots and abscesses; and they are of three kinds: there is the large one, the moderate one and the small one.
The form of the large knife:
The form of the moderate knife:
The form of the small knife:
The edges of those with which incision is made are sharp and the other edges are not sharp; and they should not be handled in such a way that the edge cuts into the vein or nerve, but so that it is done gently on the surface of the abscess to promote healing by burning which promotes healing of the abscess.
And these are the forms of the probes, and they are of three kinds: large, moderate and small, like wolves.
They should be made of iron and they should be similar to a tooth with which it is done hollow.
And at the tip it should be pointed with a hidden spike and in the other part it should be flat, both inside and outside, according to your will, likewise.
The forms of the sponges which are hidden between the fingers for piercing abscesses and not perceived by the patients, and they are of three kinds: large, moderate and small. And these are their forms:
The forms of the syringes with which the flow of blood is stopped, and they are of three kinds; large, moderate and small; their forms are:
They should be made of copper, round with no length, and fine.
And if these species of syringes are large, moderate or small, then through them stop the flow of blood quickly in necessity; and sometimes when at first there is no medicine.
But do not use them to stop the flow of blood in every part of the body; and do not use them except in fleshy parts, likewise in the joints of the arms and legs, and in the armpits, and in the groins, and in the groin and breast and abdomen, and like to the joints of the flesh.
And some of the instruments are made small like knives for cutting veins or for incision of an artery or of a vein.
And some are made round thus:
Chapter 47.
Of the cure of the breasts of men who are like women.
Some men's breasts are swollen due to sleepiness like women, and then the breasts are inflated, and they are like women's breasts, and they are Roman.
And if one who eats it, let him cut that according to the lunar incision from line .B. to line .G., and then remove the whole groove, and fill the wound with medicine, and then join the two lips of the wound with a stitch, and cure it.
But if the breast sags to the sides and is softened by its weight likewise with women, then it is split into two parts like a figure of the moon, each part contained in the other according to the form from line .B. to line .G.; and then remove the cod, and the pus, and administer what has been said about the stitch and the powders which is necessary in the cure until it is healed.
And if you do not complete the incision of that which you must cut due to the unease of the patient, and due to the flow of blood, then fill the wound with cotton saturated in a corrosive ointment and lay it in that which corrodes like rust, and then cure it.
Chapter 48.
Of piercing of abscesses which come from below the titties.
The abscesses which come from below the titties are of the species of scrofulas, hard, they contain one pimple which is loose.
And some of them contain moisture; and some of them are punctured with lunar incision thus: from line .G. to line .B.; and when the pus is completely evacuated from the abscess of the scrofula, then you fill it with oil of the veil and lay it in the other next day.
And let the wound be treated with a suitable ointment until it heals.
And if the abscess of the lymph nodes and scrofula is, then you should split it as we have said in the section on scrofula.
If the plague has spread so that it causes pus, then administer cauterization as we have previously mentioned.
Chapter 49.
Of the incision of abscesses that occur through an artery or vein.
And the signs by which inflammation and abscess are known to be through an artery or vein: for when the abscess is through an artery, it is long drawn out in the body; and when you press on the abscess with your fingers, you feel a pulsing in it.
And that which is through a vein is round at its appearance in the body.
And an incision on this abscess is dangerous, especially in that which is below the armpits, and in the elbows, and in the neck, and in many places of the body; and it is very great, therefore its cure by cauterization should be avoided, and also that which is in the extremities or the head.
But on that which is above due to inflammation of the opening of the artery, make an incision in the vein along its length; and then open up the incision with tweezers, and free the artery from the membranes so that it may be exposed.
And then put a needle into it and make it penetrate to the other side, and constrict the artery with a double thread in two places, — which will cause you to see that in extraction of two arteries which are in the temples.
And then plug up the place between two membranes with spongy material so that the blood will all flow out of it and the abscess be dissolved.
And then administer a cure in which pus is engendered until the membranes fall away, and then cure it with suitable ointments until it heals.
And if the abscess is through an incision of a vein, then you should hold that which is by your hand to the abscess with the vein, and then thrust in the needle below the place which you have held by your hand, and make it penetrate; and have in it double thread so that you may extract it from the other side, and then tie off the abscess with good membrane according as I have said to you about the ligature of two parts with two extremities of the thread.
But if you fear that you will pull out the thread, then put in the thread with that needle below all of the abscess down to the incision of the first needle, and constrict your threads in four places.
Then dry up the abscess in its middle so that when it has come out of it, then you pierce the superfluity of the vein and leave that which is tied to it.
And then put on it powder which you have soaked in wine and oil, and then administer the cure which is made with cauteries and ointments until it heals.
Chapter 50 of the abscess which occurs from a twisting of nerves.
So too abscess occurs in an artery and vein, and similarly abscess occurs in nerves when they occur with a blow or occur from excess heat, and similarly.
And it is made in the places of the assistants or the leg, or in any place in which the joints are bruised.
And it is a heavy abscess, and it is like the color of the rest of the body, and in its greatest part there are no pulsations from it, and when it is pressed with strength, the patient feels a stupor in it.
And it is not an abscess drawn out in the body, and therefore it is below the vein, and it is bruised all over and does not go before or behind.
Therefore that which is in the joints should not be cauterized with a hot iron, for it would quickly bring about contraction.
But that which is in the head or forehead open up the vein with spongy material. But if it is a minor abscess, then cut it with scissors and dig out its roots.
And if it is great, then suspend it with a hook and gouge out that, and then stop the bleeding; and tie off the wound with a suture, and cure it until it heals.
Chapter 51.
Of the incision of the abscess which occurs from a hernia that occurs in the belly.
And it occurs in some men many times in bellies and other parts of the bodies of those who are called funguals because of their likeness to mushrooms, the roots of which are subtle and their heads are large; and already their lips are conversed, and they are small, and they are great.
And I have seen one, and in his belly were two tumors which were like mushroom-like, and there was no difference between those white ones, of fine roots.
And already the lips of those were inverted and split, and moisture ran from it all the time.
Therefore I cut into them and probed in at the one in feet, 15 inches. and the other 6 inches.
And the operation at its incision is that you consider whether the patient is cold, and the color of the wound is white, moist, with subtle roots; then you open it up with spongy material, and let it be cauterized in the fire, for many times pus is expelled from it after its incision; and if the blood comes out, cauterize it.
And if the patient is fearful and nervous, beware of an incision with a hot iron; but then take a recently made thread of lead, and constrict that wound, in the manner which I have said; and leave it for two days.
And then tie off in the constriction of the lead wire; therefore do not cease to tighten the large lead wire on the tumor until it has been dug out and has fallen away by itself.
But if the tumor is of coarse roots, then in its incision there is some cause of fear and terror, and especially in that which is in the belly.
But it is possible that you cut into its matrix, and then cauterize it so that it does not return.
And then cure it until the wound is healed.
And beware that you do not presume to cut into a tumor which is of dusky color, of little feeling, of light weight, for such a one is an abscessed cancer.
And I will come again with remembrance of cancer, apropos.
Chapter 52.
Of the cure of preeminence of the navel.
Preeminence of the navel is caused by many things; or by fissures in the septum which is over the belly, and there are from it the membrane or hernia according to what comes before in other ruptures; or by blood which flows out of a vein or artery as was said before, or by constricted distention within it.
But if it is by a fissure of the septum and by splitting of the membrane, then the color of the abscess is like that of the body; and there are in it pains, and then appears in various positions. And if it is by extrusion of the hernia, then its positions are like that which we have recounted, in more violent diversity, and when you press it with your fingers it is concealed, and then returns; and it is strong within it, and is great due to the entry of foments and vehement work.
But if due to humidity it is slippery and not hidden when you touch it with your hand, nor is it constricted or stuck.
And if it is due to blood, then these signs will appear as the ulcer turns black.
But if it is due to flesh, then the ulcer is heavy, large and hard, and it feels like a certain quantity.
But if it is due to windiness, then the touch of it is slippery.
And the operation on it is that you consider whether the protruding navel is due to an arterial or venous wound, or due to windiness; then you must abstain from treating it, for in that place there is fear and danger as I have taught you in the chapter where I said about ulcers from arteries and veins.
And if the navel's protrusion is due to the intestine or hernia, then you must command the patient to hold his breath and be standing upright; and then sign with your finger around the entire navel, and then command him to breathe in while you hold your hand over his chest, and then gently push the hernia back in with a strong ligature or a bandage, and the way of binding decently.
And then open the middle of the extended ulcer over the hernia and put your finger into that opening and seek out the intestine; and if you have caught it or held it by the ligament, then pull it out gently and push the intestine back inside the belly.
And if you've caught the hernia, then take that by the inch; and cut off the excess of it.
But if it is against your artery or vein, then surround that spot, and then return to your operation; and take two needles and put on them strong threads and insert the two needles into the circuit which you have made around the ulcer in the way of a cross, making the needles penetrate; and then tighten the ulcer in four places over the needles.
And if you want, take out the needles and let the extended flesh fall back and heal by itself; or insert into it what is subtle and healing, and then treat that spot with what is suitable for the wound to heal.
And if the navel's protrusion is due to flesh in it or humidity, then you must hollow out the ulcer as we have said and extract the blood or humidity which you find in it, and then treat that spot with what is suitable for it to be consolidated.
Chapter 53.
Of the cure of hernia.
We have already said, in the division, of the kind of hernia and in what manner there is a way to its cure by medicines, and that it is cured in it by iron without being ulcerated; and we have said that hernia is engendered in the mother and cautery of its cure.
And the ancients said that sometimes hernia is in a place where its removal is possible, like hernia in the breasts or in the groin and to those similar members allocated to be extracted entirely, especially when it is started small.
But when it is old and large, you must not approach it, for I have not seen that ulcer healed nor have I seen anyone else do so.
And the operation on it is when it is allocated as we have said, is that you precede and let the patient fast and purge black bile sometimes, and then cut that spot if a manifest fullness is found.
And then prepare the patient with a preparation in which he is located for operation, and then insert nails into the wound which are suited to that spot; and then hollow out every part with a good sharp saw without breaking any cause of the roots of it. Let the blood flow, and do not bandage that loosely, and express the spots, and wipe away the thick blood with your hand or an instrument by which it is possible for you of instruments.
But if it does you harm from thick blood flowing from an artery or vein, then cauterize that spot until the flow of blood stops, and then treat that spot with the other cure until it is healed.
Chapter 54.
Of the cure of hydrocephalus.
We have already recommended, in the division, of the kinds of hydrocephalus from water and the signs of each kind, of its cure by medicines.
And that which is cured by iron is only the kind of althitas alone, and it is not approached by iron to the kind of timpanistes or to the kind of yposarcha, for that is deadly.
And when you have treated this kind of hydrocephalus timpanistre with medicines and your treatment does not work, then consider, for if the patient has already achieved weakness or is suffering from another malady or hydrocephalus, like that which is in the head or chest and similar to those, then beware that you do not treat it with iron, for there is danger over that.
But if you see the patient suffering from vertigo profuse, and in him there is no other malady but hydrocephalus only, and neither child nor old person, then the manner of its operation is that you raise the patient between your hands, and then press his belly with your hand, filling the water to the part below the navel, and then take a pointed spatula according to this form:
It is of two pointed parts long, of acute end as spatula; but indeed it has in it some brevity little by little, so that in the operation with that you do not pass into the intestine, and that you lead that.
And then consider if the generation of hydrocephalus is from parts of the intestines, for then you must with the section lengthen the navel to the quantity of three fingers to the parts below, in the right of it over the navel.
But if the generation of hydrocephalus is from malady of the liver, then your section is left of the navel for three fingers.
And if its generation is from the bile, then your section is on the right.
And beware that your section is over the side over which the patient wants to lie so that the excess does not flow to that spot.
And then pierce with the instrument all the way through, and insert into that section, and raise your hand with the spatula between the navel and the hypochondrium, and you express that; and if it is the quantity of a fingernail or finger width.
And then pierce the hypochondrium so that the spatula reaches the place it wants to go, and it is the location of the water. And then extract that and insert an instrument of which this is the form: And it is similar to a subtle silver cannula; it is made of silver or brass or lead wire, and at the lower end of it there are two small holes: one from one side and one from the other side; and its end is split according to the manner of a feather, like this:
And at the upper end of it there is a ring, for when the instrument reaches the water, then that immediately slides over the instrument, therefore emptying from the water in the hour small quantity, for if you empty from that more than that does not befell in the hour, strongly harm the patient by resolution of his animal spirit, or accideth to him death which is approaching.
Now evacuate him according to the amount of his strength and according to what you know about the disposition of his sickness, the strength of his pulse, and his overall health.
Then remove the instrument and retain the water which causes it; as soon as it is retained by the cord, which holds the wound over the head of which you are told to pierce, according to that manner.
And then repeat the instrument on another day if the patient can tolerate it, and extract a small amount of water, and do this for several days out of caution, and beware of error until the water is hardly flowing at all.
But if you are concerned about the patient and leave out a great deal of water, then treat that wound with quicklime in sand, move it in a bath, and expose it to the sun for a long time; and treat that with drying medicines until it is healed.
And cauterize the stomach and the meld, and the vein from which the water is extracted, according to what I have recounted in that which precedes.
Chapter 55.
Of the treatment of children who are born with a hernia in the urinary tract.
Sometimes, some children are born from their mother's womb and the top of their head is not broken through (or it is a narrow crack or it is in its proper place).
Thus, treat it with a break right after it is born with a very subtle move according to this form:
And then put into the crack a thin lead nail and tie it there, and leave it for three days or for .iiii.tre.
And when he wants to urinate, let him be milked and urinate; and then return that.
And if you do not put in the lead, then it is possible that the urine which goes over the place will not harm this closure.
But he whose crack is narrow should be treated with a lead nail as we have said for several days until it is enlarged.
But he who is born and the crack is not in its proper place, it has been cut, which is the cause because from him, that which is born and the crack is at the end of the head of the penis so that he cannot urinate inside, while he raises the penis with his hand to the parts above; and there is no generation for him, because the sperm cannot reach the mother according to nature, and it is a very bad disease.
And the manner of the operation on him is that the patient be laid on his back, and then stretch the head of his penis with your left hand with a strong extraction, and push in the head of the head of the penis at the foreskin with a pointed object, as one pricks with a feather, or that you scratch any part so that the skin of the penis comes to resemble the head of the penis and that the crack falls into the appropriate location according to nature.
And beware that in your operation there is no bleeding, for many times it happens; and give to him what you have used to stop the bleeding, and cure the wound until it is healed.
Chapter 56.
Of whitlow which happens in the foreskin on the head of the penis and of corruption, and blackness, and adhesion of the foreskin to the head of the penis.
Many times this whitlow happens in the penis and is an excess of flesh.
And one of them is malignant and the other is not.
Not-malignant, that you suspend with a very thin thread and cut it off so that that whole part is removed; and then put on that cut area a suppository of Egyptian ointment; and then that will cure itself with the ointment of diafinicon until it is healed.
And if the whitlow is malignant, of a light color, then you should administer cauterization at its edge and its root.
But if the whitlow is in the foreskin of the head of the penis and it is not circumcised, and one part of the whitlow is inside the foreskin and the other part is outside, then you should bring out the whitlow from its beginning so that it is exposed; and then you cure that exposed part, for when you cure the foreskin itself, it is not certain that it will not return.
And indeed, sometimes it happens in the testes and in the foreskin blackness and corruption, then you should remove all that which is blackened and which wants to become corrupted or that which is already corrupted; and then spread over that with ointment, which is ground with flour of the shell of pomegranates and of husks beaten and strained.
And then cure that with the other treatment until it is healed.
But if there is bleeding, then administer lunar cauterization according to this form:
for the cautery of juice is good for two things at once, that is for bleeding and for the wound when it is corrupted.
And if the head of the penis is腐 and destroyed all at once, then you should insert into the foreskin a lead cannula so that the patient can urinate through it.
In the adhesion of the foreskin with the head of the penis (and this adhesion does not happen except in him whose foreskin is cut, and on him circumcision is not performed; and when it happens by plague or by pustule) let you open it with a blunt object so that the ligament is dissolved and the head of the penis is released from all parts.
And if it is difficult to tear them apart, then you should cut with a pointed object some part of the head of the penis and of the foreskin; and so it is because the foreskin, when it is thin, easily pierces the penis through its thinness.
And then separate the foreskin from the head of the penis with a very thin membrane, which is already moistened in the water that was rubbed so that they do not adhere again.
And then let it be cured with green vitriol until it is consolidated.
Chapter 57.
Of the purification of children and of the treatment of what happens to those who are circumcised.
Circumcision is not a cure for continence like other diseases: but however, since it is of our operation and of our will, and it comes from that more naturally in children, it is necessary that we assign to it better operation and use the easier way and lose the more difficult one for health.
Therefore we say that the ancients did not use circumcision in some of their free ones, because they did not use it in their laws, and it is only because we have acquired it through experience, the cause of which is that I have proven the majority of the artificers and of the barbers using circumcision and purification with a knife and with torches; and they use cement for the seal and incision with the nail.
And I have already proved all these ways and found better purification with forceps, with cement at the seal that is made with the nail in purification with the nail, because many times the membrane of the foreskin comes above, because the membrane of the foreskin has two tunics, and the thick one below, and it is very easily forced to another incision and secure pain. And in purification which is done with the tweezers, and it is digital, of which the surgeons use, it is not secure to make an incision at the end of the virile member, for it often goes into the hollow of it.
But in operation with the nail, very often iron and corruption are caused by your operation. And the umbilical cord of a child is short by nature, and in many cases is cut in such a way that it does not require cleaning, and I have seen this myself.
But about the cleaning that is done with tweezers and thread using soap, I have discovered through experience and experiment, because the tweezers are of a proportional size, so the sharpness that is above is like the sharpness that is below; and therefore when you press your fingers in proportionate ways, and insert them according to a comparison at one time; and compression is made of the thread with the shape containing the umbilical cord entirely cut through, with which there can be no error at all.
And the way of the first operation is that you make the child stay mostly upright if it is one of those that I understand a little, and do not move but only tie the thread in its umbilical cord as much as you can, and leave it until the next day.
Then do that which will make him happy in every way that is possible for you to do so as one who receives his understanding. Then make the child stay between your hands in a prepared manner, and do not be hesitant; and conceal the tweezers in your hand or under your foot so that the child does not see those or any other of the instruments.
Then insert your hand into the umbilical cord and blow into it, and draw out that which is inside so that the head of the umbilical cord comes out, and then clean that which has accumulated in it as filth.
The shape of the tweezers for cleaning, this is their shape:
Let the ends not be cut and the others be cut, so that the nail is not cut, and let the length of both sides be as long as two handles equally.
But the mistake in the cleaning is that the umbilical cord intrinsecally entirely escapes or is torn from its insertion.
Then cover that part of it with your finger nail before the insertion of the spot and insert that according to equality.
And if you cannot hold it with your fingernail, then grab it with a needle and insert it.
But if it is passed three days and that which is inflated below the umbilical cord remains, then you leave that until the swelling of the aposteme has gone down, and cut it with ease, and insert that according to how you are prepared.
And be careful of the head of the umbilical cord because it will not hurt him.
Then cure that with what the plague is consolidated by the powders which we have counted in the treatise of powders.
And if it is cut from the umbilical cord beyond measure, and obeys the parts above, that will not hurt him.
But cure that with what we have said before so that it is healed.
Chapter .lviii.
Of the cure of urine retained in the bladder.
Retention of urine in the bladder is made by oppression made by stone or by blood clot, or by tumor or by swelling, and they are similar to those of what we have said about the ways of cure in the division.
And if it is not dissolved by what we have said and the cause is made more vehement upon the patient, then have him given an extraction of it with an instrument which is called a syringe, of which this is its form: Let it be of silver and let it be thin, as well as the needle of an owl's feather to be thin in length like a long needle, to whose head is a pipe of reed with a thin cane in the shape of a long needle, to which is a pipe of reed with a thin cane in the shape of a long needle, to whose head is a pipe of reed with a thin cane in the shape of a long needle.
And the way of the exit of the urine through it is that you take a folded cloth and tie it in the end of it with wool or cotton with good binding; and insert the ends of the cloth into the part below the syringe, and insert it with tweezers if any superfluous cause from the wool, but insert it into the reed with force. And then tighten the syringe with a bowstring and with egg white of an eagle.
And let the patient lie on his back, and open the bladder of him and the umbilical cord with oils, olive oil and eggs.
Then insert the syringe with ease into the place where it reaches to the root of the umbilical cord; and then bend the umbilical cord above at the part of the embelic; and then grab the syringe in that place; and then grab that until it reaches the bladder, and that which is empty of the cause, and do not do so according to this order, but let the meat go into a tortuosity.
Then extend the cloth with the wool little by little, because the urine soaks up the wool.
Then pull out that and let the urine be released by cure, and use the syringe; do not cease to do this and use the syringe until the bladder is evacuated and the patient feels better.
Chapter .lix.
Of quality of catheterization of the bladder with a catheter and with similar instruments which are in accordance with that.
When ulcers or apostemes occur in the bladder, or blood clot in it, or swelling is contracted there, and you want to distill water and medicines into it, then let that be done with an instrument which is called a catheter, and this is its form: Let it be of silver and let the needle be thin, as well as the needle of an owl's feather to be thin in length like a long needle, to whose head is a pipe of reed with a thin cane in the shape of a long needle.
But if in its end it is dull, then it is closed. And in that there are three holes: two of the one part, thus alike.
In the beginning it is a hollow place in which it is inserted, and let there be according to quantity that it pushes out that, its addition, within that when any cause is pulled from the moisture, it is pulled out, and when it is expelled long, according to how the catheter makes naphtha phlegm in sea battles.
Then when you want to propel moisture into the bladder, insert the end of clapcedra into the moisture and pull it with that which is pushing on the parts above, because the moisture is pulled in the hollows of clapcedra.
Then insert the end of clapcedra into the umbilical cord according to how we have described in the syringe; and then grab the moisture with what you grab it, because that moisture comes to the bladder as quickly as possible, and the patient feels that.
The form of the subtle crucible through which the bladder is crystallized, and that is its form:
And it should be made of silver or brass, the top part being shaped like a small feather, and from there it narrows into a tube.
Then take an animal bladder, and place within it the humidity that you want to crystallize in the bladder, and tie that tightly with a strong double ligature, and heat that humidity over a fire.
Then insert the tip of the crucible into the urethra.
And then squeeze your hand over the bladder with the humidity inside, tightening it with all your strength as the patient urinates, until that humidity has entered the bladder.
But if you don't have a bladder, then take a piece of parchment and make a circle out of it; and pierce that all around its circumference; and insert a strong needle into those holes, so that it can be rotated; and add the circle as well as the soft part, because when you place it onto what you want of the humidities, oils and waters.
And then you tie that in the instrument and do with it as you did with the bladder, and express with your hand until the humidity enters the bladder.
Chapter 60:
On the extraction of stones.
We have already spoken in the division of stones, about their kinds and cure with medicines, and the difference between a stone generated in the kidneys and one generated in the bladder, and their signs.
And we have spoken of the stone which requires operation with the hand, and incision.
And the stone generated in the bladder properly speaking is that one which is lodged in the bladder.
And for this we will relate the manifest exposition and abbreviation.
Therefore I say that a stone generated in the bladder mostly comes to infants; and its signs are that the urine which exits from the bladder is like water in its thinness, and appears in it sand; and the patient rubs his penis, and often passes water, and then is relieved; and with this there is formed a lump in those places.
And the cure of children who have reached 14 years is easy; and it is difficult to cure the old. But in the young, it is rendered smaller by what is between them.
And if the stone is large and its cure is more difficult, then it is the contrary.
Therefore when we come to the cure of that, we must first cleanse the patient with a crucible which extracts everything in his intestines; because that fissure sometimes blocks the expulsion of the stone through investigation.
And then the patient should be pressed on his feet and coughed and bent over so that the stone descends to the bottom of the bladder, or jumps from one place to another.
And then let him bend his head down between your hands, and let the patient's head be below, so that the whole bladder is made to decline towards what is below.
And then push it out entirely.
Therefore if you feel the stone in the space, then at once make incision over him.
And if it does not at all come out through your touch, then let you anoint with oil the tip of your left index finger on the patient, if he is an infant, or the middle finger if he is a young man, and insert that into his anus. And push out the stone as it lies below your finger. And gradually turn that into the neck of the bladder.
And then press on it with your finger, and expel that out through the place where you made incision.
And command the assistant to press the bladder with his hand; and command another assistant that with his right hand extend the testes towards what is above, and with his other hand re-open the scrotum which lies below the testes, in the part where incision is made.
And then insert a spathule, of which this is its form: and cut into him what is between the anus and the testes, not in the middle place, forward to the left side of the scrotum; and let the incision be over that stone, and let your finger be in the anus, and let there be made a transverse incision, so that the incision coming out be ample and its going in be narrow according to the amount of the stone which it is possible for the patient to bear, and not more, because if you press too hard with your finger which is in the anus the stone will burst from within.
And know that there is some stone of which its angles and margins are such that the expulsion from it is difficult because of that.
And of that one is like a onion, and is round, and there is made easier expulsion from it.
Therefore if the stone has such angles and margins that they fit in the fissure,
and if it is not pushed out then let you push on that, or press upon that with decent gestures, the end of which be thus with a file, and do not open from him; or insert below him a slender instrument with a curved end.
But if you cannot push out that stone, then let you enlarge the wound a little, and if you see blood flowing, bind up that tightly with a band of linen soaked in vinegar.
But if the stone is more than one, then at the beginning push your hand to the mouth of the bladder, and then insert it there; and then push in a little there; and act likewise as though they were two.
And if the stone is very great, then it is not prudent to insert that with a large incision, because it happens to the patient one of two causes: or that he dies, or that he receives into himself a continued distillation of urine, because the place is not entirely consolidated.
But let the assistant expel it as soon as it is pushed out, or draw it in the fracture of him with tongs so that he draws out that in pieces.
Therefore when you have finished your operation, then fill the wound with gum of aloe and dragon' s blood, and bind that tightly. And place over that a cloth soaked in oil and wine, or in rose oil and water, so that the wound may be healed by cauterization.
And then let the patient lie on his back, and do not loosen the bandage until the third day.
And when that has been loosened, wash the wound with water and oil, and then cure that with ointment of theriac and ointment of diapulmon within so that it is healed.
But if in the wound occurs cauterization, dryness and corrosiveness, and of that there are signs as though the blood is frozen in the bladder and because of it the urination is prohibited (and that is known through the going out of blood with urine), then insert your finger into the wound and expel that blood, for if the bladder is provoked to putrefaction of the bladder and of him.
And then wash the wound with wine, water and salt, and let it be bound up with every kind of bandage so that it is healed.
And let there be the hours of all the cure that you lie with both scrotum and bind up the medicines which are laid upon the wound.
And if the stone is small and lodged in the urethra, and there is urination prohibited, then cure that with what you have already mentioned before there was incision, because forces have been applied for this cure, and it has been proved; and now take a bore of iron wire, of which this is its form:
of triangular shape, acute, placed in a stick.
And then take the gall bladder and tie it with a thread under the stone so that it does not return to the bladder.
And then insert the iron into the stone, piercing it easily with the piercer until the piercer comes out of that stone. And gradually turn the piercer with your hand in that stone so that you make the piercing of it go in until you make the one on the other side penetrate; for then the urine is immediately expelled.
And then press your hand on that which is broken of the stone of the exit of the thread, for that is cracked and is pierced by the urine, and the patient is healed.
But if this cure is not prepared for you for some reason which prohibits it from that, then tie one thread under the stone and another thread above the stone. And then tighten your hand on the stone between those two threads. And then pull that out. And then untie the thread and clean the congealed blood which is made in the wound.
And it is not necessary to have the thread under the stone except so that it does not return to the bladder, and the other thread above except that when the thread is untied the stone will come out of its place and close the wound.
And for that it is necessary when you tie the thread above to raise the scrotum up or that it returns back with its proper movement and closes the wound as we have said.
Chapter .lxi.
Of stone extraction of women.
Few stones are generated in women.
But if you see a stone in any of them, then the cure for it is difficult and is prohibited by many ways.
One of them is because the woman is very virgo.
And the second is that you do not find a woman who knows how to uncover if she had sexual intercourse with a husband or is one of those women who have husbands.
The third is that you will not find a woman who knows this art well enough to perform the operation with your hand.
And the fourth is that the place of the incision on stones in women is distant from the place of the stone so that it is difficult to cut with a knife and there is fear in that.
But if necessity forces you to do that, then know that you must take a woman who is well versed in medicine and few are found.
But if you are deprived of that then seek medicine which is both quick and subtle or present a midwife who is practiced in the affairs of women or a woman who in this art has learned the science.
So do that presentation and command her to do everything that you tell her from the inquiry about the stone at the beginning; the cause is so that she examines if the woman is a virgin then know that she puts her finger into her vagina and feels for the stone.
So if she finds it then stop that under her finger and then command her to insert her finger into it.
But if she is not a virgin then command the midwife to put her finger into the vagina of the patient and feel for the stone for as she puts her left hand over the bladder and press that with good pressure.
So if she finds it then know that gradually she pulls down that from the orifice of the bladder to the openings below with the sum of her strength so that it comes out at the root of the scrotum.
And then insert the tip of the knife into the orifice of the vagina behind the root of the scrotum from whatever part it is stopped at and fix the stone in that opening so that the finger does not slip on the stone.
And the incision should be little at the beginning and then insert the needle into that incision and if she feels the stone then increase the incision according to the amount she knows that the stone is dropped from it.
And know that the species of stones are many for there is a small and large stone and smooth and rough one and long and round and having horns.
So you know how many species there are of it therefore you indicate about what you want.
And if you see blood flowing then apply a little vitriol to the place and hold it there for an hour until the blood is dried and then return to your operation until the stone comes out.
And prepare for yourself instruments which are used in the extraction of stones in men so that you are helped by them in your operation.
And if you see blood flowing and know that the emission of blood is from the artery which is cut then you place powder over the place and apply a bandage on it with pressure and do not go further in that; and draw out the stone and do not pull it for the patient will surely die. And then cure the wound.
So when the cutting of the blood has stopped then after a few days if the place is healed then return to your operation until the stone comes out.
Chapter lxii.
Of incision on acute hernia.
Aqueouz hernie is not but an accumulation of moisture in the white cauldron which is under the scrotum and it is called cauldron.
And some are in the proper skin which nature has prepared it in the orifice of the scrotum so that there is a new scrotum and it is not but an ulcer.
And the generation of this hernia is due to weakness which happens in the muscles for there is effusion of that matter in those and some happen by beating done on the testicles.
And this moisture has many colors for the color of it inclines to yellow or to bloody red or to red or is black and slimy and that is what happens most.
And the signs by which you know that this accumulation of moisture is so because if it is in the white cauldron then the ulcer is round and declining a little in length like the figure of a scrotum and appears the testicle for the moisture contains it on all sides.
And if the moisture is in the proper skin then the ulcer is round at the orifice of the scrotum and from this one estimates that it is another scrotum.
And if the moisture is between the testicles and the white cauldron then cuts are made under it.
And if you want to know the color of the moisture then test the color of the moisture in the ulcer with a thread which has been burned so that its shape is preceded and judge from what comes out of it.
So when we come to the cure of it with iron then know that command the patient so that he is flebitic if that is possible for you and see the body of him.
And then let it be pressed on his navel for some cause a little and place under it some woolen cloth.
And then put your hand on his left side and command the minister to follow you on his right side and extend his rod at the testicles of the navel to the orifice of the abdomen.
And then take a sharp knife and cut the testicles at their middle part for the length so that it is close to the orifice.
And let the incision be made according to the correct technique, equidistant from the line that separates the skin of the scrotum, until it reaches the white capsule containing the testicle.
Examine it, and be careful not to cut into it; and let your incision have an opening that is suspended by the more thick and subtle humors, and scrutinize the incision according to the amount that you can.
Then pierce the capsule full of water with a wide piercing, and extract all the water.
Then separate the two lips of the incision with your fingers, and extend the capsule upward; do not touch the testicle contained within, and cut into the capsule in whatever manner is possible for you. And cut into it to its entirety or in parts, and especially its subtle side; for if you do not examine the incision of it closely, there is no certainty that the water will not return.
But if the humors proceed from outside of its capsule in the moment of your operation, then when you have finished the incision of the capsule, return it inside, and then sew shut the two lips of the scrotum, and heal that just like the other wounds, until it is healed.
And if you find the humor corrupted by some other illness, then you should tie off the vessels which are over the suspensory ligament, extract the humor, and heal that just as we have said.
But if the water is aggregated into two herniations, then know that there are two hernias; therefore cut into that hernia just as you have done in the other one equally; and if it appears to you to be one operation, then do it.
Then you should cleanse the blood, and insert into the incisions wool which has been dipped in oil or rose-oil; and place outside another wool which you have dipped in wine and oil, and spread that over both testicles and the groin of the belly; and place above it doubled up cloths and powders, and tie those with a bandage which is according to this form:
and let there be pressed two cloths and they are folded of colored wool according to this semblance; and let the extremities be made with which it is pressed of cotto or of wet wool, and let them be tied with tightness in the band of the undergarments, and one of the extremities take from the buttocks into the groin, and the second take to the part of the armpit, and two extremities over the two thighs and two other extremities over the two ankles, and all the tightness be adjusted in the band of the undergarments.
And sometimes this hernia is medicated artificially by cautery instead of incision with an iron; and it is that you take a thin cutlass and that you cut into with that the scrotum of the testicles, and it is ignited according to what we have recommended until the white capsule containing the water is uncovered, and then you take cautery according to this form: and it is similar to the Greek letter alpha.
Then pierce with that capsule, and it is ignited until all the moisture is driven out.
Then extend the capsule with your fingers, and examine it with your fingers, and examine it with a thin cautery which is ignited; and cut into that just as it is possible for you until you have eradicated all of it; and be careful that the fire does not touch the humor.
And know that this operation is more safe and more distant from bleeding of blood, and better than operation with incision.
But if it does opposition to you pustule cauterized in the hour of incision or in the hour of cautery, or bleeding of blood, then know that you heal whatever opposition it makes to you by that, with healing which is appropriate to it according to what is said.
But if the patient is timid and does not expect a second operation due to his horror, then administer piercing according to what we have recommended that signified; and it is when you are certain through what we have said of the significations that this hernia is watery.
Then know that you seat the patient over some elevated seat, then pierce the pustule in the part which is lowest on him with spatulum, and make the piercing according to the length of the body.
And let the opening be wide so that all the water may flow out.
Then pause over the spot cotto and bind that and leave it, so that the remnant of the water runs out. And then heal that until the wound is healed.
But if opposition is to the discharge of the water in that hour when you pierce it: and that is not done except that the white membrane in the orifice of the wound makes opposition and prohibits the exit of the water, then know that you put into the wound a needle or instrument by which the water is extracted from the hydrocele, the form of which is preceded; or adjust in the pression of the wound a small.
And know that the water returns, and is driven out again after about a month or more; and when it has occurred, then let it be pierced according to that same mentioned manner, for the patient will thus pass his days.
Chapter .lxxxiii.
Of incision on a fleshy hernia and its healing.
Know that in the incision on this hernia there is a fearful loss of life in the greater dispositions; for it has been seen to me its dismissal and to be saved by that better.
And I remember the operation on that and the properties of the pustules.
Therefore, I say that the pustules are born in the bodies of which the testicles are composed and it is done for many causes: or due to acute sharp superfluity, which is effused into the testicles, or due to piercing.
And its color is according to the color of the body, and it does not ache in it, and it is a heavy pustule.
And often it is a pustule that has become lapsified, of which the color is dark, and there is no heat in it.
And sometimes it is done due to congestion of the veins, and due to inflammation of those thus as well as already having been perceived the memory of it, or due to inflammation of vessels.
But what is done due to congestion of the veins is known through the dispersion of the pustule when you compress that with your fingers; and it does not ache.
But what is done due to congestion of a vein is not dispersed from it any cause because of the compression with fingers.
And it is possible that on this species incision be made and on the other fleshy parts; and it is that you cut into the scrotum of the testicles, and then extend the humor upward, and extract that from the white capsule, and ligature them, and cut into the suspensory ligament more than you extract that from all parts of the parts of the humor.
Therefore if the humor is already consolidated with those fleshy parts, then know that you extract the humor and cut into it.
And if there is adhesion for some cause of the capsule, or between that which is between the vessels, then know that you release all that adhesion and cut into it by a round incision.
But if there is generation of flesh in the place of the adhesion which is behind, then know that you cut into all that is of it, and extract the humor thus as we have said.
Therefore when your operation is complete, then fill the wound with wool dipped in rose-oil and wine; and then heal that with the other healing until it is healed.
Chapter 64.
On the treatment of hernias that are wet.
Wheat is an inflammation wrapped in some wrapper resembling a bud with softening of the testicles, and it makes difficult movement, exercise, and ambulation for the patient.
And in the treatment of this ailment, there is fear of what precedes it, for which reason there is a reminder.
However, we will discuss the second one later, as we did with the first.
And I say that you should elevate the patient on a bed; and then tie the testicles to the lower parts; and hold the scrotum with your left hand while pulling up with your right; and keep the other assistant holding him by his arms, stretching them vigourously.
And you have already opened the space between the patient's thighs, placed a cushion under them, another servant on their legs, and another on their chest, holding their hands. And then insert a sharp, broad knife horizontally into the right side of the vessels where they are exposed.
And then hold the patient in such a way that the vessels are made to be dispersed and separated from each other by the knife. And then cut out, as we have said before, any arterials which are in the temples.
And if you find that the hernia is caused by hot humours infiltrating somewhere in the body and pain occurs in some part of the body, then do a pointed cautery on the surface of the foot. And then insert a needle into those places, with a double thread, the first one at the front of the places where the wetness occurs, and the other one turned around at the back of them. And then return the intestine or hernia to its cavity, and place your hand over the area to prevent the intestine from coming out. And insert them into the middle of that location with a right-angled cut according to the length of the body, and extract what is aggregated there of putrid and corrupted humours.
And if the hernia is caused by hot humours infiltrating somewhere in the body and pain occurs in some part of the body, then do a pointed cautery on the surface of the foot. And then treat the wound with treatment for other wounds from which pus is meant to be generated so that the vessels which turn black from two testicles, it is not bad for that.
And if the hernia is caused by cold humours infiltrating somewhere in the body and pain occurs in some part of the body, then do a pointed cautery on the surface of the foot. But if wetness occurs to all the vessels, then the testicles should be extracted or that the testicles, because of their separation from the vessels, be deprived of all nourishment through the incision of the vessels, and that they be withered, or separated so that there is no benefit to them.
Chapter 65.
Of the cure of intestinal hernia.
The occurrence of this hernia is through an incision that goes under the skull covering the belly, from the angle of the navel, so that it cuts into some of the intestines at that rupture.
And if you find that the hernia is caused by hot humours infiltrating somewhere in the body and pain occurs in some part of the body, then do a pointed cautery on the surface of the foot. And this rupture is either of the skull or from an incision in it; and these two species occur for many causes: either from a blow, or from falling, or from crying, or from the elevation of something heavy, or similar.
And if the hernia is caused by cold humours infiltrating somewhere in the body and pain occurs in some part of the body, then do a pointed cautery on the surface of the foot. And the sign of this, when it is from an extension of the skull, is that it occurs gradually over a long time, and does not occur suddenly, and there is wetness inside the abdomen because the skull compresses the intestine.
And if the hernia is caused by hot humours infiltrating somewhere in the body and pain occurs in some part of the body, then do a pointed cautery on the surface of the foot. And the sign of this is when it is from an incision in the skull, because at the beginning it causes very violent pain suddenly; and there is diverse wetness apparent below the neck, and that is because of displacement of the intestine, and the body of it towards the front at the edges outside the skull.
And if the hernia is caused by cold humours infiltrating somewhere in the body and pain occurs in some part of the body, then do a pointed cautery on the surface of the foot. And sometimes it is forgotten with the intestine, and this hernia is called intestinal stranglehold.
And sometimes it is forgotten with the intestine because of displacement of the intestine and for another cause; and this hernia is called intestinal ring-like. And sometimes it is made by windiness, and sometimes there is a fissure in the intestine, and here it is retained, and there is great harm to the patient, and sometimes it causes bad and worse pain when it is pressed.
And sometimes it is made because of displacement of the intestine and for another cause; and this hernia is called intestinal ring-like. And in the treatment of these ailments with iron, there is fear, so that one should avoid the casting of that.
And if the hernia is caused by hot humours infiltrating somewhere in the body and pain occurs in some part of the body, then do a pointed cautery on the surface of the foot. And the manner of the operation for this is that you command the patient to push in the intestine with his hand towards its cavity if he obeys your instruction, and then he should be laid on his back between your hands, and raise up his legs.
And then tighten the ligature which binds the ligature of the testicles to the parts above, and insert the ligature of the testicles all along; and place the hooks of the incision between two lips according to how you open the incision with them.
And make the incision according to the amount that is possible for you, so that all of the hernia is cut out.
And then cut away any excess tissue which is underneath the ligature of the testicles, while making sure that the white, hard surface of each part is exposed.
Then you put your finger into that which binds the testicle, where it is between the white surface and the surface of the hernia, and release with your finger any adhesions which are at the back of the hernia.
And then use your hand to loosen the ligature of the testicles on the sides, and at the same time extend the white surface upwards with your left hand and lift the hernia with the surface towards the incision; and tell your assistant to stretch out the hernia inwards while you dissolve any adhesions behind it using a complete solution.
And check with your fingers that there is no cause for the intestine to be wrapped up in the white, hard surface. But if you find a cause on him, then you push it back into his belly.
And then insert in the part underneath the ligature of the testicles by incision from which blood and pus will flow, just as we have recommended earlier.
And then administer wool soaked in oil, and put it on the wound; and administer the forceps which we have recommended (and sometimes the white surface is cauterized where we said there is fear of a flow of blood, when several times this happens to them) and let go of the forceps so that by itself it falls.
But if his healing is delayed, then let warm water be applied, and put it over him so that he falls according to what we have said.
And then heal the wound with the other treatment of wounds so that it is healed.
Chapter 66:
Of a hernial hernia.
In this hernia, I have not seen anyone who has been treated for it with iron.
And the first thing to do is that it is made as we have recommended in the hernia which is with the testicles; and which is to tie the vessels over there with ease for him; and then dry up the apoplectic stroke around it by opening it, while the vessels fall down.
And heal the wound as we have said so that it is healed.
Chapter 67:
Of the separation which is made in the throat.
Sometimes there is a rupture in the throat as we have said, and the spot protrudes.
And do not let any cause of the intestines enter the throat; and if they enter, it is rare; and return from it in all hours.
But if the time is prolonged with this, it is a wound in the surface where the intestine goes into the surface; and it happens because of the extension of the surface which is in the throat as we have said, and which cause is that the surface is stretched, and then softens and the spot protrudes.
And the cure for it is by cauterization just as we have given the description of it.
And sometimes it is cured by iron in this way: and the patient lies on his back between your hands, and then dry up the spot of the rupture of the apoplectic strokes sticking out with incision according to the length of three fingers.
And then strengthen the white surface which is beneath the ligature so that it is exposed.
And then take the thread and put it over the spot protruding from the surface, and press it against the front of the belly.
And then sew the two spots sticking out at the end of the thread on the surface, and adjust with the stitch one of them to the other.
And then pull out the end of the thread, and do not cut it from the surface at all, nor extend the hernia, nor any other cause as we have made you know in the cure for a hernial hernia.
And then heal that with the treatment of wounds, and as you insert the threads, cleanse it and restore the wound so that it is consolidated; because the surface is contracted and the protrusion of the rupture is not adjusted.
And cauterization is better in this spot because it is closer to health.
Chapter 68:
Of softening of the ligature of the testicles.
Sometimes the ligature of the testicles in some men is softened because the flesh which is between there is softened, and it is felt that its guard is relaxed.
Therefore it is necessary for that person who is treated in the cure for him to lie on his back according to how he feels, and insert all of the ligature which is softened over the natural ligature; and then sew two lips with a stitch.
And if you want, cut in the beginning the superfluity of the softened ligature with three or four cuts and with a firm stitch.
And then insert between the stitches; and then heal by the treatment of wounds so that it is healed and the threads fall down.
Chapter 69:
Of castration.
Know that castration in our law is forbidden, but it was allowed to me that I remember it in this book; and the reminder of it is not necessary except for two ways, of which one is for the doctor when he is questioned about it, so that he knows how to cure it if it happens; and the other way is that we many times have needed castration of other animals for our young by them, as with horses, and oxen, and pigs, and similar animals.
And therefore I say that castration is made in two ways: either by traction, or by incision into an incision.
But in that which is made by traction, the way of the operation is that we make the animal lie in warm water so that his genitals are softened and hang down. And then take those with your hand so that they are resolved and do not appear under the touch.
But in castration made by incision and wound, have the animal and press the ligature of his testicles with your left hand.
And now tie the suspension and insert it into each eye with a section in between where two processes are proceeding.
Then insert those that you have scalded. And don't put anything on the head, except for a subtle cloth which is over the vessels.
And this method of castration is better when done by incision because a strong incision leaves no cause from the testicles for the animal to desire sex.
Then cure the wound until it is healed.
Chapter 70:
Of the cure for hermaphroditism.
Hermaphroditism in men is according to two methods: the first is when there appears a space between the cords of the testicles, in that which is between two testicles; it looks like a woman's vagina with balls.
And sometimes from this cord urine flows as well.
But in women there is only one type: the clitoris of a woman on her vagina is like two testicles of a man, a little at the entrance and as big as a pearl; and two testicles as well.
And the cure is with three remedies: two from men and one from women. And you shall insert those tight meats between which the moisture flows out; then cure those with the cure for the other wounds as well.
And the second type of men from which urine flows in the cord of the testicles has no cure or treatment for it.
Chapter 71:
Of a hernia and protuberant flesh caused by women.
A strong hernia is tightly bound over natural causes until it is stressed and made tight like a rope: and sometimes it is enlarged in some women to the point that it spreads out as well as in men, and enters into intercourse.
Then if you have an excess of hernia, hold it with your hand or a bandage and insert it.
And do not finish in insertion, especially at the tip of the penis, so that you don't experience blood flow.
Then cure it with wound medicine until it is healed.
But protuberant flesh is flesh that grows in the womb of the mother until it fills up that space; and often it hangs out at the front like a tail (and for this reason some first called this "tailed disease"); therefore when we insert it, as we do with a hernia, let us cure it until it is healed.
Chapter 72:
Of the cure for elephantiasis.
Elephantiasis is when the clitoris of a woman is not perforated, or has a small hole. And it can be natural or accidental.
Accidental is due to a disease that preceded it, and it is made by tightly bound flesh or a subtle wound or thickness.
And it is made in the front of the mother' vagina, or in her ribs, or on top or bottom of her vagina, and it prohibits intercourse and impregnation and childbirth, and often prohibits menstruation as well.
And knowledge of it is made by examination by the midwife, if the opening is apparent, then push it in; but if it is not apparent, then you should pierce it with your needle or with a pin.
But if the opening is due to a subtle wound and it is near both lips, then cut and break it open.
And you shall rest your fingers on both lips, and then insert your needle in the middle between both hands.
And the woman should be on her back, with her legs stretched out, and then stretch both lips so that the subtle wound is broken open and the opening is wide open.
And then take wool and dip it in oil and place it on the spot, and keep it warm with a cloth every day so that the incision is not closed up again.
But if the wound is large and thick, then you shall insert it with broad lye or with myrrh resin.
But if the opening is due to flesh, then suspend it with a bandage and insert that.
And have these remedies to stop the flow of blood without biting, like hemlock, and dragon' blood, and gum mastic, bound up with egg white.
Then administer a broad lead rod so that the wound is not closed up again quickly.
And hold it for several days and administer hot water from a bath.
Then it is cured with the other cure of consolidation until it is healed.
And sometimes accidents happen in childbirth due to other meats, and then insert according to this manner as well. But if it is due to a ulcer in the womb which is not made contrary by iron in any way, then cure it with these remedies:
Chapter 73:
Of the cure of hemorrhoids and of a tail and of a red botul that happens in the clitoris of women.
Hemorrhoids are an appearance of orifices of veins from which blood flows continuously; and with them go old hemorrhoids as well.
And I have also spoken about their species and their signs, and I have directed those that received cure and those who did not receive cure as well.
Therefore I say that hemorrhoids and their ulcers when they are in the front of the mother' vagina and do not appear with a feeling, then in those there should be no cure made with iron.
But those which are in the orifices of the mother' vagina over which a feeling appears, then those that are cured.
And you shall place the woman in a bath and then stretch it with tweezers or with an abrasive needle and insert those into the wounds.
Then powder the blood flow of one of the internal bleeding without biting, like hemlock and its likes as well.
Then pull on her feet for an hour, then place it in hot water.
And if the blood flow persists, then make it boil in a decoction of myrrh and of husks of pomegranates and of shells and their likes as well.
Then take flour of bran and cook that with honey and sour wine and make a plaster out of it and place it on its back.
And if the blood is scanty, then boil it; but if not, make it adhere with two bandages, and on the nipples their incision as well.
Then take wool and dip it in juice of colander or in juice of arnagloza or in juice of gorse with wine and make it adhere to the spot; then cure the spot with unguents until it is healed.
Then cure it until it is healed.
Chapter 74:
Of a wound made accidentally in the mother.
Many species of ulcers happen in the mother' vagina, like an ulcer and an ulcer with a tooth and an ulcerative ulcer and an ulcer with pus and a botul and a tail and others as well. And I have already spoken about these diseases and their species and their signs, and their cures in the division of them as well.
And here is what I think it means: "And now I will tell you in this treatise about the pustule called ' caut le qual ve en la mayre' (the one that appears on the mother's breast), and if you want to know how the operation of it is done with iron."
And now consider whether the pain of the pustule at its beginning is acute with percussion and phlegm and fever, and if you see that swelling and if it is on top of that feeling, then do not cut into it, and cure it with what helps in the maturation until that acuteness of the accidents cease.
And then you shall make the woman lie on her side that has two sides; and recline on his back and adjust his feet to the part most below the belly, and let his thighs be expanded, and place his arms below his elbows, and tie each with a bandage in whatever is convenient.
Then the midwife shall follow on the right side and administer the instrument by which the opening of the breast is made, the form of which will come in those causes that are to be made properly.
And when you want to administer this instrument, you shall put on the nipple of the woman's breast, and that which is inside the instrument should not be larger than the nipple of the breast and lead the patient. But if the instrument is larger than the nipple of the breast, then you shall pause powders on the texture of the nipple of the breast so that it is prohibited that any instrument enter into the nipple of the breast.
And you shall put the vertitge that runs in the instrument from the side more above, and that the minister has the instrument and revolves the vertitge until the opening of the breast is made.
And when the excision appears, and it is touched with the hand and is soft and moist, then you shall dry that head of it with a sponge on a stick.
And when the pus is evacuated, then you shall put in the wound a poultice soaked in rose oil or oil with some astringency; and pause the cautery on the incision on the nipple of the breast.
And stop up the breast and over the bandage clean wool soaked in water in which there are bruised mallows.
Then it is to be cured after two days with ointment suitable for that until it is healed.
And sometimes the breast and the bandage is washed in that which is made astringent with water and honey, and then with water in which there is bruised lark's heel or of long aristology, and then return to the ointment.
And if the wound is within the breast that is swollen, then you shall be prohibited from the cure of it by iron, having cured that with what we have said in the division.
Chapter 75.
To teach midwives in what way the live fetuses are to be treated when they come according to a non-natural figure.
It is necessary that the midwife know in the beginning the figure of natural childbirth by signs of it, and it is that when you see the woman express at the parts below and desiring to smell the air, and over that she is stretched out because of that which is above her, and hastens the ejection of the fetus, then you should know that this part is according to a natural figure, and is its ejection over her head, and the second one with that or suspended or hanging from the umbilical.
So when you see those signs, then the belly of it should be compressed so that the fetus descends lightly when they descend over her head, and the second one with that or suspended or hanging from the umbilical is washed of those superfluities by good washing.
But that which is other than this part is non-natural and not laudable, for when the fetus is ejected over its feet and the body of it is ejected before the head of it and the feet of it, and its hand one or to the foot of it .i.. or is ejected the head of it and its hand, or to the belly of it, and hard turned over his neck, and resembling figures of it non-laudable.
So it is necessary that the midwife be wise and subtle in all those causes, and that she guard against error and deception.
And I am showing you all figures of those, and what cunning is in those so that it be indicated by that and is standing over that.
When the fetus is ejected over its head by natural labor, and that is violent on the woman and is made to it difficult part, and sees the strength of it already debilitated, then make that cease , or that the women hold it, and evaporate the semen of it with fenugreek cut and with oiled humors.
Then the midwife shall insert between its fingers a little sponge and split with that the second one, or dry that with his nail until it runs out that which is in her of moisture. And press the belly of the woman so that she descend the fetus.
But if it does not descend, then the woman should be made astringent of ptilli and mucilage of fenugreek with cress.
And then command it, the midwife, that it is compressed and make that vomit with condition; and take its mouth and nose for one hour, for the fetus will be expelled immediately.
And if the two hands of the fetus are expelled at the beginning, then you shall reduce those with little ease little by little. But if it does not obey the instrument, then put the woman on a bed and raise its feet up, and then rock the bed to the ground; and the woman shall be held so that she does not fall because of the rocking.
And if the hands are not turned inside out and the fetus is dead, then insert those and extract the part of the fetus or tie the body to the hand of it with a cloth and extract that with equality, for that will be expelled.
When the fetus comes over its feet, then you shall push those up, and then turn the fetus a little, and then that you suck it in, and then take one of its feet and extend those little by little.
But when it is ejected in between the thighs, then you command it to be pressed, and make that vomit with condition, for it will be expelled if God wills it.
And if it is not expelled by that which we have recommended, then you return the fetus little by little so that you make that second figure natural, for that will be expelled a lighter ejection.
And if it is prohibited by all that we have recommended, then take of mucilage of alder and of gum dissolved, and beat all in the mortar with good beating, and line all over the semen of the woman, the bottom of the belly of it. Then make that boil in tepid water, so that you achieve the hypochondrium.
And when you see that the parts below of it are relaxed, then make to it sublimation of myrrh and sub-burn that at him. And when the sublimation for one hour, then you make it sit on a bed, and then make that vomit and open his mouth, and raise that up and press the bottom part of its belly with little compression, for the fetus will be expelled immediately.
Examine the feet lengthwise, with one of his hands. It should be reduced by hand; but if it cannot be reduced, then elevate the woman and have her walk.
And if she cannot walk, then have her lie on her back and strike her thighs with violent blows; and give her remedies which are composed of mucilaginous substances.
And if labor has begun, then have her lie on her back, and study the reduction of the hand; and draw out the foot according to its natural shape, and have the woman sneeze, and command him to press inwards until it is drawn out.
Examine the feet on his knees with his hands expanded, and his chest against his mother's back. Have the midwife take hold of the foot and gently turn it little by little; this will make it easier.
And when it is drawn out and its length is equal to that which we have mentioned, then anoint the navel with oil and mucilaginous substances.
Then command him to press inwards little by little; and when you have done this, have her lie on one side and command her to be inclined onto the right side, and then command him to press inwards; and have her sneeze with force. The exit of the fetus prepared on its side.
When they are about to come out of the mother according to this method, examine and then insert your finger inside in order to remove moisture.
And if the fetus is suspended over its face and neck, then insert your finger into the navel so that it is not retained and delayed.
Then push the fetus inwards towards the inner parts while you pause according to what is mentioned, and command the woman to press inwards several times; then it will come out with easy exit, if God wills it.
The exit of twins or of multiple fetuses. Know that twins are born in many cases, and some give birth to three or four, but this is strange and rare; however, there are natural causes for it, and they do not live.
And count them, whether they are multiples, a second one is born, and they are separated by the umbilical cord; distinguish those which are inside the membrane in the navel of each of them. And sometimes they are born like this with easy natural exit, and sometimes they exit with non-natural exit as we have mentioned.
And if they are difficult to give birth, and reach the point that we have mentioned about non-natural figures, then you should treat them as we have recounted.
And if the midwife does what she does with facility and skill; and with delay, and is ingeniously prepared according to how it is for him in bringing about health.
Recollection of that which is formed in the womb from embryos, and miscarriages.
Sometimes they are formed in the womb one, two, three, four, five, six, seven, and even ten times, and I have verified that a woman who had an abortion six times had them all formed, which cause was made by the wise sages.
And all this is known to be in the science of the midwife; how strong it is for her to see that small thing, and therefore pause at it.
Chapter .lxxvi.
On the extraction of the fetus when it is dead.
When you treat the dead fetus with what we have mentioned in the division of medicine and it is not taken out by force, then you should consider whether the woman is of sound nature and does not have any of the accidents for which she is feared to lose.
Then let the woman lie on her back with her chest inclined downward and her legs elevated.
And his assistant should hold that in two parts or be tied down onto the bed so that the body of him does not extend because of the extraction of the fetus.
Then anoint the mouth of the mother of him with oiled herbs and with mucilaginous substances of aniseed and of fenugreek, and of linseed.
Then the midwife anoint her hand with those oils and mucilaginous substances; then insert her hand with facility into the mother, and then seize hold of the hand in the place where the nails are on the fetus.
And convenient places in which: then consider whether the fetus is prepared to be drawn towards its head; then you place the nails in the holes of it, or in the neck, or in the mouth, or in the palate, or under the beard, or in the armpits, or below the ribs, or under the hips.
But if the drawing is towards its feet, then in the ankle, or in the middle of the thigh.
And have the nail with the right hand, and pause the crookedness of it in that place which is between the fingers of the left hand; then insert the hand with facility, and put the nail into one of those places which we have mentioned, so that it reaches to the desired cause.
Then pause and put into its mouth another nail, or the third if it is necessary, so that there be a dual traction, and not an extension according to its straightness only.
And let it be drawn out entirely, so that the exit of him is made far away as it is done in teeth because of its extraction.
And consider in him that the extension is softened; and if any part of him is retained, then let the midwife anoint his teeth with oil and insert that medicine, and turn it while that which is retained is drawn out.
Then if the part of the fetus is drawn out, then the nails are moved into another place where it has been put; and do this so that all the fetus is drawn out.
But if the hand is drawn out in front of the other, and it is not possible to reduce it by constriction, then let the drape be wrapped around it; and then draw it out so that all is drawn out, and insert it or in the joint of the hand or in the wrist.
And do likewise with the other hand and feet.
But if the head of the fetus is large, or it happens to him constriction in its exit, or it has water on its head tightly bound, then let the midwife insert between his fingers asperatum spiny and split the head, or cut it with an instrument which is named “alundat”, the form of which comes with the forms of other instruments in the chapter which is proper to this.
And similarly, if the foot is large in size by nature, then cover that with a bandage, or take that with a splint as we have said; and then pull out the bones with forceps.
And if the head is dislocated and bent towards the collarbone, then it should be cut so that the moisture in the foot is released.
But if it is not complicated or stuck in dislocation, then you should move the head as soon as possible to you.
And if the bottom of the abdomen is pustular or it is waterlogged, then cover that so that you pierce where the moisture is in it.
But if the foot is on its feet, then the attraction of it is lighter and the direction of it towards the mouth of the mother is lighter.
But if it is bent by the abdomen and foot, then cover that with a cloth that you have wrapped around your hand, and cut the abdomen and foot so that what is in them flows out.
But if the other members are stuck and the head is turned, then the midwife inserts her left hand; but if the mouth of the mother is open, then she inserts her hand into the perineum, and circles with that the head, and pulls it with the said fingers towards the mouth of the mother, and then she inserts into it an inch, or two inches, and pulls it with those.
And if the mouth of the mother is bent by pustules pressing on it, then it should not be pulled on; rather, then administer application of moist causes that are fatty. And administer poultices; and follow the patient in waters that soften and moisten.
And if the foot is on its side, then if possible it should be straightened; and administered what we have said in the living foot.
And if that is not possible, then it should be cut into pieces, and pulled out.
And so that you do not leave any cause inside the uterus.
And when you have completed all of your operation, then administer what we have said about the cure for pustules that occur from the mother.
And if blood flow occurs, then use waters that are astringent and administer the other cure.
And I have also seen a woman whose belly contained a dead fetus, and moreover another fire was burning inside, and moreover the other fire is the dead fetus. It happened to her that after a long time a pustule occurred in her womb; and it was swollen so that fire opened up, and it began to spurt out.
And I was called to the cure of her, and I medicated her for a long time, and the plague was not consolidated.
Then I put on her some poultices of strong attraction, and pulled out a bone from her, and then after a few days, another bone was pulled out; and I was very much amazed how in the belly there were bones.
And then I considered that they were of the bones of the dead fetus.
Then I continued the plague, and pulled out from her many bones, the woman being in such dispositions, and she lived in such a way for a long time, and one small spurt of blood occurred to her.
And I did not believe anything strange, but rather that in it is skill and help to what the doctor crafts with his hand for cure administers.
Of the forms of the instruments that are necessary to pull out the fetus.
Form of verity with which the mother is opened:
This is the form of strength in which the ribs are bent, to that bending there are two virtues at both extremes of two ends. But this virtue should be more subtle of constriction, and let it be made of ivory or of wood of beech trees.
And let the breadth of each trunk be two fingers and the edge of each on both sides one finger, and the length of each is a palm and half; and in the middle place of two trunks are two fastenings of that tree trunks which are already fastened, of which the length is the measure of a palm and a little more, and the breadth of each is two fingers, or a little more.
And those two additions are inserted into the mouth of the mother so that it is opened by them when you turn the two prescribed virtues.
Other similar form more subtle and farther away:
Let it be made of ivory or of wood according to the likeness of forceps. But in the end of it are two additions like this with grooves, and the length of those additions is a palm, and the breadth of each is two fingers.
And when you want to open the mother with them, then let her lean back on the feet hanging down, opening what is between her thighs. And then open your hand with the instrument thus as you do with forceps according to the quantity that you want of the opening of the mouth of the mother so that the midwife does what she wants.
The form of verity which the ancients said:
Form of impulsion by which the fetus is pushed:
Form of compression by which the large head is contained:
And it is like forceps whose end has teeth, thus with grooves, and some times it is made long thus as with forceps, thus with teeth of saw by which it is cut and contained. Form of compression few:
Form of a nail having one spine:
Form of a nail having two spines:
Form of spatula having two ends by which the head is cut off:
Form of two spatulas wide:
All those instruments are exercised, and when more they are multiplied and prepared by the artisans, then it is farther from his operation and farther for men by its quantity.
And let not work of those instruments be known, for the necessity of those is inexcusable.
Of extraction of the placenta:
When the placenta is retained after childbirth, then let you command the woman to retain her urine, and then make her vomit with cold water, and if by that it is discharged, good.
And if not, then you take a cloth and pierce the covering with a hole and pause in that herbs burning the mouth of the mother, thus with hot water and rue and anise and camomile and scichado arabic and cassia ligneous and sassafras. All these herbs or some of them be soaked in water in the cloth, and pause that over the fire.
And then pause a tube of reed in the mouth of the mother, and hold that in so that the evaporation went to the hollow of the mother.
And then make her vomit thus as we have said, and the placenta will be discharged quickly.
But if that cure is applied and it is not discharged, then let the midwife soak her left hand in sesame oil or in mustard water, and then insert that in the mouth and scrape with that the placenta, and when you have found the placenta, pull it out little by little according to how the mother does not feel violent attraction. Before anyone is turned over onto his right or left side, he should be made comfortable.
And if the mouth of the mother is constricted, we have already recommended a cure with sneezing and the application of oil with herbs.
But if all of the causes which we have recommended are not removed, then beware that you do not tire yourself out with repeated extraction, but instead, what comes out of him to the mouth of the mother, place it on the woman's chest, and anoint that with ointment and tetracycline; for that will cause it to rot in a few days, and it will be dissolved and removed.
But when it rots, a foul odor rises to the head and stomach, and then the patient is tormented by that; and thus they should be administered under fumigation in an appropriate manner.
But some of the Ancients have been tried out with fumigation of nettle and dry figs.
Form for an instrument by which a woman is fumigated for retention of menstruation and the second month:
It should be made of glass or of horn.
And the narrow end should be placed in the vagina and the wider end over the fire, and the fumigation should be placed over the embers of the fire.
And she who has that within her should consume that fumigation and repeat another.
For treatment of the child's anus, if not perforated:
Young children whose anuses are not perforated, their rectums are narrow and closed. Thus the midwife who perforates that sphincter with her finger; and if not, perforate it with a sharp spatula, and beware that she does not touch the glans.
And then place wool soaked in wine and oil over it; and cure that with ointment until it is healed.
But if you fear that it is closed, then place a cannula in the anus for several days, and remove it when the child wants to defecate.
And sometimes the closing of the anus occurs due to consolidation of a hematoma or of an abscess; thus that consolidation should be incised, and then it should be cured as we have said about the cure and the plug.
For treatment of the fistulas which appear afterwards:
The fistulas which appear afterwards near the anus discharge pus and cause a knob and swelling, and they appear close to the anus or in the space of one finger.
And it is a fistula or several.
And when that knob becomes old and discharges thin white or yellow pus, and sometimes some of these fistulas penetrate in several ways.
And those which penetrate are known through what exits from them by the orifice and by flatulence; and sometimes it uses the patient for an orifice of exit, and often it is expelled from them with worms.
And sometimes from those fistulas some penetrate into the space of the bladder, and into the muscle of the penis; and sometimes they penetrate into the joint of the hip and into the socket of the shoulder.
And that in which a penetrating fistula is known to have penetrated into the anus and not to have penetrated, it is because you put your finger inside the anus, and push a thin probe of horn or iron into the fistula when there is no pain.
But if in that there is pain, then push into it a thin probe of lead or hair from a horse's mane until you feel the probe or the hair in your finger.
And if you do not feel that at all and there is no process of excretion from the orifice, nor worms, nor flatulence, as we have said, then understand that it is not penetrating, and then turn to the cure.
And when the fistula is penetrating into the bladder or into the muscle of the penis, then its sign is the excretion of urine from that and prohibition of it so that the place is not consolidated with medicine.
But if it is penetrating into the joint of the hip or into the socket of the shoulder, then its sign is that a probe goes through there if in it there is no pain within the socket, and pain in the circuit of the part; and that from it there is discharge of pus at all times; and that it does not respond to medicine, nor is healed with ointment.
And in all those penetrating fistulas there is no cure of all, and the cure for those is labor and futility of the folk doctors about which they are established.
But in that which is not penetrating and does not become old, healing with iron is expected according to what you have recommended, and that which has already been done and proven.
And it is that the patient lies between your knees over his chest and lifts his legs up over you, with his hips tilted towards his belly, and then push a probe of lead or horn into the fistula if there is pain in it; and understand the place where the probe goes through.
And if that feels around the neck, then you put your finger inside the neck.
And if you feel in your finger the probe already placed discovered to penetrate, or the skin, then understand certainly that it is penetrating; and then do not labor over that, for there is no cure for that, as we have said.
But indeed some say that it is healed in some people with vinegar.
And of the medicine by which it is hoped to be healed immediately in him is that you ignite a small cautery according to the size of the fistula, as it has been preceded, and put that ignited into the fistula until it comes around the neck; and then repeat that two or three times until you understand that all those tightened fistulas which seem like a feather of a bird's quill are tightened.
And then cure that with waters wrapped in wool until all those tightened meats are healed, and then cure that with medicines which generate meat and consolidate it, and if it is healed, well; and if not, then it will not be healed at any time by another cure.
And if the probe goes in and does not penetrate into your finger which is in the anus, and between that and the probe which is evidently of meat or of sphincter, and the fistula on what it severs the surface of the membrane, then dry up the membrane from the beginning of the fistula, and you will dry them up with the probe, and it will be in the fistula until the section comes to the place in which the end of the probe comes out, and by the probe it is freed and cut.
And then cleanse those tightened meats which are like a quill of a bird' s feather and do not break from any cause.
But if flow of blood sometimes comes between you and your instrument when you push those meats, then the milk that is and the pus the leaner instrument is cauterized with fire or with sharp medicine, for cautery with fire tightens good two habits: it is tightening of those tightened meats, and abstention of blood by drying up of the moistness.
And then cure that with waters wrapped in wool or in cress until the place gets cold, and then cure the wound with hard meats which generate and consolidate.
And thus medicines in which there is stiffness and abstention; when then it is restored, it is already healed and do not fear recurrence.
But if the fistula has already penetrated into the anus and is elongated from the surface of the body, then insert your little finger into the anus and explore it with that.
And therefore if you feel with your finger and find membrane or flesh, and it is near the penetration, then there is no operation on it but rather by way of trust and hope.
That cause is treated in one of three ways: either cauterizing it as we have said; or cutting into it until you reach its cavity so that you can insert instruments and make the wound clean; nor should you cut at all so that you do not pierce the sac containing the pus, but instead make the patient void his bowels against his will so that he expels the pus from the anus. Then treat the fistula with what we have said as quickly as possible; or elongate the membrane and open the pustule around the anus, either by probing with a tent or another instrument with a sharp end, then clean those fleshly fistulas which you can reach by cutting into them; and try to make a complete cure of the whole wound by cutting, and if the upper opening is not healed and the fistula remains open in the anal region, it will discharge pus more quickly through the anus. And sometimes the fistula is finished in this way: it occurs when you insert the tent into the fistula, and there is pain around the anus on the surface of the body with the cord, and at the edge of the anus; then take a tent with a perforated end, which is made like the needle for piercing ears as follows:
and insert it into that fistula, wrapped in a piece of cloth or around the edges; and then insert the tent with the needle into the fistula until you reach its cavity.
But if it penetrates near the edge of the anus inside, then you withdraw the needle from that wound as you would insert your little finger into the anus; and pull out the end of the needle and bring the two ends together, and tighten each one, and leave them like that for a day or two, and when you have pushed the needle deeper into the flesh, tighten it so that those fleshly parts between the two ends of the needle are drawn in.
Then treat the wound until it is healed and consolidated.
But if the opening of the fistula is not penetrating, then make it penetrate in whatever way you are prepared to do, except into the rectum, for you should not pierce the sac; and then treat that until it is healed.
The shape of the splitting spatulas with which the fistula is split: one end is very sharp and the other blunt, so that it does not pierce what it should not, as I have said before.
Of suturing hemorrhoids in which there is blood in the incision of those.
There are two types of hemorrhoids: either they are between the anus like charcoal, or they are like grass fat. And there are small and large ones, and the blood flows from them at times; they may be internal or external, and on the edges of the anus.
However, those which are external to the anus are according to the months of little moisture; from which flows a watery fluid or a little blood with a continuous body; they are according to the color of the body.
And the treatment for those which are inside the anus is that you command the patient to sit and to squeeze so that the anus protrudes and the hemorrhoids appear to you. Then you grab them and pull them out with your nails or whatever you have them with your fingernail, and then cut those to their roots.
But if the nails are not gripped by them due to their moisture and softness, then take those with a rough cloth or a cord or a piece of wool, and pull them out with your fingers, and then cut them and probe their roots; or cauterize them as is preceded in the chapter on cauterizing. And then treat those with the other cure until they are healed.
And if the anus does not obey to defecation, then anoint the patient with ointment in which there is a small amount of mordicant, and let him be washed with that water which is in the anus and let him squeeze out the excrement quickly when he has been anointed.
But if the hemorrhoids are external to the anus, then the cause of them is lightness; it is that you grab them with your fingernail or take them with a nail and probe them, and then treat them with what we have said until they are healed.
And he who has seen the incision, take a needle wrapped in cloth and insert it into the hemorrhoid and then probe with the needle into the root of the other part, and wrap both ends of the thread in the lower part of the needle, and tighten the hemorrhoid strongly with the thread; and cut the thread and pull out the needle.
And do this to all of them, and leave one and not cut it, so that the superfluous blood runs from that one.
And then place over the anus a cloth soaked in rose oil or cerot; and place that over the anus and command the patient to rest. And then let him void his bowels so that it comes out; and when it is defecated, treat those with ointment or another cure until they are healed.
And if they are old and not helped by that medicine, then take a tent with a sharp end or your fingernail and split them so that they become moist and let the edge of those above be split, which prevents those from healing; and then treat those until they are healed.
Then you dry them with a very violent friction so that there is bleeding and they are abraded; and then treat those until they are healed.
Know that hemorrhoids are a key; they are not unless the body is round according to the color of the body resembling the head of a nail, and it occurs throughout the body and especially in the lower parts: the feet and the fingers, and from these parts there is pain.
And then let that which is in the circle of the nail be cut, and let it be pulled out by its roots with forceps or nails, and then heal it.
And if you want, cauterize it as is preceded in its chapter.
But a wart is a small round asperity on the surface of the body, and many times it comes to children's hands.
And its treatment is that you stretch and probe it, or that you tighten it with a thread or nail so that it comes out. And if you want, cauterize it, as we have said, by fire or sharp medicine.
But a mole is a large asperity on the surface of the body near the anus; and when it is rubbed that mole is like a bite of an ant, and it occurs all over the body.
And the cure for it is that you take a penile catheter made of goose feather or vulture feather, which is strong, and place it over the fissure within which the foreskin contains the glans; then rotate your hand with the catheter so as to insert what is inside the foreskin and pause it in the flesh of the penis, thereby removing the foreskin from its root.
And if you wish, do this with an ergot or a needle according to this form:
Let the part above the catheter be drawn out with subtlety, silent (so that it is not perforated), wrapped up so that over the said part the sensation of touch and the revolution of it are abolished.
And if you wish to cauterize the foreskin according to what is said in the cauterization of atheyl in the chapter on cauteries.
Of the forms of instruments that are administered to give enemas.
Sometimes enemas are given with silver or lead, or melted ergot, or malleated; and sometimes they are given with those instruments small and large according to which they are administered, for that which is administered in the cure of little children must be small; and that of which the anuses are fissured or painful, the enemas of these should be small.
The form of a large enema and few:
The head of the catheter above, in which the pouch is tied, should be ample according to this manner; and it is to him distinction where the pouch is tied thus with threads.
And the extremity of it below, which is inserted in the anus, should be silent (so that it is not open) very much, drawing to subtlety; and on one side of it are two slits, and on the other side a slit, and the breadth of the slit according to the thickness of the rays and more gross a little.
And the pouch in which are placed the medicines of animal bladder or wool, and its root is a palm.
And it should be perforated with many slits thus as it is turned over; and if the space which is between the slits, the thickness of the said.
And then insert into those slits strong, raw bile which is of twelve biles, or pour it around them; and attach with that the pouch; and when it is placed on him the pouch, it should be bound at the head of the enema between two distinctions with a strong constriction, and then enema with it every slit: But the quality of enemaing with that is that you fill the pouch with medicine, which is warmed according to the quantity of the tolerance of the patient; and beware that it is not too hot nor too cold.
And then the patient should recline on his back, and elevate his legs up and place below him a bed or a bench; and then anoint the extremity of the cautery with oil or with white of egg or with mucilage of fenugreek or of similar; and then insert that into the anus with ease, and then the minister takes the pouch and squeezes it with two hands and empties with force into the enema all that is in the enema; and then pull out the enema and let the patient raise his legs to the wall.
And if the medicine forces that to exit, let him hold as much as he can; and if he sleeps with that for a whole night, it is better for his healing.
But if you enema him in the illnesses of a swollen belly and his exit coats it, then repeat the cautery until he is healed.
And if in the anus are hemorrhoids or painful tumors, then let the enema be very subtle and silent, of those enemas with which children are enemaed.
Of the cure of sores.
You have already said in the division of the cure of sores what was convenient to the liver, and I say thus the cure of those with hand and medicines according to the complement.
Therefore I say that sores are diverse according to what causes sores and according to the place on which they fall.
And the causes by which many times sores are made are thus with stone, or incision of a knife or of awl, or impact with a spear, or with staff, or with arrow, or similar to those of such causes.
But the sores that are in the places of the body are thus with a sore which falls on the head, or neck, or feet, or belly, or throat, and similar to those of the members.
And I am counting the cure of some sores so that you pause that reasoning and rule over the other sores.
And I will begin of the sores of the head simple, for the remembrance of the compounded will come to the beginning of the third chapter.
Therefore I say that when it happens in the head a simple sore and there is no fracture, then consider: if it is by impact of stone or similar, and the tendon has only been torn and it is a great sore and you fear about that patient having an abscess, then you cut it and flebotomize the cephalica immediately, and do not delay that; and extract from him blood according to the quantity of his strength if there is no prohibitive cause of phlebotomy, mostly if the blood which exits from the sore is little.
And let the phlebotomy be on the contrary of the side of the sore; and beware of the patient having repletion and of wine and coarse foods.
But if from the minor cause any prohibition, then it is diminished in food and do not come close to flesh nor wine.
And pause over the sore if it happens an abscess on him, cut it and pour into it oil boiled by itself or wine in which is stirred.
But if it is certain of an abscess on him, then pause over the sore if it is recent with his blood and the air has not changed that powder which I will count next shortly small.
And if the air has already changed that, then pause over it some ointments until it is healed.
But if the sore is great or is by incision of knife and similar, and its lips are not pulled together by threads, then pull those together with sutures according to what I will count of their sutures.
But if the sore is already uncovered of bone and pen, and there is no retention of it except for a small sling, then insert that and then cure the sore with medicines and restore the flesh after in place of tendon, and command to the patient that he abstain from foods in which is their thickness: caps and formen cut and similar to them, until it is compounded.
And if you putrefaction in the tendon and it does not adhere to bone, then you insert all that rotted and throw that out, and then cure that.
But if in these sores is artery or vein from which blood might flow, and it is not stopped by medicines, then you inquire over the artery, and if you cut that not-incised, then you insert that with spath, or tie that; and if necessity compels you to do what we have said, then cauterize until the blood is stopped.
And if these sores are simple and small, then the cause of them is cooling; also that you powder over those this powder, for when the air changes that.
And the manner of the powder is this: take oil of fennel one part, dragon blood two parts, not-extinguished three parts; let all be well beaten and sifted, and of that be the sore filled, and let it be bound with good constriction so that it presses on that until it hardens, and let the blood coagulate.
And then tighten that above with powder and let it stay like that until the patient is healed and the medicine has taken effect.
And sometimes they do this alone when they are not in the presence of their senses and dragon's blood.
And they make this operation on great wounds when it is convenient that it be applied directly to the wound and tightly bound, and on fresh wounds with their blood, which the air has not altered.
And if the air has altered them, and especially in the summer, it is not necessary to apply this powder, but rather heal those wounds with what we have said before, by placing on them some cooked ointments or a poultice made of wheat flour mixed with water and honey until they are healed.
But if it happens that there is a broken bone in the wound, and it is small, then you should remove it with tweezers.
And I will describe how to heal fractures of the head when the skull has been damaged.
Of wounds to the neck:
But if the wound occurs in the neck, then there is no difference in its treatment from a wound to the head when it is simple.
But if the nerve of the neck is cut, or an artery, then there should be no movement of that area but rather it should be treated with something that makes a strong contraction, like vinegar and vitriol, which are similar to one another in their effect on nerves and blood vessels. And you should apply nothing to the wound that is hot, for the substance of the nerve is very sensitive, and its connection goes through to the brain, which is the most important part of all the members.
And when it is healed by remedies that are light, like washing it with warm water, or applying some ointment made of rosewater or not, and then drying it in the sun until it is healed, as well as using moistened bandages.
But if the wound is large, then use stitches or close up the lips of it, and heal that area with powder until it is healed.
But if the wound has depth or there is suppuration in the wound to the lower part of it, then pierce it in the lowest spot.
But if an artery is cut and there is bleeding, then stop it or dry it up, or ligature it, or cautery it if necessary to do so.
But if the vertebrae of the neck have been split or broken, and the veins of the neck have not been cut, then you should close up the lips of the wound with stitches along the bones of the vertebrae and not touch it; before doing so, bring back that area to its natural shape, and then tightly bind it with a decent bandage, and keep it like that for several days.
But if the wound has been caused by pressure on the bone, then you should pierce it, and if there are any fragments of bone in the wound, extract them all; and whatever is not apparent, let it be exposed so that the wound can suppurate, and the pus can drain out.
And if the wound is fresh, then powder it with the powder that has been recommended to you. But if there is a fistula in the wound, then heal it with something that I will describe later in this chapter.
If it is a wound from a lance or javelin, and you see how deep it is, then know that such a wound is usually fatal.
And if there is no depth to it and the wound is fresh with blood on it, then you should apply powder to it in the first hour, and not tighten it so that the blood is not retained in its depth but rather returns to the heart and leaves the patient, but rather apply an attractive ointment, and wash it twice a day.
And if the ointment is not available, then you should stop up the hole of the wound with a piece of wool so that it sucks out what is moist inside; and make the patient sleep on the wound so that what is inside flows out.
But if three days or more have passed and the patient has no spasms nor trembling of the heart nor stricture of breath, and sees all other good signs of healing, then know that the wound is saved; and then heal it with poultices and with the other remedies until it is healed.
But if healing does not happen, and the wound has been open for a long time, then know that it is a fistula; heal it therefore according to what I have described in its chapter.
And if the wound is from a spear or javelin and is simple on the surface of the foot or back, then heal it with something that precedes stitches if it is large, or with powder if it is small.
But if there has been pressure on the bone, and only a little of it is split, then you should twist the wound and close to extract those pieces, if they are separated. But if they are not separated, then let them be exposed so that the wound can suppurate, for their extraction is easier when it is suppurating.
And for other accidental wounds on the other members, the treatment in healing is the same as what has been said before.
Of wounds to the abdomen:
The disposition that occurs in the abdomen is either great, or small, or middling.
And the disruption is made difficult in another way, and it is known that the reduction of them is more difficult if you do not close the insertion of them into their place at once, for they open up and are swollen so that the insertion of them is made difficult.
And therefore the best disruption is middling, for in that one the reduction of the intestines is not difficult, just as it is difficult in both species mentioned before.
And know that the suture of the abdomen is according to four methods, but two sutures are common and convenient in suturing the other wounds of the body.
And two other sutures are proper to the other wounds, but however they are proper to the suture of the abdomen.
And I will tell you about each one with explanation and description.
Therefore I say that when the wound is small and there is some cause of the intestines through it, and it is difficult to reduce it, then it is one of two ways: or because the disruption is small as we have said before, or when there is inflammation of the intestines because of coldness in the air.
And therefore when that is so, then know that you should warm it by soaking a sponge or cloth in lukewarm water alone, or gather in squinant water, and cyperum, and spic, and embrocations over it to resolve the inflammation.
And sometimes it does this in which there is stiffness, and it is better than plain water in resolving inflammation.
And therefore when you see the inflammation resolved, then you should moisten the abdomen with water in which is steeped mallows and alder, for by that the insertion of it is eased by a little cause.
But if it is necessary to use an instrument for this cure, then cut the hemorrhoids with a small instrument that has been sharpened.
And the first cure is better when it is not cutting and there is no need to dry it out and weaken it.
As for the instrument, here is its form:
One end of it should be curved and sharp, the other not sharp, and the tip slender, though not as slender as a stylus, but rather blunt.
And so when the wound is enlarged and the intestine has come out, then its reduction should be according to its natural shape, in its proper place, if possible on top of it, for that is best.
But if the hemorrhoid is large and it is in the lower part of the abdomen, then have the patient lie on his back, with his legs higher than his head; but if it is in a higher part of the abdomen, then let him lie on his side, with his head and higher leg on top.
And similarly if the hemorrhoid is on one side of the abdomen, then pay attention and consider that the side with the wound should be higher than the other.
And so you should administer this for both large and small hemorrhoids.
And for small hemorrhoids, have ready what you have prepared, and let the minister apply it between his fingers, which should hold the hemorrhoid firmly and close its orifices, looking out for any cause of bleeding in both directions.
And this is the common way of suturing: take the needle and thread according to the amount of the wound's amplitude; and let it go from the tip of the hemorrhoid of the little finger, and tighten the thread, making sure you do not put oil on both ends of the thread, using two fingers that are under the thread to make the other end penetrate; and you have joined two ends of the thread and two ends of the needle, and so four knots are made.
And tighten with double thread around the needle, and several times from both sides, and join together the two lips and the hemorrhoid by decent stitching; and leave the thickness of the finger, and put another needle in it, and tie that with thread as it is bound with the first needle; and do not cease doing this if it is necessary with needles until you have completed all the stitches of the wound.
And let the needles be smaller between thickness and thinness, for thin needles pierce the flesh more easily; and thick ones are difficult to use in the thread, and so for that reason let them be smaller in thickness but not in grossness.
And let the needle not be put in both ends of the thread at once, lest the flesh be pierced too easily and the hemorrhoid bursts before it is healed.
And let the stitches not be prolonged so that the wound is not prohibited from healing.
And insert the ends of the needles so that they do not hurt the patient during his sleep; and spread powder on all sides over the stitches, which will hold the ends of the needles; and let them remain until you know that the wound is healed.
And this kind of stitching with needles in whatever way is more convenient for small wounds, for it has one needle or two or around them.
But the second stitching is common: and it is that you stitch the four ends, of the thread and two ends of the needle, in one go, with a needle in which the thread is wrapped, both thin and thick.
And when with the needle you have penetrated these four ends, reduce the needle from that lower part from which you began, so that the thread drawn back draws the upper part of the wound to the wound, so that the stitching is like a stitch in cloth with which clothes are tightened.
And leave between each stitch the thickness of the little finger.
And this stitching is known to men.
And with such stitching I closed a wound which was inflicted on a man in his abdomen, and it was a wound from a knife, and the rupture of the wound was more than a palm, and it had come out around two palms from the hernia of the middle part, and the rupture was in the middle of the member; and then I reduced it after the intestine had come out through the wound for twenty-four hours.
And the wound was healed in the space of fifteen days or around that, and I cured him, and he lived for many years, and was restored to his senses.
And other physicians had judged that he would not be healed; and by miracle I cured him with ointment, for I did not heal him with poultice nor any medicine, but I put a cotton pad over the wound twice a day and washed it often with water of honey until he was healed.
But I will tell you two kinds of stitching proper according to the narration of the Word.
And it is that you begin with the thread, and insert the needle from the outside part to the inside part.
And so when the needle penetrates in the thread and in that part from which you begin, straight and throughout all the body, let the end of the needle be in the part where you have inserted it; and make the other end penetrate from the inside part to the outside in the other end of the wound.
And when you have made it penetrate, then make it penetrate another time in that end of the wound of the little finger from the outside to the inside; and let the end of the needle be in that side, and make the needle penetrate in the other end of the wound of the little finger from the inside to the outside.
And make it penetrate with that penetration with which you are making it penetrate in the needle in the end of the little finger, in the end of the needle which is in the wound until it penetrates through all of it.
And begin from that end and sew it with the end which is of the needle in the other side, and draw the needle from the thread which has penetrated, and then reduce it in that thread and sew the end of the little finger which is on the other side with that end of the needle; and draw the needle from the thread which is of the part of him.
And do that once and again, and do that once and another time until you sew all that is outside according to that example.
And the sum of this way of stitching is that you sew with skin stitching, just as you sew the skin, so that you sew the hernia one time from the end of the thread, and let it remain until you have completed it.
But the second proper stitching which I teach Gualia, and it is of wound of man and by him recomposed, is that you sew it according to similarity, just as other physicians sew it, in that they join all parts to him conveniently by nature; and apply one end to another end of him, and that is done according to how I have recomposed.
Let the needle be in the end of the little finger at your side from the outside to the inside, and make it penetrate to the inside to the outside in two ends of the hernia; and then turn the needle and make it penetrate from the outside to the inside in two ends of the wound.
Then return those bones to their original position, and ensure that some of the bones inside line up with the corresponding bones on the outside at both ends of the fractured area, specifically those on the opposite side.
This stitching method is better than common stitching, and it is the stitching for which I gave instructions earlier.
This is the speech of Gualia:
And some say that stomach stitching is done with two needles; you should insert one needle into each wound and then bring the needles together from opposite sides of the wound, just as you would stitch clothes.
And know that when there is a rupture in the middle of the abdomen, then stitching it is more difficult than stitching other places in the abdomen.
But the treatment of plague is judged based on the other plagues.
The cause is that when you encounter a fresh plague with its blood showing through the skin, and you reduce the hernia and warm it up and dress it appropriately, then apply an embrocation powder to it.
And if the air has already affected the plague, then apply some unguent to it that you have at hand, one which hardens like stone and closes up the wounds; then dress it as you would any other plague until it is healed.
But if you do not have the medicines with you, then apply it immediately, for as soon as it begins to ooze pus and is changed from time to time during the day, two or three times a day, depending on your instruction, until it is healed; for in many cases simple plagues are cured without any other treatment.
But if you fear that the plague will spread to the main limbs, then soak lion wool in warm or lukewarm oil and apply it around the area between the ankles and below the knees.
And if he feels pain or putrefaction in his intestines, for as many times as that happens to him, he should anoint that with black styptic tea, especially if the putrefaction is caused by an intestinal hernia and there is a penetrating exit wound from it.
And know that the treatment for a hernia of the large intestine is easier than that of the small intestine.
And it is more difficult to heal because the intestine called the "duodenum" does not receive healing from any plague that occurs in it due to the great multitude of veins that are in it and due to its size compared to those, and due to the subtlety of its body and its proximity to nerve nature.
But if what proceeds from the plague is pus and you obtain it recently, then reduce it according to your ability by which you warm the intestines equally.
But if it has moved on and is already black or green, then press that with a needle over the place where it is blackened, so that blood flow may result from it, for in the cloth there are veins and arteries.
Then insert that which is opposite to it and place two ends of the needle at the end below the plague, so that on you there may be a pull away from it because of the attraction of the cloth and an emission of pus from the plague.
Instructions for plagues that occur in the intestine:
When a rupture occurs in the intestine and it is small, then it is possible that it may be restored in some people; for he had experienced a plague in his abdomen with piercing by a lance, and the plague was on the right side of the stomach, and the plague was ancient and had become a fistula, and he discharged pus from it and went about.
Therefore, when I pursued the cure of him, he was not confident in his healing, but he continued to treat it subtly until it healed and the wound was solidified.
And he saw that the wound was already solidified, he took care of himself who had suffered an accident in his abdomen; and he did not suffer from any accidents due to that ill accident, and he resumed his usual activities eating and drinking, and he bathed and exercised his limbs.
And some experienced people say that when there is a plague in the intestine and it is small, then you should tie it according to this manner: and take two pieces of garlic; then press the two lips of the plague and place one of those garlics whose mouth is open over the two lips of the plague; then when he takes it into his mouth and tightens his mouth, cut off its head, for it will adhere and not be dissolved.
Then place another garlic near the first one, and do not cease to do this with garlics one after another according to the amount of the whole plague.
Then reduce it and cook the plague; and let those caps remain attached to the intestine until the intestine is healed; and let no harm come to him.
And it is possible that the intestine may be tied with a very thin thread made from an animal's intestine, for it is put on a needle; and you take the ends of those intestinal threads, and let it be somewhat peeled, and then tie its end with thread, wrapped around, and then insert that thread and cook it in the rupture.
And this method of stitching with garlics is nothing but a way of faith and hope.
But if the plague is large and wide, especially if it is in one of the small intestines, for then there is only subtle treatment and not complete healing.
Instructions for a hernia and fistula:
Know that any plague or abscess, when it becomes old and turns into an ulcer and is not solidified and discharges pus all the time and is not healed, then in any limb it may be, universally it is called a hernia and we call it azucem.
And a hernia according to truth is a knotted vein that is hard and white with which there is no pain and to which a cavity occurs just as it does in the cavity of a tooth; and because of this it is called a nodule, that is, a tooth.
And it is moist in some people, and discharges pus; and when the moisture is strong, then it is cut off within a few hours. And sometimes this moisture is great, and sometimes it is small, and sometimes it is thick, and sometimes it is subtle.
Now I have shown all those causes and their signs and the cure of them with medicines in the division.
Now, let me tell you about the cure for a hernia that is made through an operation with my medicine.
And know that fistulas occur in all parts of the body; some of these are fistulas that come to the large veins and arteries, or the nerves, or the brain, or the intestine, or the bladder, or any of the ribs, or any of the vertebrae of the back, or any of the compound joints such as those of the hand and foot.
And therefore of these fistulas which are according to this manner are of the illnesses that are difficult to cure and do not receive treatment; occupation with them is labor and ignorance.
And if it is one of the fistulas that its depth does not come to those places I have mentioned and you hope for a cure of it and wish to attain knowledge of it then take a probe made of iron or steel; if the fistula goes straight, probe for it by means of this.
But if the fistula is twisted then investigate it with a probe of fine lead for lead due to the lightness of its substance is bent and drawn out from the twist.
And if the fistula has horrifying movements then it is not possible for you to indicate it with a probe.
Then, enema the orifice for its orifices because the moisture by which you enema it goes through other orifices and runs from them.
And then inquire closely according to what manner it is possible for you to know whether there is bone or nerve; and if the cavity of the fistula is distant or near; and if it is a fistula whose orifices are all at one place and this is above all by the sum of your strength, by your inquiry, by which you inquire of the patient, and the invention of the pain from your compression with the hand over the area, and likewise of the significances and of the accidental causes.
And when you have stood over all these causes with verity then go to the cure according to confidence: and it is for you to consider then if the fistula is apparent near or in a salty place, distant from joint, or from nerve, or artery, or vein, or of one of the places which I have told to you.
Then you dry the fistula according to what is said before of its narration and prevent that which is in that filtration and of corrupted flesh, and that which is born in the orifices of the flesh or of the nail and similar, and cure it within until it is healed.
But if the fistula is of great depth and is straight then you should think to insert it into the fistula as far as possible and then cleanse that of all its corrupted flesh; then administer hot water-droppings wrapped in sharp medicines and insert these into the cavity of the fistula which you have understood with iron.
And do that several times until the sharp medicine corrodes all that is broken in the cavity of the fistula from corruption.
Then restore it with ointments which produce healthy flesh within it until it is healed.
But if it is not healed by that then you cauterize it according to what we have recommended.
But if the cause of the fistula is bone and this is certified by you then you inquire it and dry it according to what we have said, unless you prohibit any cause from vein or nerve or main member as I have said.
But if the bone is uncovered and there is in it corruption and blackness then you cut that away until all the corruption is gone; then cure it with that which makes flesh within it until it is healed.
And if it is not healed and the nerve as before then know that you have not come to the total eradication of the corruption; then uncover it again and secondarily do the reason for it and the cleansing of it with your utmost strength and then restore it.
And therefore if it is healed then it is well and if not then know that the corruption is in the great depth of the body which has not been reached and therefore to you there is nothing to do but to leave it.
And if the corrupted bone is small or it is possible for you to pull it out then you pull it with delicate pincers which are appropriate for that.
And if there are several bones then you carefully do the extraction of all those and of none do you leave any cause with your strength.
But if any cause of the moisture makes you contrary and in their beginning there is no fear nor mistake then insert that laments or flesh if they are there and loosen the bones.
But if it is not prepared for you to loosen the bones from that time then pause over the wound what will cause the wound to suppurate and leave that in order that what is around those bones of flesh and of laments and guard the wound so that it not be consolidated and the section which you have cut in your operation is constrained.
Have you fear, pause over it a clot submerged in supertincture of oil or a clot submerged in Egyptian ointment or in one of the green ointments for when those laments suppurate and the bones are separated from them by ablation and from those there is drawn off.
But if it is a large bone like the bone of the leg or of the thigh or similar and that which is corrupted is only its face then cut that away with resection so far back that the blackness and corruption are removed and then restore the wound.
But if that which is corrupted is a great part and the corruption has already come to the marrow of the bone then it is a necessary cause to close it up and to cut it all through into the area where the corruption has come and then cure it until it is consolidated.
And I have recommended to you that in a man’s thigh let it be applied as example and assistant to your operation.
A young man about 30 years of age to whom happened pain in his thigh and from the parts within the jaw was over the matter within the body where the matter came to the jaw and it is matter of pus with great pus and there was not to him any extrinsic cause.
And then the time was prolonged by that through the error of the doctors until the pus was opened and matters came from it much and its cure was paused until the leg was fistulated and in it were made many orifices all of which discharged putrid matter and humors of the body.
And then he was cured by many doctors around two years and there was not in them understanding but in the leg was pain as before when I was called.
And I saw his leg and the matters which ran from him those orifices by a great body and indeed that man’s body was all swollen and its color was yellow.
And then I inserted the probe into one of those orifices and reached the bone.
And then I probed and searched all the orifices and found that they came from all parts of the leg.
And then I cut and inserted into one of the orifices where I discovered a part of the bone and found it corrupted and indeed was rotten and blackened; and was already corrupted a part of the leg where it had penetrated into the membrane.
And then I drew out that which to me was revealed and prepared from the uncovered bone.
And I saw that it was not in the bone but that corruption which I had removed and indeed I had already cut away.
And then pursue the restoration of the plague with consolidative medicine for a long time, and it is not consolidated.
And then I iterated and uncovered the second bone from the first discovery, and found continuous corruption in the bone.
And I observed what appeared to me from that corruption, and then I found it necessary to perform the cure and restoration of it, but it was not restored.
And then I discovered another wound in it and did not cease to cut the small bone little by little particularly and to explore its restoration, but it was not restored until I had cut around a palm of it, and extracted that with its marrow, and then I restored that one with medicines, and it was slightly consolidated and healed.
And it was not necessary to iterate the operation and incision on it except for the disposition of its vein and due to the weakness of its tolerance and fear of death, because fatigue afflicted him at all times from excessive evacuation syncope.
And then he healed entirely, and there is nothing in the place of hard bone; and his disposition in his body was improved and his strength returned; and he regained his usual dispositions and did not suffer any impediment in walking or any injury from any cause.
But if an outstanding bone is to be cut from the body, then you should proceed with that second in this manner: you should take a ligament and tighten it at the end of the prominent bone, and instruct someone to pull that end away from you; and place that thicker woolen ligament over the meat below the bone, and extend the end of it so as to draw the meat away from what is below, and uncover the meat over the area which you wish to cut so that the saw does not injure the meat.
And place a stake or board below the bone properly, for when you do that it is not prohibited for the saw to cut into the corrupted meat.
And you should saw it on the corrupted area little by little, for if there is corruption in the cavity of the bone and it does not appear on its appearance to the sense, then force another cut on it.
And if the bone is corrupted and not prominent, then there is one side continuous with the other, and the corruption is in its middle or in part of it, then you uncover the meat on all sides entirely; and then place a stake below it, and then saw that from the first cut where the corruption is until the saw is continued into the other cut.
And let the sawing be according to the location of the corruption a little, as we have said.
And if the corruption is in the joint, cut that corrupted joint and saw the bone where it continues to the other side.
And if the corruption extends into two joints then there is no reason in that.
And if the corruption is in the palm of the hand or foot it is very difficult; however you should inquire into the corruption as to how it appears to you, and cut that open, and treat that according to whatever disposition is possible for you, and with whatever means rectifies that for you, provided it does not hurt a vein or nerve.
And know that the cutting and saws for cutting these bones are very different according to the situation of the bones, and their preparation, thickness, subtlety, magnitude and smallness, hardness and rarity; so that when you prepare for any kind of operation you have a convenient tool for that operation.
And know that that operation informs you about the kind of tool for which you are in need; when you have great skill and long and intimate knowledge of the ways of this art, and experience with diseases, because then you will have by yourself what is convenient for all tools in every disease.
And now I shall tell you at the end of this chapter the number of instruments which you will use with simples, with which you will proceed to your prohibition, which you will experience concerning the others. Form of saw:
Form of another saw:
Form of another great saw:
Form of a razor: Let the head of this razor be according to the form of a star-shaped key, and its points according to the shape of the points of a steelyard.
And it does not concern unless with that there are ground the heads of the joints when they are corrupted, or it is a large mouth wide open.
Form of a smaller razor:
Form of a broad razor:
Form of another saw properly made: let it be made with an arch of the most superior part and the sharpness of iron, and its handle of a wooden dagger properly made. Its form:
Form of a razor in which there is a cavity:
Form of another subtle razor:
Form of another razor with a curved end:
Form of a small razor resembling a tent:
Form of another smaller incisor:
Form of another incisor; this one resembling a razor, and its end is like a saw, and it is displayed in many locations in the bones:
Form of a razor which suits the piercing of bones:
And its end is triangular and of acute extremity.
And it is made of Indian iron, and similarly all the causes we have said of razors and of incissors and saws.
Of cutting ends and of the sawing of bones.
The ends become swollen or due to an intrinsic cause or an extrinsic one, or when you have treated that corruption with those medicines and the treatment does not confer, or when the corruption goes away from the member which has not been cut for any reason, then you should cut that member where the corruption is located, in order that the patient escapes by death or wickedness, which is a greater defect of the member.
And the sign of that to which it happens is that the member becomes black when it is cooked that fire has scorched it, or it swells soon the darkness within that the burning, then bind that with an incision of that.
And similarly if the cause of the corruption is a blow from some venomous causes like that of scorpion stings or of a snake or of a centipede or of similar ones.
And if the corruption or the blow is in the end of the finger then you should cut the finger and do not give space to the corruption that it goes into the hand.
And similarly if it affects the hand then you should cut that from the knuckle of the firebone, and do not give space to the corruption so that it goes into the firebone of the arm.
And if instead you cut the arm within the cuff in the joint.
And if another corruption goes and turns around the cuff then there is the death of the patient; and add another cause in treatment it is amount of virtue.
And similarly cut the foot when corruption happens instead of the toe of the foot then you should cut that within one of the toes.
And if it is taken in the leg, then you should cut into the entire leg. But if it goes into the groin, then you should cut into the leg up to the joint of the groin.
And if the decay has already reached the groin, then there is nothing to do but to release the patient and let him die.
And the way of cutting or binding a member is that you should tighten the ligament at the part lowest where you want to cut, and tighten another ligament above the location; and extend one ligament to the parts below, and extend another ligament above it; and separate the meat which lies between two ligaments so that there be exposed all of the flesh; and then let it be cut or bound.
And cover that which is bound with linen cloth from all sides so that it does not touch the wound, and let the patient have a poultice of boiled linseed, and let the wound be cauterized.
But if blood flow happens when you operate, then you should cauterize the wound carefully or place upon it some powders that constrict the flow of blood; and then return to your treatment until it is complete.
And then ligate the wounded member in a way convenient, and cure it until it is healed.
And he also told me of an incident that happened to a man in his foot, the same accident which I and he recounted, which is that it turned black on him in his foot due to a scorching that was like fire burning.
And that decay occurred first in his toe, spreading throughout the entire foot.
And then that man prepared remedies for himself before he went to see the doctor, the vehemence of his pain and burning increasing; so he cut off that foot at the joint, and it healed.
That man had that decay in the toe of his hand for a long time.
And then he came to me and requested that I reflect upon that excess of medicine which had been applied to his hand, so that the cleansing of his body might be accomplished; and if the excess is not reflected and begins to go into the other toe, it will begin in his hand.
And he implored me to cut off his hand, and I would not do so hoping for the reflection of that excess, but fearing that the cutting off of his hand might result in death, for the strength of the patient was great.
And when he despaired of me, he returned to his own land and it happened that the man prepared and cut off his entire hand, and healed.
And I have not added this narrative except that it be an assistant for whoever suffers from this disease and that it be a sign by which they are recognized and how they are treated.
Of the cure of sores and the quality of enemas with medicines.
When there is an abscess in some fleshy member and the space of the abscess is prolonged so that it forms a collection of pus, and then it is broken and perforated, and the pus is discharged from it, and the place is hollow as if it were a vessel, and the membrane which is above it with a thin cloth, and there has not arrived at further decay, and it does not press upon the bone or nerve or ligament, it is called a sinus, and is not named a fistula.
But if the space is prolonged so that the decay infiltrates some member, then it is called a fistula and not a sinus.
And the cure for it is that you cut off all of that membrane as it is rolled up and more so when it is thinned out and done with a cloth, and that you do not let it adhere to the location by its decay.
But if you fear that the membrane might adhere and that decay has not been accomplished through subsequent consequence, and the membrane is hollowed out on its face, then you should cure it with enemas.
And it is that you consider the sinus and if it is large and the membrane that you see has a foul odor, then cleanse that sinus with Egyptian medicine which is of oil and sour wine and honey received in equal parts, and they are poured into a vessel and boiled over the fire until it becomes like honey.
And then take from it what is necessary and dissolve it with water and honey; and cleanse it with that sinus, and tighten the orifice of it, and let the medicine remain in there for the quantity of two hours.
And then extract that with caution, and do this for several days until the sinus is cleansed and the odor eliminated.
And sometimes it is cleansed with water of ashes when that medicine is not available to you; and it is that you take the ashes of wood, and put upon it water, and then strain that and cleanse that sinus with it until you are convinced that the sinus has been cleared.
And if the patient has no tolerance for Egyptian medicine nor ash water, then cleanse it with water and honey mixed with ground-up honey, for honey cleanses and washes, and wine makes the sinus adhere more especially when there is excess of dryness and stinging.
And when you have done this several times and are convinced that the sinus is cleansed, then cleanse it with that which makes the flesh grow on it.
And it is that you take the medicine called diafinicon and dissolve that with oil of roses and stinging wine; or that you cleanse that sinus with some medicines and other unguents which have the properties which I have already written in the treatment of the unguents.
And if the orifice of the sinus is narrow and the cannula of the enema cannot be received, then you should enlarge that with a small iron tool little by little, and put into it a sponge wrapped in Egyptian unguent or in basil unguent until it is enlarged.
And likewise if the orifice is wide, then you should draw in the edges of it with a stitch and leave in there the quantity in which the enema is added to it.
And if the orifice from which the membrane hangs down is elevated to the parts above it, then dry that in the pus-filled location beneath it so that the membrane is generated in there because when the membrane is constricted in the sinus the flesh is generated in there.
And if you are unable to dry it within the bone of the pus-filled location beneath it according to what you want, then be assured that you prepare the member with preparation by which the membrane hangs down loosely according to how you have perceived it and so that nothing in there retains the membrane.
And that which is upon the orifice of the sinus and which dries up every hour because it exudes what is constricted in there of the membrane. So that you can tell if what comes out of his arm is blood or pus, or is digested or undigested.
And also consider the location of that vein, whether it hurts in that spot, and if there is an abscess there.
And after your treatment has been going on for some time in this way, and you see that matter coming out from the opening of the vein that has become attached or is sticking to it, then on the third day you loosen it, and when you loosen the dressing, then change the cloth with a new one and renew the ointment.
But if the vein is too deep for you to see the virus subtil, then do not be desperate about the adhesion of it, because its healing is just right, because there are some people in whom the generation of flesh happens slowly under their dressing, and there are some whose opposite happens.
And if after many days the arm is not digested, then you should know that the vein has not become attached; and if its adhesion is delayed and it becomes the prolonged cause, then you should put it in the exsiccation of medicines, and if the medicines are moist in their substance and in their power, they are dried like a dyaphoretic ointment, when there is added excess of white vitriol.
And the best way to cure it is that you take a dyaphoretic ointment and dissolve it in rose oil, and put vinegar with it in its substance, and then comfort it with it, and use it.
And when there is no arm, then you take the dyaphoretic ointment, mix it with honey and use it when it is cooked until it thickens; or you take myrrh and aloe and cook them together, and triturate both until they are powdered over the honey that has been cooked over the fire, and spread this on a cloth, and put the cloth on the vein; and you powder that which you have cooked with honey over a cloth, and spread it on.
And some times it is administered with a long aristology of celestial lily (which is the lily celestial) and thistles of the earth and centaurea, and you use these simples or adjust them, triturate them, sieve and powder them over the honey that I have recommended; and use it.
And if the vein is prolonged and not healed by this treatment, then you should know that corruption is in its depth, and it already makes inquiry into the bones or other hard parts or to the tendons; then you treat it with a fistular treatment, as above is said.
About the treatment of panaric and worn nail and added cutting of the finger and section.
Panaric is an abscess which forms under the fingernail of the finger of the hand or of the foot, and it usually occurs in other fingers, and when it is prolonged and its cure is less valued, then it is an abscess of cauterized abscess, or is putrefied, and it causes a wound between the roots of the nail, and it rots very much, and its corruption goes to the bone inside which has a foul odor, and the extremity of the finger becomes lopsided, and its color becomes brown.
And so when you have this which we have said in the division and do not comfort your cure, then you should know that you pierce all the superfluity that has been rotted from the nail and then cauterize the wound there with iron, because hot cautery is beneficial in it.
But if the bone is healthy and the nail is healed, and the parts of the nail are pressed together by the flesh to the joints within, and they begin to sting and hurt it, then you should know that you put a thin ray below the angle of the nail which pricks the flesh, and push it upwards and cut that flesh with ease, and put on that which comes from the flesh of the corrosive medicines until all is removed; and then cure it with ointments until it is healed.
But if the corruption has already entered into the bone, then you pierce that bone and extract it, because it will never be healed as long as there is a腐了骨。
And if you see the rot and corruption going into the finger, then you pierce it in one of its joints according to which is pressed by memory, and then cure that until it is healed.
But if the nail is struck or hit, and it feels violent pain afterwards, then you should know that you should begin by bleeding the patient, and then dry the nail with a sharp spatulum, making a transverse cut on it above, and be careful that the cut does not go into the flesh under the nail, because you will cause violent pain to the patient, and so will cause the generation of superfluous flesh in that spot; and then cure that spot with something that gives relief from pain.
But a finger joint which is born in the hands of some people is very fleshly, and it is very bone, or it is very nail.
And some are born in the root of the joint, or its birth is in some joints of the fingers. But that which is born in some joints of the finger is not harmed, but that which is born in the joints is very harmed.
And of those which are born fleshy, the cut is easier, and it is that you pierce that behind its roots with a broad spatula.
But of that which is born in the root of the joint, the cure is difficult; and so beware of its incision.
But in that which is born in the finger between the joints, you should know that at the beginning you pierce the flesh of it with a round incision into the bone, and then cut with one of those convenient saws for it, and then cure it until it is healed.
But hardening which happens to the fingers between their joints many times or by birth of man who is born in them, or by hardening of plague or by burning fire, or likewise, therefore you dry that hardening until the fingers return to their natural shape.
And then spread between their bandages which are soaked in rose oil so that they are not hardened easily, and separate between them or place between them a thin sheet of lead according to what is proper.
And likewise if hardening happens in some fingers with the palm, then you dry that hardening according to how it is prepared and suits the shape of the member.
Of an incision of wounds, thus are varices.
Varices are thus, and so are thick wrapped veins full of melencolic superfluities which come in movements of the parts of the body, and their greatest occurrence is in the legs, and most of all in the legs of travelers and workers and carriers.
Therefore you should administer a purgation of the body from black cholera several times with strong expulsion, and then let the patient bleed from the basilic vein.
But their cure by iron is according to two manners: the one is that it is pierced and that black blood is drawn, and the other manner is that the vein is elevated and all of it is extracted.
Its cut is according to this manner: at the beginning moisten the leg with hot water until the gross blood is dissolved, which is feculent of the leg, and then tighten the leg of the patient at the part above the pus-superior of the thigh to the part below the pubic bone by a bandage, and then dry the vein in one spot, or two, or three with broad cuts, and then elevate the black blood with his own hand from the part below the leg up inside until he has come out the quantity that you want and that he can bear, and which tolerates the vertue of the patient.
And then tie it up, and command him to abstain from foods that generate black bile.
And repeat the treatment by phlebotomy when the veins are filled and it is noticed in the patient.
But the elevation of them is according to this manner: you raise the leg of the patient, if in him there are veins, and then put him into a bath and embrocate his leg with hot water until it reddens and the veins become prominent; or that he be exercised by vigorous exercise, if a bath is not at hand, until the member becomes warm.
And then cut off the thread on the side of the vein either in the long or behind him, depending on where the pain is, or in the lowest part of him, depending on where the foot is.
And then open the thread with tweezers and scrape the vein all around until it appears to feeling, and the appearance of it that you see turns black.
And when you have finished with the thread, you will see that it has turned white as a cord.
And then you put down that which is beneath the thread so that it is elevated and is dripped from the thread, and suspend it with a silk thread.
And then cut another section below that section with three fingers, and scrape the thread from the top of the vein until it appears.
And then elevate that and insert it into the second section behind the foot, and extract it from the section that is above that.
And do this until you extract it from the section that is highest or highest of all the sections, so that all are extracted; and then insert it.
And if he does not obey you and extract and elevate it, then insert a strong bent needle and thread that and extract it, or insert it underneath the leg and rotate your hand all around so that it is dripped. And be careful that it is not cut, for if it is broken, it is difficult for you to elevate that vein and it has come upon the patient through that harm.
And when all of it has been completely dripped out, then put over the site of the wound wool soaked in wine and rose oil, and cure that until it is healed.
And if the vein is contracted having tortuosity at which is wrapping around the parts, and it is not according to rectitude as we have said, then know that you must split that all along its tortuosity, and suspend it with tweezers until you elevate it all.
And be careful that you do not cut the vein and harm it, for it will be difficult for you to elevate it; and use your discretion in that.
The shape of the incision with which the vein is dried:
It is not cut with tweezers nor does it have a sharp end so that it does not harm the vein; and it has great flexibility, for if it were subtle, it would cut the vein due to its subtlety; it has in it superfluous thickness as we have said.
On drawing of the vein of the leg:
This vein is generated in the legs in warm lands as in Al-Ateji in the land of Arabs and in the warm and arid lands of India with little tenderness, and in which there is no grass nor herb.
And it is also generated in other parts of the body other than the legs.
And its generation is from putrefaction that comes underneath the thread as venoms of serpents and worms and maggots and worms generated between the thread and the flesh.
And the sign of the coming of it is from this vein that happens in the leg a violent inflammation; and then the site is blistered; and then the vein begins to emerge from the site of that blister which seems like a plant root.
And then when you see the end of it, you should wrap around it a piece of lead weighing as much as a drachma and hang it from their leg.
And as many times as you see it some cause to the parts outside, wrap that in lead and tie it. And if it is prolonged, then you insert a part of it and wrap the rest; and do not cut that which is rooted so that it is completely extracted, for if you cut it, it will contract and go inside the flesh and cause an abscess and swelling in the site and a bad ulcer.
So that it may be drawn out gradually and extracted little by little so that it is dripped from the back of him and does not cause harm in him any longer in the body.
And from this vein it is found in some men that which is in its length of 20 palms and I have seen one of 30 palms.
And if it is cut in the hour of its medicine, then insert the thread into the vein of him and pierce it with a long piercing through the body so that all that is in the matter is evacuated, and administer putrefaction of the site for several days with medicines; and then cure that with the cure of ulcers.
And this vein sometimes has caused bumps, and mostly when it appears in the joint of the foot or in the foot, and it comes to him bumps orifices, and is generated from each orifice ram.
And therefore cure that as we have said in the division and with that which is above it.
Of a section under worms generated below the skin and is called bovine illness.
This illness is named in some land due to a disease of cows because sometimes it happens to them and is called bovine illness because there are worms one of which is generated between the thread and the flesh, and goes throughout all the body, and it appears to feeling due to its motion from member to member so that it breaks the thread and drips out.
And its generation is from putrefaction of some humors as happens with worms and serpents and roundworms in the belly.
And it is feared for its malice, for when it goes in the body and is elevated to the head, then it causes a strong ache and enters and destroys the brain, and from that sometimes it happens.
And therefore when you want to cure him and extract it, then do not if he does not feel the pain of it and appear to him to walk and show up to him; and then know that you must tie that which is over him and that which is under him with a ligature and constrict it strongly, and then cut it off and extract it.
And if it is stuck in the flesh and does not go out to you, then put cautery with fire over the site where it lives, and the greater cause that is feared is corruption of it as we have said.
And if you see it come to the head near the brain, then bind over the eyebrow with a strong binding, and cut it off and extract it; and know that the patient abstains from purifying his body of bad putrefied humors.
Of a section on a cold illness.
This illness is named in our land nifer, and it is an ache that comes in some members, and then it is transferred from member to member.
And I have already seen that according to how you will count them. And it was called to a woman ill a village, and he discovered her arm and saw a small inflammation in the vein of the arm, and when it came for an hour, he saw that inflammation go as if it were silver when it moved from place to place.
And then go to the pain in that place and fix it in the muscle, and stay here for an hour.
Then walk around the rest of the body until you reach the other arm.
Then I followed him as he moved around the whole body, and I was amazed at his transformation and the speed with which he moved from one member to another. I had seen this before in my own body, but I have also seen pains that travel from one limb to another. But I have not seen it happen to the female body.
And I did not think it was because of this that the woman was old, but because her body and veins were exposed, and in this case the moving air appeared to the sense as a wind.
And it is necessary that this does not appear due to this back-cure in those who are delicate and have humid bodies with hidden veins.
And when you want to cure him, and the patient feels that pain, then it is not for you to appear in the way we have said, but you should press on him strongly and then release him quickly and put your hand over the area where the wind has been cut off, and cauterize the spot.
But if you do not see it with your own eyes, then you should cure him by emptying the body and by driving out the winds, and those cramps with foul-smelling pills, and with Serapium pills and similar things.
By removing arrows.
Arrows are diverse according to their species, and according to the parts of the body where they are found, because their diversity is that some have great points, and small, and concaves, and blind, but others are hollow; and some have three angles, while others have tongues, and still others are like stars.
And the signs of the brain are when you find an arrow in it and it pierces the bone and is stuck in the sphenoid bone which is above the brain, because then occurs violent vomiting and scotomata, and vertigo, and heat in the body, and inflammation and heat in the tongue, and spasms and confusion of the mind and vomiting of bile, and the voice is very hoarse and the speech is destroyed, and there is exudation of white humidity like powder from the wound site, and the eyes look like they are filled with water.
Therefore, if these signs appear to you, then you should abstain from curing and extracting the arrow unless it is stuck in the body.
But the signs of the arrow when it pierces the heart are that it is near the left mammilla, and feels like it is stuck in a hard cause, and it is not a soft cause; and the movement of the arrow is very similar to the movement of the pulse, and black blood flows from the wound, and there is frostiness on the extremities, and sweating coldness, and syncope; therefore know that death is approaching quickly.
And the signs when the arrow has pierced the lung are exudation of frothy blood from the wound, and the vessels near the neck are swollen, and the color of the patient changes, and they exhale a great amount of spirit, and demand frequent breathing.
And if the arrow pierces the membrane which is in the foot, then the pain will be near the small ribs, and there will be a great wound made with violent pain and sighing, and not all the members of the muscles are affected.
And if the arrow pierces the stomach, then you will see the wound vomit up some undigested food.
And if the arrow pierces the belly and is stuck in it, you will see a wound, or split tissue, or intestine which has been torn, and there is no hope for curing him by extracting the arrow.
And if the arrow pierces the bladder and the urine flows out, and some cause processes from the parts outside, and there is strong pain in the body, then know that it is mortal.
But the other parts like the face, neck, collarbone, shoulders, vertebrae of the back, breastbone, groin, hip, and their likes of the limbs, are saved according to the best outcome when the arrow does not pierce a vein or artery and is not a poisonous arrow.
And I will recount this to you that I have seen from the nature of these arrows so that you may understand through it about your cure.
The cause is that in a man who had an arrow shot into his lacrimal gland of the eye in the root of the nose, when I extracted it from the other side, after releasing the muscles of his cheek, he was healed and did not suffer harm to the eye.
And I extracted another arrow from a Jew who had it shot into his eye in the muscle of the eyelid, after the eyebrow, and the arrow was already concealed and not obtained from that except for a small extremity with which it adhered to his stalk, and it was a great arrow of the acute arrows of the Turks, with lion-wrought iron in which there were no eyebrows.
And the Jew was healed, and did not suffer harm to his eye from that ill event.
And I extracted another arrow from a Christian who had it shot into his collarbone, and it was an Arabic arrow, and it was the one to which the eyebrows belonged; then I inserted it between two fingers, and it was already submerged in his collarbone; then I made it subtle with that, and I extracted it, and the Christian was healed.
And I extracted another arrow from a man who had it shot into his belly, and I thought that he would die from it; then, after thirty days had passed and there was not changed upon him any cause of his disposition, I inserted it and twisted it, and he was healed, and did not suffer harm to him from that ill event.
And I saw a man in whom an arrow was shot into his back, and the wound was healed over him, and after fire had been applied closely for seven years, the arrow was stuck in the root of the groin.
And I saw a woman who had an arrow shot into her belly, and the wound was healed over her, and she did not change in her dispositions in the least, and the woman did not suffer harm in any of her natural functions.
And I saw another man in whom an arrow was shot into his face and the wound was healed, but the arrow was not removed, causing no motion of pain, and similar things to these.
And I extracted the arrow from the man of the king's prince who had it shot into the smallest part of his nose, and he had already turned slightly to the right, and the whole arrow was concealed.
And I was called to cure him before the extraction of the arrow three days later.
I then found the wound of the arrow very tight; and then I probed it with a subtle probe, and did not feel anything there; but he felt a puncturing pain below the right ear, and then I believed that this puncturing was caused by the tip of the arrow.
And I plastered the location with an ointment containing attractive and digestive virtues, confident that this would dry up the wound and make it appear to me so that I could extract the arrow.
And I did not see any significant accident in the location where the arrow had pierced; and I continued to apply the ointment for many days, and no accident happened; but as the wound healed little by little, and the patient was relieved from his pain due to extraction over a period of several days, one day he felt the arrow tip within his nose, and he recognized this to me.
And then I applied a sharp and corrosive medicine to the wound for several days until pus appeared, and probing it with a probe, I found the tip of the arrow, which was adhering to the shaft.
And then I carefully examined the wound with that sharp medicine until the tip of the arrow appeared visible to me, and it took me some time with this treatment over a period of four months.
And then as the wound enlarged, and it was possible for me to insert forceps into it without any obstruction, I did not cease probing and manipulating it with various instruments, until one day I began to manipulate it with specially-made forceps, according to which you will find the form of these in the end of the chapter, and I extracted it; and then I restored that wound.
And some doctors judged that the cartilage of the nose was not restored, and I restored it, and the wound healed completely, and the patient recovered entirely without any residue.
And I recommend to you the quality of extraction of some arrows for which you should apply this rule and significance to what I have not said, because the parts of this art and the definitions of that are not comprehended by narration or understanding of the book.
And the wise artisans compare a few things about motion; and what is present to what is absent, and they find new operations and novel instruments the descent of strange causes of the art when it occurs.
And therefore I say that arrows are not withdrawn from the parts in which they are placed, but according to two ways, either by attraction of the location in which they enter, or by the contrary of the other part.
And that which is driven by the location from where it entered is an arrow proceeding in a fleshy location, and is thrown and withdrawn.
And if it does not obey the exit at the time in which it strikes, then you should leave it for a few days until the flesh around it becomes callused and the attraction of it and its exit are alleviated.
And similarly if it is lodged in the bone and does not obey you to exit, then leave it for a few days and repeat that with attraction and motion every day, and it will be withdrawn.
And if it does not obey you after a few days, then you should bore into the circumference of the arrow in that bone all around with a subtle tool until the location is enlarged by the arrow, and then extract it.
But if the arrow is already buried in the location of the body and is buried from sensation, then you should probe it with a probe, and if you feel that, then throw it out with some tools which are convenient to its attraction.
And if you cannot act upon it due to the constriction of the wound and because of the length of the bone, and there is no bone or nerve or vein there, then you should open the wound until it is enlarged and it is possible to extract the arrow.
And if it is held by the ears through which it is gripped, then you should loosen the flesh in which it is lodged all around with every tool that you can use; and manipulate it if you cannot act upon the opening of the flesh at the fracture of the ears and in twisting them until he obeys.
And when you administer the extraction of the arrow in whatever location it is in, then you should use twisting of your hand with forceps at all parts until it obeys; and probe it with a subtle probe so that the arrow is not broken and so that you have difficulty extracting it and it has difficulty being extracted.
And if you cannot act upon it in your hour, then leave it for a few days until the parts which are around it become callused, and then repeat that because by then it will be alleviated. But if you meet with contrary flow of blood, then you should administer what we have said about healing in its chapter.
And guard your virtue from cutting of vein or nerve, or tendon, and manipulate it in every way that is possible for you to extract the arrow; and do this with facility and tranquility, and slowness and firmness just as we have recommended to you.
And therefore contract the arrow so that the patient is according to the figure according to which you should have the position of the arrow in him, for it is more beneficial. But if that is not possible for you, then you should administer what is possible for you according to the figures.
But the arrows which are withdrawn by the contrary of the other part, or from where some part has already proceeded outward, or make looseness the extremity of the arrow by sensation of the part above the tendon and feel that eminently; then you should probe it; and the section should be according to the quantity in which the forceps take hold of it; and then extract it, for it is easier to obey.
But if it is retained in the bone, then you should torture the lamella according to contrary so that the arrow presses upon the bone, and increase it by itself, and then extract it.
And if not, leave it for a few days, and then repeat that until it is callused.
And if the shaft of the arrow is in him, then you should push it out by him.
But if the shaft is broken and you want to administer impulsion, then you should introduce it into him, if it is sound, with a tool bent so that it enters the hollow of him in the head of the arrow and then push it out by him.
But if the arrow is hollow, then you should push it out with a strong tool by entering into it, for the arrow is alleviated by that.
And if the arrow is poisoned, then you should hollow out all the flesh in which its root is, if it is possible for you to do that, and then heal that with whatever is appropriate.
And if the arrow pierces the foot or the belly or the bladder or the side, and is close enough that you can touch it with the probe, and it is possible for you to incise over it, then do so and be wary of vein or nerve, and extract it, and then close the wound if there is bleeding, and treat it until it is healed.
Here is a form of forceps by which arrows are extracted:
Their tips are made like an owl's beak, serrated so that they can grasp the arrow and not let go.
And from these are made many species, large and small, according to the quantity of the size of the arrow and its depth, and the width of the wound, and the constriction of it.
so that its instrument in the arrow is eased and pushed with that.
Of phlebotomy of the veins.
The veins from which it is customary to phlebotomize are .xxx. [a number] of which there are .xvi. [a number] in the head, and two pulsating veins which are close to the ears, called alhasisain; two herbs which appear on both temples; and two veins in the two lacrimal glands of two holes that are called aspicientz; and the vein prepared in the middle of the forehead, and the vein that is at the end of the nose; and two veins in the neck; and two veins in the upper lip; and two veins in the lower lip; and — these are the veins that are called algelic —; and there are two veins below the tongue. But the veins that are phlebotomized in the arms are  .v. [a number]; Four of those veins in the arms are   .iv. [a number]; one is a cephalica, and it comes from the wild side; and the people call it  "the vein of the head", and it is blunt, and it is a small vein, and it is composed of a branch of the basilica, and another branch of the cephalica; and they call that   "vena de tot le cors" [vein of all the body], and basilica is a vein which is paused at the domestic side, and is named  “citillar”, and the people name it  "vena del ventre" [vein of the belly]; and the funis of the arm, and it is paused over the elbow, and it is that in which phlebotomy is performed, and it is that one which appears on the wrist from a manifest appearance; and salvatella, and it is the vein between the large auricular vein and the small one, and there are two branches in it.
And in the foot and calf there are three veins: one of those is which is below the curvature of the jaw of the wild side; and the second is sophena, and its location is below the calf of the domestic side; and sciatica vein, and its location is below the calf of the wild side; and there are other similar veins in the calf.
The opening of the veins which are close to the ears is for ancient catarrh and emigration and old ulcers in the head.
And the quality of bleeding them is according to what you see: it is that you wash the head of the patient, and rub the head of the patient in the occiput at the places where both veins are with a wide bandage so that there is good friction; then tighten the patient's neck with a bandage so that the two ears appear on both sides of the head in two spots which are depressed from the head; and feel those with your finger, and if you feel their pulses with your finger, here is a probe.
Then you take the cutting lance, and it is that which pierces, and then you insert it under the vein in the bone where the phlebotomy comes from the bone. And then lift your hand with the vein and the bone to the parts above, and pierce the vein with piercing incision. And let the length of the incision be the quantity of two fingers' widths or around that; and make the blood come out as much as you want.
Then tighten it with powder and leave it so that it heals.
And see in the beginning of the book the incision of those and their cauterization.
But the opening of phlebotomy of the two arterial veins in the temples is for ancient emigration and evil cold and constant ophthalmia and sharp overflows of the holes.
And the quality of bleeding them is according to what you see: tighten the patient' neck so much that the two veins appear by manifest appearance and the pulse of them appears below your finger; then probe.
Then you lift the bone above the vein to the parts above with your finger, and insert the phlebotomy under, and lift the vein up; and pierce it as you have done in the other two veins; and let the blood run according to the quantity of your need.
Then loosen the constriction of the patient, and place your finger over the vein for an hour, then place a bandage and powder over it and tighten it so that it heals.
And see in the beginning of the book the memory of them, and their incision, and attraction.
And therefore the opening of phlebotomy of the vein in the forehead is for ancient diseases of the face, and emigration, and heat, and putrid ulcers.
And the quality of phlebotomy of it is according to what you see: it is that the patient tightens his neck with a bandage so that the vein appears; and then take the instrument which is named   "fossory", of which this is its form:
Place the eminent point which is at the head of the fossory over that vein and pierce it with a needle or with another cause in its way, and let the blood run according to the quantity you want; then loosen the perforation of the patient and tighten it so that it heals.
And sometimes it is opened with phlebotomy wide, but not believe that the phlebotomy is of acute end like the other phlebotomies, rather it is of flat end, and phlebotomy that according to the cross-section, for the bone is close by and they would break it in it if it were subtle.
But the opening of the two veins in the lacrimal glands of two holes is for roughness of the holes, and heat and swelling in the holes, and diseases of the face.
And the quality of phlebotomy is that the patient tightens his neck with a bandage, and then phlebotomize them, and you stand over his head.
And let the phlebotomy be made according to the cross-section, a little long with few phlebotomies, for in the place there is no flesh; and if the phlebotomy is subtle, then its end is broken.
Then let the blood run as much as it is necessary for you, and place bandages over them, and tighten them with a new one, then loosen them.
But phlebotomy of the vein in the nose is for acute fever and violent cold, and diseases of the face and emigration, and especially when it is ancient.
And the quality of the phlebotomy is that the patient tightens his neck and then takes hold of his nose with your left hand, and take the phlebotomy needle subtilely long and place it in the middle part of the nose according to its rectitude, for the vein does not appear to the sense here, and because the blood begins to flow immediately.
When you have finished with your hand with the phlebotomy little by little and make the blood flow according to your need; then ligature it for one night, for that is restored quickly.
But the harm of the phlebotomy of the two sides leads to constriction of the throat and to the beginning of leprosy and many other illnesses and infectious and evil corrosive ulcers as well as herpes.
And the quality of the phlebotomy of those is that the patient tightens his neck by pulling down on it with a ligature; and the operator stands over the head of the patient, and the patient sits upon a stool.
Then phlebotomize the vein along its length with a small phlebotomy needle little by little; and extract blood according to a moderate quantity or according to what you see is necessary, and then make an incision on the other vein.
And then loosen the ligature and tighten the two veins with a lighter string so that the patient is not suffocated, and lay him upon his back for the plague is healed.
And the harm of the phlebotomy of the veins of the head, brings about small abscesses and pustules in the mouth and corruption of the gums and bad ulcers and fissures, and to bad ulcers which are in the nose and around it.
And the quality of the phlebotomy of those is that you make the patient bend his head towards you, and tighten his neck with a bandage, and then open the lips of the patient and look at two veins of which one is on the right side of the lip and the second is on the left; and the demonstration of both is by the blackness of each of them, and that more so because in their circuit are small black veins; and then make an incision on each with a phlebotomy needle.
But if you have doubt and do not know which is which, then make an incision on the one that has the most pus of those.
And make the same for the two veins that are in the upper lip.
But from two veins which are below the tongue, the harm is phlebotomy of the cephalic to suffocations that are in the throat, to illnesses of the uvula, and to illnesses of the mouth.
And the quality of phlebotomizing those is that you follow the patient between your fingers in front of the sun, and elevate his tongue, and look under it, from one side of it is vein and from the other side is vein, and the color of each is declining towards blackness.
And then phlebotomize each one; and beware that you do not finish your hand in phlebotomizing those, for below those are arteries.
And the veins which are phlebotomized in the vein of the head are those in which blood usually flows in all men, and the phlebotomy of them is done according to two manners, either by putting on the phlebotomy needle myrtilate or olive-wood to subtlety declining; or cauterizing with a scalpel, and calling it an antiseptic, and this is its form:
Be the side of it as it seems, and is suitable to open the concave veins full, proceeding apparently thick, and to those which contain thick blood توربات.
And this phlebotomy is of lesser breadth and more subtle extremity, and is suitable for phlebotomy of subtle veins which contain subtle blood citrine.
But the harm of phlebotomy of the basilic vein which is one of three veins: for drawing blood from illnesses that are below the throat and neck, and of that which affects the feet and belly.
And it is suitable for the phlebotomizer, when he phlebotomizes that one, that he guards it well and be in great fear over it, for below it there is an artery, and if he err and punctures the phlebotomy needle wrong into the incision of the phlebotomy, that artery will be cut and bleeding flow, therefore it behooves him not to phlebotomize it with a pointed phlebotomy needle, but rather cauterize it with antiseptic.
And if the basilic does not appear by manifest appearance, then it behooves you to leave that one and change to the other, or to seek some vein of him; or phlebotomize in place of it at the end of the arm, for that one is manifest; and cauterize it with antiseptic as we have said.
But if you want the phlebotomy of it metatarsus, then it behooves before the tightness of the arm that you touch the spot between which you know the location of the pulse, and then press on it with your hand; and then loosen the arm and cauterize the vein with a concave incision with antiseptic as we have said; and beware that you do not make the incision too close to the location of the artery.
And when you see as you tighten the ligature, swelling in the spot that you have pressed with your hand, then that swelling is of the artery, and therefore loosen it.
And if you see the blood flow in the phlebotomy thus with the color of an infant's skin, and the blood is subtle red, then know that it is of the arterial blood; and then press and pause your finger over that for a long time; and then lift your finger, and if the blood is abscised, for many veins are abscised, then tighten the arm and leave that one.
And keep watch over the patient for several days until he is healed.
But if the blood is not abscised, and you see that there is no medicine present to it, then you make an incision on the artery, if it appears to you; for its extremity is contracted, and the blood is abscised; or take a small knife, and open it, and take the one hand and tighten that over the spot of the vein with a string and a powder within for several days.
And then if the blood is abscised, well and good; but if not, then heal that one with what it preceded from the memory of the spot of the powders flowing of blood.
And the abscision of the blood is difficult in many dispositions by the small place of the plague and the possibility of the tightness of the arm.
But of the dark vein the phlebotomy is harm that draws blood from the superior part of the head and the inferior part of the body; because it is composed of a branch of the basilic and a branch of the cephalic as we have said.
And beware of the phlebotomizer of that one that he be in great fear over the phlebotomy of it, for below it is a nerve; and then if he punctures the phlebotomy needle wrong into the incision and hurts the nerve, stupor will come upon him, and it is difficult to heal him, and if he is not healed at all, then that nerve many times appears to the sense; and if it is hidden in some men and is subtle and not shown, then it behooves you to pause the phlebotomy with which you phlebotomize with a concave incision with antiseptic, and avoid the nerve with your strength.
If the vein is between two nerves, then cut it lengthwise.
The purpose of phlebotomy on the cephalic vein is to draw blood from the head and help with maladies of the brain.
And in this way, if you want to phlebotomize with a olive or myrrh phlebotomy; because it is the safest of all veins, as there are no arteries or nerves underneath.
But however, in many people a hematoma occurs when phlebotomized on the first attempt and does not disappear with that hematoma.
The first is that you know phlebotomy is not administered for the sake of health and for the hope of it and for the prevention of maladies; and that phlebotomy be done at the beginning of spring on an empty stomach in the morning and autumn, and in winter close to eating when signs of fullness appear.
And phlebotomy be done on the third day or the first after three hours have passed since sunrise.
But phlebotomy that is administered; but when it provokes convenience and necessity for that, or at night or during the day, at any time and in all seasons.
And children should not be phlebotomized until they are 14 years old, and pregnant women should not be phlebotomized until the fourth month after seven months; and the elderly should not be phlebotomized after they have passed 60 years.
And when someone wants to be phlebotomized for any reason, they should cleanse their bowels before the phlebotomy with a lion's clyster, if in those there is retained fecal matter, so that the veins do not throw off excesses during the phlebotomy of the bowels, which are purified, and that they do not harm the principal members.
And those who are phlebotomized should not be nauseous and vomiting, or suffering from a disease or drunkenness, or have just recovered from a fever or diarrhea, nor the sick with hydrops, but phlebotomy should be avoided during colic pain and vomiting, and shortly after abdominal pain, and during multiplication of cough and of work and of fasting or vigils and due to anything that weakens the virtue, or due to a body or animal.
And consider carefully in subtlety of humors before that if the blood is thick, with foods and drinks, and with medicines if that is possible for him.
And enter a bath if any cause does not prohibit it, or be exercised by some exercise so that the blood is subtilized.
And pause the phlebotomy of him in the afternoon of the day, which is around the hour of terce, as we have said.
And for sure that the foot of him is guarded in that day from all animal accidents, such as anxiety, anger, fear, and from all bodily accidents, such as labor and excessive grief and cough and their likes.
And in his own room let the causes be present in the use of which men usually suffer from aromaticity and odorification and from balms and their likes according to the amount of possibility.
And follow the phlebotomist on a cushion that is higher than the cushion of him who is to be phlebotomized.
And then extend his arm, and wipe that with his hand the phlebotomist twice or thrice; and then tighten the bandage with a belt and wrap him two times.
And let the bandage be loose, because a loose bandage or a bandage with excess, causes the flow of blood; or is with softening, and then prohibited the body of the blood from going out.
And let the bandage, so that he who is to be phlebotomized rubs his hands together between them so that the veins are swollen and are declared by sensation.
And let the phlebotomist apply his phlebotomy with a little antique oil properly; and then pause his right hand over that vein, from which he wants to phlebotomize, so that the vein goes out a little, and the percussion is set because of those veins that are tightly bound like a string, they flee when phlebotomy is applied, and from those is that is full of windiness, and when phlebotomy is paused over that, it is contracted.
And thus, for that let the phlebotomist be quiet and be solicited in all these causes.
And let the phlebotomy be paused, but if the vein is opened in one go, then good; and if not, you iterate that another time below that location a little, or over it with compression, if the location is not hematomatic.
And if the location is hematomatic or the sick person is frightened, then let it be left for one or two days, and do not tighten the bandage, because it will likely draw out the hematoma, nor enter a bath.
And let the phlebotomy be iterated if there is love.
And if the perception is small and the blood flows gently, and you fear that there does not flow out as much blood as you want, then let the phlebotomy be iterated in that vein according to rectitude and adjusted in the perception a little; and do that with compression before that location is hematomatic, because that location is hematomatic in many men due to small perception.
But if that is already hematomatic, then do not iterate on it, because it will not help you in any way; and pause over that some part of the opening of oil, because it quickens the blood flow. And it is better in this location with oil than the other oils.
And similarly, apply opening of oil in all phlebotomy when phlebotomizing the veins due to the prohibition of the flow of blood, and do that with tyriaca alfolia and sagzenea when it is paused over one of those on the location, because the blood is subtilized and is agitated when it is thick.
And if in the location of phlebotomy a large hematoma is engendered, because many times it happens and most often to him who is not stat bleeding but that go-round, or in the perception of the vein is small, then you bind it, and pause over the location sponge infused with water and salt, slightly warmed, because it is dissolved.
And let him do that appropriately by the flow of blood from that vein or from another vein.
And if it turns black or green in the location for several days, do not fear that; and if you want, pause over that some cause of aloe and of myrrh dissolved, or some cause of juice of mallow or of camomille or their likes.
And many times hematomas and eminences happen due to phlebotomy of the basilic vein.
And then pause your hand over that, and if you then tighten softness over that, then that eminence is bad and harmful; therefore be careful that you pause over that some cause of what we have said, because the blood of the artery will flow out surely.
And make a plaster with that which stiffens, so that the place is hardened, and cure it with the other cure until it is healed.
And draw blood from all people according to the quantity of their virtue and according to the color that appears above the blood according to what is apparent.
Because if the blood is black, then let it be dried until it turns red; and similarly, if you see it as thick, then let it be dried until it becomes thin; and similarly, if it is sharp, let its acuteness be stopped.
And to him who is full and strong and needs bloodletting at one time, the phlebotomy of the vein should be enlarged, and the phlebotomies should be wide.
And for him who is feeble, let the contrary be done to him, and he who draws blood from him in many times, let his incision be narrow.
And the best that is administered for phlebotomy of a vein is that it be a transverse section, not a puncture.
And this method of phlebotomy is safe from the flow of blood and the cutting of nerves, and it is most praiseworthy and safest than phlebotomy according to width and length.
And whoever is accustomed to having a fainting after phlebotomy, and you must cure him before the phlebotomy with a little bread soaked in wine of mulberries or simple oxymel warmed; and draw from him blood three or four times.
And if it is a fainting of complexive nature, then take before the phlebotomy bread soaked in syrup of myrrh or in scented syrup with spices like pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and similar, or in scented syrup and very fragrant.
And if a fainting occurs after phlebotomy and the cause of it is too much blood being drawn, then let him take to drink water with meat and scented syrup very subtle; and use of aromatics with aloes, and let him bind his feet with that.
And use the other causes that we have said in the division in the chapter on fainting through evacuation.
And whoever wants to open his veins and dissolve his blood on the second day, let it be from whom phlebotomy is for great evacuation, and whose nature is cold, let him draw blood little by little according to the quantity of their virtue in continuous days.
But whoever wants to open his veins and let his blood flow on the second day, and his body is strong, then do so about seven or nine hours from the first phlebotomy.
But whoever wants to draw blood from his body contrary to the part to which he inclines, let him be drawn on the second or third day.
But a body in which much warm blood has already been drawn and is acute and causes fever, let him draw from it blood in one time and let a great quantity be drawn from it and the incision be enlarged so that fainting occurs, because you will have kept all the conditions of phlebotomy; and place your hand over his pulse toward the heart of the blood, so that death does not occur in place of fainting, for many times this happens when the phlebotomist is ignorant and negligent.
And do not when you want to open the veins and evacuate blood on the second day, when the orifice of the vein is already closed and it has become difficult for the blood to issue, let you press upon it with violence and it having been extended slightly bent, for this is too much ill.
Have it remain until it is phlebotomized again; or remove it with the acuteness of phlebotomy that coagulates blood in the orifice of the vein; or apply to it a poultice of tallow, or of sandarac, and compress it gently until the blood has been drawn out.
And if the vein is inflamed, then leave that and do not touch it until the inflammation is settled.
And if necessity compels you to draw blood again, and there is no excuse, then you will draw it over that spot or on the other arm in another vein.
And the vein called “the strings of the arm” is phlebotomized in place of the basilic or cephalic when they are not found or are hidden, for it is composed of those.
And the quality of his phlebotomy is that the patient immerses his hand in warm water until the vein swells and the vein appears obviously.
And then it is bound over that with a ligature with mild tightness; and phlebotomy is made according to the small transverse, not according to width or length.
And it is made ample and your phlebotomy of it over the joint of the hand a little.
And if the flow of blood is prohibited, then you immerse the hand in warm water and draw out the blood in the water until you perceive your need.
But if you are in the days of summer, then you will be excused from immersing the hand in warm water, and the body is bathed in warm water in winter time.
And phlebotomy of this vein is safest than of all the other veins, for there does not pulse in it any pulsating vein, nor nerve.
And phlebotomy of the crook of the right hand is related to diseases of the liver.
And the quality of his phlebotomy is that you bind the hand with a ligature or with your hand, for you have immersed it in warm water, until the vein is swollen and it has been demonstrated evidently; and phlebotomize it transversely; and if you incision it everywhere, it will not harm anything.
And beware that you do not finish your hand with phlebotomy, for beneath there are the nerves of the teeth bared of flesh.
And then immerse the hand in warm water and draw out the blood in that, for if you do not immerse it in warm water, the blood will coagulate in the orifice of the vein, and it is prohibited to flow.
And when blood is drawn according to the quantity of necessity, then you place over the vein olive oil and salt, so that it is not consolidated firmly; and similarly, let you do in every limb a narrow cut.
But the youthfulness of phlebotomy of that of the left hand is that it is related to diseases of the soul.
And do similarly in phlebotomy of him also as you have done in the other.
And the youthfulness of phlebotomy of the cephalic vein is to diseases that are below in the body, also as diseases of the mother, and to retention of menstruation, and to diseases of the knees and ulcers of buttocks and of legs, and to their likenesses of the diseases.
And the quality of his phlebotomy is that the patient immerses his foot in warm water and makes friction over it until veins appear evidently; and he applies to the joint of the foot with a bandage; and the place of the vein the toe points, and from that are ramified in the fascia of the foot very thin branches.
And then phlebotomize the more ample ram or below the leg from which the toe points, for it is better and more safe.
And if phlebotomize that in the fascia of the foot, then you beware of nerves which are below that on the fascia of the foot, and place your phlebotomy as you phlebotomize it transversely, as if you want to incision it.
And let the phlebotomy begin.
But if the bleeding of blood is prohibited, then you should repeat the foot in the cold water and let the blood run in that space which has been evacuated.
And if the phlebotomist makes a mistake in the first vein, then repeat the phlebotomy on another vein, for the location is salty; and do not fear evil, but rather guard against the nerves as we have said.
And likewise do with the opposite leg.
And from the sciatic nerve, the location as we have said is due to the talus below the ankle of the wild party.
And the youth of the phlebotomy of it is at the pain of the hip when it is due to blood cautery.
And the quality of the phlebotomy of it is that the patient enters into a bath, and hastens and stretches his hip from the side of the broad space above the talon above four fingers in one long bandage, for it does not appear except through it.
And therefore when it appears, then you phlebotomize that according to each device that is possible to you and according to the cross, and it is better; or insert that by incision or cut that by section, for the location of it is salty.
And it is in most men hidden and veiled; and if you obscure that, and it does not appear to the sense of all, then phlebotomize some vein of it, and it is that which appears on the back of the foot opposite the little finger and the ring finger.
And guard against the nerves, and let the blood run in the quantity that you want.
Then loosen the tourniquet and place it over the location of the phlebotomy tightly and strengthen the area, for it heals quickly.
Of ventilation and of the qualities of using those.
Ventozes are of horns, or of copper, or of glass.
And ventilation is done according to two manners: one of them is with scarification and extraction of blood, and the other is ventilation without scarification.
And this ventilation which is without scarification is according to two manners, for it is either with fire or without fire.
And to the ventozes which are administered with scarification and extraction of blood are fourteen locations of the body, of which one in which ventozes are paused is alnocrati, and it is the posterior part of the head; and the middle location of it is from two parts of the neck together; and ventozes of the chin below the mandible further down from the mouth; and ventozes of two spatulas; and ventozes of alohoster, and it is above the end of the beard; and ventozes of two little horns, and they are of two arms; and ventozes of two ankles; and ventozes of two thighs.
And ventilation does not extract blood except from the small veins scattered in the flesh, and by this it does not have the virtue through them, just as it is through phlebotomy; nor do we believe that ventilation should be done with fire or without fire in any disease made by fullness within which the whole body is evacuated.
But if necessity prompts for ventilation for disease or for continued, we administer that throughout the hour at the beginning of the month and in its end, and in the middle of it and whenever it is necessary.
And therefore when it comes to one of these causes, and especially if it is in the third or middle of the month, then we command ventilation be done after two or three hours have passed of the day.
And likewise of ventilation from the nape is that when it conferes to gravity in the head and to that which is bent down into the eyes; but if that is, then let there be proper evacuation of all the body.
And this ventilation is in the location of phlebotomy of the cephalic.
And it is not lawful to use that which is of complex friction, or in which there is catarrh, for it gives great harm to that.
And therefore let the use of that not be by the old, and on heads in which there are cold diseases.
But if on that there is continued oblivion, then let you command the ventozator to place his hand a little bit with the ventose to the parts below, fearing the generation of oblivion.
But ventilation of alkehel is in the location of phlebotomy of the vein fusca and of the basilic: and by this there is asthma, and constriction of throat and to the split of instrument of throat, and cough, and fullness.
And let the ventose of alkehel be bound a little, for if it is paused below, it generates weakness in the body and in the stomach.
And ventilation of alhagdahan confers to accidental pains in the head and to ophthalmia, and emigrarea, and pre-focic, and to pains in the roots of teeth; and it is in the location of phlebotomy of the basilic.
And let you command the ventozator that he not press his hand with scarification lest he insert the artery and accite blood flow.
And ventilation below the chin confers to alcola in the mouth, and to corruption of the gum, and to appearances like those of diseases which are in the mouth, and they stand in the location of phlebotomy of aliheric which is in the two lips.
But the ventilation that is done on the two spatulas confers to caphatan, which is done by fullness of heat.
And the ventilation of the two openings within the fingers confers to the benefit of phlebotomy of three veins, namely of the basilic, fusca and cephalic, for it draws blood from all those veins more delicate than those other veins thicker within which the attraction comes to the three veins.
And command the ventozator that he not too much process with scarification, for the location is stripped of flesh, and below it are nerves and arteries.
And it is one ventilation with which is ventilated over alshosses and confers to the effluences of the anus and to ulcers below.
And let you command the ventozator that it is great ventilation, and that it is of copper, for the location indigests from strong section; and strongly it has been struck with small ventoses and scarified with scarification.
But ventoses of the legs minor by minor demonstration, for they draw blood from all the body, and confer to old pains of the knees and of the mother, and of the bladder; and they provoke menstruation, and confer to bothor and ademil; and they stand in the location of phlebotomy of two sophenas, and alahorcoben, and of two ankles.
However, they weaken all the body and make syncope occur in some men.
And from the armpits the jugular vein is very close to the jugular vein at the armpits of both arms.
And the quality of the position of the veins is that you place the vein at the beginning seen and sucked by a moderate suction, and do not prolong the position of the veins, but place them lightly, and keep those tightly, and so that the humors come to the place equally. And do not cease to iterate this and continue until you see the place already reddened and swollen and that the blood appears red.
And then you scrape and repeat the suction little by little, and then consider the disposition of the body.
Because that man who has thin skin in few places, beware that you scrape him once and not more, so that the place is not ulcers.
And command the scarifier to enlarge the scarification and take a little, and moderate the suction with ease.
And if in the blood is thickness, then beware that you scrape twice, because in the first scraping the path of subsidence to the blood and its moisture is opened. But in the second, to the examination acquired from the extraction of thick blood.
And if the blood is very foul, then let there be made a third scraping so that the last one is accomplished.
And finally, when we want to extract blood a little or a little, it is enough for us with one scraping.
And if we want extraction of a lot of blood, we scrape with a deep scraping; and if we know that the blood is thick, then beware that we scrape with a wide scraping.
And the term of the scraping in which the depth of the vein is just enough.
And if the one of whom the vein is thick, tough, dark and its pores are tight, then let the places of the veins be anointed gently, widely and resolutely; if it is in summer time, then with oil of aloe or oil of violets, or oil of crushed almonds, or oil of cedar wood; and if it is in winter time, then with oil of nutgrass, or oil of lily, or oil of camomile, or blood, and to those similar.
And if the superfluity is thick and rough, then let the oil be of amarant, or oil of balsamita, or oil of aloe, or oil of anise, and to those similar.
But if the scarifier is of ample pores of thin skin, then beware that he be prohibited from oil, and beware that at those places of veins that his close to the vein are washed with lye or hot water of saltpeter, or water of cedar wood, or water of borage, and similar to those.
And that man whose blood is of great humidity, wash his veins with sour wine, or water of myrtle and sumach and similar to those.
And of that man whose superfluities are thick, wash his veins with old wine, or water of sanseric, which is marjoram, or of infusion of anise, or of camomile, and to those similar.
And beware that the vein be kept away from bathing; have so that it is administered close to the bath for an hour or two, and beware that he sleep close to the vein.
What should one do who must be bled before the bleeding?
Consider so at the beginning: then if the scarifier or he who is to be bled is bilious and there is upon him sharp blood and inflammation, then beware that he take causes of chilling, so with milky acetic milkweeds, and endive in sour wine and leeks, and sesamum, and julep, and to those similar.
And give him food so with poults, and meats of fat fowls, and foods seasoned with acids, and to him similar.
And of that man whose complexion is rough, beware that he take in drinking essarop of honey, or essarop of sesame seeds, and sumach, and very odorous wine mild between summer and winter; and that it be commended to him to use little drinking and eating, and give his food poults and cannabinum and pigeons and small fowls and doves.
And beware that on the day of bleeding and phlebotomy his drink is more than his food.
And beware that he be given in drinking in some hours to certain men thiuriaca of alfarac, or medicines of musk, as it is muscaded, or alcelita before the bleeding or phlebotomy or close to it, so that the principal members are comforted and that the blood is subsided; and beware that they take that cold.
But the veins that are above the liver, and on the milk, and on the penis, and on the navel, in the places of the joints, and the tip of the shoulder, for these members do not suffer scraping upon themselves.
And it is not wanted by those but attraction of blood from the member, so with pause the vein over the breast in a malady of flow of blood of the blood of the veins; and use that to be dissolved thick roughness of the member, so with pause on the belly and the navel; for that rarefies the member and scrapes it and eases the pain when it resolves the thickness.
And already it is paused over the bones when they are fallen in their setting or broken, for by virtue of strong attraction their bone setting and eradicates the break from its place.
And likewise it does when it is paused over the liver and the milk you must have thickness in those in enclosure.
And these veins are administered seen with suction only; and some times are administered with fire.
And some times are administered full of tepid water in the maladies of the milk.
And this is for what the vein must be filled and have pus a lot, then it is water only or water in which are cut herbs to that convenient.
Form of vein administered with fire: it is the width of the orifice of two grains, according to what we have formed; and the quantity of the fire be the measure of a palm; and it is in its breadth, in the place that is in the circuit, the measure of it, the hole is small according to the quantity that enters into it an agul.
It is made of wood of elm or citron tree, of thick edges, lion, inwal and terses so that it does not lead the member must its position upon it.
And it is at the base of it crossbar of wood or of iron, on which is paused candle with the fire.
And already it is this vein great more of that which we have recommended; and the little less of that according to the maladies and the state of him who uses that.
And the veins of children and exhausted others than the veins of youths and of large bodied.
And the quality of pausing that vein with fire on the member is that it extends the hand with decent fire of wood in front a little candle of wax, and pause that on the base of the crossbar at the middle place of the vein, so that the fire be kindled all around below so that it is not burned the malady.
And then it is paused on the member of the malady, and the finger is on the hole that we have said, while we hold the veins and do not feel the finger and that the vapor rises over that hole, then the vein becomes so dissolved.
And light the candle according to its usual manner, and repeat that if you are in need of that.
However, the cupping glass that is administered for pleurisy, with water, in which there is no transverse vein or pulse, and it is not administered unless it is filled with water, and it is placed on the body only briefly.
And this is how it works: The larger the cupping glass is, the better, so that it can receive a great quantity of water.
Chapter 97
Leech suckers are not administered on small body parts unless cupping glasses cannot be used because of their size, such as the lips, gums and similar areas; or on naked flesh, such as the fingers, nose and similar areas.
And you must use leeches that have been found in the smooth, clean waters of streams.
Then, they should be kept in the water for a day and night to become hungry, and nothing should interrupt their appetite inside; and the patient's body should be cleared first by phlebotomy and cupping; and then the patient's limbs should be rubbed until they turn red; and then they should be placed on the patient.
And when they are full, then:
And if it is possible to draw blood from the spot with a cupping glass, it is better for healing.
And if not, then wash the spot with sweet wine and then with water; and it should be rubbed and expressed.
And if the flow of blood is prolonged due to the leeches, and it drips, then you should dip a cloth in cool water and place it over the drip to absorb the dripping blood.
And if the blood is flowing profusely, then powder vitriol, or gall nuts and similar astringent substances over the wound to stop the flow of blood; or place cooked broad bean pods on the wound and let them adhere to it until the blood flow stops.
And if necessary, repeat the application of leeches as often as possible.
And if the leeches are prohibited from being suspended, then rub the wound with fresh blood or pierce the spot where the blood flows with a needle and let it flow out; and then they should be placed over the spot so that they can suck the blood as soon as it flows.
And when you want them to stop, then powder them with some ground aloe, or salt, or ash, and they will immediately.
Thus begins the treatment of the third part: restoration. This chapter is very important in the art of medicine; it is the restoration of fractures and accidental displacement in the bones.
Oh son, know that the foolish doctors and the common people and those who have not read the books of the Ancients nor understood a letter from them make boasts about this chapter.
And for this reason, the way of the wise in our land is hidden; and I have not been obliged to do that at any time; and I have not used what I learned, except through long study of the books of the Ancients and understanding their wisdom, so that I could extract their science.
And I have added to that through experience and study over the length of my life.
And I have already described in this chapter everything that my science and experience tell me about it; since I have condensed it for you, freeing you from the obligation of reading; and I have condensed it at the end of the discussion; and I have demonstrated it at the end of the demonstration; and I have formed it into many forms of instruments which are administered in this way, as I have done in two preceding chapters.
Chapter First.
Summary and collection of the conditions for which a fracture of bones is necessary, from which before we begin to discuss the restoration of broken and various members of the body. Now, therefore, let us begin the introduction to this chapter with summaries of our speech; and the chapters which are understood by artisans at first sight and at a standstill over their truth, as you and those who are prompt to know or learn this noble art from you.
And therefore I say that when it happens to someone a fracture or displacement or twisting or hernia, then you should first treat them with phlebotomy or the application of that, or whatever poultice, if no contrary cause prohibits it, such as debility of strength, or is that person an infant, or old and feeble, or in the time of vehement heat, or of vehement rubbing.
And then let them eat food made of fresh herbs and of birds' meat and crab apples; and refrain from thick meats and filling foods that fill the veins with blood, so that they do not fear the appearance of pus in the body.
And then return the patient to their usual diet.
And therefore when the broken bone begins to be restored, then let the patient eat nourishing foods of food rich in nutrients, thick and heavy, such as foods made from wheat cooked with water, and rice, and peas, and beans, and the bellies of cows, and hogs, and fresh pigs, and gross wine, and similar to those, and on this diet coagulation of the fracture occurs more gently and better.
And know that the bones break more when they are in people who are in their prime and feeble, it is not possible for them to be continued and consolidated according to their nature due to the drying out of their members.
But nature adjusts and connects the broken bone of all parts for no apparent cause like glue in which there is thickness that sticks and joins together so that it is strong at the end, as fire at first, so that no contrary cause prohibits it from its work.
And for this reason, it is necessary that the patient eat foods which are heavy and sticky and thick, as we have said.
And know that the kinds of fractures are diverse according to the kinds of members, for a fracture of the bone of the leg is different from a fracture of the bone of the head; and a fracture of the bone of the foot is different from a fracture of the bone of the toe; and similarly all the other members are diverse among themselves.
And I have experienced all kinds of fractures, explained in my own chapter distinct from others.
Many kinds of fractures within themselves. And the kinds of fractures of bones in their joints are diverse; for there is made an arched fracture when it occurs in them in stars; and some times the fracture is according to the length of the bone: and so the fractures are of the sitis, and knuckles, and accessories, as well as those which occur in the hand, and a crack, and disruption in the head, and a fissure fracture.
And there is great pain or torment inherent in the restoration of each according to what comes to mind about it, distinct from the others in their locations.
A sign of bone fracture. And by this is known a fracture of the bone: its crookedness, and appearance of it to the senses, and feeling of it when you apply your hand to it.
And therefore if there is not a crookedness visible in the place, nor any feeling of it when you touch it with movement and the patient does not find great pain, then there is not here a fracture.
It is possible that there be crookedness or a small crack, then you should not groan when you touch it with your hand and with compression of all; but pause upon it medicines of which you have remembrance properly at the moment which suits the location; and let it be bound closely with a subtle bandage.
And know that the location when it is arched and not split into two or else anything that does not happen in it satagium, as all the parts of its comparison are removed, then it behooves you to commence from your hour to the rectification of it have that to it happens apostema caut.
And if to it happens apostema cautery, then let it be that for some days until the apostema ceases; and let it heal that second in whatever manner you can of elevation and ingen.
And know that restoration of it and piercing of it is less difficult than of the bone in which happens satagium.
And let it be bound closely according to what will come the reminder of it.
But if in the bone it is satagium, then extension of this broken member from two parts is necessary, if it is the hand or the foot; or with your hand if the member is small; or with two cords or one cord and the hand.
And let your position be such that you pause the member in its natural location according to which the parts are extended of the broken member, then you must pierce these accessories with ingen and according to whatever manner you can in their locations.
And guard you according to your strength that no pain or harm happens over the patient by your operation of pain or lesion; and assure you according to your ability that you apply one bone to the other in companionship according to their best forms.
And it behooves you in that hour profitably to touch with your hand that, and if you see here any diverse cause, rectify that and heal that by the quantity of your skill.
And avoid violent extension and compression, as also with foolish doctors who many times make happen apostema cautery by their operation, or make happen contraction in the member as we have seen this by their many operations.
And the quality of the stricture of the broken member is that which you count; for you know that the broken members are differentiated in their smallness and in their greatness and in the shape of them.
And those that are small as the arm and the finger and the wrist and similar to them, then let the bandage be of very subtle cloth.
But those that are thick as the thigh or the calf, let there be a hard bandage in them, for the tight bandage connects the large member and tightly that from all parts with even stricture, so that in it does not enter rottenness.
And let it be commence, let your evacuation of equability pause convenient medicine at that, over the location of that fracture with three bandages or four according to which the member deserves; and tighten your hand a little with the binding.
And let you come to that at the beginning most sovereign of the location of the fracture, and tighten so that your tightness with which you have tightened the location of the fracture. And let you lengthen yourself by bandage of the location of the fracture a little, and soften the stricture a little at a time, while you take from the location its large part.
And let you take another bandage and wind that other part over the broken location with bandage, and let your operation be in the stricture of the bandage and in softening of that according to what we have said in the first bandage above.
And let you pause between the bandages of wadding or cloth with which there is healed the crookedness of the fracture, if in it there is crookedness; but if not, then do not pause in it any cause.
And let you pause over it another bandage, and let it be healed over these bandages decently made as soon as in the location there is not inflammation or apostema cautery, and then pause over it that which stops the apostema that and that ostes the inflammation; and let it be that for some days; then you tighten over it the bandages.
And let the bandages be of the thickness of wadded cane rod, and be formed wisely; or they be of wood of pine; or of strips of palm; and let the breadth of each bandage be according to this form and this figure:
However let the bandage that is paused over that fracture be thicker and a little tighter than the other bandages, and the length of the bandage according to how it is lengthened from the fracture is lesser, is lesser the stricture; and let you tighten over the bandages with another bandage according to your first stricture; and let you ligate above it with decent fiel according to what we have said about stricture, and let the stricture be according to the location of the fracture more, and as much as it is lengthened from the fracture, is lesser the stricture.
And let the threads be medium in thickness and subtlety, and they be of light lye; and if the threads are thick, as we have seen by the operation of some foolish people their threads of cords of the rope, and it is great error when the stricture is not equality.
And very thin threads are not convenient, for you will not accomplish by stricture with those what you want, and there must not be space of a finger between bandage and bandage.
And if the patient is hurt by the ends of the bandages, then pause under those of wadding or wool so that it does not make lesion to him.
Some fractures are with plaster, and happen disruption in the tendon, and I have come to reminder in that in the head according to singleness.
And know that not every broken member is bound with bandages on the first day; the cause is because the member, when it is large, let you not pause over it bandages unless after some days or seven or more, according to your security of happening of apostema cautery.
And this is the manner of the splints with which the Ancients used to heal, they which are paused over fracture and dislocation and crookedness.
Manner of splint as to bath of restoration of fracture convenient to many complexities and chiefly to women and children, for it is that which one takes from the powder of bran, and it is the pith of the flour that comes from movement of the mill in the walls of the mill.
And cover him thus as he is, except that you cover him with a white cloth, and put the composition not thickly nor thinly over him; and then use it.
Another method of preparing a restorative plaster for fractures and dislocations and torques: take assafetida, opoponax, acacia, enula, and myrrh, which is the resin of wild mastic trees, all in equal drams; myrrh and aloes, each five drams; aloe juice or egg white if the patient's complexion is scorched; and use this plaster, for it is well-composed and quickly restores broken bones, and many men have benefited from it.
Another method of preparing a plaster that benefits fractures and torques: take mastic and white hellebore, each ten drams; myrrh and aloe, each five drams; acacia six drams; Armenian bole twenty drams.
Let all be sifted in a mortar with powdered incense, and let them be mixed, and let them be applied with vinegar or white wine, and let it be used.
Method of plaster for joints and bones separated from their places, and pain caused in them, and also to wounds and fractures: let wool be soaked in wine vinegar and olive oil, and let it be laid over the affected area.
It is not a virtue of restoration, but rather of cauterization and also to expel pain properly.
Another method of plaster that restores broken bones: take the leaves of the fig tree and leaves of wild poppy; pound both together and make a plaster from them.
Method of plaster for breaking open and administering the restoration of broken bones, and also to resolve the residue of wounds: take powdered aloes, camomile and violet flowers, and flour of linseed, of all these an equal portion .i.; Let all be sifted and let them be mixed with wine, if the member is not wounded.
But if it is wounded, then cover it with water of celandine or vinegar, and use it.
Another method of a stronger plaster for resolution, when apostema happens due to the restoration of a member: take powdered aloes and licorice root, and poppy seeds, and balm, and marjoram, violet flowers, camomile, all these in equal parts i; let all be sifted and mixed with water of sage or warm water or wine, according to the quality of the member and the condition of its color.
But hypocras does not dry in the air, so it must be laid over the broken member to restore it; nor can it be made of wax and oil alone without another cause; and it should be applied between thickness and thinness.
But it is known that they are laid over the broken member to restore it, and its causes as well as if there is dryness with heat in it; for this reason also myrrh, incense and similar things are added according to those causes which we have mentioned.
Method of plaster that helps with injury and pain: take miel, and cedar wood shavings or pine tree bark, and aloes, and salt, all in equal parts; let them be sifted and mixed, and let a plaster be made from it.
But the amount according to the extent that the binding covers, and let it be bound tightly, consider if there is not pain nor bruise nor broken bone, and it does not hurt in its place; then do not loosen it for several days. And if there happens to the affected area vehement pain or bruise or swelling, then cut or loosen it immediately, and remove the plaster from it.
And take a piece of linen and marine sponge that is moistened, and let the affected area be washed with mild water; and with this wash the affected area until the pain ceases and the swelling is reduced; then let it rest for one hour; and let wool soaked in vinegar and oil or roasted oil be laid over it for one night, and be sure of cauterization, and let the swelling of the member be reduced, and the pain of it be eased.
And then tighten it gently and apply a small plaster lightly, and not tightly with your first tightening, and make it subtle by that until it is healed.
And if the apostema and heat and pain and swelling and all the accidents are already reduced to nothing, and you have removed plaster and tightening, then do this in the same way as before.
And if there does not happen to the member any cause of those which we have mentioned, then do not loosen it except after three or four or five or seven days; and some times it is left for 20 days according to how you see from the loosening of the member, thus as we have said, until the fracture adheres and comes close to the coagulation of the flesh over it.
And then tighten it gently but not as in your first tightening, and loosen it according to the increase of the swelling of the patient's body, according to how it is preceded by its recovery.
But if you see the site of the fracture already dried and weakened but not covered, then know that nourishment is prohibited from coming to it; and therefore moisten it with mild water due to total loosening that of the patient, and let this be for three days; and loosen the binding a little, and by this operation the member will recover more quickly.
But that which the fols of the restorers of the broken member do another loosening when it is not restored at the beginning, according to how it covers, and is restored according to crookedness, is error according to their operation, and great fear, and if they were drawn out by force in their free sites and were hit against it.
And I have not seen any of them doing that, so that it is most reasonable that it does not happen.
Chapter according to: Of fracture when it happens in the head.
The species of fractures are many, and the forms of them are diverse, and the causes are distinct, for any fracture is not made by the blow of a staff, and the blow hits all the bones inside the skull, which is under the skull, thus as it strikes in the trunk, and by this that type of fracture is called ascial; or the staff enters a part of the bone, and enters the flesh of it and does not pass the incision into the interior of it; and this type of fracture is called absolute elevation.
And the wound of these two fractures is large or small, and from the fracture which is crushed or broken; and its cause is impact with a stone or fall on a stone, and those similar to it.
And this fracture is penetrating, approaching the membrane below the bone, or it is on the surface of the bone, and the wound of these two fractures is large or small.
And the fracture that is concealed in the bone, in the thickness of the hair, and because of this such a type of fracture is named capillary.
And fracture that is caused by impact or fall on a stone, or something similar, that forces a thin layer of bone to enter the interior, and this occurs in the concave location just as it does to the teeth when they suffer an impact and a part of their interior is broken off.
And most often this occurs in the bodies of elderly people, just as it does to children's heads.
And all these species of fractures are set apart like stars separated. And you must use a bandage for all this in its place.
And we know all these species of fractures by detection over them and by investigation with our fingers and observation of the corrupted flesh that is over them.
And capillary fracture is known by its being uncovered on the bone and washed clean with a sponge, for the fracture appears black.
But in the cure of fractures consider first the accidents of the patient, and then if you see from these accidents that something signifies by manifest indication regarding fear, such as vomiting of cholera, and extension, and loss of understanding, and loss of voice, and fainting, and acute fever, and discharge from orifices and redness of these, and similar to them in the major dispositions, one who is not healed.
And if you see accidents that do not run their course, then you expect health, then you begin the cure of him.
The reason for this is that if the wound has come to you in the beginning as it was wounded and this is in the days of winter, then consider that you study in the appearance of the bone before the day fourteen according to all disposition.
And if it is in the days of summer, then consider that you cook the bone before the seventh day, having that which is below the membrane be corrupted from the bone, and that accidents that we have counted occur.
And if the fracture has already arrived at the membrane covering the brain and it is in small pieces and crushed, then consider that you insert the crushed and ground-up part according to how I will tell you.
And it is that you wash the head of the wounded and uncover over the bone according to custom and manner possible to you according to the figure of the wound, and let it be lighter on the patient.
And if it happens to you that you must do the detection of the bone, flows of blood or pus cauterized, then you must oppose it with what is proper, and it is that you apply the location with cloths infused in wine and rose oil, and let the wound rest while the apostema is sedated, and be certain of the flows of blood; and then begin on the circuit of the bone and in its ablation.
And this must be according to one of two manners of operation.
And the one manner is that you insert the bone with a narrow incision knife, and this is its form: And then administer another incision knife this one a little wider than that one; and this is its form:
And the other manner is that you excavate the bone with a wide scoop, and approach it by the sides according to manner possible to you. Then administer the incision knife wider than the first one.
And you must cover the bone according to manner possible to you, and cover with flesh that is over it and cover with a wide scoop, and cover by the sides. And if the fracture is crushed or broken, then you must cover the bone with a narrow incision knife, and cover with flesh that is over it, and cover by the sides.
And use them with facility in impact on the incision knife so that it does not concuss the head and lead that one.
And if the bone is strong and hard, then consider that you pierce in the circuit of it before you administer the incision knives with the drills which are named non-deepening drills.
And they are not named thus but because these do not pause the end of the bone until it is directly below it, for the drill has rounded extremity or edge over that which is below the head of it like an edge or small circle, and this prohibits from being submerged and passing through the thickness of the bone.
And it is convenient that you take from these drills great number of which each one convenes the thickness of every bone, while being present in all skulls of the brain the extremity of which is acute, and the quantity in length and brevity is according to the quantity of thickness of this skull.
And if because of what is below the bone flows of blood or pus cauterized, then you must oppose it with what is proper and approach the head of the patient to it with a wide scoop according to manner possible to you.
And then insert with incision knives that which is between each traction of the bone, and do that most subtle thing that you can over that at end of elevation, as we have said, while erradicating the bone, or with your hand, or with any other cause by some instruments which you have equipped for it, as tweezers and forceps.
And consider that you guard with total caution so that the incision knife does not touch any cause of the brain.
And then when you have circuit the bone and it is separated from the brain if it is continued with it, draw that out, and polish and smooth that in the asperity of it of what is in the bone with another instrument similar to an incision knife but however be more thin and subtle than the other incision knives.
And if you draw out any small pieces of the bones and jagged, then take that with facility with what is proper for you from the instruments; and then cure the wound with ligatures and bandages which we have said.
And the other manner of operation is lighter and distant from fear, which Gualia says and it is called by great lawgiver; and this is its speech: It is necessary for you in the beginning that you begin to uncover the part of the bone of the location in which there is the fracture most vehement and most manifest, while when you have uncovered that part and you have paused below it the extremity of this incision knife slow and gentle, of which this is its form:
And it is that the lens is a lion and does not contain any cause, and the acute part is from him in two sides in front in length, as well as times; that the lens be adjusted to the head with the face of him incident acute in the bone.
And then you pierce the scissors of one part with a small mallet inside so that they cut all bones with ease, just as they are turned, and you be sure of the membrane that nothing happens to him accidentally, in any way, and if the medicine was the most foolish of all men and the most ignorant of them; certainly, and if he was sleeping.
If there is any cause attached to the bone of the membrane in any place of bones, cut that from him with the extremity of the scissors lenticular, and deliver that from him with ease, for he is delivered from it without harm and without fear.
And if the fracture of the bone does not penetrate into the membrane, and what is cut off or damaged from the bone is the face of it, and remains in him roughness and small thorns, then cover that roughness and remove those thorns with sharp razors by which you have prepared the number, of various quantities so that it may be possible for you to administer some of them in every place of the most convenient ones, and the most right ones according to what you are led astray by your operation of that broken bone and its form.
And cover with your reason with which you shave the bone at the beginning of the sharpest side of those razors, and then use it with the most subtle one of it, and do not cease to do this according to continuity until you come to administer the thickest and the most subtle of all those.
But in any other small capillary and subtle fractures, cover that they may be cured according to what you are led astray by the rectification of it.
And it is a cause that is not hidden from all those who have studied in that art. And we have written about what we have shown in great fractures.
And if the membrane is stretched when you shave the bone, then take cloth according to the quantity of the wound, and soak that in rose oil, and place that over the hole of the wound; and then take another cloth folded or doubled and soak it in wine and rose oil and place that over the first cloth and do this most gently about that so that you do not disturb the head; and then administer on that lye, and do not tighten it except according to the quantity which the wound has so much.
And leave that with this cure for a day or two until you are sure of cauterized pus; and then unbind it and administer medicines with which there is superfluous dryness, such as lint and linseed flour, and powder of onions and of aristology, and of similar things to those.
And it is that you make of these medicines powder which is sprinkled on the wound as they are dried; and generally, administer in that all medicine of the property of which there is that it cleanses and does not bite.
And guard yourself according to your virtue that the wound in your cure is clean; and there should not be in it surdicia or other; nor do you leave an aggregate of virulence in it; for when it is applied over the membrane of the brain, it corrupts that and causes that, and a malicious malignancy happens about the patient.
And it happens in the head of the head, as the bone is cleansed and most when the cure of it is lessened, and there is blackness on the surface of it; and therefore consider then if these accidents happen to the patient, know that it is all because of you.
And if blackness does not happen except from the medicine that is placed above it, and it is because of that medicine that makes that blackness, then take honey a part and rose oil parts .iii., and with those line with a cloth, and then place that on the head; and then cure that with the spices of cure which is convenient so that it is healed.
Chapter .iii.
Of restoration of the nose when it is broken.
Know that the nose is not broken except in two parts above most superior, or one of those some bent, because there are in it two bones, for the part below is cartilaginous, and is not broken and nothing happens to it except constriction and tortuosity and sinusitis.
But if one of the two parts of it is broken, then take your index finger and insert that into your nose, and press that fracture inside with your index finger, and with your thumb push out, so that the nose returns according to its natural figure. And let it be done by you with ease, and guard yourself so that pain does not occur to the patient because of that operation.
And if the fracture is in the highest part of the nose, and the finger does not reach that, then let it be split at its extremity where there is a little thickness.
And if the fracture is in two parts, then you make the appearance of that.
And bind yourself to restore it on the first day of the fracture if possible; and if not, then you must let the wound rest for two or three days until the pus of the cauterized wound is dried up.
And then insert in the extremity of the nose a ball of cloth, if the fracture is in one part, or put in two balls, if the fracture is in two parts, and let there be thickness in the ball of so much quantity that it fills up the hole of the nose.
And some of the old restorers say that the balls be wrapped in lamb, and changed every day, but I have not seen it; they say let the ball be wrapped in almond milk with comfit flour with powder of moly; and then leave it so that the bone is made firm and the cartilage hardened.
And sometimes there is inserted into the nose, instead of the ball, pine resin more than that which is wrapped in cloth of lion; and let there be the fracture of the nose most violent and the patient not prohibited from inspiration.
And this cause is not necessary for you; and if you want, do that, and if you want, do balls.
And if another cauterized wound happens, plaster the nose with cerate or with cotton soaked in wine and rose oil, or with diaquilon.
But if cauterized wound does not happen, then take flour of sesames and powder of onions made with almond milk and place that above it, and put over it lint of lion, and do not bind the nose by any cause.
But if the bones of the nose are broken with a small fracture or are crushed, then split them and extract them with instruments that are convenient for that; and then close the cut, and cure that with what incarnates and hardens, and with plasters according to what is convenient.
And if a wound happens inside the nose, then cure that with balls and administer lead tubes so that it is completely healed.
Chapter .iiii.
Of restoration of the mandible when it is broken.
When the mandible below is broken and the fracture of it has no pus, regard then if the fracture is only outside, and is not broken in two and is bent to the sides, then its sense is obscure.
And therefore, if the fracture is on the right side, then insert your left index finger into the mouth of the patient; and similarly if the fracture is on the left mandible, then insert the index finger of the right hand; and drive with that the flexibility of the fracture inside with ease to the sides outside, with your other hand from the outside of the bone; thus you will bring it into a line.
If the jaw is already separated into two parts, then you should administer an extension of two parts according to what is right, so that it can be healed properly.
And if it happens that teeth are knocked out due to disruption, then strengthen those which you expect will remain, using gold or silver wire, or silk thread; and then apply a cerot to the broken jaw, and place a doubled-over drape on top, and place a large, decently-made plate, or a piece of wood equal in length to the jaw, on top of that; and then tie it all together according to how you are equipped to do so and according to what is convenient for the application, as long as it does not cause destruction.
And command the patient to rest and be still, and give him food in small amounts.
And if you think that the figure has been changed in any way, then on the third day, untie it and correct what is altered by applying a powder of linseed, egg white, or chickpea flour after removing the cerot, and place woolen cloth over it.
And then when the bandage is tight and adjusted over it, and the position of the bone is not altered, leave it, so as to not untie it until the fracture is healed and strong; for many times this fracture is healed within three weeks.
And if it happens that an ulcer forms due to inflammation, then administer what we have said many times in the healing of it, so that the ulcer is healed and the swelling goes down.
And if the fracture is compound, then consider whether there is a piece of bone separated or protruding; then you should subtly apply pressure on those protrusions with what is convenient in the removal of those using instruments.
And if the opening of the wound is narrow, then you should widen it with a bloodletting instrument according to the amount of your need.
And then when you have removed those protrusions and there is no inflammation remaining, you should close the opening of the wound if it is wide; and if not, place one of the bandages that is convenient for that over it and let it heal.
Chapter 5.
On the restoration of the clavicle when it is dislocated.
Many times the clavicle on the front side of the chest is broken due to a blow by a muscle, and that fracture occurs in one of three ways.
For it may be broken, or separated into two parts without protrusions occurring; and it is easier to restore it; or it occurs with protrusions, and its restoration is more difficult; or the fracture is compound.
And the operation on it, when the fracture is compound, is that you have two assistants, so that one holds the joint and follows the broken clavicle, and the other extends the collar bone towards that side.
And then join the fracture with the ligature threads so that it is made in the shape of a collar bone according to how it should be, and there is not a slight protuberance or concavity.
And if it needs more extension, then you should place below the patient's armpit a bandage or woolen cloth, and its size should be according to the amount of your need; and extend and elevate the clavicle and constrict the bandage with your hand so that it joins the fracture as it should.
And if you cannot pull the end of the clavicle towards the outside due to the chest being in the way, then the patient should be bent over at the neck, and place a cushion under their chest, and another cushion halfway down their back.
And the assistant should press the muscle towards the bottom ends so that the clavicle bone is elevated upwards from within, and then you should correct the fracture and join it with ligature threads.
But if you feel protrusions from the clavicle and they are swollen, then cut over them and extract those protrusions with ease.
And if it is retained in the bone, then you should make an incision over it with one of the instruments which you have equipped yourself for this purpose, after having placed beneath the clavicle the instrument that serves the head; and it is a wooden or iron instrument, of which this is the shape:
And it is like a chisel of which this is the concavity; and its width should be according to what you have need of it, according to the size of the bone or its weakness.
But its length should be according to what you are able to do in the operation; and it should have two ends, one wide and the other narrow.
And if the opening of the wound which you have incised when you have extracted the protrusion of the bone is wide, and there is no threat of an ulcer, then you should bring together the two lips of the wound with a suture.
And if the opening is small, or you fear an ulcer, then you should fill the wound with bandages and powders according to the amount of the opening of the wound.
And if it happens that an ulcer forms, then soak a bandage in warm vinegar and rose oil and place it over the ulcer.
And all of this should not be swollen over the broken bone; and therefore you should examine the patient every day, for when the binding is softened or you see the cloth already swollen, then you should correct that and tighten the binding.
And then place the patient' sleep on their chest, and place a cushion under their armpit from which they are sleeping at night, so that with that the support of them is raised from the side of it, and therefore the fracture of the collar bone is raised in elevation of the muscle; or their arm is bound to their neck.
And do not untie the binding if it does not happen in the place definitely or an ulcer forms, until after twelve days.
And then renew the bandage if you have seen it become loose, and tighten in compression and restore that and leave it until it is restored and the fracture of the collar bone is coagulated.
And it is strengthened and comforted according to the month in 28 days, and in some people it is done in less time than that.
Chapter 6.
On the restoration of a fracture of the shoulder.
The spatula bone is broken at its broad end and not at its narrow end but at its edges.
And therefore when it is broken at its broad end — and is broken at its narrow end — and it is not dislocated but by contact, then according to the shape of the fracture being broken you should make the preparation of it and reduce it according to the natural figure in every way that it is possible for you.
And then apply a powder made of ground-up egg whites and stopped lion's teeth over the area, then sprinkle double-folded cloth over it, and finally place a thin layer of table salt on top, according to the amount of the spatula or a little more.
But if the salt has sunk into any of the spatula's indentations, then fill those indentations with stopped lion's teeth and level off the salt according to its equality.
And then strengthen it with a long, decently tight bandage and the firm placing of the salt so that it is not moved from its place.
And examine the bandage every day; and whenever it becomes soft, replace it with another bandage and tighten it and apply more salt if it has been moved from its place.
And lay the patient on his side.
And the spatula is restored in twenty days or less.
And so when this number is completed, then you must dissolve the bandage, and know that it is safe for the bones from which its beginning is not feared nor their dissolution.
And if the process of the bone is pressing on the spot and you put the chain underneath it, then you must cut into it, pierce it, and act according to what we have said in the fracture of the furcula of suppuration of pus if this happens here.
Chapter 7.
On the restoration of a broken foot.
The foot is sometimes broken in the middle of it and this causes pain there, but its ends are usually crushed and broken down.
And in the accidents of it when its middle is broken, there is decline to the parts within and pain occurs in it, difficulty in walking, cough, strong fever and vomiting of blood; and a cavity is revealed in the broken bone and is not hidden from sensation.
And its restoration is that the patient be laid on his back, and a cushion placed between his shoulders; and then press upon the muscles of it, and adjust the ribs of it with the hands of two assistants, and apply pressure gently in the operation of it and in the adjustment according to all manner that is possible and convenient for him, so that the figure of the bone returns according to its nature.
And then apply plaster and gauze over it and place on top of it a thin layer of table salt or chalk or something similar in weight, after you wrap that in cloth; and then gently tighten it around the broken bone so that it is not moved; and sometimes press its back into the roundness of the back with decent pressure; and consider the bandage all the time, and when it becomes soft, tighten it.
And if necessity demands the removal of that which provokes pus or pricking, or pain, or suppuration that occurs in the spot, then you cut and loosen it and remove the plaster and rectify that which happens by means of its cure; and then reduce the plaster, if you see fit to do so, and adjust the pressure on him so that he is healed.
Chapter 8.
On the restoration of ribs when they are cracked.
Know that a fracture of the ribs does not occur except in large spots that follow the spine, and from their ends to the front, it does not happen to them except those which are cartilaginous. And its knowledge is not hidden from sensation because of the examination of it by the fingers.
And its restoration is that you close the fracture with the fingers according to the possible manner so that it is wrapped according to its nature, and then plaster and tighten the broken bone if pus comes from it.
And if the fracture of the ribs is declining to the parts within, then there occurs in the patient violent pain and piercing, also as piercing that which occurs in him who has pleurisy, and because of it there is difficulty in breathing, cough, and vomiting of a lot of blood; and this is of difficult cure.
And the Antixs are born in her with sick children.
And from them are born: that which you pause for the patient who engenders inflammation and swollen condition, so that his belly may be inflated and extended, and the fracture is driven to the parts outside.
But we fear that for this there is not the cause to generate suppuration of pus if it does not occur; and if it does occur, then help it.
And some of them say that it is laid upon him wind and then that it sucks strength; and it is like reasoning, but nevertheless it is feared that the wind may throw out the superfluities to the spot because of weakness.
And some of them say: that the spot be covered with wool which has been submerged in hot oil, and that powdery bandages be placed between the ribs so that it may be filled, and then that the bandage is wrapped around him according to its roundness; and then let the patient be cured by means of poultice of food and medicine.
And if it causes violent constriction of the patient and he does not suffer, and the bone pierces his veil with piercing pain, we fear for the patient, then cut on the spot, uncover from the cracked rib, and then place upon it an instrument that conserves the phlegm, the memory of which is preceded; and pierce the bone with ease, and extract that.
And then let us adjust the two lips of the wound, if it is large, with cauterization, and cure it with bandages so that it may be healed.
And if suppuration occurs within it, then you cut and pour powders in rosin oil and place on the spot, and let him be cured by that which causes the suppuration within the teeth.
And let him lie on his side over which he slept so that it may be healed.
Chapter 9.
On the restoration of a fracture of the spine and collar bone.
Sometimes a fracture occurs in the bones of the collar, and they are crushed and broken down, and similarly to the vertebrae of the spine. And if this occurs to someone and you want to know whether it will be healed or not, then consider the following: for if you see the fingers already soft and stupified and dead and cannot move them nor straighten them out, nor tighten them with your fingers or sting them with a needle without sensation, then you may know that it is not healed; and in the middle of their disposition it is deadly.
And if they are not soft but feel constriction in them with the fingers and piercing pain, then you may know that the nut of the bone is safe and that the patient will be cured by means of a cure.
And if you see the vertebrae of the collar like that and want to know whether it will be healed or not, then consider its feet.
Now if you see that they are already soft, it occurs to those which is occurred in the fingers, and then when he lies on his back, loses windiness and egestion according to his will, and sometimes is resupinated over his back and wants to urinate but cannot, then you may know that it is deadly, so do not trouble yourself with its cure.
But if none of these occurs, the cause is better and less dangerous.
And its cure is that you pierce with the needle of the suppuration of pus that you place on the cracked vertebra with hot rosin oil, or with seeds of houseleek; place upon it some times a day as long as the suppuration lasts.
And then apply one of the comforting and strengthening plasters to that area; and command the patient to rest and stay calm, and not to sleep on the side where he feels pain until he is healed.
And if it happens that the wound of the shoulder or any other cause has separated from him, then cover the wound and close the bone; and approximate the two lips of the wound with a suture, if it is large; and cure the wound with an application of a suitable ointment until it heals.
But if the rear of the shoulder bone is broken, and it is the end of the wound, then cover that you insert the little finger of the left hand in the anus, and grasp the broken bone with the other hand as much as possible by a second motion; and apply plaster and splints to it, if needed, and strengthen it.
And if you feel broken bones in him, then cover it and close it, and cure the wound with the cure that has preceded it until it is healed.
Chapter 10:
On the restoration of width.
The bones of the hips are often broken, and when they are broken, their fracture is nothing more than a separation at their ends, and they are sunken in length and decline to the inner parts; and it happens to the patient pain in the location and puncturing, and the leg is stupified when it is fractured.
And its restoration is that you extend your hand over it so that it is above the fracture as it is the figure of it.
And if the fracture is only at its end, then grasp it according to what appears to you by a motion of grasp so that it is assembled to its natural figure.
But if the fracture is in the length or that which declines to the inner parts below, then make the patient lie on his belly so that you are prepared for the restoration of that fracture. And therefore when you have grasped it, apply plaster to it, and place upon it a splint of wood or of gut, and strengthen it by compression over which you do not fear puncture of fracture nor removal of the splint.
And grasp the cavity with that which fills it so that it takes the compression according to equality, and command the patient to sleep on his back or on his side.
But if it happens that there is suppuration of pus, then cease from extension of it and its restoration until the suppuration of pus is settled, and apply to it that which sedates that suppuration according to what has preceded; and then return to its restoration, and strengthen it thus.
And if it happens in the shoulder bones or are comminuted, then treat them.
Chapter 11:
On the restoration of the fracture of the elbow.
The elbow is what is between the arm pit and the head of the shoulder.
And if it is broken, then its restoration is in one of two manners, of which the one is that you take wood plank of moderate thickness according to this form:
And they are tied at their two ends with two lengths of rope, and it is suspended from the elevated location.
And make the patient lean on a stool; and then bend his broken arm over the wood so that it comes to the tip of it in the middle location from which is attached the curve of the wood.
And then have someone suspend over it some heavy cause, or the minister extend that to the inner parts below; and then the doctor and his assistants press the fracture with their hands, so that the fracture returns according as it should.
And the other manner is that the patient be reclined on his neck and suspend his arm from his shoulder with rope; and then command two ministers, one of whom holds what is above the fracture with his hands, and the other holds what is below him; and each of them extends to his side.
And if you want the extension to be stronger, then strengthen the fracture with rope and that which is above it with another rope, and each of the two ministers extend to their two sides.
And therefore if the fracture is near to the end of the muscle, then let half of the rope be paused over the tip and the other below the fracture from the arm pit.
And likewise if the fracture is near to the arm pit, then let the rope be paused over that location and over that arm pit.
Grasp that with facility and without pain, and then when it is grasped according as it should and is applied by good application, then strengthen that if suppuration of pus does not happen.
But if suppuration of pus happens, then cease the compression until the seventh day, and apply to it wool cloth dipped in wine and rose oil so that the suppuration rests, and then strengthen it.
And the manner of strengthening that is that you apply plaster to the fracture, and then place wrapping of new cloth over the plaster; and then adjust the arm upon that elbow, and pause your open hand over his muscle.
And pause the cloth and strengthen the elbow of the arm so that the arm is in place of splints, if not prohibited by anything of the broken bone.
And then use splints.
And it is that you pause upon the fracture that splint which is more loaded and stronger of the other splints; and pause between each splint the breadth of a finger, and let the length of the splints be according to the fracture with addition of three fingers of all parts.
And then strengthen over the splints with the compression which was said at the beginning of the chapter.
And it is that your compression over the location of the fracture be more strict. And when the fracture is lengthened, then let the compression be less.
And therefore if you see the placement of the splints and the compression thus as we have said in the hour in which you restore the member to its position, then do.
And if you fear suppuration of pus, then cease the compression and the splints until the seventh day as we have said.
And then consider the rope in all parts for three days so that no pain comes in the location or inflammation; or is prohibited food coming to the member by disposition of superfluity of compression; and then rectify all that according as we have said.
But if you are over confidence that nothing of that happens, then do not cease the ligature except after three days or more.
And let his sleep be on his back, and his hands be over his stomach.
And pause over the elbow woolen cloth wound around it, and consider throughout the hour of the night or day that it is not loosed nor dissolved the figure of the broken member, or that the rope be molified, then rectify all that with your skill.
And pause the food of the patient according to the order which we have given before, so that the food be subtle in the beginning so that it is begun strengthening; and then let it grow larger.
The custom of the elbow and of his arm is that they are bound for xl days; and then let them be loosed and a bath be administered and it be medicated with ointments which rectify that.
And if the fracture is healed, then do not cease from that the rope and the splints until a day or two months.
Chapter 12:
On the restoration of a broken arm.
The arm consists of two bones which are called two rays; one of which is small and it is that which is located at the tip of the fingers, and the other is large and is that which is placed below the small one, from the part further down.
And very often only the greater ray is broken, or the smaller one, and very rarely are they both broken at the same time.
And when the smaller ray is broken above, its restoration is easier and its healing quicker.
And when it's broken below, its fracture is more serious and its healing more difficult.
And the worst of all is when both bones are broken at the same time.
Therefore, if the bone which is broken is the smaller one above, then it is convenient for the doctor to put a small extension with ease into that area so that it can be splinted.
But if it's the greater ray which is broken, then he should put a more forceful extension.
And if both rays are broken at the same time, then you must put on the splint with the most strength.
And you must put the hand position for its restoration and extension spread out on a pillow, with the palm of the hand to the upper parts, more above all the others fingers, and the auricular finger lower than the other fingers, and the patient lying on his back on a raised pillow.
And there should be a pillow beneath him in the height or angle of his body, so that he does not suffer pain.
Then the assistant extends the arm from the lower part with his hand or with a bandage, and another assistant extends above in the same way.
And then the doctor splints the bone so that it is reduced according to the best possible figure.
And if in the structure of the bone there are knots, then you must reduce all pressure on it with your strength.
And if it appears on him separated knots which push the tendon and you don't have hope in its restoration, then you must operate on it and stop that according to the manner we've said above.
But if the fracture is with pus, I have already made a chapter about that in particular, and so take the cure of that.
And if an abscess comes at the beginning of your restoration, then you must line a cloth with cerot made of rose oil and white wax, and it should be medium between thickness and thinness, and stretch the cloth tightly over that abscess so that the abscess yields; and then remove the cerot and apply plaster prepared from powdered mulberry wood with honey, and then put on poultices; and the poultice which is put over that fracture should be larger and stronger.
And know that the number of the arm's stars are seen in the major dispositions, or whether it is a fracture in one ray or in both rays at the same time.
And then put your splint over the area of the fracture more strongly and more forcefully, and if you see more swelling at the upper parts of the fracture or at its lower parts, put on the splint a little more loosely according to how it is preceded by its remembrance in the beginning of the chapter.
And the cloths which are wrapped over the fracture should be soft and moistened, and not hard or rough, and the thread with which it is tightened should be of a medium between thin and thick, just as we have recommended.
And consider the member and the bandage again after a few days. And if any cause happens which necessitates a correction, just as it happens to the member, and then you must bathe the member with warm water so that that swelling stops.
And leave the member not constricted while he rests, and then return the splint.
And if the splint is already loosened and the bone is healed and like those, then correct all that with your strength.
And consider also if the nourishment is prohibited from coming to the member because of the excess of the splint, then you must loosen that a little and leave it for a few days so that it runs to that member, and then tighten it.
But if to the patient no happens any cause of those we've said, then there is no need for it to be loosed within about 20 days or more of those.
And then the hand of the patient should be suspended by its power from motion, and make him sleep on his back.
And know that this fracture is restored in 30 days or in 32 days, or very often it is restored in 28 days, and all that is according to the disposition of the complications and dispositions of strength.
Chapter 13.
On the restoration of the fracture of the wrist and fingers.
Know that in the wrist and knuckles of the fingers there is a certain fracture, and there does not happen to them except many times repeated.
And when there happens to the hand fracture or sprain, then the patient should lie on his back and his hands be spread according to equality, and then put his hand over that extended one.
Then the assistant extends the broken bones and the doctor splints them so they are aligned with good alignment.
And then you must put plaster and lint if there is no abscess, and then put a poultice over that according to the quantity of the place, and you have already wrapped it in a moist cloth.
But if the fracture is in the parts of the fingers towards the belly of the palm, then make a bandage like a tourniquet, and command the patient to tighten that with his palm fractured; then it should be tightened with a long cloth.
And the cloth of the body with which it is lifted so that the body is applied to the palm; and tighten that according to how it should be.
But if the fracture is towards the outer parts, then you must put a poultice over that and another poultice over the part below in the palm so that the hand is open and straight; and then put on the splint, just as the hand is turned to the side between the fingers with bandages.
And if there is fracture in any of the fingers of the fingers, then if it's the finger that pushes, it should be splinted according to how it should be and then it should be tightened with the palm and if you want, put a small poultice straight so that the fracture is raised and not bent.
But if the fracture is in the other fingers, just as in that of the middle, or in the index, or in the auricular, or in the ring finger, then it should be splinted and tied with the finger which touches it; or they are all tied according to continuation, and it is better; or put a small poultice over that, just as we've said about the pusher.
And consider in your restoration and then that, the disposition of abscess cauterization — by the operation of it — by what it is repeated his narration.
Chapter 14.
On the restoration of the fracture of the bone of the thigh.
The bone of the thigh many times is broken and is revealed to feeling according to how it is turned towards the front and to the upper part.
And its restoration is done so that the bandage is tightened over the fracture and another bandage below the fracture, and the patient lies on his back and on his face.
And then the minister extends all the ligament to its end according to its quality when the fracture is in the middle of the bone.
But if it is near the root of the head, then the ligament near the nostril should be extended to the part of the penile bone, in order that the extension may draw it upwards, and the other ligament below the fracture.
And likewise if the break is near the nostril, then the ligament near the nostril should be extended and the extension to the parts below.
And then the doctor should reduce the bone with both hands until it is reduced according to its natural appearance and the bones are joined by a good union; then he should apply an ointment and a tight bandage if there is no sign of inflammation in the limb. But if there is inflammation in it, then you should leave it for several days until the inflammation subsides, and then return to your cure.
The bandage should be applied like this: fold a hard bandage over the fracture two or three times and soak up the excess fluid; then wrap the leg so that it reaches from the foot to the root of the head.
And insert long feathers between the head and the leg near the nostril to the parts below; then the ends of the feathers should come from the highest part of both parts, and then you should wrap around the leg and head what is left of the bandage.
And then place a splint over the fracture on the head and another splint over the bone of the leg.
And then fill the spaces between the leg and the head with soft rags so that the bandage is coagulated.
And then begin with a strong bandage over the fracture using three or four bandages; and as you go further from the fracture site, your bandage should be weaker, longer, and softer.
And then extend both ends of the feathers to the parts below until it reaches the ankle of the foot; and tighten both ends of the splints on the other side so that the ligament is not pushed from its place.
And then let the bandage be over that in such a way that there is no sign of inflammation or suppuration or swelling in the limb; and if any of those things occur, then you should loosen it, and correct what has occurred according to what we have said several times.
But if there is an injury to the bone that you can reduce, then you should reduce it according to what is possible for you; and if not, leave it and treat it with what has been mentioned before so that it heals.
And in some cases this fracture of the thigh is strengthened with splints on both sides as we have said for the arm and the forearm.
However, when it is restored in this way there is no sign of limping in the patient; and if it is restored alone, then it is necessary that the other leg limp as well.
And know that the thigh is strengthened in 40 days or a little more or less, and all of that is according to the variety of the complications and other dispositions.
Chapter 15
Of the restoration of the fracture of the nostril.
Know that the fracture of the nostril is sharp and deep; but it happens to it many times tension.
But if there is a fracture, then it is not more than a crack or cut in its parts; and that is on the skin or under the skin, and over that all is covered by a membrane.
And its restoration is such that what is broken in its parts is reduced by the fingers until it is aggregated and joined according to what is possible by action, facility, and fabrication.
And then apply an ointment and place a round splint over it if necessary; and tighten it above with a bandage as is convenient.
And then consider all the dispositions which we have mentioned in other fractures; as suppuration occurs and likewise to those in which there is no sign of inflammation, doing to it whatever is convenient for its healing.
Chapter 16
Of the restoration of the fracture of the leg.
Know that in the leg there are two bones of which one is large and is called by the name of the leg; and the other is slender and is called the shin.
And it happens to both kinds of fracture what happens in the arm; and its restoration is such that the restoration of the arm is done by reduction, and the operation of it is one.
And if both bones are broken together, then the leg is split into all parts.
And if only the more slender bone is broken, then the leg is split in front.
And if only the larger bone is broken, then it is bent below and is of those causes which are not under your control.
And then administer extension and action and liaison of the splints according to that reduction.
However, if the fracture of the leg is oblique having many splinters, then let the extension be less and weaker, and draw it away with your strength.
And if there is any cause for an operation on the leg, and when you reduce the splints and complete all your operation, then you shall take lengths of pine wood which have been paused below the causes which have been paused in soliders, and made evenly with white poplar; lengthen them so that they are small, not a lot of them, and not be a finger-width apart, and their length according to the length of the leg from the front to the back.
And then wrap around each one in two bandages according to the length of it; and pause one over the part of the leg from one side and the other from the other side, and let them be from the front to the back at the bottom of the ankle of the foot.
And then tie the two splints in three places from both ends and at the middle point; by this bandage the leg is prohibited from bending to the right and left side, and stands in good position.
And then a wooden brace according to the length of the leg is administered; and let the leg be paused in it so that it conserves its movement.
And most importantly you shall do this in fracture, and when that is suppurating properly.
And then consider the leg every day and study it with final study, and guard it from suppuration and inflammation and other similar causes; and if any of those things occur, then you shall treat it with what is convenient for its healing.
Chapter 17
Of the fracture of the ankle and the bones of the foot and the toes.
The ankle does not suffer fracture at all; but the bones of the foot suffer fracture in some ways; and the toes of the foot suffer fracture seldom, and do not suffer except by accident during the time of disposition.
And if the bones of the foot are broken and those bones are raised on each other, then let the patient rest his foot on the ground prepared thus with a pillow.
And then pause one foot over those bones and press them and reduce them into their places; and when they are reduced, then twist them in their places.
Then apply a plaster and a bandage on top of it, and place below the belly of the foot a small board with two holes in it.
Then stretch that leg down while you have wrapped it in clothes and other materials that cause heat.
And when three or four days have passed, then you should loosen the bandage, for you will find that the bones are swollen, or broken or displaced, and the operation on them is as follows.
But if anyone says that they are broken, then restore them and join them together as I described to you in the restoration of the fingers of the hand. Then place a splint on the broken finger according to its length and have it bound a little tightly; then below the foot place that board which I described to you, and stretch that leg down while binding it tightly.
But if what is broken of the bones is two or three or more, then you should place on each finger a splint of its size wrapped in lion's cloth; and stretch the board below the foot, and let it stand on one of the board's holes so that it has good retention.
And it is convenient for you not to forget that you do not consider all the causes that are given to you in other fractures of the accidents that we have said; and pay attention to any accident with what covers it.
Chapter .xviii.
Of fracture of the pubic bone and of the bone of the penis and of the woman's clitoris.
When the pubic bone is broken, then make that woman lie on her back, and tilt her pelvis slightly to one side, and let it be held there.
And let the midwife fill the pubic bone with cotton, and let it be done in the man' same way with spermaceti; and let the woman be pressed upon, and let her pelvis be raised little by little, for all that is forgotten when she is face down so that the broken bone returns.
And let powder be placed on her back, and when she wants to urinate let the cotton be moistened with facilidade, and let her urinate, and reduce it and return in the same way as before, and let her return to her first powder.
And do this for seven days or around that, for it is restored.
And if you want, take a bladder of sheep and stretch over the wound a catheter of wool; and insert the whole bladder into the pubic bone, and let it be insufflated through the catheter with air so that the bladder is inflated inside the bone, for the fracture returns.
And let it be filled with spermaceti and stay there for a few days as we have recommended so that it heals.
And when the bone of the penis of a man or woman is broken, then administer in its restoration and piercing what we have recommended for the bone of the hip.
And that which is straight does not hide in these nearby fractures and which few understand, especially those who have some study and understanding of this my book; for that fracture instructs you on the major dispositions through a direct path in its restoration and stricture, and therefore understand well.
But in the clitoris of a man when it is broken, take a whetstone of ash, and place the clitoris in that; then place on it a binding of cloth, and let it be bound, and let it be left for three days or around that time, and let it heal.
Chapter .xix.
Of the restoration of a fracture of the bones when there is pus.
It is convenient for those to whom fractures happen with pus, especially if the bone is large like the bone of the thigh or the adductor, or similar to that, that you take care and phlebotomize them as soon as the conditions of phlebotomy testify to you, as we have said above.
And if the pus flows out with blood, then understand that you take care to retain it there as you pulverize on it dried triphylite, unless another cause is present.
And let the restoration of the fracture begin in that same day and do not prolong it if an abscess does not happen.
But if an abscess happens, then let the restoration of it be left until the sixth day, so that the abscess has ceased; and do not approach it on the third or fourth day, for you will cause harmful accidents.
But if the broken bone is prominent over the uncovered tendon, then understand that you pierce it and reduce it by joining them with your hands with ease and little extension.
But if extension is not prepared for you and the equation of it by your hands, then let it be reduced by your hands with this instrument; and the instrument which is made of iron, whose length is seven or eight digits and whose breadth is according to the amount of pus, and it is necessary for the physician to take one of those three or four according to the amount that occurs in the cure in all kinds of fractures.
And let it be round and have little thickness so that it is not bent by the pressure upon it in the hour of the operation.
And let its tip be acute to which the edges are attached; and let it be of thick thickness above, and of thin thickness within at the ends.
And this is the shape of it:
And it is called in Greek "labrys vlantz ate-larem", and it is a little palette.
So that the acute end of it is placed elevated over the prominent end of the bone.
And press upon it in a wet way so that the bone returns, and let it be joined with some equation.
And therefore try to join the ends of the fracture between them, and if the end of it broken is thin, and do not take the instrument for a good perspective, then understand that you insert the end of that bone so that the instrument has power over it.
But if you cannot reduce the bone in any way we have recommended, then insert it with whatever is convenient for it from the incision points we have said; or saw it with one of the saws in whatever way is possible for you.
And let what rises in the bone of roughness and of small scars be shaved off.
And when the bone is reduced and especially the reduction causes violent pain in the wound, then know that the bone has not returned to its natural place; therefore do this which gives great benefit to the patient.
When your restoration which you do to the bone is completed, and especially let the dressing be submerged in black styptic wine, and properly if it is summer, and do not place on the pus wax nor another cause of which oil is made so that no fever and corruption happen in it.
And let splints be administered in the hour of your completion of the restoration of the bone and let the pus be uncovered so that you insert the wound with forceps and use bandages according to the amount of the pus.
And guard yourself from all carelessness so that you do not tighten the pus with the fracture, for many times this has been done by foolish physicians and they caused on their patients death or corrosion or putrefaction, therefore it is a fault. If his tightness was lighter, softer, different from the tightness of other fractures.
And if the wound is large or is a bad wound, and you fear over that certain bad accidents which we have mentioned, and you feel pain in the place, then do not cover over that with bandages, but rather make a wrapping of hard cloths in place of bandages and tighten him with those.
And when after a day or two the wound begins to heal, and pus has formed in it, then you take off the cloth which you placed over that, and you apply poultices with which according to our custom we treat wounds, like tetratapharmacon and similar to that.
And it is fitting for you to loosen the ligature and examine the wound every day morning and evening until it is consolidated and closed, and that the member be prepared in such a way that the pus runs off from it with ease.
If the wound passes many days and is not consolidated nor is the pus discharged from it, then know that here are some small things because of which one must probe the wound with a tent. And of those things which are separated and extracted, those which are not separated and put in the member and cause pain, pierce them as is possible for you to do.
And if it happens that the wound becomes swollen or turns yellow, there is stoma, or another kind of corruption and putrefaction, then you must treat each one with what is fitting for it according to its cure, of which a narrative precedes in its chapter.
And about this on which I will dwell and you must weigh your decision: when the bones are broken, they protrude from the member like the bones of the hip and the helper, and similarly to those of the large members, and you must not presume attraction or extraction of it, nor the extraction of it many times happened by which death; leave that alone so that pus can flow out, for often it will fall on its own after about 20 or 30 days; and then cure the wound if you see it, and if not, leave that.
Chapter 20
Of the cure of a lump which happens in the path of any fracture.
Many times this lump happens in the path of healing of a fracture, and mostly it is near the joints, and because of it the figure of the member is altered; and often it prohibits the member from its natural operation.
Therefore consider if the lump is recent and administer in that medicine which has tightened like aloe, and myrrh, and mastic, and cress, and similar to those; so you take some or all of those, and mix them with wine vinegar, or with white wine, and place that on the lump on a piece of cloth, and tighten that around it with good constriction.
And leave the constriction so that you do not loosen it for many days; and then loosen it and repeat another, while the lump is softened; or tighten over that a sheet of lead descendingly, because lead has property of softening everything which is swollen in the members.
But if the lump is already turned to stone and it is hard and necessity forces you to cut that tightly, then split that through the part which is most above it, and pierce the superfluity and protruding, or cut that with any resector until it is softened; and cure that until it is healed.
Chapter 21
Of restoration of a fracture when it is restored and then the member becomes subtle and frail not according to its nature.
When a bone fracture is restored, and then the member becomes subtle and frail, then that is not made except for many causes: of which one cause is multitude of swelling of the ligature and of the binding of it made not as it should; or by superfluity of constriction of the ligaments within which the nourishment is prohibited from running to the member; or by multitude of superfluous embrocation; or by superfluous movement not in its hour; or by weakness of blood in the body of the patient and because of frailty of him.
And cure of that is to make the patient eat and to make his heart tender so that blood is multiplied in him; and administer a bath; and put cow's milk and leticia on it.
And then place plaster on the member, so that the plaster draws to it much nourishment, or continue embrocation of it with lukewarm water, while the nourishment runs and returns to its natural figure.
Chapter 22
Of cure of the broken bones when they are restored tortuously and prohibit the operation of them from what they should do.
When it happens to the member already restored in the healing of its tortuosity and eminence to the broken bone and lump, and it is because of the form of the member, but however the member is not prohibited from its natural operation, therefore you must not take the word of one who examines that member as though it were newly broken.
But already many foolish doctors and restorators have done that in our land; and this operation is very blameworthy, presenting great fear whose sign is deadly.
But if claudication and lump are recent, then let them be embrocated with lukewarm water in which soft herbs are cooked, like leaves of alder and roots of it, and mallow, and similar to those; and let an ointment be made from it with soft-making oil; or let it be moistened with mucilage of root of alder and be cooled with cotton wool or with linseed oil, and let it be plastered with that; or let them be applied fat figures and tied with the feathers of a pigeon, and similar to those of the medicines which are named brother's consolidator.
And sometimes it is dissolved by continual gentle friction which is made with the hands moistened, and let the member be moved throughout in all hours.
But if the tortuosity is gone in front and is made strong and turned to stone and caused necessity of cure of it by iron, then let the pus be above dried up and the continuation of the bone be dissolved, and let that which is superfluous of lump of that bone with subtile incisors, and let facility be administered in that with solicitude and study.
Chapter 23
Of speech in dislocation.
Dislocation is displacement of one of the joints of its place, by which it is prohibited from movement, and the figure of the member is altered, and brings upon the patient great pains and injuries.
Therefore when it happens to any dislocation, then let it be reduced as quickly as possible, and do not delay its reduction, because if it is delayed, the joint is apoplectic and very difficult to reduce dislocation.
And for that reason do not let it be softened nor stretched in the hour of apoplexy, because many times it brings on spasms and pains.
But when that happens, then let you take care of the phlebitis of the patient, and then let it be left so that the apoplexy rests; and then the member is embrocated with tepid water and oil, and then let it be reduced with ease.
And each member is cured according to that of which the reminder will come in its place.
And you have arranged the chapters of dislocation according to that which is preceded in fracture, from the uppermost part of the body towards the lowermost part.
Chapter XXIV.
Of the cure of dislocation of the jaw below.
The two jaws are dislocated if they do not grind their teeth; and the dislocation of both occurs in one of two ways: either they are slightly loosened from their joints by a slight movement, and are slightly softened; or they are completely dislocated and fully completed, while they are softened at the beginning of the joint between them, so that saliva runs from the patient's mouth and he cannot close his mouth, and his tongue is wrapped in his speech.
But when the dislocation of him is slight, then in the best dispositions it returns by itself for some slight cause.
But if the dislocation is complete and full, then it must be administered quickly, and not delayed at all.
And it is that the minister holds the head of the patient, and the doctor inserts his right finger into the root of the dislocation of the jaw inside the patient's mouth if the dislocation is on one side; or he inserts his two fingers together, if the dislocation is on both sides, and the others hold his hands outside which grip; and command to the patient that he cease his jaws and release them from every part; and the doctor grips the jaw and splints it until it returns to its place.
And if it is difficult to reduce him, and especially if both jaws are dislocated, then administer evaporation with water and oil, while the reduction of both is made easier and not delayed at all, as we have said.
And when they return and are bound, and the mouth of the patient is closed and not softened, then place on them a powder of linen with cerotum, and let it be made of wax and rose oil; and let it be bound easily with soft ligatures.
And let the patient sleep on his back, and let his head be standing between two pillows, so that he does not grind his teeth to the right or left; and do not force him to chew anything for any cause; let his food be lion's milk, while when the pains are loosened and the jaws are sore, then he grinds what he wants.
And let this be administered easily, and do not labor over the opening of the mouth after eating and drinking and resting, while the jaw is sore and healed.
And if it is difficult to reduce two jaws when they are dislocated at any time and do not return to their places, then many times a fever comes suddenly and there is a continuous heat, and the belly of the patient is very hot, and very often he vomits pure bile.
And when you see this, then you know that it is perilous; and many times he dies within ten days who has this.
Chapter XXV.
Of the reduction of the dislocation of the collarbone and the end of the muscle.
The collarbone is not dislocated from the side within through its continuity with the foot; and sometimes it is dislocated at the outer end, and this is indicated by sensation.
And its restoration is that the patient lies on his back and extends his arms. Then press the joint with your palm with strong compression, for it will return.
And let a plaster and powder be placed on it and strengthen that.
But the end of that which is connected to the shoulder and continued from it, is not dislocated on any day; then let it be reduced and bound as we have said and as your apparatus is prepared.
And let a plaster, powder, and bandage be placed on it, and command the patient to adhere to tranquillity and rest until he is healed.
And with this medical treatment, the end of the muscle is reduced when separated from its place.
Chapter XXVI.
Of the reduction of the dislocation of the muscle.
Know that the muscle is not dislocated except in three ways, of which one is that it is dislocated at the end of the breastbone towards the lower part.
And the second is that it is dislocated at the top of the muscle, and this is done tightly; and it is not dislocated at the sides by the shoulder; and it is not dislocated in front by the nerves.
And especially it is dislocated and exits below at the ends of the breastbone, and especially in those whose flesh is thin, it is dislocated easily; but in those in whom there is much flesh, it exits out with difficulty.
And very often occurs in some men a blow or a fall, and the muscle of him is apoplectic from apoplexy, and it is swollen because of this, although he is already dislocated.
Therefore, you must examine this while you are on top of him, and then proceed in his treatment.
And the dislocation of it is known when it is at the ends below the breastbone; so that you distinguish between the dislocated muscle and the normal muscle, for you will see manifest difference among them; and you will feel in the head of the muscle concavity and above the breastbone from the touch of the head of the muscle as a hollow, and to the patient cannot reduce his hand to his shoulder, nor move that by any movement.
If it is dislocated behind or inside, and you then feel manifest touch, and it is not hidden.
And the reduction of this dislocation is made easier when it is fresh and the patient is an infant.
And the reduction of it is that the minister raises the hand of him to the ends above; and let the attendant place his hands under the breastbone of him, and raise the joint with strength into its place, and the minister raises the hand of him, and extends it above; and let him then lower that below so that it returns easily.
But if by what we have said it does not return, and it has started from the beginning that the dislocation occurred, many days, then let the patient be bathed in warm water and be administered fomenting which softens and loosens as though his joints were cut with a razor, and fenugreek, and honey in water, and let it be administered.
And then let the patient lie on his back and let him extend his arm below the breastbone of him, and wait with wool that it returns between elevation and compression; and let the doctor hold his shoulder, and raise the head of the muscle with strength, and pull the hand of the patient so that he does not grind his teeth at the ends, and let the other minister hold the head of the patient, so that he does not grind his teeth at the ends, for then it will return to its place.
And if you wish, reduce him according to this manner: and it is that you make present one man who is longer than the patient, and let him be on the patient's side, and let him insert his muscle under the breastbone of the patient and raise the breastbone of him above while the patient is suspended in the air, and let the other minister pull the hand of the patient from the ends of his belly. But if the patient is light, then let him who for another cause be suspended, so that it is heavy, for then the dislocation will return at once.
And it is reduced likewise according to another manner: and it is that a long post be placed on the ground whose head is round in shape, not thick nor slender, and then let him who is under the patient; let cloths be placed on the head of the post, and let the patient stand according to the length of the post, and then let his hand be extended from the ends of the other side with strength, for then the joint will return to its place quickly.
If it is difficult to reduce it for all the reasons that we have mentioned, then use this treatment: Take a stick whose length is two cubits, and whose breadth is four digits, and whose thickness is removed according to the curve of the breastbone in this way.
And then place a round cloth over the head so that the stick does not hit the patient.
And then the stick is placed below the breastbone, and the hand or arm is extended over the stick between the parts below, and the stick is tied over the buttock and the arm and the end of the hand.
Then the arm is placed on a ladder according to its breadth, and the hand is extended to the parts below, and the other side is suspended from the other side so that the joint will quickly come into alignment.
And when the instrument of it is completed according to any manner that you are able, then cover that which you have placed below the breastbone with a woolen cloth of equal quantity; and then place plaster prepared from ground black pepper and egg white over all the muscle, also rolled up above, and then tightly tie down the breastbone with a tight bandage; and let the ligament be rolled over the plaster, and the hand of it be attached to his neck, and let him be left, and may his hand not be hurt for four days.
And see that the food of the patient is light while the member is being eased, for that is better for his healing.
And then let food be given more often seven or eight times and exercise be taken; and therefore if it is stiff and not soft, then it has been healed.
But if the joint is dislocated many times due to moisture that happens to it or due to another cause, then let three cauterizations be administered in it, according to what was said before in the chapter on cauterization.
And if all this is done and then seven days later the ligament is loosened and the joint is not closed up, and the plaster and bandage are removed from it several times, and it is not closed up and cats cannot be lifted to the parts above by it, then know that its nerves, which are at the head of the muscle, are cut or stretched out or made soft, and know that the joint will never be fixed in its place.
The reduction of that which is dislocated from the foot and breast or the parts behind is made by pushing and extending with hands while returning it to its place.
And let the other bandage be administered in it, and cure that until it is healed.
And if healing becomes heavy in the member and delay in its movement happens, then let the patient take baths many times until that heaviness is relieved and he returns to his first nature.
Chapter .XXVII.
On the curing of dislocation of the neck.
Know that the joint of the neck is dislocated with difficulty and returns to its place with difficulty; and it is dislocated to all parts, and most to the front part and behind, and its dislocation is not hidden from you because when you adjust the neck dislocated with its head, that is clearly stated to you, for the joint is hollowed out and cannot bend the arm or touch with it his own muscle.
And see that you reduce the dislocation before it comes to him with an aposteme cauterized, because if it comes to him with an aposteme cauterized, its reduction is difficult and he will not be healed from it entirely; and especially when it is to the back parts, for it is worse than all other kinds of dislocations, and causes more pain, and often brings about death.
And its restoration, when it is possible to reduce it, is for the hand of him to be extended with two hands, and his arm expanded, and the hands of the doctor being on the neck and underneath him, and he pushing the joint with his fingernails or with the edge of his palm while returning it to its place.
But if the dislocation is to the front parts, then he returns so that he bends his hand with his own hand, while cutting the neck with the edge of his palm.
And if the dislocation does not obey reduction, then administer violent extension and very strong pressure.
And it is that two ministers expand the arm, and hold that joint so that it is not bent due to extension.
And then let the arm be rolled over all parts, more than it is wrapped in a folded cloth on the hand of him, or a ligament.
And when the doctor touches the joint with his hand, anoint it with some oil so that it is not caused by any causes which help in the lubrication of the joint with ease; and then push the joint with violent pushing while returning it to its place.
And then its reduction let it be placed on that plaster in which it is tightened and dried with egg white, and let it be loosened with a decent bandage, and the arm be suspended from his neck and let him be left for some days.
And then let it be loosened; and therefore if the joint is formed in its place, then you loosen his ligament and leave that.
And if you see the joint not be strong, then you iterate the plaster and the ligament, and leave that for some days until it is loosened; and then loosen that.
But if it happens to him heaviness due to the reduction of the joint and its disposition is in movement, then administer moistening in a bath and subtle friction, and compression while being loosened; or place over the joint aleliati, which is the oil of the fat of a lamb; and then let it be bound and leave that on the bone for the day and night. And then you wash that and put him in a bath; and when he is warm, then you rub the joint with temperate friction, and then iterate over that aleliati which is the oil of rosemary, once daily for three days. Corruption has already occurred in the brain's interior instrument due to the bath, for it is limited.
And if you wish, place over that the udder of a cow which is moist and warm with butter and strewn over it; and do that several times, for it is moist and returns to its disposition.
Chapter .XXVIII.
On the curing of dislocation of malaccen, which is of the joint that is between the arm and the hand.
Malaccen of the hand some times is dislocated, and the reduction of its dislocation is easier, and the contrary is of other joints; however if there is swiftness in its reduction in the hour that it is dislocated, before the place becomes aposteme cauterized or that an aposteme occurs in it.
And the reduction of its dislocation is that you place the joint of the hand of the patient on a table and the minister expands his hand, and the doctor places his hand or the palm of his hand over the imminence of the joint, and push it while returning to its place.
However if it is considered that the palm is already directed to the belly of the hand, then let the patient place both of his hands on a table due to extension and reduction; and if the dislocation comes before the two hands, then let the position of his hand be intrinsecally over the table so that the hand of the doctor may lean over that imminence of the joint.
And if he returns to normal immediately, that is good; and if not, then strengthen that area with a plaster, and let the blister remain; and do not repeat this, for otherwise you will not be able to endure the reduction of it, and more days will pass.
But examine the joint according to its tortuosity; and do not tell the patient any cause, unless your hand is made soft and you cannot strengthen it; then know that the nerves are cut or torn, and in this case there is nothing wrong with him except that he must be strengthened by cautery near his wound, and he should be made strong in this regard.
Therefore when the patient is returned, then apply to him the plaster which we have recommended, and let it remain and be strengthened for several days; and then let it be loose and let it remain, and let his hand be exercised.
But if his movement is impeded and some gravity occurs in him, then loosen that area with water and some rubbing several times, until he is eased.
Chapter 29.
Of the cure of dislocation of the fingers.
Sometimes the fingers are dislocated entirely.
And when any of these fingers is dislocated towards the second or third part of the palm, then you should press and push back the dislocation with your thumbs until it returns to normal.
Then support the head of the finger, and suspend that part towards which it is dislocated, and let it be for two days.
And then suspend and extend that within the day until it is straightened out.
And when night comes, then ligature that according to the narration, and do not stop loosening it during the day or exercising it by moving it, and let it be thus for several days until it is straightened out.
And do this also if it is dislocated towards the palm of the hand; and ligature that part and do your first operation on it, until it is healed.
And similarly, you should do with the others dislocations.
Chapter 30.
Of the cure of dislocation of the vertebrae of the back.
When complete dislocation occurs on any of the vertebrae of the back or neck and many vertebrae are removed from their places, then in this there is no cure, because death comes to the patient.
And the sign of this is that the excretion of the patient is outside his will, and he cannot retain it; and many times some of his members or both of his legs or both of his arms are made soft, or one of these; or a vertebra is displaced from its place, because many times it is displaced and the displacement of these is to four places.
Therefore, when it is displaced to the back parts, it is called hunchbackedness.
But its cure is that then you should consider whether the hunchbackedness occurs from childhood, because then there is no cure for it and it has no complete healing at all.
But in that which comes from accident or concussion or similar to these, the Ancients have said their ways of cure with prolix speech, of which the most returns with profit; but I have already abridged and abbreviated that for the benefit of my hearer because of my proximity to my understanding and by which I have explained it and demonstrated it with diverse instruments.
And those are not healed except that which occurs properly in the back by what I have related.
And let the patient be extended on his face over a pillow so that his feet are not elevated.
And then a straight staff is placed, fixed in the ground at the end of the pillow around the head of him; and another staff is placed in the ground under his feet at the other end of the pillow.
And the minister should hold the staff, and it should not be fixed in a hole; and another minister should hold the other according to that form.
And then a bandage is wrapped around the head of the patient and under it the tongue of the lion is pressed tightly; and extend the end of the tongue to the staff which is under the head of him, and let that be in him; and then tighten the other bandage over his buttocks by his fingers, and let them be under his legs; and then adjust all the bandages and let them be in the other staff which is under his feet.
And then each minister should extend the bandage to the end of the staff, and let the two staffs not be displaced from their places in which they are fixed, but rather not be fixed as we have said.
And the doctor should place his palms on the vertebra with strength until it returns to normal, or let him lie on a table, and then let him adjust his feet on the table until he returns to normal.
But if it does not return in this way, then take a table of which the breadth or length is three yards long, and hollow out in the wall from which we have said it is near the patient a place into which extends the end of the table. And then let the middle of the table be placed over the vertebra; and the doctor should place his feet on the other end, and stretch tightly until the vertebra is contracted and returns to its place.
And if you want to, open with a windlass which is turned by hand; and let there be fixed in the ground two staffs of one yard long, of which the length between each staff is one palm, and there is made in each staff a hole in which the windlass turns; and each staff is fixed in the ground so that it is not displaced.
And there shall be a round staff in which is the windlass, and let it be turned in the two holes of the two staffs.
And at its end there is a hole in which the staff is formed, the length of which is one palm as it turns; and similarly in the other two staffs.
And then tighten the bandages which you have tightened on the feet of the patient in the windlass which is under his head; and tighten the bandages which you have tightened on his buttocks in the turning which is under his feet.
And then each turn and let a minister twist the turn by hand; and the doctor smoothens the vertebra as we have said.
And when the vertebra has returned to normal and the place is smoothed out, then let there be put over it a plaster made of white vinegar; and then let there be stopped with cloth; and then let him lie on the table of which the breadth is three yards or around that, and the length of it is the quantity which takes up the hunchbackedness, and over the place of the vertebra.
And then let him be bound with the bandage we have said, and the patient be given subtle food until he is healed.
And if some swelling remains in the place at the end of the healing, then let there be administered medicines which moisten and lubricate by administration of the table for a long time, which we have related; and in that place lead sheet has been administered.
And sometimes they will suffer from an imminence in the lower part of the spine, and it is considered to be due to that dislocation; and it is this bone which is affected by this medicine, and therefore you must not apply it again, as this could lead to their death very quickly.
Chapter 31.
On the treatment of a dislocated hip.
Know that the joint of the hip and the joint of the muscles are not intended for dislocation alone, but only occur in those which occur in other joints with slight displacement and concavity.
And the joint of the hip is dislocated in four ways: it is dislocated internally or externally, or it can be dislocated forward or backward.
And it is mostly dislocated internally, and rarely dislocated forward or backward.
And a sign of its dislocation to the front is that when you straighten the patient's leg, it will be longer and more prominent than the healthy one, and the patient cannot bend their foot backwards, and there will be an apostemata around the hip joint from the cautery, indicating that the head of the hip joint has moved here.
And the sign of which one it occurs to the back is that its accidents are contrary to those listed above.
And the sign that it occurs to the front is that they straighten their leg according to the compliment, but still cannot bend that foot due to pain; and if they try to walk on tiptoe, they cannot; and their urine is retained and they have apostemata around the joint, and they walk on their heels.
And the sign that it occurs to the back is that they cannot straighten their leg or bend it forward due to pain; and their leg is shorter than the other, and the joint is softened, and the head of the hip joint has moved backward.
But the reduction of this dislocation is that you should consider whether it is old and ancient, having been like that for a long time, that it will not be healed by simply reducing it and setting it in place; therefore, no medicine should be applied to it.
But for the one in which it is recent, and it is one of the four types of dislocation, then you should move the joint and extend it to the front and back, and from the right to the left, as this will quickly return and not require any further treatment.
But if it does not return in this way, then you should prepare to pull and extend the leg from the lowest part, either with their own hands or with a strap placed over the leg above the joint; and another person should hold the top of the leg below the patient's fingers while pulling upward, and another should press the lion-like strap against the root of the hip.
And it is an extension from the front to the armpit, or from the back to the spine.
And they should both be extended in one movement while the patient is raised from the ground and their leg hangs down.
And this type of extension applies to all four types.
So if the dislocation returns as we have said, all is well; but if not, then it is necessary to use any means possible to achieve the cure.
In the proper reduction of it when it is dislocated and the dislocation is to the front, the patient should lie on their back; then place the strap over the root of the hip at the point between the head of the hip joint and the part below the armpit; and another person extends the strap above the armpit to the highest point of the collarbone.
And another person should grab the patient's arms and press the hip joint strongly while another pulls outward violently, as this will return it to its proper place.
And this is the quickest cure by which that part is reduced more quickly than with other methods.
But if you are not able to do this and cannot persuade them to use this method of cure for all parts, then at least tie both the patient's feet together with a strong strap, quickly, on their heels and toes.
And the length of each part should be four digits, and the leg with the dislocation should be extended more than the healthy one by two digits.
And the patient's leg with the dislocation should be suspended from a beam above their head, and they should be in the middle position; and its length from the ground should be two arm-lengths.
And you should order a strong young man to push down on the head of the hip joint while another suspends the patient by their leg; and the other young man pulls up on the hip with force, as this will quickly return it to its proper place.
But in the proper reduction when it is dislocated to the back, the patient should lie on their back with their leg bent as we have recommended earlier, and the strap should be tightly pressed against the dislocated hip and their foot.
And two beams should be placed, one under each of the patient's feet, and the other under their head; and they should be adjusted so that a mat of dampened cloth is wrapped around the middle beam so that the patient will not be hurt by it being between their thighs, as otherwise the extension downward will be painful.
And each person should extend their part, and the doctor should press down on the joint with his hand to guide the reduction according to the art.
And when the dislocation is to the front, then the leg should be extended slightly, and it is according to this narrative instruction that you press your right palm over the patient's armpit, and another person pulls upward on their foot while pressing downward on their shoulder; and with this extension, they will be pulled to the front toward the armpit.
And if the dislocation is to the back, then it should not be extended downward, but it should be raised up from the ground and placed on a hard surface; and if the hip joint is dislocated to the front, as we have said about its placement over two surfaces, then it will be elevated on its side with its leg extended, and its head will be turned back toward its chest, and the straps will be extended according to what we have said earlier.
And it should receive compression with a board over the joint on which side the dislocation is located.
So when the reduction is complete according to what you see — and the sign of the reduction of it is not hidden from you, and it extends its leg with both feet, and when you see its joints bent and the dislocation expanded while the patient makes excuses, then you will know that the part has returned — and then you adjust both sides and press down on the hip joint and extend it with a band so that the hip is not bent in either direction; and let the patient rest for three or four days.
And then untie the bandage and the plaster, and bring one leg up to meet the other.
Then, if you see those wounds healing naturally, then know that the dislocation is cured and let the patient leave.
And if you see any cause of softening, then return and bandage that, and stretch that according to your first stretching, and let that be for three days.
Then untie that, and let that delay walking for some days, until it is comforted.
Chapter 32.
Of the cure for a dislocation of the jaw.
The jaw is dislocated in three ways: it is dislocated at the forward parts, and at the inward parts, and at the lower parts to the backward parts; and at the forward parts it is not dislocated.
And the sign of its dislocation is that you command the patient to apply his jaw to his thigh; then you know that the jaw is dislocated.
And the restoration of all of its manners is that you force the patient to lie down straight, so that he extends his thigh, if he can over it; adhere your two hands to his face, and place his foot between your feet; and then adhere his jaw with your palms, and hold those between your fingers over his jaw with strength, and another extend his foot while the jaw returns to its place.
And the sign of its reduction is that his thigh adheres to the thigh with an easy, non-laborious elevation.
Then bandage that and make the thigh adhere to the thigh, and then tie those together with a bandage for three or four days, and then untie those.
And let the patient not use walking for some days, until he is healed and comforted.
But if the reduction of it to you is excused, then administer strong extension with bandages from which in the cure of the hip a preceding narrative was given.
Chapter 33.
Of the cure for a dislocation of the ankle.
The ankle is sometimes dislocated by a small removal, and sometimes it is dislocated according to the complement; and its dislocation is made either at the inward parts or at the outward parts.
And the sign of its dislocation is that you see the ankle swollen proceeding to the part to which it is dislocated.
But the cure for the removal of it is a gentle reduction, and that it be extended with ease with the hands and be poulticed until it returns.
But in the cure of it when it is dislocated according to the complement, you see that the patient lies down straight, and that he holds a strong and valiant minister of the part behind his back at the middle place of him.
And then you with your right hand hold the highest foot, and with your left hand of the lower part of the foot at the place of the ankle.
And then pull the foot to you with your right hand, and then with the left twice, and then extend it with the left; and press the foot of the leg with the right over the thigh six times.
And do that two times according to what we have counted.
And then press the foot of the leg to the thigh the third time, and you are at the ankle.
So if it returns in one time or two according to this manner, and if you see the foot swollen, that is good; and if not, then repeat the operation on him, for he will return.
But if to you is prohibited the reduction of it with that which we have recommended, then let the patient lie on his back on the ground, and stretch a rope tightly in the ground, and that cord between his thighs, and you already have wrapped a cloth over him so that he does not slide.
And then let the minister of it hold his thighs, and then another minister extend the foot with their hands or with bandages that lie over the nape of the neck; and then extend each minister against the extension of his pair, and let the cord be extended between the thighs of him holding that, so that the body of him is not drawn to the lower parts beyond its extension.
And then let the doctor poultice the dislocation with their hands, and another minister hold the healthy thigh at the lower parts, for the dislocation returns with ease.
And so when the dislocation returns and is declared to you the health of the reduction of it, then pause bandage and stretch that with strong bandages, and tie the leg to the ankle.
And see that you are wary or guard the nerves which are behind over the ankle, lest the bandage over it be violent and lead that strongly.
And then let that be for two days or three; and if the bandage is softened, stretch that.
And then untie that on the third day or the fourth, and let the patient not walk for 40 days. But if he is forced to walk before that space, it is not made certain that the dislocation is not dissolved and ruined, and then let that not receive a cure.
And if pus occurs to him, then let you minister to him in the healing of it that which in our preceding narrative we spoke of, in another place of cure and of poulticing, until it is healed.
Chapter 34.
Of the cure for a dislocation of the toes of the feet.
Let that which is dislocated be swollen with little extension six times; and that which is difficult, let it be gentle.
But if the dislocation is in some knuckles of the nape of the neck, then let the patient lie his foot on the ground or on a table, and be standing like that as if he was walking.
And then you stand on your feet and place your foot over that which protrudes from the joints, and then press it with your foot with strength while it returns, and see that it is swollen and does not protrude at the place.
And then place under the nape of his neck a table which covers all the foot, to which are two caps, and then stretch that with decent and firm extension for three days; and then untie that and let him rest from walking for several days, until it is stretched out and its reduction is assured.
Chapter 35.
Of the species of dislocation that are made with sprain or with fracture or with whatever.
When any cause of those happens to you and you persevere in the cure of it and in its restoration, many times you will succeed death.
And therefore let not that you presume upon the cure of it, but that which is wise in the art, of long experience, merciful and compassionate, tardy, not impatient nor presumptuous; and use in the beginning of medicines that yield pus cauterizations only, and let the patient be at divine judgment, unless to which you hope salvation from perdition, with the alleviation of wickedness, and in which appears some hope. And therefore strive you as soon as possible to reduce it at the beginning of the cause, before he develops pus cauterization.
And then if the member returns according as you will, then minister medicine that yields pus cauterization and cures the sprain with that which is convenient for it of the swollen joints.
If there is a dislocation with a fracture and bleeding in the bones of the joints, then you pierce their veins and do to them what we have said about simple diseases that precede those diseases in those locations.
And guard and avoid according to your ability that instrument in the ways of fear according to what has been preceded by my preaching; for it is better for you to give praise to your Creator, and more permanent for your glory, and healthier for your true body those things in your time. Thus ends the words of Albucasim perfectly, of which God be blessed. Amen.
