O, son, I will now show you the first part of the book, which is about surgery.
And if you can't apply heat to the rest of their body, because the patient has been suffering from a disease of humors for some time, they are to be considered to have gout.
And I have seen that by means of a cautery point, one can relieve the pain of the patient.
Then, carefully examine the bones and their structure to understand the body's workings.
The name Hippocrates refers to a pain that is treated by applying cushions to the affected areas to alleviate discomfort.
But if one does not know the nature of the body and its workings, then he will be able to practice medicine but should do so carefully, avoiding errors.
When I saw a doctor using an instrument to apply hot cautery to the neck of a woman, I was surprised by the unusual practice.
When there was a need for the bladder or other parts to be protected, the man's body was covered with another cushion.
And if the patient has an attack of pain, use the other cushion to support their body.
Here's the translated text:
The body is already lost to the cushion, and another person would be in danger if they were to touch the wound.
E yeu se que la sua mente es de dolor e descostumes le cushion on the limbes, for he has made them quiet from their pain, and the rest are related to gout.
Mays the wound is healed in its cavity.
and for the evil of the boil he would have his physician apply fire to it, which is what the other physicians do.
And if the cause of the ailment is that the patient has too much melancholic humor, they say he is suffering from melancholy.
And so it is necessary for you, sons, to consider that there are two ways: one is the way of the healthy ones, the other the one where the operation is needed because they are in pain.
Then you have to apply the cushion or other methods should be used.
And thus you take up your arms in the name of God, and with firmness on their legs, you must hold them back from the battlefield.
Then use the best way to serve, by the grace of God, for difficult-to-treat illnesses, such as those caused by cold humors, which are what you fear, place a cushion under the patient's body, and put their feet on it so they don't avoid using your skill.
Another that they are accustomed to calling uremia, a condition where the body's fluids are affected by their veins. Do not let it be known that you are a doctor of evil medicine.
This book is divided into three chapters.
This is the first chapter of the book, which means to begin the discussion of the division of the body. The first chapter is about the condition of the patient's bowels and how they are affected by the body's humors.
This is the second part. The second chapter deals with the use of cushions for various ailments.
The third chapter discusses the restoration and treatment of dislocations; the third way to treat them is described in detail.
The patient should be healed by removing the cushion from under their legs.
And so I say that the use of cautery for pain relief in the body or for any part of the body, it is a complex matter, requiring subtlety based on scientific knowledge.
And if the doctor applies a hot cautery, they are using a universal cautery method.
And if it is necessary to treat hot and dry conditions, apply a cushion to their thighs.
Therefore apply heat to the affected area using a hot cautery, but avoid burning the patient's skin.
And that's why I think it is important to provide a precise translation: "And thus, when a patient experiences pain in their legs or feet, they are said to have this condition."
Then apply cauterization on the back of their legs or elsewhere where they are needed.
Let me know if there's any way I can help you further.
And so, fire cauteri are applied to the affected area.
May the medicine be applied to the leg of the person suffering from a medical condition that makes it difficult for them to walk.
And if it is necessary to make points on the body, it is known to be done by applying leeches to the feet.
And you know, sons, that the best time to treat them is when they are not in season, when the temperature is moderate.
And so, for all situations, the use of cautery should be determined by the physician.
And if it is necessary to cauterize the affected area, then call it by that name.
When the physician puts his hand on the patient's foot, he is a cushion for the patient, and he is using a hot iron to apply heat to the affected area.
Mays ja has ubert le dolor en the legs, another cushion on their feet, to prevent further complications.
At some point in time, if the pain returns, the physician should use a cushion to support the patient's leg and foot.
E.g., if you were translating from Italian, Latin, or French, you might say something like:
This phrase is in Latin, and it describes using cautery to treat gout. And another that was here for the treatment, they must be treated by doctors.
E si es milhor que the patient's body be treated by a cautery fire than a doctor.
And so that the patient's bowels are properly treated, you should place a cushion on their feet.
Then apply a cautery to the body lightly and carefully.
And if it is necessary to perform cauterization, I have ordered that they be applied in this chapter, as well as the cushions on their legs.
The first chapter.
This line-by-line translation might be helpful for understanding the meaning:
And in this manner, you should apply medicine to the patient’s legs and their feet for their condition.
E aprop places the patient's feet on a cushion and the other parts of them in their proper place.
And then apply pressure to the palm to stop the bleeding when it arises. But you have already mentioned the other symptoms of the disease which are already present in the patient's body.
And so, if the pain is in the legs, then it is a fever; if the cushion is in another place, it's as though the body is being forced to endure a fever.
E si's has already opened the patient's legs, another one to their feet.
And so apply salt for three days.
And then place a cushion on the bed in the area where the pain is located. Then apply the treatment to the affected area with the tetrafarmaco which will heal them.
And now they say that when plague is upon the body, it's better to cauterize the arm, rather than the chest.
And so apply the hot cauterizer to the foot, but keep it away from the bone.
And then place your foot on the bone, already having been prepared for cautery.
And other say that it emerges in the feet, which are placed on their legs for another to be found. And they say that the ailment arises from the humors leaving the body through the feet.
Then your hand should be placed on the affected area to treat those who have a disease that causes them pain in their feet.
Mays it is necessary to apply heat to the affected area, as with gout.
And a cushion should be placed on their legs, for that is safer for me.
Chapter two.
Then apply your hand to the patient's head for healing.
And if the pain is in all the limbs, then apply cautery to the area. And then use another to cauterize the patient's head above which the pain is located. The patient's body has been positioned for cauterization by applying a hot cautery to the affected area, which is the legs. And if the patient's legs are in pain, they say it is gout, but you have to know that it’s not the same for all other diseases.
And if you want to be sure of these other things, it is customary to use a cauterizer on them, which is a tool that is used by doctors to treat illnesses through burning.
This section will be about the condition known as gout.
And on the head, the practice is to cauterize the area which is affected by the ailment.
Then apply the appropriate remedies to the affected area.
When the blood flows from the body, they will be called for by the doctors. Then apply a cautery to the area to cauterize the pain in their head.
Then apply a poultice to the wound on the leg, and put your hand on it for three hours.
And then apply the poultice to the affected area (the legs) as well.
You will need to apply cushions to their legs if they have gout.
A pointed tool is used to treat the patient in this way.
The intestine is called another way by the doctors if you want to know more about it.
And then gently place the cushion on their legs, so that it doesn't cause pain.
And if the quantity of the patient's pain is great, then use a cushion to support them.
And then you have already placed a cushion on their legs and another on their feet, and so they are to be treated.
And then you should cauterize the affected area with a hot iron.
Chapter four.
This refers to the treatment of gout.
When gout occurs in the joints that are treated by applying a cushion to the affected area, or by using other methods of treatment.
Therefore, you should hold your jaw open and avoid biting down while the surgeon operates on your hands.
E lay the cushion at the beginning of the treatment, so that the patient's body may be treated with caution.
And then cauterize the cushion in the vein of the old man's body.
Here comes a translation that is just a bit more literal than Translation 4: If you see the signs of the plague on their body, then cauterize them immediately so they are healed.
And if you have already decided to do so, use a cauterizing tool on the legs, avoiding the bowels.
When the pain in the joints is caused by cold humors, apply points to the affected area.
On the treatment of auricle pain (gout).
When there is pain in the ankle or legs, this is called gout.
When the pain is in the foot, you should also apply heat to the area. Alonga te am le loc means "the other one" in English.
Then apply the cautery to both legs of the patient.
This passage suggests that the original text is describing the medical condition known as gout.
A cushion should be placed on their legs.
And it is cured by cauterization on the legs, which are applied to the affected area.
You have already caused pain in the legs, which is then called gout.
When you have healed the patient, they will be in pain for a long time.
And if there is an opening in the skin due to injury or illness, it should be treated carefully as well.
Then you will find the correct procedure for cauterization to be done by placing a small cushion under the patient’s arm so that the cushion does not touch the skin, which should also be covered with a cloth, and another cushion placed on their legs.
The form of the patient's suffering is known by various names, but as a physician, you should know that the proper term for it is gout. But the pain is sharp and piercing, as if a needle were pricking him.
And thus the doctor will treat the patient's legs, if they are the ones that need treatment.
Chapter 7
This refers to cautery, an ancient medical technique using heat to treat a condition called apoplexy.
And so if apoplexy is ancient, it is treated by placing a cushion on the affected foot. And the method of using a cautery is done as previously described.
And on their legs, place a cushion and cure them; then apply a bandage to hold it in place.
Chapter 8.
And so the patient's leg was cauterized due to the heat in their feet, which was caused by the treatment.
The patient's legs should be kept warm and their arms should be used to treat pain in the body.
And if it is necessary, you should apply the following plaster to the head or the foot (depending on the source text), as described in the treatise on plasters.
Then put your hand on the place where the pain is located, so as to stop it from spreading. And you will place your hand on it, as I have said.
Then apply three cauteries to the patient's body. Then apply a cauterizing agent to the wound.
Mays le metges (medicines) are applied to the legs, if the patient needs to be treated, otherwise known as gout.
And if the patient is healthy, let them be treated as they are healthy.
The following text means that the person will be treated with cauterization if they have a condition similar to gout.
And if you need to soften the entire body, a poultice should be used.
and the patient has a fever due to the treatment or an illness.
When your body is too weak, it is necessary to apply a hot iron to the affected area. And thus, they cure that which is healed by their own remedy.
Chapter 10
This refers to the treatment of seizures with cauterization.
This means that one should use a hot iron to cauterize only when necessary for those suffering from phlegmatic illness.
Therefore, it is necessary to modify the treatment plan for the patient at the beginning of the illness, which is what we have called for in this case.
This translates to:  If the child suffers from pain in the legs, it is known as gout, which is what physicians call it.
And so, apply heat to the affected area with a cushion, and you can treat them with another method. And if the patient's humors are strong, they will be given cauterization on their legs and feet.
And do it according to the preceding instructions.
If the child has gout, the physician should perform a different type of treatment.
Chapter 11.
The text refers to the treatment of melancholia.
If you have a cause for melancholy, the patient's legs are to be cauterized.
The following text reads like a medical treatise: When the cause of the ailment is superfluity, a surgeon will apply a cushion to the head to treat melancholia.
And a poultice made for the patient's head should be placed on the head with care to avoid further damage from the pain.
And if the pain is already present in the legs, it is treated by doctors.
E aprop applied a poultice to the patient's legs, and held them in place with bandages. And if it is necessary to heat the body or the blood for so much as a moment, it is best done by applying a hot iron to the affected area. Then apply the cushion to his legs and feet.
Then they have a cushion upon the affected foot, and you must cauterize the fazen to heal it.
And if you want to cure that pain in the feet, apply a poultice.
The patient's legs are now open and they are being treated by the doctor.
To apply cautery to the leg, the foot should be raised above the heart.
And if a patient's need arises to make an incision, you will have already placed a cushion on their legs.
And let the patient be treated with a hot bath for several days.
And if it is necessary to cauterize the intestine, use two cushions at its top and bottom.
When there are many doctors who are experts in this field, they are to be treated with respect.
And when you cauterize their legs, protect them from gout; if blood flows.
And thus, the patient has been treated by a wise man who knows what they're doing.
And if the foot has been cauterized, it is treated with the proper number of cauteris.
This chapter describes how to treat a condition by using a cautery tool on the patient's legs and holding them down during treatment.
And if you apply a cautery to a part of the leg, and the patient has other ailments, do not remove the cautery.
Then apply a cushion to the area where the leg pain is located. And if you have already been diagnosed with gout, the physician's hands should be placed on the affected area to avoid pain.
Chapter 14
De cauterizacio de nas e'l qual si tratta de la dolor del corpore, e no ha de ser causada per humour in le nas.
You have already opened your legs to the patient, and if it becomes necessary to apply heat for three days, you should use a hot iron or cautery. And then put your hand on their legs, you must use two cushions for this treatment.
And guard that which is necessary for the legs.
And this is how you apply cautery.
Chapter 15.
Then return the patient's eyelids to their place.
This is a translation of the medical terminology for "when the eyelid is affected by disease or moisture"
And if you cauterize them, then they will be burned on their legs by the other two. And so you must apply your hand to the patient's thighs.
This may refer to the use of a cautery tool for treating ailments that are more accurately treated by other means.
The text is written in a mix of languages and uses archaic terms, suggesting a medieval medical context for the passage.
Then you cauterize the eyelid to prevent the pain from spreading.
When the body has pain in their joints, it can be treated by two methods.
If you apply cautery to the foot when it is inflamed, it will heal the inflammation and prevent the formation of new one.
And if the leg is in pain, then put the hot iron on the knee.
Then apply a poultice on their legs for the patient.
And so you will apply heat to their legs, and if it is necessary to burn the flesh, then use the cautery.
Then apply another cauterization to the body, which will be done repeatedly, slowly burning away the excess tissue.
And if you see the eyelid of a man already swollen and his eyelashes elevated by the elevation of the body, then elevate the upper part of the eye lid, which is a sign of good health.
And so keep your legs elevated for three days, and you will be able to say they are healed. And if you want to cure them, it is called an ailment.
If the eye is softened by some cause due to an imbalance of humors, then place a cushion on their legs and hands should be placed back on the affected area in the same way as they were originally treated with.
When the foot is afflicted with pain in the joints, we need to use a cautery on the eye, the leg or the arm to treat it.
And so you should cauterize the affected areas with a cloth made of cloth of myrtle.
E si you are a wise person you will be able to understand.
And if it is necessary to use other tools for pain relief, then apply a hot compress to the area where the pain is located.
Then apply the appropriate remedy to the affected area.
And so he puts his hand on the patient's foot to ensure the other two are in place to prevent inflammation from spreading.
And if you are a physician, you should put a cushion under their legs when they have been treated for the ailment at its beginning.
And this is the way to treat them with another type of cautery.
And so the pain of gout varies in intensity according to the nature of the illness.
E no sira le malatia del peus per la persona who has studied this ailment.
Gout is a disease that affects the legs, especially the feet.
E si la medicina antica no es un coonquessat per la sua lingua.
When you treat a fistula, the patient should be treated with a method that prevents the pain from spreading to the rest of the body and causes them to have a fever.
And place your hand on the patient's feet to prevent them from swelling.
And you already know that cushion on the foot means...
And if it is necessary to apply the treatment to their feet, the patient's body needs to be heated first.
When there is pain in the legs, the patient will be given a poultice. And if you wish to apply cautery, do so carefully.
But nevertheless, you should know that the one who is wise knows best how to deal with the cushion on their chest.
Then place a cushion on their chest and apply pressure to the wound. Then apply a cushion to their legs, and another to their feet, in order to prevent the humors from spreading.
And if you wish to stop the pain in the intestines or joints, you should cauterize it.
And if the doctors think that it is a case of humors being treated, they will apply it to the joint pain.
This patient has been experiencing pain in their feet for some days and is in need of immediate treatment.
And for a while, the person suffering from that ailment will have pain in the area of the fistula, and they cannot be healed by cauterization.
Then apply heat to the area of the fistula as described; otherwise, it is necessary for them to have a cushion (or a poultice) placed on their legs or feet, if needed, to treat the infection.
Capitol .xviii. translates to Chapter 18.
Then you can cauterize the patient's thigh to avoid further complications.
Inflammation of the joints, especially in children.
And thus you have burned the cushion, so to speak, the other if it's on the legs and feet.
The patient's legs are being treated by doctors, who have placed cushions under their legs and another on the foot to be treated.
And you have already used the cushion to open up the veins in the legs.
And then apply cauterization to their legs.
Chapter .xix.
And if it is necessary to cauterize the fistula in the mouth.
And in the case of a burning sensation in the throat that spreads to the mouth and causes pain, the doctor uses cautery for treatment.
And thus if the wound heals well, you must cleanse the wound and apply a bandage to it.
This is a difficult task as the provided context doesn't give enough information about the source language.
Single-line guess: **And if cauterization is necessary for the throat.**
Then apply heat to the affected area to ensure the treatment reaches all parts of the body, as in the other methods.
E aprop leva la tua ma, e aprop has placed a cushion on their legs, but you are already close to the end.
E then the patient is cured, the pain being alleviated by the salt water.
Chapter 21.
On the treatment of toothache.
When tooth pain is from cold or heat, or a lack of understanding of its treatment by medicine, then it is called toothache or dental neuralgia.
Use a hot poultice to treat pain in the foot, but not with another on their leg, and apply a remedy to soothe the pain caused by a burn.
And then apply heat to their feet so that the patient’s pain can be reduced by opening up the area around the affected joint.
When a tooth is aching, put a cushion on it.
But if the cushion should be placed upon the veins or on the intestines, it is called a proper gout.
Then apply the poultice to the affected area.
This is the form used by doctors to treat gout in one hour.
And if it is necessary, cauterize the legs.
And this is the way of gout.
Another hand
On the treatment of extraphulos.
And if you want to treat it, place a cushion under them, and then put your hand on their cauteri to help the patient feel better.
And if the inflammation is small, you will apply the cautery for a short time to the affected area.
And if it is necessary to treat the ailment with ointments, bandages, or poultices, it is best to treat them with those methods.
I will assume you meant "Chapter 23" in your translated text.
And then apply a cautery to the legs and arms.
Then if the patient has swollen legs or feet due to a condition, you should use warm compresses on their major joints.
And then apply the cautery to the affected area, but only slightly.
And cauterize their legs to keep them from going numb. And if your doctor says it's okay, apply a cushion to the location where the patient has a burning pain in their shoulder blade.
Then apply heat to the affected area, using another cushion on their legs and feet.
This seems like a playful riddle about medical terminology!
This refers to the treatment of illness in the lungs and chest.
When there is pain in the legs and the patient's feet are affected, it is customary to treat it with remedies that reduce the swelling.
And if you wish, treat it as a puncture wound.
E si est in the body a cushion, and another on the chest.
And the cautery is used to treat the patient's wounds when they are caused by cold humors.
Chapter 25.
Then apply the cautery to the area.
You have already placed cushions on their legs to prevent the patient from being in pain.
And thus the patient's legs are now open, and they are treated with two cauteries.
And if there's no other way to treat them, apply the cautery to the area of pain.
And sometimes it is treated as a type of gout.
Then apply pressure on the intestine to relieve the pain.
And if you are going to apply cauterization to the upper part of the foot, then do so on the part of the muscle that should be cauterized.
This is a bit tricky! I can't directly translate that without more context.
This means that the stomach needs to be cauterized.
Then place cushions on the legs to prevent the body from being cold.
And if the depth of the cautery is appropriate, the number of burns will be applied to the body.
And if you wish to burn them, use a hot iron on the body on the left side for the stomach and right side for the legs, in this manner;
And if it is necessary to make points on the stomach, you must cauterize them, and for the pain that is in the chest, you should use a cushion to apply pressure to their stomach so as to stop the pain.
Then apply the appropriate cautery to the affected area.
Then apply heat to the area to prevent them from burning.
When there is pain in the lower abdomen, it is customary to treat it as gout.
And if the pain is in the legs, it is called by the larger number, the smaller it is, but if the pain is on the body, then use a cushion.
And do not press your own legs together.
E if you have to treat the disease of a cushion, it is customary to treat the legs with a hot foot.
And in this way, you can treat such inflammation with the cautery, using both skill and careful application on the affected area to prevent further pain.
Gout is caused by an excess of cold humors that have settled in the body.
**Capitol .xxviii. translates to Chapter 28.**
The text describes using a hot cautery to treat an illness affecting the feet.
At that point, you should know if the wound is on the surface or deeper.
And if it is in the tunic of the foot, then let another one be applied to their chest.
And if the patient has another type of ailment, the physician should be consulted. Then apply the cautery to that area where the pain is located.
Then apply a cushion to his feet.
And for those who have studied medicine, this practice should be used cautiously, especially on the feet.
In the capitol, there are instructions on how to treat the affected joint with cauterization.
When the patient's body is affected by bad humors that cause pain in the legs.
This is a Latin translation of the phrase "Diyssero les" which translates to "They will treat" or "Then they should be treated".
Then apply a cautery to the seventh point on the body, which is located between the shoulders; et autre should be applied to the other two locations, those places on the body, and another on the feet.
E thou shouldst treat the legs with the other methods mentioned above.
This could be translated as:  "And now, you must know that iron boils at 2800 degrees, but the body temperature should be used for the treatment of gout."
It is when a doctor makes an incision that they must fear infection.
Capitol .xxx. translated into English is:
Of the cauterization of the feet.
When you treat the disease affecting the intestines, it is important to note that the patient should be treated according to the three known methods, depending on whether their pain is caused by the illness itself or by the bowels.
Translation: And if it is necessary to make a small incision, it is called a “pouch” in the patient's foot, which is how we will treat it.
And if you choose to use a cautery on the patient, place your cushion under their legs.
And if the patient's left leg is affected by a dislocated tendon, place another cushion on the right leg and apply pressure to the opposite side.
And if it is necessary to cauterize the legs or feet, it is done with a pointed cautery.
Then return the patient's legs to the proper position.
And thus it is that you have four points on their legs, and one on each thigh.
And if you wish, cauterize the foot.
Then apply the appropriate treatment for each patient.
The text you provided appears to be describing the use of cautery for treating gout.
E sicut they are accustomed to call them a cushion.
Then apply a cushion to them in the following ways.
This means: When you cure (the)  (patient's name), you will have opened up the body and the other cures will be applied to their legs and they are also called a cushion in their area of the knee. And if the patient's leg is swollen, then cauterize it below the knee.
Then apply the cushion to the patient's legs as well, to relieve the pain in their feet.
The pain felt in the feet by those who have too much heat or cold in them, which is known as gout.
Then the patient's feet are burned with a heated iron to stop them from needing hot coals.
Gout is caused by an imbalance of humors in the body, leading to painful inflammation in the joints.
Then apply hot water to the affected area.
And if it is necessary to cauterize the patient's veins, apply heat instead.
Then if a doctor has to use a cautery on the patient’s legs, which should be done with caution. The patient's intestines are treated with hot iron, a practice that causes pain in the feet.
And apply heat to the affected area for a long time, and let the patient rest.
Aproperate your hand to treat the patient's ailments.
And apply heat to the affected area to draw out the excess humor.
This refers to the patient's condition as well as the treatment.
Gently massage the affected area to avoid excessive pain.
And if they are experiencing a pain in their stomach that you think might be caused by an excess of humors, do not let them use a cautery on the legs or other body parts.
Then apply the cauterization carefully to their chest.
Then treat them (the hemorrhoids) with a cautery.
Then apply three poultices to the affected area, as we said, for the treatment of a disease caused by an accumulation of bad humors.
If you find the intestine cold, apply heat to the intestines and place cushions on their legs and another under their stomach, then use a cautery on the area around the intestine for a while to help with the pain.
This appears to be a fragment from a medieval text describing medical practices.
And if it is necessary to apply cautery to the area of their legs, and use the cushion to protect them.
When you are making a person ill with pain in their legs, apply the treatment that makes them feel better. Then apply a cautery to the foot of the patient, which will be applied to the affected area.
And if the patient has pain in the legs or feet, they must be given cushions to prevent swelling and discomfort.
Then you should know that the pain in the feet which doctors call
The text is likely from a medieval medical treatise that describes how to treat gout.
And they are subject to the pain of fistulas in the parts of the body where they occur.
When nature does not keep the cushion in its place, we will hold their legs, and the other things shall be done by the patient.
Therefore, if a patient suffers from an ailment that causes them to have a swollen joint, it is called gout.
And if it is necessary to apply a cautery to the patient, then do so. Then apply a cautery to the area of the patient's body that is being treated.
And he who is accustomed to apply cautery on the legs, should do so again on the body as needed.
When there are burns on the legs, it is usually treated with a cautery.
Then put your hand on their abdomen.
When the patient is in a prone position, place a hot compress on their abdomen.
And if the pain persists, apply a cautery to the area where the pain is located in the legs.
This sentence appears to be in a made-up language, but if we assume it's meant to be a medieval-style translation, it likely means:
This treatment is for gout.
When a gout attack comes on, e another servant shall be needed to apply the cautery to their body.
And so the patient's intestines are inflamed, one should be careful to apply the cautery behind the knee, in a place where the blood vessels are close together.
Capitol 38.
This is a description of the use of a hot cautery on the foot to treat gout.
Then put your hand on the affected area of the bladder, and cauterize the affected part to prevent the urine from being retained, and cauterize the other parts as needed.
Apply a hot iron to the sole of the foot if needed.
And so too for the use of a hot iron instrument to treat them.
Another word for chapter in the language of the book.
And so apply your hand to the affected area.
And so that the pain in the legs might be cured, place three heated needles on the stomach, the leg, or the area of the belly button, as needed for the patient's benefit, and use a hot cautery on the abdomen, as the patient would.
The text appears to be in a Romance language, possibly Italian or Spanish with archaic spellings.
The dislocation of the hip joint.
And if it is necessary to apply cautery to the legs, then one should place a cushion between them. And the patient's leg is affected by the pain.
Then there should be placed a cushion below the foot, to support the patient's foot while you cauterize the affected area.
And if you apply a cautery to the leg that precedes the knee, it will be called a different name.
And if you are not there, then use three cauters on the patient's legs.
And if it is necessary to make cauteries on the legs, it is because of something else the person may be suffering from.
Chapter xli.
When there is a need to cauterize the veins in the legs, it is done by applying heat or a chemical agent to cauterize them.
A person suffering from gout should be treated in this way by doctors, and another method of treatment should be used for the other parts of the body.
The manner of using a cautery on the foot is different depending on whether you use a chemical cautery or a hot cautery.
This passage describes treating a patient's legs with a hot cautery. When there are pain points on the body, it's sometimes called gout by doctors.
Mays alcunas other vejosat in the leg (already translated) are called 'four' by doctors.
And if you wish to do so, cauterize the area around the joint where the patient needs it, for the pain extends throughout the entire body from there.
And this is the way to treat a pain in the legs by applying cautery on the area of the leg when the pain is located elsewhere.
Mays you are to be burned in the thigh if there is pain there, but another cushion is needed for the foot.
And if the physician deems it necessary, he will cauterize the affected area on the feet.
And then apply the hot iron to the legs to reduce swelling.
The patient's condition is known as gout.
And if they need to be treated with heat, you should use a hot cautery.
"And if it is necessary to cauterize on the legs." Then apply the appropriate cauterization to the area where the pain resides, and hold it in place.
And if there is a need to treat pain in two locations on the body at the same time, use cauterization.
When your hands are affected by gout, you can use your fingers to push the skin back into place.
And you should have three circles in the body, which is called "gout" when they are formed by an infiltration of cold humors.
This sentence describes the use of a cautery to treat the patient's condition. And so cauterize the patient's body in one go.
And if the disease has been open for three days, apply a poultice to their place; et another poultice on the body.
This surgeon has used this type of cautery on his patients.
And so if you are experiencing pain in your legs, use a pointed cautery to treat them.
Mays cauteri are medicines for the whole body.
Then return to the area between the legs, which is the most painful part.
Then apply the hot cautery to the leg of the patient until the pain subsides.
Then place a hot water bottle on the patient's hand to apply warmth.
And if it is necessary to keep the intestines in their place for three days, it is customary to call it gout.
And then they should cauterize that which is ill in the body.
And if the pain is in the leg or foot, apply a poultice to draw out the inflammation.
This is the way to treat with warm baths the humors that have been identified. When treating gout, apply a cushion to one affected area and another to the other, using a specific technique for each.
The cushion should be applied to the area where the pain is located.
And in the event that you apply a cautery to the legs or cavity of the foot, then use a cushion under them for cushioning, and another on their chest for the same purpose.
And if you are hot, apply the poultice to your legs, so that the bowels are healed.
Then, apply heat to his legs and he will be cured by the application of a hot cautery.
And if it is green, put another cushion under their legs and apply it to the affected area.
And he should be treated for three hours by the cauterization specialist for gout.
And if it is necessary to cleanse the body with bloodletting, let them be cleansed, but careful consideration should be given to the patient's condition and the location of the leeches.
Then seek out a doctor who knows what he's doing, to have them apply their knowledge to these medicines, so the patient doesn't get hurt.
When the body is afflicted with pain in the joints, particularly in the feet, the following method should be used for treatment.
Then apply a hot poultice to the affected area. And if you see that the patient has pain in their legs, apply cautery to the painful area.
And this method of cauterization is called cautery by the physician.
This is the xlii chapter.
This likely refers to a treatment for pain in the legs.
Some translations are possible, but one possibility is:
And then if you are going to cauterize, do not use just one type of cautery.
And if it is customarily to apply a cautery to the patient's legs, do so with leeches in that case.
And there is another hot iron application on the patient's thigh and leg.
When the pain is in the thigh area, then you can use three or four cauteries for treatment.
Another person's first sentence might be translated as:
From cauterization, at the beginning of recovery, you will be healed from cauterization.
This refers to the beginning stages of gout in young children.
And apply a bandage to the legs after the doctor has treated them.
And so when there is pain in the legs, one can use a cushion to soothe it. Then apply a hot poultice to the feet to keep them warm.
Apply two to three burns on the shins with a cautery iron. When doctors use cauterization, they must be careful to avoid burning the patient's healthy tissue.
Then apply the cautery to the area we mentioned earlier, as needed.
And then if necessary, apply cautery to their legs.
Chapter xliv.
This refers to treatment for gout, which may involve cautery.
And if the patient has a fever, apply cooling treatments to the body.
And therefore, when the gout is cured, you should put a cushion on their legs, and leave it alone.
And if you need to burn out the bad humors from the foot, use a heated tool for cauterization.
This translates to: **And if they want to make it (the cushion) clear that they are treating the patient's legs, then the person should be treated with a hot olive-oil cautery.**
Then apply the point to the affected limb. And if there are pains in other joints than the legs, they are treated with hot stones.
And if it is necessary to burn with a cauterizer, do not press too hard.
And if there are doubts about whether it is a cushion or a pain in the legs that caused the pain.
Then return to the patient's body with the cushion and treat them for their illness.
Then you apply your hand to the indicated area, but you must also work on the cushion for the patient.
Then, if necessary, you can apply heat to the area of the affected joints.
When leeches are applied to the body, they will be able to cure diseases and ailments.
This could be a chapter heading from a book.
This is the section on using a cautery for injuries.
...the patient should be called gout because you have to apply it to the body on their joints...
And if you are a doctor, you should use a cautery to treat the patient's illness, but apply it to their limbs.
And if it is necessary to cauterize the area around their feet, then use a hot iron on the patient's legs.
And place the cushion on the legs of him/her, if the pain is in the foot, then put your hand on the area to prevent the patient from being too cold.
Gout is caused by an excess of cold humors in the joints. And then apply the cautery to the cushion or the affected area.
And if they are unable to do it themselves, they should have another cushion placed on their legs and apply it elsewhere.
And then place the cautery on their feet, making sure to keep the hot coals from touching them.
Then place a cushion on the patient's feet.
When you have a fever, do not let your hands be near the fire.
And if the patient has an inflamed gut, then apply a cautery on their legs.
Then apply a cushion to their legs, for they are the cause of the pain.
And if a burning pain arises in other parts of the body.
And if your body has been marked by illness for forty days, apply a cushion to the area to seal in the illness and let no more be released.
And when the pain is in the leg, it is cauterized.
And if he wants to have his feet cauterized, then do so properly, and bind them tightly.
And you must keep the body from being overloaded with food and drink, or by exertion, lest they be healed in the wrong way.
And so you cauterize the intestine or other parts as they are affected by the pain in the legs, which causes the pain to be kept in check.
And if it is necessary to treat the illness, you should use this type of triangular cautery.
And that is why the one who suffers from gout in the thighs should be called a cacographer.
This sentence appears to be describing a medical treatment involving applying heat to a patient's leg.
Then apply the cautery to the area above the patient's thighs.
Then you must treat them with medicines.
And if a man's bowels are affected by gout, he will be treated according to the severity of the disease.
When a patient's pain is caused by a cold humors in their feet, they are said to have the gout.
The chapter title suggests that the following are instructions for treating a patient experiencing gout.
And then apply a cushion for leprosy treatment.
Then, if the patient has a predisposition to leprosy, it will be treated with medicine.
Then if you want to cauterize the patient's foot, remember to use a cushion on their back, as we have previously discussed.
And if the patient suffers from an ailment that causes excessive pain in their legs and feet, relief can be found through cauterization.
And if you are treating the feet, apply hot cautery to the head and legs in a specific way.
And if you wish to prevent it from spreading to other parts of the body, you can use it on the chest and other limbs as well.
E alcunas others treat it in other ways, depending on the situation.
And if the doctors are mistaken about the cause of pain, they can confuse it with gout.
And if there are few or more burns on the body, the rest should be translated as:
Then apply the appropriate remedy to the patient's illness.
Chapter 48.
When a cautery is used on the cavity of the body.
Then apply a cushion to the affected limb.
When your hand is placed upon them, it will help to reduce pain in the body. And apply ointment to that area to heal them.
And if it is necessary to cauterize any part of the body, it is said that it should be called gout.
When the whole body is moved by pain, it is wise to cauterize the area.
Another meaning of the text could be that the patient is suffering from an inflammation of the bowels or a condition related to the intestines.
And apply a cautery to the cauterization of the body, which is a painful condition on the feet.
Then apply medicine to the affected area, but be careful to avoid cauterizing their intestine if they have a hernia.
And if it is necessary to treat with a poultice of lentil flour and oil, and there is a need to apply a cautere to the leg:
Capitol .l.  is that section of the text which would be translated as "Chapter 1" if it were a modern text.
The patient's illness is treated with a hot cautery.
When cancer is caused by an imbalance of humors, then apply a cautery to the affected area.
And if it is not treated by a physician, the patient will be left with the pain.
And so, it is necessary to place a cushion under their intestine, as we have said.
Chapter 51.
And if it is necessary to cauterize the body, apply heat to the affected area.
Then return the excess blood on their legs or feet to its place by applying cauterization.
And if you apply cautery to the legs, it will be necessary to use another method on their chest.
And if there is pus, the arm should be treated with a cautery.
Treaty of the Foot Pains.
And so the patient is treated with cautery.
You are treating the disease of dry rot in the body, which is called "corrosione" in the original text, which is caused by a buildup of humors.
Therefore, if your patient has pain in their legs, treat them with cautery.
Then apply cautery to eradicate the inflammation from all parts of the body.
Then apply a poultice to the intestines so that they don't become infected.
And apply a cushion to their legs.
And if a patient has three days of pain, they should be treated by a doctor; otherwise, they should be left alone.
And then the patient is treated with medication to combat coldness. But the patient's legs should be treated with hot cautery.
Therefore, when pain occurs in the leg, apply a cushion to prevent the intestines from being affected.
Chapter 53.
This refers to the treatment of cauterization by someone who is trained in that field.
In some cases, doctors treat gout by applying heat to the affected area.
You have already applied the cauterizing tool to his legs, so he will be called upon to use the cauterized leg for a cure.
Then, place your hand on the patient's foot to prevent them from swelling. And that's how you treat it as gout. Then apply a poultice of wild herbs to the affected area, and let it sit for a night, lest it be left open to the cushion, and let it be placed on their legs, and another on their feet.
And apply to the location what you have learned about poultices to treat gout in the foot.
And if the gout does not allow the patient to move freely, then apply a cushion to the area where they are experiencing pain and use that as a guide for treatment.
And then the doctor should treat the affected area.
And place a cushion under those who are suffering from pain in the foot, which will be treated by you.
The original text is likely describing the use of a cautery tool being used on a patient suffering from gout.
And then cauterize the trembling.
Quan endeve a cushion of cold humors on the stomach, or to treat the disease called the four-fold plague, apply the fire olibanum for healing.
And if their ailment is caused by a trembling, you have to hurry to bring relief.
Capitol .51.
Then apply the cautery to the affected area on the legs or feet.
The patient's legs are being treated for a sickness, the pain is being caused by the type of illness they have.
Then apply a heated cautery to the affected areas.
This passage describes using a cautery tool to treat gout on the feet.
Capitol LVI.
The patient has a pain in the legs that causes them to be feverish.
And if it is necessary to use a hot cautery on the patient's legs, that would be difficult to treat the disease.
A hot water bottle was used for pain relief by placing it on the affected area.
And place a cushion on their legs to support them.
And then place your hand on their foot to prevent the pain.
Then apply the cautery to the veins in the feet, which are affected by the illness, and thus they are called for what they are.
Then apply the cauter to their legs and another for evil spirits on the thighs.
E sapias that when there’s a blockage in the arteries, which are often found in the feet, it is addressed by a doctor using a cautery or other means to reduce the swelling of the blood vessels.
And if it is a cushion that is being used for cauterization, they should be placed on their legs or feet.
Then apply a hot needle to the affected area, but don't let it cause blisters.
From the surgery of bloodletting and phlebotomy.
Then place a cushion on their legs to prevent the pain from spreading.
Then we will proceed in this chapter in the same way as the patient's condition requires.
Then you will have already learned about cauterization.
This sentence describes the symptoms of a plague-related condition: Then apply the other part of the body to prevent the intestine from being harmed by the plague or by arrows striking it. And give them a cushion to put on their legs, and another under their arms.
Then I urge you to be careful with the use of fire for cauterization. And if the disease takes hold of the body in such a way that it spreads to the limbs, then a cushion should be placed under the patient's legs to prevent them from suffering further pain.
And it is a pernicious disease.
A quo se pause en el seu ventre; et aprop sia sobre las piernas.
And place your hand on the patient's body for healing, or to indicate what will be revealed in the future about their health.
O, son, you should be protected by divine knowledge, for I will never again say that your blood was cold.
And if you have been operated on by an expert in treating wounds on the foot.
Chapter one.
And so apply cauterization to their head if you think they have water on the brain.
Sapias que if you are translating a medical text, you'll need to know what it means for someone to have a cushion placed on their legs.
When translated into English, it is a cushion will be applied to the affected area by the patient's foot.
And if I have seen the death of someone from a disease, I will call it gout.
And if you have opened their foot, that is to say, their child's foot, and another one is needed under their legs and on their feet.
And if the doctor determines the pain is caused by an excess of humors, then use a cautery on the patient's feet.
When there are humors in the foot, the other on the chest, it is that which causes the pain.
E donc si la humiditat es mays augmentada e l’autre,  the patient’s legs should be kept warm and a cushion placed under them.
And so, if the pain is due to excess humidity in the body, which can be seen as a sign of an imbalance in the humors, then you must drain the affected area with the cushion and further guide the flow of these fluids by applying pressure there. Another person will burn your hands if you have three or more humors in their body.
And if it is necessary to apply a poultice to the affected area when using a cushion for treatment, because some of the other remedies are working to strengthen it.
E il corpo es que costuma e'l pie per le lesa, que es autra manira.
This translates to:
This is the second chapter.
When there are painful swellings in the legs or feet, they should be treated with cauterization.
And thus, when you apply a pointed cautery to the surface of the foot, you will find that the pain is alleviated.
Then place a cushion on the legs of the patient, and use the same technique for each part of the body.
And when you stop the cautery on their legs from burning, they will surely feel better.
Then apply heat to the affected area to treat the condition.
And if the hernia does not appear on the chest, it's a sign that you have misdiagnosed the patient.
And if it is necessary to let out the blood from the body, it is done by piercing the skin with a hot iron, the amount of which depends on the quantity of the ailment and the location of the disease.
And another considers the plague and therefore holds back on applying a cautery to the bones, unless it is necessary for their health.
And you must take care to heal the patient's legs completely.
E. si es necessitat de que la metges tenen les venes del malalt.
This is a tricky one!
When the intestine is affected by the first onset of these symptoms, it is treated as follows.
The manner of performing the operation on the patient's legs is to be done in such a way that the wounds are visible only on their temples, but not on the feet themselves.
And if it is due to a hidden cause, you need to be careful to avoid putting too much pressure on the patient's legs while they are being treated. And if you have exposed the patient to the danger of a burn, place a cushion under their feet. This refers to using a cautery on a patient experiencing pain in their body.
And if there is a sharp pain in the toes, apply a cushion to the affected area, and another will be applied elsewhere.
And if you're sick, evacuate their blood as well.
When the wound is large, one should bandage it with strong bandages.
And then cut into the excess, which is what causes pain in the leg, open the wound; it is through that incision that you are to be treated for the symptoms.
And if you wish, cauterize that which is infected by that same cautery.
And it is better to have a cauterized wound on the leg rather than having it be untreated.
And if you wish to draw a bloodletting, then you should do so with a dry cautery, and use that method for treating gout.
Then you should apply cautery to the affected area. And if any of those causes are present in your case, you should treat the area where the intestines are with cold compresses.
And if the patient has two or more servants, the others are treated with a heated cushion for pain relief.
This is the way a cauteri is used:
And a cushion is placed between the two ribs. Therefore, put your hand under their legs and apply another poultice to prevent the spread of the illness.
And when there is such a swelling, apply heat to the area to ease the pain.
And this is the best way to open the patient's thigh for surgery.
Then if the pain comes from the foot, another cushion is placed on the legs.
Chapter four.
This refers to the treatment of pain from injuries to the legs.
And so that the patient's body fluids do not become heated in the process of cauterization, use a cushion to protect the intestine.
And if you are experiencing pain in the joints, use a cautery to burn the skin where it hurts. And if it is necessary to make points on the legs of the patient, you should always call them away from the other side.
E lengthen the pain in your toe by continuing to use a hot iron on them. And if the patient's feet are swollen, it is customary to call it gout.
And if the blood is dry, you have to apply a poultice.
You have already found the patient's pulse. This is the first line from a medieval medical text in Latin-like language. Then apply your hand to their second foot. And apply a sharp or blunt instrument as needed to remove the excess fluid from the patient's body.
Another way to say that the patient has gout is to say they have a painful condition in their feet.
This means that the doctors would consider a treatment involving bloodletting for gout.
Another person should be called in to help with the pain in their legs.
Then you should put a cushion under them to prevent their legs from being affected by cold humors.
And on the third day apply warm water or something else to the affected area.
This chapter describes the use of a cautery in treating gout.
> This refers to applying a cushion for pain relief in the head.
When joint pain is caused by excessive humors that are causing inflammation in the feet, it is called gout.
Then apply a cushion to their left knee, for that is where the pain originates.
Dry out all the blood with a sponge or cloth. Place a cushion under their feet to prevent inflammation.
Then when the inflammation has subsided, the swelling will begin to subside.
This refers to the use of a cautery in treating the illness, which was often caused by an imbalance of humors in the body.
This refers to the treatment of the ear.
So there are four causes for pain that occurs in the legs, one being a pointed stone.
And if the pain affects the ears, then apply a cautery to the other parts of the body that are related to the legs, which are those causes that make the leg swell, and use the hot cautery on the patient for the causes of such causes as they are in the foot, or whatever else is causing them. And another person has to be there to hold the patient's legs apart as they are being treated.
Then if it is necessary to make bloodletting more subtle, it is administered on the limbs.
Then apply a gentle extraction to the patient's legs, and use a bandage for the wound on the foot.
And if it is necessary to cauterize a wound on the foot, it is said that the other one should be treated with a hot iron. Then apply cautery to the area with great force.
Then, in this way, you will be able to see how the pain affects the body. And you have already applied cautery to the patient's ear, and another part of the body, which helps to control the bleeding.
This is a difficult question to answer accurately without more context! It seems like you are asking me to translate something in a language I don't recognize.
Then put your hand on the affected area to make it stop. Then if you are dealing with an intestine problem, and you have already tried other remedies, such as using your hand to hold in place the affected area, try applying a poultice of that substance.
And if the cause is in the bowels and joints, let the patient be given a cushion to hold their intestines in place. He will administer cauterization to them, using the cushion to help protect the area.
And if you are thinking of placing a cushion under their legs, it is better to do it under the feet.
Mays is a type of sneeze, e.g., if you have a cold, it is advisable to use a cushion for your nose when making a gesture of sneezing to protect the body from the spread of illness. And so that the pain in their legs be cauterized.
And so that the pain in their legs be cauterized. E ja, if you are willing to do so, I will give you the English translation:  And then apply water to the affected area.
And then, when the inflammation has been reduced, you can apply a cold cushion to the inflamed area.
When the patient's body is affected by the ailment, such as in the case of gout, which affects the feet.
Apos le dolor de la malaute e le cavity to be opened.
And if there is already inflammation in the body, you should apply a cautery to it. And if strong pain afflicts someone, a physician will use a cautery to remove them.
Translation: When there is pain in the legs or feet, it is customary for physicians to refer to it as gout if it is caused by cold humors.
When there is pain in the joint, it is treated with medications. Make the patient stand on their legs and put cushions under them.
And then apply heat to whatever is in the cavity so that if anything is present there is a cushion for the foot and another one for the hips. And if you want to apply a poultice to a patient's body, especially for gout, you can use a cushion.
And when it is necessary to treat the legs, use a small cautery. And if the cause of the pain is in the ear, it is considered an illness of the head by physicians.
Chapter 7
And for the treatment of aural inflammation.
Then sometimes a stone is found in the body of a man and he causes inflammation in his stomach, or if he is a victim of the plague, it is done to them.
Then apply a cushion to the area to be cauterized so that the body's humors do not escape.
When you cauterize, place the patient's feet in the sun. And so if you see the symptoms, treat them with a cautery applied to the legs.
And if it is the foot that is affected by a disease, then apply a cauterization to the affected legs.
Then apply the cushion to the patient's body where they are experiencing pain, which can be caused by many factors, including gout.
Then apply the cautery to the patient's leg a little bit on their thigh.
Et autre se provat a cushion under their legs.
And if you want to treat a wound on the leg, which will be treated by applying poultice to the thigh, and use the poultice for the treatment of the condition.
Then apply pressure to the affected area to stop the bleeding, using another cushion to hold the patient's leg in place.
Chapter 8.
This translates to "for the treatment of their eyes" or "treat them (the patient) with a cautery", depending on what the translator wishes to emphasize.
And when there's a problem in the legs of those with gout, apply hot compresses to the affected area.
Then we have to consider the possibility of the patient having gout or other diseases.
When the pain is unbearable, apply cautery to the thighs with a fine instrument.
When there is an incision on their legs; they are making use of its benefits for the patient.
This is a chapter heading in a medieval medical treatise.
And if the body has been exposed to cold air, then you should put cushions on the eyelids.
The patient's illness has caused by a disturbance in the humors.
And another cushion should be placed on their feet, and a large amount of moisture applied to them.
And if it is necessary to burn the affected area, then place the patient on a cushion.
Therefore, we will explain how to treat the fissure that occurs in the foot.
And if it is a large figure, it is a doctor's role to adjust it with a cushion for the legs and another on their chest.
And if the pain is less severe, the patient will be relieved by the balm.
And if you need to apply a hot needle to the body, use a cautery, for it's only called gout when applied by a physician.
Then you must burn the place where the pain is located.
Chapter 10
This is the cure for the swelling of the eyelid.
Treat them as gout, which is caused by cold humors that affect the joints, especially in the feet.
And if you want to know what they are feeling, they will tell you through their skin about the pain in the feet.
Translation: When the body has been affected by the cold, it is necessary to place a cushion under their feet and put them back in their proper position.
And if it is necessary to cauterize the entire leg, it is recommended that the doctors use a hot iron for a burn.
And if it's necessary to open the patient's legs, let them be covered by a cushion.
When the doctor has healed a wound on your foot, he will then tell you to leave your hand on it.
Then you have placed a cushion under the patient's legs to prevent them from being ill.
And if the pain is in the foot, then place a cushion on the affected area to prevent further injury.
Then heal that which needs healing by applying a poultice.
When the sore occurs on the patient's foot, it will heal quickly.
Chapter 11.
The original text appears to be a mix of Spanish ("las cuales" seems to imply another language) and possibly Italian or Latin words in what looks like an attempt at a fictional "medieval dialect".
When the doctor sees that the patient's illness is caused by the sharp pain in his or her feet, it is called "attacking the foot" (or simply "gout").
Therefore, if you wish to brand the patient's name on those who have been afflicted by it, apply the hot iron to the area near the left foot, then another near the eye, and they will be branded with this.
And so if your body needs to be treated for humors affecting the legs, then apply a poultice to the area around the thigh bones.
Then you have applied heat to the patient's eyelids, but apply a cautery to the other parts of the body, it is called “gout” in the case of the foot.
Then apply a cautery to the area between the two channels, which are the legs, because the patient's feet have been treated. And then apply cautery to the patient's feet.
Then place a cushion on the angle of the jaw, if necessary, to keep the patient comfortable.
And so you will apply a poultice to the affected area for three days or four, and use the other one.
But if you wish, leave it alone, for the plague is already sealed.
The pain should be applied to the foot, if necessary, and there is no need to fear its application.
And if it is necessary to use a different method to treat something that affects their body, then do so using three methods of treatment: one for fuelha, one for the area above the ankle, and one for the area below the ankle.
And if it is necessary to apply heat to the affected area, one must first reduce the swelling of the patient's joints.
And if a bandage is needed for the legs, use it.
If you have an apostate, cauterize it; if it's caused by a humor, apply a cushion to the affected area.
And if you use a hot poultice on the affected area, then do so in the same manner as previously described.
Then apply cautery to the area of the leg, placing your hand over the area to prevent the intestine from being burned. and so on, until you reach the point where the other two are together. And you have already caused an incision in the patient's legs with your hands.
"And so the patient's body was affected by a cold humor, which caused pain to spread in their legs."
Mays es tu es the same as Translation 2: And if it is necessary to make a cut in the area where the bloodletting was done, you will apply a cauterizer to the cushion.
The patient's eyelid is raised and held open.
And then, according to this method, you will have made a cautery on the legs of them, and another on their feet. And if it is the intestines, then let them be neither too long nor too short.
Another one should apply a hot compress to the affected joint.
When the leg is stiff, the body is stiffened by the cold.
If pain occurs in your legs, it is customary to call for a physician. And the length of the intestine should be the length of a palm.
And so if you are another who wants to learn about the art of medicine, you should know that they typically call such things gout.
And the patient's body will be treated gently, for their ailment is delicate and subtle.
And then apply the needle to the foot, where it is needed, having first opened up the space between the legs.
And then apply heat to the area on the legs or feet.
Then apply a poultice to the affected area.
Then, apply cauterization to the leg or foot as needed.
And so you should leave the patient alone for two or three days if they have a cushion under their legs.
And if you have to use a cautery on the legs, it should be done carefully so as not to burn the cushion or the patient's body.
This chapter describes how to treat a condition where pain is caused by something external.
When treating an eyelid condition, it is important to apply a treatment to the entire eyelid, including the area around the eye.
When the pain affects the patient's feet, it is called gout by physicians.
Place your hand on the affected area to prevent the patient from having pain in the body of the foot, and apply heat to the patient's legs and a cushion to their feet, and do not let them move the affected area.
And let it be known that you should use a cushion to apply pressure to the affected area if necessary.
Usa the herbs to treat the patient's illness, which will be called gout, as the cushion should be placed under their legs and the oils are used for treatment.
To be healed by the fire of the disease.
And if their hands are not removed from the patient's body, they should be applied to the legs, etc., in order to properly cauterize them.
Chapter 14
And if it is necessary to cure the inflammation in the patient's eye, they should have their eyelid cauterized.
This is the true meaning of the word "algia" for the condition of the eye, which is why they call it "true-algia".
This sentence refers to the use of other methods for treating the patient besides lancing or cutting.
Then the foot which has been previously opened up, place it back together with the cushion or a needle.
Then apply the cautery to the flesh, as needed? Then place your hand on their eyes while keeping the patient's foot in place.
The patient's body is affected by two types of inflammation: another that affects the body as a whole.
And if it is necessary to cauterize the leg.
When already opened, the skin, for the one who has gout.
Use cushions to soften the pain caused by hard substances.
And if the patient has no fever, place a hot iron on their body to apply another cauterization. And for the other, separate the body parts according to how we have said.
And in the case of joint pain, which occurs in the legs, the other (the patient) will need to be heated with the aid of hot stones or a poultice.
And so the wise doctors always prepare for all sorts of things to do in the operation on the body to restore them to their natural state or near to it.
Chapter 15.
"Then treat the affected eye and remove the cushion from under them."
Then apply the poultice to the affected eyelid so that it is not closed.
And then you will be able to make a cushion for his use.
When there's an injury to the foot, apply heat after the pain has subsided.
Then place a cushion under them, and hold their hands to prevent the pain from spreading to other parts of the body.
And if the patient's intestines are inflamed and painful, apply your hand to their hernia as well.
Chapter 16
Of which, in the case of the foot, a cushion should be placed on the foot, or under the arms if they are in pain.
Then it is clear that this pain is caused by nerves, or perhaps by something like a frozen white blood vessel.
When the pain is in both eyes, it is customary to use the major intestine or hernia for treatment.
If it's true that you have a pain in your legs, then the pain will be severe and debilitating. And if the needle enters the flesh of the foot it is used to treat the pain in the feet by applying heat. And then you should cauterize that area, if necessary.
Then apply a cautery to the legs to prevent the patient from experiencing further complications.
And if it's necessary to apply cautery to the legs or feet, it should be done carefully, avoiding damage to other tissues.
And see to it that the cautery does not touch the skin or the tunic.
Aprop one should apply a cautery to the affected area, and another method on the legs, and place the patient in a hot bath.
And if it is difficult to cure, then you should use another method to cure this type of pain.
And if you want to cut into the surface of the foot, place a cushion on the surface of the thigh. This refers to a condition that causes pain in the chest or legs due to a delicate nature. Then put another cushion on their legs to prevent the intestine from becoming exposed or damaged.
And apply a hot cushion to the affected area of their body, and apply another that is cold to the other parts.
And then place another one of your cushions on his legs, and so on, for as long as necessary to treat the condition.
A cushion will be placed under their intestines, if necessary.
And apply a cushion to their tear ducts and keep them in their place.
When the disease affects the legs, apply a hot cautery to treat it.
And so apply a cautery to the leg, for it was caused by the cold in the thighs that must be kept warm.
The patient's eyelids are affected by the assembled body of gout.
The patient has been treated for his/her illness, which is commonly known as gout.
And let your incision be made, which is the custom when you speak of that which is called in the language of the ancients a small chapter, or, more accurately, a short description of what is being written about.
Then, having completed the operation on the patient's legs, make sure to place a cushion under their legs to ensure a smooth recovery after applying a cauterization to them.
And if there's still pain in the legs, you will know that they need to be cauterized again, and then treat them with a hot cushion.
Then apply heat to the patient's body, but only to those areas where necessary, and avoid using cautery unless absolutely needed.
This appears to be a line from a medieval medical text, likely describing the location affected by gout.
Regarding the collection of herbs, it is customary for healers to use them.
When there are gouty humors in the body, it is called gout.
Therefore, you must first ascertain if the pain in the leg is due to a cold humor.
And so that the pain in the lower abdomen be addressed, use the following method for the other parts:
And so the pain in the legs is that which causes them to be swollen.
Then cauterize the veins, and if necessary apply the herbs to heal them.
E if it is necessary to perform surgery on the foot, do not allow those veins to be cut.
Then apply a hot poultice to the patient's legs, and hold their feet in place when you cauterize.
And if that pain in the intestines is not treated, it will become chronic.
And then apply a second cushion to their legs, and the third one to their hands.
And this is the form in which the body is affected by gout.
Chapter .xix.
A l'apressia, there are many ways to treat the ailment.
Then cure with cautery if you can't find a place in the body where the disease has been caused by heat, otherwise treat it.
Therefore, when the bone is exposed and there are other servants in the form of a surgeon's hand to be applied to the affected area, you cauterize the affected part.
And if the foot were affected, or the intestine, it would be necessary to treat it with hot cautery, carefully applying your treatment.
Then gently move the leg aside, so that the patient doesn't feel pain in their feet, which are swollen due to a cold.
And if it is necessary to cauterize the patient's limbs, then hold their hands steady.
And if this pain persists for 40 days, it will be considered healed by the body's natural healing process.
And if the cushion was placed under their legs to be used for other purposes, then that's what they would be called for.
The patient's limbs are weakened and emaciated as if by a disease.
And so if you need to apply a cautery to the leg or arm of the patient.
Thus, it is customary to treat them with soothing medicines.
Therefore, since the patient's body is affected by gout.
The English translation provided for the original text suggests that "Capitol .xx" is a header and "e" likely represents an "and" in the context of the document.
"For reducing the swelling"
And when the pain of the joints is severe, it is necessary to apply a poultice on the affected area, as well as hold the poultice in place.
Then fold the bandage in four pleats, as you would for a gout attack.
Then return the patient to their natural state. And if you are applying cups to treat a person's illness, apply strong suction to their legs by placing them on the thighs.
Then apply hot poultices to the affected limb.
And then you must apply heat to their legs and feet as previously mentioned.
If the patient's intestines are inflamed, it is best to avoid using cauterization on their feet.
Another thing that's important to remember is that gout is typically caused by cold humors in the foot.
Then apply a hot knife to the area around the iris.
And so the patient's intestines are inflamed, and they need to be treated, which is why you will use a needle to treat them.
Then lay your hand on the vein for the cushion to be placed in the path of the needle.
And if the plague is upon them, then comfort them, placing your hand on their body where they are afflicted, so that the plague does not worsen.
And sometimes it is treated with a cushion wrapped around the foot.
Place a cushion under their legs, so they don't get a joint pain called gout.
Another hand should be placed on the patient's chest, and another on their legs.
This means treatment for gout.
This illness is called gout, and it is only used to treat that ailment.
Then, place a cushion under the legs of the patient and put their foot in a position where the pain will be relieved by placing your hand on the affected part.
Then placed on their legs.
The phrase "Mays es" suggests a conditional statement, similar to "if it is necessary" in English.
Therefore, because you are a sufferer of gout, I hope to bring relief by applying heat and drawing out the toxins from your body through distillation.
And if it is treated, then it will heal by itself.
Another translation for "Capitol .xxii." could be **Chapter 22.**
Here comes the translation for the body part affected by the ailment:
Now you have to pierce the cushion of the thighs.
Then apply a poultice to the affected area, and apply heat to the body part.
And if they are in the body, it's elsewhere to apply cauterization.
and then place a cushion on your right hand if the patient's leg is injured.
And if you have already opened the way for the illness to be near the part of the legs.
Then place your hand on their legs and upon their feet, so as to prevent them from being affected by gout.
Cove that the physician should be called in to treat the patient's foot pain.
And if the pain persists in the leg, you may need to treat it with a poultice or cushion.
Therefore, if you want to restore the health of the intestine, you must apply heat to their body.
And so when the heat is in the body, you move the heat to the leg affected by the disease.
We have discovered that the patient's condition was a swelling in the legs.
Then apply a cushion to their legs and feet if they are swollen, and use other cushions as needed.
And therefore, for such an ailment in that joint, one would apply a cautery to it.
And then he was given a bandage.
When it comes to the foot, be prepared to apply a proper treatment.
And apply a poultice to treat the ailment of the body, leaving no part untreated.
And on their legs, for as long as they have been ill.
Then apply the other cushion to their legs, so that they are no longer open.
And then apply the poultice to the affected area. And you have put a bandage on the affected area of the foot.
Then treat them as needed.
When you treat it for a few days, the patient's intestines will be relieved.
And apply a poultice to their affected areas.
The disciple should not be given a chance to see anything in the operation.
And so they apply heat to their legs with a cushion, and if there are any problems, the patient should be given a cushion, and the other parts of the body should be treated accordingly.
And perhaps you have seen the same in our land, which is called by the ancients.
And these are the types of diseases that are known as gout.
And if it is a case of gout or iron sickness, they should be treated with this method:
The chapter containing the text about the ailment called gout.
Then apply a hot cautery to the flesh of the patient's legs, and place another cauteries on their thighs, so that the patient may be healed.
When the disease is caused by the scorpion's sting, or some other cause that resembles it. And if a patient has a condition that affects the flesh, you should place a cushion on their legs, and hold them in place while holding the other hand.
Therefore, if you have a cushion placed under the patient's legs, then place it on their chest. When there is pain in the joints or if there are other causes. This is a bad case of gout, for it affects the whole body, but you will only know if it’s necessary to cauterize it.
And then apply a cushion to the affected area (to the nose). Mays if the nose is stuffy and there's humidity in the patient's mouth, it means they are already being healed by its influence.
And if it is necessary to make a point on the body, you should know that the pain in the legs is due to the humors being imbalanced, so apply a cushion to the place where the pain is not on their feet.
If someone has pain in their joints, and other problems arise from swollen tendons or an enlarged liver, treat them as follows.
And when it is necessary to burn the patient's body, the physician should use a pointed cautery for that purpose.
Here comes the second line: This is a description of a person's legs being treated for a hernia.
And if it is necessary to drain fluids from the body, apply cautery to the patient's limbs.
Then apply a lead cushion to the leg for a few days until it heals.
If pain persists after treatment, use medicine to treat it.
E aquesta lu purgeys, et lo cossí per la qual s'ha de ferir el pacient, then you cauterize their legs.
And if it is silver or a metal that causes pain, place your hand upon them.
Gout is caused by other things being in the way, but you can use a cauterizing tool on the surface to address the specific pain caused by them.
Chapter 25.
And if the patient has been treated for their ailment, you should apply a poultice to the affected area.
The patient's hands are to be restrained during treatment to prevent them from moving.
And if you wish to treat the patient's condition, it is important to apply the cushion to the legs, but I don't see any need for a physician. And if it is necessary to cauterize the intestine, then do so.
Then, if the patient has been burned in the legs, you should apply a bandage to the affected area.
Then apply heat to the affected area and let the patient know that it will be painful.
The 26th chapter.
And apply cushions to the lips and so on, as well as to the nostrils, to prevent the spread of the disease.
You know that in such a case, it's said to be an ailment only affecting some men.
So be careful to avoid opening the intestine or causing further injury when you are treating someone who is sick with the plague.
And if the patient's lips are swollen, you must cauterize them. Adjust the legs and use a poultice for the healing of the body, and if you need to put a cushion on the feet.
And if the patient has a problem with their foot, you will be able to see if it is necessary to make a hot compress or cauterize it.
Then apply the appropriate cautery on the affected area, being careful not to burn the patient.
And from the extraction of that which is in the lower lip or upper lip, those are the lips.
The patient's body is afflicted by painful humors.
And if you want to treat a wound in the foot, apply a cushion to prevent further injury.
**Capitol .xxviii. translates to Chapter 28.**
Make incisions on the flesh of the gums.
A large number of teeth are in the mouth, which was already opened by the dentist, so then you would burn them with the cautery.
Then apply a cushion to the area where the pain is felt, and proceed to treat it with other astringent remedies.
Then apply the cautery to the flesh in a secondary manner.
The following text is a medieval medical treatise written in a language that is somewhat similar to Latin, Italian, and Spanish, but it appears you've provided an excerpt with grammatical errors.
Then apply a cushion to their teeth.
And if there are roughnesses on the feet, or in the legs, gums, and teeth, they have already been corrupted by something that causes pain.
And if it is necessary to make a treatment for the illness, then you should apply a cautery to the affected area.
If you are careful, the intestine or the foot will be sufficient to cure him; the other, if necessary, will be opened up.
And you know that the teeth need to be treated with cauterizing tools of various shapes and sizes, depending on what kind of treatment they are undergoing. E per cushion the intestine for pain.
Capitol .xxx. is the beginning of a section in the text.
On the removal of teeth.
When one's teeth are extracted, the pain may be relieved by applying a poultice to their gums.
When a tooth is removed from the body, the pain will only cease when that tooth is extracted.
When you have a tooth that requires surgery, if there is a toothache, the surgeon will use a cushion to protect the area.
And if it is necessary to cauterize the burn on the foot, be careful not to damage the flesh.
And so if it is not stopped, gout will spread throughout the body.
This sentence describes a situation where a tooth is being treated by a dentist.
And if you are treating a wound on the gum, prepare for the patient to be treated with a scarificacio.
And if you are making points on their bones, they should be called difficult by doctors.
And if it is necessary to make points on their legs, it’s done by applying a cushion under them in the following way.
And if bloodletting is necessary for the patient, bleed him with a cushion, and apply cautery to the other parts of his body.
The shape of the forceps and tongs used for extracting teeth should be such that they are strong enough to do so without breaking.
And when the intestines are inflamed, those which are in their natural state are called by the name of gout.
And if they are suffering from gout, which is caused by India ink, the translation should be done in a way that is specific to the nature of the pain and swelling.
The patient's legs or feet are being affected by the condition.
And if you remove a tooth and the bones of the jaw are fractured.
Then after that you should remove the cushion from the legs to prevent further pain.
The doctors use other tools on their legs besides using their hands.
And if you don't have a good grip on the patient's legs, use these forceps to hold them back.
And if they are small, they have been made large because of their smallness.
If an ailment affects the joints, it is called gout by doctors.
Then, the shape of the second instrument should be such that it can be applied to the leg without causing burns.
And thus you will help to fix the pain in the legs by using this instrument. And if the patient needs to have their teeth treated with other instruments.
And if it is necessary to make a cauterization on the foot, use another instrument for that purpose, the cushion being placed upon the injured area.
And then you cauterize the teeth and gums, but don't forget to use another instrument to hold them in place.
And so, the skilled surgeon who is treating them should be careful about which diseases are treated by applying a hot cautery to their body.
And if it is necessary to make a point on the bone of a tooth, or on the other teeth, for that is the way they are called.
And if there are large knots or lumps in the joint, they are called out by the patient’s foot, and then apply heat to them to prevent them from escaping.
And if the patient suffers from a lack of cushioning in their bones, you must use a cushion for other parts of their body to prevent pain during surgery.
The text appears to be in a language similar to Latin, but with some French influences. It seems like a recipe for making a broth or stew.
And from the treatment of the teeth, which are distinguished from the other diseases by their location, it is called another disease.
Then use that same instrument to treat the pain in the legs caused by the pain of the body.
And so the patient must be careful not to let the tooth become infected.
And when the patient's illness is from a specific type of ailment in the legs, a type of gout that should be called lient by the physician.
Then place the cushion under their feet so the pain doesn't spread to other parts of the body. And then the body's humors are treated by placing a cushion on the affected area.
And if the patient has a pain in their leg, it is called sciatica by them.
And if it is necessary to treat pain in the legs by cauterization, then apply heat to the body.
Then apply a gold or silver treatment to the gums.
And if the foot is affected by the ailment of gout, it is customary to apply cushions or other remedies to their legs and feet.
And if you want to burn the skin of the foot, and if there are other things you want to apply the cautery to, and so on. Apply a cautery to the affected area to open the passage for urine flow.
When you have treated the patient's legs, place a cushion under their knees.
The patient's legs are placed on the surgical instrument to hold them steady, et autre And place your hand on their leg.
And then apply a cushion to his or her legs, and place the other hand on the foot to prevent swelling.
And thus you see the difference between healthy teeth and those afflicted by this ailment.
This means the physician should be skilled in the art of removing teeth.
And so it should be treated by a skilled artisan or craftsman.
Then some bones are affected by the pain, and it is called gout when there's no need for a cushion.
Then apply a hot cautery to the affected area to prevent the blood from escaping.
And from the ligament which is in the leg, you must apply a cautery to their legs.
This is a ligament, the which is in the language some things are natural or it is called a sprain.
And if there is a need to cauterize between the legs of the patient, apply heat to the body, which prevents the tongue or intestine from being affected by the disease.
If the patient has a pain in the legs, then treat them with a cautery.
If the patient has a wound on their leg or foot, the physician should cauterize it.
and the patient will be made to be washed by the one who has gout in their hands, and if it is necessary to wash the feet, or a cushion is placed under them, so they will be washed again and the patient will be called by the name of the disease itself.
This is likely describing the treatment of gout, a disease often associated with pain in the joints, particularly the feet. And place your hand on his/her chest so they don't have pain in their legs or feet.
This appears to be a medieval medical text discussing gout.
Then apply this same method to the other parts of the body that are affected by the ailment.
And if the pain is severe, place another cushion on their feet.
Then open the patient's legs and consider your options on the feet.
And if you see it to be black or blue in color, it is a sign that the person has gout.
And when you apply the cautery to the patient's foot, keep them warm enough so that they don't feel cold during the operation.
Then apply the appropriate treatment to the patient's body, which will heal it.
This is likely the beginning of a section or chapter in a text.
This text describes treating a condition called "apostasies" by placing cushions under their legs and another on their throat.
Gout in the throat, if it's your first time experiencing it, was thought to be caused by an imbalance of cold humors.
And if the pain is in the feet, then you are already dealing with a case of that illness.
When a disease is caused by something other than the foot, a poultice should be applied to the place where the pain is located.
E then you must consider whether the wound has been drained or if a poultice needs to be applied to the affected area.
And if it is made of silver or of iron, it is called a "crampe" (Translation: And let a cushion be placed on their legs, so that the metal does not rust).
And if the pain is in the foot, then it is called gout. And now I will translate the Latin-like phrases into English.
And now I will translate the Latin-like phrases into English. And if you use a cautery on the patient's legs, it means that the pain is in the leg.
And if a hot iron or other instrument is applied to the affected area, but the one using the cushion must be from the right side:
And then mark the other parts of the body in the same way.
Migt-se que the patient's foot·l'am or pain is caused by an imbalance of humors in their body, which can be cured with a poultice of milgrana (juniper) and mirtra (myrtle).
Then put hot coals on the cushion below, and if you need to, use another tool for cauterization.
And the woman was already being medicated, who was sick in her throat, or rather, she had a disease that caused her to be treated as if it were a boil, which is why you have a cushion on the patient's knees and another on her elbows.
And if a boil has opened up in two places by a physician, then it is a sign of a serious condition.
And if you are going to make a medical incision, you can use the phrase “pain happens” in the place of the patient’s pain.
And then apply cautery to their large intestine. And then the patient's foot must be treated with a cushion placed under them.
And if you are certain that the pain in the leg is due to gout, then you should apply cautery.
This is a bit tricky as "Capitol" isn't actually a Latin word, but rather a modern term.  It likely means:
From cutting into the humors when they are affected by gout.
And if the humors are cold and cause pain in the legs, it is called catarrh; if it is on the body or the bowels, then it is called...
Then if you are treating an inflammation that appears in the area of the body where it arose.
When you treat someone who suffers from pain in their limbs, you should treat them according to their individual needs, which are often a result of humor imbalances.
And if you have already been subjected to a surgical procedure, then you can expect to be healed by the natural healing process.
And so place a cushion on the feet when making an incision there.
If a physician wishes to apply heat to the area between the legs, they must use a special tool, place a cushion under their hands, and be careful that the treatment doesn’t cause more harm than good.
When the pain in the joints arises, use a cushion to apply a hot poultice to the affected area, as if by using a cautery on the bone or the cavity of the body.
And then put your hand on the affected area (the leg) for as long as necessary.
And if you wish, place the patient's leg under a cushion to protect the skin from burns.
And if you are treating a person for a disease, they may be afflicted by humors which cause pain in the body due to its infiltration by the cold, damp humors, that is what causes pain.
And this type of treatment is more saving than cutting, and takes longer to heal from.
When the wound has been opened, treat it with a poultice made from calamus, ysop, and other herbs mixed with a solution of water and vinegar.
And if it's applied to the throat, it is called "podagra" because it affects the whole body.
Do the same to the other leg at the point of the boil and apply a hot compress to the area.
When you are in pain, use this instrument to apply a hot coal to your mouth.
And this treatment is good for your health.
Capitol 38.
And if the pain is caused by other things in the throat, it's due to various reasons.
And if it is necessary to keep the limb warm, and do not let the patient get cold.
And if it is necessary to declare the patient's condition as you would apply them in their proper place, which is the body part they need to be applied to, it is obvious that a cushion is being used for the treatment of the patient.
The first part of the text seems to be in a language similar to Latin, but it's likely the author meant for "pe" to mean "feet" rather than a medical term. And if you must apply cautery to the body, use another one for the cushion.
When you know the causes of gout, apply lead to the affected area according to the following method:
And if it is necessary to cauterize the intestine, place the cautery with care.
Then place a bandage on the affected bone to prevent further pain, and treat the skin to make sure the infection doesn't spread outside of the wound.
When the doctor is called in for the patient's ailment, they must first treat the underlying cause before addressing the symptom itself.
Capitol .xxxix.  means Chapter 39.
And so you apply the cautery to the neck (or throat) of the patient.
When you are treated with medications, consider the patient's health when using them on the patient.
So you see, if one experiences pain in the legs, they should be careful when applying this treatment to the body.
And if it is not possible to remove the fluid from the patient's body, pause the other cauterizations.
Then apply cold water to the affected area.
If you are in pain, apply a poultice to the affected area.
And then you must apply cautery to the foot.
And then apply heat to the affected area, so that the cushions may be warmed to treat the patient for the ailment.
E if you do not cauterize, it is customary for doctors to call it gout that causes the pain.
This sentence describes a specific type of medical treatment. Then apply to the patient a poultice on the intestines and make them apply a hot poultice to the affected area.
The text is a title or heading in a language similar to Latin, Italian, Spanish, and French.
When illness affects the legs, use leeches on their feet to draw out the humors from the body.
And if there are many boils on the skin of the body, or on the legs, we can translate that as:  "there is a lot of illness in the body, the book says"
And then for another, they must be treated with care.
Then apply leeches to the affected area to draw out the humors.
May many blessings be upon them.
And place a cushion on their legs so that they are warm if needed. When a boil has matured, it's time to lance it.
Then apply another hand to their limbs, so they are not exposed, and treat the area with a hot cautery.
And if it is necessary to cauterize a patient's body part, it is done by making punctures with a needle for other treatments to be applied to the area.
And if a wound is made on the body or a limb, apply a cushion to the area as needed.
And if you have lanced a leg boil, treat them as follows.
If your body has wounds that are open to the air, they are usually called abscesses.
And if there are small boils, it should be treated with cauterization accordingly.
When the humors are out of balance, it can cause pain in the legs and feet.
And the patient's foot is held in place by the other two, which are cushions.
And so you see that the moon-shaped treatment for pain in the legs is similar to those given to the foot.
But for one who has a lion in their chest, they will be called something else.
The other three options are incorrect.
You have already opened the space, or legs, or you are to be a woman or a man, who has been affected by illness in the past.
When you are treating a patient with a large intestine and have to remove a part of the body that has been affected by a cold humor, and the other parts are less severe, you must treat them carefully to prevent damage to the intestine.
And if the patient has a wound on their foot, you must apply a bandage to protect it from the pain of the abscess.
If during the operation you find blood coming from the patient, administer water and apply hot vinegar to their legs.
And so the book teaches that a continuous flux of blood should be treated with a regimen and stopped from spreading.
If there is an infection in the legs or feet, apply a poultice to them.
And if it is in summer, and the cushion is placed on the patient's chest, then you should apply a cushion to the area of the pain.
Then we must use the knowledge of the cure of the apostemas to treat each individual part.
Chapter xli.
This is a description of the location of a boil in the thigh.
In the case of pain in the legs, use a cushion under their knees and place them on the foot to prevent the small ones from being formed.
And they are to be treated with those who are known as leeches. And from those [people] who are already suffering from excessive humidity in their body, I recommend you apply the following treatment to them:  a cushion be placed under the patient's legs, et cetera.
In every part of the body, there are those who have a special skill in surgery.
And so you must know that the intestines are often affected by such ailments.
This is an old medical text describing how to treat someone suffering from a condition that causes pain in the joints, particularly those in the feet.
And so begin treatment to reduce the cushion's influence on the ailment.
Then you should apply a poultice to their legs; if not, use a poultice of cushion and water on the body.
Then cure the infected area with the second and third methods, and the disease will be healed.
And here's how to treat a patient who has gout, according to this text, you should use this method: (This phrase likely describes a specific treatment for gout) When there are signs of gout in the body, you must place your hand on its location.
And if your hands are affected by the pain you should apply the cushion to the body and then.
Here the patient's ailment is caused by an overabundance of blood and a lack of proper drainage in the joints.
When leeches are applied to the head, and the bloodletting is done.
This is a description of the first step in treating an infected wound on the foot.
You then need to place cushions on their legs, and you should also apply heat to relieve the pain.
Then place a cushion on their legs so that they are properly supported, and apply the appropriate remedy.
"Gout" in this context refers to a painful swelling caused by the buildup of uric acid crystals in the joints.
And if there be a scrofula that afflicts the chest, it is proper to apply cautery.
Motas are applied to the legs when they have been afflicted by gout; we place cushions on the body to make the patient comfortable.
So that the patient's leg would be warm, the doctors used a cushion to apply pressure to their foot.
Then apply a poultice to the affected area, and if the patient has a boil, they should be treated with a poultice for the duration of the illness.
When you are treating a patient for that condition, you should use a cushion on the parts of the body where the pain occurs.
And it is more careful than you have to be careful with its own vein (infiltrating)
In the case of a wound, you must treat it with care to prevent infection or gangrene. When blood is drawn.
Return to the patient's legs, and he will be taken care of by the physician.
Then apply the treatment for the other causes of small pains to the legs.
And if you are making a mark on the body, use a tool that does not cut into the veins. If the pain in the legs is necessary for the physician to treat, then apply a cautery point to their body.
Then apply the Egyptian ointment to the area you have already opened up.
And if you treat that which is caused by a bad humoral balance, such as an infected wound, you should immediately cauterize the two lips of the open wound, using the cushion to protect surrounding areas.
Mays the patient has a large amount of scrofula, which must be treated by removing fluids from the affected area.
When the foot is affected by a disease or ailment, it is called scrofulous.
Then apply a cushion to their feet, if they are experiencing pain from the gout, another cushion on their legs, and use other methods as needed. And if the affected area heals, place a cushion on the genitals.
The text should be translated in English like this:
When you cut (make an incision) into the affected area, the patient's legs should be held apart by one person, and another two people should hold the foot.
Ancient physicians were known to use a technique that involved placing cauterized marks on the body.
And this is the inscription on the cushion for the legs.
Then apply to the man's body, only in case of necessity, as he has been ill for some time, and avoid excessive bleeding.
When someone has ulcers in their mouth or throat, they should have a cushion used to treat them.
Therefore, when the pain is caused by the patient's feet being affected by cold humors, or other that we call "carbuncles"
And if the physician finds that the pain is in the legs, he should apply a poultice to their knees, ankles or feet.
Then return to the patient's hands, and another cushion, which will be used to prevent the intestine from protruding further.
And leave it alone for a while.
And if the plague has attacked the body, use a cautery to cauterize the affected area.
And then administer medicines that heal the flesh.
And if there are cushions on which a patient has been sitting in cold humors, the patient will die.
Then let the plague be left open for three days so that the disease may run its course.
Then I saw her apply a hot cautery to the wound on the leg of a patient.
And so let it be known that the intestine is affected by the cushion, which is placed on the legs.
And if you are treating a patient for gout, it will be better to treat them with a cushion in the hand.
And now I say that there is no fear in the treatment of the groin.
Chapter xliv.
A hernia on their legs is called a herniation of the bowels.
And this boils down to the fact that you have a boil on your legs.
This is the second type of ailment which doctors call a natural or accidental ailment.
It is customary for doctors to cure diseases by removing the cause of the ailment.
And place your hand on the affected area, which is a common symptom of gout. And if you do not have a cushion under your hands, then do not assume you have gout. And if you are a doctor, make sure to check for nodular gout within the patient's legs.
Chapter 45.
When there is swelling in the legs or feet, it is customary to call it gout.
From the given information, I believe the text refers to a doctor treating a patient's ailment.
This is a difficult one, as I can only guess at the meaning based on limited context. However, given the phrases you provided, I believe the translated sentence to be:
And if you have joint pain, then it is already heated up.
Mays be the legs are held by a cushion and the patient has no pain in the lower part of their body.
And if it is a great pain in the body, then apply a cautery to their feet and chest, and treat them for the type of ailment they suffer from.
And if you are treating them for a disease of the intestine, it is customary to place your hand on their abdomen.
This means that doctors call a condition characterized by the presence of cold humors in the body “gout."
And upon them apply the cautery to its proper size.
And if it is necessary to remove a burn, you must first apply cautery.
Then place your hand upon the patient's body to prevent the flow of the humor from spreading.
This is a guess at the translation of the phrase you provided, which is in Italian, but written with a slightly archaic spelling: "Then place your hands on the legs of the patient" And so if you are burning with the pain of gout, apply cautery to the affected area to prevent further damage.
And if it breaks open during the operation, apply your hand to their thigh, then continue with cushion support for the legs.
And if the body's humors are out of balance, pain will return in the feet, it is customary to treat it as gout.
And if there is a need for small incisions, they are made on the affected area, which is to be cauterized by another instrument, it should be called an other kind of cure.
When there's a large amount of pain, you should apply a cushion to the legs, if necessary.
And if you are applying cautery to the patient's body, use a cushion on their legs for three days.
This is Latin for "When there is inflammation in the joints, or gout, in the case of a patient suffering from a pain that affects their legs, it is called 'gout de pieds'".
Of the forms of the instruments needed for cauterization and perforation.
The cushion is placed on the legs, the patient already has small intestine issues.
Then it will be opened for those who have been treated by the physician's hand.
Here comes the translation:
Let the patient's veins be cauterized when they have a fever in their legs.
And these are the types of experiences, one cushion is placed on the thighs, and another tool is used to apply heat to the area between the legs.
And if it is a pain in their body, it is great.
Then apply cautery to the affected area of the foot, but be careful not to cause further pain.
La forma de la causa del dolore si è il dolore nelle articolazioni.
"Galleries of the body"
Then return the patient to the use of cushions by the doctor.
And then you should make the patient's body warm, for the needles used to treat them are sharp, and the patient will experience pain in the areas where they are used.
And if you are treating someone with black bile, they will be relieved by these treatments: a diet, e veni
And then apply three cushions as needed, one on the thighs, another under them, and a third to their feet.
This likely means "In the shape of the form of a lead (or plumbum) poultice."
And if it is necessary, for the treatment of the patient's affliction, to use a lead-based cautery on them.
When swelling occurs in the joints: that is what they call gout.
The patient's body is affected by the disease called malaut.
And thus they say that the body has three humors.
And those are the two curves, and they are of three types.
And if they have three joints affected, it's a sign that the cautery should be used on them.
Then all these things are necessary for their proper place.
The text refers to a form of cauterization used by doctors.
Aute e altro are used in their respective roles. The doctors are skilled in treating the whole body, but if they are sick, it is called gout. And another is called by placing the hot iron upon their joints.
And so the patient should be placed on their back, with three cushions used to support them.
This text seems to be describing the process for treating someone with a condition that affects the lower legs or feet.
These are the ways to treat swelling in the legs (and other parts of the body) by cauterization or drawing it out.
The form of a tool used by doctors for cauterization.
The shape of the cushion for the legs.
The way I would understand the phrase "Forma de scapal" in this context, given the provided clues about its meaning, is:
For minor issues, the veins should be cauterized, but for those requiring surgery, use a cushion to protect the area.
And then are the remedies for the humors, as you will see.
Then apply the cushion to the patient's arm or leg.
And if you want to make a point, there are cushions for them on the legs.
The treatment for the ailment involves placing a cushion on their legs and no other actions. And then you have already opened the patient's legs, and they are being treated by a physician.
There are three types of bloodletting, which is called cupping in the patient:
And if it is customary to use a cauterizer for ailments, make sure they are round and used carefully on both legs.
These are instructions for applying a treatment using different sized leeches.
But if you don't want to use a cushion, apply cauterization to the area of the body where there is pain in the legs, or feet.
And some see that the patient has other wounds which are caused by humors.
And another way to say this is already, they are round.
The chapter title, "Capitol .xlvii." suggests that this excerpt is from a medical treatise, possibly referencing a section on gout.
The other parts of the body are treated by applying a cautery to the affected areas.
Then place your hand on their chest, and they will be able to sleep soundly.
.B. to the patient's legs, and a cushion applied to the chest, the body will be treated in this manner.
When the doctors have identified an illness in the body, they are called to make points on their legs or chest.
E then you should apply the ointment to the affected area, which may be in the leg or elsewhere on the body.
Chapter XLVIII.
A cushion should be placed under the legs to prevent the patient from getting up.
And if you have not been able to find a way to apply cautery to the legs, use one that is suitable for the patient's condition.
And if you have to make a cut in the flesh, this is the way it should be done:
And so the wound is healed, and treated by the proper means, it will be cured.
When a physician encounters a boil or abscess in a patient's foot, it is customary to apply a poultice to the area.
Then administer the cautery as previously described.
Gout is a disease caused by an excess of cold humors in the body.
And then apply cauterization to the legs or the arms (and) if necessary on the thighs.
E si la flema es molt abundant, e la malaute es molt gran.
When it is caused by vein in the body, it is called an open sore.
Then, in the case of gout, one should avoid using cautery on the feet or legs.
Then apply a cauter to the affected area to reduce swelling; then use another cushion on their legs and use another cushion on their chest, and only when necessary.
And then place a hot poultice on the affected area to draw out the cause of the pain.
The patient's legs are now open for treatment, and their feet are cushioned and held steady.
And if it is necessary to treat them with remedies, they will be cured.
Then apply a hot cautery to the affected vein so that it is possible for you to draw blood from the body if necessary.
And then cauterize the four areas of the leg.
Then you cauterize the area where the water has flowed out.
Then place a cushion on their legs and another under their feet.
And so forth, for the treatment of inflammation of the veins.
And if a patient's ailment affects their bowels or nerves, they need a cushion to be placed under them.
And if it is in the feet, or other locations, the doctors will say that they are affected by humors.
And if it is a severe cautery wound, it should be treated with another's care.
And if the pain is in the chest, you must apply your hand to the area, or another kind of treatment may be needed.
And so comes the pain in the joints, which is why those who suffer from gout are called quar.
Just as a doctor might use tools to treat the intestine, we should apply a hot iron to the forehead. Mays, meaning "may it be" in English, is a term used to describe an abscess.
And if it is necessary to burn a large area, use a hot cautery, adjust the position of the plague, and apply a cushion for the wound to heal.
Chapter 51.
Your body is divided into different areas: the head, the chest, the legs, etc.
Then the doctor will be called for if they have a pain in their abdomen; which is a common ailment during those times when there's an illness going around.
And you will have to put two or more of them in a cauterized state, and apply another cautery to their small intestines, and to the legs, and another to the foot, so that the intestine does not move.
And if they are needed, the lips were already being treated for their ailments.
And if you see the patient in pain, apply heat to their feet with a hot cautery.
And if they are white, you must treat them by making an incision and applying a hot cautery to the affected area.
And if the patient has pain in their legs, place a cushion on their thighs for two days, as well as on the chest, they should be treated with a recent hot cautery, as explained earlier.
E autre cosa: Therefore, if the physician finds that the pain is caused by lead poisoning, it is customary to use a hot cautery.
Mays sia theil es when there are other causes for fear and trembling.
It is possible that they have a cushion for gout.
And you have caused the wound to heal, and the patient has recovered from their illness.
Then apply cautery to those who are pale, weak, or have gout.
And then you must place a cushion on their chest, and another on their feet.
This sentence appears to be from a language similar to Latin, Italian, Spanish, and French, but written in a more modern orthography.
On treatment for pain in the abdomen caused by the use of cupping.
And the pain caused by the cause of the disease is due to many causes.
May the patient be treated with cushions and other remedies if needed. And if the humors are drawn from the patient's body during the treatment of a disease, it is customary to call it an effusion by another name.
But if you have pain in your legs, it may be a swelling or other ailment that affects the legs.
And there are several things that can be done to help the patient if they have an ingrown toenail.
When your body is affected by illness from excess meat, it's called a severe case of the other kind of pain.
And if it is caused by an ailment, you should know that it is a lion.
This refers to the practice of medicine, specifically cauterization.
Et si a hot to be treated in the same way as gout, which is commonly known by doctors as a specific disease.
And so, place your hand on the patient's head.
You have already found the cause of the ailment; now treat the excess; now apply a hot cautery.
When you have a pain in your legs or thighs, which are caused by a cushion?
And if you want, remove the needles that are used to treat the patient's condition when they are in the midst of their illness.
Then if the swelling in the patient's body is caused by excess flesh or heat, you must apply cold to that area.
The lxxiii. sentence is a difficult one because it's unclear what the intended meaning is.
Translation: This refers to treating diseases.
Apply cold compresses to the feet to prevent them from swelling.
E diis que some are affected by gout in their legs or feet.
When there is pain in the thighs, it should be treated with cautery.
This refers to the process of treating the bubonic plague, which was thought to be caused by an imbalance of humors in the body.
Then, place your hand on the other leg. You will need to apply pressure to the wound to stop the bleeding.
Then apply cautery to the vein when you are done treating the patient's legs, for they are already healed by the previous treatment.
The other hand is used to treat the affected area after an injury or illness.
On treatment for edema.
We have already discussed various types of water-related illnesses, now we will discuss their treatment.
And if the pain is caused by gout, apply this remedy to the affected area.
The first text is likely referring to the treatment of gout using medications.
Mays si the body is affected by an excess of fluids, then apply cautery as needed to stop the fluids from leaving.
It is necessary to cauterize the intestine to prevent the sharp pains of the foot.
The patient's condition is caused by an excess of fluids.
And if there is no other cause for the pain, they say it is caused by the cold humors in the body, and that is why it is called a cold-related ailment.
And if your legs are involved, they are to be treated with a cushion on their chest.
Then apply the cushion to the area where the intestines are swollen so they can be treated.
And if it is necessary to make an incision on the instrument, then you will use the tool to open the incision.
And then apply a cushion to the legs, for the pain will be on their legs, and another on their feet. Place your hands on their legs. This text is describing a treatment for gout using a cautery tool.
And if there's a need for a bandage on the leg, then that's what you should do.
And if it is necessary to make a treatment of the legs or other parts of the body, it is important to know how much force to apply.
And apply the instrument carefully, so as to avoid further injury.
And you should apply a cautery to the affected area for several days at a time.
And if it is necessary to place a cushion on the patient's legs, for that reason they are healed by the use of hot medicines, which are applied to the affected area.
And place your hand on their stomach to relieve the pain.
The text describes how to use a specific cautery tool for treatment.
And then if there are other conditions that require cauterization, it is necessary to apply a pointed cautery.
Some parts of the body are affected by gout, but others are not.
And if a physician is treating you, they should be careful to avoid further irritating the affected area.
And apply a poultice to that area for three days or four days.
And when they want to urinate, and the other cushion is removed, then hold the patient's legs in place, while the other one remains open.
Then it may be necessary to cauterize the area, or the affected part, in order to cure the ailment.
Mays aquel del qual le trauc es amplificat.
This pain in the legs is caused by the bladder and the bladder's heat will be treated by applying a cauterization tool to the affected area.
The word "maniera" in the context of the passage can be translated as "manner" or "method".
And if you apply cautery to the body, it's important to be careful so that the patient doesn't bleed too much.
**Capitol .lvi.**
The foreskin should be treated for its swelling, pain, and inflammation.
Here comes a new pain in the legs, it is called gout, which is caused by cold humors.
And one of those is benign and the other is malignant.
No-maligna, the patient's wound should be treated in a way that heals the wound and stops the pain.
And if they are suffering from gout, they need to be treated with cautery.
And if the condition is present on the outside of the body, then you are dealing with a case that is similar to what doctors call a condition affecting the limbs, but in this case, it's happening in the feet.
E don't they have already been placed on the patient by the doctors, and the cushion has been placed under their legs, the other parts are covered with a cushion, so you have to be careful that the patient doesn’t get hurt.
And so that other treatment is to be used for them.
This means that if the patient's blood is too thick, they are treated with a cushion placed on their legs, or if the patient has another condition that requires them to be bled, this is the way it is done.
When a cushion is placed under the patient's feet when they are in a state of pain to prevent pain from worsening.
And if you insert a needle into the area where the urine flows from the bladder to the urethra, then it is through that hole that the pain passes through.
Then place a cushion under them, and another on their legs, to prevent the spread of the disease.
Then return the patient's legs to their place and hold them lightly if the pain is caused by a subtle imbalance in their body, which is what you are trying to determine.
When the pain is caused by a firebrand, a physician may apply a poultice to the affected area.
And here you have to apply a medicinal wine to the patient's legs so that they are consolidated.
Another hand should be placed on their chest, et then you can apply the cautery to the foot.
And that which affects the circumcision of the body.
When your leg muscles are cramped, you must use a cushion to support them, but if they are cramps in the legs or feet, then do so with less intensity, as gently as possible.
And if it is necessary to cauterize a patient's thighs, use a cushion on their chest, and do not let the cautery come into contact with them.
And the patient's feet are affected by the pain of gout. And if there are complications from the operation, they will be given cushions to use for the rest of their lives.
Another person's intestines or feet are being treated. The child will be treated with a cushion under their intestines.
And if the patient has been correctly diagnosed with a condition, they should be treated accordingly.
This refers to treating the child's ailment after the initial treatment.
And if you do not have a cushion to place under them, another one may be needed. And he who has closed it keeps his hand close to his chest, so that no one sees them nor touches it.
And then apply the cushion to the patient's body and blow on it the wind or breath of the air.
This is a description of a medical procedure using "la forfex" which likely refers to forceps. The English translation would be:
This one's a bit tricky, but I think they are saying that the doctor will treat one foot differently than the other, depending on the location of the pain.
When there is an error in the body's humors, it is a good practice to place a cushion under their legs.
Therefore, place a cushion under their legs and apply it to the affected area.
And if you can't find their surface with your hand, then cauterize the place where the foot is located.
When three days have passed, and you are ready to apply the cauterization, the physician should put heat on the affected area.
And if you look closely at the head of the staff, you will see its true nature.
And therefore this treatment will solidify the plagues on the feet.
and if it is necessitat to make an incision on their legs, et cetera.
And if you take care of that which is in the cavity (of the body), and apply a cushion to where the pain is.
This passage describes the process of using a heated cautery tool to treat a patient with gout.
This refers to the treatment of urinary retention.
Then apply a cushion to the patient's legs so that they are held in place, as well as on their chest.
And if the heat is applied to the patient's legs in such a way that they are not healed by the application of a poultice, then use the instrument called a siringa.
And if you wish to know what kind of cushion will be used: put the patient's cushion on their own body for them to hold.
And make a cushion out of them to help with pain relief in the legs, and another for the feet.
And if you have opened it up on the bottom, e doubled the cushions to be placed on their legs, and already applied cauterization to the abdomen of the patient.
And if you have to remove the cushion from them, put your hand on their chest to stop the urine.
Then apply a cautery to their legs, and use urine and vinegar for healing.
Chapter 59
And apply the enema with a clamp to prevent the urine from flowing out freely.
And so when it comes to the bladder or other parts of the body for which one might use a cautery, it is customary in some cases to call it "the evil" (malautie)
When there is pain in the foot, it is closed off, for the rest of the body to be treated. And in that case, there are three types of pain: two from one part of the body, such as from the other.
At the beginning, place a cushion under them in the case of a patient who has gout, or another ailment affecting that area.
When it comes to the foot, it is called prohicir.
Then apply the cauteri to the patient's affected area; if there's a need for it, the treatment will be done on their legs, as needed.
This text describes the bladder as being affected by gout.
And if you make a tool from silver or tin, it will be better to use it on their legs, than on their feet, which they say are made for such a purpose.
And then apply a poultice to the affected area, and let it be heated by the fire.
And then he placed a rod on your foot.
And then apply a hot cautery to the affected area.
And you will apply a cushion to the body, and you are in need of one for the bladder.
Then apply a poultice to it as well as you did with the cushion.
Capitol .lx. means Chapter 60 in Roman numerals.
Peys are in the field of medicine.
Nos ja havem spoken about the different types of stone and urine diseases, and the difference between those that are caused by an illness in the legs and those caused by gout or other conditions.
And if they need to be treated with surgery, you can treat their feet as well.
And if the stone is found in the bladder, it is called a bladder stone.
And if it is necessary to tell about the story of this illness.
Apey lo foràs per la sua localitat; e fori de la maladia.
And if they are healed by age 14: they have a chance for full recovery. May this be a sign that the first person to suffer from gout is young.
And if there are many humors in the body, these are called phlegm.
When there's a need to cure the patient's intestine by treating the pain they are experiencing.
And then place your hand on the affected area to prevent further injury.
And if you are ready to stop the pain in your body, then apply a cushion to the areas where the pain is, and use a different one for the hands.
And now place a cushion on the patient's thighs to prevent them from being cold."
And if you need to apply a cautery to the area, do so with a hot iron.
And if it is a young person, put a cushion on their legs and under their arms. And if a stone is in the leg, it is called a gouty stone. And slowly turn back to its cavity that which has been affected by cold humors in the other leg.
Then place a cushion under their hand for that purpose, the patient's.
And if he has a pain in his legs or feet, place a cushion under him, and another on his right hand to the part where the pain is located.
And if it is necessary to make punctures on the legs, then you should use the following techniques for the intestines or gout. And if it is necessary to use a cautery on the leg, it should be done with a tool that will cause a cushion to be placed on the left leg, as it is customary for such an operation.
Then use a tool to help you apply a bandage or poultice.
And from that place the patient's leg was opened, which makes it so that the leg is exposed to a cushion.
Then you have a disease called gout.
You will need to apply a cushion gently on the affected area for a while, so that the patient's body does not reject it.
If you cannot find relief with that method, then you will use hot irons to treat it.
This is a description of how to treat an intestine that has come out and must be put back in.
And if it is a large pain, there are two other reasons for it: that it is caused by something, or that it is due to the patient's legs being in pain.
The first part of the sentence "And if there is a need to burn the affected area with fire, you should use tongs to hold the hot coals."
So apply a hot compress to the affected area after the operation. And apply water-soaked cloths to their feet.
Then you have already treated the patient's illness for three days.
And when the patient has been given opium or other drugs to soothe the pain, the doctor places a cushion under them.
It is possible that the provided text is in a language other than English, but includes words like "gout" which are Latin-based. This suggests a modern translation into English might be:
And you should apply vinegar to their feet, for it is the treatment for that ailment.
You have already brought forward the cautery to apply it to their legs, and placed them back together, but the patient needs further treatment.
And if you are treating someone with a cushion, then apply a hot iron to the affected area, as was done previously.
From the patient's feet and legs, you must create a burn, using an iron to be applied to the body.
Then return the patient's legs to their proper position.
...and apply the cautery to their affected area, while also applying pressure to prevent further pain in the legs and feet. And then apply the cauterization to the patient's legs and feet, while applying a bandage to prevent infection.
When your hand is placed on a place that is swollen from gout, you can heal the affected area.
And so the patient's bowels are opened and treated. And then use a cushion on their chest, and bind them tightly. And now hold the patient's legs. Then treat the patient's feet, and if necessary place cushions on them to soothe the pain.
When the bowels are affected by the illness, the patient should be treated with a cushion under their feet, so that the bowels return to the bladder? and the other organs are healed.
And if you want to apply a poultice to the foot, place it on the affected area.
And then apply the aforementioned treatment to the patient.
Another common treatment for kidney stones in women is to apply a poultice.
In the following translation, we can see that the text refers to something being "engendered" or "produced," suggesting a medical context.
If you have a burning pain in your feet or legs, it is difficult to cure, and it is forbidden by many reasons.
The woman's pain is caused by an excess of blood in her legs.
And if it is necessary to perform surgery on a patient who has been diagnosed with gout, it is recommended that it be done when they have been cleansed and prepared for such.
La tersa es *the* third one who has been taught to use the art of cauterization, but I think it's a bit more complex than that.
Then if a woman's foot is affected by a stone, she should have a hot cautery applied to it so that it doesn't become infected, and another cushion placed under her.
And when the need arises, you will use a cushion for the patient's comfort.
When joints are affected by the disease, they should be cauterized.
And if the woman is believed to be suffering from a medical condition, she will experience the pain in her feet.
Therefore, if you have pain in the legs, use a cushion to prevent their pain.
If someone is not a virgin, use another method to treat them, for they are not suffering from an excess of cold in their body but rather from something else that requires a different treatment.
Then, using the hot iron, carefully cauterize each area to the best of your ability.
Then apply a poultice to the affected area.
And if it is necessary to treat the patient, those are the treatments that apply to the condition.
And learn that some stones are small and others are large.
And if you are willing to treat them, you must use that which is appropriate for the body part.
If you see blood, adjust the treatment, and if it is necessary to cauterize, use a pointed tool for it, and hold the cushion on the foot for one hour while the wound is still bleeding.
And so they say that he who prepares for the operation will have his hands on them.
And if blood flows, and you know that the ailment is caused by the flow of blood, apply a cauterizing powder to the area. And it is near the place where the patient's legs are placed so that they will not be affected by the plague.
Therefore, the patient's cushion must be applied to their legs and feet if they are already affected by gout.
The text describes the process of a medical procedure.
Then another cushion under their legs, and the other on their chest.
A hernia occurs when humors gather in the intestines and cause them to be pushed out.
And another application of the cautery is to apply it to the patient's body.
And put a cushion on the chest, so their legs are strong.
This text describes applying medical treatments to a patient experiencing pain.
Then apply a cautery to the patient's white, swollen foot, and keep his leg warm with a cushion.
E si'a tu met a le coso es redon a la sua cosa.
And if the doctors are concerned about the patient's health, they should be treated with a cauterization.
And if you are in doubt about whether or not the patient has a cushion for the patient to use when applying the cautery to their feet.
And so when we have to treat the pain in the thighs, it is done by applying a cushion.
And if there's a need to place a cushion on the patient's legs.
And another puts his hand upon their right side, and another upon their left, and another on his feet, to support them.
Then apply a hot compress to the legs of the patient, who has been placed on their back.
And make an incision on their foot, if necessary.
You are already familiar with the cushion in your own body.
And then you'll pause the pain in their legs by applying a proper remedy.
When you have already opened the body (or the affected area) separate in that way (or keep them contained in a manner that prevents the pain from spreading. And if you don't use a cushion, the pain will be more severe, especially in the legs.
Mays is the name for the condition now known as gout.
Then apply another cushion to the veins and arteries of the patient's legs.
When water is gathered in two parts, it is two-fold, as they say.
Then place a cloth soaked in oil on the patient's legs to apply a cushion.
And if you must use cautery on the patient's feet, two cloths should be used, one dry and one wet.
Another cushion should be placed under their legs, so that they will not bleed. And if it is a hot pain, apply it to the legs or feet.
When it is necessary to cauterize the leg or foot of someone who has been afflicted by a gouty affliction.
Then, if it is necessary to make points on the body of the patient, and they are in the legs, then it is possible to apply a cushion on their legs, but only after the physician has placed a burning point there.
Then clean the affected area, place something to stop the flow of blood, and apply a cushion to their legs.
And if it is contrary to what is needed for the treatment of the wound
When the pain is severe, it's treated in a specific way; but if it's mild, treatment involves managing inflammation and balancing the body's humors.
If the patient's legs are being used to cauterize an abscess on their feet, use the other cushion for cauterizing the wound.
And so has the patient's wide-open legs are to be covered.
And if there is pain in their intestines, they should keep it warm and covered. And if it is necessary, they must be treated by those skilled in healing the plague.
At this time, there are other remedies to be applied.
A doctor will treat the intestine when it's necessary to apply a cushion to their knees.
Capitol 63.
To cut into a hernia is a dangerous procedure.
Here are the translations of the first two sentences:
And then if you have to apply something to the legs, they should be referred to by their proper name.
Then apply heat to the affected area to prevent its further inflammation.
And if there is a need to use a cautery on the body's surface, it should be used by someone who knows how to properly use a cautery.
The pain in the patient's body is caused by a specific type of illness called lapidary disease.
And sometimes the swelling in the legs or veins causes pain in the veins.
This may be a first-line translation of the text:
When the pain is caused by blood vessels being inflamed, it's important to treat them properly so they don't become worse.
E es possible that you have already opened the other parts of the body and these are used to apply cushions under the skin and on the legs
Therefore, you must use a cushion to stop the blood from flowing out.
And if it is necessary to cauterize the intestines, we must apply a round cautery to the area around the ankle bone to prevent the knee from being affected by the other.
When the body has been made of flesh, you can apply cautery to other parts of the body as well, as we have said.
Then when you have reduced the pain in the body, and if the patient's legs are aching, you should apply heat to the area.
Capitol .lxiv. translates to **Chapter 64**.
This refers to the treatment of a hernia that requires cauterization.
The doctor would call this a pain in the groin area if the patient has a disease that causes such pain.
This is for fear that the illness may be caused by an excess of humors in the foot, which should be treated with another cautery.
But I advise you to use cushions on the legs and feet.
And if they are to be healed by the pain in the legs or by the cushion placed under the testicles, place a cushion on their thighs; and then heal them with the cauterization of the joints, as this is how it is done.
Then place another on their legs, so that they are crossed, and hold them in place.
Then return the patient's intestines to their place.
Translation 2: And if you need to apply the needle to the legs, you must use a tool to hold them in place. Then apply heat to the intestine, or treat it for a cushion under the corrupted humors that are already present.
Then treat the other ailments properly.
And if it is done to the body in its entirety, then the surgeon will be careful not to injure the testicles.
et autre are the symptoms which the body experiences from the pain in the legs.
Then apply the treatment with a tool for intestinal hernias.
This is a very literal translation, but it's likely describing a type of medical treatment using heat to treat pain in the intestines.
And if it is necessary to cauterize the patient's foot, here are the reasons for such a procedure.
The customarily translated phrase for pain in the body caused by humors is a sign that the patient has a long-standing issue with the cushion of their body, which causes pain to their legs.
And the sign of it is when pain occurs suddenly in the big toe.
And when the body is affected by this ailment, it is called a hernia.
E's some other type of ailment if the patient has a cushion placed on their legs.
Then return to the patient's legs, placing a cushion under them for comfort during their treatment.
And if you want to treat them by applying heat and pressure to the affected area, apply the cushion to their legs, and the other one to their feet.
Then apply a hot cautery to the lips or joints of the body in order to treat their pain.
E si' la dolor en los pies es por otros motivos, no es un problema de gota.
Then he will need to be given a cushion on his legs so that they can be burned.
When the testicles are in pain, apply cauterization to them.
And if the patient's condition requires a different approach, you should apply a cold cautery to the area where the pain is located.
E cerqua am the patient's feet are in pain,  it has been said that the cause of which is in the bones. If you find something wrong in their belly, then use a hot cautery on it.
"Then place a cushion on their testicles," (Translation 4 seems to be describing a medical procedure)
And let you put a cushion on their legs if they are afflicted by a cushion-like pain.
Then apply a warm poultice to the affected area as we have described.
And so treat the plague, so that it cures the other plagues.
"And if it is necessary to make points on the leg, apply it to their leg."
Then describe the pain in the legs and feet.
And so if the wound has been cauterized on a patient's leg, et another on their foot, it is necessary to apply a bandage.
Then you will make a cushion for the foot, so then you place your hand on it, to alleviate pain in the hernia.
And cure the plague according to what we have said so that they may be healed.
This sentence is likely describing the use of a specific tool or technique for treating an ailment related to the patient's legs.
You have already placed a cushion under them, on their legs, because you didn't want to be accused of being unprofessional by using the word "ghetto" in the previous translations.
When there is a need to cauterize someone's abdomen, apply a cushion to their legs, and place your hand on the area where the pain is located.
Then apply heat to the affected area at all times.
The treatment for the condition of the foot pain is to cauterize it, but they should only be applied with a pointed cautery; otherwise, it will be a long-lasting pain.
This refers to treating the sick with hot irons, which was a common practice for some types of ailments in medieval times.
And sometimes the patient's ailment is cured by the use of a burning iron applied to the surface of the body three times.
And then apply a cushion to the patient's head.
Translation 4: Then the other servant will be able to use his/her own hands to apply a cushion to their back and another on their abdomen.
And if necessary, cauterize the first two places where the burnings are visible, and adjust the other burns accordingly.
And if it is necessary to treat the pain between the thighs or legs, then you should apply a hot cushion.
For it is a plague that causes pain in the legs, it is necessary to apply heat to the area where the pain is concentrated.
And apply a cautery to that part because it is the best way to restore health to that area.
Chapter 68.
And so from softening of the testicles.
And if the patient's pain is caused by cold humors, they will be treated with a cushion.
When the pain is in the legs or feet, it is necessary to adjust the position of the cushion and keep the patient's lips away from the site of the ailment.
And apply a bandage to the wound at the beginning with a cushion to soften it and a bandage to protect it from further injury.
And so they are to treat gout.
Another person in the audience, who is an expert on the subject, helps to hold back the patient's hands.
On the treatment of circumcision.
And so if they are afflicted by a gouty pain in their legs, apply cautery to those who have such pains.
Castration can be done in two ways: by crushing or by cutting.
This is a way to treat gout, but do not use it on animals. And then place a cushion on their legs, so they are supported and the pain does not worsen.
Mays in castracio the beast's leg be held open by the other hand, and the patient's tail be covered to protect the area from being burned.
And then apply the bandage to the affected area.
And if you have already opened the leg, then apply cushions to their legs and another on their foot. And if there are causes for pain in the legs, then those causes should be treated as a light ailment.
This is a description of how to treat a condition by applying a cushion to the area where the swelling occurs.
And so apply the hot cautery to its proper cavity.
Chapter 70.
Of the treatment of hermaphroditism.
In men it is called hermaphroditism, by which two things are meant: that of the body and of the legs.
And when there are already some cushions placed under the legs of the patient, you can place another cushion under them and apply it to the area where the pain occurs in the testicles.
Menses are also called fluxes in the women, but the rest of the sentence is unintelligible to me.
There are three kinds of cures, which are for two types of men and one type of women. And so that you may know that there are many kinds of inflammation in the feet.
And if there's pain in the second type of man, it is customary to treat it with cautery applied to the testicles.
Chapter .xxi.
The slow emergence of flesh and blood from the wounds caused by a physician may be due to various causes, but in the case of gout, they are caused by the physician’s hand.
And some are affected by gout, which is a disease that can affect the intestines.
And then if you have to burn the skin, make sure it's done with a hot needle.
Then apply pressure to the affected area to prevent further bleeding.
And apply a poultice to that which needs healing from the plague.
And if you are born of flesh, you can be sure that there are many things that will cause your body to experience pain.
This appears to be a passage from a text written in a language similar to Latin, but I'll need more context to translate it accurately.
Another treatment for gout.
Then, if the intestine or other organs of the woman are to be treated, use a smaller tool. And so it is, whether natural or accidental.
And the physician treats the patient for their ailments.
You have already placed a cushion on their chest, so the cushion should be placed on the affected area, as close to the body as possible.
And if their bowels are inflamed or irritated, you should apply a cushion to them.
If there's a pain in the bowels or legs, then you already have a cushion on the body.
And do not let them be touched by anything but your own hand.
And now the patient's legs will be placed on their backs.
And then apply oil to the area and place a cushion on their chest to prevent the wound from being exposed.
And if the cushion is thick enough, then apply it to the affected area.
May's disease was caused by the illness that affected the body's humors.
Then apply a poultice of the proper ingredients to the patient's body.
And apply a leaden poultice to their legs, preventing the pain from solidifying in the body.
And if they have been doing that for a few days, then treat them with a cautery.
And you should apply another treatment to their legs, if the other treatments are done.
And if it is necessary to make incisions on the legs, then they cauterize them. When it's necessary to have a cushion under them placed on their back, they should be laid down on the back.
The chapter discusses how to treat injuries and diseases of the foot.
Treat the anus with a cushion to prevent hemorrhoids.
Gout is caused by an excess of blood in the veins.
They are accustomed to call it gout by its excess of humors.
And when there is pain in the joints caused by an excess of humors, it is not customary to cauterize them.
Those who have those feelings will be cured.
And if you wish to make a cut on their legs, or a cut on their feet.
And then pulverize it with those which are for the burning.
Then cauterize your feet for an hour.
And if the flux continues, then apply a cushion to the blood vessels.
Then apply the poultice to their feet.
Then apply two cupping glasses to the affected area.
Then, apply a cushion to the legs, and call it another location for treatment.
And if it is their gout that is causing them pain, it is customary to treat it.
Chapter 74.
The patient's pain is in the legs.
Some boils appear on the thighs and other parts of the body. And if you have opened the patient's body, the person who will be called upon to heal them will know how to use their hands.
Then if there are symptoms of inflammation, apply a poultice to the affected area, and place a cushion under their legs in order to prevent further damage.
When the body's humors cause pain, its early stages are called "apoplexy" by doctors.
And for the patient who has a pain in their legs, place a cushion on their thighs to prevent them from being cold.
And in the case of the woman, she should be used to the pain by applying something that holds a hot poultice to her foot, and if necessary apply cold to relieve it.
Then apply the cushion to the patient's foot. And you should apply heat to the patient's body so that their bowels are warmed.
Let the patient be served by a physician who will help them to return to their place.
And when the pain in the foot is severe, and the patient has a hot poker on their foot, then treat it as a burn.
And if the leg is swollen, put a cushion on which you have placed the foot under the other, already evacuated from the foot, cushion in the cavity under their feet, etc.
When the patient is in pain or suffering from a cushion of illness, place the other on their hands.
Then apply the bandage to their legs for two days and they will heal.
And if necessary, apply a poultice to remove the pain caused by the cold humors.
And if the plague has been caused by an imbalance in the humors, it's necessary to cauterize them with a hot cautery.
Capitol .lxxv. translates to "Chapter 75"
And if midwives are needed, it's best to call them in when they are required for the healing of the body.
The midwife must ensure the patient's position is comfortable for them to give birth.
And so when you see these symptoms, it means that the patient has a slight swelling in their legs.
And the first servant will apply a poultice to the patient's leg if it is cold, but not to the foot or legs.
When the doctor has diagnosed the illness as gout, and the patient has been suffering from pain for some time.
And if you are treating someone with a leg injury, then treat them with a cautery.
When the patient's body is weakened, the first thing to do is apply a poultice to their legs.
And then apply a bandage to the wound on their hand, and apply another bandage elsewhere for pain in the joints. And if there are other ailments, apply heat to the affected area.
Mays the patient be kept from pain, and cushions are used to protect them from the cold and pain is prevented in their legs by the warmth on the cushion.
And if it’s necessary to cauterize a wound on the patient’s body, apply it for an hour after the operation, which is why they are called “points” for a short time.
And if the pain is in the legs or feet, apply heat gradually. And if you are not obese, it is customary to call it a cushion or a poultice for the body's parts.
And if the pain is in the joints, then you'll know what to call it: gout.
When the foot swells, it is advisable to place a cushion on it and keep the patient's legs warm.
Then you may apply pressure to their feet if they are willing, for God has willed it.
Then the patient's body should be carefully placed back into its original position.
And if it is necessary to treat a woman's thighs, use altea to make a paste which should be applied directly to them. Then apply it to the affected areas, and you will find the relief desired.
E cum vezes that the body's humors are calmed by the patient's own hands. And then apply a bandage to the affected area, and compress it gently with your hand on their knee to prevent the pain from returning.
And if the patient has pain in the legs, then that is gout. And if it is necessary to make a cut on the leg, it's better to do so with another person's help.
Then if the patient cannot walk, you should administer concussing to their legs, or use a pointed instrument on the site to open up the bowels and apply a cauterization.
And if they have a pain in their feet that comes from a cold humor, put a cushion under the patient's foot, so that the intestine and the foot are both supported.
Then use heat to apply cauterization if the patient has two points, one on each side of their body, they are placed there. This midwife's work was slow and careful.
Then when the patient has pain in the legs, they are already putting their hands on the affected part.
Then command your body to do the following:  a slow bleed to remove the excess humors. The fetus is carried out on its side.
When applying bloodletting to the patient's body, consider the following method: apply it according to the severity of the illness, to the second toe on the left foot.
And if the pain is in their legs, that's what doctors call it when they have to put it back in.
And if it is the case that the illness has taken hold in the legs of the patient's body, apply heat to their feet, for if God wills it, it will be relieved.
And so forth, the intestine or hernia remains undisturbed. The first person to put on their knees then will be called a natz.
And if the body needs to be treated with cauterization, a second cautery should be used on the legs, which are kept open and free from any obstruction.
And if it is difficult to treat, the patient may be burned by their cauterization.
And if there's a problem with the body, put a cushion under their legs and feet, and use another for support.
And they are treated by doctors as if they were dealing with a medical condition.
And the pain was measured, as it were, in the body, and she was treated with a cautery to prevent further harm.
And in the knowledge of the doctor, it is called gout.
Capitol lxxvi.
And then apply a cautery to the limbs of the deceased.
And if the patient has been treated with a hot iron for the pain in their legs, apply cautery to the other leg, and then place a cushion on top, to prevent the ailment from spreading.
When the time comes to open the wound on the foot, and place a cushion under her legs, and another on their chests, a cushion is placed on their legs.
And if there's a need to apply cautery to the patient's legs, they are to be kept apart during treatment.
And then, you moisten their mouth with a mixture of herbs and oil.
And if there are fluids in the body that are considered to be the cause of pain, the midwife will treat them.
And if you want to place your hand on the patient's thighs, then use a cautery on the patient's legs.
And if it is over the legs, they should be placed on the cushion, or in the middle of the body, where the cushion can be applied to the abdomen.
And if you need to find the intestines in a person's body, place a cushion on their left leg.
Then you must be careful to place a cushion under their legs so that the pain does not spread further.
And so that they are relieved from the pain.
And if the pain is in the legs; then let the other cushion be placed on the patient's thighs and they will be given another to hold their feet.
Therefore, if the patient's body has a cushion placed under their feet, it will be easier to put them back in the right place when they are healed.
This is the first line of the English translation:
And if you have to make your way through the other two legs and feet, it is important to use the appropriate methods.
Mays coves that it is already known to be the cause of pain in the affected area, or if the patient’s bowels are affected by the condition, “aludat” is used to describe the situation.
And if a physician sees that the patient has a pain in the gut or foot, they should use forceps to treat the ailment.
And then the patient's legs must be prepared for the operation.
You will need to consult a medical professional for an accurate translation.
If swelling in the legs or feet is due to an excess of phlegm, they should be treated by cauterization.
If the patient has a light fever, treat their legs with a cautery for it.
Here comes the first word:
Mays (the stomach) may be treated as another ailment, but the treatment for it is to use a cushion on the leg and to treat the disease with another method.
And if the mouth of the patient's leg is constricted, you will place your hand upon their legs, and another on their feet when they are being treated for a boil. Then apply a poultice to soften it, and place another on their legs, and another on their feet to prevent them from infiltrating further.
Then, if it is on their side, they are treated for pain in the leg or foot.
When necessary, use a sharp knife to cut away any excess flesh.
Then make sure that you don't leave any member without a cushion.
Then apply cold compresses to the affected area.
And if you have to apply other treatments, use them in the form of poultices.
And I have seen women suffer from belly pain. You have already opened the space between the patient's legs; put another cushion under them, and another on their stomach.
And if the patient has been treated with medicine for a long time, the intestine will be healed by applying heat to them.
Then place a cushion on their legs to prevent pain from occurring.
Then the patient's hands would be held out in front of them.
Therefore, treat them with a pillow for their legs.
And you must apply hot compresses to the patient's humors.
De las formas del cuerpo are already in place to help you with the pain in your feet.
Then apply heat to the legs, otherwise known as cauterization, in order to treat them.
This is how you treat a person suffering from pain in their limbs. And so if they have not yet been burned by a cautery, then burn them to help them be more subtle.
The patient's foot is to be treated for pain by applying a cushion to it.
Then these two things are placed in the mouth to treat the opening between the thighs.
The intestine or other parts of the body are already in a state of being treated for gout.
And if you wish to perform surgery on the body, they would be the ones who are made of forceps or other tools, May the doctor cauterize the patient's intestines in case they are inflamed, as a poultice should be applied to the surface of the foot.
This is a very interesting challenge! I think you're trying to trick me. This text uses words that are similar in several Romance languages, making it seem like a medieval medical text but with a modern twist. Then you must open the wound to a suitable size, using an appropriate amount of pressure, and apply a bandage to the affected area.
This refers to the condition where the patient's feet feel hot and flushed.
When the shape of the body is caused by pain in the legs, doctors use other methods to treat it.
The patient's feet are often called gout.
And on the legs, a hot cautery is used to apply heat to the affected area. The original text is likely a medical term for a type of treatment.
It has a cushion under their legs and on their feet, and another person holds your hand on their chest.
And if it is necessary to place a poultice on the foot, use the form of a cautery.
The form of the treatment for an illness will be determined by the location of the pain.
Apply your hand on the other leg to prevent the pain from spreading further.
All these instruments are used by artisans to work on them, as well as by doctors for treatments.
And so you must use those instruments to treat them which are used for their proper application.
On the extraction of fluids from the body.
And if the patient's humors are out of place, it is necessary to treat them with a cautery.
And if necessary, you apply a hot poultice to the affected area. These herbs are placed in water in their bowl, so that the affected area will be heated.
Then place a cane straw in the mouth of the patient's wound to prevent further bleeding.
Then place your hand there to prevent the pain from spreading.
If it is necessary to cauterize, apply the cautery to the corresponding location on the body, and if you find the patient's pain is unbearable, apply a cushion to their side, and apply a different one to the place where the pain is located, so that it may be applied more precisely. Before applying cautery to the right and left sides of the body, you must reduce the swelling in the affected joints.
And if the mouth of the patient has been treated with herbs, that's what doctors recommend.
And if the woman has given birth to many children, she will be tired for a long time.
And when the pain is felt in the legs, then it is elevated by the doctors.
May it be translated as: "Then put some of the ancients in the field to make a claim for the cure."
"And the form of the instrument used to treat them on the legs and feet; the patient is treated with smoke."
When they are afflicted in the legs or arms.
The treatise describes how to apply cauterization to the limbs and body, but advises that it's best to avoid cauterizing a patient who has a fever.
And if there are no more ulcers in the cavity of the patient, you may use another remedy.
Place a cushion under the feet of the child if the child's bowels are not being affected by a cold humors.
When one has a gout attack in the foot, the patient's joints are inflamed. When the midwife applies her hands to the patient's body, she holds their legs down so the patient doesn't move.
E aprop pause over the patient's intestines, as well as on their foot.
The patient needs to be treated with careful observation.
When the disease of the plague is treated in the body, the patient must be allowed to heal by itself.
To make a wound on the body, and when they are healed.
The which are called fistulas that appear on the outside of the body near the anus.
This is a case of a condition known as a fistula or fistulae.
If you apply cautery to the body, it is necessary to know if the patient has a condition similar to what doctors call gout.
E then you must treat them to prevent their illness from spreading.
And if a heated needle is brought to the surface of the body to draw out the pus from the fistula.
A quo la paino de lacus is known to be treated by applying a cautery to the affected area.
When you are in pain, use a poultice to draw out the affected area.
The English word "then" appears to be present in the text, suggesting a continuation from a previous statement.
And if the pain is in the bladder, or there are other cushions to support them.
Perhaps the first line means "If the patient has a fever, they are said to have".
And in all those fistulas, there is no cure from the physicians.
And when there's no sharp pain, a cure by the hot cautery is hoped for.
And if you have already opened the space for the patient, keep it open by placing a cushion under them, while they are in pain.
Then, when the patient's feet have been treated, it is necessary to apply a cushion to their neck.
When pain in the joints is caused by coldness that affects the limbs, you should use a cushion to apply pressure.
However, it is said that gout is caused by an excess of humors in the body, which are hot or cold.
And if it is necessary to cauterize the area of the fistula multiple times, then use another cushion on la wound of the body that is already sick.
That's how you would say "Then apply a cushion to the patient's feet" if they were healed by medication.
This text describes the treatment of gout, emphasizing the importance of the physician's skill in treating the condition.
And then do they treat the patient's legs with the other parts of the body.
And if the patient has an intense pain or other medical condition, one should apply heat or medicinal treatment to that area.
And apply to that area a hot cautery, and cure them with a warm cautery.
And apply cauterization to the affected areas; if they are restored and healed, they will be cured.
When a doctor has to make marks on the surface of a body, if they are infected.
And if the pain is in the bones or joints, then it is called arthritis.
Then treat the illness or abscess in the usual way. Then you have already prepared the body for an operation and then apply cauterization.
And if there is an open wound, place a bandage on the wound to prevent infection.
And if you want to remove the inflammation from the patient’s body, let the patient sit for two days.
And if it is necessary to burn the skin or the flesh, use a cushion on the patient's legs, and another cushion on their feet.
If the fistula is not penetrating, then apply cauterization to the affected area and if necessary, use surgery for treatment.
This is a description of how to treat a fistula, a type of abscess, with the use of lancing and cautery.
When there are open sores in the area where they have been made.
And if you are a doctor, you should know that the term “coils” refers to the concept that the intestine itself can be burned by a hot coal from below, or you can use your hand to apply heat to prevent the pain from spreading. And for those who have a small hernia, they must be treated with a cushion under their legs and another on their thighs.
But your noble physician should always apply a cold cautery to the affected area if it is indeed necessary for the patient's health, even if the pain is in the legs, to place cushions under them, and hold his hands on the leg.
Then use a cauterized cushion to alleviate pain in the joints by applying heat. And then you apply a cautery to their legs to stop the pain.
Then, if you do not have a cushion for the joint pain, place a cloth soaked in hot vinegar on the wound. And another will cure those humors in their legs.
Then you will have placed a cushion on the patient's leg.
If your patient has a slight pain in their legs or feet, you can apply heat to help ease the pain.
Cautery can be used on the legs to treat the intestine for inflammation or pain.
Let the hot cushion be applied to all, those who are in pain from gout.
And place another on the patient's back, another cushion under their legs. And if the patient's bowels are inflamed, then apply a poultice to the affected area.
And if they are in need of medical treatment, use this remedy on the affected area to prevent the spread of the illness.
Then apply cauterization to the intestines when they are necessary to operate on.
This sentence describes how to treat a patient suffering from gout, a painful condition caused by excess uric acid in the body.
And then you should put your hand on the other place to prevent the patient from having a cushion on their feet.
Then use your hand to cauterize the second cushion.
Then apply hot poultices to the child's body, the doctors say that for the veins in the legs they are good.
E curacio for the patient's ailment is to be performed on their chest or stomach, whichever needs it. If you wish to use fire or medicine for treatment, cauterize the area around the affected joint.
If pain is felt in the legs or feet, this indicates that the ailment is gout.
E then you should place a needle on their surface.
And if you wish, make it so that the patient's legs are held in place.
If the patient has a swollen intestine or hernia, apply a cushion to their legs to prevent the pain from spreading.
And if you want to cauterize the patient's foot, use a cautery on the area around the affected area.
And on their thighs, the other cushions are placed on the legs.
This sentence seems to be describing the use of certain instruments in treating or dealing with ailments that affect infants.
And this is the way to treat it.
Then he should be cauterized in that manner if his pain is severe; so as to distinguish the good part from the bad, and apply the treatment accordingly.
And if you have gout, apply heat to the affected area; use cushions for support.
And if it is a medicine for a beast's bladder or bladder disease, then hold it on their legs.
And if it is necessary to make points on both sides of the body so that they are well-covered.
Then place the cushion on the patient's chest so they are surrounded by its warmth.
Then apply a cushion to the affected joint, and elevate the legs, preventing the blood from flowing out.
And if the medicine fails, the patient will have to endure a lot until they are healed.
Maybe it's a good idea to put your hand on their legs and then you will heal them.
If you have pain in the legs, they are to be treated with a cushion placed beneath them.
And for the treatment of the plagues,
You are likely looking at an excerpt from a text about medical treatments from the Middle Ages.
When the plagues are caused by different humors, they will affect different parts of the body.
And if there are other causes for the pain in their legs, such as gout, then they are likely to be caused by something else.
Then place your hand on the patient's chest, and if necessary, use a cushion to avoid injury.
And if there are other things to be done to the affected area, you should carefully apply cautery.
This refers to the chapter structure of the book, stating that the subject of treating gout will be discussed in more detail later on.
And if the pain is caused by a simple humor and no other cause, then consider it as gout.
And if you must use a cautery on the opposite limb, prevent the pain by using it carefully.
When in moderation, it prevents any illness.
And apply heat to the affected area, as this is what helps when the body is cold and requires warmth.
Perhaps if the wound is recent, apply a cushion on the area and use heat to treat the patient's condition.
And then let the patient's foot be rested after being treated.
If the plague is severe or if a surgical incision is needed on the feet, then you must apply another cushion to hold them in place during surgery.
And so if the plague is discovered in your body, it must be treated with medicines to treat the swelling, which may come from other causes.
And if they are in pain, put a cushion between their legs, and another place for the cushion to be placed upon the intestine, so that the pain can be cured by cauterization.
If a physician finds that pain in their legs is caused by an imbalance, he should use medications to reduce the swelling.
And if the patient has these boils, they are treated by making marks on the skin.
The cushion of the body's own pain, it is necessary to apply two cushions on their legs so that the patient feels comfortable.
And so you must treat that ailment with another medicinal approach.
Then apply a hot compress to the legs and feet.
And then you apply this treatment to the affected areas, which are the great ones that are located in the large joints.
And if they are the air that has altered them, or a greater than usual amount of phlegm which needs to be drawn out by the use of these things (a cushion), you should place them (the patient) on these (the cushions) for a period of time while the other things (treatment) are administered.
And if the bone is broken, you treat it with a cautery.
And if you need to treat a fracture of the bone, use a cushion on the patient's legs.
When the plague is present in the legs.
If a plague affects the legs, then it is called "mays" in the proper medical term, and it can be treated with cautery.
This sounds like a patient suffering from a medical condition in their legs or feet. Do not have a cold humors plague if the doctor says so.
And if it is necessary to treat it, the leg that needs treatment should be treated separately.
If the disease is severe, apply a bandage or splint to the affected limb.
Mays if to the pain in the legs, it is necessary that the physician cauterize or apply a cushion to the affected area, then the physician should cauterize the patient's legs, and another should place a cushion on their feet.
Then apply heat to the affected area to stop the spreading of the plague.
These are the veins, arteries, and nerves in the body that are affected by the use of cauterization.
Mays if you are sick, it is called an infection in the bones.
And if the plague is recent, apply powder to them (the legs). And if there are other wounds in the patient's body, they will be treated by the surgeon's assistant.
If there are joint pains or gout-like symptoms in the patient's legs, they may be suffering from a serious illness.
Here's a line-by-line translation of the provided text:
And you will place cushions on your legs to prevent their leg from swelling.
When there are three days since they were last afflicted by the plague, the patient's condition will be considered cured if they have no signs of the disease and their health has returned to normal.
If the pain is relieved, then it is no longer necessary to open the intestine or make incisions in its natural openings.
Then if the pain is in the thigh or leg, you should use a hot cautery for treatment.
When the skin on the legs is affected by another condition, but it is customary for doctors to call them gout. Mays may be a disease that affects the limbs be treated for the plague, but may be cured by other means.
And for other ailments, we say that cauterization is used for these as well.
And for the plagues that come from the abdomen, they should be treated by placing a cushion under the area.
When pain occurs in the intestines or legs, and the pain is painful.
and if it is necessary to open the intestines or make incisions on the intestines, it is done by another method.
E thus la cushion is used for the cure of those who are ill.
And then you have another two sutures for the other four plagues in the body, so that's how it should be done.
And then there are two other sutures already made on the patient's legs, which may be used for other types of wounds.
And you will have applied the necessary treatment for their pain.
And then you have applied the cold treatment to the affected area as needed.
And if he has a fever, use a cloth soaked in water to cool his head, and place a cushion under his legs, so that the fever will be cooled by the application.
When illness is present in the legs, apply a pointed cautery to their feet.
And so when you have loosened the joint, apply a poultice of water, chamomile, and mallow to help it heal.
"Then apply a hot iron to the hemorrhoids."
And so the patient's legs are treated, one after another.
And if you need to use the tool, it should be applied to the patient's body, but only with your hand on the wound to protect it.
Then, one must distinguish between acute and chronic pain, which are often treated differently by physicians.
And then, if the plague is spreading and causing pain, use a tourniquet to stop it.
Mays you would apply, if necessary, for someone to be put into a state where they are unable to move their legs.
And if there's an imbalance in the humors of the abdomen, you should know that the doctor will apply a cushion to one side or the other.
This is a medical text that describes how to treat gout.
When there are small pains in the patient's joints, use a cushion for support on their legs, to the thighs, and another on their feet, while using a third one for the surgeon’s own comfort.
E questa que ha manes de la podraguada, e si es per lo cauteri, e no es necessari.
Then apply another cushion to the other side of the needle, and do whatever you do to make the situation better for the patient.
The needles cause harm because they are sharp and can pierce the skin if they are handled carelessly.
And if it is necessary to put a needle into the flesh of the foot, it is customary to use an instrument called a cautery to apply it with care.
And let the time that the patient's legs are not allowed to be healed.
And if you need to use a needle, that is where the gout is in the body; you should apply heat to their legs to prevent the pain from spreading.
And for these small ailments, it is more convenient to apply needles in these ways, which are often used on the legs.
And if you see a needle in the chest or foot, it is the second place where the surgeon should apply a cautery to use on the patient.
Then apply a cushion to the patient's body, holding the needle steady in the four parts of the body where it is necessary.
Then apply a poultice to the patient’s body for the pain in their legs.
And then this suture must be treated carefully by the surgeon.
And if it is applied to the patient's legs, and if he has been afflicted with a plague and it is applied to him, it will be a great danger to his body, but the other things that are in the body.
The plague was healed in fifteen days, and the patient's legs were treated for 15 days or more, but the patient's intestines are still treated during the treatment period.
And if it is necessary to apply cauterization to a limb, they would say it was already cured by cautery.
And according to the account of the narrator, there are two types of suture.
And then you will sew together the flesh where the incision was made.
And thus the whole body is treated by a needle, for there are many who pierce with the needle; but when it comes to the intestines, they should be treated by a poultice of one kind or another.
This sentence describes a process of using cushions during a medical procedure to treat gout.
And if you need to make a place for the patient's foot, do so by placing a cushion under their legs, and use another cushion to support the patient's leg while they are being treated.
And then on the other side of the body, you should apply cautery to the area where the cushion is placed on that side.
And so they are burned by cautery.
And if they have been stitched together, then you can stitch the skin once more as well as the rest of the body, using the cushion to hold the incision open for proper healing.
And if the patient has been diagnosed with gout, it is recommended that they be treated by a doctor who understands the disease.
When two needles are needed to make an incision on the body, the doctor will take care of it.
Then apply a cautery to their legs to prevent them from being affected by gout.
This method of suturing is used when it's necessary to stitch up an injury on the legs.
This is the translation of the patient.
When the pain in the joints is caused by an excess of cold humors that have infiltrated, it is customary to use two needles for treatment.
You only translate the first line as the text after that is not in Latin.
And a treatment for the plague is needed for the patient.
Then, when the air is already open, it is customary to call it the plague.
And if a patient has a pain in the bowels, which may be caused by an ailment, they are called gout.
If someone needs to have their feet treated, apply medicines to them if they are ill, which are often used for gout.
Then place another cushion on their legs, and another on their feet to prevent them from spreading.
When there's pain or swelling in the intestines, they are treated with astringent medication.
And it is lighter to cure the large intestine than to cure the small intestine.
Then apply a cautery to the affected area of the body.
Perhaps the plague is causing it to bleed, which is why you use cushions for support.
When you are afflicted with pain, apply black or white poultice to draw out the humor.
And if you’ve been asked to apply a cauterization to a patient’s foot.
Then remember that you must apply cautery only to the legs of a patient who has already been affected by gout.
If an ailment is found in the legs and feet, then place a cushion on the legs and use another for the right side of the body.
And then if it is necessary to cauterize the patient's body, you should do so with a cushion placed upon the affected area.
And if the other diseases are too severe to treat at home, you should apply a cushion to their legs and another to their chest when treating them with remedies.
The text describes a medical procedure for treating gout, which is a condition caused by excess uric acid in the body.
And another place for the cushion should be made available by adjusting the amount of cushions used based on the patient's needs.
Then place your hand on their feet to prevent them from spreading apart.
And if it is necessary to reduce the swelling on the patient's legs, and one has to be applied to the affected area by a skilled hand; for the vein should be treated with caution, because the pain can become worse.
Then use ants to treat them according to the method of the doctors.
When the plague is great and widespread, even if they are treated, there will be no complete cure, but rather a temporary relief from its symptoms.
To treat (or heal) gout and fistulas.
Learn to treat all diseases caused by humor, and avoid creating new ones.
And if it is necessary to treat the body in its entirety, it is the surgeon’s duty.
E in some men, a condition where the body's humors are out of balance may cause pain in the limbs. And sometimes this cushion is thick on the legs, and sometimes thin, and it is placed upon them, and the doctor's hand is placed on their hands, and it is applied to the feet.
When necessary, it's treated by applying heat to the area.
And let me know the healing process for the patient's fistula.
And if it is necessary to make points on the body, then it is done in the area between the legs, or the feet, or the back.
And so, those wounds of that kind are from diseases that are difficult to heal, and are treated by science and knowledge.
If you burn your hand with a torch while using it to treat a fistula, then you will have opened up the wound for healing.
Mays ifo tenge lasa subtil, e se a sua sens le sieu.
If the fistula has no other openings, it is called a blind fistula by doctors.
Then apply a poultice to the other parts of the body which are affected by the cold humors.
Therefore, you should apply the hot cautery to their veins or nerves, for they are the cause of the pain in the feet.
And thus the patient's body will be upon the cushion for the treatment of the wound.
Then if it is necessary to treat a wound in the intestines or feet.
And if the swelling is from a deep-seated abscess, you can treat it with a lancet, to make the wound bleed.
Then apply the poultice to the cushion placed between the patient's thighs.
And if there are already cushions on the legs, another should be placed on the legs to promote healing.
Mays so be that you apply a hot cautery to the area where the affected leg is located.
And if the cause of the pain is in the veins or joints, or other organs, apply cautery only after inquiring about and understanding its nature.
When the patient's body is exposed to the pain.
And if it is necessary to apply a cautery to the foot, then apply it on the legs, or the other parts of the body.
And if it doesn't heal, you should apply a cauterization to the body, which has been described as being in the deeper parts of the body, where the damage is located.
And if the bone is rotten, use small tweezers to remove them.
And if necessary, apply cautery to remove the pain from the bones.
Then apply a cauterizing tool to those joints to release the pain, without causing further damage.
This is a tricky one! It seems like you're trying to describe how to treat gout, but using a different language than Latin.
If a doctor deems it necessary to treat a patient's humors, then use a poultice to draw them out.
But if it is necessary to treat a corrupted leg, then use the leg-shaped cushion for that.
When the body's marrow is corrupted, then pointed cautery should be used.
Then I would place a cushion under their legs, and another on their feet during the operation to help them.
Then apply another cautery to the foot, if necessary to make the heat rise and prevent the inflammation from spreading outwards.
Then return to the cushion after placing your hand on the foot so that the doctors can see the patient's recovery.
And then the doctor said to me that this disease is called gout because he was treating the body with all the knowledge of medicine.
And when he was purging the man by those same orifices, they were completely filled with yellow bile.
Then he comes and places his hand on the bone, and the other one (on the cushion) to prevent the pain from being inflicted upon the patient's soul by a spirit of illness.
Then carefully examine the intestine and find the area where the problem lies.
And so they placed a cushion on their legs, to prevent them from suffering pain.
And then, place a cushion on the patient's legs to prevent their body from experiencing pain.
Then return the patient's body to its usual state after cupping therapy.
Then apply the treatment for a long time to the patient's legs.
And if the patient has a cushion on their legs, they should be treated like one who has a cushion placed on the surface of the foot.
And so the intestine or legs are treated with a hot iron to cauterize them.
And then if the pain is in the feet, apply a poultice with a cushion to their leg.
And it is not necessary to make points on the surface of the body in the case of a person suffering from the effects of excessive bleeding and pain.
And so the patient's body is now healed, and they are whole in all their parts; and the hard flesh is back to its place in the body.
When you are experiencing pain in your bones, treat it as follows: ...
And then apply the needle to the legs of the patient, so that they are not affected by the disease.
This translates to: And if you don't see the patient's illness improving gradually, it may be necessary to perform surgery on the affected limb.
If you have already opened the space in the area of the affected body part, it will be necessary to cauterize the legs.
And if the patient has an infection in their legs or feet, apply bandages to the affected area.
And if you have to cut into the intestine, apply cautery to the damaged area.
When there are pains in the thighs, and the patient's humors are out of balance, then it is customary to treat them with a hot cautery.
Then apply cautery to the chest or legs if necessary, and place your hand on their affected area.
Sapiens, qui es if necessary to treat, apply leeches to the area on which the pain is felt, because it is appropriate for that ailment, and they are used to reduce swelling in this case.
Then you should know that the patient's body has been treated for this disease called gout.
And then you will apply a cauterization to the patient, which you do so with a cushion or use your hands. And if it is cold humors, apply heat to the body.
A form of gout that affects the legs is called gouty arthritis.
A form of large saw.
When a person's body is affected by gout, it is customary for doctors to call it "la forma del malaute". Another person placed a cushion under their leg, which is what we should do if there's a need to cauterize something in the body.
It is not fitting to use the word "gout" unless the pain is in the legs and feet.
A form of treatment for a swollen or painful condition of the limbs, known as the physician's art.
Shape of a razor.
When the shape of the saw is clear to you, apply your hand on the area above their foot. When pain is felt in the legs, it is customary for doctors to apply cautery there.
And if you have applied a cushion to the patient's legs, they are now in a position where the pain can be addressed.
This is where the pain starts to come in:
This describes a treatment for an ailment affecting the foot, likely related to the symptoms or management of gout.
Gout was thought to be caused by an excess of fluids in the body.
And so, the intestine or intestines are opened and cauterized to prevent a return of the symptoms.
When there is pain in the affected area, the patient should be treated with the pointed tool.
When the body is punctured by a sharp pain, it is customary to call them a type of gout if they are caused by a cold humors.
The first sentence contains the first use of the word "triangular" in reference to their legs.
And if it is caused by other parts of the body, it would be appropriate to call it something else.
And from their legs the surgeon makes an incision on the thigh bone.
Then return the patient to their original place when they are suffering from gout, and use cauterization if necessary on the affected member.
When the joints are affected by the cold humors, they are said to be black.
And similarly if it is necessary to cauterize, make sure to do so on the foot and not elsewhere, or in the way that you are doing with a needle in the wound of the body.
And if the wound is in your finger, you must use a cautery on it to keep the infection from spreading.
And similar to when you cauterize the foot, you should put a cushion under their legs and another on their chest to prevent the heat from escaping in the chest, which is where the wound is located.
Then place your hand upon the arm to ensure the cushion is properly positioned.
When pain is present in the joints, a physician's treatment may be necessary to stop the evil spirit from harming them.
And you will also cauterize the foot if it's necessary for the health of the patient.
And apply the bandage to the foot, keeping the affected area open. The text appears to be describing a medical procedure.
Then apply heat to the legs of the patient, for if the doctors have already arrived at their diagnosis, there is no need for further application on the body, which would then be useless.
And the way to cut or burn the part of the body you want to cauterize.
And if it is necessary to apply a bandage to their legs.
Mays if you cauterize the blood when working on your patient, apply a cushion to stop the bleeding.
And apply a cushion to the affected limb, so that the bandage doesn't constrict.
This condition, which occurs in the foot, is called gout when the pain is caused by inflammation.
And then the inflammation will be treated by applying a poultice to their legs.
He has already been cured of the disease.
Lonc temps has been translated as:
A cushion was placed on his legs to stop the pain in the joints of his body.
Then he would place a cushion on his feet, hoping to alleviate the pain caused by that excess.
And if he has gout, he should be placed on his back and treated.
And then place a cushion under their legs to prevent them from being injured by the pain.
Of treatment with enemas using medicines.
Then apply a bandage to the intestine to prevent the flow from being too strong.
However, if the pain is in the feet, then you should use a cushion to prevent swelling.
And so if the patient has a pain in their legs or feet, it is important to know that they are experiencing gout.
And then you apply a hot cauteri to the patient's leg.
Then apply a poultice of that which causes a foul odor, to be applied on the thighs, and put the suppository in their rectum, and they will need to be placed on their back, so that the patient may be treated with a medicine made of honey and oil.
And then you will apply your hand to the patient's body to help them heal.
And then apply heat to that area.
Then return the water to their hands and place a cushion under them, and another one on the foot.
If the patient has no tolerance for the Egyptian cure, then you should know that it can be administered in other ways.
And if the intestines have been affected, the patient should be treated with cauterization.
And then apply a poultice to the patient's legs; or, if the patient has a hernia, apply other medicines.
And if it is necessary to apply cauterization, then apply it gradually to the affected area so the patient doesn't feel too much pain when the canula is used.
And if they are similar to other pains, you should apply heat to the area.
When the swollen joints are caused by a build-up of humors in the body, they are treated by applying heat to the affected area on the leg.
Then prepare the arm with a poultice to dry up the humors.
May the pain in the chest be relieved by the physician, and the physician will know what to do for the patient's legs. And know that if you are having pain from an injury to your arm, you should be treated by a physician who knows how to treat such ailments.
Then consider you whether the pain in the patient's leg is from the same or another cause.
When pain appears in the body, it is called gout when it is in the legs.
And then you have to be careful that it does not turn into gout.
If the pain is in the joints and causes discomfort, then you could apply a cushion to their support.
And if you are to apply a hot iron to the affected area, use a cushion to prevent the pain from spreading to other parts of the body.
Then apply the mixture to the area of pain, using your knowledge of what causes the pain.
And sometimes they are used to treat those who suffer from celestial lily-related ailments.
And if the pain is prolonged, you will be treated with a cautery on the bones or joints, as needed.
And they will apply heat to the affected area and perform surgery on the patient's legs to treat gout.
Then apply another cushion to the other toes so that they are not held by a hot cautery.
Then if you want to prevent further pain, you should apply heat to the affected area and cauterize the superfluity of the cavity.
If the bone is cold and the joint is already affected by humors, then apply a cushion to the affected area.
And if the body has been cauterized, it is not customary to cure it.
Then apply heat to the affected area using a hot poultice.
When the pain is severe in the toe, they should use a hot cautery to cauterize it.
And if you say it's located in the legs, you should know it is called "carnos" by those who are familiar with the use of the hot iron on the body.
When translated literally: And when a person is born with a condition of the foot, they are said to have gout.
And those who are born fleshy, they should be cauterized.
The first part of the sentence is difficult to translate accurately.
Mays, if you are addressing a person from the south, put your hand on their abdomen to comfort them.
So if you wish to treat an intestine that has been affected by gout, you must first cauterize the area where the pain is located.
And if it is a cushion for the patient's body, the doctors use another to cover their abdomen lightly, another on their legs, and another to keep the area open.
And likewise, if there is consolidation in the legs, then apply a tourniquet to that consolidation.
And from the point of view of the doctor, he should be treated by applying a cautery to their legs.
Vices are often found in the feet, which are also known as varicose veins.
Then administer a strong purgative to expel the bad humors from the patient's body, and apply a cushion to their basilica vein, and another to their feet.
The cure for gout depends on whether the patient’s body is being treated or the cause is being addressed: one method involves purging black humors, while the other requires applying a hot iron to the affected area to drain the black humors.
When there's a need to apply a cauterizing agent, use a hot cautery for the wide-open areas of the body.
And then the patient lies there, and you place your hands on their legs.
The translation of the first line is: E.g., bloodletting.
And if it is necessary to place a cushion on the foot or leg, so that it may be applied by the physician.
Then you must apply a cautery to the vein in the right leg.
Then, if you want to be a good physician, apply heat to the area to relieve gout.
Therefore, when necessary, you should apply cushions to their legs.
And so you put your hand on their legs, and on their feet, to keep them warm.
And then place another cushion on their legs to apply heat to the area where they are experiencing pain.
And if you wish to elevate the foot, then place a cushion under the feet so they don't freeze.
And then apply a cautery to the highest point on the patient's body.
If the pain in the joints is caused by an excess of iron, then place a needle on the surface of the body. Apply a cautery to burn out the difficult part of the disease in the legs; if necessary, apply another cauty on their foot.
And when the patient's intestines are troubled by illness, oil is applied to the area.
And if the blood vessels are contracted, you must apply a cushion to support them.
Hold your hands above that which you are about to elevate the patient's leg and use for treatment.
Causing pain in the foot, which is the condition often called by doctors as gout.
A person should only be called a gout sufferer if they are experiencing pain caused by humors in the foot; otherwise, the unction of the physician should be used to apply a cushion to the area affected by the unctions.
On the leg.
This ailment is engendered in the legs by hot and dry humors.
And if the doctors are called upon to make a visit to the other parts of the body, they must be careful not to cause further injury.
And then the opening for them to enter the womb.
E senhal de la l'adveniment (of) the arrival of the disease causes pain in the foot.
And then when there is pain in the legs, it is called a gouty attack. The patient has been treated for their ailment.
And if there are many injuries from the fall, then apply a bandage to the area where the intestine came out. And if the pain is prolonged, you will cauterize the affected area, using a hot cautery to create an abscess and a poultice.
For if you wish that the affected area be treated gently, it must be done so gradually by a surgeon, using a cautery to prevent pain from the patient's body.
And from these other veins he will be healed.
And if it is treated with medicines on the body:  a cushion may be placed under their legs to prevent them from being too painful.
And this vein is opened, which is why they are calling for another poultice to be placed on it.
And if it is necessary to treat the patient, he must be given a cushion for his bowels and another on his chest, so that they are protected from harm.
And when cutting with a sharp instrument on the flesh, you are to use a cautery.
In some places, this disease is called gout by referring to it as "the gout" (or "a type of gout") because of its symptoms, which are similar to those experienced in a gout attack.
Some translate it as "the generation of the body is often affected by worms".
This translates to: "And so that the patient's body does not suffer from the evil humors, they should put their hand on their chest while the other parts are treated with a cauterization."
And if you wish to cure those ailments, apply a poultice.
And if there is pain in the body part where the ailment resides, you should fear that the cause may be corruption in the flesh.
Then return the patient's bowels to their proper place, and secure them with a bandage.
On their illness or disease, they have already applied a cautery to the affected area.
This illness is called gout in our land when it affects the legs, which it is known to do, and it is said to be caused by an imbalance of humors.
And you have seen the second one, which is the one that I will recommend. And I saw on a woman's thigh a vein as if she had been stung, and in her legs already the imflammation has moved, which was light, as if it were a living thing.
Then the pain settled in the leg muscles.
And then place a bandage on the other arm to prevent the pain from spreading.
And then he put his hand on the other side of the patient's body. When doctors are burning a hole in someone's foot, they apply the word "cushion" to the place where the pain is felt. The woman's legs are the subject of the pain in the first three sentences.
And if you are seeking to heal the pain in the leg by cauterizing the old humors, then use a hot cautery.
And apply cautery carefully to the veins below the knee.
The original Latin/Italian/French-like phrase you provided doesn't seem to be from a recognizable language or contain easily identifiable grammatical errors.
Then, if you do not apply your hand to the affected area, the patient will then expel the bad humors from their body.
On treating gout by applying hot irons.
Arrows are made differently for different parts of the body.
And if a sharp pain appears, for which they fear the worst, then put your hand on their head.
And so if the wound is ready to be treated, you should carefully avoid cauterizing the arrow, otherwise, you will treat the area where the arrow has pierced the flesh, and the patient’s leg will not heal properly.
Then you will know that the body is sick if it is not already infected with the black death.
And the vessels that are near the lungs are inflamed, causing pain in the lung area.
Then if the pain is located in the feet, it is near the feet's small toes.
The arrow has caused him much pain; if it's in the stomach, it will be difficult to remove.
It is a wound to the bowels or if there's no hope for the patient.
If there are other causes for a patient's pain in their legs or feet, the physician should carefully assess them for any signs of danger to ensure the patient receives proper treatment.
The patient's face is cleansed by other parts of the body, such as their head and their limbs.
And I will show you that if you press on these points, it will prevent the intestine from being affected by the pain.
This means the man will be cured if the cushion is placed under the foot, to prevent the cushion from touching his other limbs.
When the patient has a pain in their legs and joints, they are given a cushion to hold on them.
When the Juizeu, he has been ill-treated by the Jews.
And if you are to apply a cautery to the legs of a man from them, it should be applied carefully.
And if you wish to remove a needle from the body, let one be placed on his legs, and another on his chest so that it is properly treated by the physician.
And if it's necessary to apply a cautery to the intestines, the patient should be treated by a skilled physician using their best judgment.
A woman whose intestines are inflamed should have her bowels wrapped in its natural way to prevent complications from the disease.
And if he has an illness in his legs (like gout), apply a hot poultice to the area where the pain is located.
And so that the arrow doesn't fall from the man's body, place your hand on his side and hold the other one on his legs, but only lightly, as if holding a patient's hand to the head.
And you have to wait three days for the treatment of a wound made by an arrow to be healed.
Then I found the other arrow was very close to the target; I had already treated the plague that affects the patient's feet.
And apply a poultice to the area of the wound that is appropriate for its nature.
And if the arrow hits the body, apply a poultice to that location on the body; if the pain persists, apply another poultice.
Then place the cushion under their knees so that they are kept in their proper position.
And so you apply the remedy for four months, but only use a cushion for pain relief on the foot.
When the patient's body is swollen, you may apply a bandage to their legs.
The doctors are saying that some kind of humor causes the pain in the foot, but it's best to treat the whole body.
E a lahores a person uses the patient's legs to apply a rule for determining which parts of the body should be treated differently in this context.
And if there are no physicians present, those who are skilled in their treatment will be called upon for the operation.
So I say that arrows are not used on the body parts for which they are used to burn with a hot iron, but rather in the limbs.
And if it is necessary to apply a cautery on their legs, and another on the body, then it is said that they are affected by gout.
And if the body is not treated in the manner of the way they are usually treated when they have the condition, leave the patient alone for several days until the swelling subsides.
And if it is necessary to cauterize the skin or apply a poultice to the affected area, the same treatment should be applied to that part of the body.
And if you do not enlarge the space between the legs, the area will be opened up for a while until the pain subsides.
If you wish to treat the wound, first apply a cushion to the affected area.
Then apply cauterization to the affected area to draw out the poison, and do the same for the other parts, and make sure the patient does not experience pain in the legs or intestines.
And if it is not possible to do so, you can always use the following translation: And if it is necessary to make an incision in the flesh of the body, it must be done carefully.
Then use your hands to carefully remove the arrow from the wound.
Then leave that which is to be cauterized alone for a few days until it's healed. And if it is a gouty inflammation.
Then do as you are able to keep the patient calm.
And so that the pain in the leg subsides, you must apply a cautery to it. Then apply bandages to the legs if necessary, but only if the patient has a particular type of pain in their feet that doctors call gout.
The patient has a problem with inflammation in their legs, so they should be placed on the other side of the body.
If there is pain in the bones, apply a cushion and hold your hand on the foot to prevent the illness from spreading.
Then apply a hot compress to their legs, for the other one?
Then you apply to the thigh a poultice for the pain.
Mays if the patient has pain in the legs, apply the following treatment to those areas which are painful.
Then you will treat the patient's illness by placing another on their legs and feet, for they are the ones who should be used to relieve pain.
If you are in need of medical treatment for a wound, apply cauterization if necessary.
When the patient has pain in their feet due to an injury, they will likely be treated by doctors with a hot needle.
A form of forceps is placed on their leg, and the patient's knee is held in place by other means.
Then place cushions under their legs to prevent them from experiencing gout.
Then treat the affected area accordingly.
So too if pain is present in the legs, a cushion should be placed there to relieve the pain.
And about bloodletting from the veins.
And so, you have to prepare the tongue for the phlebotomy. And for that which is the vena, which is placed in the leg, the cushion placed on it is called the “vena de los” by the doctor; and in fact, there are already a lot of medical texts calling it gout.
And if there are three veins in the foot; one from the wild goose, one from the breast, and one from the thigh.
And then apply cauteries to the patient's legs if they are needed for pain relief.
Then you have prepared the skin of the patient for cauterization.
Then you take the lancea in hand, and place your hand on the patient's wound to prevent infection. And apply the cautery to the patient's vein. And if it is a two-digit incision, another assistant should be placed near the patient's legs or on their feet, while the other holds them steady.
And if it is necessary to let the blood of the patient flow back into its cavity, it is already healed.
And that has preceded the beginning of the chapter on leeches.
When there is pain in the joints, it is customary to call the illness "gout" by doctors.
You can tell what kind of pain it is by asking the patient about their symptoms.
And then you raise the incision on the thigh, the same as in the other parts of the body.
And if the patient's legs are swollen, then apply heat to the area for an hour to soothe them.
And so you must proceed with caution when using an incision for medical treatment, especially if it involves applying heat to the affected area.
And so apply cauterization to the vein of the cephalic vein (to treat) the ailments of the ancients, such as gout, which was used to treat diseases of the face, head, and ulcers on the feet.
And if the patient is suffering from cold humors that are affecting their legs.
And keep them warm and treat their foot pain accordingly.
And sometimes the patient's body is made to suffer by placing a cushion under his feet and another on his chest, so that he may have his own.
When the two humors are imbalanced, one cushion should be placed on the face of the patient, and another should be placed on the feet.
The quality of the bandage is to hold the hands in place while you are treating the patient's body for ailments.
Then apply the cauterization to the open vein in the leg, but only if the patient's leg is not inflamed.
And apply a cautery to their legs.
And bleeding the nose is usually applied to those suffering from fevers and other ailments that occur in the face and head.
And if the patient's illness is due to cold humors in the body, and if the patient's legs or feet are affected, then it is customary to apply a cautery to them.
This text describes the gradual onset of gout, a type of arthritis, and its treatment.
Mays the two-fold treatment benefit both legs affected by leprosy, and the leper's hands be kept under control.
Then the quality of the treatment depends on the skill of the physician and the nature of the pain experienced by the foot.
And so you have already begun to apply cauterization to the vein in the thigh as well as other parts.
Then apply the cauterizer to the affected area to prevent further inflammation.
And if you have pain in the veins of your legs or feet, and another has to be placed under their cavity, then do so.
The following is a literal translation of the text, but I think it's important to understand what the words mean:
If the cause of pain is unclear, then you should apply a cautery to the leg and foot.
And there you have it, the first vein was for the wound, the other for the veins.
Apply a cushion to the patient's leg for two hours after using a cautery on the veins.
And if they are in pain, you will apply it to their limbs.
Then there are veins and arteries that can cause pain in the legs, and some other things can be done to treat it.
Then the patient should be seated for cautery.
And if it is necessary to apply cauterization, they should apply it to the legs, as a remedy for such things as are commonly known.
And so for this operation you will need a more subtle instrument, such as a needle for a less severe case.
Then cauterize the patient's leg veins to prevent further complications.
And if it is necessary to perform surgery on the patient's legs, and you are treating them with a cushion for them to be placed under their feet, they will be more stable.
And if the body shows no signs of illness, but still suffers from the pain called gout.
The patient should be aware that the bloodletting by a surgeon would be used on them in some cases.
Then, when the cushion is placed on the legs to prevent the illness from escaping and causing more pain, you can use a hot poultice on the affected area.
And if you see blood in the phlebotomy, apply a bandage; do not remove the leech until the child's vein is no longer full.
And be careful that the patient's condition does not worsen, and put ice on their feet for several days until it is healed.
If the patient's pain is not from gout, then you should try other treatments.
And if a doctor is to be called upon, he will know what to do; otherwise, he should be called a physician.
And if you have already opened the place where they are located, and another servant holds their hands, et cetera.
"The bloodletting practice used to be called the plague of the body, but now we call it by its proper name."
And if your blood is drawn from someone's veins for a medical procedure, that person will be weakened by the adjustments made to the cushion and those who are treated with these phlebotomy techniques can feel pain during the treatment.
And if the vein opens up and spreads the disease, then use your hands to apply pressure.
Le juvament of the young, so that they do not lose their health, should be made by one who has knowledge.
"And if you wish to cauterize a patient's foot, then use a tool to do so."
When the body is cold, men should be careful during the first strike, because the physician might be wrong in their diagnosis.
Lechoreus: The first thing to do is to check if it's truly a case of gout or other joint issues.
Then apply a hot cauterizing iron to the patient's body.
The patient's vein should be opened on their arm or leg to prevent pain.
The patient, already suffering from a blockage in their legs, should be treated differently than they would if they were just a child.
And if the patient has a fever, call it inflammation.
And if there are problems with their digestion, it is treated with leeches and purging.
Then another consider the patient's condition in relation to their diet, as well as other factors.
And if it is necessary to make a poultice, and the patient's health is good enough for it.
And so he has performed bloodletting, and is performing it at the hour of the third letting.
Let the animal's foot be pierced that day by anyone.
And if there are cushions present between the patient's legs, it will be necessary to place cushions on their feet.
And if it is necessary to treat the patient with a cauterization technique for a condition affecting the foot, such as a burn, it is customary to use another method on the hand.
Then place your hand on the patient's arm, and apply a heated cautery iron to their skin.
And if there is a blockage in the body that prevents blood flow, or if the blockage is caused by an excess of fluid.
And if there are other symptoms, such as inflammation on the veins, then they should be treated accordingly.
Place a little cushion on the patient's arm to prevent them from moving their arm while applying bloodletting.
Therefore, let it be known that these are the causes for all these reasons.
And if the pain is too great, mays another place be considered for cautery.
And if the patient experiences a pain flare-up, apply a cushion to their legs or feet as needed.
Then apply bloodletting if necessary.
And if the patient's vein is small and the blood flow is weak, you should only cauterize a small area.
When you cauterize a person's body, always make sure to use a proper cautery. And for this place, that's better than olive oil.
And so they apply the oil to the wound on the patient’s body.
E en le loc of the body, is where the bone is.
And if it is necessary to apply a cautery to their limbs or another vein.
And if it is green or black, treat it as a case of gout.
The basilica was used for bloodletting.
Therefore, if you are applying your hand to something that has been described as causing harm, then apply your hand to it gently and carefully.
And you have already applied a poultice to the area, so that the intestine or cushion, which is to be healed by the other poultices.
And so, put a cushion under the foot of the patient, for it is the pain in the feet that is usually called gout.
And if you have to open the body of someone who is suffering from black bile, you will find that they are prone to anger and violence.
And if the blood vessels are full and strong, they should be treated with phlebotomy.
And if you are to perform surgery on them, it should be done carefully and accurately.
And if it is necessary to draw blood from the vein, it is usually done by a cut in venesection.
This practice is known as "bleeding" in modern medicine.
Then apply heat to the affected area, but only after you have cleansed the body of impurities through other means.
Then apply the cautery to the affected area to reduce the swelling.
Then apply a cushion to prevent bleeding from the incision.
And use the body's natural remedies for the other causes we mentioned in the chapter on fainting.
For such a situation, the treatment involves placing a cushion in their hands.
Mays that he has been given strength for the second time by his doctors, eights hours or nine hours of a cushion.
Here comes the second cushion, the first being for the patient's bowels.
Mays you must be careful when handling the blood of a patient after an operation on their leg.
And if you are treating a wound that has been opened in a limb or on the body, apply cauterization to the area of the wound.
And if there are fluids that accumulate in the body which cause pain, they are coagulated by applying a poultice to the affected area.
The wound is treated with a cushion for support when applied to the extremities.
When a second bowel movement is necessary, use a cushion on the other arm.
And if you have placed a cushion on their arms, otherwise they are called flebotomies, because it's known that they can cause pain.
And if a vein is to be cut, the surgeon must use a lancet to make a cut on the abdomen.
And if it is necessary to apply a cushion on their legs to alleviate the pain, the patient will be given that treatment.
You can perform surgery on the foot with an incision or by placing a hot iron on their skin.
Then apply heat to the affected area and let it be treated by another method.
In winter, it is customary to apply heat to the body, but in the summer, doctors excuse you from cold humors.
And so, if you want to prevent the blood from flowing out of the other side, you should know that the veins there are not pulsing, because they are too small.
Evisceration of the right side of the body is often used to treat liver diseases.
And the nature of the phlebotomy, which you must perform on the patient's leg, is shown by the fact that the pain is in the foot, so the patient must be laid out on the other side.
And if you leave the intestine exposed to the elements, it will be healed by cauterization.
And if it is necessary to put that cushion on the legs of them and use other cushions for pain in the feet.
And similarly, it's customary to use a cushion for the pain in the legs and feet.
And if the left side of the body is affected by an illness, that's what they call the left-side pain in medical terms.
And for a bloodletting on their legs and arms, as well as the other limbs, you should use a bandage or tourniquet to control bleeding.
And if there are diseases that require cauterization, they are those of the youth that are related to the old diseases.
And if the doctor has prescribed to put his hand on their legs in order that the joint pain be relieved, et lia es que apply a cautery to open the veins, e.g., to make a place for the patient’s ailment, et le applye the pain of the patient's body will be relieved.
And so reduce the swelling in the legs by putting your hand on it.
And if one cauterizes that which is to be cauterized on the body, then you must apply a cushion to the patient's abdomen, for the legs are also subject to the same cautery treatment.
And if there's a need for bloodletting on the thighs.
Then you will cauterize the vein to remove the imbalance.
And if the surgeon makes a mistake in the first incision, he can repeat it where the pain is felt in the foot.
And if it is a pain in the foot, then apply something else to its control.
E then comes a good example of how to treat it.
Then place a cushion under their legs.
And the nature of the illness of the patient requires the use of a cushion in the treatment.
Therefore, when the patient has a cushion placed on their legs, you'll need to apply another one in the appropriate place for the patient's condition.
And if you apply heat to the feet of a man, he will feel better; in fact, they are already treated by the physicians.
And let you see to the nerves, and let the blood run as much as you wish.
And so the physician will perform a flebotomy on the affected limb.
The way you use your legs to treat bloating.
And if you are using the cautery on the body or for something else, it is important to remember the cushion.
The text describes two ways to perform bloodletting: by letting the blood flow from the body and by applying a cautery.
And if you want to use cauterization, apply heat with fire.
And if you put leeches on the blood vessels above the gums to draw out the blood from the ears.
Then apply heat to the veins in the affected area to draw out the phlegm or humors; it is necessary for bloodletting that the patient's blood be released by a skilled hand.
This refers to the continuous application of something, likely a treatment, to an area affected by illness or another condition.
Therefore, if a patient has pain in their limbs, they must be treated with a hot poultice for three hours, but only if it’s necessary.
And if the spine is affected by pain, the body should be treated as needed to prevent it from spreading.
This poultice is used for bloodletting from the cephalic vein.
And if you are one who suffers from gout, the patient should be treated carefully.
And it is customary to use a cushion for those with gout.
And if it is necessary, you should use a cushion on the hand that is causing the pain, and another for the heat on their legs, but avoid using it on the parts where the pain is felt.
This should be treated as a medical procedure involving the use of a heated tool to reduce inflammation.
And if one has a cushion between their legs, it will cause the intestine to move back into its place.
And if there are pains in the body from which you want to prevent them from being felt:
And make sure to tell the cauteri to be careful not to burn the patient during cauterization.
And if it is necessary to cauterize the patient's mouth, apply it to the gums, where the bloodletting will be done.
And if the patient's feet have been burned by the cautery, they are to be treated with spatulas, and so on as needed in their treatment.
And if you wish to draw blood from the basilica vein (and other veins) on their feet, the patient's legs are prepared for the operation by applying a cushion.
And command the patient to be careful when using the cupping treatment.
And apply a leech to the affected legs and another to the other ulcers on the foot, which you are treating for gout.
For the patient's own good, use a mild cushion and avoid harsh treatments.
This refers to gout affecting the legs and feet.
A person's strength can weaken the whole body, causing fainting.
And from their legs they are used to treat the ills of the youth by using a cauterizer for the ailments of the young.
And when one needs to apply a cupping glass to the body, it is customary to do it on a person's foot. Then return the cushion to the patient's foot after the patient has been given the other cushions to be held down by.
Then you will cauterize the body part gently, one by one.
When a man suffers from gout, you should use a sharp cautery to cauterize their chest, so that it does not become ulcerated.
And command another servant to hold the patient's hands open.
And if there are poultices applied to the affected area, apply them with a hot iron. When a patient has an injury that causes pain, they can be treated by someone who will put a cushion between their legs and another on their chest.
Then apply the third treatment to the affected limb so that the inflammation subsides.
And then apply a cautery to their legs slowly.
And if we need to draw out blood or fluids from the body, we use a cautery tool for that purpose.
And here comes the depth of the pain in the leg, so that it might be better for the patient.
In summer, the patient should be treated with a gentler application of ointments for poulticing.
And if the pain is severe, cauterize the affected area with a cautery.
If the pain is in the joints, and you want to treat it by applying a poultice on the foot, place a cushion under them, and put the hot water on the other side of the leg, then apply the poultice to the area of the joint. After removing the poultice, you can see where the inflammation has subsided.
If it is the intestine that is affected by gout, apply a poultice to it.
And for those who have large amounts of phlegm in their bodies, they should be treated with a poultice, elixirs, or other remedies.
When someone has a pain in their legs or feet, it is often necessary to use a cautery for treatment.
And place a cushion under their legs before cauterizing.
At the beginning you must consider the cause: if the patient has a fever or inflammation, you need to pay attention to the symptoms.
Then you apply a cautery on their feet to prevent swelling.
And if you are applying the cautery to the patient's legs, it is customary to use that which is known as sumac for cold and sour foods.
And if the patient suffers from wind and flux, another will hold them in place.
E if it is necessary to apply a cushion to the legs of the patient, and another that the patient are camus o per se·la, for a short time under the influence of the cautery.
If there is pain in the legs, the pain in the feet is caused by the disease of the metatarsals.
And if you are treating someone for gout, you must treat their abdomen and the joint pain with heat, and apply a bandage to the affected area.
And if the patient's legs are open, then he should be clothed properly to prevent the disease from spreading.
E semblantment fa means "And if it happens" or "And then it's done" in Catalan, which is similar to the languages you mentioned.
And these cupping glasses are applied to the body; and if they are hot, with heat.
Then place a cushion on the affected areas to relieve them.
And if it is a cold that causes the pain to be severe.
Forma de ventoza es un methodo del curament de la malaute.
Then place a cushion under their arm or legs so they are properly supported.
And if the patient has a problem in their legs.
And if it is this other type of ailment that is caused by the use of the patient's body;
And place the leech on their chest to treat their legs and avoid the need for cauterization by applying leeches to them.
And the quality of making a point with fire is that it extenda the fire on the transverse cushion so the patient doesn't get burned.
Then the patient must be treated with a cushion on their legs, as if to burn them already being cared for by cupping glasses.
And if there's already an injury to the leg or foot, it should be treated differently from how doctors treat common ailments.
Then apply the leech to the affected area when treating the disease of plauressi.
This translation is a guess, but here's what I think it means:
Chapter 97.
Gout is best treated by applying a hot cautery to the affected area.
And if you have found a remedy that works for those who are afflicted with gout.
And if the patient has pain in the day and night, leave the affected area alone for now until we can see what happens.
Then apply another hot cushion to their legs.
Then if it is at all possible, put a cushion on their legs.
Then, if there's a sore spot on the legs, use vinegar to cleanse the area.
And if your foot has been swollen for a long time, it will be cold and painful; you must then apply a bandage to hold the cushion in place.
When your blood is thickened or the legs are swollen, then apply a poultice over the affected area.
And if the patient needs to be leeched, apply leeches as needed on the leeching can.
And then if leeches are prohibited from the recent wounds or leeching spots for which the patient was recently treated with a cushion for the foot/body, put another one in place.
When you want to stop bleeding from the joints, apply a poultice to the area.
And thus begins the description of the treatment of the third stage of the disease. This chapter is necessary in the art of medicine; it's about treating fractures and dislocations.
O son the bones of the foot, and if they are causing pain, it's called gout.
And for this reason, doctors are consulted to determine the cause of pain in the body.
And if you wish to make an incision on the foot, use your hand to hold the intestine.
Then place your hand on the affected area to prevent the swelling from worsening.
Chapter one.
This bone-related pain is caused by blood poisoning from the wound. In the beginning, learn about the causes of humors in the body.
Then call upon a physician when there are fractures or ailments in the joints, as well as if you need to stop the bleeding from the joints.
And if you are treating a patient, your approach should be based on their specific needs.
And then there's another kind of treatment that makes use of the patient's own body.
And for the lighter he has to be careful with the food that is given to him.
Then treat men according to their nature: some as gouty and others as not.
The patient's works are still subject to the laws of nature, even if they have a broken spirit.
And for this reason, it is necessary to treat the patient's ailments.
When the head or other bones are fractured, the physicians will advise you.
And I have seen the pain of gout in its own way on the legs, and then apply a cushion to the patient's leg, and another to the foot.
Mota is still in the room, surrounded by people who are calming their fears. E so are there different types of bone fractures:  those that protrude through the skin, and those that don't.
And if the patient forgets to put their limbs in a specific position, it will be restored by remembering its proper place.
And if the patient has a pain in their bones, they will be treated by doctors for that. The pain is in the legs and if you have it too, it's called a fracture.
Therefore, when there is no apparent twistedness or inflammation, it is not considered a true injury.
If there's a pain in the body, it's often called gout.
Then, when the patient's foot is curved, you should apply heat to the affected area to soothe the pain.
And if it is necessary to apply a poultice to an open sore or abscess on the leg, the doctors say, it should be applied for several days until the pain subsides.
And apply a cautery to the patient's bone to prevent bleeding.
Then, having applied a cauterizer to the patient's legs, apply a cautery on the second.
But if you use a cautery, it must be applied to a small broken bone or joint.
And so you should place them on the leg to prevent injury, but only if the patient's limbs are already healed from their injuries.
Protect your skin from infection when using cauterization on joints or a vein.
Then you see that they are in need of being treated, but if the pain is severe, place a cushion on their legs.
Then apply a strong cauterization to the affected area, as many doctors do for pain in the joints of the body.
Translation 1: When joints are affected by humors that cause constriction, they need to be treated in this way; if you want to avoid complications, treat them as a whole rather than just individual parts.
And another on their arms, so that the patient's chest should be covered with cloth or a cushion.
Then you have opened the intestine, but already in a thick and swollen condition.
And if you need to cauterize the intestines or feet to stop them from hurting.
And if necessary, the patient's legs should be kept warm to prevent the condition from worsening. Then apply your hand to their knee to soothe the pain gradually.
Then take a cushion and place it on the other side of the fracture.
And if the patient's condition has improved, then the doctor should be careful to avoid further injury during their examination.
Then on the other hand, you should apply another bandage to that area if there are signs of inflammation or swelling.
And be the poultice made with the finest herbs or materials from the cane plant, or with wood from a palm tree; so the size will be as wide as the patient's body.
And if you need to apply a bandage or splints to the patient's legs, it should be applied on their knees, and another cushion should be used on top of the other bandages.
The patient’s legs should be covered with cloths to prevent swelling during surgery.
Then it's a good idea to use a hot cautery on those legs.
Then apply cautery to the patient's legs, if needed, always using a cushion for protection.
The doctor will treat some ailments by applying heat to the legs and prevent them from being too exposed.
You see, if you are already experiencing pain in your legs from something like an abscess, it is called a boil on the body.
This sentence from the treatise translates to:
And so if it's a hot or dry pain, you should apply the powder from the root to the places where the pain is located.
And if you have already opened the space between the legs, then use a hot cautery on the leg to stop pain.
Then apply the poultice to the patient's body, using a bit of this recipe on the person's legs, and some of the other ingredients to their chest.
This refers to a treatment for gout using poultices made from specific ingredients.
And three are to be treated with a mortar and pestle, then strained and mixed with water, and another that is applied to the legs, and three are applied to the feet, so that they may be held in place.
And if your body needs to be plastered with cushions on its limbs.
This sentence should be treated with caution as it appears to be corrupted.
Then, to restore their health, use this method: apply cautery to the foot.
Take some altea, a piece of wheat dough should be placed on the legs to reduce pain and inflammation: take the following recipe for making a poultice for the resolution of a fracture, or for other ailments requiring such treatment.
And if they are burned, they will be healed by a hot cautery.
When there are complications, they should be treated with strong poultices and baths.
And thus, the doctor says that gout, which is a disease caused by an excess of humors in the body, is what he would call a condition affecting the legs and feet.
This statement means that if there are issues with a patient's legs or ankles due to a problem with their body's humors, then they should be treated for a specific ailment.
This is a list of symptoms that occur when doctors apply the hot cautery to the affected area.
If the pain does not occur in the same way in both the legs and feet, then you should put your hand on their body to prevent further damage. And if it's a severe pain in their legs or feet, then place a cushion under them.
Then apply heat to the affected area and allow it to rest for a while before submerging the patient's legs in a cushion soaked in wine and oil.
And he will be able to help you when there is a cushion within the confines of the body.
Then apply an poultice to the affected area.
When the joint pain persists for three days or more, you should suspect a serious condition.
E altre ma:  The patient's leg is healed. (This assumes "mays" means "legs" in this context, which is a reasonable assumption given its similarity to Spanish)
This Latin sentence refers to a medical procedure involving placing a cushion under the patient's leg during a fracture treatment.
If the bone-setter cannot reduce the fracture, then they are doing it wrong.
Therefore, if one has to perform surgery on a patient's legs, it is better to do it while they are warm.
Of the broken bones, the second chapter deals with the treatment of fractures.
And the causes of fractures are diverse in their nature, but some fractures occur from a blow to the bone, while some occur when the bone itself is injured.
And if a person's joints are inflamed or aching, use a cauterizing tool to relieve pain and remove the infection from the body.
And if this injury affects the bones, the doctor will need to apply a poultice.
The bone has fractured itself, and in this case, the patient's body is used to describe this type of fracture.
And if a patient needs to have their bowels or a cushion put back in place, that's how you are supposed to do it.
Then apply a sharp cautery to the affected area, otherwise the patient's pain will worsen.
And if one's feet are affected by gout, it is called a specific name. And bring forth the fire of the cautery to its proper place on the patient.
And there comes the cushion for their legs, so that the pressure on them can be relieved.
And by the way, it is known for being if there is an infection in the foot.
And if you see that a patient's legs are weak from their affliction, or that he has a fever, then consider it cholera, which is a disease caused by an imbalance of humors in the body.
And if you are experiencing an illness caused by accidents, another begins treatment.
In this case, doctors used to call it "the plague" if the patient's bone was affected by pain in the joints.
When it is summer, apply cushions to the place where the bones are affected by hot, and if it is necessary to cauterize the feet, then use a cushion on the patient's limbs.
E si'l ha algo que no entiendo bien.
And if you know how to treat the sores between the patient's feet, do so according to the treatment methods for such ailments.
And if you have to treat a wound or abscess in the leg, apply cautery to the legs, not the foot.
And there are two types of operation.
And so one method is to apply cauterization to the affected bone; this is how it is done.
And apply more cushions to their legs, so that they are supported by two cushions.
And if the patient has a pain in their limbs, they will be treated by different methods.
And if they are unable to be treated by cauterizing the affected area, other treatments may be necessary.
And if the bone is strong and hard, they are to use a hot cautery on their feet and that’s why it's called gout.
Let the bones be treated with an instrument or cushion placed under them, and let the patient’s thigh be covered with a cushion so that the area where the pain is located is protected.
And it is convenient that you apply a cushion to these parts of the body, which are those that are most affected by the disease.
Then apply a needle to the bone at the location where you know the pain should be felt by the patient.
And if the pain is caused by something other than the joint being inflamed, such as an ailment in the legs, then it is called a disease of the legs.
And so that you have to be careful that the cautery does not touch the toes.
And if there are other illnesses that need to be treated, they will need another cautery for their treatment.
You have already opened the area between the patient's legs; you are to use a cushion for their legs and apply another cautery to the area.
And if they have many sores on their legs, you should make sure to remove them carefully.
Then return the intestine to its place with hot cautery, as you would adjust a bone, so that the intestines are kept in their proper position.
And treat the foot with a cautery in order to prevent the occurrence of such things as the disease from spreading through the body.
When you have already opened the cavity by a certain method, then another must be used to keep it open.
Then, place a cushion on their thighs and administer the treatment in the most suitable way.
And if you have the patient's blood, which is to be drawn from their legs when they are in pain.
You are right about the small, sharp pain in the feet, but I need to know what type of humor causes this.
And then prevent further spread to those who have been taught about that art. And another cushion should be placed on their legs, in case of injuries to the feet, etc.
And if it is necessary to apply oil to the patient's legs, you will do that to relieve them.
And lay down on your side for one or two days while being treated by the physician with remedies to prevent an infection from spreading.
Then administer medicine to treat the plague, which often affects the whole body.
And when you treat a patient with a cautery, make sure that the skin is protected.
E therefore it is necessary to use a poultice for the pain in the foot.
Then if black bile has been brought on by a medical condition.
E.g., for the third source sentence:
On treating a broken foot.
And if the patient has two bones in their body, which are the two most difficult bones to treat, then you have done well by using the method of cauterization on the nose.
If the bone in the leg is broken, it is necessary to put it back into its natural position. And if you are a skilled surgeon, another may be used on the legs or feet.
When the pain is in their head or a particular part of their body, then they need a physician to diagnose it.
Then apply a bandage to each part of the leg.
And if the patient's condition allows, apply a restoring bandage for the wound.
E another put his hand on her face, if the pain is located there.
And so the old healer said, "Let me put a cushion under your legs."
And sometimes the septum is inflamed with polyps, causing the nose to be blocked by the swelling of the nasal passages.
And this cause is called by doctors a sign of the disease.
And if they are in need of treatment, apply a cushion to their legs or feet, and use cerot or wax for the other ailments.
If there are many blisters on the feet, treat them with album applied to the affected area.
When joint pain is caused by cold humors that affect the body, doctors may use the term gout for this condition.
Then apply warmth to the nostrils and sinuses, and you will see the ailment diminish.
Chapter 4
When the jaw is dislocated.
Gently place your hand on the patient's legs, to ensure that they are properly supported.
Therefore, place your left finger on the tongue of the patient, while holding their right hand.
Then use a hot cautery to draw out the excess humors from the patient's body.
And you have already applied a gold or cedar-wood splint to the injured tooth, so that the bone does not come out; e.g., a gold filling for a cavity in the tooth.
And apply to the patient's feet and legs whatever suits them.
And if you feel pain in your feet, put cushion under them, and apply another to the body.
Then adjust that bandage on their wounds, so as to avoid its spreading.
And if it is necessary to treat a wound in the foot, apply a poultice as needed.
And if the fracture is caused by the ailment of the legs, place your hand on the affected area to reduce swelling.
And if it is necessary to make cuts on the leg, then you should widen the incision in the leg as needed.
Then apply the plaster for those ailments that are not caused by excessive cold in the joints.
Another servant places a cushion under them and another on their feet, while placing the patient's leg back in its place.
This concerns the restoration of a dislocated clavicle.
There are three types of injuries that can cause pain in the joints: one where the bones are broken, one where the muscles are injured, and one where they are twisted.
And if the patient has a fracture or two in the body, then use the other cushion to support their legs; otherwise place another one on their knees.
And if the bone in that area is fractured, it is necessary to splint the fracture.
And then place your hand on their foot, and if necessary, use another cushion to ease the pain.
When the patient's body needs warmth, they should be covered with blankets and wool.
And if you cannot apply cautery to the parts outside, then place a cushion on the patient's shoulders, and another on their chest, to support the body during treatment.
And the patient's bones are set below the sternum, with the help of cushions.
And if you have a fever, put cushions on your arms and legs and apply them to the area where you feel pain.
And if it is necessary to cut the intestine, place it back into the body, but if it is gout in the feet, you must use the other method.
And if it is necessary to make use of a lancet, it should be used on the leg or foot.
Mays the pain be borne by their legs so they can stand.
And if you have opened the plague that affects the bone, you then treat the patient's legs by holding them under their pain.
And if there is little disruption, you should only cauterize a small amount if you are dealing with a tear in the muscle or joint.
Then apply a cushion to the affected area, if necessary.
And so apply the cautery to the intestine or legs; but make sure to avoid burning them.
And if the patient has a wound in the area of their foot, place your hand on the wound to stop the bleeding.
And if a pain is caused by a wound in that area, do not apply heat to it unless it's an open sore or blister, which requires careful attention.
And apply a cushion to the affected area, if they are in their legs.
And if it is necessary to cauterize and soothe the afflicted area, it should be done within 28 days.
In this context, the text likely means that the following passage is about the treatment of gout in the foot from Chapter VI of a medical treatise.
The treatment of a dislocated shoulder.
The spatula is broken in the place you mentioned, but other than that, I don't know what it means.
And so when the patient has a cushion under their feet, you must hold the bone in place until it heals.
Then apply a cushion to their body, placing cushions on their legs or limbs.
If you have a splayed foot, this treatment will help you.
Then place a long cushion on their legs and hold them there.
And for those whose legs are softened or softened by the affliction, it is called lethargy.
Then put a cushion under the patient's side.
And apply a warm cautery to the affected area for 20 days or 35 days.
And then when you are done with this process, apply another treatment to the affected area.
And if you must treat the affected area, put the cautery on the bone to prevent pain from spreading to the foot.
Chapter 7
On treating a fracture of the foot.
The foot has been opened by the use of a cauterized tool to prevent the pain from worsening.
Then make sure the patient's bowels are kept open, so that they do not feel the pain.
And if it is necessary to apply cautery to the intestine, it should be done with care.
The sentence should be translated as:
If you wish to treat gout in your foot, you should use a cautery for that purpose.
Chapter 8.
And on the treatment of the coasts (of the body)?
Sapiens that the pain comes from the joints and tendons of the patient. And when it is necessary to know what is wrong, then they are examined by the physician.
And apply a dressing to the affected area, if needed by the patient.
And then if the fracture is in the body, you should apply cautery to the affected area.
And so the doctors are already skilled in dealing with the leg pain caused by humors.
Then apply a cautery to the legs to prevent the swelling from spreading.
And if it is necessary to make a poultice (application) or cauterize the legs of someone who has been cauterized by gout, apply it elsewhere.
And they apply a bandage to the leg, e.g., bandages for the wound.
And you should apply a poultice to their cushions for the joints.
And if you place a cushion on his foot, he will feel pain in his legs, and he will be able to find relief by applying it to his body.
And then we must apply the cushion on their legs, another on their feet.
And if a burning pain has seized you in the region of the joints, let it be treated as an ordinary burn.
And if it is necessary to use the cautery for treatment, the patient should be treated on their side, where they are able to rest comfortably.
This passage from the Latin-based languages likely describes a medical procedure involving the treatment of an ailment affecting the joints or limbs.
This refers to the treatment of the patient's back and neck with cushions or supports during an illness.
And if it is necessary to apply heat to the bones of the foot, they should be treated accordingly. And when you want to know if the patient will be healed by the use of a needle, or if it is necessary to apply a cushion, it is for the other to be cured; then consider, with the cushion, where the needles are applied.
And if you cauterize the bone, the pain will be cured by cauterization.
And if you want to know whether he will heal or not, look at his knees.
This sentence translates to: "If one has a wound in the legs or thighs, you should avoid making incisions there, if the pain is caused by something other than an injury."
And if it's not due to any of those causes, the cause is better and lighter
And if it is necessary to cure the patient, it is customary for someone to apply an incision.
And apply poultices to soothe the afflicted limb and bring relief.
And if the pain is caused by an excess of the body's humors, which are the fluids that govern the health of the body, then you should apply heat to the affected area.
The English translation for the provided text would be:
And if you are sick or have pain in them, apply a cushion to their legs.
Chapter 10.
Then apply the treatment for their ailment.
And if there are problems in the bones, such as fractures, the patient is said to have gout; otherwise, it is called something else.
And the restoration of the body is done by placing one's hand on the fractured area, as well as the way to treat the patient with the cushion.
Then return the patient's hand to its place.
Then apply a poultice to those parts to help prevent further injury. E then the patient's body will be in pain, but that's how it should be with gout.
Then apply the point to the patient's body, which should be applied to the same degree on all sides.
When there are ulcers in the body, you must first treat those before addressing the pain from gout.
Then treat them with a hot iron and a special cautery, if necessary.
Chapter 11
And then apply heat to the patient's leg, et cetera.
Help must be given to the shoulder, where the arm is located.
Then, if one has a broken bone, you can set the bone and hold it in place.
Place cushions on both legs, and ensure the patient's legs are bound together.
And if the patient's illness affects their legs, they should be placed on a bed or mat.
And if there is a need to prevent further pain and suffering, the doctor applies a tool to the patient's legs.
And if the wound be on the leg of the patient, he will apply a cushion to the wound; and if they have a pain in their legs or feet, it is customary for him to call for the help of a cautery.
And if you want to treat the intestine with a cautery, put your hand on the other side of the wound.
And if the patient's legs are being treated, you must use cushions to support them.
Then similarly if the fracture is near the knee, apply a cushion to the legs, so as to protect the skin and underlying ligaments.
Then apply a poultice to the affected area.
This sounds like a treatment for gout, using a cushion and another tool (the "other" being the word for "something to apply heat") over the affected area.
And apply an ointment to the wound, and hold the patient's arm still; when applying the ointment, use it on their arms and legs.
Then place a cloth on their arms to prevent the body from being cold.
The doctor will use a tool to make marks on the body.
When the joint is opened up and a cushion is used to cover the area above the fracture; that's what you do when the joint pain is caused by humors.
And then apply a cushion to their legs.
And if the foot is injured, apply a cautery to the affected area. And when the wound is severe, it is called "stricture" by physicians.
And so you will see the situation of the patient's condition when applying cauterization.
Then apply a cushion to the legs if necessary and hold their hands.
And if you wish to know whether the patient's body has a particular ailment, one should carefully examine the pulse in all parts of the body for three days.
Mays you have to be careful so that the patient’s bowels don't move.
This suggests: Then place your hand on their stomach (and) on their legs, so that they will be protected from injury.
And you should be careful that it is not a case of something else entirely.
You are translating the following medieval medical text:
Here comes the translation:
And if the fracture is severe, it will take from one to two months for it to heal.
Another one must be kept on the surface of their body
Then apply a bandage to the arm to protect it.
Two bones are called "pous" because they are affected by it and are used to treat pain in the legs.
And so the cure for the pain in their legs was to be cauterized.
The doctors will restore health to the patient by restoring their humors to balance.
And when there is pain in the foot, it can be difficult to treat.
And so the other two legs are kept in place.
Therefore, if the doctor determines that an incision is necessary, it should be made on the bone where the cushion is placed, rather than elsewhere in the foot.
When the fire burns too brightly, use cold compresses.
And if the two bodies are in pain, then apply pressure to their limbs.
And if you have found that a member has been affected by a cold which causes pain in the feet.
And if the patient's foot has been opened by the other means, one must be careful to place cushions under them so that they do not cause pain.
And another has placed leeches on the arm on which the bloodletting instrument was used.
And place the bone between its legs in such a way as to make them comfortable.
And if you have pain in their formation of bones, use the cushion to prevent them from being harmed.
And if you find the pain in the foot, put a hot compress on it to reduce swelling.
So if there is a wound on the foot, another servant should apply their hand to the injured leg.
This is a bit tricky to translate directly, but I can tell you that this text is describing the use of a poultice made from beeswax and beeswax-soaked rags in the context of treating an ailment with the described symptoms.
And you may know that this is how it is done by the doctors: to treat fractures in the leg.
And if you want to make the intestine or hernia suffer from a strong pain, put the leg on the cushion and the foot in its usual position.
And let the sheets be soft, and let them be smooth on their legs, so that they are not irritated by the use of a hot cautery.
And consider holding a cushion near the legs for a few days. And if it is necessary to apply heat to the affected area, place a cushion there, and put the patient in a comfortable position.
And let the cushion be placed on the legs.
Here comes the first line in English: And if the patient's condition has worsened, and the other if they have a cushion on their legs.
Then you must consider if it is necessary to treat the patient's legs for a hernia or other issues, and use a cushion under them while they are treated by the physician.
Mays al malaute no cove has cuatres (20 days) is not customary for a patient to be treated with a cautery on the legs.
And place a cushion on the patient's legs to keep them still.
And if a patient suffers from long-lasting pain in their legs, they should be treated by applying cautery to the affected area for that many days.
This chapter provides remedies for pain in the joints of the foot.
And if you need to make a cut on their legs, and then apply a cautery to the pinch of the foot,
Know that it is a sign of those who are skilled in treating the pain of gout that they know to treat the foot, e.g., with a cushion placed beneath their hands.
And if a patient has a wound on their leg, another should be placed above it.
And if you are unable to do so, other treatments are available.
Then apply a poultice and bandages to the affected area; if you have to use another method for treatment, then use an appropriate amount of cushions or bandages.
When the injury is treated for by applying a bandage, you should apply a long-lasting bandage to the abdomen so that it may be used for the treatment of the wound on the foot; otherwise, it would be unwise.
And if it is necessary to cauterize, apply the cushion to the affected area.
Then if you break a bone in the legs, you should use a cautery to prevent further injury.
And if there is a fracture in the legs, apply a splint to the affected limb and keep the patient's hands on the area to prevent further injury.
Mays es que la fractura es in the other things by li, but they are not sure if it is the same thing as gout.
E consider the position of the wound in the affected area, as the patient's legs are healed, you will place them on their legs, and they will be treated with a poultice.
The fourteenth chapter describes how gout is treated by applying hot cautery to the affected area.
For the restoration of the bone of the leg.
The bone in the leg is called the "leg" by doctors.
The patient is brought to the doctor for treatment with cauterization.
And then apply cautery to the affected area.
When there is a pain, the other is that which is customary to call a pentinent.
And if the patient's bone is broken, they must be placed on their back and the joint must be held above the injury to prevent the pain from spreading.
And if he has to, the doctor will know how to reduce it. Mays (the) if the pus-filled swelling recedes, you can continue to apply a cushion under the swelling, as the wound will be healed by itself.
Then apply a bandage to the wound.
And then apply a bandage to the affected area after placing the patient's foot on a cushion.
And so you have opened the space between the legs of the patient, another cushion on their chest, and another one should be placed under their feet.
Then reduce the swelling on his legs by applying a poultice to them.
Then you should have already opened the intestine by making use of your knowledge.
Then place two cushions on their legs to ensure the patient's legs are supported.
Then apply a bandage to hold the wound together.
Then you must carefully move your hand away from the patient's body;
And another treatment for the aforementioned pain in the legs would be to place a cushion on their leg and apply heat to the affected area.
Mays in reality, another cause of pain in the legs, such as a cramp, should be treated differently than those who are afflicted by gout; but for now, I have to treat the other one with a cushion.
And if he has been sick for forty days or a bit more than that, the patient should be treated differently based on the nature of his illness.
Chapter 15.
When the body is injured or dislocated, it can be treated with other types of treatments.
This means the patient's limbs should be kept warm and still to avoid inflammation.
Then apply cautery to the wound to stop the bleeding.
And then the intestines or other parts of the body are treated as well as possible by placing them back in their proper position and keeping them there.
And upon that roundness, you have placed a cushion to apply pressure.
Then they are considered other injuries to the bones, which occur in the legs, but not in the same way as gout.
Chapter 16.
And put the leg back together.
Then, to avoid complications, the physician should know that doctors call it gout when there's an excess of heat in the joints.
And if there are injuries to the limbs, they will be treated in the same way as the one for the two.
And if one or more members of the body are injured, the pain will spread to all parts.
And if the patient's limbs are affected by the subtle bone structure, the treatment should be done carefully.
And if you have broken a bone, put a cushion under them.
And then you will apply a cushion on their legs, and use another to measure the area, and another to hold them in place.
But if the fracture is severe, it is best to use gentler methods.
When you have to make an incision for a boil, apply it directly using the cushion placed under the legs (and) the one that is holding them down.
And if it is necessary to treat the affected area, you must use an ointment and apply it to each leg separately, using the opposite cushion for the other leg.
And place a cushion under the patient's two legs, to prevent them from being bent or twisted.
Then place a cushion under them, and apply another to their legs; and another on their feet for warmth.
And the most important thing is to cover the legs with a cushion, and if there is a fracture, then apply a cushion to the area where the wound is.
When there are other causes of inflammation in the leg, it is considered by doctors to be a case of gout.
When the pain of gout affects the joints of the limbs, it is called "podagra" by doctors.
And you will have already placed a cushion on their ankle and foot.
When there are many ailments, you should use a cushion to support the affected area.
Then apply the poultice to the affected bones while ensuring they are properly aligned.
Then place your hand on the area to be cauterized, and then cauterize those bones, and do not forget the other one.
Then place a poultice on the body, and apply a hot compress to the affected area.
And then apply a strong bandage to the affected leg, especially if it's due to other causes.
And if after three or four days, you have to use a cushion on their legs, then apply heat to the affected area.
When the patient's intestines are affected, they must be treated carefully. And cushion the joint or other parts of the body to protect them from the pain of so-called gout.
This describes how to apply a poultice to treat the symptoms of a condition that is likely gout.
And so that you do not forget to put a poultice on all the accidents that we have said, you must place them in the cushion of their own injuries.
Capitol .xviii. translates to Chapter 18.
This is a Latin phrase that translates to: **"Of fracture from the femur bone in a woman, you have already placed the cushion for the bones of the foot, and the other (the cushion) under the legs."**
When a woman's bowels are inflamed, apply a cushion to her legs.
And so the midwife will place the woman's body in the proper position for childbirth, placing her legs as she deems necessary.
And then apply the medicine to the patient's body as you deem necessary.
And so for seven days or thereabouts, the patient's condition will be restored.
And if you want to make the humors return to its cavity, use a heated cane for the treatment of the patient's swollen intestines.
When there's pain in the intestine, it is healed with a cushion on the leg and another on the foot, and your hand should be placed on their chest.
And if a bone is broken in the foot, you must apply cauterization.
And es la que no se troba in the book, a fracture is rarely hidden by the pain itself, and that's why I say to you that it's a good thing to have someone help you with these treatments.
And thus, if the patient's vein is blocked, the patient should be given three days or so to heal.
Chapter 19
The patient's legs should be treated for inflammation caused by cold humors.
The first line is a commentary on the pain of the ailment, not the patient's condition after the treatment.
Then you should apply cautery to the patient's blood vessels, and use a cushion or other support to keep their body from moving during the procedure.
And if there's an abscess in the thigh, it should be treated with heat on the affected area.
When you are treating a wound that has been festering for nine days, do not let the patient near it on the third day.
And if the injury is a joint in the foot, you must apply a cushion to that area.
Mays tu has un cobayes que's necessiteys de cushion in a nearby room: a cushion, a warming pan for the patient’s body, e per le dolor del metge o la quantitat that which is nearby should be used.
And if there is a need to apply cauterization to the patient's body, they must use other methods for pain relief.
Apply heat to the affected limb, and use a cauterizing tool on the areas around it.
Then, you should know that this is how you treat gout.
And so in Greek it is called "labre volentz atelem" (meaning "the palette of the one who wishes") but the meaning is unclear without more context.
And if the foot has pain, place a cushion under them.
And then apply something to bring on healing.
Then cover the fractured area to prevent its swelling.
When a bone needs to be set in place, you should use a saw if necessary, as one might use for setting bones in surgery.
And then place a cushion under the area of the body where the pain is felt.
And if the bone is returned to its natural place, then you should know that it was dislocated.
Then place a hot poultice on the affected area to prevent the disease from spreading and causing gangrene.
Then leave the cushion open to the air so that it can be used for the restoration of the intestine.
Then if they are experiencing pain in the legs or feet, it is necessary to treat them with caution. And if you have to place your hand on their legs, it should be on the area where the pain is located.
Then if a pain arises in the feet, they will say that it is a pain of the foot.
When a doctor has already diagnosed a plague as being caused by something other than an infiltrated body part, or perhaps even if you have already treated the patient with a cushion in order to prevent the spread of the disease, and he's still sick, then it might be a good idea to use a cautery.
Therefore, apply a poultice to the affected area in the morning and evening.
You should consult a doctor if you experience gout or other pain in the legs. And then you must apply hot cautery to the intestines, which are capable of causing pain.
When you have done that, then the patient must be treated with a hot iron, to cauterize the area where they were healed by another method.
And then you should apply remedies to the affected limb, if necessary.
"Then, upon the patient's legs."
The healing of the body's ailments that occur in the area of a wound.
This is what happens when a person has a wound and they call it gout.
when there are recent signs of a wound in the flesh, apply cold to the affected area or use a cushion for the pain.
And so the pain will be relieved when you place your hand on it to apply pressure; e a patient suffering from constricted circulation should not have a problem with their feet.
Mays, if there is a need to apply a poultice to the body that requires assistance, place a cushion on the area to be treated so that the patient's feet are not affected by the cushion and poultice.
Chapter .xxi.
Then restore the broken bone and another cushion is placed on their legs to prevent them from moving.
And you have already restored the patient's bone to its proper state.
This line proposes to treat the ailment of a "malaute" (a person suffering from a condition) by making their intestines tender so that the doctors can address whatever issue they have.
Then apply a poultice to the affected area.
A hot poker is applied to the affected area to treat gout in the feet.
And for the treatment of fractures, surgery should be performed by the surgeon.
If you can't place cushions on the legs, then make sure to avoid the word "gout" when referring to the injury.
> And if it is necessary to prevent the doctors from mistaking it for gout when it is in fact something else.
And there are many remedies for recent wounds and a variety of other ailments.
And so if there's no longer an opening in the intestine, then you put your hand on the patient's legs and stop the treatment.
And if the body has been pierced by a sharp pain, make sure that the intestines or the intestines remain in place.
You have already opened the space between the patient's thighs, and are careful not to let them get too cold.
This sentence is likely from a medieval text describing a medical procedure or treatment method. It is written in a language that resembles Latin, but with some inconsistencies between the two languages.
Dislocation is a common ailment caused by an imbalance in the body's humors.
Therefore, when a joint is dislocated, it needs to be treated with cautery to reduce pain.
And for that reason, the leg should be held still at the opening of the cauterization, so that it does not cause pain to the patient during the procedure.
When the patient's blood has been let, the bandages are applied to the wound.
And each limb shall be treated as needed, and healed by others.
And if you have already been told to bind the patient's legs, then bind them well and place a cushion above their knee, or put another way, use a cushion for the injury.
Of the twenty-fourth chapter.
A method for treating dislocations in the jaw.
E  la  dislocació del patient sia per les masloques e a la cap de la dislocacio
When the pain in the legs is less severe, the doctor will know the reason for the patient's condition.
May your joints be healthy and free from pain, for if you are experiencing a dislocation, it should be treated early, and completely healed by the use of proper remedies.
And then the doctor places his hand on the wound, and prevents the foot from being cauterized.
When the condition is severe, apply hot compresses to reduce swelling.
Therefore, if the patient suffers from gout, he should be treated by letting him draw his affected foot back to the original location.
And if he sleeps on their legs, have them lie down and place a cushion on their legs; they should be covered up to the knees, so you can see how the patient will react.
And you should place a cushion under your arm, as well as the patient's legs and arms to facilitate healing.
Then the pain spreads to the other limbs of the patient, so that the intestine or the belly be inflamed by gouty humors it will cause more intense pains in the rest of the body.
And when you see that the patient has died, you must know that he or she was sick for several days.
Chapter 25.
And if there is a reduction of the pain in the shoulder, you must have a cushion under the collarbone to apply pressure.
The doctors must be careful to keep the intestine and other organs from being injured while treating the patient's foot pain.
And if there are no cushions available, then the patient's body will be in pain. And you shall cauterize the spot with your hand and a burning tool.
And then apply it to the legs and thighs.
Then the patient may be treated with continuous reduction as we have said.
And so, place the cushion on their legs, commanding stillness and peace within the body.
And then the doctors apply cauterization to bring back the separated muscle to its proper place.
E a la persona que tu voles que lo fai in
For the reduction of a dislocation of the muscle.
Sapias that the muscles are only used for burning pain in the foot if the humors are treated as cold and stagnant.
And the second is that it be dislocated at the level of the muscle.
And in the same way, the return to its place of the part where the body is weak and thin is difficult for the intestine to go back into.
Some men are afflicted by strong blows or inflammation, which causes dislocation.
Then, if you have to cauterize the intestine, make sure the cushion is placed properly.
And so the metatext is known as gout in the other parts of the body when it affects them.
Then apply a bandage over the area to prevent the patient from feeling pain in their feet.
And of this dislocation is made an easy reduction when it is fresh and the injury is in the thighs, and also if the dislocation is in the foot.
And the minister gently places their hands on them.
Perhaps if the patient has said that the joints are painful, and they have a pain in their legs, then apply heat to the affected area to prevent inflammation.
Then, you should be careful to apply the cushion so that the muscle is supported by the cushion and the person's chest is lifted by the hands of the person who has placed them on the sick person, placing a cushion under their arms.
Then apply a poultice to the affected area to soothe the pain. Mays if the joint pain is mild, the patient should be watched for signs of worsening or complications.
And if you must treat gout, place your hand on the affected area to apply a poultice of mortar and that's how the gout is treated.
And if it is difficult to reduce the swelling by making incisions, they should use cautery on the legs to relieve the pain caused by the aforementioned method.
Then apply a cloth to the wound on the patient's legs.
Then apply a cushion to the patient's intestine.
And if the doctor wants to cauterize the intestine of the patient, they should put their hand on the area where the bandage will be placed, as a precaution so that the heat doesn't damage the intestines.
And when the pain spreads from the muscle to the bone, it is called gout, and you should apply a cushion to that area if the patient has pain there.
And if the stomach is closed to the patient's legs, it is good for healing the illness.
Then, if food is needed by the body, a burning sensation in the limbs or cushion pain is felt.
For if the joint pain is severe, a poultice must be applied to the affected area.
And if at that time the bandage is applied to the affected area for seven days, then you should know that the pain will be felt in the head, or the body.
If a joint is dislocated, treat it as such.
And if the pain is in the intestines, then apply another cauterization.
And if you so desire, apply a cushion to the affected area and use it while the patient needs relief.
Then apply the appropriate cautery to the affected area.
On the treatment of dislocations.
And another person who has already placed their hands on the body will be treated as a form of treatment for gout.
Then return the intestine to its proper place, and apply a cushion to the patient's affected area, for this usually causes pain in the feet.
This passage is in Latin, but with some intentional misspellings that resemble spellings from Spanish, Italian, and other Romance languages. This suggests the original text is likely written by a physician familiar with those languages, possibly for a patient who speaks one of them.
And if the patient has a dislocated joint, then it is necessary to apply heat to the affected area.
And if the joint doesn't stay reduced, use other methods to help it heal correctly.
And apply it to their thighs so that they may be treated with heat.
And if the arm is affected by a disease, it is necessary to apply a cauterized bandage.
When the physician applies pressure to the joint where the cautery was used, the patient's bowels will move, which is why he is called a physician.
Then apply what you know about the body from leas to the leg, and leave it there for several days.
Then apply a cushion to their chest; et cetera, et voilà, you have already opened the space between the patient's thighs, place your hand on them.
This translates to:  When applying the poultice and bandage, you will see that the affected area is swollen, so place a cushion under it to keep it from swelling more.
And if you leave them [the humors] unaddressed, they will become inflamed and cause the pains that are called gout to be made. And place a heated iron on the affected area to relieve the pain. Then return the cushion (to its place) on the patient's legs, and the other (servant) on their chest, to which they should put their hand.
And if you wish to cauterize the patient's body, place a cushion on their legs so that they do not burn.
**Capitol .xxviii. translates to: Chapter 28.**
Treatises written in a language that resembles Latin, Italian, Spanish, and French.
The first sentence is translated to: When the pain is in the legs or feet, it's called another type of problem by others.
And if the reduction of the intestine in its cavity is needed, you will place a cushion on the table and hold the patient's foot over it.
When the pain is in the foot, you must apply a cushion to prevent the intestine from becoming inflamed and painful.
And so it is good if you return to the patient their strength; but do not call it gout if you don't know for sure.
This appears to be a passage from a medical text describing how to treat someone suffering from gout.
Then if the patient's pain has lasted for seven days, the cushion should be removed.
Then apply heat to the affected area and keep it closed.
In the xth chapter, it is customary to place a cushion under their legs and another on their feet.
And let your hand be placed on the patient's feet.
At times, you might need to use a cauterizer on their legs.
Then apply a poultice to any digit on the hand that is dislocated.
And place the head of the patient on their legs, and suspend the foot above the ground, so that they are supported by the cushion.
Then apply a bandage to the affected area.
And when you have to apply heat to the affected area, do so for a few days after using a cushion.
And if it is necessary to perform surgery on the leg, it is called a dislocation.
And similarly, you may apply a cushion to other parts of the body.
Capitol .xxx. translated from Latin means Chapter 30.
From the patient's feet, hold the vertebrae in place with your hand.
Then apply the appropriate treatment to the patient's legs, and apply a cautery device to prevent further complications.
And where the intestine or leg muscles are affected, the patient will have pain in his bowels, which is another way of saying he has a condition affecting his bowels, also known as "the gut" by those who know its signs.
Therefore, it is called gout.
This is a humorous but difficult task! You've given me three interesting sentences that seem to be about medieval medicine.
Mays in their chest, a physician would use instruments to treat them, which they have already learned
But that which is cured by medication is only a symptom.
And then use your hands to hold the other end of the body in such a way that the pain will be alleviated by keeping the intestine from being pulled out.
And if a doctor uses a cushion to treat a patient, they are placed on their legs.
Then the minister shall apply the cautery to the patient's feet; as for the other cushion, another cushion shall be used on their legs.
And you are to apply the cushion on the legs of the patient.
Then, if they are not used to pain, they will be unable to endure it in their cavities.
And the doctor holds the patient's feet, while another stands ready to assist.
If the body cannot be returned to its normal position, then take a cushion and place it on the foot, as well as other measures are needed. And if the patient's body has been affected by pain in the joints, the physician should place his hand on the area to be treated.
And if you use two of them for a medical procedure, place a cushion on their body, the patient's intestines will be burned by the hot coals.
This refers to a situation where the patient has a medical condition in their legs, and the doctor uses a cushion and a hand on the affected area for diagnosis or treatment.
And in the extremitat there are three things: one is the length of the bone, one is its width, and the other is the length of the bones above the knee.
And if there are other injuries besides those already present on the legs of the patient, then place a cushion under them, and the patient's hand on their own leg, where they can feel the pain.
E aprop deves apply to the patient's legs, and keep their leg straight as they are being treated.
Then apply a poultice to draw out the cold humors from the affected area.
And if the leg must be opened or the foot's humors are treated, then use a cushion to protect the patient, and place it under the cushions.
If the swelling remains after treatment, use medicines that reduce inflammation and pain in that area, which are applied for a long time.
When you cauterize the bone on the foot, it's important to also consider the potential for complications or infections in the affected joint.
Of the 32nd chapter:
And apply heat therapy to the affected area, taking care to avoid causing further injury.
la malvada de la cushion and other such things are for the joints only.
The intestines are swollen and painful due to a disease.
The disease gout affects the major joints and minor joints are usually affected more severely.
And if you want to put your hand on the foot of the patient, you can use this method to help them.
And if he has a pain in the joints, they are on his feet, for which the doctor should be called.
When there is pain in the joints, and the pain is felt in the leg, the doctor will treat it accordingly.
And if it is necessary to make cushions for the legs in order that they should be used to relieve pain.
May's reduccio be done with caution so that the condition does not worsen.
Then apply a cautery to the affected area, using caution to avoid burns on their legs and chest during treatment.
And if it is necessary to apply heat, then apply it directly to the affected area.
And let it be known that the patient's body, or the two parts of the fork, or the other part of the body, be they a few or many, shall be treated as such.
And let the patient's body remain suspended above the ground while they are suspended from the ground.
And this kind of pain is known as gout.
And when the dislocation is cured, they are no longer considered a cushion.
For the treatment of a dislocated joint, we apply a cushion to help support the displaced limb.
And if it is necessary to prevent the intestine from becoming infiltrated by the bad blood.
And this type is cured by the lightest of cures.
When gout affects the foot, it is necessary to apply specific treatments.
And let it be known that if you apply cauterization to the foot, it should be four fingers above the ankle.
And if the patient's body is swollen or inflamed, place a cushion on their head to prevent further pain.
And so apply your hand to the patient's joint, pressing down on the cushion, so that the patient’s leg does not become inflamed.
And if you have an injury to the leg, it will be treated properly by the surgeon.
The intestine or legs are already affected by gout; the other leg should be placed in the cavity to avoid further complications.
The other term for the condition where the body's humors are out of balance, causing an infiltration of the intestines and pain in the feet.
And if the dislocation is in the leg, the doctor puts a cushion on the area where there is pain.
E aopu is si la cosa es that in the middle of the face is painful,
When there are no other causes present, and it's clear that the problem is due to an imbalance in bodily humors, they are often called "le loc" by physicians.
When you want to make a reduction in the foot, it is necessary that your hand be placed on the surface of the body during the process, so that it doesn’t become swollen — but if the pain continues and the patient feels it in their legs,
And compare the leg to the other leg.
And if the patient has pain in their legs, then you should stop cauterizing the foot, and only apply the cushion to the affected areas.
And if you see any cause for the pain in the foot, then treat them for three days.
A cushion should be applied to the body part affected by the ailment for comfort.
Gout is caused by an imbalance of humors in the body, leading to painful inflammation in the joints, particularly those in the foot.
And so the treatment of the intestine or wound (on the foot) will be done.
The pain is caused by an imbalance in the humors of the body.
The signal for applying a bandage to the patient's shoulder is that they have pain in their foot.
And if the patient has a pain that affects his whole body, he should be treated with a special remedy to restore him.
And if you need to cauterize an area of the foot, place another hand on the leg.
And if there is a need to make three points on the legs of the one who has gout, place a cushion under their legs and another on their chest, and then apply a bandage over the affected area.
Let the patient rest for a few days, and apply a cushion to the affected area for comfort.
If swelling persists in the legs, use cautery for other ailments.
And if it is necessary to treat a wound in the leg, apply poultices.
On the treatment of the dislocation of the ankle.
Then apply another cushion to the affected area, and use a cautery for the pain in their legs or feet.
And that the dislocation is in the legs or feet, it is the other joints that are affected.
The use of cushions will help reduce swelling in the feet.
This seems to be an example of Latin-like text describing how to treat someone suffering from a medical condition involving setting a bone or treating a displaced joint during childbirth.
And if the patient is right-handed, place your left hand on the right side of the patient's body to secure their condition.
And apply the heat to the patient's legs; and do not let go.
And if a wound has been made, apply a bandage to the affected area.
And if it is necessary to make points on the foot, then put a cushion in the area of the leg so that the pain does not spread.
And if it is necessary to repeat it in two ways.
Mays si a tu are not allowed to touch the foot affected by gout.
Then apply another cautery to the legs, for the patient must be treated so that the intestine or hernia does not protrude from the body.
Then the doctor would apply the treatment for gout, which is the illness that causes pain in the body's joints, particularly the feet.
Then apply a poultice to that area to help reduce its swelling.
And so you see that a person should be careful about anything that could cause pain in their joints.
Then leave it alone for two days if the pain persists.
And then place a cushion under their legs to relieve them. This is the way they are told to treat it (the patient) in this manner by physicians.
And if the inflammation occurs on the foot, then apply cauterization.
Another place for the cushion, the other for the foot.
This means: "On treating dislocations of the fingers."
If a joint is inflamed, apply a cautery to the affected area; if it's not too severe, a poultice will do for the foot, and it requires careful handling to prevent further injury.
And so the patient's leg is held in place, as if they were on their back as if they were lying down.
Then place a cushion on the patient's legs for them to rest upon.
And if the patient needs to be treated, the patient should be treated with a cauterization against the table, three times for three days, each time.
The English translation for "Capitol .xxxv." would be **"Chapter 35"**.
A dislocation can be caused by an injury to the bone or by a wound in the foot.
When there are complications from that illness, put your hand over their feet, and another on their legs, and restore them to their former state.
A wise man should be over the metate, for you cannot cure a disease without understanding its nature. Then apply heat to that area, lest you cause pain in their hands.
And then apply treatment to their legs, which are already affected by the disease known as "the plague" in the form of a poultice on the cushion.
And if there is dislocation of the joints, it will be in the stomach, then you should make incisions in the affected area to remove the cushion and return them to their proper place.
Then place another cushion on their legs, for the pain is caused by other factors are in the affected area to stop the intestine from being harmed. Ayssi, use the word "gout" or "goiter" to describe the patient's condition? Amen.
