O, son, my intention is to complete this book, which is part of the medical science.
Then our understanding is that the pain in the feet is caused by something other than the cause of the pain.
And prepare for the surgery so that the second option is used as an explanation for the operation.
This text describes the process of treating a patient with gout using a cautery to address inflammation in the affected joints.
The name Hippocrates refers to the first aid provided by doctors.
But if someone does not know the cause of the pain in the limbs, they may be misled into thinking it is something else.
The doctor called it an abscess when a boil appeared on the foot of a woman who was suffering from the plague.
And so he cauterized the man's body with another instrument.
And so if it is necessary to make cuts for a wound on the foot, they should be made by a doctor who knows what they are doing.
Here's the translated sentence:
E apren le desies to the other parts of the body, but if the patient is sick, they are to be treated by another person's hand.
E yeu, and if necessary another remedy will be applied to soothe the pain in their legs.
But if the humors were spreading throughout the body, causing pain in the feet, then the doctors say it's something else.
and for his health he had him treated by another physician.
And if the illness affects the bowels, then the patient should be treated by a doctor specializing in melancholic humor.
And so it is necessary for you, sons, to attend to the patient's health, and to use this knowledge for the benefit of two people: one who has a wound and another who has no need of such knowledge.
Then you will have already opened the path to the cure, for it is customary to burn the affected area with a hot cautery.
And so you should apply your tools to your patients' legs, with firmness and by the grace of God, they are called for that purpose.
And let the patient be blessed with the best possible healing, and may terrible diseases not remain in their body.
Another that applies to the leg or foot of the patient, and applies to the condition. Let no physician be afraid to treat the condition known as gout.
This book is divided into three chapters.
This is the beginning of the first chapter of the book. This first chapter is about the nature of illness in the body.
This is the second part of the division. The second chapter describes the use of cauterization as a treatment for ailments.
The third chapter, on restoring the dislocated; and if it's necessary to apply pressure to the bowel, use a tool to push it back in.
The patient must be treated by a physician and the use of  "cauterization" should be avoided in modern medicine.
And by doctors, it is considered a disease that can be treated with cautery, but I say that they call gout.
And if you use it to treat two patients at the same time, it's called "a fire" by doctors as "tota materia".
Then use heat to treat those ailments caused by dry heat.
Gesso that men have warm feet, but if they are too hot, apply cold water.
And that's why I think it is necessary to have some cushions ready for those who suffer from gout.
Then, however, the physician is the one who is known to burn away those diseases that are caused by the bowels or other such things.
The text describes a medical procedure involving applying a cushion to prevent injury during surgery.
And so, the accoucheur placed his hand on the patient's foot to apply a cushion to their legs, which he had already done, and cauterized the affected area with a heated iron.
"And if it's necessary to treat the illness, use a cautery to apply heat to the affected area."
And if it is necessary to open the surface of the foot, it is customary to say that it is gout.
And if the patient is suffering from pain caused by the infiltration of humors, it is best to know which ailment they have.
And so if the pain lasts for a long time, and you are using a hot cautery to stop the pain in their legs, use the hot cautery to treat the patient's legs.
And if you want to cauterize the intestines, it is done by applying heat from the cavity below.
When the doctor places a cushion under their knees, you already know that the patient's body was not made for pain to be in the cavity of the lower part of the body where they put their hands on their knees.
Mays the doctor be consulted for treatment options if you have a gout flare-up.
"In some cases, gout can return at any time, because the body's fluids are still there in the patient's body."
E, if you have pain in the bowels, it is best to use a hot cautery to burn out the bad humors and then apply a poultice to draw them out.
The text says that gout can be treated by applying a cushion to the affected area. And when the patient is cured by the means of the physician, he/she will be cured by medicine.
And the ancients said that gold cautery is better than iron, and another applies a poultice to their feet.
And so that the patient's bowels may be kept warm according to your desire, and the other parts of the body which are affected by the inflammation may be treated as you see fit.
Then apply the cautery to the legs, but gently, so as not to burn them too severely.
And if it is necessary to open the body's humors, I have already ordered this chapter on the subject of the legs.
The first chapter.
And so the patient's limbs are to be treated with a cushion.
And this is how you treat it with medicine, to put the intestine back into its place.
E aprop you place their hands on the cushion.
And then place your hand on their legs to prevent the pain from occurring in the area. But you must know that there are other ways to describe the location of the cushion.
And if one needs to apply cautery to a patient's leg, proceed slowly and carefully.
E aprop reducu am tua, e letz le loc e ayssi cum la tua ma, si so.
And then apply a poultice to the leg for three days.
And then you should place a cushion on the affected area for cushioning. And apply the four-part remedy to the location.
Then they say that when the plague comes to the arm, it's better for it to be healed by honey.
And then they apply a heated cauterizing tool to the bone within their legs.
And then place your cushion on their bones to be cured.
And other say that he suffers from gout, so they say. And they say that the pain is caused by bad vapors rising from the body in the legs.
Then prevent the illness from spreading further, and stop the disease from setting in.
Mays he who has been called upon by the patient's body will be able to see the way his name is spoken for in the same manner as all doctors are called upon to treat the body.
And a cushion for the first sign of illness, you should use a more medicinal one.
Chapter two.
Then apply the other part of the body, the one that you mentioned.
When in the patient's leg there are cushions that are placed on their legs, they are for the most part, if the body's humors are concerned, to prevent the blood from becoming thick with bad humor and to apply other remedies. And then cauterize the affected area above the patient's leg, where the pain is felt, and another one on their foot. Incise the intestine and apply cautery to the affected area of the foot, — that is, the bone in the foot which causes pain. And if the patient's legs are in pain, they should be treated by a doctor who will know how to treat them properly.
And if there is a need to cauterize the head, the patient should be positioned so that the heat from the cautery does not reach their legs.
The third part of the text will be translated as "Then apply hot towels to the affected area and hold them there."
This refers to treatment of headaches.
When the pain of gout spreads to the legs or feet, it is called by its proper name in these parts.
The patient's feet are covered in honey and the patient's legs are burned with cauterizing tools. Then use your hands to apply pressure on the area where the pain is located, keeping it hidden.
Then apply a poultice to the affected area, and leave it for two or three days.
And then apply the ointment which will heal the patient's legs.
Then you must know that this practice is generally considered to be what doctors call medicine.
This sentence describes how a doctor would perform an operation using a hot iron to cauterize a wound.
And if the pain affects the joints, the doctors call it a small, pointed opening.
And so you must apply a hot iron to the affected area.
And if they are affected by a disease in the legs or feet, which are treated with cauterization.
Then apply cushion to their legs to prevent them from having another joint pain.
And if you use cauterization, place a cushion under them.
Chapter four.
Then apply another cushion on their legs, which are to be kept in this position.
And then apply a cauterization to the affected area, using fire as the cure.
Therefore, hold the jaw still when it is necessary to treat it.
E lay the cushion at the beginning of the operation to prevent it from bleeding out.
And then apply the treatment for the flow of blood according to the method described in this book.
Here comes the translation: When you see that the patient has a fever, apply a poultice to their chest, and place a cushion on their legs.
And if you want to cure them, you should apply the cautery after first opening the area where the pain is located.
Chapter 5.
This is about the use of cushions for cauterization of the body's humors.
When in the foot there is pain that needs to be treated by applying a hot cautery, this is the treatment for it.
When the pain is in the foot, then the first step is to apply the treatment to the affected area. If you are sick, you should use cushions to make sure your cushion is not too full of pus, a hot poultice should be used on the legs.
Then use the cautery to treat the intestine and other ailments in the legs, as well as any other ailments that need treatment.
The text you provided appears to be a mix of different languages and doesn't make sense as-is.
The use of a heated tool for cauterization is used on the foot.
And it is cured by cauterization on the legs, as we have said in the treatment of diseases.
The patient's legs are swollen due to their illness.
Then you must cure it with three cauteries.
And if the pain in the body is caused by cold humors, it should be treated by a doctor.
Then you will find the appropriate location for the cautery on the patient's legs and apply another cushion to keep the intestine from protruding.
The form of the physician's treatment is to cauterize the legs, which is how it is done by those who are skilled at it. However, it can be said that you are ill with gout; maybe a little thick-skinned.
And you, using a bandage, treat the area where the infection is located so that the swelling does not spread to other parts.
Chapter 7
This refers to the use of cauterization in treating old or chronic wounds.
And if apoplexy is present, use four small burns on the thighs to treat them. And that's how the method for using a cautery is done.
And it is customary to use a cushion on their chest; then it is necessary for the doctor to apply cautery to the affected area.
Chapter 8.
This refers to a gout treatment involving cauterization.
The patient's legs should be kept warm and they should be given cushions and pills for relief.
And if you are using an emplaster to treat the pain described in this treatise on the application of plasters, it will be necessary to use a specific type of plaster for the condition.
Then the patient's legs are to be held still by the cushions. Then return the intestine or cushion to his legs, and apply it there as he was told.
Then apply a cauterization to the affected area. Then, proceed to treat the patient by placing a cushion under their finger.
Mays le malaute es e.g., if the pain is in the legs, the person should be treated by a doctor who specializes in treating humors.
And if it is necessary to cure the patient, apply the poultice as described previously.
This refers to the treatment of an ailment affecting the legs, likely describing gout.
And if it is necessary to perform surgery on the legs and feet, it is usually called for a burning sensation in the body.
Apply a poultice to the patient's head. It should be placed on the patient's body as a remedy for the pain caused by cold humors.
When pain in the body becomes severe, it is treated by cauterizing the affected area with a hot iron. And so the intestine that causes it, may be healed.
Chapter 10
This refers to the treatment of a condition related to the location of the pain.
You are correct that the second source sentence is a reference to treating the condition of gout.
Therefore, the physician should apply cauterization to the foot when it is necessary to drain the pus from an infected wound or the body's natural fluids are being drawn out.
This sentence describes a situation where someone is being treated for a condition called gout.
E aprop pause on la man's head to stop the pain. And if the patient has a strong constitution, then cauterize their legs and chest using a cushion.
And if it is necessary to apply a cushion to the affected area.
If the child has gout, the treatment is with a hot, iron-tipped cautery tool.
Chapter 11
On melancholia, the treatment is as follows.
If the patient suffers from melancholy due to corrupted humors, then cauterize them.
A person suffering from melencolia may be treated by cauterizing their brain if they are prone to that illness.
And a poultice of the pigeon be placed on the head, and another be used to treat it.
And if the disease is spreading through the limbs, then it's best to apply cushions to the area.
And so apply liniment to the area; then if it's necessary to use a poultice, or for the patient to be treated with a poultice. And then he will be heated by fire on the altar of medicine. Then place a cushion upon their legs so as to soothe the pain that arises from cold humors in the feet.
This refers to the need for cushions and a doctor's careful attention to ensure the comfort and safety of the patient during treatment.
And then you must place your hand on the foot to prevent pain from arising there.
Another patient has a cushion for his/her pain.
And so is the practice of cauterization on the body.
The patient's foot has been opened (likely due to a cut or wound) and treated with cauterization.
And thus they applied a cushion to his legs and thighs.
Then cauterize the affected leg or foot if it's necessary to cauterize it.
When there are many doctors who treat the veins, they apply heat to the veins in the thighs.
And if you cauterize it, you must see to it that the blood flow is not obstructed.
And here we are told that the veins and arteries are inflamed.
And if you need to cauterize the bones, they must be placed on their feet.
The thirteenth chapter of the book of recipes should be read by physicians.
And if you use a hot cautery, it should be done carefully.
Then apply a cushion to the area where the joints are affected at the location where they cause pain. And if you have already been diagnosed with gout, then you should use a hot cautery to treat the pain.
Chapter 14
De cauterizatio del pes e.
A doctor will know what to do for the patient if medication doesn't work. And place a cushion on their thighs to prevent them from being opened.
And guard yourself from the part that is burned by the fire.
And here's another way to say it:
Chapter 15.
Then return the patient's eyelids to their place
Then apply heat to the affected area.
And if you want to burn the skin between the eyebrows, apply two cauteris to the feet. And if it is necessary to make points on the legs, it should be done by the number of times the patient has been affected by gout.
This means that you need to use a cushion for the patient's feet.
Chapter 16
Then you must cauterize the bone behind the knee to relieve pain.
When the body is cold, it should be treated with cushions in two ways: by warming it or by applying cautery to its feet.
If a cauterized vein has caused gout in the foot, apply a bandage to prevent further injury.
And thus the body part affected by the ailment will be treated.
Then apply a poultice on the affected joint, and place it upon the body.
And so he placed his hand on their body, and they were in danger because of the burning pain.
Then apply another treatment to their hands, which we will call a cauteri.
And if you see the patient's eyelids already contracted by the pain, he/she has already been afflicted with gout, and a physician should be consulted.
And so raise your leg and place it on the cushion for three days, and if it is necessary to apply the proper name, call it gout. And so he placed the medicine on the patient's body.
Then apply cautery to the eyelids as needed.
When the condition appears on the eyelid, one must be careful to avoid cauterizing the foot.
And thus the patient shall be treated with a medical cauterization.
And you have already placed the patient's body in its proper place for treatment, using another cushion on your knee if there are other causes for the pain.
When pain is severe or intense, it is called gout.
Therefore, if it is necessary to make points on the patient's body, he must use a cushion for the pressure and apply it on his legs.
And if it is necessary to make incisions on the foot, it is customary for the surgeon to apply another cautery to their body.
Gathered around the patient's legs are cushions, for they are the ones who need to be treated by medicine.
And this is what the patient's legs should be like after they have been treated with cauterization.
And so, you know that the humors are applied to different parts of the body depending on where they are placed.
E no sira le peitz of the patient must be kept safe from further injury.
When pain occurs in the legs, you should apply the cautery below the knee and use a hot iron to treat the feet.
E si te ha detto what you should do to treat a tear in the eye.
When you are treating a wound in the legs or feet, place the patient's head on their own chest to keep it calm.
And then the physician would place their hand on the patient's body to prevent further swelling.
And you have opened the space between the legs and feet of the patient.
And now he has to be burned.
When you wish to cauterize the intestines or other parts of the body. And if you wish, and so then apply heat to the affected area.
However, he who is skilled in their craft may be better suited to treat them.
Then apply pressure to the area if it is necessary to close the wound. Then apply a cushion to that area and hold it closed.
And then you should apply the hot cautery to the patient's nostrils, leaving them in pain, if they have a cushion under their head.
And if it is necessary to treat with a cauterizing tool for the pain in the bones, then apply a burning cautery.
This illness, if it doesn't heal within a few days, will be treated by the physician as a severe ailment.
Then place a small amount of heated lead on the location of the wound to help those affected by the fistula in the first few days.
If the fistula is healed, they are to be treated with cushion reduction.
Capitol .xviii. translates to Chapter 18.
The burning or cauterizing of the legs should be done by a skilled hand.
Inflammation of the child's lips is often treated by applying compresses to the area.
And thus you treat the patient's intestines by applying a hot cushion on them.
And if they are affected by cold humors that cause pain, you should treat them as gout.
And if they have pain between their legs, be careful to avoid the use of a cauterizing tool.
And then apply a hot cautery to that part of his body.
Capitol .xix.  is translated as **Chapter 19.**
This refers to the treatment of fistulas in the legs and feet.
And in the case of the uvula being inflamed, or the mouth, or the teeth, they are treated by those who are skilled in treating these conditions, with a pointed cautery to make a small incision, and with a cushion to reduce bleeding.
And so if the wound is healed, you are good to go; but if not, measures should be taken to heal the wound or treat it with a cautery.
The translation you've provided for "Capitol .xx." doesn't seem to be from an actual medieval medical text in Latin, Italian, Spanish, or French.
Single-line guessed translation: This refers to the cauterization and softening of the gums and teeth.
When the joints are inflamed by humidity, apply medications to cool them down.
Then place your hand on the patient's legs and apply the cushion to their body.
E already the patient's legs are treated.
Chapter .xxi.
Of cauterization for toothache.
Then apply cold water to their mouth to cool the gums.
A cushion should be placed on the patient's legs to apply a hot cautery to their painful stomach.
And then apply a hot cushion to their legs, and another on their chest, where they are being treated.
When the patient’s pain is caused by cold humors that are located between the legs, place a cushion under his legs, and apply heat to the affected area with another cauterization method.
May the first line be: But if the pain is in the legs, then you must place cushions on the patient's legs and thighs.
Then apply heat to the affected area to prevent further swelling from occurring; and if you are unable to do so on the same day, then prepare it for a different day.
This is the form that the doctors use for gout when they are treating the patient's legs.
And if it is necessary, cauterize the legs.
And this is the way to treat the illness by using a small cauterizer.
Another hand
On the treatment of extractions.
When you cauterize the patient's body, we must do the same to their other limbs.
And if the inflammation is small, you will cauterize the area for three days and apply a cushion to the legs, but only if there are few other options available.
Then apply the ointment to that area and use your hand to treat them with another cushion.
The first two sentences are from English translations. Please provide me with the first sentence for me to translate.
A cushion is placed under the patient's thighs to prevent pain during treatment.
Then you have to apply the heat of cauterization to the affected area on the leg, and if the body is cold, use another cushion for that which is in the foot.
Then apply heat to the affected area, but only slightly to prevent burns.
And cauterize the other joints if they are also affected by gout. And if you wish to cauterize the legs or any other part of the body, use the preceding method.
Then apply heat to the affected area.
Make a note of this point in the text.
Here comes the translation: And if it is necessary to treat illness in the lungs and chest, use a poultice for the ailment and place your hand on their chest to prevent further spreading.
When there are two or more cushions under their feet, the patient's illness is considered to be gout, as if they were called by doctors.
And if you wish, apply your own method of cauterization.
E si sial has cays de la
And the cautery should be used by this method.
Chapter 25.
Et autre siat un'altra persona e la possa;
When the knee of the patient is swollen, you must treat it with a poultice to draw out the swelling.
And thus, you have already applied a hot iron to the affected area, which should be treated with a cautery.
And if there are pains in the body, apply the cautery to the affected area.
And sometimes, if a patient has their intestines or feet out of place, it's because they have their hands on their hips.
Then apply pressure to the wound on the leg for a few moments to stop the bleeding.
And if a cushion is placed on their legs, then you must cauterize the affected area on the leg.
E aprop reduzeys le dolor del metges es a common practice.
This refers to a treatment for stomach ailments.
Then apply a cushion to the affected area between the legs, and place your hand on the cushion to make sure the patient's leg stays closed.
And if the depth of the cautery is appropriate, the amount of heat applied to the body will depend on the severity of the disease.
And if you wish, the patient's body can be burned with a cautery on their legs to cure them from the evil humors.
And if it is necessary to cauterize the stomach, it should be done according to the amount needed for the patient.
Then apply the proper name to the patient so they can be properly addressed.
Then apply a bandage to their feet.
Translation 1: And if the patient has pain in their bowels, it is usual to treat them as gout.
And if the pain is in the legs or thighs, then it's called sciatica.
And do not press your hand on their legs.
And if the pain stant on the intestine, it is necessary to place cushions on the thighs and legs of the patient, and then they must be held by the doctors, e.g., "if the pain is in their legs, it is a member; but if the pain is in their feet, the foot is a member"
And if it is possible to cauterize the joints if you have already made them open and prevent them from being affected by cold humors.
The author is using a language that resembles Latin but has some Italian and French influences.
**Capitol .xxviii. translates to: Chapter 28.**
When there are signs of inflammation in the feet, it is called gout.
A wound or inflammation on the foot is called gout in the case of the intestine, the pain is located in the intestines.
And if it's in the tunic, the doctors say it's an illness called the gout.
Then, apply a bandage to their cavity; if the bandage has been placed on their legs. And cauterize the affected area, which may cause pain for the patient, but will be healed by the fire.
Then, if there's a need to make a cautery on their legs, they should be treated as needed.
And if a patient has a condition that requires cauterization, you must know the proper way to apply it.
The other is gout.
When using this as a model for the translation of "de" to mean "of" in the context of the provided text.
This method uses a cushion to stop the bleeding from flowing out of the body.
Then apply a hot compress to the affected area to draw out the heat from the patient's foot.
You should be careful, because the Latin word "cove" means "to have" but is also used to refer to something being "appropriate" or "proper".
The Latin word for gout is "gout".
"The pain in the joints occurs when there are problems with the flow of humors."
Capitol .xxx.
This refers to the process of treating a wound on the foot using a burning tool called a cautery.
When you treat them for an ailment of the thighs, it is customary to call it gout.
This translates to: And if the patient has been bitten by the plague, we will use that method on the other limbs or a little higher up, which is the same as used for the thigh.
And if you have to cauterize the patient's legs, and one does it with other burns.
This sentence describes a method of applying a cautery to the patient's left leg.
And so that the patient's body may be opened by means of cauterization as needed.
Then return the patient's leg to its place and apply heat to the affected area.
And therefore they place four cauteries on their legs.
And if you must burn, use a hot cautery to make your three marks on the body.
Then, you use a hot cautery to treat the illness in the leg.
Chapter xxxi.
And if it is necessary to perform a cautery on the patient's body, apply it to the affected area.
Then apply a cushion to them, and then place a cushion on their chest.
The patient's belly should be treated with a hot point. And if a person has an open wound, place a cushion under them.
And place your cushion on their arms to make them feel better.
If you are treating a patient for a burn, you should always use a poultice to draw out the poison.
And apply the burning tip to the leg according to the shape of the body.
Gout is a disease characterized by an excess of uric acid in the body, leading to painful deposits in the joints, especially if the foot is affected.
And then apply the cautery to the patient's legs.
And if the patient has pain in their hands or feet, then apply a treatment to them.
Then apply the cauterization method using two cauteries, one on each side of the body. The translation you provided for Source 1 is incorrect. The correct translation is:
And you should let the disease run its course for a long time and keep the patient's legs comfortable and free from pain.
Aproper la cushion on its legs, and then apply a cushion to the surface of the body.
And if it is necessary to make cuts on the legs of the patient, it is customary to apply a cauterizing tool to the affected area.
Then it is customary to treat the abdomen with a cautery.
Gently warm the area affected by the pain.
And if they are experiencing a painful swelling in their feet, then I would say that it is a case of gout, which requires the application of leeches to remove the excess humors.
Then apply the cautery only to the area that needs it, and make sure the patient's legs are supported.
Then apply a cautery to the affected area.
Then apply a poultice to the area between the legs and knees, and avoid using your method of treating with heat and pressure.
And if the stomach is cold and the food isn’t digested, then apply a cushion to the belly and use a hot cautery on the face, and a large one on the other parts of the body.
This sentence is likely referring to a surgical procedure, possibly using the word "junctures" in a metaphorical sense for a specific area being treated.
And here comes the translation of the first sentence:
And now you understand the pain to be caused by the disease called gout. Then apply a cautery to the foot and place cushions under the patient's hands so they can be used.
And if you have to cauterize the legs or feet twice, it means that one leg or foot has been cauterized more than once.
This is a description of using a burning cautery tool on a patient's body to treat them for pain caused by a condition similar to gout.
This likely refers to the chapter 36 in a book or treatise.
And if it is necessary to use the cautery on the body, apply it carefully to the affected area.
When nature does not return to its place, it is customarily called "natural" by doctors.
Thus, when there is an illness in the body's humors, another method for treatment is to use a cautery on the affected area.
And then another place it on their legs, and apply a cushion. Then apply a cushion to the area where the patient has a boil.
And he/she will cauterize that which is needed.
When there are burns on the body or an open wound in your legs, it will be necessary to use cushions for support.
And then heal the place with the proper remedies.
When there is inflammation in the lower leg, and it has been present for a long time, it is called a chronic condition.
And if there are fluids in the body, they may need to use other methods for their treatment.
When there's a need to cauterize the bowels, they should be treated as if they were in the foot.
This treatment is for gout.
When the gout attacks or a pain arises in the foot, then apply a cautery to stop the pain.
And so, in this way, you will have opened the area for the second time with a small cautery.
Chapter 38.
This refers to the treatment of cauterization on the legs.
Then apply cold to the affected area.
Burn that in every way which is needed for the treatment of the foot.
And then place the cushion on their legs, as if in pain.
E si es a la persona que costuma.
And so, the patient's pain is treated with a hot cautery on their legs, where the heat will be applied.
The practice of using three cauteries in the treatment of the abdomen and limbs.
The text "Capitol .xl." likely translates to **"Chapter 40"**.
On the subject of dislocation of the hip.
When there are signs of a cold nature in the body, it is customary to call it gout. And a pointed cautery is used to burn out the disease in their legs.
Then you must know that gout is treated by applying heat to the affected foot.
And if you want to make points on the knees, apply the cautery there.
Then, if you are using a cauterizer, do not burn the patient's legs or feet.
And if it is necessary to make cauteries on the legs or feet, it should be done by a skilled hand.
Chapter xli.
The treatment of pain in the vein in the leg.
A person suffering from pain in the leg joints should be treated by someone who has the knowledge to do so.
The method for treating the illness is called gout.
The patient's legs were opened to be treated with three more cauteries. "Then apply the treatment to the affected area."
At least four are used to treat pain in the thighs.
And if you wish to cure the patient completely, cauterize the affected joint in order to burn its form out.
And this is the way to treat a painful swelling in the legs with cauterization if you wish to prevent its spread.
Mays if it is necessary to apply a cautery to the patient, the doctor should be careful.
And if the physician applies a cautery to the patient's body, he will do so according to their condition.
And if one has a wound in the foot, apply a cautery to cauterize the pain.
When pain affects the legs, they are usually treated by a physician with a cauterizing tool.
And if you have a cushion on your legs, it is customary to call that a hernia.
Then apply cautery to the leg or wherever the heat is needed in the body. And then apply a strong laxative to the body, and place them in the abdomen, and carefully cauterize the stomach.
And if there is a need to reduce pain by applying hot points on the body.
When they cauterize something in the foot, one should use a small, sharp cautery for that purpose.
And you have already opened the intestine of the patient, and made them ready to be treated with a cushion.
Apply heat to the affected area on the patient's leg and place your hand on the patient's foot while they are burning with fever. And then cauterize that one with a hot iron.
Leave it open for three days, and use the other cushion to treat the gout.
This translates to: "And this is how Albucasis, and if of this type we have used it, for the treatment of this ailment, as a rule, it requires a surgeon."
And so, when you have the gout, it is advisable to place a cushion on the affected area.
Mays cauteri (the patient) be used to place the cushion on their legs.
Then apply a poultice to the affected area (the foot) after applying heat with a cautery, as needed for pain relief.
And if water is applied to the body, or "water" for the patient's benefit, they are called hot baths.
Then apply a hot cautery to the affected area.
And if it is necessary to apply other cushions, do it for three days, then apply the hot cushion, and after that, you must let it go.
And then apply a cautery to the area where the inflammation has affected the legs.
And if the pain is in the leg or foot, apply a poultice to draw out the inflammation.
This refers to the way to treat it with hot compresses. When you are treating a patient for a blockage in their joints (or a hernia), use an alkali and make sure no other doctor's advice is given priority.
That's how you apply cauterization to the legs, using a cushion to protect the skin from direct contact.
And place the hot iron on the patient's body to apply cauterization using its power.
And if you are to cauterize the affected area, then use a cushion on the legs to be used to apply heat.
Then, if necessary, apply a cautery to the man's body.
And it is good for it to be applied where a pain is felt, or in the case of gout, on the legs.
And if the pain is in the legs for three hours, the swelling will subside.
And if your body is in pain, then put a cushion on their legs, because they are the ones who will be treated by the other two.
Then know that these medicines are used to treat ailments by allowing for the removal of harmful humors from the body.
When using lan for the first time, use a hot poultice when treating the foot.
Then apply heat to their legs and use a cushion to support them. And if you see that there is a need for a cushion to be placed on their legs, e.g., on the foot, place your hand on the other side so they can't feel the pain.
And this method of cautery is called cauterization by fire.
Translation: This is the chapter about how to treat someone for an ailment.
Of the legs, already having an opening for the treatment of the pain.
This is the English translation for the second sentence provided:
And then the cautery should be used only for this specific ailment.
And if it is customarily necessary to apply a cushion for the patient's suffering from pain in the legs, you must apply it to their legs, not just the surface.
And here's another thing: place a cushion on his legs so that they don't get cold.
When you want to treat a pain in the foot, use this method for cauterization.
The capital 43rd.
From the burnings at the beginning of the illness.
This text describes gout, a condition of pain that occurs in the joints.
And apply a hot poultice to the affected area behind the knee.
And so when you apply a hot cautery to the burn site, use a cushion to apply another part of the body to the area that needs cauterizing. Then put the other hand on their legs, to prevent them from spreading to the rest of the body.
And if you want to treat it, cauterize it on the leg or two on the body, using two or three lines. When doctors treat gout, they are often said to have "cured" it by applying cushions to support the patient's body,
Then apply the cautery to the affected area.
and to prevent the pain from spreading to other parts of the body.
Chapter xliv.
This refers to treatment using cautery for cauterize pain in the feet and treat joint pain.
And if they are afflicted with gout, apply a cautery to the affected area to prevent them from suffering.
And so, once the gout is cured, it is customary for doctors to use a cushion to treat the condition.
And if you need to cauterize their intestines, use a cautery tool to do so, and another cauterizing tool on the other side.
This is how doctors are treated with hot iron.
When it is necessary to make points on the legs. And if pain arises in the joints, it is treated with a poultice on the affected area.
And if it is necessary to apply cauterization, use a gentle touch on the legs and arms, and avoid using excessive force.
Then use a cushion for their feet.
Then apply the cautery to the area where it's needed, using a technique where the foot is placed in a position so that the intestine doesn't protrude from its place.
Then another placed his hand on the patient's legs and another on the body.
Then if it is necessary to make a cut on their leg or foot, they should be cauterized.
G: When the body is afflicted by illness, other remedies are prescribed.
This likely refers to chapter 45.
The cure for broken bones.
If a member has a pain in their foot, then use other remedies to treat them.
And if you are a physician, you should apply a cushion to the affected area, which will help the patient's body temperature.
And if the physician wishes to perform surgery on you, he will do so on the bones of your leg.
And if you need to place a cushion under their feet.
It is necessary to apply a hot poultice to the affected area. Then the patient's abdomen will be opened to expose the intestines.
And if you are treating a patient for pain caused by a humoral imbalance, you must apply a cautery to their legs.
And then place the cautery on the cushion you have put under the patient's legs.
Then you should know that the other method to apply the cautery to the body is to cauterize it when it's not painful for the patient.
When you are treating a patient, use a hot cautery for a cushion if necessary.
And if it is necessary to make an incision on the leg, do so carefully.
E aprot cura le loc should be applied to the area of the body that needs treatment.
And if the patient has another problem, they will be healed by cauterizing the legs and feet.
Then, if you have already been diagnosed with another type of plague on their legs, they will be sealed.
And if your hands are cold, you should use a cushion during treatment.
Then, if you have to make an incision on the leg, it is important to do it properly.
And you should apply this remedy for reducing the food and drink intake.
And so you apply the cautery to the already ruptured part of the body, and another person helps to hold the patient's other leg.
Then you can apply cautery to their legs, and another one on their feet, which are the areas that should be cauterized.
And the other hand is upon the chest, so that the patient's feet are kept warm.
This is the start of a new section in Chapter 46.
When there's pain in the joints of the body, it is customary to call it by the name "tortico".
Then use a cautery to burn the affected area.
And if one cauterizes the hands, they should be placed on the legs of the patient.
When one's skin has become inflamed and painful, and the pain is felt in the legs, it is called gout.
The chapter on the treatment of gout.
For which it is customary to place a hot cautery on their legs, to apply it to the affected area.
Then they place the foot under your arm to prevent the skin from getting too cold.
Then apply a cushion on the affected area if necessary, or use another tool for the procedure and keep the burning heat away from the patient's body.
And if you have an excess of fluids in your body, use caution when applying cauterization.
And if you have already expanded the meaning of the term to include both thighs and the area where the legs join the body.
And if you place a cushion on their knees to keep the intestine from being burned by them.
E alcunas veguadas es cauterizat, the other on le colet.
And if you are in pain from the cushion, it is said that you should use cushions to support them, etc.
This is a translation from English:
And so the cauterization is done to the patient's legs, and another remedy is applied to them.
Chapter 48.
Then apply it to their legs, they will be treated for stupor.
Then you cauterize the affected area of the body as needed.
When your hand is on their thigh, they are to be cauterized. And apply ointment to the patient's legs, applying a bandage after.
And if it is necessary to cauterize any part of the body, it is said that the pain should be cauterized on the ankles or legs.
This is Latin for "May his/her knowledge be applied to all the limbs."
This text describes how to treat different parts of the body using a cautery.
A hot poker on the foot will cause the patient to experience pain.
Then apply cauterization to the patient's legs to reduce swelling.
When health is affected by the cold humors, it is customary to treat them with the use of cauteri and lentil flour, applied to the leg.
Capitol .l. means Chapter 1.
The patient has been cauterized.
And if the cancer is starting to spread, then cauterize it with a hot iron as soon as possible.
And the wise men say that if the pain is in the foot, they will use a hot cautery.
And if it is necessary to cauterize the intestine of someone in pain.
Chapter 51.
And if it is necessary to cauterize the legs.
Then apply the cautery to the affected area.
And if you want to apply a cautery to the affected area, place it on the patient's legs, then apply it elsewhere on their body.
And if there are painful sores in that place, it’s a good sign for the doctor to know that the patient needs help.
Chapter 52.
And so apply cautery to their body.
You are treating the patient for gout.
And if you translate "the pain" to gout, then you should use a cushion when applying the cautery to the legs.
Then apply cauterization to the affected area, ensuring all parts are treated.
Then apply a poultice to the affected area for three days, cauterizing their legs and feet with oil.
And then apply cold treatment to the patient's body.
Then apply the cauteries again to the affected areas if there is no other way.
And for those who are treated by medicine, the patient should be given medication. However, it is more properly called gout by doctors.
Therefore, the treatment for this condition is to apply a poultice to the affected area and keep it warm.
Of gout in the joints, which are typically located on the legs, it is necessary to make a point of applying a cautery to the affected area.
This refers to the application of cautery (burning) to treat joint pain.
This text describes using a poultice to treat gout, which is applied to the affected area.
You have already used a cushion to treat the patient's legs for a while, but now you must cauterize them.
Then apply a hot iron to the affected area, and carefully treat it. And let it be left for three days so that the patient may heal. Then place the poultice on their legs and leave it there for one night, as if to eradicate it from the body.
And apply to the location already affected by the disease the same treatment used for the legs and feet.
And so, if the patient's body does not return to its normal state, apply a small amount of water to the area for a period of time.
And then the physician should be careful to avoid the vein becoming too inflamed.
And place a cushion on their legs, and another on their feet, so that they are warm.
The original text appears to be in Occitan, a language related to Catalan and French.
There are a few ways to interpret this, but I'll go with:
Gualtier shall be given to the patient when they are sick, but only for tremors occurring in the nerves or fever due to the cause of their ailment.
And if it is necessary to apply the cautery on their legs, then the patient should be burned.
This is the 50th chapter.
Then apply the other causers of the illness to the cushion being placed upon them by the physician.
This sentence is likely describing various types of medical procedures involving cauterization.
Then apply a hot cautery to the affected area to treat the pain caused by gout.
Another servant may be used for bloodletting.
Capitol lvi.
The patient has a burning pain in their legs.
And so you should apply an ointment to the affected area and use a tool to burn away the cushion of the plague, which causes pain in the feet.
A hot iron cauterized the pain in their legs and sometimes caused it to burn, but they were strong and held their hands steady.
And place them in order by size, from smallest to largest, according to their severity.
And then place your hand on their foot to prevent further damage.
Then if you are applying a cautery to the body, be sure to apply it carefully to the affected area.
Then apply your hand to their legs, so that they don't mistake them for another person's.
E sapias que si the pain is caused by excessive bloodletting or by an excess of humors in your body, it should be treated with appropriate remedies to reduce the humors, such as applying a cushion to the area.
And if you want to stop a fire from spreading, you must apply a cushion to it.
Therefore, if the physician deems it necessary to treat a patient's condition with a hot cautery, he should apply it to the area where the pain is felt.
When you need to cauterize a limb or treat an ailment of the feet, you should use hot burning tools.
Then place a cushion on the head to protect the wound.
Then we will discuss how to treat those who want to know how to be healed by this method.
And if it is necessary to make cuts, then you will use the same methods as in the previous chapter on cauterization.
This sentence describes how to treat the foot with the appropriate medical procedures for different conditions. And place a hot cushion on their limbs, so that they may be healed by the warmth.
And put another hot compress on the back of your hands, for as some times they are heated by fire. And when the pain of his illness would be fatal to him, he must use a cautery on their feet.
And if it is dangerous to apply cautery to their legs, it is because they are filled with a dangerous ailment.
A person should be careful about a condition called gout.
And place your hand on the patient for inspection, ensuring their health and good memory are protected.
Oh, sons, if you are unable to understand or grasp the meaning of something.
And if you are using a cushion on the legs of a person suffering from pain, you should know that it's for the good of the patient to be relieved of the pain in the thigh.
Chapter one.
And so the child was cured by placing a cushion under their thighs.
Sapias que la noyrissa is the cause of this illness in children.
When translated to English, the first sentence is: "And then you must apply a cautery properly."
And if they have seen this disease in their child, they will place a cushion on their chest or place them on the legs to prevent them from running away during surgery.
And if you have already opened the area under the child's navel, the cushion should be placed on their legs and they should hold the place between them.
And if the doctor determines that a patient has gout, then they should be treated with a pointed cautery.
When there are humors in the affected area, it is called by its proper name.
And so if the moisture is present in excess, it is said to be treated as a burn.
And if it's necessary for the patient to have his/her water-filled body parts drained, then the physician should apply a cushion or something similar under their limbs, and carefully hold them during the procedure. Cover your patient's legs in the following manner: by applying a bandage or cushion.
And if it is necessary to open the intestine or to stop it from being closed, and another poultice for the wound
The physician will examine the patient to determine which method of treatment is appropriate.
This is a list of instructions for treating another patient.
This is the second chapter.
When there are painful swellings in the legs or feet, doctors use a special cauterization tool called an "a la sua loc" to remove the excess fluid from the body.
And thus, when you want to cut into a vessel, then apply the cauterizing tool to the patient's leg, otherwise the skin will be damaged.
And then you place a cushion under them, and a tent over them.
And if it's pain in the legs, then other things are used to treat it.
And if a person's legs are affected by gout, they should be treated by applying cushions.
And if the pain does not subside, apply a cushion to the area between their fingers and toes, that is, three fingers' width of padding.
And if the patient's humor is from the blood, then it is considered a gouty ailment.
And consider the plague, if another considers the cushion to be helpful for the patient, then apply it to their legs, and to their foot.
And if it is necessary to use a poultice on their legs, then apply it to the affected area.
E. If the patient has a fever, it is customary for doctors to call for a physician, but if the pain is in the feet, they are treated by applying a cautery.
This refers to a method of treating gout by drawing blood from the temples where they are placing a cushion.
When there is pain in the legs or feet, apply a cautery to the affected area.
The way to treat someone for a condition like gout is with a cushion placed on their legs.
And if the patient has a cushion under them to prevent the opening from becoming rough or the pain from spreading to other places. And if you wish to treat the patient's condition with a cautery, do so on their thighs. This text appears to be describing a medical procedure for gout, likely involving applying heat to the affected area.
Then apply cautery to their extremities to prevent them from being too thin, and use a cushion for the rest of the body.
And if you are seeking the blood of a living person, apply it to their veins.
When the pain of the arrow is severe, the patient should be treated with a strong cauterization, which is what you call the treatment of the affected area by placing a cushion under them.
Then apply a cautery to the patient's feet to reduce their swelling, and another to the rest of the body.
And if you wish, apply cautery to the affected area, which is in the leg, as needed.
And if it is better to apply cautery to a patient's legs, they are using other methods for that.
And if you have a pain in the joints, then apply a poultice to the affected area.
Then apply a cautery to the legs or the other parts of the body affected by the inflammation. And if you are experiencing other pains, they are usually treated with cold poultices and by applying a remedy to the affected area, but sometimes the pain is caused by something else.
And if there are no two places where the artery can be treated, then you have to use the same method for the other parts of the body.
This is the way to apply cautery:
And apply the cauterizer to the cushion where the patient's body is located, and place a cushion on their ribs. But if it is necessary to apply heat to the body, it is best done slowly.
And so when there are swellings, it is known as gout in certain limbs.
And this work is best done with the legs apart.
Then if necessary, he should be burned in a way that can be applied to the body.
Chapter four:
This refers to the treatment of wounds on the legs and feet by a doctor using specific methods for each body part.
And so the patient must be treated, for the body's humors are no longer in balance.
And if you are experiencing pain in your feet, they are to be treated by those who are familiar with them. And if it is necessary to make points on their legs and other parts of the body.
And take care to treat the wound in your legs, and make it long. And if there are three fingers' widths between the patient's thighs, they will be in pain.
And if you are dry-needling, you put the sponge on the body.
You already have a clue to the patient's condition, and another comes in the form of two sharp points on their legs. This is the second part of the medical treatise. Apply heat to the area of the bone, so that the second one may be healed. And place the instrument on the patient's legs.
Another way to say "gout" is "a cushion on the legs".
Mays one of the most common diseases among physicians is gout.
If blood flow is restricted to the feet, apply a cautery.
Then you should apply hot poultices to the patient's legs so they don't get cold.
Then on the third day, apply a bandage to the area to keep it closed, and apply a cushion to the patient's legs.
Chapter 5.
> This means that the patient's legs are to be supported by something else when they are being treated.
When joint pain is caused by excessive humors that have caused an inflammation in the affected body part.
Then apply a cautery to the patient's mouth (when making incisions, place another cushion over the wound in the temple area to protect them from the heat of the cautery.
Dry out all the blood with a sponge or dry cloth. Place a cushion under them to prevent the inflammation from spreading up the leg.
Then you should apply a poultice to keep the wound dry.
This refers to the use of a cautery (a tool for burning) in treating gout by applying heat to affected areas.
This is about treating the disease called "gout" in the 3rd-person singular present tense.
So there are four types of causes for pain in the joints or similar to that, just as if you were a stone and a vein, which is the way they are treated with a cautery.
And if the patient's legs are affected by the cause of the pain, treat them according to the treatment of the legs. And if the patient has a cold humor in their body, apply the treatment to their legs and call for cushions; perhaps he's suffering from a painful swelling in the feet.
Then if you are not using an instrument, it is called extraccio de la vena by the doctors.
Then you apply the treatment to their feet.
And if it is not a cushion, the patient should be given another treatment by the physician. And then apply cautery to the affected area.
In this way, you will be able to cure the cause of the ailment of the foot. And then place a cushion under their arms for support.
This sentence is written in Occitan, the translation is:
Then place your hand on the affected area to relieve pressure. Then if it is necessary to cauterize the affected area.
And when you have done so, if the ailment is in the leg, then place a cushion under their foot, and do as follows for the treatment of gout, but make sure to use a cushion suitable for the patient. Then apply a cushion to the affected area.
And if you are thinking about using the warmth of the fire to burn away the illness, keep the heat from the fire on your hands.
Then place the patient on their body, holding them down on the area of the legs, and use cushions to create pressure points. And then apply a cushion to the knees.
And then apply a cushion to the knees. The patient's pain will be relieved by applying heat to the affected area.
And so if there are many inflammations in their legs, let him be called a gouty patient.
When evil humors enter the body and reach the feet, then treat them with light hand as the other ailments are treated.
A good treatment for the ailment known as extraccio de verm, which causes the intestines to be painful to the point where they must be cauterized.
And if there is a worm in the body, take it out with a hot needle, or apply a poultice to its location. And if you have a strong pain in your joints, that's because of the way they are affected by the cold humors.
Mays si no beu-lo, e thus it es necessaire to use the method of cauterization when dealing with worms, and you may find it useful to know the Latin names for the various parts of the body.
When you have opened the body's humors to be released. And if you want to apply a remedy of silver, I will place the cushion on their legs.
And then, if necessary, place a cushion on which the patient has been placed. And if you want to apply a poultice to the affected area, use a cushion to support the leg and press out the oil from the poultice with your hand.
And when it is necessary to apply a cauterization to the foot, and the patient's legs are held apart by force. The pain in the foot should be addressed by applying a hot poultice directly to it.
Chapter 7
And when a patient's ears are treated with cauterizing tools.
Then, some causes are caused by humors that cause pain in the feet, others by the illness itself, and sometimes a wound.
This condition, which is difficult to cure, is found in the thighs, legs, and knees.
When you have to make points on the patient's legs. And if you have to treat someone who has a clear case of it, you use a sharp instrument.
And if there is pain in the legs of the patient, use two cushions to keep them from being too constricted.
Then apply it to the flesh of the patient's body, and apply another on their legs, preventing further damage.
Then apply a hot cautery to the patient's body and burn the area a little bit, and use another type of cautery for the other areas.
Et autre se
And if you wish to apply a poultice to the wound.
This is a description of an operation to treat a wound on the body, and it is necessary to apply pressure to the area.
Chapter 8.
For the treatment of the condition which is known as the athiez.
And some use for the pain in the eyelids of those who are suffering from gout, the patient's eyelids should be cauterized to prevent swelling.
Thus, the text says that if the patient has pain.
When the pain in the legs spreads to their veins, then apply the other.
The best way to treat them is by using a cautery to prevent the infiltration of the pain into other parts of the body.
This passage is describing a surgical procedure for treating a condition called gout.
And if there are cold humors in the eye, and you need to make a cut in the eye?
And if someone has a wound on their legs, they are burned with a cushion, which is called a cold poultice.
And another treatment for a swollen foot.
And if it is necessary to treat an illness in the body, it is common practice for doctors to apply hot compresses to the area.
Therefore, we will use a pointed cautery to apply that to the thighs, and it is best if the patient has no sensation in their feet.
And if it is large, then you fix it back to its place in the thighs, and use another cushion for cauterization.
And if it is little, the doctor will restore health to those limbs by using medicine and treatment.
And if the pain spreads from the cushion to the inside of the body, apply cold to the eye.
And if you want to cauterize it, cauterize it with salt water.
Chapter 10
And so you have placed a cushion on the legs, which are swollen due to gout.
A long time ago, when doctors were called upon to treat the pain in their patient's feet, they would use a pointed cautery.
And if you are feeling pain in your foot, and you need to apply heat to that area, it is called "a cushion" by the physician who applies a hot iron to the affected part.
When one has an excess of humors in the body, they are usually called "sputum" or "humoral fluxes" by doctors.
And if it is necessary to cauterize the entire leg, then use a tourniquet to constrict the blood flow.
And if you are applying the treatment to the foot, use a cushion for the pain, and another under their legs.
When doctors say that a pain caused by gout has been brought on by a cushion.
Then you have already opened the wound in the process; you can see the veins through which the blood flows to the affected area.
And if it is necessary to put the cushion on their legs, one should do so carefully.
Then treat that area accordingly.
When pain occurs in the area where it is located, apply a poultice to the affected area.
Chapter 11
Of the methods of treating the body, there are many ways to address the issue, but only one thing truly works for this ailment: a pointed cauterization tool.
The text appears to be describing different methods for treating gout in the foot.
Then place a cushion on the patient's feet so as to prevent the physician from putting their hands on their legs.
And so if it becomes necessary to cauterize the body part, place the cushion under their legs, and hold them in the same way as you would with a burn; and do it in the manner of a leaf of myrtle.
Then you have found out the cause of the pain in the eyes, place a hand on their face to prevent further injury.
Then apply heat to the affected area, and hold your hand over the wound. And if it's necessary to be treated for your ailment.
Then burn the cushion for the humors that are caused by heat in the body to be purged.
And already the pain from the feet has been relieved for three days by placing a cushion beneath them.
And if you are concerned about a specific ailment, that's what causes the pain to be called a gouty pain.
This refers to the joint pain experienced by the patient.
And if it is necessary to apply cautery to the patient's veins, use a heated needle to pierce the skin on the affected area.
And if it is not possible to burn away the pain, it must be treated by physicians.
And if it is necessary to suture or operate on the patient's body.
If you have a cushion ready to be placed on the legs of the patient, they should place it on their legs and then put their hands on their legs.
And if there's an opening in the body that needs stitching or closing, use stitches for that purpose.
Then return the hands on their thighs or legs to ensure proper cauterization technique. and you can apply the use of the other remedies to help treat the condition. And if there are other wounds, treat them with thread.
And if there are humors in the eyes or eyelids that cause pain, they should be burned away by the physician.
Mays es tardat, the patient should be treated with a cushion on their legs and another person should hold their hands.
The patient's eyelid is elevated, and other cushions are placed on their legs to keep them from being opened up.
And then, the other is to make cushions for the patient's body parts, and the rest of the cushions are placed on their legs, which are used by doctors to describe the way they treat gout. And if it's a case of neither too much nor too little, they call it a proper amount.
Another person's hand should be placed on the foot if they are in pain, and another person's hand should be placed on the patient's legs to prevent further pain.
It is customary for doctors to use the word "agente" when referring to an ailment caused by a fever or inflammation.
If your condition requires cauterization, be careful to use a delicate tool for the operation. And let the quantity of the fibers be as much as a hand's breadth, and no more.
And so you'll be able to apply a poultice to the affected area.
And so the patient's soul can be seen to have been put in contact with the sun by means of an operation.
And then apply a needle to the vein under the skin, which needs to be done quickly when it is needed.
And then apply it to the skin or the foot so as to prevent bleeding.
Then treat the patient in a way that they are healed naturally.
Then apply a cushion to the area where the wound is located.
And thus you should apply heat to the affected area three times a day.
E si's a mays lonc (long) del·la pel·la, e sia no se ajustes.
This is the thirteenth chapter.
When a doctor treats someone for a condition involving the eye,
When a cushion is placed on the patient's legs, they are then said to have a pain in the feet.
This means that you must use the technique of "the cloth" method to treat their ailment.
And let it be known that you should treat it carefully so as to prevent the cushion from being affected by your condition.
Usa that to which a doctor may apply a poultice.
And the treatment for your ailment is to apply cushions so that the pain does not leave the initial area.
And if the patient's body is in pain from this operation, then apply a cushion to their legs, as it is done when treating ehalixacrati.
Chapter 14.
And if you're referring to gout, place your hand on the foot.
This is a true case of a disease which happens in the eye, but which is called gout by doctors.
Then place a bandage on their legs and another on their feet.
Then the patient's eyes are opened and a cushion placed under them, and another cushion placed between the thighs on their legs.
Then apply a cauterization to the patient's legs, and place a cushion there so that the intestine does not receive further damage. And then it is necessary to apply heat to the legs or body to prevent the infection from spreading further down the leg.
The patient's legs should be held together if they are experiencing pain due to humors in their legs, and the surgery should be performed carefully so as not to damage the intestine.
And if it is necessary to apply cautery to the body, it should be done to the area above the feet, but not to the toes themselves.
When the pain is in the legs or feet, it is customary to treat them as gout.
Use cushions to soften the affected area when treating injuries caused by cold.
Then apply cauterization to the wound as needed, if it is a suitable case for it. And then you separate the lips according to what we said.
And in the case of joint pain, it is called gout (or something similar) depending on where the pain is located.
And so the surgeon's tools are already used to bring the body back to its natural form.
Chapter 15.
When there is a cushion between the legs, it is called the "other" if they are placed on the eye, another on the other side.
Then apply a cautery to the eye, so that the other one may be treated if necessary by applying a cautery to the leg or the foot.
And if you have to perform surgery on the patient, you must place cushions under them so that the intestine does not become injured.
When you use a cautery to treat someone for a pain in the foot, place your hand on the patient's legs.
Then apply a cushion to the legs under your feet, so that the humors do not flow out.
And then apply the cushion to the patient's eyelids.
Chapter 16
A physician attends to the patient's pain and places cushions for comfort.
Then you will burn with a hot iron, or with a less painful method if the pain is not caused by fire.
When there are two sources, they should be used to make a cushion between the legs.
If there's swelling in the foot, then you must treat it as a cushion. And if the patient’s foot is swollen, apply a cushion or needle to prevent it from getting worse. And then you should cauterize the thigh of the patient if they are suffering from pain caused by a buildup of humors.
Then apply a cauterization tool to the skin near the ankle to reduce subtle swelling in the intestine.
And if there are many humors in the foot area, they should be cauterized as needed to prevent them from spreading.
And take care that the patient's bladder doesn't touch the tunic cornea and also that the eye isn't poked or injured further.
Aprop the cautery to apply it to the affected area.
And if you cannot return the nail to its place in the foot, apply another treatment to the feet, and use other remedies.
And if you wish to treat it, open the opening between the patient's thighs and use a fine cauterization tool. And if you are skillful, do not use the other one. Then if you are making room for the physician to use on the patient's legs or feet, and have placed a cushion there, place your hand on the patient's legs and another on their knees, so that they cannot feel the pain in those areas.
And apply another cautery to the affected area, but in a different way than before, so that the patient does not feel pain.
Then place another cushion on their feet and let the patient hold still so that the pain will subside.
If there are signs of infection in the eyes, the patient may be experiencing a tearful condition.
And apply a cushion to their tear ducts and the rest of the body.
When the pain occurs in the legs, it is customary to place a cushion under them.
And so apply the lancet to the affected area of their legs, and apply another cushion to their feet.
The patient's eyelids are affected by a cushion in the cavity.
The patient should be given a massage if the pain is in the legs or feet.
And so you will find the intestine already in its place, or have placed it back in its cavity.
And then apply the hot cushion to the affected area, which is where you would usually treat an ailment with a hot cautery.
And if the condition remains, you should apply the cautery to the affected area.
Then you must carefully avoid cauterization or other treatments that might cause further harm.
Capitol .xviii. translates to Chapter 18.
The practice of medicine in the past involved burning a hot iron on the affected area to relieve pain.
And if there are cushions to support them, use another to soothe the pain.
Therefore, at first, you must treat the other ailments as well.
And place a cushion under the patient's head according to your judgment; ...
And thus they have opened up the body's cavity.
Then cauterize their veins to prevent them from being inflamed.
And if you have placed a cushion on the legs, take care that you do not harm the veins in your work.
Then apply something to the patient's legs so that they don't have pain.
And if it is a pain in their legs or feet, it may be treated with poultices and other remedies.
And then apply a poultice to the affected area for healing.
And this is how the form of the scissors is made.
Chapter .xix.
A la sua origine, el dolor del nas es una malattia che si trova nel nas.
And if you cure by another method than by cauterizing the other's legs with a burning cautery, it will be necessary to apply heat to the affected part.
Therefore, if it is found that the ailment is in the legs or feet, you should treat them with a cushion.
And if it is necessary to treat the patient's legs, then use a cushion or apply a sharp cautery.
And then, place your hand on the affected bone to treat the condition, knowing that it can be painful.
And if it's necessary to cauterize the affected area, the doctors will apply their knowledge in the use of specific types of heat cautery.
And if the sickness is confined to the body, it will last forty days, and if it doesn’t go away, it's a sign that it is in fact true gout.
And if you are uncomfortable, a cushion will be placed under your armpit and another on your legs, to prevent it from protruding.
The patient's limbs are weakened by gout, which is a disease that causes pain in their feet.
Then place your hand on the patient's thigh to hold the swollen part in place.
Therefore, when the intestine or hernia needs to be cauterized, it should be done by the physician.
When the patient's body has become stiff, one must apply heat to the affected area.
It is customary for physicians to treat the condition of gout in the same way they would treat an ailment of the feet.
And then apply a cushion for treatment.
Then apply to the patient the remedy for the complete illness, which is called the "huel", so that there is no loss of blood, and the pain does not return.
The patient's foot should be covered in four folds to prevent further infiltration.
Then return the patient's intestine to its cavity. Then apply cupping therapy to the affected area, placing a cup on the bowels for pain relief.
Then when the ligament is tight, it must be treated straight away.
And then if it is necessary to use a cushion under them, as we already discussed, do so by putting it on their chest.
If the pain in the feet persists, apply heat to them again.
Chapter .xxi.
Then apply a hot cautery to the swelling in the patient's legs.
This text describes how to perform a medical procedure, likely an operation on the eyes.
Then apply the hot poultice to the affected area.
And for the comfort of the patient, place a cushion under their feet to ensure proper drainage.
And if the pain in the foot is severe, apply a bandage or cloth to the area.
The translator will place a cushion on their legs to prevent further pain.
Another cushion should be placed under the body's chest, and another on the foot.
Here is the treatment for a pain in the legs.
This disease is customarily called gout, but it is not what it seems.
And so you see, if a patient suffers from pain in their legs, they are said to have a point, or a small ailment in their feet, which is caused by something other than a larger problem.
And if it doesn't descend, you should know that it is called sciatica.
The tunic is to be carefully cauterized in the area around the bone where the pain originates.
So if you are experiencing pain, apply heat to the affected area, and use cautery only if necessary.
And if it is treated, then the patient's pain will be healed.
Another hand holds the patient's legs, while another one holds the other leg.
Here comes the translation for the first two lines:
This refers to a specific type of medical treatment involving placing cushions on the patient's legs to prevent the spreading of pain in the joints.
Then make sure to apply the cushion to the area where the patient's legs are placed on the bed so they don't become stiff.
And so you should place a cushion on their feet.
And if it is necessary to apply cautery, use your right hand for one side and your left hand for the other.
And if you open the foot too much, put a cushion under it.
Then place your hand on their legs to prevent the first servant from being necessary.
When there is an opening in the body for the use of applying a poultice, the physician should apply it directly to the affected area.
And if you see a patient's intestine protrude, hold it back to its proper place.
Then close the points that are open on their hands.
And thus you have reached the end of the pain in the foot and the cushion has been placed on the patient's legs to help them.
Mays it be known that we are dealing with a description of the use of poultices for treating ailments in the legs.
Then make sure the patient's legs are not obstructed if they need to be treated for their bowels or a hernia.
And when there are swellings or inflammations in the feet, the physician should use cauterization to open them up, but not too severely.
And the patient's body should be treated as one.
When it comes to the treatment of the feet, doctors will often apply a cushion to prevent them from being in pain.
And place a cushion on their chest so that they may be healed.
And for the patient, the cushion will be placed on their legs on the third day.
Then apply a hot compress to the patient's affected foot, and let them know that it's for their own good.
And then apply heat to the legs, as needed, using a cautery. And if there are other causes for their pain, those should be treated differently.
And if a pustule forms on the body, apply a cautery to their legs.
When there is a severe case of gout or pain in the joints, apply it to the feet for several days.
And apply hot compresses to that area to relieve their pain.
The disciple is not exempt from the operation if they have some pain in their legs or feet; they must also be careful about diet.
And then some say that they have brought fire to their legs and feet.
And perhaps it has been seen in our country only as a condition affecting the old.
And these are the ways to treat the body's humors, so that it is the one who uses a cautery on the leg, and not the other way around.
And if they are to be made, use a cushion for support.
Capitol .xxiv. translates to:
Then comes the treatment of flesh wounds.
When the ailment resembles gout or a polyp but occurs in the nose, it is called scorpio. And if there is pain in the bones, and they are hot, then apply heat to the area above the knee; but do not use a cautery on the skin below the affected area.
Therefore, if you are experiencing pain in your legs or feet, it is important to have cushions readily available. When you have to perform surgery on the foot, then you should apply a poultice to the wound. When a person has a malignant illness, the pain is often in the lower extremities.
Then you must use a hot cautery to remove the excess from the nose. Mays si le nas is a cushion or other protection for the body.
And if the pain is in the thigh, you can be sure that it is not caused by a wound.
And if there is swelling in the legs due to an excess of humors, it is customary to treat it with a poultice on the foot.
And if it is necessary to make points on the surface of the foot, then do so with a hot cushion, and prepare for the patient's cushion to be placed on his chest, which will cause him to be more comfortable.
E then the patient's own body heat will be enough to keep them warm.
And if it is necessary to make a bloodletting for the patient, they should be put in a position where the cushion is placed on their legs.
Then hold your hand on the patient's legs to prevent the spread of the ailment.
Then use a hot compress if you are already treating someone for illness in general, and apply cold compresses to their legs to reduce pain.
E aquesta de la natura del nars (nose) being that the patient's bowels are cleansed, and to avoid the risk of the nars (nose) becoming infected, you will need to use a specific type of cautery.
And keep a cushion under their arms, for the sake of the patient's comfort.
If you are concerned about a patient's health, use a canula (a small tube) for treatment.
Chapter 25.
And if you are applying cauterization to the leg or the nose, it's best to be careful.
They are applying a cautery to his legs to treat a patient's ailment.
And if you wish to make the wound heal quickly on their legs, then do so by cauterizing it with a cautery. And if it is necessary to use a cushion, place it under the patient.
Then if it is a case of gout requiring treatment, treat it accordingly.
When there is pain in the intestine, it is possible to cure it by applying a cushion under the patient's knees and placing a hand on the area to support them.
E a la persona que se li fa un punt, e ha de posar la mano en el lloc on es troba la còpia.
And if your hand has been injured by the knife or a wound, treat it with a poultice for the swelling and a cushion for their hands.
You know that in many cases, you will find these ailments are more common in men than women.
Then, if there is a wound on the leg, apply a poultice to it.
And if the patient's lips are chapped, you must cauterize them. Adjust the legs of the patient with the cushion and apply the plaster to the affected area.
When a doctor has to use a cushion to keep the patient's leg warm after surgery, it is called a surgical dressing.
Then apply the appropriate cautery to the afflicted area according to the custom of physicians.
When using the second translation, it appears to be a continuation of the medical discussion from the previous examples.
The patient's pulse is taken as a sign of their health.
And if you need to treat the intestine and other parts, you should apply a burning cautery.
**Capitol .xxviii.  translate as Chapter 28.**
"This is a common ailment affecting the gums" (this is based on the similarity to the Italian translation provided in the prompt)
> And if you want to do surgery on the gums, it is customary to call upon those who use three types of tools: the first for the teeth, the second for the jaw, and the third for the teeth.
Then apply a cushion to the patient's legs and use other substances to create a burning sensation.
Then cauterize the flesh, but only in a controlled and specific manner, so as to avoid further damage.
The following text is a medieval medical treatise written in a language that is somewhat similar to Latin, Italian, and Spanish, but uses an archaic vocabulary and grammar:
Then apply a cushion to their feet and legs.
When the body's humors are in balance, it is customary for them to be healthy.
And if there is anything you need to know about the patient's condition, I will be there for you.
If you are translating a text from a language similar to Latin, Italian, Spanish and slightly to French, it's likely about the use of a cautery tool for medical purposes.
And you know that the teeth need to be heated by fire, and the body will be in pain. E per cushion the intestines from being cut open, they are called a special type of knife for the patient.
Capitol .xxx. translated to English means Chapter 30.
On the removal of teeth.
The substance is another reason for illness in the case of gout.
When a tooth is removed from a patient suffering from toothache, the pain will cease if you remove the infected part of the gum, but the pain from the other teeth will continue until they are treated.
When you know that a pain in the foot is caused by something that is painful and has been diagnosed as gout, place a cushion near the patient's leg to support their knee, and another cushion under their chest, so that they don't feel the pain.
And apply a cushion to their joints so that they will not be injured by the cold.
And so if you are in pain from the instruments, the first aid given is done with great care.
This sentence translates to:  "And if the tooth is decayed or the pain is caused by the gums, use a cloth to cover the tooth."
And if you work carefully on the gums of the patient, they will be protected from the disease of the teeth and the pain will be stopped.
And if you are already using heat to treat the patient’s feet, it is called gout when applied elsewhere.
Then another servant would be required to be present for the patient's mouth to be washed.
When the blood flows through the legs, treat it accordingly.
When using forceps to remove teeth, you should make sure they are suitable for the patient's needs, depending on whether it is a tooth or a series of teeth,
And let the great intestine be treated with remedies for its ailments.
And if they are suffering from gout, which was then called gout by doctors, they are often in pain because of their legs.
Of the pains that affect the limbs, some are caused by humors.
And if it is necessary to extract a tooth, use proper tools for removing bones from their sockets.
Then you should place your hand on the affected area to prevent further toothache.
The doctors will treat them accordingly.
And if the patient's condition doesn't improve with the use of forceps or with applying it to their joints, then you can apply them to the rest of their body.
And if the intestine is thin, another cushion should be placed on the leg of the patient to hold it in place.
And if you have already opened the patient's thighs, then they are good; otherwise, use other instruments to treat them.
Then create a second line that is thin and delicate.
And then there's help for the patient's legs, which is in this form: And if they are other things that cause the pain, then use the following methods:
And if the patient has a large or twisted foot, they should be treated with a cushion on their legs, and if the foot is swollen or inflamed, it should be straightened.
And then you should apply cautery to their legs and feet, as they are different from other parts of the body.
The ancients believed that medicine should be practiced with knowledge and precision.
Then when the foot is injured or the other bones (in the mouth) are affected, then place your hand on the jawbone, their position in the case of a toothache:  the other use of the cushion should be done with the doctor’s assistance.
And if there is a pain in the foot, which the physician calls a cold that has infiltrated the body, causing inflammation.
And if someone has pain in their legs due to something lodged there, use another method to treat them.
Gout is caused by an imbalance of humors in the body, leading to painful swelling in the joints, particularly in the feet.
And from the treatment of the teeth you will have taken care of them by the time they are done.
Then use a poultice for the natural humors of the body.
E que lu sua o lesi, it is necessary to apply a cautery to the tooth.
Translation 4: And if you want to make a treatment for gout, use a file to scrape the skin.
Then place your hand on the patient's foot to make a poultice. And then the patient must be kept warm, and the body's humors in balance by other means.
And if you find pain in a joint, then apply heat to the affected area.
And apply cautery to the affected area to treat the pain.
When it is necessary to treat the teeth by making them golden or silver.
And if a blow to the knee should cause the joint to be inflamed, it is said that it is caused by the disease of gout.
And if the patient has a bile duct or vein that needs to be treated, then you can use a hot needle to treat them. Apply heat to the area where the patient's skin will be pierced.
When the gut is affected, apply a bandage to the area.
The patient's legs are placed on the instrument to prevent further injury. And apply your hand to that area as gently as possible.
And you have to be careful with the patient's legs, so they don't get gout.
And if you see two humors in the body, then treat them separately.
Then apply the cauteri to the cushion on their feet.
And they are only to be treated by those who know how to handle them.
Then put a cushion under them, on their legs, and place a poultice on the area where the pain is.
Then apply the cautery to the affected area.
And if the tongue is swollen, it is called swelling by doctors.
This is the first line of a Latin-like phrase: This ligament is which to the tongue, which is natural or what has been caused by accident.
Let the patient's mouth be cauterized if they are suffering from gout in their feet.
If a person experiences pain in the joints, especially in the knees, when the temperature changes or if it is caused by the foot being affected by the plague.
If the patient has a joint pain, it is because they are experiencing an imbalance in their body's humors.
and put the patient's body back together, or apply a cold compress to their legs, and if there are still open wounds, put another on them; so they can be treated.
This is a medical treatise describing how to treat a patient with a wound or injury. Then place it under the affected member to prevent further injury.
This translation requires context about the meaning of "junctures" in this specific language usage.
Then apply this to the legs.
And if there are several ailments in the body, small ones that prevent the tongue from performing its natural function.
Then consider the infection in the mouth of the patient carefully.
And if you see that it is a red foot or black foot, which has no other sensation than pain, treat it with a hot compress.
E then treat the affected part with a cautery.
Then apply the proper remedies to the patient's legs, their body will be cleansed by the other medicines.
The text appears to be written in a combination of languages, possibly a dialect of Occitan influenced by medical Latin.  A possible translation for "E si es necessitat" is:
And if there are other sores, they should be treated similarly.
When you apply a cushion to the afflicted area of the body, you are speaking of gouty pain.
And if the pain is severe and the cautery is used on the body, and you have to stop it from going out, apply it carefully.
When a pain occurs in the foot, a physician should apply a cautery to the affected area.
E then you apply the other two cushions on their legs, while the patient's body is held still by one hand, and the other cushion is placed so that the patient's leg is supported.
And if it is made of silver or with a tool of iron.
And if it is necessary to apply heat or use a cutting tool on the patient's thighs, then you should do so with great care. And if you want to treat that with an instrument, do so with a cautery.
And if you want to treat that with an instrument, do so with a cautery. And if the patient's body is closed with forceps, they are treated with another tool for pain in the legs.
And if a cautery is not available, use a knife on one side, a spoon on the other.
And then mark the one who has an infected joint as if they were in the hospital.
Mils si endeve are, then it heals the pain.
Then put hot coals on them, for the patient's legs will be treated with cauterization.
And she was already being treated for a boil, which was on their groin, and they put a cushion under her to help her breathe easier.
And the abscess had already risen to such a degree on his legs that he needs two lancets to treat him.
And if there is a pain in the joints, and you are to use a cushion for their treatment, it is customarily called “podagra” (painful swelling) by doctors.
And if it is placed upon their body, they are given a small amount of blood. The cushion will be placed on the body, and the patient must stay in bed for a long time, so that the wound may heal.
And if you have gout, then apply a hot poultice to the affected area; do not apply it to the feet.
In Chapter 37, we will find more information on the treatment of humors.
From incision of the patient's legs.
And if the illness affects the feet, it is called podagra, which is the same as gout.
Then if you are treating an infection in the area we have mentioned, it is customary for doctors to treat it with cauterization, which is why you must apply a bandage.
As you have described, the condition of the tongue is said to be similar to gout.
If you want to know more about what is causing pain in the body, use a cushion on the legs, and if it is necessary to know about the location of the pain, then place a cushion on their legs, and another above the patient's feet.
And use a cushion on the legs when making an incision.
If a patient is suffering from pain due to a sharp cautery, apply a poultice to the affected area and use soothing words.
When the doctor applies a cautery, he should do so to the affected area and apply pressure only on the part where he wants the cautery to be applied.
And so if you apply a cushion to the area where the pain is located for a period of one hour, the patient will be relieved by the pressure of the cushion on their legs for a while.
Then you should use a cannula on your hands, to put them in the medicine, so that the skin does not break.
And if you apply a burning iron to the body, and if it is necessary to make a cauterization, place a burning iron on the leg.
And this type of treatment is more saving than cutting, and long-lasting in its effects.
A cushion is placed on the patient's throat to prevent choking.
And if the pain is caused by humors that are already in the body, then apply the treatment to the affected member.
Do this at the beginning if the inflammation appears in their feet, and that's what they usually treat with a cautery, as you know.
This is a question about if the use of this instrument is necessary for the patient's health.
And this treatment is good for health.
Capitol .xxxviii.
And if it's necessary to use a cautery, do so carefully.
And if it is necessary to keep the foot warm for its healing.
And if you want to remove your tongue from its cushion in the mouth, then press on the legs and have a doctor examine it.
If you put your hand on their stomach, they will be unable to vomit. And if it is necessary to bind a bandage around the leg to prevent the pain from spreading.
"When you are treating someone for bad blood, they should be treated with an iron cautery."
And if it is necessary to cauterize the intestine, put a cushion on the patient's legs so they can be cauterized while the wound is being cauterized.
Then place a bandage on his legs to protect them from further injury.
When the doctor has placed his hand in the wrong position, he will know how to treat it.
Capitol .xxxix.
Then, place a cushion on their neck.
When treating someone for the pain in their legs, consider that the cushion may be placed on the foot.
Therefore, if you must use bloodletting, apply it to the legs only if necessary.
And if it is not possible to draw out the blood from the patient's toes, the surgeon will hold a concave tube against the affected area, pausing on the toes for as long as necessary.
And then apply a bandage to the vein after washing it with water.
If you are experiencing gout, then apply heat to the affected area by using a pointed instrument.
And then they are called by the name of gout.
When the physician has placed the instrument on the surface of the foot, he should apply heat to the area.
And if you don't drink water, it is necessary to avoid eating foods that cause gout.
This text describes the process of bloodletting when treating gout, which was thought to be caused by an excess of humors in the leg muscles. Then if you use a cautery on your neck, it will be marked by a red spot.
This is the fortieth chapter.
When your body is affected by gout, it is said that the illness has spread to the legs.
And if they have a boil, they should use a poultice to draw out the pus.
And then use it to apply cauterization.
And to apply another cauterization method, you would use a hot cautery.
May some of the doctors already know what they should do when there are boils on their feet, but not in the usual way.
Then, apply a cushion to the affected area, if they are inflamed or swollen from being overworked. When a boil has matured, you can lance it.
Then translate the following: "And if it is necessary to cauterize the foot, apply another cushion under them."
And if it is necessary to cauterize a patient's inflamed area.
And if at any time the patient feels pain in their limbs, apply the cushion to the area where they feel the pain.
Mays, when the abscess is healed, it is considered a good sign when the wound heals well.
Sometimes doctors incorrectly call it gout when it's actually caused by other factors.
And if it is a small perforation, apply a cushion to the larger perforations.
And others use other methods to treat the swelling of the body with poultices and cauteries.
And then, from those who are sick, place them in their cavity.
And so you should apply a cautery to their legs in both a round and crescent shape.
When the patient has no more pain in their legs, then only a few people will know about it.
The pain will be most severe if you allow the affected part to be treated with heat and pressure by physicians.
You have already opened the opening to the urethra, so you can treat men and women, or children, for the disease.
This chapter describes how to treat a wound on the feet or legs by applying a poultice or using cauterization.
And if the wound was caused by an abscess or concave wound, apply a cushion to prevent it from being further damaged.
And if blood flows from the patient's body, apply water to the area where it happened.
And if it is necessary to apply the treatments described in this book, you will use a cushion for their pain.
If there's pain in the ankles, then use this method for applying the poultice.
If it is summer, apply cold water to the area, and if necessary, make incisions on the legs of the patient.
Then apply a cautery to each point on the body.
Chapter xli.
This means to make a cut on the legs (or perhaps thighs) to prevent the infection from spreading further.
And then you apply cauterization to their legs and feet if needed.
And they are to be cauterized on the legs, and their hands should be kept from being infiltrated by lime. And for those who are affected by dampness, which causes the pain in the legs; they should be treated with a hot cushion, or something similar to that.
And in the case of gout, the patient's pain will be felt in the feet.
And so the patient's legs are being treated by those who know how to treat them.
And if there are many fluids in their body, then you must use a cautery to open the intestine for them, and treat them with appropriate remedies.
Therefore, you should use a hot iron to cauterize that area if the patient has a disease that causes it.
Then put your hand on the patient's leg if necessary, and leave it for another day, but if it is a cushion or a cushion in the foot then apply the cauterization.
Then cure the pain in their legs, which are already known to be affected by the plague.
And so, if you are treating a patient for gout, here's how to proceed. When there is a pain in the area, we have already found its cause to be bad humors, then we should use a hot cautery on the legs and the other parts of the body that are affected by the pain.
And if you're working on the patient's feet and thighs, the archer will be helpful.
Here's another example:  "The following comes from the text:" "And if the body is too dry in the area where you cauterize it, it's a sign that there are no ulcers and it is necessary to stop the burning before the pain becomes unbearable."
Gout is caused by an excess of cold humors in the body.
This is the first part of the text that I need help translating.
You apply a cautery to the lowest parts of the body.
Then apply a poultice suitable for the area to be treated with a cushion.
When pain in the joints occurs due to a particular cause, it is called by its proper name.
And if there be a scrofula on their neck, then apply the cauterization to the neck.
And some people say that if you put cushions on your legs and ankles, you'll be healed by the use of cautery.
The sentence provides instructions for treating "gout" in a way that suggests it's more similar to a general term for inflammation or pain than a specific disease.
And if there is a need to apply a cushion to these parts of the body, it is best to place it under the care of a doctor.
And if you must cut into the body, have your cutting done on the leg of the patient.
And more caution should be taken when dealing with their feet than they would usually need.
This sentence describes a situation where a poultice (pasty medicine) is being applied to the affected area to treat inflammation. When the blood is drawn out.
This is a bit tricky, but based on your examples, it seems like it means "Therefore, return to your own operation" in the context of medical procedures.
Then apply poultices and poultice-like treatments for small wounds.
And if there are many large humors in their bowels they are called gout by doctors. A strong person must be present to hold the patient's legs and feet, and the surgeon must perform the operation with care.
Then apply Egyptian oil to the patient's legs using the methods described above.
And if you cauterize the body for that purpose, then you should first cleanse the area by making incisions to drain the pus.
Mays there be some other reason that you say that the patient has a swelling from the scrofula.
When there is pain in the foot due to a superficial infection, apply a cautery on the patient's limbs.
And a proper cautery should be applied to the affected areas, with the patient's hands on their own body. And when the body is healed, apply a cushion to their legs.
The capital 43rd.
Here comes the first line from the original language: De seccio del pilhot in another place on their body, the physician must be careful to avoid the flow of blood.
"When the ancients saw that the patient's condition was caused by an excess of humors in the body.
And this is the inscription for that statement.
Then apply cauterization to the legs if necessary.
In cases of pain in the feet or ankles, it is customary to use medical treatments.
Therefore, if you are treating a patient with a small cut in their feet, make sure to bandage them up carefully.
And if the doctor is poor, you should cover their face with a poultice to avoid further harm.
Then return the patient's body to its original state; it is the cushion that has been placed on their legs, which you should remove after they are in a stable position.
And then the patient's legs should be treated with other methods.
And if it is necessary to cauterize the body, use a cushion on the cushion-related areas.
Then apply medicine to the legs where the pain resides.
And if there are cushions upon which the patient rests, they will have a cushion placed under their legs.
Then let the plague be left to fester until it becomes a good thing; then in three days, they will cauterize it and apply a poultice for such a time as their pain subsides.
And I have seen that the doctors are called to treat the illness, and if they can't find a cure for it, then they call it plague.
Therefore, we must confess that the patient suffers from the ailment caused by a specific condition.
And if you are treating someone for gout, you should know that healing takes several days.
And now I say that there is no fear in the operation.
Chapter xliv.
A hernia on the legs is called a hernia.
And this swelling on the legs is called by doctors as a "hernia".
This means: And according to the two ways, natural or accidental.
In the case of the foot, it is necessary to cauterize the affected area.
And hold the patient's foot still when they are experiencing pain. And if a person has a small intestine, then do not assume that it is a cushion unless it's clear they are small. And if you are already treating that patient, see what is in the cushion, and if they have swelling, it's likely gout.
Chapter 45.
On the treatment of various swellings.
From the nodes, many types of pain are known to be caused by the various humors.
And if you wish to apply cauterization, it should be done to the legs and feet.
Therefore, it is necessary to cauterize the intestine so that it doesn't come out.
Mays is related to "may" meaning "it's possible" or "it may be".
And if it is the other person who has a pain in their bowels, it is treated by applying a cauterization to the affected area, which is what we call the "other" for gouty pains.
And so, when you arrive at treating a patient with a pain in the body, you should use another method other than what was written in the previous sentence, which is to say, you should apply a cautery to their legs.
This means that doctors call this disease by the name of the affected area, which is where they put their hand in order to treat it.
And apply the last cautery to the affected part of the body.
And if you have to cauterize the leg, place a cushion under the foot.
Then apply the cauterizer to the area of the patient's body where the humors are known to be present.
When there are cold humors that cause pain in the feet, make sure the patient's legs are warmed up. And thus, if you wish to heal such pain, you should use a cautery to treat the condition between the legs.
And if it's necessary to break the skin for a bloodletting, it is done in a specific way.
And if the body has too much or too little of a particular humor, then the symptoms will be present in the opposite way.
And if some pain remains on some small part of the body, we should cauterize it.
When there is a large amount of pain, you should apply cauterization to the affected area.
And if you have a problem with your blood flow, apply it to the veins in the legs.
Capitol .xlvi.
Of the forms of the necessary instruments, the cushion is used for their feet.
From these three signs, which must be done carefully, comes the word for "of those who are" in its proper sense.
Then if the patient is ready for surgery, you have put a cushion on their legs to prevent the joints from being inflamed.
"And here comes the treatment for the ailment."
Let the patient's veins be cauterized if necessary.
The body would be called gouty, if they are treated with cauterization.
And if it is the feet, they are great in pain and few in number (of doctors).
Then apply a cushion to their body.
La forma de la medicina più simile alle lingue moderne è il latino moderno.
Gaiters are used to protect the legs from the effects of gout, which is why they are called "socks" in some regions.
The patient must be treated in a manner appropriate to their condition, whether it be for pain in the foot or other causes.
And then the patient must be cauterized, the large ones on the chest.
And if you cauterize it through the blackening of its color, it will be relieved from the pain.
Gout is a disease that affects the legs, feet, and other parts of the body.
This could be interpreted as:
Lead-based treatment of the ailment.
When applying a cautery to the body, ensure it is applied carefully by placing a cushion under the patient's legs to prevent their leg from being burned and protect them from injury.
The patient is subject to the risk of one-sided pain.
And so there are three kinds of people.
And there are two types of those in the body.
And if they are suffering from three curves, and three species.
Then the patient's legs are placed in their proper position.
The text describes a process of applying heat to the body in a specific way to treat joint pain.
This looks like a description of a medical condition, and the use of "Forma" suggests a Latin origin. And so that they have two cushions placed upon them. And if the patient has a sharp pain, put a cushion under their feet and another on their thighs.
Having three curves, a large one has a cushion on their legs, and a cushion under their feet.
Forma del corpo having three curvatures:
These are the ways to treat the nodes with cauterization: hot, cold, and by applying a poultice.
Shape of the foot in its entirety.
Forma del scapel migia means "of the shape of the knife" but I need more context to understand what it refers to in this case.
The way I would understand the meaning of "Forma de scapel" (from the context you've provided) is:
And if they are sharp or another pain in the foot.
And then he will show you how to treat the different types of almagidas.
When the pain is in the legs or feet, it is treated with cauterization, but only by those who are knowledgeable about its nature.
And if you want to make a point on the leg or elsewhere, then place a cushion under their legs, and use it as you see fit.
The forms of badness of the bowels are known as humors that cause pain in the feet, which are called spatimis (in the given context). And then apply the other one's hand on their joints, and let them be held in place.
There are types of cupping for the blood.
And if there are many sharp pains, they are caused by something else besides cold humors.
These are the various types of cups used by doctors, who used to apply them directly to the body (in case you're wondering, that's what they'd call a "cupping" session in Latin.  It's a way of applying cupping therapy.)
But if they are to be treated with a cushion, you should place the patient's body on their hands or a cushion in a place where the patient can easily touch their skin.
And if you placed a cushion on their legs, they would have been used for this purpose.
And sometimes they are made round in this way.
The chapter title is "Chapter 47" in Latin.
When talking about the treatment of men, and another about their feet, they are speaking of the breast or foot pain.
Some parts of the body are swollen in gout, which affects men's feet and hands differently than women's.
.B. is the name of the body part to which you have applied the poultice.
The English translation provided for Source 3 seems to be about using different types of treatment on the patient's body.
E then apply the treatment to the patient's legs, so they can be cauterized.
Chapter 48.
A hot poker is used to treat the patient's boils when other methods are needed.
And if they are in pain from an abscess, use a cautery on their veins to stop the burning.
And already has been evacuated the bad humors from the intestine; then you must apply the cushion to their thighs.
And so the patient's affliction is cured by the application of a suitable remedy.
When it's necessary to treat a boil or abscess, you use a cushion of poultice for the specific ailment, and apply it to the affected area.
Then administer the cautery as we have previously described.
This sounds like the beginning of a medical text, possibly describing an examination or treatment process.
This likely refers to the process of treating a boil or abscess (arceria) using a lancet or by other means (like drawing it out through a vein), but the phrasing suggests a more poetic or metaphorical approach to medical language.
And so the pain becomes a well-known ailment.
When the pain comes on gradually from the accumulation of cold humors, it is said to be a gouty attack.
And if the patient has their foot cauterized, it is often considered an error to cauterize them in the groin, or knee, as complications are more likely there.
Mays over that which is inflammation of the bowels, usually causing pain in the intestines, would be treated by placing your hand on a cushion under their feet.
And then place a pad on their legs, which will be used for the second time to apply the other cauterization method.
When placing a burning iron on the affected area, place the patient's body in a position where the heat from the cautery will be felt by the person who needs to be treated.
And if it is necessary to cure the patient, apply remedies to their legs, and use other methods to treat them, and apply a bandage to the area to prevent further injury.
E tu, the which in the body's muscles, already mentioned, is called a cushion for the pain in the foot.
And if you have to cauterize a wound, use a cushion on the four limbs.
Then apply a cautery to remove the excess water from the patient's foot.
And then apply heat to the area.
This is a chapter about an ailment related to the opening of the intestines or another location in the body, which is what causes the pain.
And so too, when an abscess appears on the body, you may find pus in the thighs, veins, and other parts.
And if there is pain in the feet, apply cauterization to the affected area.
And if a wound is severe, and the other remedies have failed to work.
And if your doctor says you have a cushion in your body, they are wrong.
Therefore, cauterization should be used on those who have pain in the legs due to inflammation.
And you apply a cushion to their forehead or head. Mays it be that your doctor may say it's a disease of the foot.
And if it is great, then you have already sutured the other legs.
Chapter 51.
The first cut affects the body's belly.
Then, if the pain is severe, put your hand on their foot, for they are often called gout in that area.
And he was a cushion in the bagatelle.
When there are ulcers in the legs, it is said that they have gout.
And if there are many cushions, you may need to use more than one cushion.
And if the operation in the joint is necessary, use a cautery to burn out the bad humors from the patient.
And if the patient’s pain is severe, use the method described previously to apply leeches and leeching.
E another must be used to treat the gut with a tool to remove excess humor.
Mays if the pain is in the legs, it may be called a gouty condition by doctors.
It is possible that you will be burned by the hot iron of illness.
Then treat that person's body with a remedy.
Then apply cautery to the exposed area, but be careful not to burn the good flesh.
And you have already opened the space on their legs and feet.
Chapter 52.
On the treatment of eminence.
And there are many causes for the affliction of the abdomen, as well as if one has to apply pressure to the intestines.
May it be known that gout is a disease that affects the legs. And if the humors are on the feet, they should be treated with heat to relieve the pain.
But if gout is caused by moisture, it's best to keep the legs warm and dry.
And you will see that the patient's swelling has begun to subside.
When there are no other explanations for a person's pain, it is thought to be gout, depending on the severity of the symptoms.
And if it is caused by wind, they are already suffering from gout, and you should press on their veins.
This is a very difficult task, so it's likely that I will make mistakes.
And if it is necessary to have a cushion placed under the patient's legs and for the patient to be given a cushion when they are in the leg, then for the patient’s foot.
Then you've found the affected area and can feel the pain there.
You have found the cause of the ailment.
When you are affected by gout in your legs, use needles that they are for this purpose.
And if you wish, apply a cautery to the patient's body for the purpose of burning away the pain.
This translates to: And if the omentum is swollen, you must apply heat to the affected area for a while.
When the text describes a condition affecting all parts of the body; it is described as being a type of gout.
The phrase "de curacio" suggests a medical context, potentially referring to treatment or healing. "De" often means "of" or "from" in these languages, and the word "cranc" (with variations) appears in several of them, meaning "sick" or "ill".
In this case, it is customary to apply medicine to the affected joint after using a hot cautery to treat it.
E in the breasts or in the other parts of the body,  a cushion should be placed for the treatment of pain to work correctly.
When cold and hot, it is customary to call it gout by doctors if it is a problem that can be healed by it.
This refers to the process of treating someone experiencing a bout of illness, particularly one that affects their legs, by drawing out the black fluid associated with the black death.
Then place a cushion for another cushion to be placed on their legs, so that the operation will be successful. And if it is necessary to cauterize something on the body, apply heat to the area but do not use excessive force.
Perhaps if it's an artery, but when you have already opened the vein or applied other treatments, then use the term "artery" for the veins, and apply a different treatment method to the blood vessels.
The other hand should be used to support the patient's body during the procedure.
On the treatment of dropsy.
Then apply the appropriate remedies to the patient's symptoms.
The patient has already been cured by the cushion, but the other person is still dying.
The first line translates to: And if in another case you have already treated this disease, and in that other case the patient has been cured by treating them with a different type of medicine.
When the patient has the malady, the remedy for them is that they be treated by means of a hot cautery.
The intestine must be kept open for a while during the operation, so that the doctors can cleanse the patient's wounds.
And if the patient's body has been opened up by placing a hand on their stomach and another on their feet.
And if the patient has a fever, let them be treated for three days.
And if your legs are affected, it is by the humors that are in them.
The pain is in the side of the body where the patient needs to be cauterized, so you can place your hand on the affected area.
And if necessary, you should cauterize the instrument on the affected area, as well as beneath the cushion.
And if it is necessary to make an incision, then do so on the patient's body near the foot, where they need to be cut. Place a cushion under the patient. This is a bit tricky to translate directly into English as it appears to be a mix of languages. The sentence likely describes a gouty condition affecting the body.
The first part of the sentence refers to a medical condition.
And if you have already diagnosed the illness, other things are done by the patient, as well as the doctor's recommendations.
Then follow the ancient doctor’s advice.
E you have already applied a hot iron to the area affected by the ailment.
And if he has pain in his legs, they are often cured with the heat of the sun.
And place your hand over the stomach and apply heat to the cushion for the patient.
Capitol 51.
And so treat the treatment of the ailment of the urine in children, so that they are not affected by the pain of the bladder.
Some people have a cushion placed under their thighs, but the pain in the foot is so bad that they are called "the gout" because of the place where it appears.
And thus, the pain of the patient is felt as a subtle prickling sensation.
And apply a poultice of lead to the affected joint, and use a poultice of three kinds to treat them.
And when they want to urinate, he urinates.
Then you must apply cautery to the patient's legs and not let them have gout in their feet.
Mays aquel del qual le trauc es amplificat.
This is a description of how to treat gout in the legs, using hot iron to apply pressure to the affected area.
The surgeon will place a cushion under the patient's legs.
And if it's necessary to use a cautery on the patient, you should hold them down securely.
**Capitol .lvi.**
The foreskin should be treated for inflammation in the head of the penis.
Here comes the first part of the intestine or something:
And one of those is benign and the other is gouty.
No malignant disease, place a cushion on the area affected by the illness; place another on the patient's feet, and another on their chest.
And if the illness is severe, use the other type of cautery on their legs, which are being treated.
And if the inflammation is outside the foreskin, it is customary to treat it as a separate condition.
Then you put your hand over the patient's legs to prevent the intestine from being exposed and that they are treated with a hot iron.
And if it is necessary to treat the other's member with cautery, then apply the heat there.
So if the patient has a flow of blood, then apply a bandage to stop the bleeding.
And if the patient's legs are cauterized, the blood flow is altered.
And if you want to know where to put your hand on the skin.
Then place a cushion on the head of the patient so they don't get gout.
Then you must cauterize the affected area to prevent the return of the ailment.
Then apply a sharp instrument to separate the patient's legs and feet.
Then apply a cautery to the affected area, and allow it to heal.
Another [person] on their leg, and another cushion on their legs, et another on their chest.
Then apply a hot iron to the legs of the patient, and place a cushion on their feet.
When the patient has pain, the other sources are already in pain.
And if it is necessary to use a cushion under them, the patient's legs are treated with novacula and the rest of the body below it by barbers.
When your feet are affected by cold humors, it is customary to call them other things. C'est dans les deux sexes que sont la causa des problèmes avec un membre viril.
And you will put your hand on the chest of the patient during surgery. The child's humors are bad, but it is necessary to apply a cautery to the affected area.
And if you wish to treat the ailment that afflicts the patient so as to remove the pain from their limbs, do so by using a hot iron to apply cauterization, but be careful because it can be dangerous.
And the way to treat the first case is that you should use a cautery on the child's body.
And if it is necessary to treat them with herbs, then do so carefully. And he who has made you open the space between your legs, place a cushion on his legs or his chest, so that the patient does not see him.
E aprop monsifies a la tua ma in lu.
This is a description of the process of treating gout with cauterization.
The length of one leg is shorter than the other, and they are as different in length as the difference between two cushions.
And if there's need to drain the body or open the bowels of the body.
Then make sure to apply pressure to the area above their foot when you cauterize it.
Then apply heat to the legs with the other, and then apply the cushion.
After three days, apply a poultice to the area where the pain is felt.
And if the patient is to be burned, it should be done carefully at the head of the leg, so as to avoid burning them on the foot.
And therefore the treatment for the plague is that which consolidates the humors.
And if it is incited by the pain to be worse.
And if there is no cushion beneath their body, they should be kept below the waist.
Translation: Another is for the cushion under the patient's legs.
This refers to the treatment of urinary retention.
Retaining the urethra in its place, apply a cushion to prevent the pain from spreading.
Then use a needle to draw out the fluid from the patient's legs if they are affected by what you have mentioned.
And if you apply pressure to the area where the intestine or bladder is located, you will cause pain in the joints.
And apply the cushion on their legs.
Then apply a cautery to the patient's legs, and apply it in such a way as to bring the pain to the surface, and place the cushion on their legs.
And if the patient's illness is due to cold humors, and their condition requires it, the urine will be released from the bladder.
Then apply a cautery for healing purposes, and provide relief to the patient's affliction.
Chapter 59
If you are able to apply this knowledge to other areas, use it to help you understand the following:  When there is a pain in the cavity of a person's bladder that can be treated by applying a cushion, it is known as a "vesical ailment" or "bladder stone."
And if you've got an ailment in your bladder or a boil on the foot, then make an incision to allow its humors to drain, which is done with an instrument called a lancet.
When the patient's body is hot, it is customary to say that they have a fever. And for that reason, you have three cushions, one on each of their legs, so to place them on the thighs.
At the beginning, place a cushion under their legs.
When you want to stop the pain in the legs, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
Then apply the cauteri to the patient's body; and if it is necessary, place the patient on another cushion, and the patient should be treated with a hot cautery on their legs, for the burn of the disease.
This is the first line of a treatise on treating gout, which is often caused by excess cold humors in the body.
And if it is made of silver or of tin, and another servant is made to apply the cushion, it will be said that they are placing a bandage on their leg.
And place a cushion on their legs so they don't get cold.
Another placed a cushion on their feet to make them feel comfortable.
And then apply a hot cautery to the bladder to stop the bleeding.
And if you want to treat it, apply a poultice directly to the affected area.
Then apply a poultice to their humors to soothe them.
The chapter number indicates this is likely a continuation of a numbered text, suggesting it is not an isolated sentence but part of a larger document.
Peyso is a cushion for cushions.
Nos ja havem spoken of the types of stones that are found in the bladder and kidneys.
And if necessary they are to be treated by doctors, even if it hurts.
And if a stone is formed in the bladder, which can be treated directly by the physician.
And if it is necessary to apply cautery, use a pointed instrument.
And therefore I say that to heal the child’s ailment, one must be careful not to let the disease spread from their bladder to other parts of the body.
And then you should apply hot remedies to their feet, and another cushion in the legs. May be that in young people, it's called gout more often.
And if you wish to make an incision, make sure the patient's leg is held firmly in place by the doctor.
This is a tricky one! It seems like the text is describing a medical procedure involving the intestines or something like that, but using a word (that I can't translate) for "peyra" which means "painful" in the original languages.
And then the patient's legs should be kept warm by the doctor.
And if you are ready to cauterize the intestine or other parts of the body, and prepare to cauterize others.
"You have already placed the hot iron on their legs," or "And apply a cushion to the patient's legs."
And if there is a stone lodged in the foot, apply pressure to the affected area.
And if you are applying a treatment to the affected leg, it is necessary to use another method on the other leg. And if you don't have a stone to hold the patient's foot, use your hand to support it. And slowly turn (it) back into the bladder's space.
Then apply heat to the body on the area between the patient's knees.
And have the minister press on the affected area with their hand.
And if it is necessary to make points on the legs, then do so with a pointed cautery, as in this case. And if it's necessary to make a point on their side, the one who has them will hold the burning iron to their left leg, allowing the foot to be burned with cautery.
And if you understand that the pain is caused by something other than heat, then treat it as gout.
And from their legs, it is called gout by the doctors.
Then you have a point on their legs, apply another cushion to the other side.
You are right to think that the translated text should be clear and concise.  The first sentence means:
If you cannot get rid of the pain with pressure, then treat it with a poultice soaked in vinegar.
This is the first line of the translated text: When the pain is worse than usual, the doctor says that it is a case of the gout.
When there is a large pain in the body, you have to put your hand on them, and another on their side, so that the patient's bladder is treated with knowledge of the cause of the illness, but perhaps not the cure.
The original text uses terms like "punct" (point) and "forfexs" (to cut), which suggests medical procedures. So:
Therefore after you have completed the operation, apply a cushion to the patient's legs, and another to their chest. And when you have found the patient's intestines and another part of their body needs to be treated, the physician will use the same method on the other part.
Then you must put the patient's body on its back, and for three days, keep the patient elevated.
And when the patient's intestines are inflamed, they say it is called gout, and treat it accordingly.
And when the body is affected by the plague, which causes painful ulcers, it's important to place a hot iron on the affected area to treat them, but be careful not to burn the skin.
And apply heat to the patient's feet, only if necessary.
And if it is necessary to do something to the legs, the pain is felt in the feet, which they call "la podagra" by placing a cushion over them.
And if there are small stones, a cushion should be placed in that location.
When there are swollen joints in the patient's feet.
Then place a cushion under them, and place your hand on their foot, to avoid the pain in their feet?
And if you need to cauterize the affected area, do so using a heated iron on the vein, while he has another cushion under them, and another near their legs. And then the doctor would use a small needle to make punctures on the patient's legs, little by little, until your urine is finally released.
The cauterized wound is already healed over, so you should put your hand on their knee.
And apply heat to the area while using a cautery to cauterize the pain. Then apply a bandage to the affected area so that they don't get worse. And place your hand on the patient's legs. Then if the patient's foot is swollen or has pain, apply pressure to the affected area with your foot, and use a hot iron to burn the cushion, which will draw out the inflammation.
When the body has been treated with a poultice, and then the joint pain returns, it is said to be a case of the plague.
And if the disease affects the legs, you must apply a bandage to the knees and use other remedies for the ailment as we have already described.
Another interpretation of the sentence could be:
Another common treatment was to apply a cauterizing tool to the affected area.
This translates to "And pain in the leg is customary" or "Gout is usually caused by excess fluid in the feet."
Treating gout is often difficult and prohibited by numerous methods.
The woman's pain is caused by an excess of blood in her legs.
And if it is necessary to burn away the excess fluids caused by the second physician, it is important to note that he's treating the patient for their illness.
The third line of text will be about cauterizing the intestine or treating something that affects the intestines.
And the fourth condition is that if there are indigestible substances in the body, apply a poultice to the area to draw them out.
And when the pain of gout is caused by other factors, it is customary to use cautery on the body, but in this case you must apply the cushion to the feet.
When joints are affected by that illness, they will be called gouty by some, but only their legs are truly considered so by doctors.
And if the woman is afflicted with a disease that causes pain in the lower part of her body, then she has the disease called gout.
Therefore, if you encounter such pain in the groin area, cauterize that part of their body.
If they are not a virgin, then use another cushion to prevent them from having an attack of the spleen.
Then place a cushion under their bladder and apply it to the area where the pain is.
Then, if you have a wound on their leg, treat them with a cautery to stop the bleeding.
And if it is necessary to make a section at the beginning; then put another on their legs, and another on their feet, the first one being the most important one.
And you know that some stones are from the legs and if it is necessary to apply cautery to the leg it's called gout.
And thus you will know which species are affected by the ailment.
And if blood flows from a wound on the leg, cauterize it with a hot iron after it has been stopped by the use of another tool.
And so the doctor said, prepare you for surgery by using the tools.
And apply heat to the joint pain, which is what doctors call gout, to the legs, etc. Then apply the patient's hands to their chest.
The cushion is placed on their legs, so if there are no other instructions, you can close the intestine to prevent further pain.
The text describes the use of acupuncture needles in treatment.
Then another cushion under their legs, and another on their feet, for the patient to be cut open and have a cushion on their chest.
A hernia is caused by an excess of humors in the body.
And if it is cold, you can use a cautery to treat it.
And if there's weakness, which is what causes the hernia to develop, then it is this weakness that will cause pain in the groin and other parts of the body.
And if it is necessary to cauterize someone's intestine, it is best done by placing a cushion under them.
Then apply a cauterizer to the affected joint if needed, making sure no inflammation occurs in their legs.
And if there is moisture in the intestine, it should be treated by making an incision and allowing it to drain.
And if the doctors call it gout, it may be a sign of other ailments.
And if you want to know the location of the inflammation, the nature of the fluid will tell you.
And if they are to be cauterized on the foot, then the doctor's hand must be placed over the patient's legs and another over their feet.
And if you apply cauterization to the legs, a little bit of heat will reduce them.
And another puts your hand on their left leg, and another servant on the right, and another on the chest, to prevent the intestine from moving.
Then apply a cautery to the foot's toe, if necessary.
And make an incision along the line of the groin, where there is no need for cauterization.
You have already opened the way to the patient's legs, and you must now carefully examine them for signs.
And you have already placed a cushion under their legs, and opened the wound with a cautery.
E a prop separa la persona affected by doas, e leave the space between their legs as they are. And if the pain persists in the legs, use a different technique for the patient's relief.
If a doctor diagnoses someone with gout, they will put their hands on the body part affected by the pain.
Then apply another cushion to their feet, so that they do not leave them unattended.
When water is accumulated in two parts, it becomes a disease; but when it accumulates in the legs, they call it a gout.
Then you have to wash the blood away, and put another cloth on the wound.
And if you have already placed a cushion on the leg where the pain is, then apply cauterization to the joints.
Then you have to use a knife for that. And if it is caused by Greek fire, it is called gout.
When you are ready, put a cushion under them.
And apply a cushion to their legs so that the patient's thighs are protected from the heat of the fire.
And if you have already diagnosed the patient as having a cold-related ailment, it is best to apply a cushion on their legs, and another for their feet.
Then you must cure the gout in their legs, as the following describes.
When there is a pain that is caused by cold humors in their feet, they are truly experiencing a terrible thing.
Then, if there are other signs of illness, such as a swelling in the body, the physician should use the term "perforation" for the treatment.
And you have already opened the patient's legs, then place a cushion under them.
And if they are pointed on their location, then they will be in pain from the aforementioned swelling. And if it is necessary, hold your hand on their thighs, preventing the disease from spreading to other parts of the body, and another on their legs.
At that hour, apply a cauterizing tool to the affected area to prevent further damage.
When the patient's intestines are inflamed, they will suffer for many days.
Capitol 63.
A sharp instrument cuts into their flesh, and a cushion is placed on which to rest their body.
Then you know that in the section on the treatment of hernias, it is feared that they will be lost to other diseases.
The patient's legs are being caressed and comforted by cushions.
Then return to the patient's body the cushion or a hot compress should be applied.
And if there is a need to apply a cautery to their legs, then it should be done carefully.
And a strong pain in the legs, which can be felt, but not on the foot itself.
And sometimes cold humors cause pain in the joints.
If you have a cushion on the patient's legs, then place it under their hands, and avoid touching the affected area; if it's on their foot, treat it with a cushion.
When blood vessels are inflamed, they are often affected by gout.
E then you see if it is necessary to make incisions in the flesh.
Therefore, if the humors have already consolidated in the patient's legs, you should apply a cushion to them, and another on their chest, and hold their hands.
And if there's an adherence in the leg, apply a cushion to their legs.
Mays is meat or flesh that is already behind so you should be careful when applying cauterization.
Then since you are opening the intestines for treatment, use cushions on their legs and feet.
Capitol .lxiv. translates to **Chapter 64.**
This refers to the treatment of a condition related to the patient's legs.
Then exercise caution when burning the affected area to avoid burning the intestines or causing pain.
This means that the patient's own body uses its own resources to heal itself.
But if a surgeon wishes to cauterize, they must prepare for the operation.
And if you place a cushion on the bowels, they are to be elevated; and the gout in the legs is to be treated by applying cushions to raise them.
Then place a cushion on their legs to prevent them from experiencing pain in their joints.
Then apply the cautery to the area of the affected part of the body.
This sentence describes treating gout with a pointed cautery to drain the excess fluids from the affected area, likely caused by the old belief that humors were responsible for the condition. Then apply cauterization to those legs.
Then treat the disease with a poultice as you would the plague, using a cushion to apply pressure to the affected area.
And if it is needed to apply a cauterizer to the patient's legs, it is applied with a cushion so they don't burn themselves.
et altro e la persona que es que vol dir "and so on"
Then apply the treatment to the intestinal hernia.
This refers to a hernia that occurs when the intestine protrudes from the cavity through a rupture in the abdominal wall.
And this pain or cushion of the legs is caused by many things, such as pressure on the nerves or a sprain, but it is customary to call it gout.
The doctors cauterize the cushion in the foot to treat the gout.
And the sign of it is when the patient experiences violent pain suddenly; and the other signs are different.
And in some cases, it is called this condition of the intestine.
E.g., Some people experience pain in their legs due to the wind, which is called "windy gout" in the foot.
Then return to your patient's body the intestine has already been treated for their condition, and place another cushion on the chest.
And if you put the patient's body on the bed, and place your hand upon their limbs, you will have to command them to keep still.
Then apply a hot cautery to the affected areas of the body.
E si' la dolor sia in the legs.
Then he will be ready to help if you have already placed a cushion on their testicles.
When the testicles are in pain, apply a cautery to the feet.
And if you need to apply cautery to the foot, use a cushion for protection and have a skilled assistant hold the tools.
E cerqua am looking at the intestine for signs of disease. If you find that there is a reason for your illness, the patient should be treated by applying remedies to their feet, which are related to the cause.
You placed a cushion in the knee of the bed.
And let oil be applied to the patient's legs, so that the white blood may flow;  and if the disease is due to an excess of phlegmatic humor, then apply a cushion within.
Then apply hot water to the area as needed.
And then heal the plague, and for another plague let them be treated by another hand.
"When there's a need to treat pain in the joints by applying a cautery tool to the affected area."
Then treat the patient for their gout.
And then if you have to cauterize a part of the body, another cushion would be placed under them.
Then you will make a small incision there to drain the swelling from the affected area.
And cure the plague according to what we have said until it is healed.
This sentence is likely from a translated version of the original text, as it's in a language that uses words like "podra" (could) and "cushion")
Then return the wound to their place on the legs, and apply pressure elsewhere.
When there are painful swellings in the foot, apply heat to the affected area to alleviate the pain.
Then apply heat to the affected area.
Then you have to put a cushion under the patient's knee if you find that the intestine has been swollen for some time.
This treatment is called for when there is pain in the legs, but it is important to specify what type of treatment you are referring to.
And sometimes the patient is treated by placing his hand on the cushion.
And you shall apply a strong cushion on the head where the pain is felt, and then hold their hand over the place where the pain is.
Translation 4: Then open the knee joint with your hand to prevent a condition called "the other" from occurring.
And place a cushion on the patient's body to adjust the two parts together.
And then you remove the stones from their proper place, but be careful not to damage the intestine.
And for that [condition] you should place a cushion under their legs, so as to protect them from the effects of the other things.
And if you have opened the site, and they are in the process of being healed, the patient will be better served by another method.
Capitol sixty-eight.
And if you must place your hand on the patient's feet, then place it on the other parts of the leg.
And if it is necessary to make incisions in the skin, they should be cauterized.
Therefore, adjust your treatment accordingly.
And apply a cauterization to their legs with three or four cushions.
And for that you have to make a small incision on their feet.
Another patch of the skin is exposed on your legs.
On castration.
And the rest are for the treatment of those who have them.
Castration can be done in two ways: by attrition or by incision.
And so that the body is softened by heat and made less stiff. Then apply a remedy to those joints to resolve the issue.
When you need to perform surgery on the surface of the animal's testicles, use a cushion to support the body and keep the animal still.
And if there is an obstruction in the legs, you can treat it with the use of a cushion.
Then cauterize the legs where the cold humors are, so that no more will be affected, and make an incision on their chest. And if there are other causes for the pain in their legs, apply a poultice to the area.
This is the way to castrate in this manner.
Then cure the plague where it is within the body.
Chapter 70.
Of the treatment of hermaphroditism.
In men it is called hermaphroditism but in women it is called something else.
And yet another place to place a poultice on the body is the testicles.
One could also translate "Mays" as "May it be" for a more poetic rendering.
There are three types of cures: by fire, by water, and by medicine. Cove es that you should know, what the doctors are doing when they apply their trade to the patient's legs.
And as for the second type of ailment, it is not yet curable.
Chapter .xxi.
The slow-growing pains are caused by various factors, including diet.
And some are affected by strong humors in their legs, which causes pain.
And then if you have swelling in your legs, apply your hand to them to keep the humors from spreading further.
Then apply a hot cautery to the affected area.
And if it is necessary to make cushions on the surface of the body, you should place your hand on the affected area.
"May your flesh be born again"
This appears to be a set of Italian sentences, but I need more context to provide an accurate translation for "Capitol .lxxii.".
The following English text matches the provided Italian/Latin sentence and translates the Latin phrase:
Then, if it's necessary to make incisions on the woman's body, she should be given a small incision. And so the pain is either natural or accidental.
And if there are other conditions, such as pain in the flesh or feet, that cause discomfort, they should be addressed first.
You must hold your hand on the patient's body, or as needed for their feet, one should use the cushion to support them.
And if the pain in the legs is known to be caused by that ailment, put your hand on the area.
If the patient has gout in the joints, then you can treat them with a poultice.
And do not let the patient's legs be touched, except by the physician.
Another already sits on the patient's chest and holds her hand in place.
And then apply oil to the area and put the cushion there.
And if the cushion is already on their legs, you should move them to the other place where the problem is located.
May be called "the meat" by those who are affected by it.
Then apply a poultice to the patient's legs, and if necessary, use a cauterizing tool.
And apply a lead cushion to their legs, so as to prevent the plague from spreading easily throughout the body.
And if they have had a cushion for that purpose for several days, they should be treated by the physician accordingly.
And you should apply another cautery to their legs, and another to the feet.
And if it is necessary to make points on the legs, then cauterize according to this method. When it's necessary to cauterize a wound, the patient must be willing to have their legs or feet burned.
"The intestine has been called a cushion by you."
Then use emollients to soothe the hemorrhoids on her legs, and apply the red-hot iron to the affected area.
The translation of "E.g., the ancients used to cauterize the veins of the foot."
And apply cauterization to the legs.
And when there is pain in their legs, it is called gout.
Those who suffer from gout are often treated by having their legs or feet cauterized.
And then that it is customary for the physician to apply a hot poultice to the legs, as well as a bandage to the bandages, while the patient is in pain, and another to the chest.
And then pulverize those areas with the appropriate cauteries.
Then apply a cushion on their feet to prevent them from being cold.
And if the flux of blood persists, apply a poultice to the affected area to draw out the pain.
Then apply a poultice to the affected area.
Then apply two cups to the affected area.
Then apply a cushion on their legs, and another to the location of the pain.
And if it is caused by a pain in their feet, they will be called gouty.
Chapter 74.
The surgeon makes an incision on the foot.
Some types of boils are called apostilas, but the doctor will treat them properly. And if you have removed the pain from the body, the patient needs to be placed on his/her legs.
And if you want to know about hot poultice applied to the body, I will tell you how to apply it properly.
When you first feel pain in the foot and the signs of inflammation are present, apply heat to treat it.
And so the doctor will be able to see her disease through the examination of her feet.
And so, when the midwife uses her knowledge and skill, she will administer the instrument which will be used for its purpose.
Then use a cushion to apply heat to the affected area so the pain subsides. And you place a cushion on the legs, to prevent them from being burned by the hot cautery.
And if you are already experiencing vertigo, the doctor should apply a countermeasure on their legs to prevent further injury.
And when you cauterize the legs or feet, be sure to apply the cautery to their proper place.
And if the thigh or leg is affected, it is customary to apply a poultice of a cushion with a cushion; place another on their chest.
When the patient is experiencing pain in the legs and feet, place your hand on the affected area.
Then apply the healing balm to the affected area.
And if it is necessary to cauterize the patient's foot, place a cushion under them.
Then let the doctor be careful when applying cauterization to avoid damaging the patient's intestines.
Capitol .lxxv. translates to "Chapter 75"
And if midwives are needed to treat someone's illness with bloodletting, they must be careful to avoid applying it directly on the patient's feet.
The midwife must ensure the child is in the proper position for delivery by using natural methods to guide its placement.
When you see these signs, you should know that it is true that a small cushion can be used for good if it is applied correctly to their feet.
Then apply cautery to the patient's flesh, but be careful not to let the heat spread to the other parts of the body, or cause the skin to become burned and blistered.
And if she avoids mistakes and subtle errors in judgment by her skill as a midwife, it's the best way to ensure the safety of both the woman and the child.
And if you are treating a patient, use those other tools to treat the legs and feet.
When the illness has weakened the body, apply heat to the affected area to treat the patient with a cauterization.
And then apply another cautery on the thighs to make them sweat. And if the pain is in the legs, then cauterize the area near the groin.
Mays it be that you have to apply leeches on their leg, in case of pain.
And if the patient has a strong fever or cough, they will be given other instructions.
And if the pain is in the legs or feet, use gentle methods to reduce them gradually. And if you are too obese to be treated by means of a hot poultice, they are typically treated by doctors for pain in the legs and feet, which causes swelling.
And if a patient has problems with their bowels, do not let them be burned, but treat them by removing the bad humors.
When the foot swells and pain occurs, apply a hot poultice to the affected area gradually.
Then you should place a cushion under the patient's legs if they have pain in their legs.
And if it is necessary to cauterize the pain in the body, you should place your hand over it.
When the pain is localized to the limbs, then apply a cushion of water and gum. Then apply the treatment to the affected part.
E cum that to be a disease of the joints, which are called by the same name by the doctors, that is to say, gout. And then apply a bandage to the affected area, and treat the cause of the ailment.
Then apply heat to the foot, and place your hand on the area to prevent the pain from spreading. And if you have to reduce the swelling, elevate the leg and apply your hand.
Then apply strong cauterization to the body only after the patient has been properly prepared for it, and ensure the cushion protects the patient's body from burns.
And place a cushion under their feet.
The patient's legs are to be kept warm by placing a cushion under them. This midwife should be given a proper name and she should be treated gently.
The patient's legs are already swollen from the fluids that cause gout.
Then command your legs to be treated by placing cushions on their legs. The fetus is brought out through the side.
When applying leeches according to this method, consider the following instructions for using them.
And if you have a pain in the face or neck, apply a cauterizing tool to the area where the pain is located.
And if it is necessary to make a mark on the body, one should apply a cushion to their body, so that they may not be injured.
And so you make them return to their proper place. And you must know that it is three or four days ago since the patient was taken to his bed, which is when he will be brought back to health by nature.
And if there are many more than one, make a second incision on the foot.
And if they are difficult, some parts of the body are more prone to be affected by gout than others;
And for a cure for a patient with gout, you should use a pointed cautery on their foot.
And apply a cautery to the legs if they have difficulty standing up.
"And if you have been treated for a while, you can't be sure that all the bad humors are purged.
And if it is necessary to cauterize the patient's feet, then do so.
The translation for "Capitol .lxxvi." is "Chapter 76".
Then, when the patient's body is affected by gout, apply a cushion to their legs.
Then consider if you should use a cautery to cauterize the affected area.
When the doctor's hand is placed on the woman's legs, and she is customarily called to be healed.
And if there is a problem with the leg, it is customary to apply a cushion.
And then apply the hot oilments to their legs, and another cushion for the patient's feet.
And if one has to apply cauterization to the affected area, it is done so with heated tools by the midwife.
Then consider whether the patient's body should be cauterized, which would then be done immediately by placing a cushion on their head and applying heat to the areas around the left side of the chest.
And if it is over their feet, then it is a cushion.
And if you have already burned your hand on the left side, then put a cushion there to protect it from the heat of the fire.
Then apply a hot cauterizer to the legs, but only if necessary.
And if it is necessary to make cuts on the legs, they should be made quickly and carefully.
And if there is a pain in the limbs, the surgeon should use a cushion to protect them.
Therefore, if there is a need to treat the patient's leg, they are treated with hot poultices on their legs.
This is an example of how a medieval physician might describe the location of a problem:
And thus the patient's condition is such that it can be used to treat the other ailments.
Mays use hot cauterization on the affected area, if they are not already suffering from gout.
And if the patient has gout, you should apply the cautery to the affected area.
And if the vein is cut, then the blood will be released onto the legs.
The patient should be treated with cupping therapy.
If the patient has pain in the legs or feet, they are to be treated with a cauterization.
If the patient has a light fever, and the pain is in the feet, they should be treated for gout.
Here comes the first explanation: When you are using the word "coyssi" you are referring to "cloying".
Mays, the other foot, was opened (by the doctor) because the patient has suffered from the ailment of gout.
And if the mouth of the patient is constricted or cramped, which is called gout, the person who applied the cushion should be careful to apply it carefully. Then apply poultices, and another treatment for the patient's feet.
Then apply heat to the affected area, if needed, as well as the treatment we just described above.
When it is not possible to cut into the body, you should place something on the legs to prevent the pain from spreading.
Then you should leave no part untouched under their feet.
E cum tu es in pain, place your hand on the affected area to prevent it from worsening.
And if it is the other way around, it means you should apply a poultice to the affected area.
And I have seen women afflicted by a fever and they say their pain is due to an imbalance in the humors. You will apply a cushion to the area where their foot is burned by the disease, which causes gout.
And if there's pain in the body, ye need to place a cushion under them.
Then you apply a poultice to their legs, etc.
Then they were already applying the heat to the bones of the dead man's feet.
Therefore, the plague will be treated with proper treatment.
When there's pain in the foot, the other one is on the legs.
Then use a cushion to extract the foot from its space.
Then apply heat to the legs, as it's necessary for their pain relief.
This is how you treat a person suffering from pain in their limbs, where they are located to apply the caque. And so if they are in need of treatment, the physician should treat it carefully and gently.
The patient's pain must be treated by applying a cushion to their feet.
And if there are two cushions, place them in the mouth of the patient and apply it to their mouth.
Take the form of a cushion (or something similar) and apply it to the legs.
And if you are to use forceps on the patient, they should be made of wood. But perhaps the most common type of ailment affects the feet, so use the term "gout" for that.
This is a description of how to treat the feet. Then you must open your patient's body up to what's needed.
This refers to the patient's condition, not their body part.
When the form of treatment is unknown because it is in a foreign language, it is customary to say that the patient has a strange ailment.
The patient's legs are being burned at the affected areas.
And for those who have pain in the legs, they should be treated with forceps applied to the affected area. The patient is in pain.
The text describes someone experiencing gout, a painful inflammatory condition, needing attention to their legs and feet.
Forma de unci having two points means it has been burned in two places by the use of hot needles.
If a pain appears in the foot, which is caused by bad humors, they should be cauterized.
Apply a cautery to the affected area.
All those tools are used for surgery, and all sorts of people are prepared to perform surgeries on them.
And so you must apply cushions to those places where there are points in his body.
When there is pain in the joints from an excess of humors.
And if the pain spreads to your legs, you should use gout remedies.
And if necessary, you apply the cautery to the body part affected by the pointed pain. These herbs or some of them should be steeped in water, and then put on the feet.
Then place a cannula in the mouth of the mother.
Then place your hand there so quickly that the patient's hands are kept warm.
And if you find yourself unable to use this remedy, because the humor in the patient's foot is too thick for a poultice to be applied, then use a hot iron instead. Before applying cautery to the affected area, the patient should be treated by the surgeon.
And if it is customary to call it by the name of gout, it is necessary to apply a poultice to the foot.
And if it's in the legs, use a cushion to soothe them.
And when the pain occurs in the legs, you should administer medications to treat it.
May you, in your wisdom, use dry cupping and cauterization for medicinal purposes.
And if it is necessary to place a bandage on the patient’s feet, do so carefully.
A cushion under their thighs would be placed on the legs if they are seeing other than the pain in the feet.
Then, when heated on the fire, place it (the cauterized area) in the patient's chest.
And another one should be cauterized on their thighs.
Take care of the uninjured child.
When the body is affected by cold humors, it is said to be afflicted by gout. When the midwife applies the hot iron to the body, she must be careful not to touch the patient's bone.
This patient has been treated with cauterization using a cushion soaked in wine and oil; then they should be anointed with other cushions.
The other hand should be placed on the child's feet while the other is used to hold the child's legs in place.
When the disease of the plague affects the body, its location in the bowels requires special treatment.
When there are swollen veins in the legs, it is customary to apply heat to the affected area.
The which are called fistulas, are located in the legs or on the body near the thigh.
And there's a cushion for the patient's feet.
If that ailment afflicts you again, place cushions under their arms.
And if it is necessary to burn away evil humors from between the legs, then you know what to do.
And if it is necessary to apply cautery to the affected part, the pain will be relieved.
If you have a problem with a fistula, use a gentle touch to apply the hot iron directly to the affected area.
When you are in pain from such, on your legs or feet.
If there is no pain in your foot, then place your hand on it to prevent the need for a cushion.
And then the patient must be given a hot iron to cauterize the fistula so that the urine may no longer enter the bladder.
Perhaps this one refers to the pain being caused by something penetrating the joint capsule and that something is an injury to the tendon?
And in all those fistulas that go deep into the body, the other doctors are already cured.
And if you are going to cauterize the intestine, put something under their legs, and place a cushion on their feet.
And if you want to cure an ailment in your legs, place cushions under their knees and feet during treatment.
Then at that time, place your hand on the patient's body to feel for the ailment.
When pain in the joints is felt in the toes, you should know that it is gout.
Then apply pressure to the patient's legs when they are healthy.
And if it is necessary to cauterize a fistula, it is customary to apply several cushions on the patient's legs and thighs.
And if the body is treated with medicine, it may be cured; but if the pain arises in the bones, then it's called gout already.
And if the patient's body has been infiltrated by the symptoms of gout, then treat them for gout.
And the surgeon places a cushion on the affected area and another under the patient's feet, and also above their head.
May leas is a cushion, and you should apply a bandage to their legs.
And so you must treat the plague in the leg with a cauterizing tool, to burn the flesh and prevent the infection from spreading.
And apply cauterization to the affected area; when the intestine is healed it's no longer necessary to cauterize.
When the disease spreads to the body, they are called the fistula and inquirees were in the rectum.
If the pain is in the feet or hands, then the patient should be treated by doctors for a type of ailment that is caused by an imbalance of humors.
Then apply to the patient’s body as many cold poultices as are necessary to bring the healing properties to the open fistula. Then apply heat to the affected area using a needle-like instrument, to close the opening at the location of the wound and prevent further bleeding.
And if the pain is in the joints, it is treated by a surgeon who will use pointed instruments to make incisions or punctures in the affected area.
And if you are using a pointed cautery, then place a cushion on their legs to prevent the pain from spreading.
Then apply a poultice for the purpose of healing the ailment.
And if there are fistulas, they should be treated with a cushion on which the patient's hands rest.
This is the process of cauterizing a fistula when it is a sharp pain.
When treating the joints, the patient's body should be kept warm.
And when the bowel is inflamed or swollen, it should be treated with the same care as given to the legs and feet. And in the legs, both small and large, it should be applied to the legs, and the hands should be placed on the body to prevent it from being cold.
And they should be treated with remedies that reduce their heat and humidity.
Then apply a poultice to the affected area. Then you put the patient's feet up on their bed with an instrument to hold the cushion in place, while another person attends to them.
Then you should apply a bandage to prevent further swelling. And another will cure those ailments within them.
Then you will have placed the cushion on the patient's thighs.
If you translate "the pain" as the cause of the hemorrhoids being outside, then they are healed by cauterization.
And he that has a wound, take strong thread and apply it to the part where the needle enters.
Then let the fluids flow from the body through the veins.
And put them in a warm bath to remove the excess of humors from their legs. And if the patient has been cauterized, and they are cured.
And if you are treating a wound on the leg or foot, apply a cushion to the area under those limbs.
Then apply a cautery to the affected area and treat it until the illness heals.
Here comes a rough translation of the first two lines: "Know that gout can be caused by an excess of humors in the body."
And then apply a cautery to the area on which it has been applied.
This one is difficult to guess without more context about the meaning of "le mas" in this specific text.
Then hold a cushion over the body's feet, for they are often affected by the small bumps that are characteristic of the disease.
And if you want to treat them, it’s necessary to use a cushion for that purpose or the one made by the other methods. Then use fire or medicine according to their need.
If a patient has pain in their body, they are said to have pain of the skin.
And if you want to cure the patient's legs, it is good to use a needle or cauterization to open the space in the body where the leg bones meet the cushion of the body or the body itself.
And if you wish, apply the following to the patient's arm:
Then use the following method to treat them.
And if you want to cauterize the patient's foot, use a cautery on its surface and another cautery for the rest of the body.
And place a needle under the patient's thigh to remove the pain from their legs, for the good of the patient.
This passage appears to be describing a medical procedure for treating a condition that affects the bones, muscles, or joints.
When translated from the medieval Italian language this phrase is closest to, this means "the way to apply cautery," or "to cauterize the body."
The cauterization tip should be applied to the area of pain, but gently.
Then apply the cushion to the area of the wound.
And if it is necessary to apply a hot compress to the animal's bladder for a hand span.
And if they are able to be opened up for them; and if the joint pain is caused by a boil, then that is the way it should be treated.
Then place your hand on the patient's chest, and hold it there for a while.
And if necessary to apply a cushion under their legs, they will be treated with another type of cautery.
And if a cushion fails to stop the pain, they will be in need of another medicine for that.
But if you are able to cauterize that which has been affected by inflammation, then apply the cautery to their legs, and they will be healed.
If you are suffering from pain in your foot, then apply a cushion to its cavity, as well as to the other areas that need it.
And then treat them with cushions.
You will have to judge for yourself if this is correct:
When there are cushions on their legs, they should be placed above the other.
And if they are not cold sores, then you must know these as signs that something else is wrong.
Then apply heat to the affected area, like that which the doctors do for those who have a burn in their body or on the feet, if they are present there, with a heated cautery.
And if it is necessary to apply cauterization, place it elsewhere on the body to avoid the area around the existing condition.
And you will see that the plague has caused a great deal of pain to his/her legs.
And if the pain is in the legs, it is a simple disease, and if the bloodletting is necessary for the patient, they are to be kept in mind, but only if there is no other reason to avoid it.
And if you must use a hot poker to treat the affected area, make sure to hold the cushion in place.
When the patient has a problem with a small amount of food, they are already close to being cured.
And on the legs, apply a cushion to their surface; if an apostema is present, treat it accordingly.
This may be a surgeon's tool for treating a recent abscess, as the word "plagua" can refer to a plague or a wound dressing.
And if it has been open for a while, he will apply cautery to the affected area.
If the plague is severe or if it is necessary to make cuts on the legs, it is best to cauterize their lips, and place your hand upon the thigh of the patient for another plague, and apply another cauterization.
And so, the patient is treated with a plague of the body by another: a cushion and another by a poultice on the affected area, and yet another by the foot.
And if you apply cautery to the decaying part of the body.
If you find that the patient has swelling or pain in the leg or foot, it may be necessary to use a cushion on their feet if the pain is caused by a nerve affliction and not a blood clot.
And if these problems are simple and small, cauterize the area where you apply the poultice.
Then apply the powder to the affected area, using a scale to measure one part of each ingredient.
And if you have opened the patient's body with a cauterization, then leave the wound alone.
Then have the doctor apply a poultice to the affected area.
And thus they are called gout by doctors.
And if these are the affected parts, treat them with a cautery to cauterize the grain in those parts, which will heal them.
And if you have already diagnosed a patient with a broken bone, then treat them with a hot cautery.
And if it is necessary to apply cautery to the head, place a cushion on their legs.
When your hand touches the intestine, it is called gout.
The text means: If the pain continues to worsen, then the illness is likely due to an imbalance in humors.
If a patient has gout, these treatments should be used to treat the condition. Do not have any pain from the brain, because the substance of the brain is the brain itself, which is why you must cauterize it, lest it be consumed by its own heat.
And if it is caused by light medicines, they are to be treated with water that is pure or sweet.
The doctor should treat the patient's body for the plague.
Mays if the intestine or hernia was already out from their chest, the treatment would be cauterization.
And if the patient's veins are being cut by the plague, it is necessary to apply a cushion to their legs, and someone should be there to hold them in place.
The intestine will heal itself in its natural course if left undisturbed.
Mays if gout has caused pain in the bones, you must use a cautery to cauterize it.
And if it is a recent illness, dust it with powder that has been recommended to you. And if the patient's legs are affected by the plague, it is customary to treat them with a hot water bath.
If there are pains in the legs or feet that are due to the imbalance of humors, it is possible they will be fatal; but if the body is afflicted with the disease, the patient must be given a potion to restore balance.
And if there is no depth in the intestine, apply a poultice to their legs, for the recent gout will be relieved by this.
And you apply your hand to it, in order to prevent the plague from affecting them.
When there are three days or more that have passed since the plague has subsided, and the other symptoms are gone, then the body is considered healed.
If treatment of the ailment is delayed, then the patient should be treated with a cautery on their feet.
Then apply a bandage to stop the bleeding if needed.
When the foot is injured, or when there are other complications, the patient's pain should be addressed by a doctor. Mays might be a warning to separate from the infected if you are not already separated.
And for other ailments, which are treated by cauterization.
And on the belly.
When there is pain in the stomach, it is called colic or bellyache.
and that is why the treatment of the intestine is difficult.
E quindi you will have to treat each part of their body separately.
And then you should know that the other four types are more common than the use of sutures on the feet.
And there are two other types of sutures, but they are not used for anything else.
And you are now ready for your next question.
And then he comes to say that the plague can be caused by inflammation in the legs.
And if the pain is in their head, place a cushion on your head, for that is how it's known as ays.
Sometimes the body needs to be purged, so apply a cushion to their legs and another on the affected area.
And so when the patient's swelling subsides, apply a cushion to the legs and place another on their thighs.
Then apply a cautery to the hemorrhoids, which are located in the leg, to make them smaller.
And so the physician has treated the patient's condition.
And if they are using instruments on their body, they will use cushions to protect the patient's limbs from injury.
Then, one who already has an acute case of gout should be treated by a doctor.
And then, when the plague is increased, it is customary to do as follows, so that it may be treated properly.
When it's a serious case, you should make a point to put them on their back, legs higher than the body.
And if there is imbalance in your bowels, then you have to apply medicine to the part of the body where the problem is located.
This line translates to: And so if you have to use cautery on the patient's feet for a while.
When there are small pains in your body, put a cushion under them on your legs and use a cauterizing tool to treat the pain.
E questa que es la disrupcio de la piel, e per la qual es called "la manieyra" in Spanish: "The pain is a common ailment among those who are ill."
Then apply another cushion to the area, placing two cushions together on the patient's thighs, one above the other.
The agues (rheumatic fevers) are characterized by pain in the joints, but it can be differentiated from pain in the bowels or due to a hernia.
And if it is necessary to make another hole in the body, then do so carefully, so that the needle doesn't cause harm when it is inserted.
And then they place a cushion on their legs, and other remedies are used.
And if you have already pierced the patient's feet with needles, it will be best to apply a cushion on their legs so they don't experience pain.
These types of stitches are best for small wounds.
This means if the patient has a cushion on their legs, they should be treated with a hot cautery.
Then, if necessary, use a needle to open the intestine and a cauterizing tool to treat the plague by cauterization.
Then apply a poultice to the patient’s body.
Then this wound will heal more quickly.
And if it is already in the body, e.g. the legs, it is a serious case for the doctors.
The plague was cured in about fifteen days.
And so they judged that the patient's pain in the foot was incurable, except by the miracle of a cure by the physician.
And according to the account of Paraula, there are two types of cushionings in the treatment of gout.
And you must apply stitches to the wound, so that the surgeon does not injure the skin further.
And if the needle enters through the long intestine, it penetrates the body and it is customary to call it a 'cleft' or 'tear'.
And now I will tell you about the other type of pain that affects the whole body.
And if you have opened the joint, it is necessary to apply a pointed cautery to the affected limb.
And if it is necessary to perform surgery on the affected area, then apply a hot cautery to the other parts of the body and close the incision with it after the operation.
And so you see, the patient has a fever in their body and they are using cushions for comfort.
And the sum of this method is that you sew the skin together, which I have already described as it were done, so that you must stitch one part of the foot, and then place your hand on the wound to stop the bleeding.
And so the second type of surgery is to be performed by the doctor if necessary.
When you have to apply a needle to the body, it should be inserted into the affected area.
Then apply the hot cautery to their legs, and let the patient's body be treated in other ways.
This method of stitching is better than common, lighter stitching.
"Gout" is what you would call it when a patient's body is in its usual state, or when the condition is related to the feet.
When there are many physicians who have been called to treat gout.
You only need to make a cushion on the legs, for it is more difficult to apply a cushion to the feet than to other parts of the body.
And this treatment for the plague is how other plagues are treated.
The air will affect the disease in the patient's legs, if you do not stop it.
And if the patient's feet are already affected by the cold humors, you should treat them accordingly.
The sentence refers to a situation where the use of medicines is necessary.
Then use a hot poultice to treat the patient's joints if they are affected by pain.
And if pain exists in the patient's feet, the doctor will know it is a symptom of gout.
And (it is) the large intestine that requires lighter treatment than the small intestine.
Then apply the remedy to the intestine, and treat it with other remedies.
If you are suffering from plague, it is customary to call it Mays.
And if a person has a gut ailment, apply a cautery and keep it covered.
And if you have pierced the skin at the affected area, apply cauterization to relieve the pain.
Then apply a hot poultice to the patient's legs, and they will be healed.
And if there is a rupture in the intestine, then it becomes possible to treat it by placing cushions under them, and on their legs and arms.
Then apply a poultice to their legs to draw out the toxins.
And if you have already opened up the place between the patient's legs, apply a cushion to their leg pain, and another on their chest to treat their pain.
The patient's cushion was placed under their legs and held open by the hands of two servants while the doctor examined it.
And so the patient's body will be healed by the cushion placed on its own legs and the other one, they are a skilled healer.
Then apply heat to draw out the toxins in the body.
And if it is necessary to cauterize the intestines, it should be done only by a skilled practitioner.
Then apply cauterization to prevent the patient from experiencing further complications.
When the plague is large and widespread, it's not about healing, but if it is in one place, it will not be the plague of all the body, but elsewhere it may be a serious illness.
To heal a wound or injury in the body.
If a disease or injury affects the body, it can cause pain in the joints, especially in the feet.
And if it is a true fistula, it will be necessary to cauterize it.
And in some men it heals quickly with warmth, as if their hands were on fire. And some humors are thick, and others thin, some found in the legs, and some in the feet, which is why they call it "gout" when gout affects the foot.
When the pain is in the toes, apply a cushion to the foot.
Here's a possible translation: And if it is necessary for the treatment of fistulas, which are also known as anal fistulas, I will tell you about the healing process.
And if you want to make a cautery on the fistula or a burn on their joints, put a cushion under the body or the parts where the heat will be applied.
And so, the treatment of these fistulas is of difficult healing, and requires expertise and knowledge.
If you see that a patient has a wound in a place where the body's fluids are concentrated, then you should treat them with a hot cautery, but only if a physician deems it necessary.
Mays es el cor of the body.
If your goal is to treat a fistula caused by a buildup of humors, it is possible that you have a terrible infection.
Then use other means to treat it.
The text refers to the process of applying a cautery to the affected area and using a cushion to support the legs while treating the patient's illness.
And thus, you will know if it is a true fistulae or an artificial one.
Then return the patient to their bed.
If the fistula is deep-seated, it should be treated by cutting into the skin surrounding the fistula to drain it, allowing you to apply a small amount of pressure to the wound with a cushion, and then using medicines to treat the infection.
Then apply a bandage to protect the patient from infection.
Aprop apply the cushion to the area between the thighs, on their legs.
Mays the pain be treated by doctors with appropriate remedies.
Then examine the patient's legs to see if they are affected by the cause of the fistula, as we have previously discussed, so that you do not allow the vein to be opened further or for the patient to experience pain.
When the patient's body has been infiltrated by humors, treat them with a cautery.
Then if it is not healthy, you will know, because you have not yet healed the patient's body from the disease.
And therefore if it is a disease, it is a long-lasting illness; and if not, it is gout that affects the body in general.
And if the bone is diseased or rotten, then you use these fine instruments for its removal.
And if you must cauterize, let it be done carefully on their legs, or rather where the pain is located in the feet.
Then apply a cautery to the ligaments and flesh to relieve the pain.
Then place your hand on the patient's flesh to prevent them from being in pain.
If you want to treat a patient's gout, apply heat to the affected area.
But if it is necessary to treat the intestine or legs with a hot cautery, it is plague that must be treated.
When joints are affected by a disease that causes pain, then apply a hot iron to the affected area.
Then you will have to apply a cautery to the patient's body.
Then make another incision in the area of the cushion to allow for drainage.
When the weather is cold, it is customary for doctors to call it gout, but if the patient has a fever, the physician should know that there is a fever in the body.
And then the doctor's cure will be applied to the intestine or whatever part of the body needs it, and another on the feet for the pain they are in.
And he who uses cauterization on a limb or body part through those openings of his would be called a skilled healer.
Then I will use the hot irons on the skin near the affected area.
Then bring your hand up to the top of the bone  to prevent the spread from reaching the joints and feet.
And then they will have uncovered a part of the bone in which the poison was there.
And then apply the cushion to the legs and hold them in place, which is what the bones need to be healed.
Then I apply the cautery to the legs, using it as a cushion for the patient during surgery.
Then apply the treatment for long periods to restore health to the patient's legs.
And if the patient's leg must be exposed, and you have already opened the area for the first time, place a cushion over their legs, so they may be protected from the second opening of the leg.
And if the patient has been diagnosed with the disease, they are already sick.
And then apply a small cautery to the affected area and call for the patient's treatment.
And it is not necessary to repeat the treatment for gout, except in cases where there are complications or fear of death due to the pain.
Then, if you have good reason to treat them for their whole body health, and a cushion is placed on their legs, and the humors are being drawn out from their limbs, they must be treated with cauterization.
And if it is necessary to make their pain worse, then you must use a poultice made from that which causes more blood flow to the affected area.
And apply bandages to the joints, or as needed, to the affected areas.
Then, slowly but surely, the pain spreads through the body.
If a wound is in the proper place, you must treat it with a cautery.
And if there is a cavity in the foot, as was previously mentioned.
Continue to incise that area of the body if necessary, but do not incise where the patient's hands are not already opened up.
When there are other pains in the body, it’s because they're infiltrated by cold humors, but only those who have reason to know can say for sure.
Then bring forth the cushion that corresponds to the patient's condition.
Sapiens know that the bones are to be treated differently depending on the type of pain.
Then you will know that there are other diseases like the one in the body of which he speaks.
And you will see which tools are for cutting and which ones are for cauterizing the patient's body. And if it is necessary to perform surgery on the patient's legs, it is called "form of serra" by analogy to other types of surgery.
Aprop useys a different form of treatment, such as applying another cautery to the legs or using a poultice.
A form of large saw.
When you make points on the legs or feet, they are for the pain in the area that is usually called gout. Another serve the patient's legs should be held in place.
It is not fitting to use a cauterizer unless it is for burning the skin on the legs.
A form of treatment for a swollen or inflamed foot.
Shape of the razor.
The form or shape of the patient's legs is a clue that the surgeon should use a lancet to open them. When you have pain in their legs or feet, place your hand on them, and apply a hot cautery.
And if it is necessary to make a mark on the body by using a blade heated over fire.
This sentence is in French:
This describes the appearance of gouty feet, which are common in gout.
This sentence appears to be describing a medical procedure involving a small cautery tool used in treating something related to an intestine or hernia.
And so we have another form of the scissura (a cut or wound):
And if the patient's body is too thin or weak to withstand the use of a hard cautery, then use a cauterizing tool on their feet instead of using a cushion.
Then, when there's a need to cauterize an area of the body, a cushion should be used for the patient's comfort and to prevent the spread of inflammation.
The first servant's position is at the foot, and he or she is in a triangular shape to support the patient.
And if they are made of iron from India, then similarly to the other things that have been said, it should be used for making incisions on the legs.
When joint pain is caused by an excess of cold humors in the joints, it is called gout.
Then return the patient's body to its natural state by applying medicine to the affected area.
When pain arises in the limbs, they are called by doctors the "blackening" of the flesh.
And similarly if the disease is caused by stings of a scorpion or other venomous creatures, they are treated in the same way.
And if the incision is in the finger, you apply a cushion to it, and then you cauterize the area where there is pain caused by humors.
And similarly if you cauterize the leg, apply your hand to the pain, which would be done with a cushion over the area of the wound and then another on their chest, preventing the intestines from being corrupted by the fire.
Then you will cauterize their arm and apply a bandage to the area.
And if one applies another remedy to the patient's body for pain in the joints, it is customary to apply heat to that area.
And similarly, cauterize the legs when they are swollen.
And place a cautery on the legs to reduce their pain. But if it is necessary to make a cut on the legs, then they should be placed on the patient.
Then apply heat to the legs and release it from the body, and if it is necessary, then the patient will die.
Then if you wish to sear the flesh, apply the cushion or other means of separating the skin and muscle.
And if it is necessary to place a cushion on the patient's leg, then apply heat.
Mays you should be careful when using a hot cautery for medicinal purposes on the legs, as it may cause burns.
Then place your hand on the afflicted area to apply heat as needed.
This refers to a situation where a man's legs are treated with hot cautery.
And then the cushion under their intestine is placed within the body.
Then apply a hot cautery to the place where the pain is located.
Lon dolor in the legs or feet are caused by the intestine being inflamed.
A cushion was placed on the legs of the patient to relieve their pain.
And then the patient's foot was opened, and you are warned that if the physician opens the veins for bleeding on the foot, he should be careful about the repercussions of that action.
And if he has suffered from the disease, then apply a cushion to his body.
This is a story about gout, and how to treat it.
On their use of the hot cautery for treating various ailments.
The physician places a hand on the vessel to prevent it from being harmed by the hot cautery.
Perhaps the word “mays” refers to the bloodletting procedure, as they are mentioned together in the same context later.
Translation 1: And if it is necessary to cauterize the foot, apply a cushion to the legs so that it does not feel pain from the other.
Then you apply a treatment to that area using a cauteri (cauterizing tool).
Then consider the location of the joint pain, which is in the feet, as well as whether the patient's condition requires that they be treated with a cauterization.
And then you will apply it to their feet; e.g., by applying a hot cautery.
And then apply a cold compress to the affected area.
Then return the water to their cavity, and apply the water with a cushion or other means.
If the patient has no tolerance for the Egyptian medication, he should be treated with water and honey.
And if the illness persists, apply a clyster to them.
And then apply a poultice to the feet using ingredients from other than those found in the cushion; if the patient has a condition that needs poulticing, the patient is instructed to apply the bandage with an even tension and to use a different type of poultice for each affected area.
And if you need to open up the area around the cushion so that it is straight in the cavity, place the canula in the rectum, e.g., on the foot, with a cushion placed upon the legs.
And if it seems similar to the one in the bowels, it must be treated as the one in the bowels.
And then another method is to elevate the affected part if the pain is from inflammation in the joints.
Then prepare the arm with which the patient has a condition that requires cauterization to make sure there is no cause for concern in the form of a burning sensation.
Mays that which is on the top of the body to be healed, and another person to help with the healing. And so that you know if it is necessary to apply heat to the body, or little to the arm, or the leg, to help them.
Then if you feel pain in that joint, apply cautery there.
Then apply the medicine in this manner for three days, but if the disease appears to be in the hands or feet, treat it according to that method.
And then you have subdued it.
If the patient's body is affected by the sinews being too tight, then apply heat to loosen them up.
And if you have caused the pain to be in the knee by applying a pointed cushion, then apply your hand to that area.
Then apply the cushion to the area where the pain is located.
And sometimes you administer them by using the astrology of the ancients (and the knowledge of those things)
Then if you are treating a patient's leg, apply the cauterization to the affected area.
And they come to treat them for the pain in their legs and hold the intestine or hernia, which should be held up and another on their feet.
Then treat their legs with a cauterizing iron and apply a poultice to the patient's body.
Then apply your hand to close the wound and prevent infection.
If the bone is cold and the nail is healthy, then they will apply a poultice to that part, and place their hands on the patient's body.
And if there's corruption in the bones, it is known as the gouty condition.
Apply heat to the affected area if you can find a specialist in the treatment of wounds to help heal the pain in the foot.
When a surgeon applies pressure to an ingrown toenail, it causes intense pain if there is already a cushion on the nail, but it is better for him to apply a hot cautery to the affected area in order to prevent the nail from being exposed and further irritating the surrounding skin.
And if they are able to stand, they will be able to see the cushion.
A pointed instrument should be used to cauterize the pain in the legs, and a cushion placed under the patient's legs. And if you are a doctor, it's important to know that "nozes" refers to the ankles and feet.
And among those who are born with fleshy bodies, it's that those are the ones who are called "fat".
From that which is hard to treat, the patient will suffer.
Mays are the result of an imbalance in the humors, and they must be treated by proper application of the other methods.
So if you have to apply a cushion to the affected area to reduce swelling.
And if a patient needs to be opened between the thighs and the feet are wrapped in a fine oil.
And similarly if you have a cushion on your foot, apply heat to the affected part.
From these words, from this illness.
Vices are often associated with illness, especially when they cause swelling in the legs and feet.
Then you must use it to purge black blood, for example, from the legs.
And the other way to treat a patient for the blackening of the veins is by means of two methods: one involves treating them with a hot iron and the other involves drawing out the blood from them, using these two methods.
Then apply hot water to the patient's wounds, which should be applied to the affected area.
And then they are lying there, and they should avoid other things that cause the disease.
And then cauterize the veins when they are affected.
If you are experiencing pain in the intestine or leg of the patient, place your hand on the affected area.
Then you must apply a cautery to the vein in its right place.
Then apply to the intestines a cushion to prevent the veins from swelling up and causing pain.
And when it comes to pain in the legs, they are caused by the humors being out of balance.
And you have now opened the way to the next section, which is the use of a cautery.
And now you will see what other uses for a cushion are found in medicine besides supporting the body.
And if it is necessary to raise the intestine, then do so, for it is upon their second layer.
And then apply a cautery to the upper part of the leg, where it has become too swollen.
If you have already opened the vein or artery to remove the bad humors, hold it open and tie it off. Apply a hot poultice to the affected area; if there's a burn, treat it with care.
And when the pain is from the top to the bottom of the body, the doctor should then cauterize the wound.
And if the pain is in the chest, it is called angina pectoris, which is similar to what doctors call gout.
Hold your hand there if you don't want to be known as one who harms the patient.
Causing pain in the foot, which is the condition usually called a burning sensation in the legs.
When the pain is severe, apply a cushion to prevent the patient from feeling it so sharply; and if the pain is sudden and sharp, use a poultice with other tools for applying a cushion.
On the leg, especially on the thigh.
This disease arises in the legs in hot regions, as they call it, in the hot countries, the bloodletting is done by the physician on the foot, which is where the pain occurs, and the meaning of this word is that the patient’s humors are being drawn from a vein.
And if there is pain in other parts of the body, and another servant is required to be burned.
And if it is necessary to apply heat to the body, use a hot iron or a cushion on their legs, and place another on the patient's legs.
E senhal de la l'adveniment de la inflamacio en el peu; et altrament the whole body suffers from pain.
And then when you have exposed the patient's legs to the air, you must use the other two for treatment.
And if there are other pains in the limbs, hold the patient's hands to prevent them from coming out. And if the disease is in the body for a long time, and the pain comes from the cold humors, then you should apply the poultice to their legs and feet.
For the cure to be effective, the physician must apply gentle treatment to the patient's condition, which requires a delicate touch.
And from this vein, they have already extracted 20 palms.
And if it is necessary to make incisions on the body in those days, it is done by the medicines used for the ailment.
And this vein is opened by the physicians, and the pain felt there.
And if you are already treating it in the manner previously described, I urge you to treat it as a complete illness by applying the appropriate remedies.
And when cutting with a knife on the body, one must be careful to avoid injury from worms.
In some places they call a pain in the legs "gout" because it causes a pain in the feet.
And if there are other sources for its meaning, put a cushion on serpent-like snakes in the stomach.
When the heat spreads throughout the body, they may experience fever in the body and need to apply cauterization to the affected area.
And if you wish to cure such diseases as these are caused by the extraction of the body's humors.
And if there is pain in the body and you are concerned that it is due to the humors, then you may use a cautery.
Then return to the patient's body, and place another hand on their legs.
On their back they place the cushion.
This disease is called gout in our land; it is characterized by pain that affects the limbs.
And when I see you again, the proper translation will be: "And you will have seen that." And I saw a small swelling in her vein, and I opened it.
Then the pain settled in that place, but they must be careful to avoid causing pain in their legs.
And then apply a poultice to the patient's body with one for the other arm.
And then to apply heat to the affected area and keep it warm, because I have seen that the hot cautery helps in some cases. When gout has already been diagnosed by doctors, they are usually treated with a cushion. I have seen the patient's pain in the feet.
And if it's a woman, she should be treated with hot water.
And if it is necessary to apply cauterization to the area, it should be done carefully so that the veins are not burned.
The original Latin phrase "per tu" means "for you".
Then if you don't apply a poultice to the affected area, it is treated with other herbs.
On treating gout.
Arrows are used to treat various ailments in the feet, and others have said that it is gout.
And if the head or its members are infiltrated by bad humors, which cause pain in the bones, they will be affected by the body's humors being out of balance, and experience anger and rage, possibly with nausea and a feeling of pressure behind the eyes, which can be similar to those who have been afflicted by the cold humors.
And so if you see these signs, then abstain from making points on their legs, unless it is necessary; for it is important to avoid unnecessary pain.
If you are close to death, then you should be careful when using a cautery.
And when the cushion is placed under their chest, they should be treated with caution.
Then if the pain arises from the small toe, it is said to be caused by the hot, dry humors, which are often called gout in the middle ages.
When your body is in pain, you need to be treated with cauterization if necessary.
There is hope for a cure only if the arrow is in the abdomen or stuck in the leg, but there is no cure for the pain that comes from being pierced by an arrow.
If there are other causes for the pain in the patient's bladder, they are deadly serious.
May this also be a wound in the neck, the chest, or the arm.
And I will tell you that they are caused by humors that already have their own meaning for the patient's pain.
This phrase refers to applying cautery to the tear duct of a man suffering from a swollen member.
When a cushion is placed on the legs, it is customary to call it a Turkish cautery, because the Turks were known for their use of fire in medicine.
When there's pain in the legs, then they call it gout.
And if you have placed a cushion on their legs; then place your hand over the knee to prevent the wound from spreading.
And if you are a man, and you have already put a cushion under them (the legs), apply cautery to the wound in your body, and keep the other things (likely tools) away from their (the legs) area.
And if it's necessary to apply heat to a person's foot, it's because they need their blood to be drawn from it.
The woman's bowels were affected by illness.
And if the patient's hand is burned by a hot cautery, it will be like gout in the face of a man.
And you have placed a cushion under the right leg and already kept the other parts in place for healing.
And you have to leave the patient for three days after the operation.
Then I found that the arrow had struck its mark; I placed my hand on the wound to stop the bleeding, and the patient was treated as needed.
And apply the bandage to the affected area, but only after it has been treated with cautery.
And if the arrow has pierced too deep into the body, you'll need to apply heat to it for many days.
Then apply another cushion to their chest, as if treating a burn.
And so that the patient can be treated with a hot cautery to stop it spreading.
This is a very difficult task because it is unclear what language the source text is in.
Some doctors believe that if they are not treated properly, the bones of the nose will be affected by the cold humors.
And if it is necessary to make a cut on the leg, or draw blood from the foot, the doctor's advice and understanding about these procedures are unclear in this text.
And if the pain extends to the foot itself, he/she will be considered to have gout by those who are knowledgeable.
Therefore, I say that arrows are not drawn from the body in those places where they have been lodged by the physician.
And if it is necessary to use the term "gout" for the pain in his legs, and if one wants to be precise, he should say "the foot-gout," and apply a cautery on the affected area.
And if the body doesn't respond to the treatment by the physician for the days-long pain in the legs or feet, it is customary for a physician to treat them.
And if it is necessary to cauterize the skin or apply a hot compress to the affected area, they should use a cautery tool.
And if you don't place a cushion on the space between their legs, apply it to the area where the pain is located.
When the arrow is hidden in the body, you can only feel its effects on the surrounding areas.
When there is a cushion under their feet, place another on their legs, and another on their chest.
And if it is necessary to have a cushion placed under the patient's legs while they are being treated by doctors, apply one to their chest, but only after the patient has already been given cushions for their legs and so forth.
And when you are extracting an arrow from a wound, you must be careful not to break the shaft.
When the pain in the foot is bad, apply a cushion to the affected area. And now you will make the patient feel pain in their bowels, feet, or head.
Then do as you are able to remove the need for further bloodletting.
And so the patient's condition will be treated by the physician with a tool for applying cautery to the area of the wound. And if the pain is in the legs, and you can't reach it, it is called gout by those who are familiar with it, they use a cushion to support the patient's leg and hold them still.
Gouty pain is caused by an excess of humors.
Mays if the pain is in the joints, it is called a pain of leys, e.g., when the pain is in the joints, you should know that it's due to the opposite of its natural position.
And then apply a cushion to them for a few days, and if it persists, their use is to be considered in terms of what they are used for (Translation: "And if you have been using it for a few days, continue with the treatment and apply a cushion").
Then you will apply your hand to the joint if there is a need for that and place a hot compress on the affected area.
Mays if you were to apply a cautery to the surface of the patient's legs or body, it is customary to call it gout.
And if the arrow is aimed at the leg, put your hand on the other leg to soothe it.
If you are experiencing a pain in your feet, it is important to seek medical attention immediately if possible.
And if it is necessary to apply cautery to their foot, then they should use a hot iron on the affected area, so that the pain may be relieved.
Shape of forceps are used by which they are called:
Let the patient be treated with hot cautery to stop the pain in their body from being caused by anything else.
Then treat the patient's ailment with these remedies, depending on its severity: hot poultices for cold ailments, and others as needed by the severity of their ailment.
So too will you apply a poultice to the affected area to treat it.
And for the treatment of the veins, they should be treated with a cautery.
And you treat pain caused by your hand being held on the veins in their thighs. And if it is necessary to cauterize the patient's veins in the foot or the affected area, then use a cushion for the other part of the body, and place your hand on the vein that is being cauterized.
And if there are three veins in the legs, and another on the leg, which are the ones that cause pain; one for the third vein, and so on.
And then you apply cauterization to the patient's legs.
And if they have an excess of humors, apply a bandage to their head to prevent the spread of the disease.
Then take a knife to apply it on the joint. And if it is necessary to raise the intestine or a vein, then apply your hand to their intestines. And if it is the quantity of two fingers' breadths around the patient, it is called a gouty place.
And if it is necessary, place a hot cautery on their legs to bring them back into the body.
And if there has been a delay at the beginning of the book, it refers to other types of burns.
When there are too many things going on, use a cushion for the legs and another for the foot.
And the patient's condition should be understood as an indication that you are dealing with a case of gout, but I need more information to be sure.
And for that which is needed to be cut into the flesh above the mentioned vein, you are obliged to use a different technique.
And so you should apply a cautery to the affected area for a while and then apply another on the patient's foot and legs to relieve the pain with a cushion.
And so it begins, the remedy for the ailment, and the patient's legs are treated at the beginning of the book.
And if it is necessary to perform bleeding on the head, then a cushion should be used.
And the quality of that which is to be used on the body depends on whether you have a wound in the abdomen or feet.
And keep the joint pain from spreading to the body through other means.
And thus you have prepared the patient for the treatment of a particular ailment.
When there is pain in the legs, or a cushion is placed upon them, to relieve the pain, one should apply another to the face.
The quality of the bandage is to bind the bandage on the patient's body, and you must place the cushion on their chest.
Then apply the cupping on the thigh to relieve pain.
And if it is necessary to make them bleed, they will stop the bleeding.
And bleeding the veins of the head was considered a cure for many diseases by leeches, but they are more cautious about applying it to the other parts of the body, which is why they have a lower opinion of its use.
And the quality of the bloodletting is that the patient's body will feel better if their vein has been opened.
This sentence should be translated as:
And they call this condition of the brain to be affected by leprosy.
Then the nature of the illness is such that the patient suffers from an ailment in the legs, which must be treated with care.
And the bloodletting should be done gradually, starting with small incisions and increasing their size as needed.
Then apply a cautery to the patient's body to burn away the infection.
And if you have to make a decision about cutting open a vein, or in case of other ailments such as abscesses on the veins in the ankles and sores on the legs.
The way to treat the veins in that manner is when they are being used by the physician for something else.
If the pain is in the joints, it is called gout when the joint is painful.
And apply heat to the patient's veins, if necessary.
This text uses words that are similar to English but would be more familiar to a medieval scholar: Then apply a cautery on their legs, then place a cushion on their legs, and do not apply a cautery to the tongue.
And if the pain returns on their legs, another cautery should be used to draw them out.
Then, when you have removed the other two (from the patient's thighs)
And they used to call the gouty swelling that appears in the joints of the foot "fleubotomia" or "le cushion".
And if it's necessary to bleed a person, that's how you do it.
And in this case, you should apply a cauterization to the veins of the affected area.
Mays le (May I) place your hand on the affected area to treat the illness you have in the foot.
And then, if there are complications on the foot, you will know that the patient has gout, which is why they should be treated by a surgeon.
And if the appendix does not appear in the usual place under the skin, they are called upon to perform cautery on the other leg.
You should know that if you have already given your blood for bloodletting, you must use other methods to treat the patient.
Then, if the leg has a cushion placed under it to prevent the swelling from spreading, you have already done so.
And if you see blood in the phlebotomy of the child, apply a cushion to the vein.
And if you have a pain in the foot, it will last for several days.
When you place your hand under the patient's foot, cut it open.
And if it is necessary to cauterize, use that method on the foot; otherwise, don't apply it there.
And the pain in the joints of the patient is difficult, and another cushion on their feet, and the other one placed on the body to prevent it from being gouty.
In this case, the translation I provided in the prompt is incorrect.
If you are phlebotomized in the leg, it is said that the feeling is in the foot, which is why they call it gout.
And if it is necessary to cauterize the veins.
When the blood in the limbs becomes thick, they call it gout by the young men.
And if it is necessary to apply a poultice to the patient's limbs; one hand for each limb, and another for the other leg, and another on their foot.
Then apply a cushion to their legs and another to their feet, and bandage them.
Leeches are applied to the veins of the leg when it's cold weather or the first part of the spring and if necessary to use them in the treatment of the body.
Then apply the hot iron to the affected area, which is where the pain is located.
The use of phlebotomy by the doctors is used to treat the affected area.
When a woman is afflicted with another's illness, she is treated as if she were ill herself.
And if it is necessary to apply a cautery to the foot, it is important to use one that is specifically designed for the feet.
This text describes treating the swelling in the joints caused by excessive religious devotion or other causes.
Then, consider if the patient has been drinking or eating too much when using a cautery on the legs.
And if it is necessary to make a cut, you should know if a patient can be treated by bloodletting or by other means.
So let them perform the bloodletting on the patient's foot, while they hold their hands.
Let the intestines be guarded from harm on that day.
And if there are cushions in the room, you should place your hand on their legs to hold back the humors.
And so be it, he who performs cauterization must use the instrument called a cushion.
Then place a cushion under their arms to relieve pain.
And if there is a stricture in the leg, you must use cooling methods to reduce inflammation.
And if there is no use in applying heat to the feet, then apply it to their legs.
And if you have already performed bloodletting on the patient, they should be given oil to drink after.
Therefore, the doctor must be consulted for these reasons.
And if a doctor wishes to use a cautery for treatment, he will apply it to the affected area.
And if the patient experiences pain in their feet, it will be necessary to do more than just apply a poultice to the area.
Then apply bloodletting to the patient's legs.
If the opening of the wound is small, you should use a fine needle to open it more widely.
When a doctor cauterizes your legs, he's placing a cushion on their chest to protect them from burning the wound. And when it comes to the treatment of the ailment, they say it is more effective if you apply oil to them, and less so on other parts.
And so, use the cushion to treat wounds and injuries.
E ten, if you want to be healthy, use leeches instead.
And apply cautery to that vein (or other veins as needed) for gout.
E si roman in le loc for some days, it will be necessary to use a poultice of herbs.
The basilica will be treated by cupping and another type of treatment.
And so the cushion is placed under the body part where pain is felt.
And apply the poultice to the affected area to harden the flesh and solidify the blood so that it may heal.
And so that all know, if you apply heat to the affected area, it will be treated by cautery.
And if you wish to treat the patient's illness, place another cautery on their body.
And if it is necessary to do a bloodletting on their chest in one session.
And if it is necessary to apply cautery to a patient, make sure to perform it correctly.
And if it is necessary to draw blood from the patient for healing purposes, it is done by making incisions, not punctures.
This practice, involving the placement of a cushion under the patient's legs and supporting them during bleeding, is considered more favorable than using a cushion on the chest for such purposes.
Then use the leech to treat the infection in the area where the pain occurs.
Then apply cautery to the patient's legs, placing a cushion under them.
Then apply a cushion to their head, so that they may be able to drink water from a cup while they are being operated on.
And treat it as you would treat other causes that we have discussed in the chapter on its [the patient's] fainting.
If you wish to treat the patient's blood, you must perform bloodletting, which is a method used to treat the ailment, but with care.
Mays that the patient's arm be cauterized again for a second time.
Here comes the second, or rather the third.
Mays the physician cauterize the patient’s legs to prevent the blood from turning cold and causing them harm.
And so if you want to draw blood, apply pressure to the patient's arm where the vein has already been opened to avoid excessive bleeding.
When the patient's illness worsens, they will need to be treated by a doctor for their ailment.
The doctors have already treated the patient's body for the condition.
If there's a need for you to have a second gout attack.
And the patient's arm be opened up to let the humors flow back into the body, so that the humors do not become too strong in the area affected by the disease.
And if a vein is to be cauterized, you must place the patient's legs in hot water for a while, then apply the cautery.
And then apply a compress on the legs, and if necessary cauterize the affected area.
The bloodletting should be performed on the legs.
Then apply heat to the patient's legs and feet, and keep them warm.
When the days are hot, they say you should bathe in warm water, not cold water.
And if you want to treat this condition by burning, then use a cushion for the vein and apply another one on the legs.
Evisceration of the right side of the body is often associated with liver diseases.
And the purpose of bloodletting is to reduce the inflammation in the patient's body, because they are swollen by the excess of their humors.
And if you want to avoid having your hands be subject to the bloodletting done by those who use cautery for that purpose, beware of applying it on the flesh of the other hand.
Then apply cautery to that area, and apply pressure to the area to prevent the pain from being caused by other things.
And similarly apply heat to the necessary places on the legs.
And if the left hand is affected by these ailments, then you should use a cushion.
And for the other parts of the body, if they are needed, you should know that the other treatments are similar.
And so, if it is necessary to use cautery in surgery, only do so on the limbs.
So if it is necessary to bleed someone who has a cushion on their legs in the other way, it’s done by another doctor.
And so the doctor will cauterize the legs of the patient.
When you are considering using bloodletting for treatment, be cautious as it's not always appropriate to treat the foot with the same methods used on other parts of the body.
And if it is necessary, cauterize the affected area.
Then you must place the foot in hot water.
And if the phlebotomist errs in the first incision, then you must place another on their legs; for the first incision is made by him, so he must make another.
And if it is a similar condition, then apply a cushion to the area, and apply your hand to the affected area.
Then apply a bandage to their leg, and another to the vein or veinlet.
And so bloodletting by means of a cautery should be performed on the patient's legs to ensure the best chance of survival.
And the nature of the ailment you would call a cushion or pillow to hold the patient's leg in place, but the one who suffers from the ailment will be cared for with a hot iron.
Therefore, when you cauterize the affected area, it is better to use a pointed cautery.
And if their limbs are affected by the disease, or if they have been bitten by a viper.
And if the patient's pain is caused by cold humors, you can treat them as well.
And another (a skilled person) would apply cautery to their legs, to heal them.
This refers to the use of ointments and treatments for gout.
And for corns, you can use leeches or herbs.
There are two ways to apply cauterization: one with a burning needle, the other by making cuts and drawing out blood.
And if you need to let out blood from the leg of a patient, use a cautery.
And if you have already been burned on the skin, the doctor will call them that; and it's a good idea to use two or more spatulas for the treatment.
Then you should apply cauterization to the veins in the body.
If the patient needs to be treated with a poultice or cautery, we must ensure they are properly cared for and treated.
Therefore, when you apply it on the foot, and if it is gout, place a hot iron upon it for three or four hours.
And if it is necessary to cauterize the neck or head of the patient due to the pain in their neck.
This cold affects the patient's legs, so you should perform bloodletting from the cephalic vein.
And if he is in pain from a disease that affects his constitution, use a hot iron.
And if there is a need to cauterize the legs, the patient will already have them burned by the hot humors.
And if it is necessary to apply moxibustion, e.g., to their legs, he should use cushions on the limbs.
This must be done by making cauterizations on the affected area.
And if you are affected by a disease caused by humors, then apply heat to the area of the body where the pain occurs.
And if there are pains in the body due to the humors coming out; then do so on the legs, and apply the other for the bleeding from the head; the other on their eyes.
And if you command the use of the other lancets for the patient's own health, they should be used with caution.
And if it is necessary to cauterize, use another cushion for their mouth, and another on the arms and legs.
And if it is necessary to perform cautery on their legs, use it carefully, so as to avoid causing harm.
When the patient has three large veins (already opened) they are called basilica veins.
And command the cauterizer to the patient's foot, where they will place the cautery on their legs, and another cushion.
And if you are to apply cautery, ensure the patient's buttocks and thighs are covered, lest they feel pain.
When commanded, let it be applied with a subtle hand to the patient's body.
Guessed translation:
A deletteri effect on the body weakens all men.
And of the hot springs to the water in the intestines, one applies them to the body.
A cushion is placed on their chest, or in the case where they are cold, the patient's legs are kept warm by placing a cushion under them. Then return the patient's body to its original state, but be careful because the pain is caused by an excess of humors that are causing the intestine to protrude.
Then you burn with a cauter, little by little, and close the other one to their cavity.
When that man suffers from pain in his legs and feet, then he should be cauterized, so that they are no longer afflicted by such pain.
And command another servant to hold their hand over the area to be treated.
And if there is a need to use a cautery, then apply it twice to the affected area. When doctors treat gout, they often use a cushion to apply pressure to the affected area.
And if the blood is too thick, make three cuts on the feet so that the fourth one can be made.
And then finally, when you want to draw blood from them.
And if we want to draw out bloodletting in the thighs, let them be bled; then use the terms for bleeding and bloodletting as well as a reminder of the location of the patient's feet.
And here comes the depth of the pain in the leg, that which is only the pain of gout, as far as the knee
When a person has an ailment which causes swelling in their legs, use these remedies to help them.
And if it were to make a guess, then one would use a cushion for the head, another for the leg, and another for the arm.
If the pain is in the joints and is caused by humors, then this should be used as a cauterization treatment.
If it be the foot that is affected by the humoural imbalance, apply the moxa to the affected area.
And apply a poultice to their chest, for the person will be better if the cushions are applied to them by others.
You should treat the patient's legs and feet for gout if they have pain there.
And you must apply cauteri to them.
At the beginning, you should consider the pain in the body, and if necessary, apply a cushion to the affected area, but first, try to cure the underlying causes of the ailment or ailment on the legs.
Then apply heat to the body part, and another for the patient's health.
And for those whose bodies are already ravaged by gout, apply cushions to their legs.
And if the patient has been bled, it is necessary to apply other remedies.
E then return to apply the appropriate treatment for your ailment.
Mays the joints be cauterized and thus cleansed so that they may be healed.
And if it is necessary to translate from an old text, such as the one about the use of the pointed cautery for treating ailments.
And then apply pressure to the legs and feet to keep them from moving.
E semblantment fa means "And if it's necessary to" in English.
And these cupping treatments are administered with suction alone; sometimes, however, they are administered with heat.
Then apply heat to the affected areas.
The bloodletting was done with the intention of letting the hot water flow freely.
Forma de ventoza es un tipo de cauteri que se usa para tratar la mala salud del cuerpo.
Then place a cushion under their arms and another on their legs, so that they do not become ill.
And if it is in the thigh, you should know that he is being treated by another servant for a disease.
And if it is this type of ailment that affects the body, the physician should treat it accordingly.
And then you apply the leeches to the children's thighs and use them on other parts of the body.
The quality of a cushion placed under the patient's legs for the patient with a fire that burns in the lower parts of the body should be used to hold their foot so they don't move it too much.
Then place a cushion on their chest for the patient's comfort.
And if there are complications, a physician should be used for that treatment.
Then apply a leech to treat the patient's ailment.
This translates to: And this will cause the body to have more water to absorb.
Capitol .xcvii. translates to Chapter 97.
Gout is best treated by applying a poultice to the affected area while using heat therapy.
And if the humors are found to be in their own body, they have used leeches for such a purpose.
Then if you want to treat the intestine and you're still unsure about whether to use a tourniquet or not, you should apply the same techniques as described in the previous lines.
Place another cushion under their legs, as needed.
And if it is possible to remove the cushion, then it's done with a cushion, and so are hernias treated.
And then, if it is necessary to cleanse the area with sour wine, and apply a hot compress to the affected limb, while also keeping the patient's hands warm.
And if the pain is prolonged, apply a cloth to the area and use the heated cushion to draw out the fluid.
When blood is dry, or if you wish to prevent them from multiplying, they should be cauterized.
And if you are using leeches, it is best to avoid unnecessary bites.
And then if leeches are prohibited from the recent incision or are placed on the site of the wound to draw out blood, there is a need for further treatment.
When there is inflammation, apply a poultice to their legs.
And thus begins the treatment of the third stage, restoration. This chapter is about fractures and dislocations, which are common in medical practice.
Oh, son, know that I will not write about this topic in the book of medicine.
And so, when the doctors in our land are convinced that it is necessary to stop the use of such things as these on their legs.
And if there are cold humors that cause pain in the patient's legs, they should be treated with a cushion.
Then I have already explained in this chapter all that my knowledge has taught me, about the uses of [the text continues]
This refers to the beginning of a chapter in a book.
And if a bone is fractured, you must first reduce the swelling. This text is likely describing a treatment for an ailment using a cautery tool.
Then apply a cauterization to the body when there is an injury, but only after applying a cushion to the affected area on the advice of a physician.
And if you have to apply a cushion to the patient's flesh, then place another cushion on their limbs; and if necessary, you should also use herbs for healing.
And then place a cushion on their legs and the patient's leg must be kept still.
And if a cushion between their legs, the patient will be put on a cushion, and another, and they are to be fed with nourishing food, and with light meat.
If you have the symptoms of gout in the wrong place, you should consult a doctor.
The patient's strength weakens their bones, but they must be strong to withstand gout.
And it is necessary for the patient's body to be treated with cushions, as described before.
When a patient's body has been injured, it is customary to call it a fracture.
And I have seen you, oh doctor, and if it's necessary to cauterize something.
Mota diversitas is a condition that should be treated by doctors. E so the intestine has been infiltrated by something, maybe an ailment or infection, but the cushion is under the cushion, which is another word for cushion.
And if it's necessary to cauterize the surface of the foot, then you should hold your hand on the area being cauterized.
And if the patient has a gout attack, it is customary to apply heat to the affected area. The pain in the legs or feet can be recognized by the sensation it causes.
Therefore, when there is no apparent twisting or dislocation in the patient's body, but pain when you touch the bones, then they are likely experiencing a bone-related ailment.
If there is pain in the joints, or a small swelling, put a cushion under their legs, and another on the feet at that moment, the one who has a cushion.
And if it is necessary to treat someone who has a condition that causes them pain, it is customary to call it gout.
And when the inflammation subsides, it is a good thing if you are in need of pain relief.
And if you are to apply a cautery to the patient's foot, it is best that the cushion be placed under them.
Then apply a second cushion to their legs where the first one was placed.
If pain in the bones arises, use a cushion for small bones, or two if necessary.
And so let your hand be placed in the position that makes it possible for you to treat the natural breaks by cauterizing the broken parts.
And keep your hand on the patient's body so that the pain does not reach the other parts of the body.
Then do you see that the patient's intestines are being used up by the gout, so apply your hand to the area where the cause of the disease lies.
Then prevent the severe pain from spreading to other parts of the body, as doctors often do for gout.
When a person experiences leg pain, the cushion should be placed under their legs to prevent the intestines from being affected.
And for those who are small, like the arms and hands, put cloths on them.
Then use a strong bandage to reduce swelling and pain.
And if you are unable to find the cause of the illness, place your hand on the affected area.
And if the joint pain is caused by a disorder of the blood, then you should use a cautery to treat it. Then gently apply cauterization to the chest, starting small.
When you have already performed an operation on the patient's legs, apply another bandage.
If the pain has already been established in the affected area, then they are ready for cauterization if there is another indication requiring it, e.g., swelling or redness.
When a burning sensation occurs in the body, and the patient has a fever, they should be treated with cold compresses and poultices.
And be the bandages on their legs made of wood and applied in the manner of a bandage.
And if it is necessary to apply cautery, then it should be used on a patient's broken area.
Then you see the size of the cushion is too large for the patient's legs and feet.
And then you have to place the patient's hand on his legs, so that there are no more than two fingers between the cushion and the foot.
Then if it is necessary to apply cauterization to the legs they are treated with a hot cautery.
Then return the patient to the position where they were in the first place.
You see, when your hand has been placed on his legs so that he is unable to move.
This sentence refers to the methods used by ancient healers (the "Antics") for treating injuries.
And if it is necessary to place the cautery on their legs, it is best to keep it from the doctors' hands.
And if you have a cushion for pain relief, use it on the patient's body.
Then apply a salve made from these ingredients: 1 part asafetida, 2 parts water, 3 parts assasinated alchemists’ secrets.
This describes how to treat a patient suffering from a fracture or dislocation.
Then apply the cushion to the patient's legs and thighs.
And if it is necessary to treat pain in the joints with a cushion for the patient's legs.
It is customary to apply a cushion to the patient's legs.
Then, if you have to use a cautery on the patient's feet, apply them carefully.
Take a piece of alum, chamomile flower, and apply it to the affected area: And if you want to make a poultice to resolve the remaining pus, take some alum, some flowers of chamomile, and.
And if he is scalded, we should place his feet in water.
A pain in the leg is treated by a poultice made from herbs and other remedies.
The first part of this medieval text translates to: "And if one wishes to treat a fracture, then one should consider"
This translation should be used:
And so, to treat the pain in the legs, apply the poultice to the area and use a bandage for support.
If you are unable to put your hand upon the affected area, it is possible that the pain will return. And if it is necessary to apply cauterization to the affected area, gouty pain is likely to be caused by inflammation in the foot.
Then submerge it in water for an hour; then apply a cushion to their legs, and apply a poultice to them while they are resting; and then use a cushion on their feet.
And if it is necessary to reduce the swelling of the intestine or hernia in the patient, do so with gentle manipulation.
Then you will place a cushion on their legs to prevent the pain from spreading.
When the joint pain persists for three days or more, they are said to have gout.
E altre ma l'hauras en el teu Translation 1: And if it is necessary to cauterize in the first place.
This sentence implies that the affected area is healed by applying a substance to it, and cushions are used to prevent complications.
If a doctor has a need to make a diagnosis of gout.
You are being reasonable by opening their legs, and you put a cushion under them, for that is what is done to those suffering from a reasonable condition.
Of course, on the subject of fractures.
And the causes of fractures are diverse, and they are caused by various factors.
And for the treatment of the pain in the legs, cushions are used.
And this fracture can be caused by a sharp blow which has opened up the bone, the other parts of the body will need to be treated carefully.
And this is called a fracture when the bone breaks in its thinness.
This phrase refers to a medical condition in which a person's hands are placed on their body parts to prevent the intestine from being cold and damp.
Then apply a heated instrument to the affected area of the body.
And if the pain is in the legs, it should be treated as such. And bring the patient in that manner to the place where their bowels are.
And so the patient's leg was burned to remove impurities.
And the type of gout that is caused by cold humors was known as a special kind of ailment to be treated with a cushion or other means of poultice.
Then if you are treating a person for a fracture, consider the situation and location of the injury; otherwise, use other methods to make them feel better.
And if there are accidents that don't heal themselves, you should use a poultice to help them heal.
And when the body is affected by the illness, you should use a cushion to support it at its onset.
When the sun shines on their legs, the doctors recommend they be consulted about gout.
E si'l hauria menuda o gran cosa, e fa un'esquisit de la medicina: E
And if you are dealing with the plague on the leg, it's best to apply it directly to the skin.
And apply the cautery to the affected area, and the patient will be given care and attention.
And there are two ways to perform an operation.
Then apply another incision to the patient's leg bones; and this is the way to do it.
And apply ointment to the wound, and apply a cushion to the second part of their body.
And therefore, if they are short and pointed, it is necessary to know that the person has been affected by the disease of the various ailments that can be found in a body.
And if they are using a cautery on the legs, it should be done by someone who knows what they're doing (a trained physician).
And if the bone is strong and firm, use tools to cut into them.
This text describes a physician's practice of treating someone suffering from gout.
And it is convenient that you take care of these wounds on your legs and feet; it is also known as the condition of those who have been diagnosed with gout.
Then you must know that the way to treat it is to remove the bone from the body.
And if you want to treat a patient's condition, it's best to use a sharp tool for leeches and other treatments that require incisions or removal of fluids.
And if you are careful to avoid that which may cause harm, be careful too to keep the body safe from harm.
And if there are other diseases that require a cushion to be placed under their bones for a period of time, they will be called gout.
You have already opened the area between the patient's legs, placed a cushion on their lap, and put another one under their feet, which are now in its place.
And here if the other wounds are caused by a more severe injury, the wound itself needs to be cauterized quickly and completely.
Then return the intestine to its place and place another on their legs, so that the intestine does not cause pain.
And apply the cautery to your skin for it is customary to call it by its original name.
When you are treated for a pain in the leg, you may need to use leeches on the body, and you will be able to apply another leech to each part of the body that needs them.
Then place your hands on the area where you've put the cushion.
And when you have given the patient a cushion to protect the area, you must also use the most delicate tools.
If you encounter small fractures, you should treat them appropriately.
And then the pain that afflicts all those who have studied in this art. And if you see a patient suffering from gout, then put a cushion under them.
Then make sure to bandage the wound after the patient has had their wounds cauterized.
And let the patient be given this treatment for one or two days.
Then place your hand on their feet so that the patient's body does not have to be touched by those pains which are caused by the pain of a plague.
And if you have found a cushion for the patient's foot.
E therefore let us consider the first cause as the modifications to the bones or pain in the hands; then it's a good idea to apply heat to the affected area.
Then apply a cloth soaked in the oil of that which heals under the influence of their illness, and place a cushion on the chest and a bandage on their limbs to treat them with the power of the medicine.
E if you are a physician, you have already opened the patient's legs, e.
On treating a broken foot.
Knowing that the pain is in the cartilage, but is not located in the bones, treat it as you would for gout, using a hot iron to cauterize if necessary, to prevent further damage.
If a bone in the legs is broken, then a cautery should be used. And if you are doing surgery, and other servant is needed, they place a cushion under the patient's thighs during the procedure.
And if it happens that there is a need for a cushion on their legs or thighs, then apply it to the location.
Then make it appear in two parts.
And if it is possible, on the first day after a fracture, the patient should be treated for pain; otherwise, they should be treated with cautery.
E then you must apply a cloth cautery to the nostrils.
And if the ancients have said that this is caused by an excess of humors in the body.
And sometimes in the nose, a surgeon places another cushion to prevent its being inflamed by the surgeon's touch, and uses that same tool to treat other ailments.
A first-aid kit for the unwell; if you want to use heat, apply it to the cushion if it's necessary.
And if there is another time when it occurs, treat it with an antiseptic cautery after applying heat to the affected area.
If a boil occurs on the surface of the body, apply poultice to it.
When joint pain is caused by cold humors that have infiltrated the joints, you should apply cauterization to them if necessary.
Then apply a bandage to their legs and bring them back to health.
Chapter 4
When the jaw is dislocated, the surgeon will need to carefully reposition it.
If the jaw is broken, you should use a different cautery than if it is only displaced and needs to be set back in place.
And so you will apply the finger on the left side to the wound which is being treated.
And now the other two surgeons are needed to help put the bones back in place, as well as the patient's legs, which were previously being held by two assistants.
And you have already put the cushion on their legs, or on their feet, hoping for a cure from the pain in the joints.
And apply to the patient's feet and legs whatever causes them to move freely from their illness.
And if you need to rectify the shape of your body, you should apply a poultice, which will be used after it has been corrected by the doctor, who must also use a cushion to hold the patient's hands and keep them in place.
And then if the patient's limbs are not stiff due to injury, they should be treated by the doctor as described in the text.
And then if you need to treat a boil or abscess on their body, apply heat to the area, as described in the second translation, to draw out the pus.
And if the fracture is in the area where the pain affects the legs, consider the appropriate treatment for the patient's condition.
And if the patient's leg is affected by the plague, apply a cauterization treatment as needed.
Then apply the appropriate poultice to the affected area so that the wound does not fester.
Chapter 5.
This is when your shoulder blade is treated with a hot iron.
The bone in the shoulder breaks in three ways.
And if a bone is broken or fractured in the foot, it is customary to call that condition gout.
And then the surgeon should apply a hot iron to that area.
And then place a cushion on their legs for a while, so that the intestine may be burned back into the body's cavity.
And if there is no cushion needed for the patient's pain, let the patient be called "without gout."
And if the patient cannot be treated by letting them be burned by a hot iron, you must use a different treatment method.
And you apply the tongs to the bones of the foot, and then you hold your hand on their wounds, or the other you might have elevated the shoulder, but you are correcting its position with your hands.
And if you have a pain in their foot, put your hand on the bone of the foot, and if it is necessary to make a cauterization due to gout, apply heat to the foot.
And if it is necessary to cut open the intestine because it is causing pain; then place your hand on the area to stop it from happening.
And if there is a need to make a point on the legs, then apply a cautery.
Mays the pain be on the feet, but the severity may vary.
And if the patient's legs are swollen from the plague, you will know which one to burn.
And if there's little disruption, you should put your hand on the affected area, to treat it as needed.
Then apply a cushion to the affected part of the body.
And if it is necessary to tighten the bandage on the injured part of the body, then take care to bind it tightly.
And if the bone has been elevated, then you should place a poultice on it at night, so that the patient's bowels are treated by applying a poultice to the affected area of their arm while the person sleeps.
And do not apply a cautery unless there's a need to treat a wound or abscess on their legs, within twelve days.
And apply the bandage to the patient's foot, and the rest of the body will be treated accordingly.
And it is strong and comforted by the cushion, according to the way of the patient's bowels.
When the physician has to treat the ailments of the body, he will use a variety of methods for different parts.
This refers to the treatment of a shoulder injury.
And let the doctor use a blunt instrument on the affected area, but don't let him cut into the patient's body.
And so, when the patient's leg is broken — or has an opening in their intestines — they are to be treated for the pain by putting a cushion on the area.
Then, apply a cushion to their joint pain, and let them have no more pain in the feet.
If you are experiencing pain due to an imbalance of humors in the leg, then you should use a cushion to help keep the intestines in their place.
Then place your hand on a cushion upon the patient's legs to prevent them from being burned.
And consider the foot in its entirety, which is to be treated with another cushion if it has been softened by the application of a cushion to the place.
When the doctor's servant is on his side, he will have a better understanding of the body.
The doctors say it will heal in xx days or xx.25.
And then when you are done, apply heat to the area to dissolve the cushion that was there for the duration of the procedure.
And if you must treat them, apply cautery to the affected joint, as we mentioned.
Chapter 7
On the treatment of foot injuries.
When pain occurs in the foot, it is customary to apply cautery there.
Then apply a cauterization to the area where the pain is felt in the feet, so that you may see the real cause.
And if it is necessary to use a needle on the patient's spine, take care to insert it carefully and precisely into the designated area for treatment.
The patient's body will be covered in a cloth bandage for the treatment of their illness, and they should be careful to ensure it is applied correctly and securely to prevent further complications.
When necessity compels you to cauterize, put the patient's bowels or feet on the cushion, but do not allow the hot iron to touch them.
Chapter 8.
And for the restoration of the coasts when they are dislocated.
Sapiens that are skilled in medicine know that pain in the lower legs refers to the condition of gout. The doctors know that they should cauterize the area to prevent the problem from being aggravated.
Do as the doctors do and use bandages on the injured part to prevent swelling.
And then if the patient's pain is spreading to their internal organs.
And if it is another way to say that your servant is already suffering from gout.
Then use this to treat pain in the intestines by making incisions, and then you will have an opening in the intestines.
And if it is necessary to make points on the body, they are usually called gout.
And they apply heat to the foot, so that the pain is alleviated by bringing warmth to the patient's feet through a cautery.
Then place a cloth under the patient's feet to prevent them from feeling pain.
And if it is necessary to cauterize their legs, it is called for, so that they are not infiltrated by the bowels.
Then apply a poultice to the affected area to help draw out the pain.
If you must cauterize the intestine or other parts of the body, do it carefully so that the patient doesn’t suffer from a buildup of humors in their legs or feet.
And if the patient's condition worsens, apply a hot iron to their body.
This is the ninth chapter.
This refers to the placement of a cushion under someone's legs while they are being treated for a condition related to their pain being caused by the body part itself.
And if it is necessary to treat a fracture in the body, use cautery on the bones, and apply a cushion to the legs, and another to the affected area, using the hands of the patient for support. And you know if the body will be healed by such a treatment, if you see that the body has already been treated with these and cannot heal itself.
And if you apply heat to the foot, it heals the disease.
And if you want to know whether the spondils will heal or not, then you should consider the patient's body.
This sentence refers to a condition where a person experiences pain in their legs.
And if there's no need for a cushion, then use another cushion.
And if one wants to avoid the pain or if one has an open wound on their foot, then apply moxa to the area of the pain.
And if you are able to, use one of the soothing plasters and keep the intestine in its place.
When pain occurs in the patient's body, it is customarily called the "os" (bone) disease: la divas that refers to a specific type of "os" (bone) ailment, such as gout.
When a bone is broken, you should place your hand on the injured area to prevent infection from the other two limbs.
And if you have pain in your legs, the doctor will use another point to cauterize the intestine.
Chapter 10
Then apply the treatment for a cushion (placed on their legs) for those who are suffering from this ailment.
And if bones break, you have already broken them by using a cautery on their joints.
And you have already placed the cushion on the patient's legs over the area of the fractured bone.
Then return the patient's hands to their natural position.
Then you can apply the cautery to that fracture which has been opened up. E thus the patient should have a cushion under their legs to prevent the ailment from affecting them.
The patient's condition will be treated with a cautery on their side.
From the given sources, it seems you're asking for help translating "Mays" - "Then" is a good starting point, but the word "c'est" in the third sentence suggests a more precise translation might be needed.
Then treat them accordingly.
Chapter 11
This is where the patient's body should be anointed and treated with healing herbs.
And then you should place a cushion on the shoulder.
Then, if there are cushions for the patient's legs, restore them in one of two ways.
Two more cushions are needed to separate the two parts of the body, the thighs.
And if it is an open wound, the patient's leg should be treated with a hot cautery.
And if the patient's intestines are protruding, they be treated.
And if they have put their hand over the injury on the foot, and a cushion has been placed upon their legs, then call for a cushion to be placed on the patient's chest by placing their hand there.
And if it is necessary to make points on the surface of the foot, apply a poultice to the leg.
And if doctors were to call for a cast, they would use it on the leg and place their hand on the area that needs it.
Similarly, if the injury is near the joint, apply a bandage to the area and make sure they have a cushion for their legs, put one on their body.
Then apply a poultice to the patient's affected joint.
This sounds like a recipe for treating an abscess using a poultice on the seventh day after it has been treated, but I'm just guessing!
And apply an poultice to the cushion on their legs and the other hand to the affected area.
Then apply a cushion under their arms, and another on their legs, to prevent any other cause from breaking the patient's leg.
The illness is in the knees.
And the cushion was placed on his legs, so that the patient wouldn't be able to move them.
And then place your hands on the patient's legs, which are now open.
And if the patient's condition is such that the pain can be attributed to an injury, let it be treated with cautery. And when pus gathers in the joints, use it to treat the condition.
Then you should apply a cushion to their knees or whatever joint hurts.
Then apply a cushion to the legs as needed, just as you would for the other translations.
And if you consider the patient's joints, and if they are inflamed, do not constrict them.
Mays three days should pass before you apply anything to the affected area.
And so apply a poultice on the stomach, for that is where the illness lies.
And it is customary to treat gout with a poultice that contains wool to reduce inflammation.
And then apply a cushion to their chest for a while.
Here comes the translation:
And if the fracture has been there for a long time, it is customary to place your hand on their legs, the cushion on them.
Another one?  A cushion should be placed under their legs.
Then apply a bandage to the arm.
The patient's legs are open to their full length, which is what they are called.
And so the patient's pain is relieved by the use of fire, or other methods together.
The doctors will say that their work is done.
And when there's a break in the bone, it's important to know what kind of fracture it is.
And so you have made a mistake if he/she is still using two instruments for their illness.
Therefore, if the doctor determines that a splint is needed for the injured area.
When the fire is hot, you must apply the cure of fire to those who are suffering from gout in their legs.
And if you are strong enough, then you must apply force to another part of the body.
And if you have a wound, another cushion should be placed there under the patient's hand, for the others are very similar to the English language and a little bit like Italian or French, but I will guess this is the text about the body. Then, you need to apply a bandage or dressing to the wound, depending on your needs.
And if the patient's foot has been opened to prevent the patient from being troubled by gout.
And another person should hold their hands during the procedure.
And so you should apply cautery to the bones in the legs, which is what is done for the most part.
And if the doctors are in the process of making a cast for the leg, then they will use their skill to heal.
And if you find the intestine has become inflamed or affected by the disease of the humors, then apply poultice to the affected area, which is what we call a poultice for pain.
So if you are injured by this disease, then you will need special care for that particular ailment.
When the patient is suffering from a cold humor, they are treated by applying a poultice made from a mixture of oil and beeswax to the affected area.
And so you will know, this is how they say in medicine and other fields to which the term "stelas" refers, and how many are needed for a procedure.
And if the disease is a strong one, and you need to make a small incision on the skin, then use a poultice to heal the wound.
And let the sheets on which the patient sits be soft and smooth, so that the injured part may not be further irritated.
And consider the leg and its location for several days. And if a pain occurs, make sure to apply warmth to the affected area to prevent its growth.
And let the cushion be placed where there is pain in the foot.
Translation: Then apply a bandage to the area of the intestine using your skill.
Then you must consider if the patient's condition is caused by an excess of humors in their feet.
Mays it be necessary to address the patient's condition as a result of their ailment, otherwise, they will likely remain in pain.
And so the patient's leg was held up by the other cushion.
And if it's a simple fracture, you should know that it heals in 28 days, or 32 if it's a severe one.
This chapter explains how to treat a person suffering from gout in the thighs.
And if it is necessary to set the bones back into place, and they need to be held there.
Know that to the hand, know that to the toes.
And if the patient's intestines are afflicted by pain, it is important to note that the doctor should place his hand on the patient's legs to soothe the pain.
And if a patient has pain in their feet, they should be treated by a doctor using other methods.
Then apply a cushion to their legs; then treat them as needed.
When the bandage is applied to the legs, the patient should be treated with a poultice for the aches in their body.
And if you have opened the affected area, you should use a cushion to protect the intestine, and apply another to the foot, applying pressure to the affected area.
Then if the injury is near the outside of the body, apply a bandage to the wound so that the intestines or other organs don't protrude.
And if there is a fracture, it should be treated with cautery instead of pain in the joints.
Mays es que's the Latin for "maybe," "perhaps," or "it may be."
And if there are other causes for the patient's illness to be treated in the future, we will place a cushion under their feet.
The Latin word "capitol" means that the patient's head should be covered by a blanket during the treatment.
For the restoration of the bones of the leg.
The bones are broken by the cold, and they are declared to be the result of a specific ailment.
The patient's treatment for their ailment involves treating the affected area with a heated tool to draw out the excess fluids.
And then on the affected bone with a cautery, to be applied directly to the bone, and another to the patient's legs, and another to their feet.
When the doctors see fit, they will apply another poultice to the patient's ankle.
And if the patient's condition is serious, apply a bandage to the affected area, e.g., the ankle.
And when the physician has treated the bone for inflammation, they are healed by natural means. This refers to applying a hot cautery to treat an ailment related to the body's humors, likely as a method to burn away excess fluids or impurities in the area of the ankles.
Then apply a bandage to the wound on the leg.
And then put a bandage on the affected foot to contain the pain.
And so you have opened the space between the legs (or perhaps the abdomen) to allow for the proper healing of the bone.
Then return to the patient's legs, place a cushion on their feet.
And if you want to make a poultice for pain from a hernia, use strong bandages and a cushion to hold it in place.
Then place two cushions on the legs to stabilize the patient's position.
And if there is no cushion for the patient’s humors to flow through, then use a cauterization tool.
Then you should use that same cautery on the bones.
And another place for the patient's pain to be treated.
Nevertheless, in this way, the patient is afflicted with gout.
And if he has been suffering from pain for 40 days or more, he should be considered to have a different ailment, as per the nature of his illness.
Chapter 15.
This refers to restoring a cushion to the injured knee in order to prevent further complications.
This means the patient has another disease that affects their joints.
Then apply [a] hot compress to the affected area on the leg, which helps to relieve pain.
And then the intestines will be treated, so they are well-cared for as much as possible.
Then place your hand on their legs to prevent the hernia from returning to the abdomen.
Then they are considered healthy for their age.
Chapter 16
And place a cushion under the leg.
When treating an ailment of the legs or feet, it is important to know the difference between those requiring a cushion and those needing cauterization.
And if you have to cauterize the patient's arm, the wound should be treated as one.
And if the patient has a fracture, two bones are broken.
And if the patient has a hernia, another cushion should be placed on their legs to hold them down.
And if the pain is located in the largest bone, and it is necessary to set the patient's legs apart, it is customary to call it gout, but there are other causes of this kind.
And then place a cushion on their legs after the treatment.
But if the fracture is severe, you should use a cushion to hold their hands.
E se las mas en la tieu, e es que la persona so ha de fazer un fust per les quals ha de fer una mala cosa.
And if it is necessary to cauterize the intestine, use the cushion on which they are resting.
And apply two cushions, one on each side, to prevent the patient from being too cold or hot.
Then place a cushion under them, as well as another cushion on their legs; otherwise, they will be cold.
And doctors most often treat that which is caused by cold humors.
Then the patient's body should be examined for an abscess or swelling or other similar causes.
Another cushion should be placed on the legs, and another on the feet, to prevent them from moving.
And for a fracture in the legs, place a cushion under them.
When there is pain in the whole body; it is called gout.
Then you have opened the foot for those who are suffering from the pain of gout.
Then place a cushion on the patient's feet to protect them from harm.
Then apply a cushion to the foot and place it on their legs.
And if there are other causes for the pain in the foot, you should know that those are the legs, and another place where the humor has been found.
And if the pain lasts three or four days, then you will know that it is gout.
"And when there are other ailments, one must use other methods to treat them." And if the pain is in the joints, apply that treatment to them.
This is a very literal translation of the phrase "the first three fingers" from line 2 of your example.
And in other fractures of the body, you should always apply cushions to soothe the pain and prevent further injury from happening.
This refers to the previous sentence's meaning being related to medicine.
And if it is necessary to reduce pain in the bones, and for men, the pain in the legs and feet (and other areas) is treated by applying a cauterization to the affected area.
When a woman's bowels are inflamed, it is treated by applying cautery to her feet.
And thus the midwife will place the woman's belly on a cushion, so that the woman does not feel pain, and the legs are supported.
And then apply a poultice to their legs, and another to their back.
And so for seven days or thereabouts.
And if you're treating them, use a canaveral (canne de sucre) to draw out the pain; otherwise, leave the bladder alone.
When the body is treated with a cushion and left to heal for several days, it will be clear whether it's truly healed or not.
And if the bone of a man or woman is broken, then you apply a hot compress to their legs and arms.
And es que for this book is already opened to the section on the right way to treat these fractures, so you may know how to treat them.
And thus, for three days or so, the patient's legs are kept open so that the pain may be relieved, and you must apply a cushion to their wound, covered with cloth, to prevent the intestine from being affected.
Capitol .xix.  is translated as **Chapter 19.**
Then return the hand to its place.
"And so if it's necessary to perform surgery on someone with a fracture, they are treated with care."
Then you should apply cautery to the patient's legs and treat them for the plague.
And if there are injuries to the legs or feet, it is customary to treat them with cautery.
When your patient has a painful inflammation in their legs, they should be treated by a doctor.
When the bone is affected by such pain, you must apply a cautery to reduce the swelling.
Mays tu placed your foot on the cushion, and you are already prepared to use the cautery.
And if you want to know, the surgeon says that it is customary to have a cushion between the legs and the other on the foot.
Apply a cushion to the affected area if your patient has an acute gout attack; apply a hot compress to their legs or elsewhere as needed.
Then you have already placed a cushion under their legs, and now they are ready to be treated for the pain in their intestines.
And if pain is inflicted upon the body (especially the legs) by an evil humor, it is called gout in Greek.
And if the pain persists, place a cushion on the affected area.
And then you apply the other cushion to the patient's groin.
Then cover the area with your hand to prevent the bone from becoming infected.
Then, if you cannot reduce the bone in its entirety, it should be done as much as possible.
And then place a cushion on their legs and another under their feet.
And if the bone is returned to its proper place.
And now if you have another case of the burning pain of the summer flux.
Then leave the cushion there to allow the intestine to return to its proper place.
Then if you are careful, it will heal the wound on the leg, or cause death to the plague. When there is a slight injury to the leg, it is necessary to treat it gently.
Then, if there is great pain or fear that the patient may suffer from a bad case of swelling, apply a cushion to their joint.
When there's a swelling in the feet, apply hot cloths to your patient's legs, and place a cushion on their legs, then cauterize them with heat.
Therefore, apply a poultice to the patient's legs in the morning and evening, and let the patient rest after using the cautery, and apply a cushion to their legs, so that they can be treated with it.
If there are other days when pain persists in their body, then they should use medicine to treat it. And for those pains that are not caused by the intestines, but rather by other means, apply a poultice.
When you apply heat to the affected area, the other two servants, one for the intestine and another for the bowels, are already mentioned as if it were a specific type of corruptio.
And when the bone in the joint breaks, apply a cushion to that area, for the pain will be relieved by it.
It is customary for physicians to treat the condition known as gout in this manner.
The treatment of inflammation in case of injury to their legs.
This is how you would say if your metate are given to the patient's legs, it will be applied on the foot by the physician; if a bandage is needed for a wound or injury, you must apply it loosely so as not to constrict the limb.
And if the patient has recent or old gout, apply a cushion to the affected area.
E extremitatz, e la forma del pergamino or another on their limbs, will be difficult for any other reason than to cause pain.
Mays ja es the name for a person who has been cured of a disease by having their bowels or hernia treated properly, but the word itself means to be healed.
Chapter .xxi.
And if the patient's natural position is restored, the pain will subside.
And it is healed or the bone which is affected by the humors is treated, the body's natural healing process can be supported in various ways.
A cushion placed on the legs of the patient to keep them warm and prevent gout from spreading.
Then apply a poultice to the affected area so that they may be healed.
Another hand on the foot, for the patient needs must be treated with care.
And if you wish to heal broken bones, prevent them from being twisted.
If the patient's intestine is affected by inflammation, you will need to cauterize it.
This is a common medical practice for treating diseases.
And when the patient has pain in the joints, which is recent, they are covered by an ointment made with herbs.
And if it is necessary for the patient to have some kind of treatment with hot compresses to be applied to their legs and feet, it is called gout.
And if it is necessary to apply cauterization to the patient's limbs, they should be carefully examined by a doctor.
The patient's condition when they have points on the surface of their legs.
It's likely a medieval Latin term for "of speech or dislocation" in a medical context.
Dislocation is when one of the joints loses its normal range of motion.
Therefore, when the body is affected by illness, apply a hot poultice to the area.
And for that reason, the leg must be kept straight and covered by the other one in the case of gout, so that the foot does not get worse, as to the use of the term "gout" itself, it's a bit misleading.
When this happens, apply hot water to the area and let it rest there for the duration of the operation.
And every member should be treated with a knowledge of their proper place.
And if there's an injury to the legs or body, you must apply your hand to the injured part.
And there are twenty-four chapters.
Treatises on dislocations are often used for the treatment of dislocations.
E autre ways, the foot can be affected by a dislocacion, which affects the entire joint and causes the mouth to be opened up, and the other the paraula that comes out with the pain in the foot.
When the pain is less severe, it is because of other causes.
If the dislocation is complete, you must be careful to treat it properly.
And then apply the cushion to the affected area and gently press on the patient's chest.
When the patient has difficulty urinating, you should use a cushion and oil to ease their urination.
Therefore, when you apply this treatment, it is important to place the patient's hands on their legs so that they do not experience pain during the process.
And if you put your hand on the patient's legs, it is best to do it gently so that the person doesn't feel pain.
And you should administer to them a cushion under their foot and apply it to their legs, so they don't need to be opened up again.
Then you will know that the reduction of the intestine in the case of a boil is difficult.
And when you have to make incisions in the legs, you must be careful.
Chapter 25.
And now you must apply your knowledge to address the dislocation of the shoulder blade, which is what we will refer to as gout.
The tools are used for burning or cutting away cold humors from the body.
And if the patient's condition worsens, they are to be called the other healer. And to this point the patient’s place should be protected by using a cushion or support under their legs.
And then apply the poultice to the affected area, and give them the powder and soothe it.
May the patient's limbs be returned to their proper place; the body being kept warm.
And if there is a need to cauterize the legs, you should place the cushion on the wound so that the patient does not move them, causing more pain.
And so if there is an issue with the patient's legs, then they should be treated with cushions.
E aprop reduzeys le dolor a the area of the body where pain occurs.
On the reduction of a dislocated muscle.
You know that muscle is only displaced when it is displaced in one of three ways: when you have a cushion on their foot, a cushion on the legs, or the pain is caused by a cold humors.
And if it is caused by the second cushion placed on their legs.
And so you are to burn the skin on the patient's leg (or legs) lightly with the lightest cautery, so that the intestine or hernia doesn't return.
When pain is felt in the feet, it is customary to use a cautery.
Then, if it's necessary to treat a patient for a condition that causes pain in the feet, and another for the other conditions, apply heat to the affected area.
And so the patient suffers from pain when they have a touch of gout, you will know the difference between a muscle affected by gout and another affected by gout (in other parts of the body) because it is clear that the part of the body affected by gout is not in dolor.
Then apply a bandage to the area to prevent infection.
And of this dislocation a gentle reduction is made when the gout is in a fresh stage when the patient is young.
And the minister applies a hot iron to the affected area.
Perhaps if the ailment has not subsided, it may be called a dislocation because of this.
Then a cushion is placed under their armpit to prevent the gout from spreading through the body.
Then place a cushion under their arms and legs to prevent the pain from spreading, as well as apply the other cushions. Mays if the body has been treated for a period of time, you must consider the patient's condition carefully and apply your cushion to the affected area.
And thus it shall be placed on the other side according to the length of the leg, or as I have said, where the pain is felt in the legs.
And if the patient has a cushion in their hands, do not reduce it, but apply a different treatment.
If there is pain in the legs that causes swelling in the joints, apply a cushion to those joints.
Aprop placed his hand on the affected area and held it steady.
And if it is necessary to cauterize the wound, you can use a tool for that purpose.
And when the bandage is placed on the wound, the patient's condition must be carefully monitored for seven days.
And if the body is affected by pain in the intestines, treat it gently so as not to worsen their condition.
Then place your hand on their leg to prevent the movement from being too sudden or jarring.
If a limb is cold and painful, apply a cushion to the affected area.
And you have already opened the space between the legs, but if you have to make more than one incision on the patient's body, then do so with a cautery device.
By applying pressure to the affected area in the legs, you can relieve pain in the feet.
And if the other remedy is needed, administer it by applying a tight bandage to that area, which will help them heal.
And if your body suffers from coldness, apply warmth to restore balance and comfort.
Then apply the proper name for their ailment.
This is a treatment for gout.
The meaning is something along the lines of:
Then you should put them in a place where they will not be disturbed by the heat of the fire, and use your hand to keep the heat from reaching the intestine, which are already suffering from the pain of the other injuries.
"And if it is necessary to reduce the swelling of the hand, and they are to be treated by the physician."
And if the pain is felt in the legs, it should be treated accordingly.
And if their hands do not move, they can be forced to hold on their legs.
And if there are two doctors, let them place their hands on the patient's feet, and place a cushion under them, and another on their chest.
And if the arm needs to be cauterized, place a hot cloth on the area.
When the doctor applies cautery to the joints of the patient, it is applied to the affected areas so that the pain may be alleviated.
Then treat the wound with albumen and apply a bandage for a few days.
Then apply a cushion to their chest; they are already experiencing the effects of gout in the body.
And if you see that the joint pain is in the leg, then apply a hot poultice to the affected area.
And if you want to soften the pain, then apply a cushion on the legs. And another, which the patient's body will be placed on a cushion. Then return the intestines to their place in the body, and treat them with a cushion, so that they do not become inflamed.
And if you wish to treat that ailment, use a cushion on the legs.
**Capitol .xxviii. is a Latin phrase indicating chapter 28.**
Treating the injury to the arm, and then the patient's hand on the cushion.
When the foot is dislocated or injured in some way, the process for treating the dislocation or injury is straightforward.
And if you are treating a patient for a herniated bowel, then place a cushion on their legs.
The doctor should place their hand on the patient's hand to better diagnose the cause of the ailment.
And so, if it returns soon to its natural state.
The intestines are affected by the heat of the fire, which may be painful.
And so the pain will be gone and the patient's intestines will no longer be inflamed.
Then apply heat to it, so that the pain is relieved.
In the Capitol, they say it is customary for a physician to use a cauterizing tool for medical treatments, such as bloodletting.
And for the treatment of that which they call dislocation of the fingers.
Then burn the areas between the legs and arms.
And when the pain is caused by some hot-bloodedness, then treat the wound in the following manner.
And then place your hand on their finger, where the pain is located.
Then apply a bandage to their legs to prevent further swelling.
And when the weather is warm, they said the patient has two servants, one for their legs and another for their feet.
When joint pain appears in the body, doctors might call it a problem in the legs.
And similarly, other symptoms may appear when the body's humors are out of balance.
Capitol .xxx.
Another cushion on the back of his neck, the treatment for the dislocation of the vertebrae.
Then apply heat to the back of the thigh or chest, as needed, to help the patient recover if there's no cure for your ailment.
And on the patient's legs, two cushions should be used for their thighs and one cushion should be placed under each leg, etc.
Therefore, it is called gout.
So may it be considered that gout affects all parts of the body, and it's important to note that the disease can also manifest in other areas.
Mays in the future, the mays will be called by a name that reflects its true nature.
And then you are to cauterize the affected area.
And then, doctor, ensure the patient's bowels are treated, but be careful they don't get burned.
And a cushion should be placed on the patient's legs.
Then apply a hot poultice to the affected area.
And the doctor will use a cushion to place on the leg of the patient that needs it, and they are to press the fust against the other leg, and the other leg should be kept covered with the cushion.
Then if the pain is in the legs, doctors are likely to use other methods instead of cauterization.
A doctor helps by applying a cushion to the patient's body, where the pain in the legs will be placed.
And if the body does not have this condition, it may be treated by applying a poultice to the affected area. And if the patient's foot needs to be treated, apply the cautery there.
Then apply the cautery to the head or any other part of the body where necessary, if needed, two fingers' width should be left below the knee when applying a cauterization.
This translation is based on the provided source sentences:
A cushion was placed for the patient's pain, on his legs,
Then apply the cushion to the patient's leg, for he will need them after the operation.
E aprop deves apply heat to the affected area, as needed.
Then apply a poultice to the patient's affected area, which will stop the flow of humors.
And if you need to cauterize the patient's limbs, which are already affected by another disease.
If you've got to keep the patient's health in mind, then administer medicine for long periods.
When you cauterize your feet to relieve them from pain, it is known as a cure in modern medicine.
Of the treatment of gout in the joints.
Treat a dislocated hip.
La poiesis a la cual you are trying to translate is likely a description of a medical practice from the Middle Ages, but I can't be certain without further context.
This text describes the four ways a patient can experience pain in their feet due to a condition similar to gout.
The gout is treated by applying heat to the joints, but only after they have been cleansed.
And if you are making a cautery on the limbs, then place a bandage on their legs after removing them from the fire.
And if he has pain in the foot, it's due to humor imbalance, then apply this treatment to him:  "The patient shall be treated with a remedy for that type of humor."
When there is pain in the joints, and especially in the foot, then the patient may have a dislocated joint.
And if it is necessary to cauterize the dislocation in the thigh, you would use a pointed tool on the leg where the patient has the dislocation, which is shorter than the other, and hold their hands.
May's reduction: when you are considering the treatment of a condition, you should not assume that it is gout.
Then apply a cautery to the affected area, after first cleaning the area between the bones.
Then prepare a strong poultice and apply it to the affected area.
Place a cushion under them when they are at rest on the bed.
And he must have his hands elevated on each side by cushions.
And this type of extension is common to all four humors.
And if the dislocation returns, it's necessary to apply a cushion under their legs, elsewhere in the body.
The patient may be referring to a cushion for their leg pain, which suggests they are experiencing pain in the thigh, and perhaps also hinting at a potential case of gout.
Then another person must hold the patient's arms while they are being treated.
And this type is cured by a light cauterization.
When gout affects the foot, it is customary to cauterize it.
And let it be so that the intestine or cushion is extended two more times than usual.
Then place your hand on their head, and the other on their feet, and keep the patient's intestine from being harmed.
And so the wise man instructs the young apprentice to apply cautery to his foot, as he commanded him to do to the other.
And if you have to burn the patient's intestines, then apply a second cautery.
Then let the patient's body be extended, the two legs apart, and let them be kept from further pain by tying them to the parts of the body that are close together.
It is customary to apply heat to the affected area after the doctors used their tools on the patient's intestines.
And if the dislocation is in the legs, use another to be used on the body, and leave a cushion under their hand, and another on their legs, using the other to apply pressure to the area where the dislocation occurred.
E auris es per la coys
And if he has pain in his leg, it is customary to use a cushion on the table.
And if it is customary to cauterize the body — for a member to be affected by gout and you are the one who should know which part of the body to cauterize based on your understanding of how to treat it.
And compare the leg to the other leg.
When there is no longer a need for cautery to be applied to the joints, then remove your hand and let them heal.
Then apply your knowledge to return the patient's legs.
And so, if necessary, continue to apply it for several days until their pain subsides.
Gout is caused by an excess of humors in the body, particularly in the feet.
And the patient shall be treated by setting the bone in place.
The patient has three types of pain: outside the body, inside the body, and in their joints.
The signal for a reduction of the dislocation is a sign that the patient has a strong constitution.
The patient's hands must be used to help guide the burning away from their body, but they should also hold the other cushions.
And if it is necessary to make your hand into a fist, then place it on their chest gently.
And if the patient has been treated with a cushion under their legs and arms, then they are to be bandaged for three days or four.
E no use to its proper place for healing.
If inflammation persists in the legs, use a cautery to treat them.
Another one that is translated as "And then apply your hand to the patient's groin."
On the treatment of the dislocation of the ankle.
Then apply another cushion to the affected area, and adjust the patient accordingly.
And that he has a swollen foot, you should apply poultice to the legs and a cushion to the sole of the foot.
And if there is pain in the legs, apply cold treatment to them.
This is a tricky one! I'm guessing that you want me to translate this into English.
And if you need to apply a cautery to the patient's body, place your hand on their right side, so they are not pregnant with the burn.
And if the patient's legs are opened, and you have to apply a hot cautery to them, then apply a cold cautery on the leg in its proper place.
And if a vein needs to be opened, you will do so as we have described.
And if you have already applied a cushion to the affected leg, then apply another cushion to the foot which was in pain, and hold it there.
And if it is necessary to return the intestine or the other, it should be done in this way.
Mays si a tu may have a cushion placed on their legs if they are suffering from pain in the feet.
Then apply a bandage to protect the area after you have made an incision on their legs or feet, and leas the extended leg be supported by something.
And if a doctor has already opened the patient's legs, it is customary to say they have a dislocation in the leg.
Then, when the dislocation is corrected, apply a poultice to their legs.
And if you have pain in your ankles, then you should use a cushion on your legs to avoid strong pains.
Then remove it from their legs, and apply a poultice to the affected area.
And so that you may know, the intestine or a hernia in the patient’s body will be treated by applying a cushion to their abdomen for 40 days. When pain comes from the feet, it is not customary to call it gout.
And if there are boils on the patient's legs it should be treated with a cauterizer where they have appeared.
Another use  the patient's legs, it is necessary to apply heat to the affected area.
The treatment of the patient's fingers.
When that which is dislocated in the joint of the body is in the legs, then use a hot cautery to treat it.
This phrase means: If your joint pain is severe enough to cause you to limp, then the foot should be treated.
Then place your hand on the patient's leg to guide the intestine back in.
And if the patient needs to be treated for three days.
This is about chapter 35 in a book.
This condition is caused by dislocation or injury, and may also be referred to as a plague.
When the cold humors affect the body, they are called gout.
May the patient be given relief, and may the wise man, who is skilled in healing, be wary and use his medicinals cautiously. And thus, you've got yourself a good starting point for your treatment plan.
This text should be translated as: When the body needs to be treated for the plague, another method is to use a cauteri on their legs and apply a poultice to the affected area.
And if a bone fracture occurs, you must apply a bandage to the injured area and place the broken piece back in its position.
Then place another cushion on their legs, for I have seen that your practice should be to keep the body's bowels in its proper place. When fine-tuned by God's will, the disease of the body needs to be treated carefully. Amen.
