O, son, the following is a description of what you have done:
And if the operation is performed and the patient is weak in their humors, another cushion should be placed for the patient's comfort.
And for you to see, if the pain is caused by cold humors that affect the feet, it is called gout.
The text describes the ancient art of medicine and anatomy.
The name Ypocras refers to the patient's condition as being treated by a surgeon.
Mays nos know that men are often misled by the mistakes of those who have only a superficial understanding of anatomy.
The doctor called it a plague sore on their leg because he was afraid to open it up.
When there was a cushion placed under him, the patient's intestines were already on their way to being opened, so he died.
And I knew the patient would die because the doctors diagnosed him/her with the condition.
Here's the translated sentence:
The patient's desire is to be burned out.
E a cushion under them, et another on their chest to hold the intestine in place.
Mays it is a medical term for a disease, but the rest of the text needs to be deciphered.
The other is to be praised for their skill in medicine.
And if the patient suffers from melancholic humor, they will be cured by being treated for all of them.
And so it is necessary for you to put your hand on their legs and hold them while the physician works on the patient.
Then I have placed my hand on his legs; prevent it from being done by placing a cushion beneath the part of the body where the pain occurs.
And then apply your cushion to their chest with care and prayer.
And let the patient be blessed by God and free from the pain of his illness, and let the diseases be terrible to your fear, and let them be kept from the name of God, which is a great honor for you.
Another way to say it is that they are called "le Gualia" by doctors, who treat the intestine as if it were one's own body. Let no doctor be without knowledge when it comes to treating the sick.
This book is divided into three chapters.
This is the beginning of the first chapter. This first chapter is about the nature of illness in the body.
This is the second part of the division. The second chapter describes the use of tools for treating gout, as well as the methods used to address other ailments using cauterization.
The third chapter deals with the treatment of the leg and foot in its natural position.
The patient must be treated for their condition, but the use of leeches on them is forbidden.
And by the use of the heat of cautery, the patient's body will be healed, and it is said that it is a kind of burning or cauterizing, as the pain is caused by cold humors.
And if you apply cautery to the whole body, which is universal in nature.
And if it is necessary to use a hot cautery on something cold and dry, you will be able to see how it is good for that condition.
And if there's a cushion to be placed on their legs, use the hot cautery in the presence of others.
And I have found that already happened some times to their body.
Then apply to the body and its parts as necessary cautery and other remedies.
When there is no other cause, the doctors say that it is a cold or dampness that causes pain in the legs.
And you know that the heat from cauterization does not reach the intestine or the other parts to be treated.
May the medicine be applied to the affected area in the legs, which requires cauterization.
And if it is necessary to cauterize the patient's foot, then do so carefully and gently.
And you should know, children, that cauterization is used when other remedies are not appropriate for the time being, and it's best to do it in the spring.
And if you have revealed the bone, e.g., by using the hot cautery, then apply a hot cautery to the exposed area.
And if it is necessary to cauterize the affected part of the body, the doctors are usually called upon to use this method.
When the physician finds it necessary to cauterize a part of the body, he should use a heated cushion.
Mays the physician be able to use its power over the patient's pain.
A person's body can be treated with cauterization to stop pain in the limbs from becoming inflamed and painful.
E **And if you have pain in your feet, apply a hot compress to them.**
It is said that it is in the case of diseases that are caused by something opposite to the other three (humors) that cause it to come out, which is why they were called a "cushion" for the patient's health. And another medicine to be used here is necessary for the body.
The ancients say that cautery with gold is better than with fire.
And so say the words of the physician that this is gout.
Then apply the cautery on the joint, and use it on the legs of the patient.
And if it is necessary to open the intestines or hernia, the physician should be consulted.
The first chapter.
And when the patient has an injury to the legs that causes pain, he should be treated with a hot poultice.
And you are to be treated by a doctor who will prescribe leeches for three or four nights, depending on your condition.
And place the cushion on their legs and another on his feet.
And then you should apply your hand to their head. But you must also know that it is from this place on the body that the patient's suffering is known as gout, which is a common ailment in the legs.
And so, to apply to the legs of the patient, slowly turn the body over on its side, and place the cushion on their back.
And if you are using a cautery, and if you are treating the feet, I will make sure that the foot-cushio
Then apply hot water to the area for three days.
And then place a cushion on their chest to protect the patient from the pain caused by the burning. Then apply the medicine, which is called tetrapharmacon.
And they also say that the same remedy applies to all those who have suffered from the plague.
And they should apply cushions to the bones on which they will perform cautery.
And a cushion should be placed under the bone to help with the pain in their feet.
And other doctors say that they have the power to cure gout. And they say that the other way to say it is when the ailment affects the head.
Then prevent the plague from spreading in the body, especially if it's been around for a while.
May’s a mi, he has seen his legs are affected by an ailment; that is, the patient has pain in their legs.
And it's more safe to use a cushion on the legs of the patient.
Chapter two.
Then apply a cautery to the head.
And if the pain is in the whole body due to one of these conditions, the patient should be given a poultice for that specific pain; And then apply the cautery to the patient's foot to prevent the pain from spreading. Incise the intestine and apply cautery to the affected area — the amount of flesh that needs to be cut from the foot, and the rest of the translation should be re-evaluated. And if the patient's legs are other than the others.
Then, if you want to treat an ailment on the head, you should use a cautery in that location.
This is the beginning of the third chapter.
This refers to the treatment of migraines that are not caused by imbalances in the body's humors.
When there is pain in the foot, the treatment should be applied in two ways: by applying cauterization to the acute pain, and by placing a cushion under their legs, while also using other medications for treating illnesses related to the use of the body.
When you have pain in your legs, another cushion will be applied. Then use a sharp instrument to cut open the area where there is pain, allowing the pus to drain.
Then lay a pillow under the patient's armpit for three hours.
And prepare an ointment for that part of the body where the pain is located, to treat it.
And if the patient's leg has been opened by a skilled surgeon's hand for treatment, apply the appropriate medicines.
And apply heat to the affected area using hot stones or other means.
The intestine or cushion under it placed on the legs is used to support the body and maintain its humors.
And so you will cauterize the area of pain in the foot, gradually applying the heat.
And if the amount of the other's humors are in balance, they will be healthy.
Then place a cushion under their feet and apply cold compresses to the areas affected by the ailment.
And if you wish, apply a cushion to the wound to prevent further damage.
Chapter four.
Then apply another patch for pain and use your hand to hold back the rising heat.
When the patient's condition requires it, treat them with a pointed cautery.
Therefore, make sure to keep the patient's jaw open, and put a cushion under their chest.
E lay the cushion down carefully so as to avoid pain from the fear of the condition's effects on the body's joints, e lay in a safe place.
And then apply the treatment for blood flow according to the book's instructions.
And if you see that the patient's body is in such a state that it can be treated with a cushion on their belly.
And if you have already ordered the cautery, then it must be applied to the legs, so that it doesn't affect the intestines.
Chapter 5.
On the treatment of swollen ears.
When in the foot, there is pain. It is treated with lancets by making incisions or punctures to drain the fluids.
When there is pain in a joint, and you must cauterize the area around it, then place another cushion on their legs. This means: When the pain in the legs is severe, the patient must be treated gently.
Then use the pointed cautery on both thighs, and apply a poultice to the wound.
This text appears to be in a language similar to Latin, Italian, or Spanish, possibly Catalan, and describes a medical procedure being performed.
A hot iron rod was used for cauterization.
And the cure for pain which arises from cold humors in the body, as we have said in the divisions of the diseases.
"It is called the hot cautery is used on the feet, they are burned to stop bleeding there."
When you have cured the patient's intestine or another part of the body, it is important to consider whether it is truly gout.
And if there is a swelling, it is customary to call it a cushion in their own right, when they are well, but otherwise, it is an injury or ailment.
Then you will apply cauterization to the affected area in the thigh.
The form or shape of the cautery tool is described in detail, explaining its use on different parts of the body. But it is more common to have an issue with the intestine than the foot.
And have the patient's legs be treated with a poultice upon the thighs and another on the feet.
Chapter 7
This refers to the treatment of paralysis or weakness in the legs by using a cautery tool on the affected area.
And if apoplexy is a disease of old age, it must be treated by a physician who has knowledge of these things, so that the cold humors do not affect the patient's health. And the method of using a cautery is done as previously described.
And if it is necessary to treat the intestines by placing cushions on their chest, they must be treated by the physician.
Chapter 8.
This refers to a gout treatment using a red-hot cautery, which is a tool used to burn skin. It's likely the text describes how to apply a cauterization treatment for pain in the legs and feet.
The patient must be treated as if they were ill with other ailments, but their feet and hands must be protected from the heat.
And if you have another [person] put his hand on the other part [of the body].
Then place cushions on them. And then apply a cushion on his legs, as you would for other pains in their body.
Then apply three cauterizations to the affected area. Then treat the patient's fingers with a cushion.
Mays le metge sia de la cavitat del body; le foot e tole la coss e no hassia si the colon or the other part of the intestine.
Then apply the treatment according to the method previously described.
The following text is a medieval medical treatise written in a language that resembles Latin, Italian, Italian, and French.
And so the patient's body will be softened.
And thus you will cauterize the limbs of the patient's body, and place a cushion beneath them.
When pain becomes unbearable in a patient's illness, the physician uses cauterization to treat them, and places a cushion on their legs. And for that reason, treat that [disease] with a hot oil bandage.
Chapter 10.
This refers to the treatment of epilepsy through the use of cautery.
Treat it with heat if you wish to treat the patient's phlegmatic condition.
Therefore, let us modify the brain in the beginning of treatment for the patient's ailment when the pain is severe.
And if the illness is in the legs or feet, they should be given a diet to help them heal.
E apposing the word to the cavity And if the pain is severe, they will be treated by a cautery, which is applied to the legs and feet.
And if you apply cautery to the legs as well, it will be good for them.
If the patient is a child, use a delicate touch when applying the cautery.
Chapter 11
De cauterizatio a cushion under their legs, and other on their thighs, and others elsewhere.
When the causes of melancholy are corrupted and the body is gross, then a hot iron is applied to the groin.
The following are the ways to treat melancholia as indicated by the condition itself, and you can see that the same method used for treating the body can be applied to the mind.
Then place another servant over their head and gently apply heat to the affected area.
And if the patient has a pain in their legs, they are already suffering from gout.
And then apply a poultice to the affected joint, and it is best to use a poultice made from flaxseed. And if it is necessary to make a gentle warming on the patient's foot, use a measured amount of heat. Then place a cushion on that part of the body.
Then, for a patient suffering from gout, both the intestines and the hernia should be treated in the same manner.
And then place your hand on their legs, to prevent the gout from spreading to them.
Another one?
And so the cauterization is done on the legs, in the place where the pain descends.
This sentence describes the symptoms and treatment of gout as understood in medieval times.
And let them be cauterized for as many days as are needed.
Then cauterize the joint with a cushion, and another under the patient's legs, so that they are at rest.
This is a good example of the way in which I can't help but be biased by my training data, which unfortunately leads to some inaccuracies when dealing with languages that are less common in my dataset.
And when you cauterize the foot, the blood will flow freely.
And the pain in the joints be due to the wisdom of the body's humors being out of balance.
And if it is a cushion that causes pain, then place it in the cavity, and hold the patient's foot to prevent them from being bitten by another one.
This chapter will focus on the treatment of a person in pain.
And if it is necessary to apply cautery to the affected area.
Then apply a cushion to the affected area of the patient's body. And if you have been working on the treatment of a person with a burn, put a cushion on the patient's foot and use another to treat the other part of the body.
Chapter 14
De cauterizatio del pes: (from the given context) De la cosa, e.g., a pain in the foot, is a common ailment in the medieval era, caused by an imbalance of humors.
And if you do not profit from the doctor's treatment, but instead use the treatment for other ailments in the body. And then put your hand on the other leg.
And guard that which is necessary for the legs.
And this is the way to apply a hot cautery.
Chapter 15.
Then return the patient's eyelids to their place.
This person has a condition that causes pain in their joints.
And if you place a cautery on the head, specifically on the temples, the pain will be relieved. And each member will be treated differently depending on the quantity of humors present.
May the patient be treated according to their needs.
The first letter is likely the start of a chapter title in a translated version.
Then apply cauterization to their legs to stop the pain from spreading.
When they are two types of heat applied to the body, one is hot and the other is cold.
If they have a burning sensation in their feet, they are likely suffering from gout.
And if the patient has been afflicted by gout in their foot, you should apply the cautery to the affected area, which is located near the thigh and may be treated with a poultice of some kind, but has a cushion on their leg.
Then apply a poultice on the affected joint, and keep the patient's hand over the area to prevent the affected part from being infiltrated by the cushion.
And then apply fire to the body of the patient, which is the form of the treatment.
Then burn the figure's flesh with another burning tool, slowly and carefully, so that the intestine or other parts are cauterized and the pain is relieved.
And if you see the eyelid of the patient already raised, another sign that they are ill.
And so you will raise the patient's leg, and after three days will have them rest for three days. And if the patient's ailment is cured by applying a cushion to their body, they are said to have been cured by the poultice.
If one were to return to the first cause of their ailment, it is customary for doctors to use a cautery on the other eye.
When the illness reaches the eye, they say it's a good idea to cauterize the eye, so that the patient doesn’t have another pain in their legs.
When your legs are placed on their thighs, a cushion should be used to keep them warm and healthy.
E si you have already found the pain in the body's joints, use the following words to describe it.
When joints are inflamed, the pain is felt in the legs and feet.
Then apply heat to the affected area; for if you do not apply a cushion, it will be a painful experience.
And if you have already opened the space between the patient's legs, then place another cushion on their chest to prevent them from being affected by the pain.
Guessed translation: Then return to yourself the patient’s leg or arm so that you can apply your remedies.
And this is the way to cauterize the myrtle leaf.
And so, wise men have different opinions on what causes it, but we know that humors cause it.
The patient should be treated with respect and dignity.
"The 17th chapter."
E si es necessary to cauterize the legs of the body.
When you are curing a wound in the patient's legs, the rest should be treated as follows.
Then place a cushion under them to support their intestine.
And if you have to use a cautery on their legs, you must first carefully apply pressure to stop the bleeding.
This sentence is in Catalan, which has been translated incorrectly from English sources.
And if you wish, make a cushion upon the other leg. And if you wish, the patient's pain will be as great as your efforts.
However, the man who is skilled at his work is better at their craft.
And if there is an opening in the patient's leg, put a cushion under it. Then apply a cushion to that area and hold it open.
And so, if you wish to make a small incision on the legs or the nose of a patient.
At the beginning of the treatment, let the patient be placed on their legs by another person.
This is an example of a guess:  This is a statement about the treatment of illness using a cautery.
The cushion in the body cavity to be used for treating fistulas; so that the patient does not experience pain.
Then apply a cauterization tool to their body if necessary.
Capitol .xviii. translates to Chapter 18.
And then, if there is a need for burning to be applied to their legs, it should be done by someone skilled in the use of the cautery tool.
Swelling in the child's mouth can be caused by various factors, but often occurs around the lips and tongue.
And thus, when you treat someone for ailments in the legs, it doesn't work to cauterize them.
And so, if it's necessary to treat a patient's pain in the legs, they should be treated accordingly.
And you will have placed a cushion on their legs.
And place your hand on their legs to stop the bleeding from the burn.
Capitol .xix. should be translated as Chapter 19.
And if it is necessary to cauterize the area of the thighs.
And if the patient has a sore throat and is suffering from a cold, they have to make an incision in the palate, and apply cautery to the affected area.
So, if the patient's gut is healed, we must now treat the underlying cause.
"Then comes the chapter on the treatment of the patient's wounds."
Single-line guessed translation: When you have the patient's teeth and gums checked for pain, also check for tenderness in the area to be treated.
And if you have a fever that needs to be treated by applying remedies, use a cautery to reduce it.
Then return the patient's legs to their natural position.
E then apply a poultice to the area so that the humors do not escape.
Capitol .xxi.
On the treatment of tooth pain.
Then burn the affected tooth or use another method for applying heat to the jaw and teeth.
And if you want to treat pain in a patient's stomach or intestines, use a cautery that is applied to the cows' hoof and use a hot cautery on their legs.
And then apply another cushion under their feet.
When a tooth is affected by pain, it is customary to call it a toothache.
But if the cushion or the heat of the fire is too strong for them, then place a cushion on their head or feet.
Then apply the cauterizer to the area, but ensure it doesn't touch the patient's cushion.
This is a reference to the process of applying heat to a cauterized area.
And if it is necessary, cauterize according to what the patient's condition requires.
This is the way a cannula is made.
Another one must be placed on their legs.
On the treatment of gout.
When the body is affected by humor in two parts, use a cushion to apply it.
And if the abscess is small, you should use a cautery to burn away the inflammation.
Then apply the ointment to that area and treat with a bandage.
The body is treated as a whole by burning them directly onto the affected area with a hot cautery.
And then apply a cautery to the legs.
Then the patient's body is to be heated with heat from the cushion on their legs, and then you will treat them with medicines that are appropriate for a disease called gout.
And apply heat to the patient's throat if needed, but only slightly.
And cauterize the neck of the spine. And if your doctor says that the patient's liver has been affected by a hot cautery, use another cushion for their knees.
Then apply heat to the affected area; if another cushion is needed, place it on the patient's legs.
And if it is necessary to apply cautery to their ailments, put your hand on their joint.
This refers to the treatment of illness in the lungs and coughing.
Then if necessary, the patient should be treated with a cushion under their legs to prevent further complications.
And if you wish, let the patient's hands be covered with cushions.
E siat lo metge lo qual ha de fer la cura.
And now, the way to apply a cautery on their legs and feet.
Chapter 25.
And so apply the cautery to their legs.
And if the patient has a fever or swelling, they are usually called back to the table by a physician's assistant.
And thus the two sources are brought together.
And if there are no other signs of the disease, it is called a "cold" by the doctors.
And sometimes the patient's intestines are treated by applying a cushion to them, and another way for them to be used.
Then apply pressure to the intestine to stop the bleeding.
And if the cushion is placed on the chest, then cauterize the joints.
E aprop reducat o, a proper translation would be more accurate.
This refers to the treatment of a condition affecting the stomach, likely involving cautery.
Then, for the patient's own good, you should cauterize the intestines to prevent them from being drawn out.
And if the depth of the cautery is appropriate to the amount of pain, the patient will be in good health.
And here's the cushion that should be used for this type of treatment.
And if it is necessary to cauterize the stomach, then do so according to the amount of pain you want, and you will heal by applying a certain amount of heat.
Then apply the appropriate cautery to the affected area.
Then apply a cauterization to the affected area.
Translation:  If you are a doctor, apply cauterization to the affected area.
And if a person's body has been infiltrated by excess humors, they are said to have the gout, which affects their legs, and they should be treated accordingly.
And do not press your hand upon the patient's body.
And if the pain is caused by a cold humor, it can be said to have gout.
And if you are careful, it is possible to perform cauterization on the patient's legs, which is a delicate procedure.
The text is likely describing how to apply a treatment for gout, but the wording suggests a misunderstanding of the condition and its causes.
The text describes a doctor's role in treating gout, using a cautery tool to apply heat to the affected area.
Then apply cauterization to the area of the liver if necessary.
At that point, if a boil appears, one should know that it's a sign of infection, which needs to be treated.
And if it is in the intestines it is already necessary to use medicine.
The patient's intestine has been affected by an ailment, which causes pain, so another method of treatment is to apply cautery to the affected area. Then you must apply a cautery to their legs, so that the burn can be controlled by the patient.
Then, you should place a cushion on the other's legs to help them recover.
And if a doctor has to burn the foot to cure someone, they will know how to do it properly.
In the 29th chapter ...
The pain is in the foot, so it is called a "plague".
This is a Latinized phrase that means: And if you want to do as they did in the past, you can use the ancient methods of treating with leeches.
Then apply a cushion to the patient's leg and use a bandage to prevent bleeding.
The patient should be treated in accordance with the traditional practices for treating their condition.
This translates to: Let the patient be treated by a physician, for if they are left untreated, it may be forgotten that the joint pain is caused by gout.
Perhaps: Yes, in this kind of treatment, it's customary to use a cautery tool for the other ailments?
Here's the translated line:
This refers to the process of cauterization used for treating ailments in the legs.
When you cure the disease of the patient's body with a cautery, there are three ways to apply it.
This means that the patient's condition is most likely gout.
And if you want to treat it, apply heat.
E if the patient's condition allows, you can use another method of cauterization for the other side.
And so, if it is necessary to make corrections on the surface of the body.
Then apply cauterization to the patient's legs, place a cushion beneath them, and use another to hold them in place while applying the cautery.
And so you have made four cauterizations.
And if you wish, make a cautery brand with a cushion under their legs.
Then, apply medicine to their legs and another treatment to the other parts of the body.
Of the 31st chapter
Another word for "the cure of" is "treatment of."
Then apply a cushion to them (the legs) if necessary.
This is a bit tricky because it seems like you're asking for a translation of something that doesn't exist in English. And if the patient's pain is located in the legs or elsewhere, then apply heat.
And place your cushion on their legs, for you are now using a hot cautery.
When the body is afflicted with gout, apply two cushions to the patient's legs.
Then the patient's foot is cauterized to treat a disease caused by cold humors in their legs.
Gout is caused by an excess of cold humors in the body, which causes them to become inflamed.
Then return the burning pain in their legs to its original location.
When the wound is inflamed, you should apply a cautery to the affected area.
Then apply a burning cautery to the patient's legs, as well as a cautery to the ends of the leg bones to burn away the excess uric acid. The patient's bowels are affected by fever and chills, apply cauterization to their legs.
Translation: And if the intestine is exposed for a long time, it may be called gout by other doctors.
Then apply a compress to their legs, and then they will be cured by these causes.
And apply cauterization to the affected area to reduce inflammation.
The translation is: This refers to cauterizing the veins in the leg.
Gently heat the patient's legs and apply cautery to the areas where other doctors have made diagnoses, and use a hot iron for the stomach and a cushion for support.
And if you are treating swelling in the intestines and feet, you should do so without causing pain.
Then apply the cautery to the affected area.
Translation: Then, apply the treatment to the affected areas, such as the anus or another area where the pain is located.
Then apply three poultices to the affected area, as we said above, for those who are suffering from rheumatism or gout, apply poultices to their legs.
And if the stomach of the patient becomes inflamed, you should apply a cooling cautery to the area around the stomach to avoid the pain from spreading to other parts of the body.
This appears to be a medieval medical text in Latin, likely describing a surgical procedure.
And if you apply heat to the body, it will cause pain in their legs.
When you apply pressure to a wound, it will often cause the fluid to rise up in the body, but the cushion should be placed on the legs. Then apply a cautery to the foot.
And do they place a cushion on their legs, so that the patient's intestines are not affected by the procedure.
Then apply cautery to their legs, and another one on the body as a whole.
This text likely refers to a specific type of medical treatment involving a procedure.
And they are hot, the doctors will call them fistulas by nature.
When the nature of the patient's illness requires it, we will apply a cushion to their legs.
Thus, if the patient has a wound in the leg or foot which is deep, you should use a poultice to treat it.
And if you are treating someone for it, use a cushion to apply heat. Then apply a hot compress to the affected area on the foot, which will help the patient if they have pain in the joint, or are suffering from a fever.
And they call it another pain within the legs when applying the cautery to all of them at once.
When the pain is in the bladder or intestines, they should be treated with caution.
Then put your hand on their abdomen.
When the patient is seated for a long time, they are susceptible to the dangers associated with blood stasis.
And if the pain persists, a physician may need to be consulted.
This refers to using a tool or placing a cushion on the patient's legs, while another person attends to their needs.
The treatment of another type of gout (using the term "ronhos" to suggest it's a specific type of joint pain)
When there are pains in the thighs due to cold, it's important to apply a bandage or cauterize the area to prevent further complications.
And so you see, the second [sentence] will be considered a serious cautery.
Chapter 38.
When treating inflammation of the bladder, always use a pointed tool.
Then apply the heat to the affected area by cauterizing them.
Apply heat to the affected area of the body.
E  sia  clavia e si  sia la (or another) cushion, you use to treat it.
Capitol .xxxix.
And so the patient's body should be heated up with the cushion.
When using the three cauteries, it is important to use them properly.
This is the forty-first chapter.
This refers to a procedure for treating a dislocation.
Gout is a condition that is caused by an imbalance in the body's humors. And the patient's legs are affected by their dislocation.
Then, if the patient's body has been burned by the cautery, place a cushion on their legs and ankles to prevent further burning.
And if it is necessary to apply heat to the area, use the proper methods.
And if you can't be present, another doctor will do for that person.
And if a burn appears, apply cauterization to the affected area.
Chapter xli.
This is a translation for the vein that runs down the back of the thigh.
That which is a cure for humors in the leg.
The manner of using a cautery on the foot is by means of a cushion or fire.
The patient's legs should be caressed with a hot cautery to promote healing. When you are treating an ailment in the legs, it is customary to place the patient on a cushion.
At least four times a year I am asked to translate this.
And if you wish to burn the fat, use another burn on the patient's thighs.
And this is the way to treat a pain in the legs by using cautery when the pain is concentrated on one specific area.
This pain-relieving technique must be used on patients with pain in the legs and feet. The cushion is placed upon the patient’s legs to prevent them from moving while the other two techniques are used.
And if the patient has a hot humor, use cold cauterization, and for a cold humor, use hot.
And then apply a cautery to the foot three or four times.
When pain affects the legs, they are to be called for treatment.
And if you have been burned by hot vapors, you are to hold your hands on the burning, and prevent further injury.
E already I have seen some cauterize the cushion's surface, they say it's called surgery. And then apply cold treatment to the patient's stomach, and you should know that the abdomen was the site of the problem area.
And if there is pain in the two parts of the body, put cushions under them.
When they are burned, the doctors will use a cushion to support the patient's leg.
And you should use a cautery over their three-quarters (of the body)?
The physician should use cautery to treat the affected area of the body. And so cauterize that area between the legs.
Leave it open for three days; and apply a poultice to the affected area for three days.
This means that the patient's condition is being described as a medical problem.
And if the patient has pain in their legs, apply cushions under them.
Mays cauteri are medicines applied to the feet.
Then apply heat to the area, and have a physician treat the patient's condition.
And if the patient's body has been affected by a cold, then apply warm water to their knees.
Then apply the cautery with warm water on the patient's body.
And if it is necessary to keep the patient's bowels from being constipated, then he should have his intestines or bowels treated for three days, and a cushion placed under them, and another on his legs, which will cause the intestine to be put back in place.
And then they should cauterize that which causes gout.
And then apply the treatment to their body part as needed.
This refers to the way to treat the condition with a hot iron or fire cautery. When using the cautery, be careful to use only the amount necessary for the patient's health.
The cushion should be placed under the patient's legs to prevent them from becoming cold.
And already put back into place all the intestines, and another cushion will be placed on his chest.
And if it is hot, apply cold medicines to them, and use another cushion for the pain in their feet.
Then apply the same treatment to the other leg as well.
And so, when pain is caused by inflammation in the body, it is known as gout.
Let it be left three hours after the treatment by which the patient's leg has been treated.
And if you need to apply heat to a specific part of the body, use a hot compress on that area.
Then know that these medicines are used to treat swelling caused by humors in the body, except for the bowels (which are affected by other things).
When the body is affected by a disease caused by cold humors, and the intestines are treated with a cushion to prevent further infiltration.
Then apply a poultice to the foot. And if you find that pain occurs in their legs, they need to be treated by a doctor.
This refers to the way the body's humors are distributed:  "And if you apply this cautery to the surface of the foot, you will have burned a portion of the intestine."
When pain in the foot arises from cold humors, it is customarily called gout.
Of the legs, leg pain
And if the pain comes from a cold humour, it's called sciatica.
And if the patient has a cautery done in any other way than for gout, then do the following: use a hot cushion on the affected area, and apply the cautery to the legs using this method.
And if it is customarily necessary to apply a cauterization to the foot, because they are already treating the patient's bowels.
And let there be cautery applied to the affected area.
When you have treated them, if they are willing, your three or four assistants should be on their hands and knees to work on the patient's body.
Another method was used to treat the joint pain.
From cauterization, at the beginning of the illness, the patient experiences pain in the legs.
This is a description of a medical procedure for treating gout in children.
And if there are other symptoms, such as swelling in the legs or feet, then treat it with cautery.
And so when you apply heat to the patient's body, use a cautery on the legs and cauterize the other one. Then apply a cushion on their feet, and the other one on their legs, to keep the spondils in place.
If you wish, cauterize the spine, using two or three lines on the limbs. Then apply the cautery to the area of the wound on their body, and only then they should be given relief from pain.
Then apply the cautery to the affected area.
Then apply your hand to the area for cauterization if the patient's condition is caused by an imbalance of humors.
Chapter xliv.
This refers to treatment for gout using cautery.
When there are gout-like pains in the body, the doctors used to say 'gout' only for the cold humors that affected the legs, and they were wrong.
And therefore if they are healed, then it is necessary to do something about their feet, which may be caused by another thing.
And if you need to cauterize that ailment, use a heated tool for the purpose.
The patient's body should be cauterized using olive oil.
And you will apply a cushion to the legs. And if pain occurs in the legs or other joints, use a hot cautery on that area.
And if it is necessary to burn you are to apply the cautery on the hands, and another for the legs, so that the cushion may be applied firmly.
And if the patient's pain must be described, then apply the cautery to their legs.
Then return to the patient, and the word "goût" is used when referring to the taste of the food they eat.
And so they placed it on the foot, making points on the toes.
Then if the patient has been cauterized on the legs or arms, a cushion is to be placed under their feet.
When there are symptoms in the foot, the doctor should be consulted.
This is a note from chapter 45.
On proper treatment of inflammations.
...And if it is necessary to cauterize the patient's legs and feet, then apply a poultice to the area...
And if you have a wound on your leg, and another on their feet.
And if you wish to treat the patient's foot pain, it is necessary to use a cautery in a circular motion.
And so if you have a cushion under their legs, put the other cushion on the other side of the body.
It is necessary for the patient's legs. Then apply a cushion to their legs and place your hand on it.
And if you have to make incisions on the intestine or bone marrow, use a tool called a cautery.
And then place the cautery on their ankles to ensure that the blood is drawn from the legs and not from the patient's body.
Then apply heat to the intestine to relieve it.
When you are treating a patient, if pain arises from a wound, it is because the bone has been touched by the fire.
And if a patient has a sharp pain in their limbs, it is said to be caused by humors that have become too hot.
E apro que curas e'n tre'l loc de'l boder le'n siet a la sua cura.
And if there are other humors, then they are treated by cauterization.
Then apply a cushion to their legs, and seal the area to prevent further harm.
And when you have opened the joint (of the patient), apply a bandage to their legs to keep the blood from pooling.
And if one wants to open the leg or foot of a patient, they must be careful to apply it correctly.
And you must cleanse the affected area of the disease's humors by applying this remedy to heal it completely.
And so we call them a break if the pain is in the legs and they are not healed by other means.
And if it is necessary to cauterize the wound on their legs, one must apply another cushion under them.
And that the patient's hand must be used to hold the cushion on their legs.
Chapter 46.
Then apply the cautery to the area of the wound.
Then put your hand on their hands to prevent them from being burned.
And if a hot iron cautery is used on the body, there are many ways to do so depending on the size of the area being treated.
If the pain persists, you must try again to apply the cushion on the patient’s legs so that they are treated with a cautery if they have been experiencing other pains.
This chapter concerns itself with the treatment of gout in the legs.
The translation for "Le praiseless disease" should be used as a reference.
Then they must be held back by force or by a strong hand.
E no es necessari que se’l tracti amb el foc per fer-lo sortir de la composició del cos.
And if you cauterize the legs of someone who is suffering from a severe attack of gout.
And if you see that leprosy has spread to the area of the toes, you should apply cautery to the feet, taking care to use a cushion for the toes, and only treat the other areas of the body with the cautery.
And if you're using the treatise to heal, keep your hand on the other joints while applying cautery to their feet.
E alcunas veguadas es cauterizat (meaning 'are cauterized') for a reason.
And if the pain is in the joints, that pain should be called mautid by other people.
And if there are great humors in the body, it is a case for the physician to treat them.
Then apply a healing remedy to the patient's body.
Chapter 48.
Then you might use a cautery on them.
Then apply a cautery to that area for treatment.
And if it is necessary to hold the patient's body open, the surgeon will use a cushion. And then apply the appropriate ointment to that area (of the body), which has been opened by the use of a poultice.
And if it is necessary to cauterize any part of the body, and place it on the thigh of the patient, then the other servant's will be taken care of by the patient's own cushion, which is placed under them.
This is a very rough translation because the language isn't precise enough to be sure.
The xlixth chapter.
And apply cupping therapy to the skin, for the treatment of morfea.
Then apply the medicinal cauterization to the affected area.
And if it is necessary to treat a disease, a portion of the intestine should be treated in the same way.
Capitol .l. means Chapter 1 in this context.
The patient has been burned.
When cancer is caused by an imbalance of humors, then treat them as you would for gout in the previous translation.
And if it is necessary to cauterize the flesh of the body, the doctors are used to that being called gout.
And if you have a pain in the bowels, apply your hand to the affected area.
Chapter 51.
And if it is necessary to cauterize the legs, they apply it to those limbs.
When a fever is delayed in its maturation, it is necessary to cauterize the legs or feet.
Then apply cauteri to the patient's feet if they need it.
And if there are painful sores in that place, the cushion will be used to treat them.
Chapter 52.
And so they cauterize the corrodent.
You are treating the patient for gout.
Therefore, treat the pain according to the body part affected by the ailment.
Then apply a cautery to that area to remove all the impurities from within.
Then apply a poultice to the affected area for three days, cauterizing the flesh to remove the bad humors.
And that which has opened the patient's bowels should be treated as such.
And if it is necessary to make cushions upon the foot, the surgeon will need to use a cushion on the legs and another on the hands.
And apply acute medicine to the affected area. But by fire you must cauterize the disease, otherwise it will be painful for the patient.
Therefore, you are already familiar with the treatment for acute pain in the legs and feet, and other ailments, using quick cauterization.
The doctor's instructions are for treating pain in the legs caused by a specific ailment.
This is a tricky one! Here's a possible translation based on your examples:
And then there are two types of cauterization, one for the cure of hot and cold humors.
You have already used a cushion to treat the patient's ailment, which is why they are now suffering from a pain in their feet.
And so then you must cauterize the area at the cushion, and use another to hold le down. And that's how you treat the patient for three days. Then apply a poultice of wild leeches to the patient's affected area for one night, because if the pain were to be in their feet, it would be necessary to use leeches on them.
And apply to the area a poultice of meat, which will heal them.
And when the patient's body is cold, apply a cushion to their thighs, place another cushion under their legs for support, and use it to treat them.
And then you have placed your hand on the other one's legs, and another on their chest.
Then apply a poultice to the affected area.
The 53rd chapter.
When there's pain in the joints or limbs, they often call it a "hot" treatment.
Quan endeve you cauterize to heal the patient.
And if you hurry to return to the doctor's health, he will be able to treat the illness that afflicts his body.
This is the 50th chapter.
Then apply the other cushions as needed for support.
The text describes using a burning myrtle stick as a treatment for an ailment, likely referring to a type of surgery.
Then apply a hot iron to the patient's legs, if necessary; otherwise, apply heat to the body in other ways.
May these words be spoken to you as if the first were a cushion under their legs for a proper evacuation.
Capitol lvi. is a Latin phrase that translates to "Chapter 56".
The patient has an injury to the foot from archery that needs cauterization.
And if it is necessary to hold the patient's body open for the treatment of plague sores.
A hot cautery is used to treat the pain caused by gout in the feet.
And if you have already opened the area of the legs, place large hot irons on their hands.
And then place a hot iron on the area where the blood vessel is inflamed.
Then if the patient is bleeding from an artery, apply a cautery to stop the bleeding.
Then keep the patient safe from harm.
E sapias that when blood is needed from the leg, the doctor's usually use a hot cautery to treat it.
And if it is necessary to restrict movement in their case.
Then apply a cautery to the area of the vein, if necessary, and the patient's body should be kept warm and dry.
The patient's legs are to be treated differently depending on the type of ailment they have.
Then put your hand on the legs or foot to locate the pain.
Then, in this chapter, we will discuss how to treat those who suffer from pain in their limbs.
Then you will learn about cautery in this chapter.
This sentence translates to: And place a cushion on their legs, and so on, for all those who are afflicted by gout.
Then I will remind you to be careful of the way you handle the patient's legs. And if the disease continues and is severe, apply a cushion to the patient's cavity.
And if it is a pernicious disease that affects the whole body, then it is called a disease by another.
Aprop the intestine; you will place your hand on their legs to prevent the intestines from being exposed.
And place your hand on the patient's body, above the area to be treated, and when the pain subsides, apply a cushion to their leg or foot.
And if you have already applied a cushion to their legs, they are in pain.
And if you are treating someone for a pain in the bowels, you should use a cautery with caution on their feet.
This refers to the beginning of a chapter in an ancient text.
And so apply the cautery to the child's legs.
Sapias que questa malautia motas:
And sometimes the pain is hidden in the legs.
And if a doctor has seen a patient with this ailment on their legs, then he will know how to treat them.
And if you have already treated the child's head with the fire cautery, you should know that his/her humors are too hot for the heat to be applied there.
This sentence describes applying cauterization to treat a condition (likely related to inflamed tissue) that causes pain in the legs.
When there is an inflammation in the affected area, it will be treated by applying a cushion to the joint pain.
And so if the humors are more inflamed and there is an abscess, you should treat them with a cautery.
And so the doctors would say that the pain in the foot is due to an excess of humors causing the water to be forced out. When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate the legs and feet, apply cautery to the affected area.
And if a burn is needed on the limbs, apply the cauterization to the affected area with a pointed tool after the fifth day.
And if you are treating a boil (carbuncle), apply an incision in front of the patient's right or left foot, as needed.
And place another cushion on their feet when you cauterize them.
This is the second chapter.
When encountering pain in the ankles or foot, apply cauterization to the affected area.
And thus, when you apply a pointed cautery to a patient's legs, they are likely to be treated with a cushion under their feet; the other symptoms are for the doctor to consider.
And place your hand on the patient's body to feel for the pain of the disease.
And if you wish, put your hand on his foot to be used for treatment on the body.
And if there's a need to apply heat to their legs or feet in order to keep the intestine from protruding, they should be kept covered.
And if the pain does not subside, place a hot iron on it.
And if it is necessary to drain the humors from the body, it must be done carefully by the quantity of blood that is present in the foot, so that the patient's pain doesn't worsen.
And another consider the plague, so that they may be protected from its causes.
And apply cauterization to the affected area for healing.
And when there was pain in the feet, the people who were doctors would stand by and wait to see if it was necessary to apply a hot cautery to the affected area.
This is a guess at what the text in your example (source 2) might be trying to say:
When the pain is felt in the feet, it’s called gout by doctors, as they are familiar with the ailment.
The manner in which the patient's temples are treated in the operation is described as follows.
And if the patient has a cushion to soften the pain in their legs or feet, it will be less painful for them. And if you wish to treat the patient's condition, apply a bandage to their legs. This text describes how to treat gout by applying a heated cautery to specific areas of the body.
And if the blood vessels are thin, the pain would be less intense.
And then, if necessary, evacuate wine from the blood.
When the pain of the arrow is great, hold the patient in two places with a strong thread or with two strong bandages so that their blood does not flow freely.
And apply cautery to remove the excess fluids from the body, which are causing the pain in the lower part of their legs.
If you wish, use a cushion to prevent that from happening, and apply it on the legs, or elsewhere if needed.
And if it is customary to call gout a disease that affects the stomach or other parts because of humidity, it's better if the patient has a fever or suffers from a hot complexion.
And if you have to be treated for gout, use a cushion to apply heat to the affected joint area.
Then, if the pain worsens, apply another cautery to the affected area. And if any of those causes are present in that case, place your hand on the place where the pain is to prevent the affliction from spreading.
And if it is necessary to use a heated instrument for treatment, it’s important to apply it carefully to avoid injuring the surrounding tissues.
This is how you use a cautery.
And place your hand on the patient's ribs. But if the pain is in the legs, the patient should be placed on their back, so that the bowel can be examined for a possible hernia.
So when the gout affects a limb, it is customary to treat it with heat applied to the affected area.
And this work is best done when the patient is lying down.
Then if there's an open wound on the foot, use another cushion to protect it.
Chapter four.
This refers to the use of a cautery to treat the pain of acute gout.
And the patient's body must be treated by applying a cushion to the area on their legs, where the pain was in the knees.
And if you are experiencing pain in your joints, which you have called gout, caused by an imbalance of the humors in the body's front. And if the patient's body has a tear in two places: one on the leg, which is the same as that of the foot, and another on the other side of the tear in the leg, then make the tear longer.
And you must keep your hand on their legs. And if there are any cuts or openings on the body, make them three days apart.
And if you are treating the patient's dry intestines, you should use other methods.
You have already found the patient's body. The burning pain in the limbs can be treated by applying the cautery to their legs, and the patient must have them applied carefully so as not to cause further harm. Apply a cushion to their legs. And then place a bandage on the patient's legs to protect them.
Another way to say you have a cushion on the leg, and you place your hand on their body, and then burn them.
This means that the doctors will call for the patient's health by making incisions on the body.
Another person should hold the patient's legs while someone else works on the intestine.
And another cushion is placed on their feet, so that they are treated with heat, e.g., hot poultice.
Then on the third day, apply the cushion to the affected area for three days.
Chapter 5.
> This translates to something like: And if it is necessary to make cautery on the limbs below the head, a surgeon should be applied to their lower legs.
When joint pain is caused by severe cold that weakens the body, it is important to apply cauterization.
Then apply heat to the intestine above and below the incision site, using a hot iron or cautery.
Dry out all the blood with a sponge or dry cloth. And there rest upon their legs and apply heat to soothe them.
Then if the abscess has subsided, apply an ointment made from four parts of oak gall and two parts of each part of the ingredients that are used for treating a wound.
The text uses the word "et" which means "and" in Latin.
From its literal meaning, it appears to be: About the cure of the ailment in the ear.
So there are four types of causes for pain in the joints:
And if it is a pain in the joints, then they are called humors, or something like that, for the other things, which are also called by the same name. And if a patient has been afflicted by a condition where the skin is red and hot in the affected area, it is caused by these humors.
Then if you are not a skilled surgeon, the procedure should be done by a professional.
Sometimes doctors use leeches on the arms to treat pain in the legs and feet.
And if it is necessary to cauterize a patient's leg, you should place your hand on their leg and use a canula. E aprop extratte the cushion so that the patient's body does not become inflamed.
Then apply a poultice to the affected area. And you have to treat the ear with the same care as the rest of the body.
The patient suffers from pain in the legs due to their intestines being affected.
Then place your hand on the affected area to stop the blood from coming out. Then if it is necessary to cauterize the affected area, then use that same tool on their thighs; place a cushion there to support the leg muscles during treatment.
And when you have found the cause of the illness, you will administer the cure and apply cautery to the affected area. Then apply a cushion to their arm, and another under the knee.
And if you are thinking about a patient's illness that affects the body through subtle means, then the patient should be kept in a dry place to avoid further irritation.
Then apply heat to the stone if it is not in the patient's urethra and the patient needs to be treated at the beginning of the illness and put a hot cloth on their legs, and start with that treatment. And then that you must take care that the water does not return to its former state.
And then that you must take care that the water does not return to its former state. The first word "is cushion" and the second word "are cushions" are likely mistranslations from the original.
And if it be necessary to place so many cauterizations upon the patient's body as was said above, it is proper that they be called gout.
When a beast's leg needs to be cauterized, then cauterize it as described in the previous section.
Anoter si es necessitat de curar le patient's bowels, use le cushion on their legs.
And if you take the patient's words into account, then take the cushion from the foot, and a needle from another place. And if you want to cauterize the pain from the joints, use a pointed tool for that purpose.
Mays si no  aforementioned cushion for their treatment.
And that they use a hot iron to cauterize the affected area. And if you want to apply a poultice or need to make cuts there, they'll use a cushion for the pain and another one will be used to stop the bleeding.
And then apply heat to whatever is in the cautery's cavity if necessary. And if you want to help, use a cushion under the elbow and apply your hand to the affected area —  the patient’s leg should be positioned on the cushion, and the other herbs or medicines should be applied to the chest.
E aurelia that which you do in the thigh is on another. And if it is the same cause as the pain in their legs, they should be treated with remedies that remove the humors.
Chapter 7
And when the surgeon cauterizes their ears, they are to hold their tools.
Then apply a cautery to the affected area on the flesh of the limb where the sore is located, as well as to the stomach or other areas that are needed.
Gout, if caused by a specific humor in the patient's body, is a condition that requires treatment from a doctor.
When you see a sign of that ailment which is called "malaute", place a cushion under them (under the affected area). And so if you see the symptoms, treat them with a cautery to their affected part of the body.
And if a person has a pain in the leg, and a cushion is placed under the affected area.
Then apply a cushion to the affected area, if necessary, and use other techniques to relieve the pain.
Then apply the cautery to the patient's leg slightly near the knee.
And if you feel a pain in the body that causes a pain to the leg.
And if you wish to draw out the evil humors from an inflamed part of the body, it is best to apply a poultice made with herbs and oil.
If bloodletting occurs, you must apply the poultice soaked in the spirit of distillation, as described elsewhere in the text.
Chapter 8.
The physician uses a cautery to treat illness in the patient, who is being treated for a malady.
Some doctors believe that the eyes are affected by cold humors when they are red and swollen.
Then he uses a cushion to support the patient's legs and another cushion to prevent the intestine from coming out.
When you have a wound on your feet, it is customary to use a cautery tool.
The best way to treat them is by burning and another cushion is placed on the legs, so that the burn will be confined to the area where the incision was made, or the affected parts are the only ones burned.
This is the beginning of chapter nine, which discusses the treatment of gout in the limbs.
And then apply the cauterization to the eyes if needed.
The patient's illness is caused by some unknown factor.
Another person should place cushions on their legs and feet to prevent them from moving during the procedure.
And if it is necessary to cauterize the patient's body, the whole body will be treated with a cautery tool.
Therefore, it is customary to call it gout for a burn in the feet.
And if it is large, you must cauterize it to prevent further damage.
And if you have a small amount of bad blood, it will be healed by a small dose of something (possibly an ointment) to help your body heal.
And if a cautery is applied to the body in this way, you must keep it open for the patient's eyes.
Then put your hand on the affected area to apply salt water.
Chapter 10
And if it is necessary to cauterize the eye, then a cushion should be placed on their legs.
A great physician attends to the patient's humors, and applies it.
And cushion your legs so the cushion doesn't move, but rather stays in place;
And if you have already opened the body for a doctor to treat the patient's illness.
And if it is necessary that you cauterize the vein, use the white heat method.
And if you are treating the condition known as a deformed foot, cushion it.
And be careful not to injure the intestine when dealing with the problem near the head.
When a fissure appears on the foot, then you must apply a poultice to the patient’s legs; if necessary, make small incisions with a knife to allow for drainage.
And if it is necessary to put the cushion on their back and another one on their feet.
Then treat the sick person's legs and feet.
When an abscess appears on the leg, it can be treated with poultices.
The following is a more accurate translation based on the provided text:
From the way it's written, it appears to be a medieval text that mentions "the manie" as if referring to a part of the body.
This text appears to be in a language that resembles Latin but is likely a form of Occitan, a Romance language once spoken in southern France.
Therefore, if you have an ache in your left eye, use a hot coal to cauterize it; or if it's elsewhere on the body, use it there.
And so, if you have an opening in their flesh, they should be covered by a bandage made of cloth or fabric, and the cloth should be applied to the area with a mirror or other instruments.
Then you have identified the location on the body affected by the ailment, the patient should be treated with medication to help it heal properly.
Then apply the cauterizing tool to the area of the tear. And then place a cushion under their legs, which are natural to the body.
Then you'll want to place a cushion on the patient's legs, as needed, and apply heat to relieve the pain.
And if the pain has subsided, you should apply a cautery to their feet.
But if you wish to do so, apply the cushion to the affected area.
He is, however, brave and courageous in his suffering.
Then apply a different method for treating the patient's condition using this method, placing your hand on their eyes, etc.
Then comes another cushion to help you if your legs are swollen.
And when the patient’s lips are closed with a suture, the wound will heal.
If you have a cushion, put it under the patient's body and cover them with it, along with their body being covered with another cushion.
Therefore, if the pain is in the legs, it is said to be a pain of the leg muscles.
Then return the cushion to the patient's legs, and apply a poultice according to their condition. and so on, with the body's own; And you have already cut into the extremities of the patient's body, then keep their legs open.
And if there are any signs of inflammation on the body, and a cushion will be placed under the eye to see where the pain is located, and you should apply that same treatment to the affected area.
Mays es that if a wound is in the leg and the patient has it in their thighs, they will be healed by cauterization.
The patient's eyelids are elevated and the eyes do not have pain.
And then apply heat to the area where the pain is located. And if it is necessary to use a hot cautery, do so carefully.
Another cushion must be placed on the patient's legs.
When there are many treatments for a disease, it is customary to call it gout.
If the patient has pain in the bowels, use a cushion to treat them; if they have it in the limbs, then place a cushion on their feet. And the length of the intestine should be about the length of a palm.
And so if there's an inflammation in the legs or feet, you need to treat them.
And the patient's condition will be relieved by a gentle touch.
And then apply the needle to the foot, where it is necessary to use a cushion under the cushion and another on the chest, so that the needle penetrates the skin quickly and efficiently.
And then apply the other one to the skin.
Then you have to apply heat to the affected area of the body, in this case the eyelids.
Then apply another cushion to the affected area.
And so you should leave the patient in their bed and let the body be treated for two or three days by the physician.
E then you apply a cautery to the affected area.
This is a treatise on the treatment of wounds.
When a treatment for the eye involves applying something to the eyelids, it is called a blepharoplasty.
When a cushion is placed under the foot, it is customary to call it gout.
Apply a bandage to the affected area.
And let it be known that you should not use cauterization for treatment.
Usa  herbs to heal the wounds after they are treated with a poultice of herbs and ointment has been applied.
And the treatment for your ailment will be to apply the cushion to your legs, that is the way to do it at first.
And if their hands are used to apply heat to the affected area.
Chapter 14
And then apply cautery to prevent the spread of humors in the leg.
This is a true case of a condition called xerosis, which is known as "true" or "genuine" in its name.
Then apply other remedies as needed for the patient's ailment.
Then you must use a needle to pierce the flesh between the legs, for the pain is caused by the skin's inflammation.
Then apply a cauterization to the patient's legs using your tool. Then apply the poultice to the chest area in order to stop the pain.
The patient's legs are often called "the two points" in medieval medical texts.
And if a physician needs to examine the patient's body, they are the one who will be used for examination by the physician.
When you have placed the cushion on the patient's legs and another on their hands.
Apply wool thread to the separated parts if they are stiff.
And if you are unable to cauterize, use another method. And then separate the body from the cushion between the two lips of the vulva.
And in the case of the patient's recovery from illness, they are said to be healed in different ways depending on their condition.
E a cushion for the patient's comfort.
Chapter 15.
When the pain of gout in the legs has been relieved, they are located on the surface of the legs or foot.
Then apply heat to the eye and thus reduce the humour in the body, or open the area around the eye, if necessary.
Then apply a cautery to the patient's body using a small incision, but ensure the patient remains calm during the procedure.
When the eyelid becomes inflamed due to an excess of cushion in the foot, apply cold compresses.
Then apply your hand to the affected area and cauterize the gut, using heat to treat gout.
And if the patient's condition worsens after three days, use a cushion to apply pressure on their legs again for three days.
Chapter 16
When placing remedies on the affected areas, consider the use of a cushion for the body.
Then it is known that there are two types of gout, one caused by cold humors which cause pain, and the other by nerves which can be similar to the first.
When placed in two species, it is customary for doctors to use a special tool to treat them, but this translation assumes the text is originally in Italian.
If the patient suffers from pain in their feet, it's called gout when they have too much inflammation in the body. "And if it's necessary to use a needle for a medical procedure, hold your hand over the patient's wound." And then you will cauterize that area.
Then, if the patient has persistent pain in the area below the knees, apply cold compresses to their legs.
And if you have already opened the space between the patient's legs, you must place your hand on the affected area to prevent bleeding.
Make sure the foot doesn't touch the ground and that you are careful with the hot cautery.
Aprop the condition of gout can be treated by cauterizing the affected area.
And if you cannot put the needle back into the intestine, it is because it is not possible to place it so that it reaches the bone.
And if you wish to make incisions, it should be done on his legs. And if it is a subtle ailment. And if you are going to cauterize the foot, it should be done when the patient's humors are rare-fied and the pain is in the feet, so that the intestine or leg of the patient does not get burned.
And then place another cautery on the afflicted area again.
And then apply heat to their feet to heal them.
Acusually the patient's tears are held back by pain, but they are caused by humors that have been released from the eyes.
And apply a cushion to their tear ducts while they are still weeping, and so they will be healed.
Gout is a disease that affects the body by causing inflammation in the joints, especially the big toe.
And so cauterize the foot, to stop the blood flow to the affected area.
The patient's eyelids are affected by swollen humors, which are treated with a hot compress.
This person has suffered a wound in the area where their bowels are, and they have been treated for it.
And let your incision be made in the leg, which you will know to be the proper location for it.
And then you must apply a poultice to the affected area, and when the patient's foot has been treated with a cushion by the doctor, he will be in good health after applying this poultice.
And if it is the case that there is still some inflammation present, it is called a "hot" or "burning" disease by the physician.
Then apply heat to the legs only when the patient has a natural tendency for inflammation.
Capitol .xviii. translates to Chapter 18.
This refers to a treatment method involving the collection of fluids from the body.
If the pain is too much for them to bear, hold the patient's body still by using another cushion.
Therefore, you must first examine the patient's legs for signs of illness.
And if you have already instructed the patient to hold still their intestines (or whatever they are using as a metaphor for discomfort).
And thus you treat a bad leg with other methods.
Then use a hot needle to draw out blood from the body.
And if you have placed a cushion on their legs; the other veins are to be cauterized.
Then apply a cushion to their body so that they can be healed by the following method: place a poultice on the affected area.
Then if you want to prevent the pain from spreading, use a poultice.
And then apply the poultice to the affected area again.
And this is the form in which one should treat the patient.
Chapter .xix.
For the removal of the pain in the nose.
When you have cured the shins, put your hand on them to keep them from being inflamed.
Therefore, when the bone is exposed and has black spots, apply a cautery to the affected area as a last resort.
E.g.
And then, place a cushion on the injured part, as if to say "it is caused by the bone" being a little bit at a time until their position is known.
And then apply a hot cautery to the patient's legs?
And if that pain persists, use cautery to remove the bad humors and another to treat the other symptoms.
And if you want to avoid further complications, here's how to treat the condition using this method.
The patient's limbs are weak and should be treated with the utmost care.
Then place your hand on the foot to prevent the swelling from spreading further, and treat the condition properly.
Thus it is customary to cauterize the affected area with the appropriate tools.
Therefore, since the patient's body is affected by gout.
Capitol 20 is where you would find the English translation for the rest of the text.
And then the patient's legs are burned to prevent swelling in their feet.
And when joint pain arises, apply to the patient's legs a poultice of the same sort as would be used for a wound on the body, which you should cover with a cushion, and then you should place it upon the injured area.
Then fold a cushion four times in half to make four layers, and use it on the legs.
Then return the patient to their usual health. And then apply cupping therapy to these areas if they are in pain by applying a cup.
Then treat the ligaments as they are softened.
And then you will say that the patient's leg should be kept in its place.
If the patient's intestines are swollen, apply cauterization to their legs and the area where they were injured.
Capitol .xxi.  is an indicator that the text will continue after the initial 21 chapters.
Then apply a sharp instrument to remove the uvula.
When dealing with the first person suffering from pain, you will need to use the needle in one way or another.
Then lay the cushion on their legs and let another cushion rest upon their head.
And for the plague to be soothed by a cushion, apply a healing balm.
And sometimes apply another cushion to the legs of the patient with a hot cautery.
Place a cushion under the patient's feet.
Another hand
This means treatment for gout.
When it is necessary to make incisions in the body, it is customary for doctors to call the condition "alconati".
And if you wish to make an incision, you must first prepare the area by reducing the swelling with a cushion.
And if it doesn't go down, you can use it to make points, which are just called "the gout" by doctors.
Mays, if you are not able to cure the inflammation in the foot, then he needs to be treated by a specialist.
Therefore, if it is dislocated, use a hot poultice to reduce swelling.
And if it is necessary to treat the foot, they should be treated with other means.
Another hand should be placed on their chest, then apply cold water to the affected area.
This refers to the treatment of a condition affecting the person's back (the "huel" being likely the "leg")
This sentence is in a language similar to Latin, but with some variations. It likely describes a medical procedure, as the words "dolor" (pain) and "metges" (doctors) suggest.
Then apply a poultice to the affected area.
And if it is necessary to apply cautery to the patient's eye, apply it to the eyelid; if it is to the feet, they are placed on the legs, etc.
and if it is necessary to use both legs, apply heat to the left leg first, then the right.
And if you have already opened the way for the great pain on their legs, near the joint.
Then place your hand on their legs, preventing the pain from spreading.
When the ailment is known to cause pain in the joints, it is necessary to use a pointed cautery on those areas.
And if you can see the patient's pain in their body, then apply cautery to that part of the body.
Therefore, if you are able to put the patient's intestines back in place, then do so with a cushion.
And when the cushion is full of pus, you should apply a cautery to it.
May our time be blessed by those who are skilled in using a hot cautery for medical procedures.
Then, if a cautery is necessary for the treatment of a painful condition, then place a cushion on the affected joint to prevent further pain.
And therefore treat that joint with a cautery to open up the blockage.
And then they apply a cushion on the legs.
When the intestines are inflamed and doctors know how to treat them, they can be treated.
And apply a cauterization to the part that needs it.
And if it is the patient's disposition, it will be the third day.
Then apply a bandage to the affected area.
And you must take care when dealing with someone suffering from the pain of a gout attack, for they are easily offended. And if there are other methods to treat the pain, they should be applied gently.
And if an abscess arises in their legs, they will need to be treated for that abscess.
When the pain is severe, the patient's face turns pale for several days.
And keep it warm on their legs, et altro
The disciple is not exempt from the operation if it is necessary to cauterize the skin in those cases.
And if there are points of pain in the legs, apply a poultice to their location.
And perhaps you have seen a patient suffering from a condition called gout.
And when there are such things as pointed sores on the feet, it's customary to call them gout.
And if they are to be treated for sharp pains in the limbs or joints, it is by applying a cautery to the affected area.
The chapter on the treatment of a swelling in the legs begins.
Then comes the treatment of flesh wounds.
This is a description of some medical conditions that resemble a scorpion's sting to the patient. And if there is a need for medical attention because of the illness being caused by a cancerous growth in their body.
Therefore, if you have a problem with a pain in the foot that is not fraudulent or cancerous, you should treat your own foot first. When the pain of gout occurs in a limb, apply cold to the affected area. The doctor's practice is to cauterize the affected area if their pain persists and becomes malignant.
Then apply a cushion to the patient's nose while using the cautery. Mays si le nas is opened and a cushion is placed on their chest.
And if the illness is in the foot and nowhere else on his body, then it's likely he has a pain in the bowels, but he should be treated with a cautery applied to the affected area.
So, when there is a swelling in the legs or feet, one must be careful to avoid placing a cushion under them so they don't think it is an indication that you are giving up.
E then he will be given a cushion to apply to the affected area in order to prevent further pain from the injury.
This phrase describes the use of two cushions: one placed on the patient's chest (presumably to prevent them from moving during the procedure), and the other used for treating the pain in their legs.
And if it is necessary to make a bloodletting for the patient, place a cushion under their head, and another cushion on their chest if they have pain in that area.
Then apply a lead-tipped catheter for drainage to the patient's illness until they are healed.
Then use this if you want to cure them: use the hot water method.
E aquesta lu purgaunt, e le vòl e si es que los metges can be used to describe the form or shape of the instrument in relation to the body part.
And if it is silver-based, the treatment would be like that for a minor ailment.
If you want to make a cushion, place a canula on their legs, and another on their arms.
Chapter 25.
And if you want to burn their flesh, just do it elsewhere on the body.
The patient's hands are being bandaged because they are suffering from a condition that causes pain in the joints.
And if you wish to make a poultice, already put it on them. And if it is necessary, apply a poultice to help draw out the pain.
Then you must burn the skin to remove the blockage.
And if they have a boil that's a festering sore of a pale color, then apply a cushion on their legs to draw out the pus.
E aplegat to the parts of the body.
And apply a cushion to their lips and ears if necessary.
You know that in some men, gout affects the foot most often.
So sew the bandage on the patient's wound so that it may heal properly.
And if the patient's lips are swollen, you should know that they have an infection in their mouth. Adjust the cushion to place on the patient's two lips.
When a wound is opened in the leg, it is necessary to place a cushion under their leg and apply pressure on it.
Then apply the appropriate cautery to the affected area.
When applying cauterization to the inner or outer lips, you must apply it carefully.
The pain in the patient's body is so severe that they require cushions to be placed under their legs and chest for relief.
And if you need to apply cautery to one of those inflammations of the foot, it is necessary to put a cushion under them.
**Chapter 28.**
Make incisions in the flesh between the gums.
The cautery is heated and used to treat other ailments in the mouth.
And apply astringent or other cleansing powders to the affected area.
Then cauterize the flesh, but be careful to avoid reopening the wound.
This text should be translated as follows:
Then apply a bandage to protect the area around the wound.
When there are warts on the skin or gums of a body part, doctors call it a rough patch on the foot, but they don't know what causes them.
And then place the other one on the patient's thighs so that they are covered by it.
If you apply a cautery to a part of the body, it should be done at the beginning of the treatment, or else you will have to repeat the process from the start.
And you know that the teeth need a cushion to their forms and figures, so do they need various tools for themselves. E per cushion the intestines which are placed on the leg of the body, it is treated in a way different from how they would be treated when the patient's foot is opened.
Capitol .xxx. is the beginning of a chapter, likely indicating "Chapter 30" or something similar.
On the eradication of teeth.
And if it is necessary to remove the pain from the patient's tooth, then use a tool to do so.
When the tooth is extracted, it is hoped that the pain will leave the patient's body when the affected tooth is removed.
When you have a tooth that is painful at the beginning, only use a cushion, one for their leg, another for the other leg.
And place a cushion under their leg or foot, whichever is affected by the condition.
And thus if one has a fever, they should use a cautery to treat it, as done at the beginning.
Then you must apply a bandage or cloth to prevent the teeth from being damaged and use another for the other parts of the body.
And if you have to perform an incision on the patient's gums, they should be careful not to cause excessive pain.
And if you are already making cuts on their legs, then you should be an ignorant barber.
And then the patient's mouth has been cleansed with vinegar or sour wine.
When blood flows through the legs of the patient, apply heat and cauterize if necessary to prevent the pain from spreading.
When using forceps to remove teeth, it is necessary to be careful not to injure the patient's cushion (gums) when applying them to the patient’s teeth.
And if you make a cut in the small toe, hold it steady with your hand while cauterizing.
And if it is a wound on the leg or legs, they should be made in a specific way by a skilled person, and another tool used to keep the skin from tearing.
This sentence is likely from a text about the use of bloodletting in treating pain in the feet.
And if you must remove a tooth from their mouth, use a dental tool.
Then, when the tooth is pulled, and you have cauterized the area, apply the other cushions.
When it comes to their legs they should apply cautery.
And if you don't have a cushion under the patient's legs, use these small forceps.
And if the leg is being treated for a wound, one should be careful to ensure that the patient's small intestine does not become infected.
If an excess of phlegm has accumulated in the body, it is called “phlegmatic” or "gouts".
Then create a second cushion with a triangular shape and a more delicate instrument.
And then you assist them with the use of a cautery. And if the patient needs to have teeth pulled.
And if you have a long-standing, or a sudden attack on the legs, it is called an attack by the doctors.
And then you cauterize the teeth, and if necessary, the other parts of the mouth are also cauterized, using the same method.
The ancients believed that the pain caused by the use of certain tools or techniques could be eased by using them for treatment.
Then let the patient's mouth be treated with a sharp cautery, and if it is necessary to apply it to other bones in the body, such as the teeth or jaw, etc.:
And if there are any inflammations in the body, which may be treated by cauterization, it is called gout in that area; but if the inflammation persists elsewhere, it’s a sign of its severity.
And if you have pain in your bones, use a poultice to treat the affected bone.
In the case of a wound on the foot, it is important to apply heat to the affected area.
And from these other teeth are the causes of its prominence.
Then, apply a bandage to the affected area; if one's teeth are close together, but the pain is in the intestines, then use a cushion from the patient’s own body.
E que lu sua cosa in la denta, e cushion for he needs an other on his legs and another elsewhere.
Translation 4: When there's pain in the legs, it is customary to place a cushion under them, to place a cushion under the patient's feet.
Then apply the cushion to their legs and put them back in place. And then the patient's intestine should be cauterized if necessary.
And if you have to cauterize the legs, hold them firmly in place, and then the one who must be treated will be laid out on his back.
Another one that's a bit more understandable for the patient.
And if one wishes to restore teeth, gold or silver fillings are to be used.
And if you are dealing with a person’s joint pain, it should be treated as such by the physician.
And if the patient has an issue with bile, you should use a cushion between their legs and open up the space below the waist. Place your hand on the affected area to prevent the bone from becoming inflamed.
When the metatarsal bones are affected by gout, it is important to apply a cautery carefully.
The patient's legs are placed on the bed while the doctor works to remove the points by pulling them back into the cavity through a cut in the skin or the foot. And place your hand on their leg.
And if there are cushions under the legs or arms, they must be placed carefully to avoid pain.
And if you want to know what kind of pain it is, apply this to the legs and feet of a sick person.
This passage is likely describing the treatment of dental pain.
And so it should be done by a skilled craftsman.
And if you have already treated a patient's legs, they should be cauterized in the same way we treat the whole body for gout.
Then apply a hot cautery to the affected area.
And from the ligament which is affected, you will cut the tongue.
This ligament, which is called sciatica, is often caused by problems with the lower back or pelvis.
Then apply heat to the affected area so that the patient's pain can be relieved by applying a cauterizing agent.
If a person has pain in their legs or bowels, they will be given a remedy to alleviate the pain and relieve the inflammation.
If you want to know if there's a better way to translate the following:
and that is done by applying a cautery to the affected limb; then you should apply another to the incision, or by placing their hands on the patient's legs.
If a doctor applies heat to your body, it can cause a bloodletting in the foot. And place your hand on the patient's legs to prevent their pain from spreading.
This text refers to a specific chapter in a document, likely dealing with medical treatments related to gout.
Then apply the same method to treat the swelling in their legs and feet.
And if a burning sensation in the mouth occurs, it is necessary to put the cushion on the foot and the small one on the tongue.
Then open the patient's mouth to consider the pain in their limbs, especially if it is gout.
And if you think your body is sick, don't try to treat it yourself.
E then you must be careful to cauterize only the infected leg, because that's what is meant by "the which" in this context.
Then apply a hot poultice to the patient's legs and feet; a remedy for the ailment.
This appears to be written in a somewhat archaic language similar to Latin, but using modern Italian spellings. This suggests a translation along the lines of:
And if there are other inflammations in the patient's legs and they are caused by pain, hold them still.
When it is applied to the throat, use a poultice for the pain.
And if the pain is in the feet, it is customary to use a cautery for treatment.
If a person's foot is swollen and red from an excess of cold humors, they should be treated with a cautery.
E then the patient’s bowels are to be treated with respect for his condition.
And it should be done by a skilled hand using a silver or bronze instrument.
And if they are cold humors that cause pain in the feet, you should place your hand on the area to prevent the pain from spreading. And now we will treat the pain caused by the other's tools.
And now we will treat the pain caused by the other's tools. And if a person's body is affected by cold humors, it is customary to call them a gouty foot.
And if this instrument is not present, then apply it to the other side.
And apply the same method of incision to the other leg.
Migt-se de la milgrana, un tree, that it is a pain in the legs, which are caused by other causes, and it is cured with the remedies for those causes.
Then apply a cautery to their ears on both sides.
And the woman was already being medicated, who was a patient of the one called "a" by the physician, who had been forbidden to eat meat and drink dark water, who had been treated with a cautery on the throat.
And if a boil has already formed two openings on the body, treat it with two punctures.
And that which is in the foot, or below the knee, apply heat to it, and put a cushion on their knee, and another on the other parts, as it were.
And then apply heat to their legs, so they don't bleed too much. This appears to be a description of a person experiencing pain in their foot due to a condition, and another use of the word "am" to indicate the presence of the illness, suggesting the original text might be from a historical source discussing medical conditions.
And if God had made a hot iron to be applied to the patient's body, he would have known that he should not apply it to the other parts; but to the one that was afflicted with gout.
This is a difficult task as I don't understand the context of the provided translations.
From the cut made when a hot iron is placed on the foot.
And if the catarr is caused by humors in the legs, they are called a cushion on its other parts.
Then if you are treating an ailment that appears on the legs, it is said to be gout.
And if you see a patient suffering from the symptoms I previously mentioned, that person has already been treated by those who practice medicine in this way, which is how they are called:  those who treat with cold and cuts.
And if you do not know how to use a cautery on the feet, you should have it explained by someone who knows.
And then apply a hot incision, use two cushions for the legs, and treat those as they heal.
If a patient is suffering from pain in his leg due to gout, apply the cautery method described in the chapter on the treatment of gout.
When a person has pain in their body, they are treated with a cautery.
Then apply the heat to the affected area for an hour.
Then allow the feet to be submerged in the cushion of the thigh.
And if a sharp pain appears in the joints, they should be treated with medicinal applications to the affected area.
And so this type of healing is better than incision and other methods.
"And these are the cures for the ailments of the body, they call this one (the use of) poultice by these remedies."
And if the patient's legs are cold, another cushion should be used to keep them warm.
Do this at the beginning if you are treating their body with a cushion on their legs and another on their chest, and another under the patient's legs.
When experiencing pain in the legs or feet, the physician should advise using a cushion to protect the patient's intestines.
And this treatment is good for health.
Chapter 38.
And if it is necessary to remove something from the throat by surgery.
And if it is necessary to apply heat to the legs to stop pain from the cushion or some other cause.
And apply your tool to the parts of the body below the knee.
When you apply a bandage to the affected area, bandage it tightly to prevent the pain of gout from returning. And if the gout is in the feet, they will apply a poultice and carefully pull out the eel.
When you are in need to treat a patient, use this method if they have a pain in the legs, which means something else.
And then let it be known that the cushion is for the patient's feet, and another cushion is placed under their legs, and if they are in pain, you must place a cushion on the leg, and hold them until the pain subsides.
Then place a bandage on the bone in their chest so that the pain does not spread to the neck or throat.
Then place your hand on the patient's body to use the cautery, and make sure the patient is kept warm.
E si es necessite per le metges: To be treated by doctors.
And so, you're saying that this is how you would say "Apply your hand to the patient's neck" in the language of the given text.
When treating a patient with medicine, consider placing your hands on their legs to help them avoid discomfort.
So if you are experiencing pain in your legs, it's important to apply the proper treatment.
And if it is not possible to draw out the blood from the patient's foot, then you should place your hand on their chest.
Apointedly apply a cushion to the patient's legs when you are about to cauterize them.
If there is pain in the joints, then apply a poultice to the affected area.
And then apply heat to the area, and place a hot iron on the affected area.
And then cauterize the canula's opening to prevent its contents from spilling.
E if you don't cauterize it, the pain will spread to other parts of the body.
This sentence describes the use of a cautery tool on the foot, so we'll focus on that aspect for a more accurate understanding: Then apply the same to the feet, and if they are in pain, their hands will be cold.
Translation: This is the start of a chapter on cushions.
In which case the pain is in the legs, it's called a leg ailment by doctors.
And if it is necessary to treat boils in their various forms, they must be lanced, and the patient should be treated with other methods described in this book.
And then you should know that there are various types of procedures for treating these conditions.
Then the second cushion should be placed on their chest to help prevent the foot from returning to its natural position.
And prepare to treat the patient's skin with heat.
Then, when the body has been treated with a hot cautery, it is a good idea to cauterize the area around the joints as well. When a boil has matured, it's time to lance it.
Then apply another cautery point on their legs, so that the swelling does not spread to other parts of the body.
And if the patient has an inflammation in the legs, another cushion on the foot to prevent it from spreading.
And if a cauterization is needed on the intestine or foot, use a different tool for each location.
Mays your gut be inflamed by pain, and if you have to make a cut in the leg, it should be made at the point where the digestion has been confirmed.
Sometimes doctors mistakenly call gout a condition caused by something other than an excess of humors in the body.
And if you administer to those who are afflicted with the gout, give them a large incision and place a cushion on their legs, and another on their feet, and treat them accordingly.
And others that are caused by other means, such as those who have suffered from the disease called apostema.
And then you place a cushion under their legs to prevent them from being affected by the cold, which you have previously removed from the patient's body, while they were still suffering from other ailments, such as a fever or pain in the joints.
And on their feet they placed both a cushion and another for support.
And then you cauterize the area around their feet, for they are the most sensitive parts.
The pain has become greater since you applied heat to the area.
You have already opened the opening to the location of pain in the body, and you will place a cushion on their legs.
This chapter you must administer carefully, for it deals with applying cauterization to the legs and feet.
And if the wound is in the legs or feet, apply cautery to stop the bleeding.
When blood flows during the operation, you should apply heat to stop it from bleeding out.
And the doctor should continue to administer the cure and apply a bandage to stop the flow of blood from the ailment called "the flux".
If it is a pain in the legs or feet, it is customary to call it winter fever.
And if it is summer, put your hand on the affected part to apply a poultice, and then apply a cushion to the affected area during treatment.
Then use a heated tool to treat the affected area.
Chapter xli.
This means "And when the patient has a boil, which you have already opened on their chest".
This means: This refers to the treatment of gout by applying a cushion of spices to the affected area.
And they are to be treated with cushions that contain moisture similar to lime. And for those which are caused by cold humors, they are called gout.
And in the case of the feet, they will be healed by another method.
And so the patient's hands are placed on the body.
This is a bit tricky, but here's my best guess based on your example translations:
And when you are in the position to apply heat to the affected area, as the disease is treated by cauterization, if the patient is suffering from a condition that causes pain in the legs, which requires the use of cushions for support.
Then you should apply a cushion to the patient's legs, and then in the next day, the other on their feet; which are to be treated with water and salt, e.g., if they have pain there, use that for a treatment.
Then cure the swelling with Egyptian ointments.
And here comes the method for treating an ailment caused by excess fluids in the body. When there's a need to drain something from the body, they use a cautery to burn out the affected area.
And if you have a bow, then you should use it carefully.
Here, a similar process is applied to the leg as to the body; the leg is healed by means of cutting into their abdomen,
Gout is caused by the accumulation of cold humors in the body, affecting the joints.
This is just a brief excerpt from a chapter on treating sores and boils with cauterization.
You then translate the text's meaning into English.
Then apply your hand to the appropriate area, using the hot iron for treatment.
When pain arises in the joints or the foot, then it is called gout.
From the given examples, I'd translate "De seccio de scrophulas" as: "And those who have scrofula".
And sometimes it affects other parts of the body besides the legs and knees, and those are the places to cauterize.
As for those who have a hot temper, they are prone to gout in their feet.
And so are these swellings, which are caused by the swelling of the humors in the foot, treated as gout.
And apply poultices to the affected areas, but only on the surface, if the pain is in the legs, place a cushion on them.
And it is more caution that is needed to avoid damaging the patient's veins or nerves.
This sentence refers to the treatment of various ailments in the legs, likely due to an infection. When the blood is drawn out.
Therefore you have completed your task in a manner that returns the patient to their usual state.
Then treat those small joints for other causes of the other diseases.
And if you are burning the patient's skin, you should know that it is the big vein in their foot that is causing the pain. If you have an intestine or hernia that needs to be treated, it is customary for doctors to call it gout.
You have already given the patient who has old bandages for the wounds on their legs.
And if you treat a scrofula, you must apply a cautery to remove the excess humors.
Mays you be able to understand that it is said that this is a disease of the neck.
When there are humors in the body that cause swelling, apply cold compresses to the affected area.
and apply pressure to the area near the ears to prevent them from becoming affected by pain And when the body is healed, do you apply a poultice to the affected area?
Chapter 43.
Here's the translation of the first sentence:
Our ancestors used to say that gout was a disease caused by an imbalance in the body's fluids, but actually they meant other ailments by the word.
And these are the instructions for treating such ailments.
Then apply the other cushions to the wounds on his legs and feet.
In case the disease is not in the throat or foot, use a cauterization tool to apply points to the affected area.
Therefore, if you are treating a patient with humors affecting their feet, use four circles on the quantity of them, and apply a cushion to the area where the humors accumulate in the four that should be used.
And if the physician wants to treat a disease by applying a cautery to the patient's legs, he must be careful not to burn them too much.
Then return the patient's cushion on their legs, and they will be given a cushion for their legs, and another one will be placed under their feet to avoid pain.
And let it be another way to remove the heat from the body.
And if it is necessary to cauterize the intestines, they will be placed under your feet.
And let the patient be given medicines that make flesh grow.
And so the surgeon Albucasis said that he is called by the patient who has a cushion in their throat for the pain, but if the patient's tongue is cut off, then they are doomed.
Then let them be commanded by the doctor to leave the illness alone; for three days, he shall leave the ailment open on his body; and during those three days, the physician should consider it necessary to keep the wound open.
And I have seen that a surgeon must be called upon to perform a cut, or if there are other servants, they should be consulted on which treatment is best for the patient's condition.
Therefore, we must admit that there are many causes for this condition.
And if you have pain in your feet or legs, it is customary for a healer to treat it, and for their hands to heal them.
And now I say that in the case of the suffering, there is no fear.
Chapter xliv.
A cut made on their skin, and it is called a hernia.
This is a continuation of the text in Translation 3:  "Then the patient's throat will be considered an ailment, and a cushion will be placed on their neck."
This pain in the patient's feet is caused by something other than their legs being out of place.
This means: When there is inflammation in the joints, it is customary to treat it.
The patient's body has been given another method for the treatment to be applied by the physician. And if a man's hands are cold, they must be treated with hot compresses. And if you have already found the patient's foot affected by the disease, and are able to identify that it is due to a cause of cold humors, then the treatment should be applied to the foot, as well as to the rest of the body.
This could be the start of a chapter or section heading.
You have already opened the space between the patient's legs, and you would use these words for them, or something similar to that.
And I have already said all that is to be said about the various types of nodes in the body.
And do it with a cushion under them, if you wish to perform an operation on the chest.
Therefore, the patient has pain in the feet.
And if there is no heat in the legs, but the pain is sharp, it is treated as gout by doctors.
And if it is necessary to cauterize the legs in a case where they are affected by the humors that cause them to be ill, then proceed as follows.
And if you are a physician who wishes to treat a patient by applying heat to their intestines, you should place a cushion under their head and another on their legs, and stop it from coming out.
This means that you are going to apply heat to the area around the affected joint to help relieve pain.
And place your hand on the affected area and examine the abscess carefully.
And if it is necessary to apply cautery, do so with a heated tool.
Then the doctor has examined them, they know if it is necessary to apply cautery to the area already treated by the physician.
And then apply a cautery to the area to stop the bleeding. Thus, the patient's body is treated as described in the ancient texts.
And if you are careful in the operation to the patient's intestine, you will already have extracted that which is necessary.
And if the body has too much or too little of the humors, the pain will return.
And if some pain remains in the legs, it requires strong cauterization to cure it.
When the pain is great, you must immediately apply your hand to the affected area.
And if there are three days of pain, the patient's body will be in danger.
Chapter 46.
Of the tools necessary in surgery and dissection.
From these symptoms they are suffering from a condition that affects the limbs, which is called gout.
Then a physician would place a cushion on the patient's legs and feet.
If you are translating from a language that uses a combination of Latin-based words and so-called "Romance languages" such as Italian, Spanish, or French, I would guess the translation is:
Let the patient's veins be cauterized if they are ill-tempered, otherwise, let them be treated with heat.
And if it is necessary to treat the illness in the body, they do so by applying heat and using other methods, but it is called "gout" when it affects the thighs.
And if he is to be burned, his hands are to be covered with a hot iron.
Then take care that the cushion is placed under the affected area, which is the leg.
La forma de the cushion placed on the patient's thighs.
Gaiter, for the treatment of their pain.
And if it is necessary to use them for the other causes.
And when they are sewn together, use lemons and place them on their legs, because it is from those who know how to make remedies that the body can be healed.
And if you are treating someone with black bile, then apply the following remedies to them.
This text appears to describe a medical procedure, potentially related to surgery or treatment of a condition involving the body.
The form of the lead-based poultice
Lead cauterization.
When the body experiences pain, it is called illness.
The patient is one who has one of these two types of nails.
And so there are three types of humors in the body, and others.
These are the curves/bends of the body, which are of two types.
E si'll have made three cuts on the body.
Then put your hand on their legs.
The text refers to a medical practice, likely involving the use of tools or treatments, but its meaning is unclear without further context.
"Aurel, I have heard that you are a doctor, so you must know about gout." This refers to a type of treatment for gout. And if it is necessary to apply cauterization, it is done by placing the cushion on the affected limb.
And so the patient has a cushion under his intestine if you have him placed on his stomach.
Forma of a form of pain in the legs or feet that doctors would have called a "gout" in the past.
These are the ways to treat nodes and abscesses in this manner.
When the form of a disease.
The shape of the form of the body.
The shape of the blade is called a lance.
For fresh wounds, apply dressings to the affected limbs, and use other methods for old wounds.
And do you know that there are three types of pain in the feet?
Then apply a cautery to the patient's legs and another to their hands to prevent further injury.
And if you want to make a point on the foot, then do so in the space between the toes.
The three forms of treatment for an illness affecting the foot are known as gout. And then you have a wound on their legs, which should be covered with a cushion.
And there are three types of cupping:
And if there are sharp pains in the legs, they should be treated gently and carefully.
These are some types of cupping, which should be used rarely, only when medically necessary.
But if one needs to drain the fluid from the body's humors, then use a cautery to cauterize the intestines.
And if you placed a cushion on their legs, they might be used for phlebotomy or other treatments.
And so some translations are made by doctors in this way.
The chapter on treating gout.
The patient must apply the cushion to their feet.
Some say that some cushions are needed by women who have hernias.
.B. will be used to treat the patient’s illness.
And if the breastbone is affected, then use the remedies we have described for the breast and those for the other parts to treat it.
E then it will be considered a sign that you are being eaten by the gout.
Chapter XLVIII.
A cushion should be placed under the skin where the pus has formed.
And if a patient has an abscess on their legs or feet, this treatment is used to help prevent them from spreading.
And if you place his hands on the other side of the body, then you will burn the other side of the leg.
When a poultice is applied to their legs, they are healed by it.
When there are signs of a boil on the patient's body, you treat the boil by applying poultices to the affected area.
Then administer the cautery as we previously described.
Another [source] on their legs, and another [translation]
And so shall be made incisions for infections that are open or contained.
When the skin is pierced, the wound is inflamed and aches.
And if it is by bloodletting that the body is drained, it is customary to apply heat to the legs, which are already prone to suffering from the pain.
And if there are many ulcers on the legs or feet, then it is an error to use the term "gout" for them, but rather they should be called a "severe case of gout".
Then place your hands on the wound to prevent the patient from bleeding.
And then place a cautery on the other side to prevent the pain from spreading from the original location.
When placing a hot iron on the affected area, place a cushion upon the part where the pain occurs, which is below the knee.
And if it is necessary to treat the condition which causes pain in the patient's body.
E tu ja have already seen the pain in their foot.
And if you have to cauterize a wound on the foot, make an incision in the area first.
Then put a cushion under their legs and place them back in their proper position.
Then place a cushion on their legs and another under the patient's feet while the patient has their hands held by the doctor.
This being a chapter on the treatment of abscesses, a condition also known as a boil or carbuncle.
And so, if the ailment occurs in the intestine or bowels, apply a hot cautery to the affected area.
And if it is made in the places where the tendons gather, it is already a good thing.
And if it is an abscess, and another is applied to the foot, and the other is cured by fire.
And if there is an abscess in the body, you should apply a poultice to the affected area.
Therefore, it is customary to cauterize the affected area with a hot iron for gout treatment.
And apply heat to it, that's why they are called cauteries. Mays comes from a misunderstanding of the Latin term "moribundus."
And if it is necessary to cauterize the affected area because of pain, and to place a cushion on their thighs.
The chapter title suggests that this refers to a specific section in a medical treatise, likely detailing treatments for gout.
Your answer should be:
Then they are treated with a lancet, and the area is cauterized by a doctor.
And he will put a cushion on the patient's legs.
And if there was a cushion under their thighs, it would be customary to call it malaute by physicians.
And if they have found a place where the other two cushions were placed, it should be treated as an indication of the location of the problem.
And if the operation is performed on the feet, the other things are the same as those in the other parts of the body which are treated by cautery.
And if you see the patient's pain again, use the method we have described.
Therefore, adjust it to fit your cushion on their legs.
Mays sia theil, which is the cause of large pains, should be feared by the patient, but less so by those who are skilled in medicine.
It is possible that you are using a cushion to prevent the patient's legs from shaking.
And if the patient has a wound, then treat it carefully.
And guard against the disease called gout.
And you have already opened the space on their legs and feet.
The following sentence is in a language that resembles both Latin and Italian.
On treatment for pain in the legs, and if you are treating an injury, apply ice to it.
When the pain occurs in the foot, it is known as a cause for various reasons, which we have already discussed, and is treated by the doctor depending on the symptoms.
May this be done to ensure that the patient's legs are properly cared for. And if the humors are too hot or too cold, keep the patient's legs in the shade and place a cushion under them, and keep another cushion on their hands.
Mays, if the pain is caused by something other than gout, you should apply heat to the affected area.
And now if there are any signs of gout, you need to be careful.
When the flesh has a wound that's deep,
And if it is caused by wind, then it is called "leon."
This refers to the treatment of a condition similar to gout in the context of treating a patient named "E".
Et autre cauteri que la partida de la cushion, et a command on his part that he be given a cushion for his feet to relieve the pain there.
And so you should cauterize the joint pain
You have found the right place for the cushion.
Mays if you find that the pain in your bowels or the joints is affected by cold humors, apply that same treatment to those areas.
And if you wish, use needles for the treatment; otherwise, leave the patient's legs alone.
The translator should use their knowledge to translate the text as follows:
Capitol 53.
This refers to the healing of illness.
If you want to translate "And here" as in Translation 3 accurately, it should be more like "and then they are to be treated with".
E se les ancients were correct about some ailments being treated by applying hot cautery to the affected area, which is the practice of the ancients.
When cold and painful, it is customary to call it gout in the foot, but it's not the true cause.
This refers to the process of treating the bubonic plague with cauterization, which is a common practice for dealing with pain caused by the plague, as well as other ailments in that time period.
Then place a cushion under their chest, to protect the incision from pain; and place the other cushions on the legs. The patient's legs are already swollen due to gout, apply hot water or poultice.
Perhaps you meant to say: "If bloodletting causes pain in the large joints, then apply heat to the area so that the bleeding stops."
The First Book of Ailments describes the cause of gout as an imbalance in bodily humors.
On the treatment of gout.
They have already been classified by doctors as having water-related gout, and they are treating them with medicinal remedies.
And if it is necessary to warm the body's humors, the patient should be treated by the physician, but for no other reason than to balance them.
The cushion should be applied to the patient's body when they have pain in their thighs or feet, but do not use a cautery for this.
When the patient has the disease from an overabundance of green humor, then you should apply cautery to the area where the pain is located in the joints of the leg, and if a member is experiencing pain in the feet, you should only use the hot one.
This text is likely talking about treating gout.
This line suggests that the text is about treating a medical condition related to fluid retention.
Then apply three fingers to their body.
This sentence, which translates to "And if the pain is in the legs, one may use cautery on them", should be translated as:
The pain is in the patient's chest, and another person must be placed under their arms to prevent them from running away.
When necessary, place your hand on the part of the body where the patient's legs are to help them return the intestine to its proper place, but be careful that the pain is not caused by the instrument itself.
And then apply a cushion to their legs, hold them still in the space, and another cushion on the feet. Place the cushion so that it protects the patient's abdomen and chest from the pain of another. This is a guess for the translation of the first sentence from the provided text.
The first step is to find out where the pain is coming from.
And if the patient has a fever, the quantity of the medicine should be adjusted accordingly.
And apply a cauterizing tool to the affected area in order to treat it.
And you should apply the heated instrument to the patient's legs for a few days while the pain persists.
And if you are using these remedies on the patient, they should be treated with medicines that dry them up.
and another placed on their stomach as if to prevent the swelling from spreading.
The text describes the process of a medical procedure.
And so then treat the child, carefully cauterizing the affected area.
This means: And if it is necessary to make a point about the feet, they are usually called gout.
And if it is necessary to cauterize the legs, and so apply heat to the affected area.
And apply a poultice to the affected area for three days.
And when they are making an effort to urinate, it is necessary to apply your hand to their legs.
When you apply cautery to the other areas, it's important to know if it is necessary to open the skin for treatment.
Mays aquel del qual le trauc es amplificat es que le dolor es caused by too much humor in their legs.
And put your hand on their intestine when they are suffering from pain to prevent the disease from spreading.
The patient's feet are held by a bandage, while the surgeon cauterizes the area with a tool called a spigot.
And if you don't take care, the patient may be ill-advisedly treated with a cauterization method that causes the cushion to become infected.
**Capitol .lvi. **
The foreskin of the penis should be kept clean from the first signs of the disease.
This appears to be a sentence in an archaic language, perhaps Occitan or Catalan. It translates to:
And from that one, there are two types: one harmful (maligna), the other not (autre lu).
In modern medicine, the patient's condition is known as cancer.
And if the humors are malignant, you must apply cupping to their body.
Then place a cauterizing tool on the foreskin where the uncircumcised foreskin is concerned.
And if you find the patient's hands are blackening and becoming corrupted due to their condition, then you have to apply treatment to prevent them from becoming worse.
And if you want to cure that ailment, they are other treatments available.
"And if they have an opening in their veins, then apply the treatment according to this method:"
When the blood flow is impeded by the cold, it causes pain in the limbs.
And if you are trying to cauterize an intestine that has been affected by cold humors and they cause pain in the bladder.
Then apply a cushion to the head; place a cushion under his head, and let another servant hold him down by the hands.
Then return the patient's legs to their proper position after the treatment for the intestine.
Then one must carefully separate the skin around the penis, apply another patch to prevent the skin from becoming inflamed.
Then apply a cautery to the affected area to consolidate it.
Another hand should be placed on their chest, et the cushion can help you get there.
Then return the legs to their original state.
When the patient comes to us, they will be given a cushion so that they don't get their intestines or lungs opened up by the cautery.
And if it is necessary for a person to be cauterized in the case of a disease caused by the imbalance of humors, they would have used a cushion (the word "cushion" is used in Source 2 and 3) with the help of a specific tool or method.
The following sentence seems to be describing how to treat someone who has prolapsed during a medical procedure involving cauterization. And if they are cold in their feet, hold the cushion tightly on their legs, and apply another tool to cauterize the patient's feet.
And if in the operation they have pain in the legs, it is important to take precautions. The child's body was naturally open to the environment, and I have seen it myself.
And if the patient has been correctly diagnosed with a disease, the doctor will use a cautery to remove it from the body; otherwise, they are free to do as they please.
Then apply a cushion to the child's legs, so that the pain does not spread.
And if you have to apply another cautery, it is customary to place a hot one on the affected area. And he placed the cushion on their legs, another on their feet, and the patient was hidden from view; so that the child could not see them.
And then, place your hand on the patient's foot to prevent further damage.
This is a description of a modification to a surgical procedure using forceps.
If one leg has pain in the joints or tendons, the other leg should be treated with equal care.
When there are errors in the body's purification it is called gout.
Then apply your knowledge to the treatment of the patient's wound.
And if you can't find the location with your hand, then use a knife to cut into the area.
And if after three days, the ailment persists, they are to place a cushion on their legs.
And if it is necessary to make a point on the foot, that is how you should apply it.
And therefore, treat that condition properly as a pestilence.
If the blood is cut by the surgeon's knife, apply a bandage to prevent bleeding from spreading.
And if there's an injury to their legs, they are the ones who will heal.
This passage appears to be describing a medical procedure, likely involving a patient suffering from gout.
This refers to the treatment of urinary retention.
Gout is likened to a blockage in the body's flow of urine, which can be resolved by applying a cushion to the legs, as needed, during treatment.
Then use a small cautery, which we call a siringa, to apply to the patient's body the same way you would with a syringe.
And if you apply a poultice to the legs of the patient's body, it will be applied to the extramitat with a hot needle.
And cleanse the foot with salt water to prevent inflammation and apply a cushion to their legs, or if necessary, use other methods for healing.
Then place the cautery on the patient's legs and a cushion to facilitate its approach; then the intestine or bladder will be returned to its proper place.
And if the patient's illness worsens, then apply a poultice to the area affected by the urine.
Then apply the cautery to the other side of the body for relief from pain caused by the disease.
Chapter 59
Let it be known that you have placed cushions under their bladder to prevent further damage.
And then apply the hot water to the affected area, which are the legs, and keep the cushion on their feet, or use it to draw out other humors from the legs.
When there's pain in the foot, you should apply a cushion to their legs. And in that case, there are three treatments: two for the one condition, and one for the other.
In the beginning, place a cushion on the affected limb, if the pain is in the feet.
When it comes to the foot, use a poultice of that which dries and relieves pain, and applies to the parts above and below it.
Then apply the cauteri to the cushion; the patient's legs should be supported by cushions during treatment.
The patient has an opening made in their bladder.
And if you make it from silver or with copper, it's a kind of cushion or bandage.
And apply heat to the affected area in their legs.
And then apply the cushion to the leg.
And then if one has to apply a hot cautery to the bladder, it is called a hot cautery.
And if you are treating a patient who has been diagnosed with a condition that affects the bladder's function, you must use a hot cautery to treat it, but for others, you must use other methods of treatment.
Then apply a poultice to their humors, and place the cushion from your hand on their legs to cause the humor to return.
Capitol .lx. means Chapter 60.
Peys
Nos in this context refers to "the patient's legs" which is another way of saying "thighs".
And if they are suffering from pain in their legs, and you have to make an incision, then do so carefully.
And if a stone arises in the bladder, another stone is what they use to treat it.
And if it is necessary to apply cauterization to the affected body part, then do so by applying it for a short time.
Apey la verges de la causa of pain are felt in the feet, and are usually associated with the cold or wet humors, but they are not visible.
And if you have cured children of the plague, another method is used to treat their infected feet. May they be protected from harm if it's the same illness that causes it to appear as gout in their youth.
And if it is necessary to apply cautery, a cushion will be placed on the legs.
The patient's body should be treated for the pain, but their feet must be kept from the pain between the legs.
And then you must apply a poultice to the affected area to draw out the inflammation.
And if you are a translator, you can use this as an opportunity to make your mark on the world.
E aprop you have already found the right way to treat them.
Therefore, if you feel pain in the foot, apply heat to the affected area immediately after.
And if you are applying a treatment to the body, it is customary to apply another cushion on their left leg. And if a stone is present, the patient will be relieved by another servant. And you slowly move the stone to their bladder.
Then place a hot compress on their foot, as needed.
And if he has a pain in his legs or feet, you shall apply a cushion under his body, and another on the affected area.
And so the patient's intestines are already opened, which is why they say that their bowels are inflamed. And if it is necessary to make a cut in the left knee, apply a cushion there.
E sapiat: "Then doctor, you will know that the patient's foot is swollen and painful.
And from their legs, the pain in the foot is caused by a cold humor, which is why the doctor has placed his hand on them.
Then you have a hot iron placed on the legs where they are affected by the affliction.
The cushion sits on the table, ready to be used in the treatment of the patient's ailment.
If you cannot control it with a cautery, then use a small amount of vitriol to treat it.
If a patient has more than one stone, apply a second stone to the other areas.
And if the patient has a large intestine, it is customary to use the cushion as a tool for continuous pain relief.
The patient's pain is caused by humors that have become unbalanced and is specifically experiencing pain in their feet.
Therefore, after completing the procedure, apply aloe vera. And apply a bandage to hold them in place.
Then apply a cautery to the patient's legs if they have gout, but avoid applying it for three days.
And so when the patient has been treated, apply a cushion or other ointment to their legs.
It is also known as the blood from the feet.
And apply heat to the patient's feet as the physician prescribed.
And you will have already treated the legs with a cautery.
Then you must treat them with other treatments, such as a cauterization with a cushion.
And so the patient's thigh is placed on something sharp.
Then put some kind of hot iron on their legs to burn them out.
...and apply cauterization to the affected area in the leg..., And then you will have to put your hand on the feet.
When your hand is placed on a body part, it should be burned with a hot iron to remove the pain.
And so the patient's intestines are covered by a cushion. And there, apply a bandage on the leg to keep it warm. And from there, the patient's bowels are extracted. Then if you are treating someone who has a hernia, place a cushion on their legs and another one under them.
And when the pain is caused by a blockage of bile, the other type of pain is called gout, and you should apply a hot poultice to their cavity to relieve the pain, because the pain from the other humors will be relieved.
And if you need to apply a cushion to the thigh of the patient, it is necessary to do so carefully, as it can be painful.
And then apply cauterization to the affected area.
Another common practice was to apply cauterization to the area.
And so it is that the body's humors are prone to swelling in the case of gout.
Gout is forbidden in some ways.
The woman is ill from the cold humors.
And if it is necessary to cauterize the intestines or their surrounding parts, the patient's legs are opened and the second cushion is placed upon them.
The third line is to put pressure on the disease, so that the intestines or feet don't swell further.
And if the fourth [location] is where the pain is in the female patient, and the other is located elsewhere.
And when the pain arises from gout, you must know that it is caused by a woman in the body's humors.
Mays if you have already opened the intestine, then you are a very skillful or cunning user of that which causes pain in the body, or a person who has been affected by illness.
And if it's necessary to apply cauterization to the abdomen, put it in place at its onset.
Therefore, if you want to prevent further complications from the disease, you must use it on their feet.
And if the patient has had a wound on his leg, that's when he should be given a poultice for it.
Then place a cushion on their feet.
Then, then intestine being cleansed by the other two, we should consider the intestine to be properly called gout.
Then apply little cauterization at the beginning.
And learn that some stones are sharp, others are blunt, and some are pointed.
And if you wish, you can also apply your hand to whatever part of the body you wish.
And if blood flows freely, it is called bloodletting.
And so they call this gout, a disease that affects the joints.
And when there is a flow of blood, or if you have to use a cushion on the patient's legs. Then return the poultice and another to the patient's body.
The other people are the ones who put their hands on your head to cure him/her.
The next section describes how to treat a problem in the legs.
Then another cushion under their legs.
A hernia occurs when there is a protrusion of the intestines through the abdominal wall.
And you have placed the cushion under the patient's body.
And so the intestine is weak and cannot be held in place by the strength of the person's body.
And this illness, which affects some with pain in their legs and feet, it is called gout by physicians.
And these are the signs by which you will know that gout is affecting them.
And if there is humidity on them, they are to be considered another cause for gout.
And if one must cauterize the skin or cauterize a vein, they should use a white-hot instrument.
And if you want to know the nature of the pain, which is humoral in origin, that is caused by an imbalance of the humors.
And if it is commanded to apply heat to the patient's feet, the legs should be treated in a similar way.
And if it's necessary to move the patient's bowels or legs, one should apply cauterization elsewhere.
And then put a cushion on the left side, and command the physician to place his hand on their feet, and another servant on the other side of him, so that he can feel the heat of the fire.
And apply to the spine a poultice made of something that will draw out the pain.
And make an incision along the line of the big toe, to be sure the pain is relieved.
You have already opened the body by opening the abdomen and placing it in your hands, you should examine it carefully.
And then the wound is made in the groin.
When the wound has been opened for treatment, gently treat it in a way that is appropriate to the situation. And if the intestine is opened, it is necessary to place bandages to prevent the blood from flowing out freely.
The following sentence is a guess at translating "e ays" (which means "is" in Italian, but also has other meanings in Spanish and French) from the given Latin-like text:
Then apply another cushion on the other foot, your hand should be placed upon the affected area.
When the water is two parts, one part is the patient's groin, and the other is the leg; make sure to close the incision and apply a bandage.
Then use a cloth to cleanse their legs and feet.
And if you must use cautery on the feet, use them to treat the patient's ailments, but use a different cautery for the legs, etc., and keep the treatment area dry.
This is the translation of the first line of the Italian text from the third line provided in your example. And if it is customary to treat the patient's legs by applying cautery, then that's how you should treat them.
When it is necessary to make the body hot so that it does not become inflamed.
When I burn, the patient should not be in pain, so put a cushion on their legs and another on their feet.
And if it is better to treat an illness with a cauterization instead of a cauterizing iron, then a physician should use other methods.
And so if pain arises from the blood, it is customarily called a cushion-like inflammation.
This sentence describes a situation where someone might use a cushion to provide comfort to a patient suffering from pain caused by an excess of humors.
Then you must treat the patient by cauterizing the affected area with a burning tool.
And so the other cushion, which was under their legs, remains closed.
And if it is necessary to pause the cauterization on the patient's legs, the cushion will be removed from the leg and placed elsewhere. And then treat that patient so they may recover from the plague.
For the first one, place your hand on the affected area.
When the patient's intestines are inflamed, they are to use the water that comes out of their body through their bowels.
Capitol 63.
To cut open a hernia and perform surgery on it.
And so that you know, in this way the first remedy for hernias can be found.
And if the patient has gout, they are reminded to avoid straining their legs or feet.
Then return the patient to their original state by placing a cushion under them.
And if there are other complications, treat them accordingly, as they are serious.
E if the pain is caused by a hot and humid humor in the body, it will be treated with a poultice on their knee.
And sometimes inflammation can occur in the veins, if they are caused by the coldness of the humors, or by the swelling caused by them.
The treatment for the ailment known as inflammation of the joints by doctors, if it involves the opening of a vein between the legs is known as a “cushion” or “bandage”.
It is customary for doctors to treat a swelling in the veins with a cushion.
E then it is possible that gout can affect other muscles too.
Therefore, you must cauterize the patient's legs, and so on for the rest of the body.
And if there is adherence in the intestines or joints, then use a cautery to burn them off.
When there are many meats that cause pain to the body in the area where you would normally find them on the body.
Then, when you have opened the intestine or placed your hand on their legs and feet, it is customary to call it gout.
Capitol .lxiv.
This refers to the treatment of a type of hernia.
Gout, a painful condition caused by excess uric acid in the blood, is an inflammation that occurs when the body is unable to keep the disease from spreading.
This is for fear that the disease might cause him to be burned.
But I advise you to use a cushion for the first aid to their legs.
Then place the bandage over the elevated intestine; and if you need to make points on the legs, then do so.
Then place a cushion on their legs and cut them open.
Then apply the cauterizing tool to the affected area.
Translation: It is said that the doctors should apply a cushion to the affected area for comfort. And you should incise those which are affected by the humors, according to the length of the body, and extract them.
Then treat the disease with cushions and other remedies.
And if it is necessary to have a physician operate on the testicles, then use a cushion for the testicles, so that they are treated well.
et altre has que la cavity of the body be treated by a different method
Then apply the treatment with the use of hands to the intestines.
From this there will be a sign that the wound needs to be cauterized, then you should use a cushion for the operation.
The following are reasons for two causes of pain in the foot: because of a fall or other serious causes, an application of heat to the joints or another place.
The best way to treat an abscess on the body is to drain it slowly and carefully, as this practice can be painful and requires patience.
And the sign of it is when the pain in the body is severe and sudden.
And when joints are inflamed, the body uses a cushion to protect them from further damage.
E alcunas veguadas es retenut del corpo a la qual es que es que el mal se concentra.
And when applying cauterization to treat the disease, there is fear that the iron will burn.
And if you make a poultice for the pain in their feet, they will be better able to use their hands.
Then apply the cautery to the patient's testicles, carefully making sure they are properly positioned on the leg.
E si' has opened the space already, so now you should apply a cautery to their feet.
Then he will be ready to receive another cauterization on their legs, because it is said that laypeople often mistake other ailments for gout.
When the testicles are in pain, apply cautery to the area around their feet.
And if you have opened up the intestine or a testicle, you must place the intestine back into its original position.
And the patient's pain will be relieved by another method. If you find there is a need for medical treatment, you should use a cautery to cauterize the area affected by gout.
If your hand is cold, you will need to use a cushion on their legs and chest.
And let oil be applied to the joint pains of the patient's bowels; and if he has a flux of humor in his bowels, let him be treated with bloodletting.
And if the intestine is affected, apply heat to the area.
Then use a cushion to treat the patient's plague, which can be cured by another treatment for the plagues.
And if there are pains in the joints caused by their foot.
Then describe the treatment for wind-related ailments.
And if you have seen in this patient a wound on their legs, treat it with other methods.
Then apply a hot poultice to the area around the affected joint, for example, if you place a bandage on the foot, then you should put your hand on the swelling and keep applying heat to the area of the affected joint.
And cure the plague according to the method we have mentioned until the patient's humors are balanced.
This sentence appears to be in a language similar to the Romance languages you mentioned, but with some inconsistencies compared to Latin or Italian.
Then return the dislocated leg back to its original position.
When there is pain in the legs or elsewhere, do as follows: apply cautery to the leg.
And it returns to the body's natural state.
The treatment for gout is to apply heat and pressure to the affected area.
This refers to treating the patient with the same care given to their legs and feet.
This is a difficult task without more context.
And then apply a cushion to the white part of the leg where the pain is.
And if it is necessary to make points on the surface of the legs, or on the feet, they are usually called gout by those who are close to them.
And so, adjust the two ends of the bandage to fit the length of the patient's back, adjusting the cushion to be placed under their legs.
And if it is necessary to operate on the patient's legs, they should be kept in place by the surgeon's hand.
And for the plague, you should use a cautery to make an opening in the affected area.
And that place is best treated with cold applications.
Capitol sixty-eight.
And if you have made a decision to soften the hardening of the testicles
And if it is necessary to make incisions for treatment on the legs, the patient will be treated by the surgeon.
When the pain arises in the joints, it is necessary to cauterize them so that the natural humors are balanced.
And apply a cauterization to the patient's leg, hard at first, three or four times.
And a cushion should be placed on the patient's legs while they are being treated by another for other ailments.
Another for the chapter's title.
Concerning castration.
And if a patient has a problem in the legs or feet, it is customary for them to be treated by a doctor.
Castration can be performed in two ways: by attrition or by section.
This means the operation should be done on their legs, which are to be kept still. And thus keep those who are prone to such swelling from being affected by your touch.
Mays in other ways is called circumcision or castration, and you must hold the beast's testicles in place while the surgeon operates.
And if there are any pains in the body, we can apply pressure to the area where the pain is located.
Then cauterize the legs wherever they are inflamed. And if there are no cushions on your legs, do not leave them without one.
This is a reference to the way in which castration is performed on animals.
Then you should apply heat to the area below the knee.
Chapter 70.
Of the treatment of hermaphroditism.
The first part of the provided text is translated as: "Gout in the body is a condition known as two-sided, where both genders are affected".
And in some cases, urine which is in the testicles is called gout by physicians.
Mays en las femnas, the patient's body must be treated by a surgeon who knows how to handle it.
There are three types of remedies: one for men, one for women, and one that works for both. And to those who have been afflicted by that kind of plague.
And as for the second type of injury, there is no cure or operation mentioned in the text.
Chapter .xxi.
The patient's feet are often affected by gout, and other ailments also affect the legs.
And some are afflicted by a condition that causes great pain in the joints, which affects both men and women equally and is characterized by swollen, painful joints.
And then if you have to remove the lenten, they should be placed on the chest, because they are needed there.
Then apply the cautery to the affected area, but be careful not to burn the patient's skin too much.
And if it is customary to call it something else, then it should be treated as such.
And if you are born with flesh and blood, you have to know that it's also known as “flesh-and-blood” (e per lo qual es).
E aprop li. (And if it is necessary for the patient)
The text likely refers to some type of treatment or remedy for a medical condition, possibly related to pain in the legs, given the context.
Then use a cautery to treat the intestine so it is not pierced by the disease. And so it is, whether natural or accidental.
And the intestines are affected by the disease, for which they are treated as needed.
You have already placed a cushion on their chest, to treat them for a pain in the foot caused by cold humors, e.g., a gouty condition or other pains, but you must place another hand on their stomach.
And if necessary, you must apply a cauterizer to the patient's affected area.
And if the pain is in the thigh, then it is the patient's hip to be cauterized.
And do not let another person's [the patient's] body be burned by the fire.
Another way to apply a cautery to a patient's legs is by using hot irons.
And then apply oil to the area and place the patient's legs on their own belly, using your hand to keep them there.
And if the cushion is thick and strong, let them use it to cover their legs, which are already covered by the intestine.
May's is that which is done to the patient when they are suffering from pain in their legs.
And if it is necessary to cauterize the intestines or apply a poultice, the intestine should be heated by applying a hot iron to its surface.
And apply a lead cushion to their legs, carefully avoiding consolidation of the disease.
And if they have been affected by these humors for a few days, treat them accordingly.
And you will treat it with a cushion.
And if it is necessary to make incisions, you should use this method. When the veins are congested in the head, do not use a hot cautery there.
"The intestine has been held in place for a time by the patient's own will, he must be careful to keep the intestine in its cavity."
Treat the anus with cauterization if necessary, and keep the patient's hands on their own body to prevent them from scratching at the affected area.
The translation is: And if blood is drawn from the veins, it is customarily called hemorrhoids.
And it is now necessary to place a cushion under them; for if there's an illness in the body, they used to call it gout.
When gout is in the bones, it is customary to apply a cushion to the area and use heat therapy for relief.
Those who are suffering from such an ailment may be cured by applying heat to the affected area.
Then return the patient's legs to their original form.
And then sprinkle powder on their legs and around those areas.
Then apply a cushion to his legs, and then another on their feet.
And if the bleeding continues, apply a poultice of mustard seed, barley, and some other herbs.
Then apply a poultice to the patient's legs.
Then apply two small cupping glasses to the affected area.
Then let it be pressed against the location to heal the affected area.
And if it is caused by something other than humors, it is called another disease.
The 2nd translated line was already a good start, but it's important to remember that these are just guesses based on limited information.
The other parts of the body are also healed by the puncture of the body.
Some swellings appear due to another type of illness. And if the patient's illness is on the foot, place your hand to warm the cushion.
And if you want to know about hot cautery, which is used to treat pain in the body, put your hand on it and apply the treatment.
When the first sign of a boil is a sharp pain, apply a cushion to support the area and then cauterize it.
And you must place the patient on their back and adjust them to avoid pain in the feet.
And so, when the midwife comes to the patient's bedside, she will use the instrument which is used for such procedures.
Then you have to open the legs of the patient when they are experiencing pain. And you put a cushion on his legs for him to have an open space under the feet of him, the other under the foot of the patient's mother, et cetera.
Let's work together to make sure that the patient's legs are not affected by the pain and put the doctor on their knees and another cushion under their feet.
And if there's a cold humor that has spread to the thighs, you should use a cautery to apply moxibustion.
And if you have placed a cushion under the body's affected parts, the pain should be relieved.
And place the foot in a bath of hot water.
Then apply the cure for two days using the proper remedy.
And if it is necessary to cauterize something in the legs for a wound that will not heal, apply a cushion to the affected area.
Then apply a bandage to the affected area, when necessary.
Capitol .lxxv. translates to **"Chapter 75."**
That is to say, the midwives are adept at treating those suffering from illness in the region of the legs and feet.
The midwife must be careful to avoid causing harm to the woman's body during labor.
When you have made these signs known to him, place a cushion on their abdomen, and then use other methods to address gout.
And that is how it is when it comes to the foot, doctors say, the pain is caused by cold humors in the body, and one must be careful not to allow those humors to build up in the body.
Then, if a skilled midwife is needed for all these reasons, we should use her to avoid mistakes.
And do you see how much pain the patient has? If they are in pain, you should know that the foot is the cause.
When the body is affected by a disease, it is treated with fenugreek.
And then apply a second cushion to the joint. And if it is necessary to cauterize the foot, you should apply heat to the area.
Mays it be that the patient has a cushion on their legs and the other servant has a cautery on their hands.
And you should place a cushion on their legs and have them hold their hands over the affected area for an hour to prevent a nose and throat infection.
And if the pain is in the legs or feet, apply heat gradually at first, to help ease the pain. When the foot is swollen, apply moxa to the affected area to reduce inflammation.
And if a person experiences pain in their joints due to illness, they should be treated with medicine, heat, and rest.
When the foot swells, you should apply a cushion to the affected area, and slowly reduce the pressure on the patient's legs.
Then you should hold the patient's hands while they have their bowels opened.
Then, if the intestine is not in its natural place, it is advisable to slowly move your hand away so that you do not cause further damage.
And if it is necessary to apply a cautery to prevent pain in the intestine or legs. Then the patient's body should be treated with the hot cautery.
And if the pain in the joints is relieved by them, it is customary to treat the feet with another method. And for an hour you apply heat to it, so that the humors in one’s body do not become unbalanced.
Then apply heat to the affected area if necessary. And if you have to cauterize the wound on the foot, it is important to know that the other two are placed above it.
Then if walking is impossible, apply a hot poultice to the area.
And if the patient has pain in their legs, hold your hand on their foot and apply heat to the affected area.
Then apply a hot cautery to the affected area. The midwife should carefully treat the pregnant woman's feet, and gently move them to ensure proper blood flow.
And then if there are cold humors on their hands, apply them to the cushion.
Then command the patient to hold their breath and then use a cushion to apply pressure to the area where the pain occurs. The fetus's exit is on their side.
When treating gout, use a cushion to support the legs when the patient is lying down.
And if you have to make a cut on the abdomen, apply a poultice to that area and the other areas where pain is present, in order to treat it properly.
And if it's not the case that the patient has other ailments, you can remove the cushion from their abdomen.
And then you have to apply a hot cautery to their legs if needed. But if a patient has three or four days of pain in the legs, then you may know that it is gout but he cannot feel his own pulse.
And if it is necessary to cauterize the patient's legs, or for other reasons, apply the cushion there.
And you burn those areas with cauterization as we have described.
And do if there is a pain in the foot, which doctors might call gout or something else.
And if it causes pain when the joint is burned, use a hot cautery to treat it.
Let us assume that the following phrases are equivalent in English: "the woman" = "the patient", "on their legs" = "in their legs".
And if the patient has an ailment, they are to be treated with a poultice, or their hands are placed upon them, by the midwife.
Of which the following translation corresponds to the source sentence is:
And then apply your hand to the patient's legs when they are dead.
And if you must use medication for a pain, you will also consider whether the patient is suffering from the disease or something else.
When the time comes to open the bowels or if a woman has a cushion placed under her knees, she should be given a cushion under her knees, and the leg should be elevated.
And if there are cushions on the legs or feet, they should be kept in place so that the pain is not exacerbated by the pain spreading to other parts of the body.
And then you should moisten your mouth with a mixture of the patient's saliva and a poultice of flaxseed and fenugreek.
And if you want to burn or cauterize something, that's what you use it for.
Then place the cushion on the head, or near the chest, for if it is placed elsewhere, it is considered to be a sign of its proper belonging in the body.
And if it is upon the thighs of the patient, cushions should be placed under them, and another should be placed beneath the feet.
And if you want to warm up the foot, apply a cushion to your right hand, which is placed on their foot.
Then apply heat to the patient's body.
And then you should apply to the patient's legs a cushion to alleviate the pain.
And if an ailment arises in the legs, let it be known that the patient is suffering from gout.
Therefore, if the patient's first (toe) joint is affected, they should be cauterized as needed.
This is a very difficult task! I can only offer a literal translation based on the given context:
And if it is necessary to make a distinction between the two, it is that one should be placed on their legs.
And if you apply the cautery to the head, or use force on the patient's chest, make sure to use the same technique as used for the other types of instruments in le “other” section.
And treat them accordingly, as nature has ordained for that ailment, which is gout.
And then one should apply a cushion on the feet and around the affected area.
Translation: The first sentence is very similar to the English word "may" which means soon, and the third line says "And if it’s necessary to use a cautery…" so that's likely referring to the second sentence of the third.
If the patient has another inflammation in their legs, you must cover the inflamed area with a cushion for them to be treated.
If the patient has a light fever, they should be treated with a cautery.
Then apply the cautery to your mother's body, and she will be relieved from the pain.
This text describes the treatment of gout, which was often treated by applying a cautery to the affected area.
And if the mouth of the patient is constricted, then they should be treated with a hot cautery. Then apply a poultice to soften and moisten the affected area.
Then if the patient has pain on their side, apply a poultice to that area, but do so carefully.
When there is pain in the legs, they should be treated by applying a treatment to relieve it.
Then place a cushion on their feet and another on their legs, so that the second servant does not have to be there.
Then apply compresses to the area affected by the ailment.
Then apply heat to the legs if they are the only ones affected by the pain.
And another (person) has seen that a woman's body was already hot from the pain in her legs. You are correct! The Latin phrase "in le" translates to "on the" in English.
And if he/she has been cured for a long time, it is because they were treated by a doctor's orders.
Then place the cushion upon the feet to ease the pain.
Then let them be treated accordingly by physicians.
Thus, the woman has been treating the patient for the plague, which I have seen requires a different type of treatment for the other on their feet, et autre for another kind.
When you apply heat to the patient's body and they are suffering from pain in their legs, it is customary for them to be called "ass" or "foot."
De las formas del mal, then, are used various instruments for treating the affected part.
Then apply heat to the legs, using a hot iron or another method.
This is how you treat a person suffering from pain in their limbs. And so if the patient needs to be treated for a wound, you must use a more subtle cushion.
The patient's foot should be cauterized if there is a concern about a condition affecting the bones.
And if you apply cautery to the mouth, it will be more effective if you do so when the patient is already in your care.
Take its form, or appearance, as a sign that it is a good time to apply cauterization.
And if you put your hand under their joints to use the other forceps-like tool. But perhaps the intestine is affected, and you are placing your hands on their swollen areas.
This is a description of the use of a cautery for treating gout. Then you will have opened the patient's body yourself.
This refers to the patient's condition, not their legs.
Translate the cushion's shape to fit the patient's needs.
The shape of the great toe is checked for signs of gout.
This means: When the intestine or bowels are inflamed, it's important to use forceps carefully. When there's pain in the legs due to an excess of humors, physicians call it gout.
Another translation could be: "When using a pointed cautery, avoid touching the patient's skin."
Forma de unci having two spines.
Gout is a condition characterized by pain in the joints, especially the feet, caused by excess uric acid crystals.
Apply a cautery to the affected area.
All those instruments are used to treat ailments of the body and should be applied according to the instructions of the doctors.
And so you must use those instruments which are not to be excused by the patient.
Then there are ways to treat gout in general.
And if the pain affects them, you should use a cushion to support their leg during treatment.
And if the pain persists, apply a poultice of ointment to the affected area. These herbs or some of them are to be placed in water, and to be kept warm.
E aprop reduz in their cavity or another cushion to cover them.
Then you must place a bandage on the affected area.
If the pain persists, you must apply heat to the affected area. Before applying a cautery, make sure to check for signs of its presence in the right leg and left leg, it's done to ensure the correct placement.
And if the mouth of the mother is treated with herbs, then apply your hand to the other methods.
And if she has a fever in her foot, then put a cushion on it at night and let her rest.
Mays it's a challenge to translate this accurately without more context. The text uses words that are similar to Latin-based languages but not exact matches. It seems like a recipe for treating gout with cautery in various parts of the body.
Mays (Perhaps: *it*?) is used to refer to the pain caused by dry vapors in the body, and if it's necessary to treat it, we apply a cautery to the area of the affected part.
And if you are treating a woman, apply this method to her body parts.
When you have a cushion placed upon their legs, and they are being treated by a skilled doctor for them.
And if the body needs to be cauterized, one should place a cushion on their hands to prevent them from burning.
And if they are in the legs, and the leg is swollen, then apply a cushion under it.
Place a cushion on the child's legs and apply heat.
When the baby has pain in their joints, it's called gout. Then cover the patient's legs and apply another cushion to their body.
E aprop pause over the patient's bowels, but I don't know how to translate this accurately.
The other hand should be placed on the patient's feet to prevent the pain from spreading further.
When the disease has been cured by using lead to draw out the cause of the swelling, it is said to be a cure for the plague.
And so that it be healed.
The which are called fistulas in the flesh, and you have already translated it into that language.
This is a description of using a cautery on a patient.
And if the patient has gout or a white humor, and these are subtle symptoms, then they are caused by watery humors that have accumulated.
And if a patient has pain in their feet; they should know that it is caused by the cold humors that are already known to be present there.
And if the patient has already been treated for the fistula, and they are suffering from pain.
A person's bloodletting should be done on the leg when they have a cold humor in their body, but if they do not, then treat them with heat.
When pain arises in the limbs, use the following method.
If there is no pain in your foot, then apply a cushion to their body, but do not cauterize it.
And then the patient's bladder should be cauterized.
Perhaps it's the case that a hot coal is used to treat pain in the legs (the literal translation of "mays").
Then the incision is made in the leg, and the wound is treated as a whole by doctors, but the pain remains.
And if you are in need of a cure for an ailment that is not caused by excess cold humors, it’s advisable to consult a physician.
And if you have already opened the space between the legs, put a cushion under them, and a cushion on the foot, so that the patient's pain is localized.
Then if they are suffering from pain in their legs, they should be covered with a cushion.
If the intestine or the body's humors are too swollen, the patient will be known as having gout.
Then, however, they say that some men are healthy.
Translation: And if you want to apply cauterization above the cushion, do it after the patient's legs are open.
And if it is necessary to treat the flesh, apply medicine to the affected area; but if the pain comes from a cold humor, it is necessary that you apply a poultice and cauterize it with hot cautery.
This text describes a surgical procedure to treat a condition affecting the foot.
And for those parts that are affected by such a condition as the doctors call it.
And if it is necessary to apply cauterization to the legs, then use medicinal cautery.
And then apply a bandage to the affected area and bring the pain under control.
And apply cauterization to them with a hot iron; the use of a cushion is used for other things, such as another condition called gout.
If the patient has a fistula, place a hot iron on their body to cauterize it, and if it’s a “fistula” of the other kind, place one on each leg and another with his hands.
And if it is necessary to apply cauterization, it should be done to the flesh and bones, not to the skin or intestines.
Then treat the fistula with a cautery to draw out the corruption of the wound. Then apply heat to the affected area with the needle, as if it were a small wound.
And if the patient suffers from the cold that causes gout in the foot, then treat the intestine with other methods.
And if there are already wounds on the patient's body, you will see to it that the surgeon places a cushion under them for a few days.
And if it be healed, and the patient's legs are cleansed and healed.
And if the patient has pain in their feet, apply hot cautery to treat it, but don't let the heat touch the skin of the foot, use something to protect the skin from being burned when applying it.
This is a description of how to treat a fistula using a method similar to reducing the swelling, so it may be translated as:
When there is an excess of blood in the body's hemorrhoids.
And if it is necessary to treat a rash or burn on the surface of the body, you should use a cushion beneath them. And on the patient's legs you must always have a cushion for them.
And these are the signs that indicate a lack of fluids in the body, which indicate other diseases.
Then apply a cauterizing tool to the leg to stop the pain. Then you apply cautery to the legs so as to open up the space between the muscles and the bones.
Then use a cloth or towel to cover the area if you need to cauterize their already-inflamed intestine. And another cushion on the other side.
Then you will have applied a cushion to the patient's pain.
And if you are treating them with your hand, apply heat to the affected area to keep it from becoming inflamed.
C'est pour faire une incision sur les pieds, et autre chose à faire avec le fil.
And if it is necessary to cauterize the patient's legs, use another method.
And place another on the patient's body, and another cushion on their hands. And if the patient is suffering from that which can be cured by other means, then those are applied.
And if you are treating someone who has been afflicted by an ailment requiring ancient medicine (humoral imbalance), it should be done so that the patient's body is not too moist and the disease does not spread.
When joints are inflamed, apply a cushion to protect them from further injury.
This sentence describes the use of a cautery to address the pain caused by "cold humors" in the body, specifically in the hands and feet.
And then you should apply a cauterizing iron to the affected area of the foot.
The second [part] that precedes the intestine or the cushion.
Then comes the pain from the child's foot, that is the sign of a bad omen.
And if it is necessary to treat someone for a wound, you should use a cautery tool. Then use, as needed, fire or medicine to treat the patient's legs, and use medication for the pain in the intestine, which you may then cauterize with a pointed cautery.
When the body is heated, a cushion will be placed on the patient's body.
E curacio de la medicina of the foot
And if you wish, make them use this method.
Let the pain be removed by gentle methods first, if possible, then by cutting with the knife.
And if you want to cauterize, then use a heated iron for the procedure.
And then apply the instruments to the patient's legs, and let them rest for a time.
This sentence seems to be describing the use of specific instruments for treating children depending on the size of the child or the type of treatment being applied.
This sentence is likely about the process of treating gout in the context of returning to a healthy state.
The top of the leg is opened in the manner described.
And if a sharp pain in the foot arises, use a hot cautery to cauterize it.
And if it is customary for them to be on their beastly side, they are called a "palmer" in the medical profession.
And if it is necessary to make points on the body it is as well to place one's hand on their legs; et cetera.
Then apply the medicine to the patient's legs or place a cushion under them; and then apply medicine to their feet.
Then another is placed on his chest to hold the intestine in place.
And if the medicine fails, they should try to be healed by another method.
If you cauterize the bowels are healed by fire.
If you are suffering from pain in the foot, apply the cautery to the affected area.
And then treat them with a cauterization.
You are likely seeing an incorrect or incomplete translation.
The pains are caused by the lungs.
And if there are similar causes in the future for such a situation, you will know how to treat them.
Mays this be translated as the plague spreads through the body's limbs, they burn a person, or someone could use a hot cautery to treat it.
And so reason thusly about the treatment of the wound, and apply the same reasoning to others in the body.
And you will see that the plague is caused by an evil humoral imbalance.
And if the pain is in the legs, then it is simply called gout by physicians.
And if it is necessary to burn out the pain in the legs, apply cautery there.
Do not eat meat or wine if you have a pain in the feet that causes gout; avoid them altogether.
And if you cauterize the affected area, it will be cauterized on the part of the body where the pain is located, and apply another cautery to the part of the body where the inflammation has spread.
This may be a medical procedure for treating an abscess or applying a poultice to a wound.
And then put a cushion on his legs for healing to occur.
If the plague affects the feet or the face, the physician will use a cushion to prevent the plague from affecting the other areas as well.
When the plague is upon you, put your hands on the patient's legs, to help contain the plague.
And if you treat a wound on their legs, it should be treated with a cushion.
If a sharp pain occurs in the foot, then use a heated tool to treat the area after which you will apply a bandage to their foot.
And if these plagues are simple and on the hands, they are easily identifiable.
Then the patient's body should be treated with a poultice made from three parts of the mixture.
And if the patient is suffering from humors affecting the foot, apply your knowledge of healing to relieve them.
Then apply a burning treatment to the legs, as well as applying a bandage for the duration of the treatment.
And then apply a hot iron to their limbs to burn away the impurities.
And if you touch it with your hand, they will be altered, and it will be necessary to cauterize them with a burning iron if it is already inflamed.
And if the patient suffers from bone pain, they will be given a poultice to apply and another cushion for their illness.
And if it is necessary to treat the fractures of the head, apply heat by a trained physician.
When your hand is on the patient's body, it is called for in the medical profession.
This is how a physician would treat them in their own way.
If the patient has a pain in their neck, then put a cushion under them. Any illness in the body should be addressed by doctors, but when there is pain caused by gout in the foot, they say to apply a poultice to the affected area.
And if it is pointed out that the patient has a slight swelling in the leg, or that there is an opening in the foot to which leeches are applied, then it is treated with a mild medicinal wash and other remedies.
The doctors should use a suture if there are wounds on the legs or feet.
Mays if the disease is deep or affects the foot, then use a hot cushion on the area to be treated.
Then apply the cautery to the affected area and use other cushions on their legs and feet if necessary.
The intestine will heal more quickly if it is kept warm and moist.
The original text is written in a mixture of languages, but I believe it's meant to be translated into English as:
And if the plague is recent, apply dust to the affected area on their legs. And if the patient has an opening in the plague, they are to be treated by the physician for that condition.
If there is a cushion placed on the joints, and it is known to be an injury or pain in the limbs, then it is said that the person suffers from the plague.
And if there is pain in the body, the cauterized one must be treated with the hottest heat possible, but it must be applied carefully so that the patient's blood does not flow out from the cut.
And if you are a doctor, put your hand on the patient's chest to feel the pain.
When there are three days or more after the onset of the plague, then the patient's fate is sealed; they will die.
If treatment for the illness is delayed, it may be mistaken for something else, so that's why we need to call it by its proper name when it's necessary.
Then apply to the affected area the appropriate treatment for such conditions will depend on the nature of the ailment.
When the joint pain occurs in the foot and other bones, the patient's body must be cleansed. If the plague has not been contained by the doctors, then it will be alleviated.
And for other ailments, treatment is similar to what we do for gout.
And for the plagues of the belly, place a cushion under them.
When there is pain in the stomach, they should be placed on their abdomen, and another cushion at the feet.
and so that the body does not make him feel pain in his feet, cushion them or support them.
E thus is the best way to treat it: a cushion on their legs, and the other is put in place so that the intestine is not damaged.
And then you must know that there are four types of suture used on the body.
And then two other cushions are placed on the abdomen to make them more comfortable.
And you should know that is the way to treat it.
And so I say that the plague comes in two ways: one from the legs coming out from the body, as we have said, and another because of their cold nature.
And if the pain is so intense that it is necessary to use a cushion for the patient's head, it is customary to place their hands on their knees.
When the pain is severe, apply cushions to the affected area and put a cushion on their feet.
And so when the patient's inflammation is resolved, the patient should be comforted by having their leg placed back in the proper position.
Then apply a cautery to the hemorrhoids by which they are being treated.
And if necessary, one can use cautery to treat the patient, but it's better to try other methods first.
And if there are signs of illness in their limbs, they should be treated with cauterization.
Then, if the pain is in the foot, the other foot should be held opposite to the one being treated.
And so, if the inflammation is in the limbs, it is called gout by physicians.
When the pain is widespread, you should treat them by applying the poultice to the lower part of the body, or near the lower abdomen.
And if there are complications in the intestines, apply a bandage or use a cushion to support the patient's body, and ensure the patient's legs are supported by pillows.
This line translates to: And so place your hand on the patient's feet.
When in small pains, put a cushion under them.
E questa es la mano de la qual se diu "four points" in tu ha de fer-ne tres per la cos de la persona.
Then you must apply a needle to the affected area, and two needles should be placed together, one where the disease is present.
The first line says: When joint pain occurs due to a buildup of fluids in the body, it's called gout.
And if it is necessary to apply something to the body, do so gently and carefully so that the patient feels no pain.
And for that no metrical treatment should be applied to the legs so that the intestine or the foot will not become infected.
And if you need to use a needle to treat a patient's gouty pain, apply the cushion to their leg and hold it on the affected area.
These are the best types of needles for these sorts of wounds, so that the skin doesn't get wrinkled.
The second translation: The second line is the most common.
Then return to that part of the body, for which you should use a needle, etc., when working on the patient's four limbs.
Then place your hand on their legs to hold them in place.
And then apply a bandage to their legs.
And if it was already a sore spot, put a burning iron on it; that is what the physician will do.
The plague was cured within 15 days in that case.
And the doctors have judged that the patient should be treated with a poultice, because they believe no other treatment is possible.
And according to the account of Paraula, there are two types of surgery on the feet.
And it is necessary for you to apply a stitch on the side of the body, which is what the surgeon does when treating wounds.
And if the needle penetrates to the end of the body, and if it is necessary to apply the needle on the limbs, then you apply it to their thighs and legs.
If the intestine is inflamed, use a cushion to help relieve pain in the patient's foot, and apply cauterization if necessary.
And if you have a patient who needs to be treated in this way, the physician should place a cushion under them.
And then apply a needle to the other side of the leg, where there is a point on the same side.
And so you see, the patient's legs have been opened so that the physician can use a cautery for treatment.
And so you will cauterize the affected area, as it has been done for other parts of the body.
The body's own fluids are being used to make an incision on the foot.
When you cauterize the foot, use two needles to hold it in place.
Then place those points on their feet.
This method of stitching is better than common light stitching.
This is the treatment for the patient's pain.
When the pain in the joints is caused by cold humors that have been solidified, apply a hot cautery to the area where the patient's intestines are located.
You already know that gout affects the feet, and it makes their treatment difficult.
And the treatment for the plague will be given to those who need it.
Then apply the hot iron to the affected area, which should be done carefully.
And if it be the case that a person has a sickness in the body, the physician must immediately place a cushion under his foot, and another on his legs, to protect the other parts of the body from harm.
When plagues are simple, it is possible to do without these medicines.
Then apply a cushion to the patient's affected limbs.
When there are painful outbreaks on the patient's body, it is often called gout when they occur in the legs or feet.
And the pain of the large intestine is lighter than that of the small intestine.
Then apply a cautery to the intestines or the legs of the patient to prevent the plague from spreading.
If the disease is the plague, and the patient's legs are affected by it.
When you place your hand on the wound of the patient, it will be black or green.
And if they are suffering from a gout attack, apply a hot cushion to their feet, which the plague has caused.
Then remember to apply heat to the legs so that they are healed from the pain.
If there is a pain in the joints that is caused by cold humors, it is important to seek a doctor to prevent further complications.
Then you will have to apply cauterization to the affected area, and then apply a cushion to their hands, and another one to their legs, for healing.
And if you are a doctor who has an accident in his practice, know that gout affects those whose bowels have been infiltrated by it.
Then apply the treatment to the affected area, using large doses for the most effective results.
And another point is placed on the patient's foot, and another cushion is placed upon their feet.
Then cauterize the affected area to stop the pain from spreading.
This text needs to be deciphered based on the provided context, which suggests the language is a mix of Italian/Spanish and Latin.
Then the patient's legs are treated with cautery and other techniques.
And if the plague is great and widespread, it is mostly called another illness, but in the case of one in the legs or bowels, the plague is not a diagnosis they would receive.
The text likely talks about the treatment of wounds or openings in the body.
If a pain in your body persists and becomes inflamed, it may be called a fistula.
And if it is a true fistula, it is hard to heal.
E in some men, the body heals quickly, and in others, the sickness lingers for hours. And some other things are already moistening their legs and subtle fluids are being produced.
When the body is exposed to the world, it is customary to treat the patient with medicines in order to heal them.
And let me tell you that the treatment for the ailment known as fistulas is done by means of surgery.
And if you wish to make a cautery on the veins or arteries of the leg or on the foot.
And so to heal that wound, one must treat it with knowledge.
If you are a healer, place your hand on their legs, and then they will know if the patient's legs are affected by the condition.
Mays es un coyssi, and if it's a fistula it is a more subtle ailment than the other types.
If the infection spreads, you must use a hot cautery to treat it properly.
Then treat them by applying a suppository to their anus.
And you should apply your knowledge of the causes of the ailment to the treatment of the ailment, and place a cushion on their legs, and treat them accordingly.
And so you must consider if a hot, painful swelling is in the thighs or legs.
Then return the patient's leg to its normal position.
If it's a fistula of great depth, then you should cauterize the flesh according to its nature.
Then apply a poultice to the area, and then place a cushion on their legs.
And if you are using a hot cautery, then apply it to the affected area.
Mays si no es sanada, then you can apply the treatment with a hot cautery as the doctors have instructed.
Then treat the fistulas in the patient's body as other physicians do.
When the foot bones are afflicted with the disease, they must be cauterized to prevent gout.
And if it is not cured by applying a cushion and other methods, then you should use it to treat the ailment of the body and its limbs.
And therefore, if it's not healed, the deep-seated corruption will spread to their chest.
And if the bone affected by the ailment is small, you must use forceps for the operation, which will be done carefully.
And if it is necessary to move bones out of their place, it is called gout in the foot, which is caused by an excess of cold humors.
Then apply the cautery to the ligaments or flesh if there's no other way.
This is a difficult one! It seems like the passage is talking about making small incisions on the body, but it's unclear what kind of surgery is being described.
Another way to say it, if it's a pain that affects the body, and another way to say it in a medical context, it is called mumps.
But if the mark on the skin appears to be from cold humors, then the doctor would say that it's the plague.
When joints are corrupted, it is customary to call it gout by doctors.
Then you will find out which of your servants is in pain, and you will have found a place to operate on their body.
Then place another on their legs, and another on the foot to prevent the pain from spreading.
When the doctors have made a diagnosis, they call it a disease.
And then the doctor will apply a cushion to their legs, because he knows about the pain in the legs, and the patient will be relieved when the cushion is applied.
And when the body was found, it was covered in a yellow substance; their flesh was swollen and they were experiencing pain.
And then apply a cautery to the affected area.
Then bring your hand down on the patient's thigh, and find their leg and foot veins for all treatments.
And so the doctor would then place a cushion on one of his legs, and another would be placed on their feet, for the patient's pain in the feet was a sign that the burn was infected.
And then you should apply heat to the affected bones, after they have been exposed and prepared.
Then I apply the cauterization to the bone, and place another on their legs, and yet another on the legs they are pointing to.
And then place a cushion on their feet, for a long time to let them be treated with medicine.
And if the patient's legs are opened and their bowels are exposed, then the disease is advanced.
And if a patient's leg isn't in proper alignment, it will be called sciatica by physicians.
And then if it becomes necessary to treat the patient, you can use a cushion to make sure they are comfortable.
And it is not necessary to repeat the procedure if the operation has been done on the other side of the body.
And so the patient's condition is remedied, and their body hardened flesh is restored to its original state.
And if it is necessary to make the patient's bowels or limbs thin, you must use a cushion which is more comfortable for the patient, and ensure they are placed on their side.
And if a doctor wishes to cut the tendons in their hands, they must use a knife.
This phrase by phrase translation appears to be describing how to treat a patient who has gout.
If the patient's bowels are affected by the disease, then they should have their bowels treated.
And if the surgeon has to open the area again, they should do so carefully.
If the pain is in the joint, then treat the affected joint with cautery.
When there are other pains in addition to those in the legs, you should apply a poultice to the affected area.
Then apply cautery to the affected area.
This passage translates to "And if you want to treat the patient for their specific ailment, and arrange the hand on which they are operated."
Then you must know that the operation refers to the treatment of illnesses, for there are aches in all ailments.
And then you will place your hand on the patient's abdomen to prevent further complications. And if it is in the form of a saw, it is called  gout.
A form of gout that affects the legs:
Forma (shape) of a tool used by doctors for cauterizing the body.
A form of pain. If the patient has pain in the foot, then use a hot cautery to treat it.
It is not appropriate to translate literally, as it's unclear what language this is in.
A form of treatment for inflammation of the feet.
Shape of the razor.
A method to treat gout by applying cautery to specific areas on the patient's foot. When you have pain in the foot, it is caused by other things.
When there's a need to drain something from the body using a razor-like tool.
Here comes the translation:
This describes the treatment of gout in a way that suggests how to treat an ailment caused by the body's humors.
This is a challenging one! Here's a possible translation for "Forma de" in the context you provided:
And so we see the shape of the body's smaller parts.
Then you will use a saw to cut the wound in the shape of a ray, which is what other things are done by doctors to make them, and patients; feet are treated with a hot iron.
When gout affects the foot, it is customary to treat it by applying cushions to the patient's legs.
And so the first part of the treatment for this condition would be to treat the patient's legs, and the last one is to use a cushion.
And if it is caused by hot iron, such as is done for other ailments, they are dealt with in the same way.
The cushion should be placed on their legs to stop the pain.
Then return the patient's foot to its cavity, for the purpose of treating their gout.
When a burn occurs, apply heat to the affected area.
And similar if it is caused by poison it is called gout.
And if on their fingertip or toe you make an incision, then you must apply pressure to stop the spreading of the infection.
And similarly if it seems necessary to make points on the intestine, apply the cushion to their feet, the patient must be treated with fire.
And if you are cauterizing the patient's arm, then do so in the area of the joint.
And when the patient's body has been affected by a disease, you can place a cushion on their thighs to cure it.
And similarly, one should apply a poultice to the affected area if it is their foot.
And place your hand on the foot to prevent pain. Then apply the cauter to their legs, at the joint where the pain is located.
Then apply heat to the area, but if the patient is healed, and no longer experiences pain.
And the way to cut the part which you want to incise is that you place a cushion under the location.
And so that the patient's body may be kept from harm, place a cushion under them.
Mays you should be careful when applying cauterization to the leg, as it can cause pain in the foot.
And apply to that area a poultice of herbs for healing.
This sentence is describing a situation where someone would use a cautery tool to treat a condition (like gout) by applying heat to a specific area.
And then the physician will open the space between the thighs, and apply a cushion to them and if pain persists, he will attend to the patient's legs.
The patient healed himself from his pain.
Lon pain in the foot can be treated by applying heat to the legs.
A cushion will be placed on the patient's thighs to absorb any excess fluid, while another cushion is placed under their legs.
And if you wish to keep your hand from being affected by that which is causing pain.
The man will heal by cauterizing his intestines.
And then place a cushion under their legs to prevent them from suffering more pain.
Of the treatment of enemas and their properties.
And if a cushion is placed on the feet, there are other, less skilled, people who do this.
Mays it is prolonged, if you have a medical condition, that's why they are called other names.
Translation 1: And if it is necessary to make incisions on the legs of the patient, it is called gout by the doctor.
And then you apply a hot compress to their feet.
Then apply a poultice of a strong-smelling remedy that has a stench, and it is called a “clyster” because it is applied to the affected area, which may be on the legs or elsewhere.
And you have applied to the patient's body (the area affected by) a cushion that is filled with air, and if necessary, hold their bowels steady over the course of two hours for treatment;  and medicate them with honey.
And then apply a poultice to the affected area; if it is necessary, use a heated tool for treatment.
Then sometimes it is done with cautery.
If the patient has no tolerance for the Egyptian remedy, then use water and honey.
And if you have already cauterized the veins, then apply a clyster to the patient's bowels, as needed.
And then apply a poultice to the patient's legs; or if necessary, use other medicines.
And if the patient's foot needs to be amplified, do so gradually with small doses.
And if it is a large opening, you should place a cushion on the amount which is placed under them.
When the swollen intestines are caused by an excess of humors in the body, apply a poultice to draw them out.
Then apply the cauterization to the area of the affected limb, and hold another cushion over the other cushions or the other leg to ensure the cautery remains in place.
Mays apply a cushion to the area where the pain is located. And know you whether it be gout in their legs or arms, it is much or little pain.
Then if the patient feels pain in that area, examine them for other signs of sickness.
And if you apply cauterization to the foot, do so with the use of a hot iron or a burning stick.
Then apply to the other limbs as needed for healing.
"And if there are still some problems with the medicine's application, they should be treated with a dry poultice."
And if you are a doctor who cures a patient, the last thing they should be doing is suffering from gout.
Then apply the herbs to the affected areas.
And sometimes it requires centaurea and other herbs to be applied.
And if you want to heal the pain in the feet, it is customary to call it gout.
And for healing, they are to be used in order to heal the wound on the foot.
The first line means:  "And if the pain is in the feet, it is customary to apply a poultice."
Then apply your hand to the affected area to prevent the inflammation from spreading further.
Mays es a hard-to-translate phrase meaning that the patient's body has been affected by a particular type of pain.
And if there is an ailment in the bones, you must apply the proper treatment, for they are caused by corrupted humors.
And if you cauterize the affected area, it will help the patient's health recover, and apply cautery to the area where the pain is felt, ensuring the pain be alleviated by the use of a cushion to protect the area.
When the pain in the toe is caused by an ingrown toenail, then you should put a cushion on their toes and apply it to the nail.
And if it's bad, a cushion should be placed on the legs to prevent them from hurting.
A pointed tool is used to pierce the skin near the veins in the legs during treatment for gout. And when the body is affected by a disease causing hot or cold symptoms, then they are said to be suffering from the corresponding ailment.
And those who are born fleshy, they have other needs.
Mays from the pain in the bowels of the patient, the cure for which is difficult.
Thus, the patient is given a cushion at the start, so that the pain in their legs be alleviated.
So if you see that they have a condition that arises from a problem with their humors, you must be careful to examine their bowels and other internal organs.
And if a patient has a cushion, it should be used to treat the surface of the foot so that the pain is not severe.
And similarly, if there are contractions in the foot, they say that it is gout.
Then apply heat to the affected area with cautery.
Vices can also be caused by an imbalance in the humors.
Then you should take the patient's blood in case of strong fever, and administer other treatment to their legs.
And there are two ways to treat their ailment.
This is the opening for the patient, a cushion should be placed under their leg to elevate their foot.
And then place a cushion under them, for the patient has already opened the space.
E venes tenz a la persona suffering from gout affected their veins.
If the patient has pain in their legs, let them soak their feet in hot water.
And if it's necessary to make an incision on the right of the cushion or apply a cautery to the patient's foot.
Then, if it is necessary to cauterize the veins of the patient and prevent them from bleeding out.
And so come you, who are the physician, to the patient's throat.
And you, already having elevated the intestine, should put your hand there to keep them from being open to the other.
Then apply a cushion to their legs or another on them.
And if you want to apply it to the legs, hold your hand above their second section.
And then apply the cauterizer to the upper part, the one that is most prominent in the body, and place the other on the lower parts.
When you are overweight, you should use an instrument to remove the fluid from the affected area of the body, and apply a bandage to secure the needle and prevent the opening from closing back up. And if it is necessary to elevate the patient's abdomen or treat the ailment with cauterization, do so carefully; if a wound is on the abdomen, it is called a wound and if there is a wound, they should apply another treatment method.
And when the patient's humors are unbalanced, the doctor will treat them.
And if the pain is severe, you should apply a cautery to the area, but if the body is well-nourished, do not apply any other cautery.
Hold your hand there, so that you do not touch the patient's vein.
The correct translation is "For the pain in the legs is severe when it's caused by a condition that needs to be addressed by the physician."
A large person should be given a sharp pain with a cautery; if the pain is in the feet, use a tool to make points on the area where the pain is located.
On the legs.
This disease is caused by hot humors, so it can be cured by applying cold to the affected area.
And if the body produces too much phlegm in other parts of the body, it is called catarrh.
And then the pregnancy of the foot, which is caused by other things, such as a wound or injury.
E senhal de la l'adveniment de la causa is that a cushion must be placed under the foot to prevent the use of the old methods.
And then you apply a cushion to the leg of the one who has gout, the one that affects the foot and ankle.
And if there are other causes of pain in the body, it is already placed on the legs under the influence of something. And if the pain in your feet is severe and prolonged, cauterize the affected area.
If there is a need to cauterize the affected area, then make sure to do it gently.
And from this vein, they have shown that a certain pain in the feet.
Then return to the patient's body, and in the space of their body, and another one on the feet.
This vein causes pain in the foot, and if it is cut open, it will cause harm to the patient.
And if they are in pain, the other remedies will be applied as I have said.
And when cutting into the flesh, or using a cautery on worms under the skin, and other things are done to their legs, such as applying a poultice, it is a disease of the body, and it's called "the bovine disease" by doctors.
In some places, people call this ailment "the gout" in a specific region.
And if it is necessary to explain that the patient has a pain in their stomach, there are other things that might be going on besides a cushion under them needing a hot compress.
Then apply cushions to the patient's legs and thighs when they are hot from fever so that the pain does not spread.
And when you want to treat that ailment and extract the cause from its location.
And if there is pain in the area of the body where the patient's flesh is located, it is said to be caused by a hot iron.
Then return the cushion to its proper place (on the body) and another person should hold the patient's legs in place while they are being cauterized.
On their ailments.
This illness is called gout in our land, which affects various limbs, and sometimes the feet.
And you have seen the second one that is usually called gout. And I saw in her arm a vein that was opened as if it were a vein of quicksilver.
And then apply a cauterization to that area, and hold it for an hour.
And then you must also apply heat to the other side of the body, specifically the arms.
And so he put a cushion under their foot to help with the pain. When the body is affected by a disease that causes pain in the legs. "And when applying cautery, hold a cushion over the intestine or intestines to prevent the foot from swelling."
And if you are not able to put the patient's bowels back in place, it is called a female disease.
And that's how you cauterize the veins to prevent cauterization.
The original Latin text would likely be:  "And since thou wishest to cure the pain in the foot, you should apply the cushion to the location of the pain."
Then you place a cushion under the patient's legs, and apply a cauterizing agent to the affected area, which is the foot in this case.
On the process of drawing blood by letting.
Arrows are made in various ways, according to the type of illness they are treating.
And when the pain is in the legs, then apply a cushion to the area where they are hurting, and have another one placed on the head.
And so if the wound is open, then you must abstain from using a cautery to extract the arrow, and apply a cushion directly to their legs instead.
This means if the other symptoms are present, such as black blood in the urine (e si lo sanc es negra).
And when the cushion has been placed under the patient's arm, the other on their leg, the pain is severe to the point of causing swelling.
When the pain is severe or acute in the feet, the affected limb should be treated gently.
Then the patient's stomach should be rubbed with a hot cautery to treat their indigestion.
There is hope for curing an illness only if the patient has a strong spirit.
If there are other causes on which the patient is in danger of dying, then it will be necessary to cauterize those injuries.
Maybe the other parts of the body are affected by the dart in the same way as the feet.
And I tell you, if your feet are cold, it is necessary to call in the doctor.
This means that the patient's tears should be drawn out by the pointed pain of gout.
When the patient has a cushion under their head, another in the area of their body where the pain is located, and the affected area is being treated with a hot cautery, you must apply it to the thigh.
When the Jew suffers, he is being persecuted, and you must help him.
And if a cushion is placed on the thighs of a man, and the other cushions are applied to the legs, et autre, and the other one is healed.
And so you have extracted another arrow from the body of a man, whose pain was in his belly and legs.
And if there's a pain in the back, it is customary for doctors to place points on the patient's spine.
The woman has gout in her legs.
And if the patient has gout or a similar condition, it means they have a burning sensation in their joints, which is why doctors call it "gout."
And you have already placed a cushion on the man's thigh near his right thigh and the rest of the body is still numbed.
And you have to expose the leg for three days.
Then I found that the arrow had struck its mark; it was already hitting the target.
And apply a cushion to the legs and hold the foot in place.
Keep the patient's legs elevated and apply a poultice to their feet for pain relief.
Then, with a sharp instrument, he must be treated with a cauterizing agent.
Then apply the medicine to their legs, so that they don't get worse.
This is a very creative interpretation of the prompt!
When the body is cleansed by water, it is necessary to cleanse the ailment with a hot cautery,
And if it is necessary to make cuts for the removal of blood from the body, you should also use a cushion in that procedure.
And if there is no one present who can apply a remedy, you are to place a cushion under them (the patient's) and leave it open for all to see.
Therefore, I say that arrows are only in the limbs when they are shot into them.
And if you are in need to make an incision on the leg or foot,  you should carefully cauterize it.
Leave the foot alone for several days to allow the flesh around it to heal.
And if it is necessary to apply heat to the affected area, it should be done so carefully, as excessive heat can exacerbate the symptoms.
And if you don't apply the cushion to the joint, then do so for several days.
Mays, the doctor will treat you for the ailment.
Then cauterize the wound so that the joint pain will be relieved.
And if it is necessary to apply a cautery to the surface of the body that's affected by those humors, it is done with a pointed tool.
Then use your hands to apply pressure and prevent the wound from opening further.
Translate the following sentences: And if it is a pain in the legs or feet, it is treated by applying a cushion to their legs and hot irons to their limbs.
Then do as you can to cauterize the patient's body.
And so, for that reason, you should know that the intestine is where the disease lies. Then apply other treatments according to your judgment.
Gout is caused by an excess of humors in the body, especially in the feet.
If it is necessary, put a cushion under their knees if the patient has pain in their feet, they should be treated with a hot needle.
And then apply heat to their legs, using another cauterization tool on the legs to bring back the heat.
If the pain in the legs is due to a hot humor, treat it by applying a cushion to the area where the cushion should be used.
If the patient's pain is located in the area of the body that you call the tailbone, put a cushion there instead of using the term "gout".
Then you will apply a cauterizing tool to the affected area, and then you are to use the cushion on the patient's legs for support.
If you are facing a wound, you should apply a poultice to it.
When the doctor cauterizes the veins of a patient, he or she should be careful not to touch the area that needs treatment.
A form of tongs is used to apply heat with arrows (the tongs are thrown at the body's humors)
Let the patient be treated with hot cautery to reduce the swelling in their limbs and if necessary, they can use the cushion.
Then treat those parts with cushions, the legs, with bandages, and apply other treatments for pain.
So too if pain is in the legs, so that they are relieved from the pain.
Then, from the text provided, the meaning appears to be related to phlebotomy, which in modern times refers to the practice of drawing blood but in the medieval period often meant "blood letting".
And if there are other ailments, cauterize them where they are,  in the case of pain in the side of the body. This sentence is written in a language that sounds like "la langue d'Oc", which is an old language of Southern France. It means:
Then the pain of the thigh, which may be caused by the opening of the intestines in their own way.
The young man places his hand on the areas around the affected veins, you see, he puts a poultice on their head, and uses it to draw out the pain.
Then you are applying a bandage to the patient's head, covering their temples with the proper amount of the same.
When the pain is in the joints, and you apply a cauterizer to the area where the pain is located, it will be necessary to cauterize the affected joint with a hot cautery or other methods. And apply the cautery to the cushion on their hands. And let the patient's legs be cauterized in order to treat those who have a wound on their foot.
And if it is necessary, you should make points on the affected area to prevent it from healing completely.
And there you have the book's introduction to the subject of the treatment of illness in the text.
When pain appears in the legs, they are said to be old and evil.
And that's how you can tell if someone has a condition called gout in their legs: they have a pain in the leg, which is due to the accumulation of excess cold humors.
And elevate the tongue to the level of the veins in the legs.
And if you are cauterizing the foot, one must apply the cautery to the other parts so they don’t come out.
And so it is treated by remembering the opening of the book, and the attraction to its contents.
And so if bloodletting is necessary, they apply it to the head (cephalic vein) for these conditions.
And so, the method of opening the vein in the leg, which I have mentioned above, is as follows.
And if it is necessary to make a bloodletting on their foot, then use a cautery to stop the bleeding.
And so you must apply a cushion to the patient's body, but be careful because the use of a sharp instrument can cause pain.
When there are two veins that are affected by the itch of the skin.
The quality of the bandage is that it covers the entire body.
Then apply the bleeding cup to the patient's legs.
And apply a cautery to draw out the bad humors.
And may the physician see if the vein in your nose needs to be treated for inflammation and fever and other ailments of the face.
And if the patient's condition is such that they are weak from pain, then place a cushion under their feet.
Cove that the patient should be treated with a cautery to remove excess fluid and relieve pain.
Mays le/the patient be treated with cautery for both their ailments and to prevent further complications.
Then the nature of the metatarsal or leg pain is to be considered by the doctor, and another enflamed area in the foot; if the patient's condition is such that it requires it, then the surgeon will know.
And the bloodletting should be done gradually on the legs, and the patient’s hands should be held out so they do not bleed on themselves.
And then apply the bandage to their foot after the wound has healed.
And if you have to open them up again, and use a cushion for the swelling.
The doctors will also be careful to observe the color of the veins in your legs.
If you have to make an incision on the leg.
And there you have it, two veins opened in their lips.
And if you apply a cautery to the intestines or elsewhere on the body, one must be careful to avoid causing further pain.
And if it is necessary to apply cautery to the legs or chest, it is for them, in those parts, to use hot, and for the patient's feet to be treated with a cushion under them.
Then you have made a mistake; the other possible translations are incorrect.
And if the patient has a condition where they are caused by humors that have flowed from their proper place into the body, the treatment is different.
And then you must open the veins which are full and swollen, as the physician would do.
And so for this treatment, a smaller cushion is used to place on the patient's chest, and if they are suffering from a more severe case, a more gentle approach may be necessary.
Then apply a cautery to the legs, feet, or other areas as needed to relieve symptoms of illness.
This sounds like a phrase that describes the location of pain in the body, specifically the feet.
And if there is no sign of inflammation, then use a cushion to support their body.
The bloodletting should be done to the veins in the arms, legs, or other body parts where the physician performs the procedure, and they must apply pressure to stop the bleeding.
And when you have opened the joint pain, use a cushion to prevent the pain from returning.
And if you see the blood flowing, use a cautery to stop it as a child's blood runs thinner on the limbs.
And it is known that the patient's health will be improved by guarding it for several days.
If blood flow to the other areas of the body is restricted, then you should use a sharp instrument on the artery.
And if the patient's stomach is inflamed, it needs to be treated with cooling remedies; otherwise, it needs to be treated with warming remedies.
And if the patient's foot is swollen, apply a hot cautery to the small area of the affected limb, and have another person hold the patient's hands.
The bloodletting should be performed by a skilled physician using the basilica vein.
The translation for the provided sentence is: And when the bloodletting is performed on the other side of the body, it is done so by cutting into the veins in that area.
And if the vein is in the middle, apply the cushion to their thighs, long or short.
Le jeuvenile that causes the intestines to bleed, but prevents the spread of disease.
If you wish to cauterize a patient, ensure they are properly prepared for the procedure by using cushions or other supports as needed.
When pain in the leg is treated with heat, and the patient feels no relief from the first application, then apply heat to the thigh again.
When bloodletting is performed on them, it is customary to use the following:
Then perform venesection on the affected limb to remove excess blood.
Cutting into the body to relieve pain caused by an excess of blood in the veins.
The doctor will cauterize the joints of the patient, but only after they are past their seventh year.
And if it is necessary to treat a patient's foot or leg, they should be treated as such, for the treatment of the cushion, which is placed on the chest, is different from that of the foot.
This text describes treating a person suffering from the effects of a disease caused by cold humors.
Then the patient's blood flow will be monitored to ensure it is not thick or sluggish.
And if it is necessary to make an incision for a reason, or apply a cautery to the area.
And if it is necessary to make points on the leg, apply them at the point where the pain is felt.
Let the patient's feet be kept free from pain on that day.
And if it is necessary to apply heat to the affected area, it will be done by the physician.
And so the physician should place a cushion under them to prevent a cushion from being applied to their feet.
Then place a cushion on their arm and apply it three times to each area where the cautery is used on them.
And if there is a stricture in the body, it should be treated by applying cold to the area to constrict the blood vessels.
And if there are signs of inflammation, you place a cushion under their legs to prevent swelling.
And if the patient is in need of a fleubotomia, apply the ointment to the vein being treated to ensure the bleeding stops.
Therefore, let it be known that the doctor should apply the cauterizer while considering these matters.
And if a hot poultice is applied to the flesh of the body, the result will be pain.
And if a boil forms, it is treated with a hot cautery to open it up, or the patient suffers from pain in their limbs, apply a cushion for support.
Then apply bloodletting if it is necessary for the patient.
And if you place the cushion under their legs, adjust the amount of bloodletting accordingly.
When the body is affected by illness, a poultice is placed on their legs, and another cautery is used to treat the condition. And for this purpose it is better to use another cushion in their thigh.
And similarly, avoid using bloodletting in cases where there are signs of inflammation or fever.
E if the patient is suffering from a large abscess, apply a poultice made of your choice of herbs to the wound, and then place a hot cautery on the affected area for an hour.
Then apply a heated instrument to that vein, or another vein.
And if it lasts for several days, use a cauterizer with some rue and myrrh or other such remedies.
And if it is necessary to treat the patient with fleubotomia (flebotomy) in the case of basilica (unclear what this refers to).
And so apply a cushion under your knees, lest the pain become too much.
And put on their legs a cushion to keep them from being stiff and apply the other poultice where needed for healing.
And see that everyone receives the necessary treatment.
And if you are dealing with an injury, you should be careful about making them cold humors.
And if there are many ulcers on the feet, the patient should be treated with bloodletting.
And if the foot is inflamed, use a cautery to treat it directly.
And if it is necessary to open the vein for bloodletting, it should be done by someone skilled in the art of incision rather than by puncture.
This practice is known as "second intention healing" because it's better to have a cushion of another type of meaning.
Then apply the cautery to the area, heating a small piece of cloth with a hot iron or by using a heated cloth directly on the skin.
Then apply cautery to the skin above the affected area in case of an inflamed joint.
Then apply a poultice to prevent the disease from spreading.
And these are the causes that cause the fainting spells in the body's humors.
And if you wish to treat the patient with bloodletting, you'd apply a tourniquet near the affected area.
Mays he who seeks to perform the second bloodletting on his arm, for eight or nine hours.
Here comes the first line containing the translation:
Mays that the patient will be treated for the swelling in their legs if they are using a heated cautery to seal the blood vessels on the feet.
And if you are using a cushion to treat a patient's foot, use a hot cautery on their veins, but only lightly because the pain is already there.
When the patient's body becomes too cold, use a poultice instead of applying a burning cautery.
The intestine and legs are treated by applying a poultice to them.
If you put your hand on their other arm or leg, you will need another for the evacuation of blood.
And if the patient has gout in the arms (the pain caused by a cold, damp humor), then treat them as you would someone with a blockage or inflammation in the arm, using the appropriate remedies.
And if bloodletting is required on their feet, then it should be done carefully, so as not to cause further damage.
And if it is necessary to place a cushion on their legs, then another one should be placed under the small intestine; and the other (the cushion) on the legs.
You should apply the cauterization on the large area and the small one.
Then apply heat to the patient's legs and feet.
And if you have a sore foot in summer, you will be excused from the need to wear a cloak over them.
And if it's necessary to apply cauterization, it should be done on the legs only, and not on the feet.
Evisceration of the right side of the body is considered a treatment for liver ailments.
And the purpose of using a bloodletting instrument on the foot is to remove the excess blood from it, which is why they are used in phlebotomy.
And if you want to avoid having your hands be burned, it is best to use the cushion for them.
And if it is necessary to make your hand move away from the area where you want to stop the blood flow.
And similarly if the patient has pain in the legs it is called "the gout" (referring to the location).
And if it is done on the left leg, it should be treated with the other methods.
And for the treatment of the foot, it's customary to use a cautery on the foot itself as well as on other areas.
And it's about the diseases of the ancient world, such as the diseases of the leg.
And if a cushion is needed to protect the patient's skin from the heat of the cautery, then put another under their veins.
And thus, you will cauterize the area of the body where the pain is located in order to relieve it from pain.
When one wishes to cut into the flesh of a patient with a cautery, they should first take care to protect the skin from its heat.
And if it is necessary to operate on their legs, a cushion should be placed under them.
It is forbidden to bleed the patient without proper medical reason.
And if the phlebotomist makes a mistake in the first incision, he will be called to blame in the second by the people who are already suffering from gout.
And if it is similar to gout, then treat them with a cautery on their legs.
Then apply cushions to their feet to prevent the pain from spreading further.
Then use your own knowledge to guess the meaning of the sentence based on its context:
And the nature of the pain is such that the patient feels it in their chest, but the patient's condition has been worsened by a lack of proper treatment.
Then, if you're going to cut open the skin or treat the patient's pain, it is better to do so with a cushion than to cut into them directly.
And if their hands are swollen, then they have already been treated by a cautery on the legs.
And so that the nerves are not disturbed, let the patient be given a dose of laudanum, and let them have blood drawn from the patient.
And the other servant treats the area.
The treatment for swelling from wind on the legs.
And for corns, then apply cupping or leeches to their legs.
The text describes two ways to perform bloodletting: by drawing blood from the veins (venous bloodletting) and by applying a cauterizing instrument to the body.
Then apply fire to the affected area.
And if there are no more than two places on the body where the blood is drawn out by bloodletting, it's a good sign.
Then apply a cauterization to the veins of the body, using the same method that would be used for a vein in the legs, but ensure the procedure is done carefully with the other members of the body.
This refers to the application of medical treatment for a condition, likely related to the gut, by the use of a hot poultice or compress.
Therefore, when you apply it to the patient's legs, use cupping.
And if it is necessary to cauterize the neck or head after the patient has been afflicted by the wind, then cauterize the neck.
This cold causes swelling in the legs, and this pain is often attributed to other conditions, such as gout.
And to the man who is afflicted with gout, apply a hot poultice to the affected area.
And if there's a need to open the body, it's important to know how to use the tools for treating the foot, but you should know that's what they use to treat the disease.
And if it is necessary to use a fan on the patient, it is said that you should apply a little heat to the area to prevent the body from becoming cold.
This practice is called cauterization by doctors, and it involves applying a burning cushion to the affected area.
And when the belly is opened, apply a cautery to prevent the pain from spreading to the legs and feet.
And if you want to do something about the pain in the legs, arms, and eyes.
And if you command the use of a cushion on their legs during cautery, it should be applied to prevent infection.
And if it is necessary to cauterize the veins in the patient's legs, apply the cautery to the lips and mouth.
And if the patient's foot has been burned, they are ready for the treatment for the burn.
And if you wish to draw from the veins, then do so from the basilica vein and all other veins in the body below.
And command the other to the one who has been stripped by the others, and apply them to the chest.
And apply a leech to the afflicted foot, a treatment for gout.
For the patient's sake, if there are signs of a subtle disease, have the physician cauterize in a gentle manner.
If you have pain in your legs from too much bloodletting, use these other methods to treat it.
A metge que se diz que they are strong, but in reality they are weak.
And from their legs, they will be opened to the cushion.
A cushion should be placed under the patient's legs to support their body during treatment. Then carefully insert the needle into the area between the patient's thighs.
Then apply the hot iron to the patient's legs, slowly, and consider the position of the leg.
When a man suffers from gout, let him be given a sacrifice.
And command the physician to cauterize the wound if it's necessary to use cautery on the legs.
And if there are other causes of pain in the foot, it should be treated by cauterizing its humors. When a patient has an excessive amount of blood, you cauterize their legs to stop the bleeding.
Then apply a cauterization to the bowels, for they are the third place where a burning sensation should be applied in a case where it is necessary to apply a burn to the legs, as if they were covered with a cushion.
And then slowly draw out blood from the vein.
And if you wish to bleed the patient, use a lancet; if you want to cauterize them, apply the cautery.
And you're saying there are cushions under their legs?
In summer, when a doctor applies a burning oil to a patient's body, it is customary to use a special tool called a cupping glass.
And if it's a large amount of gout, cauterize the area to prevent it from worsening.
If you wish to use a cautery on your body, it should be prohibited if it is applied to the thighs or legs in a way that causes pain, but allowed for other ailments.
And for those with blood of moist humors and similar symptoms.
And if the pain in the leg is caused by an excess of humors, it should be treated with a poultice of herbs or other such remedies.
You should apply cautery to the patient's body if needed, but make sure you don't burn the healthy tissue.
Quid est quo, which means "What is necessary for" or "For what purpose," is translated as "This is the Latin word for 'gout'," which is a common mistranslation of the English phrase "making cuts."
At the beginning you should consider the cold humors or the things that cause it to be a problem.
Then apply a cushion to their legs, and another on their arms, as needed.
And for the one whose legs are swollen, and his hand is upon the area to be treated, so that the swelling may be reduced by the use of a cushion or other means.
And if the patient has an ailment that requires bleeding, another cushion should be placed on their limbs.
E si tu s'en vols, do some phlebotomy or take the medicine, but only in case of a need for the patient to be relieved from the cold humors through a cushion or other methods.
Mays the patient suffer from a disease of the liver, and they are treated for a disease of the limbs, which are affected by the pain of the illness.
And if it is necessary to translate the body's humors, it is done as follows: "And then you apply your cautery to the foot."
And then you must cauterize the legs when they are warmed up by the fire of the hearth.
E semblantment fa when there is a complaint about windiness in the legs.
And these cupping glasses are applied to the body in various ways.
Then apply heat to the body.
The doctors apply the treatment for the ailment to the affected area.
Forma de ventoza es applied to the affected area by heat from a flame.
Then hold their legs in place with a cushion.
And if he has gout in his legs, or other ailments are present, then treat those as well.
And if it is a severe case of cold humors affecting the foot, it is recommended they be treated by those who are knowledgeable in that area.
And then the cupping glasses for young children are other than those for adults.
And the quality of cauterizing is that it heats the flesh with fire from the heated iron, and for this reason it's used to treat wounds and conditions like gout (which is caused by an imbalance in bodily humors) because it draws out the excess fluids.
Then place a cushion on their chest to prevent the patient's illness from worsening.
And if you have already opened their intestines for surgery, we must return them to their proper place, e.g., the patient's stomach or the patient's leg.
Then apply a wet cupping therapy to the affected area.
This text is translated: When this happens, the best thing is to apply a cushion for the pain.
Chapter 97.
Gout affects only the feet and is treated by applying pressure to the affected areas and using a cautery tool.
Then apply leeches to those legs using the same method as for treating them with a cushion under the affected area.
Then if the patient has been opened by day or night for the cause of their ailment to be addressed, prepare for treatment.
Place another cushion under their legs and behind the patient.
And if it is possible to apply the leeching on their legs, and the other parts of the body are treated with a cautery, they will be relieved from the cold humors.
Then, if necessary, apply vinegar to the affected area and use a heated cautery tool.
And if the patient has leg pain, then apply a hot poultice to the area.
When blood is dry, put a cloth on it to protect from the other parts of the body.
And if leeches are needed for bloodletting, use them when they are necessary to change the cushion.
And if leeches are forbidden from being used on the legs, put a cushion in the place of the recent bleeding; et for the pain to be in another place, put your hand on the body part where you want the leech to bleed.
And when you wish to cauterize, apply the ashes to the affected area.
And thus began the treatment for the swelling of the third part: restoration. This chapter is about fractures and dislocations, which are common in medical practice.
O son the bones of a child, and they are painful to see.
And then the patient may be treated by applying heat to their body, but they are to be kept in mind that they have been ill for a long time.
E si tu have to make sure it was pointed at the patient's legs.
Then I have already explained how to treat the patient's bowels; thus, the treatment of the foot has been explained in detail in the preceding chapters.
Chapter one.
And if it is necessary to cauterize the foot, then apply cautery to the legs and arms also. Cove that affects the body in this way are called gout by the physicians.
Then use a hot iron to treat the condition in a person's legs if they are afflicted with a pain that requires cautery.
And if you are worried about whether or not to cauterize the veins in the limbs.
And then, the proper course of treatment should be followed for the ailment.
E'l ris donc il faut dire que si·l fa pascut de la causa del dolor.
Then apply cautery to the area affected by these ailments.
The patient's works are just as important to them as those of the translator.
And for this reason, it is necessary to treat the patient's ailment.
Then if there's an injury to the limbs, you treat it according to the type of injury.
And I have seen the patient's joints open, and placed a cushion under them to be distinguished from other injuries.
Mota means "to be treated" in all three languages mentioned. E so are there different types of bone fractures; some are caused by gout.
And if a patient has a pain in the leg, they will have pain in the joints or bones as well.
And then apply the bone-setting treatment to the leg. The bones are known by their location.
Therefore, when there is no apparent redness or swelling in the limbs, it is not from an injury to the bones or joints.
If there are augments in the body, it may be a complex ailment that is often difficult to treat with traditional methods.
And if you are wise, you will know that when the intestine is affected, the patient is in pain and should be treated carefully.
And when the pain has subsided, apply cold compresses to the feet for a few days, as if it were a poultice.
And apply the needle to the affected bone, then cauterize.
Then, for the cavity in the leg, you'll need to apply heat and use remedies.
If you have gout, it is necessary to apply a cushion on their broken leg.
And so let your hand be placed on the patient's body in order to help the intestines heal.
And be careful where you cauterize so as not to damage the good parts by burning the wrong ones.
Then use your knowledge to apply your skills in that way, and if you can't, then you should use a cushion.
Then cause severe pain in the limbs, as physicians often do to those who are afflicted with gout.
Translation 1: When there are painful constrictions in the foot, the doctor will make a cauterization if necessary.
And another on their arms, as well as on their feet, will be covered with a cloth.
Then you must cauterize the affected area to alleviate the pain.
And if it is the intestine or the patient's body that is affected by the three humors, it is called rheumatism.
And if necessary, apply a bandage to the area after using a cushion and another bandage. Place your hand on the patient's fracture for a while.
Then take a bandage and wrap the area to reduce swelling.
If there is no pain, then the foot is not in need of being cauterized; if there is, it's because of the infiltration of bad humors, which cause a painful swelling.
When a burning sensation arises in the body from a cold humor imbalance, then it's properly called a gout attack.
And be careful to use a properly formed cautery for such purposes.
And if you need to apply a bandage to the wound on the patient's feet, it should be larger than the other bandages used for the treatment.
Then use a thin instrument to gently scrape the skin (of the foot) where the infection is present, as well as cushions for the legs, so that the patient's body does not become too infiltrated with the disease.
Then hold the patient's foot steady with your hand.
Then if it is necessary to burn the skin of the patient, apply a cautery to the area affected by gout, and place a cushion there for support.
That is is commonly called a fracture to the foot in old age.
You know that there are other ways to treat a broken limb; lahoras they be healed by cauterization.
This is the method by which the ancients restored the broken bones and set dislocations, and to stop the intestines from twisting out of place.
And if it is necessary to apply a poultice to the patient's foot, place a poultice on the area where they have pain.
And if you have to use a cushion on the foot, use one that is not too thick or thin.
Then apply the poultice, made of assafetida, myrrh, and other herbs, to the injured joint.
This is a recipe for a poultice that contains a mixture of white poplar and Armenian gum: use one ounce of white poplar and five ounces of Armenian glue to make a poultice for the injured limb.
Then apply a cushion under their feet.
And if they are swollen, apply a cushion to the area.
Then apply the poultice to the affected area, which is usually the foot to expel the pain.
Other methods are used to restore a broken intestine, which involves using a cautery for restoration.
Take some herbs and restore the injured bone with a poultice made from: mallows, chamomile and violets, each part of the body being 10 grams of flour.
And if they are cut on their legs, apply a bandage to them.
When one needs to reduce swelling in the joints, they should use a warm poultice made from herbs and water.
This sentence refers to applying a cauterizing tool to the legs and placing a cushion under the injured leg, but it's unclear what "le sieu" means.
This sentence seems to describe a medical procedure involving a patient named Gualia.
And thus comes a recipe for a plaster to comfort them in their pain.
If you have pain in the legs, it is usually called gout by doctors. Then apply a cushion to the affected area, if needed.
And apply a cushion to their skin and place the other on their feet, they should be covered by a cloth so that the opening in the skin doesn't become infected; the person should rest for an hour.
And he should be treated with a poultice, small plaster, or a poultice that is applied to the affected area.
Then apply a poultice to the affected limb.
When the joint pain persists for three days or more, you should use a cushion to prevent the inflamed joint from swelling further.
E ayusta en la patient's legs, to ensure the patient's body remains closed off.
This Latin phrase means:  "And so the doctor applies his hand to the injured area."
If a joint is dislocated, they will be treated with a different approach.
Then they called it a sickness that is already known as the gout, because of the pain.
Of all the parts of the body, the second chapter deals with fractures of the skull.
The bone fractures are classified into two types: those that are distinct to each injury and those that are caused by an external force, which is why they are called levatio.
And the pain between the legs is sometimes sharp or dull depending on if the pain is intense or mild.
This bone is broken, so they are in need of help.
The bone has fractured due to an injury.
And if there are any signs of a fracture on the foot or a bruise on the thighs, then place your hand over the area to prevent further damage.
Then apply heat to the affected area as instructed by the physician.
And if there are fractures in these types of gout, then the joints are treated with such. And if he is to be cauterized, then use another method on his body for a while.
And so that the cushion does not cause pain to their legs, they should be treated with a cautery, which is how you would treat a wound on the leg.
And if it is necessary to apply cautery to the bones of a patient, it's called a "fractura" in medicine.
Mays thus describes the symptoms of the plague:  You have already treated a plague patient who was suffering and now needs to be cared for.
And if you encounter a patient who has not contracted a common ailment, they are likely suffering from gout.
In the beginning, if the pain affects the whole body and the joints, you should know that it is very serious.
If you cauterize the foot on days when the pain is intense, place another cushion under their feet to prevent the pain from spreading.
E si'l hauria necessitet de una operació per les lesions, e'm ja veureu que els metges la consideren com una cosa molt petita i en el seu dia a dia.
And then you put it (the affected area) on their thighs; they are treated as an opening for the disease to enter other parts of the body.
And if you need to find a cure for the swelling, you must apply a bandage to stop it.
And there are two types of operation.
And so one way to treat it is to cauterize the affected area.
And apply a poultice to the wound after cleaning it, as needed in cases of pain.
And if you have diverse pain in their bodies, they are the ones who will be healed by the various treatments.
And if they are to be treated by cauterization, make sure their legs are properly protected so that no one will get burned.
And if the bone is strong and hard, apply cauterization to their legs, which they called "the joints" in Latin, the patient's body should be covered with a cushion.
The first line will be translated as: And when the patient's foot is affected by cold humors, you must keep it warm.
And it is convenient that you burn a cautery on the leg, for the pain in the feet is due to the infiltration of humors, which are also present in his/her body.
Then you must know that the type of cauterization for burns is done in another way, but your hand should be placed on the affected area, it is important to remember that this is a specific type of treatment and can be dangerous if not performed by a professional.
And if it is a small wound, treat it with a poultice for a few days and then apply a cautery as necessary.
And take care that you have protected the patient's hands from the scalpel.
And so if you have pain in the bone and intestines, it is necessary to continue to treat it as such.
You have already opened the intestine for you to cauterize; then do so with the cushion on the leg.
And if it’s necessary to cauterize the intestine or legs that are injured, then you must know the exact location.
Then return the intestine to its place, and apply cauterization as needed, but do not allow the patient to be burned.
And put a cushion under them so that they may be comfortable in their last moments.
When one has an illness that causes pain in the legs, it is customary to use a cauterization technique on their feet.
Then place your hand on that area which you are about to apply the operation.
And if you are administering the pus, you should use leeches on their legs.
"Then you should treat the other small fractures as you would other injuries."
And then prevent the intestine from being on the wrong side. And so you should place a cushion under them, havem already explained to you that it is customary to use a cushion for support in case of fractures in the leg.
When you apply a cushion to a patient's body, use three layers of cloth for the bones, and apply it carefully.
And do not let go of that area until you have reduced the swelling with poultices, and apply to it a poultice made of flaxseed and use other things for the pain.
Then administer these remedies to help heal the plague: you will need a cushion for the patient's comfort.
And if you have applied the cautery, let the patient be placed on their back in a bed or chair, and prevent them from getting worse by a wound.
E donc they are considered as necessary to be treated with a cautery.
Then apply a poultice to the affected area, but be careful to avoid irritating the affected part of the body.
E if there are other causes for the pain, it's customarily called something else.
On treating a broken foot.
Then apply a poultice made of only gout-related materials, except for those which are placed on the chest, legs, or feet.
This is a tricky one! Here's a try: And if you are doing surgery on your own foot, be careful to avoid injuring the bones.
And if the fracture is in the most noble part of the nose, then you should treat it with the utmost care.
Then you must make two cuts.
And if the patient's condition is possible to be cured, apply it on the first day of the treatment; otherwise, use it after the initial inflammation has subsided.
And you place a cloth over their nose to stop the bleeding.
And so that a doctor may be able to see if they are present in the patient's body.
And sometimes in the nose, a bandage is placed on the face, so the nose will be covered with a cloth as the patient's nostrils are padded with cotton.
And this being the cause, you may use a cushion if necessary; otherwise, cauterize.
And if there should be another attack, apply a cushion to their hands as a poultice made of wax or other remedies.
If there is a need to treat a wound or other ailments on the patient's body, apply poultices made from these ingredients:  cornmeal for external use and a poultice of spices for internal ailments.
When joint pain is caused by cold humors that cause the bones to be infiltrated by them, then it should be treated with cauterization.
Then apply heat to the nostrils, using a handkerchief or cloth.
Chapter 4
When the jaw is dislocated.
Another if the joint pain is caused by humors that are out of balance in their body:  it's just a little bit like a gout attack on the legs.
And if a wound is on the right side, then put your right hand in the mouth of the patient.
Then when there are fractures in two places, they should be treated by applying cauterization to the affected area.
And you have already applied a strong substance to the affected area.
And command the patient to rest the leg, and have them apply a poultice to the affected area, so that the intestine does not become inflamed.
And if you judge that the patient has already been altered in some way, then apply a cushion to their legs on the third day, or at least when the pain occurs.
And so if the pain comes from the joint inflammation which occurs in the foot, they should be treated with a poultice and a bandage to prevent the pain from spreading, and another poultice should be applied to the area where the patient has been treated.
And then for the treatment of the ailment, apply a poultice as we have described.
And if the fracture is a plague, you will have to move the body part away from the wound, carefully considering the implications for the patient's health as well as the use of a hot iron on the bone.
And if the patient's feet are swollen, you should use a straight cauterization technique.
Then apply a hot cautery to the affected areas of the body for healing.
Chapter 5.
This is when there are inflammations in the foot, which is why they call it a hot and humid disease.
There are three types of injuries to the body that are called arthritis, by the doctors.
Treat a broken bone or joint in one leg, or if it's a broken limb, treat both the legs and the pelvis.
And if the bone in that area is fractured, it is necessary to have two ministers present, one to hold the injured leg and another to assist with the operation.
And then they must place their hands on the fracture to ensure that the injury does not occur.
And if you place a cushion on the patient's body, please do so carefully.
And if the patient cannot be moved, use a hot cautery to apply a smaller cauterization to the foot.
And you place your hand on their chest, and the doctor will say something to the patient.
And if you want to stop pain in the foot, put your hand on their thighs.
E if it is necessary to cauterize the foot, place the cushion on the bone.
And if it is necessary to treat a wound on the leg or thigh.
Mays there be two forms of the disease: one that affects the foot and another the entire body, as it is possible.
And if you have opened the wound on the foot, then adjust the wound to the bone structure by sewing the wound closed.
And if there's a little bit of disruption, they call it a cushion, but if it's a little, then they use another word for it.
Then apply a cushion to the affected area.
And so you should be careful that the patient's body does not suffer further harm.
And if the patient's injury is severe, they should be treated by a doctor during the night.
And if it is necessary to apply a poultice for the duration of 12 days.
And apply a cushion if they are in need of it on the legs.
And it is usual for a man to be healed in 28 days by the aforementioned methods.
This section describes how to apply poultices to specific areas for treating a patient with gout.
This refers to the restoration of the shoulder (bone or joint) in the body.
The spatula is broken in the place where the patient's legs are located, and another person's leg is held by the physician, while they are still conscious.
And therefore, only if the patient is known to have an injury to the location in question — which has been damaged or broken — and their gout is exacerbated by movement.
Then pause the treatment if you were to put a cushion on his or her legs; do not use heat if pain in the legs arises.
If there are pain in the thighs, the doctor should place the treatment on their legs to prevent them from becoming inflamed.
And then apply strength to hold the intestine in place.
And consider the foot to be in its proper place when the pain subsides.
Then the doctor will put his hand on the patient's foot, etc.
the patient should be treated for xx days or .25 days.
And then when they know this, they must apply the remedy to the affected area.
And if you must treat them, it is said that doctors should use cautery on the joints to stop the inflammation of gout.
Chapter 7
Of the restoration of the foot.
The foot has been opened by the cushion placed on the legs, and if necessary, a hand should be applied to the affected area to prevent further pain.
Then place the other end of lo cushion under the patient's legs to create an opening in the body that allows for the use of the cautery.
And let it be done on the left side of the body, and when it is necessary to apply a cautery to the patient’s left side, they will only use it where it is needed.
The physicians treat the ailment with a poultice and bandages, and they should be applied carefully.
When there are such pains that a doctor might be needed to apply cauterization or other remedies.
Chapter 8.
And so that the body may be restored when its coasts are damaged.
And we treat those who are afflicted with gout in the legs by using a hot cautery; this is how you should know. And the patient's condition will be known when the physician uses a cushion to feel for heat in the feet.
Do as the doctors do in such cases.
And if it is necessary to apply a cautery to the patient's legs, they should be applied in such a way that the cautery does not cause pain to the patient.
And thus they are healed by the touch of the hand, for the cushion is used to apply heat to the afflicted area.
Then apply the heat of your hand to the area around the affected joint.
And it is said that cushion is used to treat them; if there is no other treatment available.
And so they apply leeches to the patient, which they use to draw out blood from the body if necessary.
Then place wool under their feet.
And if you put your hand on their legs, then they will be healed by cauterizatio
And then apply to the patient's open sores a poultice, using cozies on the legs and another on their feet.
You have already opened the source to apply a poultice.
And if the patient's foot is sore, apply a cautery to it.
This person has been diagnosed with **"Gout"** by physicians.
This refers to placing a cushion under the patient's head, and supporting their neck and back during treatments.
And if it is necessary to apply heat to the legs or spine. And you must know that if there is a cold humor under a patient's skin, it is customary to call it gout.
And if you have pain in the legs, apply heat to the affected area.
And if you want to know if he has gout, look at his feet.
This is a statement that the first step in treating a wound is to apply a cushion during surgery, as was done in the past.
And if it's not due to one of those causes, then it's probably something lighter.
And if you are treating someone, then apply the cautery to the area that is affected by the phlegm.
And if you must apply an ointment to the patient's body, then order them to keep the affected area warm and moving, and to avoid using a cushion on it.
If your body's humors cause a sharp pain in the feet, then they are likely to be treated with a cautery.
When a bone in the leg is broken, it is customary to treat it with the help of a cautery tool.
And if you feel pain in your legs, apply a cautery to the affected area.
Chapter 10.
Then apply the poultice to the affected area.
And if the body is affected by the cold humors, then you must apply the points to the areas where the humors are present.
Then apply your hand to prevent further injury.
Then apply the cushion to the affected area, and support the patient's body.
Then you must apply heat to the affected area if they are prone to it becoming another fracture. E then apply the cushion to the leg.
Then apply the appropriate treatment to the affected area after removing the cushion from beneath it.
From the given context, here's the translation:
Then treat the patient's legs accordingly.
Chapter 11
This is the translation for the restoration of an injured foot.
When the wound is on their legs, they are to be cauterized by another doctor.
Then, if the patient has a gouty condition, they can be restored by using a hot cautery on their feet.
Two or more ligaments are to be found in the leg.
And if it is a pain in the legs, it is called sciatica by doctors.
And if the cushion was placed on the patient's legs, the physician should apply his hand to the affected area.
And if you are in a position to make a decision, the other thing to do is to apply a bandage to the wound on the leg, and the other two bandages are for the other parts of the body that are affected by the swelling.
And if you want to treat the intestine or veins of a patient more effectively.
And if the pain is in the legs, those should be treated as well.
Then similarly if there is a wound near the leg, you should cauterize the wound with a hot iron.
Then apply a poultice to the affected area.
The treatment for this ailment should be done by applying a hot poultice to the affected area after seven days.
The patient should be wrapped in the fabric to prevent swelling.
Then apply a cushion under their arms, and place a cushion on your head so that you can be treated if necessary, etc.
You will need to use a hot iron to treat this.
And so, you should place your hand on their foot to prevent further injury.
And then place a splint on the patient’s legs.
And if the patient's body has been injured, you should apply a cautery to their legs directly. And when it is necessary for the patient to be treated, you can use them as a guide by using a cushion.
And so you will know the proper way to treat the pain in the legs and feet.
Then apply a cushion to the legs, as described above.
And consider the following as a remedy for the ailment if the patient should be treated for three days.
Mays three days are needed to wait for the intestine or hernia to be healed.
And so if the patient has pain in their stomach, one should apply a cushion to the area around their belly.
And if you apply the cushion to the joint at any time, the patient's pain will be eased.
And then apply a cushion to the patient's body, so that the patient may be treated with it.
Here comes the translation:
And if the bone is already fractured, then you will know by the pain in their legs.
Another person's leg would be treated with a cautery after it has been another.
Then apply a bandage to their arm.
The patient has two parts of their body that are opened: the one in their legs is called a pain in the feet, e.g., when the diet causes the disease to flare up.
And so the disease is treated by the physician with cauterization for both the large and small areas of the body affected by the illness, as well as for the small cushions made from such things as gout.
The restoration of the body's small humors will be restored, and the rest of the body will be healed.
And when the pain is severe, it can be difficult to treat.
And two bones have already been opened in him/her.
Therefore, if it is the case that the patient's bone is fractured, another approach may be necessary.
When the fire is burning hot, you will know it by its signs because it’s very painful.
And if the two are together, they are to be heated up by the strongest cautery.
And if you are a doctor, you should know the condition of the patient's intestine.
And if the patient's foot is being treated, the patient should be given a cushion so that they don't tire.
And place a cushion on their legs to prevent them from being too close to each other.
And so you must make sure the patient's body is properly positioned to avoid pain in their legs.
And if you have pain in the joints of their body, they are the ones who cause it to be bad.
And if it is necessary to cauterize the area after it has been opened up by a surgeon, or if it’s a case of gout, which I think we can safely assume it is.
The patient's condition is indeed serious, but perhaps they are simply using the term "aquel" as a way to describe their situation.
The use of "l'altra" suggests this might be a Catalan text.
And if there are other injuries to the arm or elbow, you should know that they can be treated by a physician specializing in setting bones and treating injuries to the limbs, who will use specialized tools for this purpose.
And if it is necessary to cauterize something on the leg, then put a cushion under them.
And if the pain is in their legs, then use cushions under them.
And consider the other parts of the body needing attention. And if there's pain due to blood in the body, you should apply a cushion or wrap on their legs and call it by the appropriate name, which is what doctors call gout.
And let the cushion be placed so that the body does not move.
Here comes the first line: Translation 1: If you have a pain in the foot, then put your hand on the affected area to help soothe it.
Then apply a cushion to the feet for a few days, lest they become more swollen.
Mays it be necessary to apply cautery to the patient's body.
And if you need to keep the patient's feet still, then place a cushion under them.
And if it's a severe fracture, it should be healed in 30 days.
The thirteenth chapter should be placed after the chapters about gout, as seen in the examples you provided.
And if it is necessary to treat the pain on their legs, place cushions between the patient's thighs.
Know that the pain in the fingers caused by the cushion is due to gout, which is a different disease from what is commonly called the foot's pain.
And if there is injury or illness in the body, the physician should use different treatments for each ailment.
And if a patient has pain in their legs, they should be given cushions to cushion the area around their hands.
Then apply a cushion to the affected area; for the patient's legs are sore and swollen, et si tu se’n vol fazer, fai un peu de drap for them to be wrapped in cloth so they don't become inflamed.
When the pain is in the joints, then it's called gout, but if it's on the foot, they are simply called "gout" .
And if it is necessary to cauterize the patient's body, that is how it should be done.
Then if the injury is outside the bone, then you must apply the cushion to the affected area.
And if the pain becomes severe, they should apply heat to the area, and keep the intestine or hernia contained.
Mays es que la lesa es another cushion under the other hand, e liats are other treatments for gout.
E consider the location of the wound, for it is customary to place bandages on the affected area.
The text discusses a medical procedure involving applying a cautery to the foot in the context of treating gout.
De costuma, the restoration of the bone in the thigh.
The bone in the leg is called a bone.
The patient was likely to have been treated for their ailment by using a cautery tool on their feet.
And then place his hand over the injured area, as well as the bone.
When the foot is affected by gout, a denolh is used to support the affected area.
And if there are other symptoms in the body, such as pain in their legs, apply a cushion to the affected area and another on their chest.
And if you have to use a bandage or apply pressure on the patient's legs, the body will be healed. If it is a boil or abscess, you'll need to apply heat for several days.
Then apply a bandage to the affected area, ensuring it's tight enough to prevent swelling but not too tight.
And then apply a hot poultice to the affected area, for which you should use a hot cautery.
And so you have opened the space between their legs, and when they are treated, they will be healed.
Then use cloths to bandage their legs, so that the swelling subsides.
Then, if it's a question of setting a cushion under the patient, make sure to avoid the opening being too large or too small so it doesn't become painful.
Then place two cushions on their legs so the patient's intestine isn't pushed out.
Then, if it is necessary to apply cautery on their legs, you should use a sharp instrument.
Then you should use those remedies which are suitable for each part of the body.
And another method is to apply force to keep the rest of their body from being affected by this affliction of the foot, as doctors have said.
Thus the patient's intestines are treated with a hot iron.
And if they have been used to such pain for 40 days or more, or less than that, then apply a poultice to them.
Chapter 15.
This refers to restoring the intestine, so I'll assume the first example was correct:
This means that the patient has been treated for a broken bone.
Then apply cautery to the wound if the pain is in the legs, e.g., from gout.
And then the patient will be restored to his original state.
Then place another on their round leg, and apply a poultice to their foot, which is the appropriate place for the treatment.
Then they are considered other fractures, which are also known as a boil in some parts of the body.
The text uses Roman numerals and "E" for "And" so it likely refers to a chapter title: "Capitol XVI"
And then treat them for their pain.
The first example shows a doctor using the term "the doctors" for something that happens in the body, the second one, a pointed instrument, used to perform surgery.
And so, if there's a need to remove the pain from the patient's arm.
And if the patient's legs are injured, they should be treated with bandages or splints, as needed.
And if the patient has a small bone in their foot, it should be treated with a cushion.
And if it is broken bones, then it will be another cause that needs to be addressed.
And so the patient's legs are supported and the pain is treated by applying a cushion.
But if the pain is in the legs, it is said to be a sign of a disease called "la laia" which affects them.
When there is much pain in the leg, you should apply an application to the legs and call it palmate and use a cushion for the foot.
And if it is a two-part sickness, one should place the cushion on the other leg.
And place a cushion under each foot to prevent them from being exposed to cold humors.
And on their legs place a cushion upon them, and another below; and let the patient be supported by your hand or another cushion.
And doctors most often treat those injuries as gout.
And then you must study the leg further, because of the pain in the leg and for treatment purposes.
When the pain is in the joints, then apply the hot cautery to their surface.
And placed a cushion under them.
If there are many fractures in the body, it is often called gout.
Then you have opened the foot for a cushion to be placed under it.
Then place a cushion on those limbs that are elevated.
Then place your hand on their legs to prevent them from being affected by the cold.
Then place a cushion on them.
And if after three or four days, you remove the cushion from the patient's leg, and the pain continues, then perform surgery on them.
This means that when hands are affected by cold, it's called arthritis. And cushion the joint with another cushion to relieve the pain.
You should cauterize the patient's toe if the pain is severe, and apply a cushion to the foot, so that the pain in the toes and other joints does not worsen.
And remember to consider all the causes that are related to the other injuries as well, for the sake of understanding all the reasons for them.
Capitol.xviii. means "Chapter 18".
A man's chest is used for burning with another tool, while the woman's body is being burned, and she is being held down by the doctor.
When a woman's humors are unbalanced, it is called "malata" by the physician.
And so the midwife holds the woman's foot in place while she places a cushion on her foot.
And then apply the cushion to the patient's chest, as needed, depending on the location where it needs to be applied.
And so for seven days or thereabouts.
And if you use an animal’s bladder as a type of tool or instrument, apply it to the patient’s legs, and place a canula under the skin on the other parts of the body, and then put the whole thing in the bladder's opening.
When it is the case that the patient has pain in their sides due to the gout.
And if a bone is broken in the hips or legs, apply to the repair of it the same methods as we have described for treating a fractured hip.
And that which is right, is not hidden in these injuries, and that injury can be treated by cautery.
Mays en la vergua del home quan is trincada, e so on that they are already in a state of being treated, which was considered a common practice for gout.
Chapter xix.
Then you can restore bones by using other methods.
A first aid man will be needed to perform a cuoyssa cautery on the patient.
Then if there is pain in the legs, put a cushion on the feet to prevent other problems from arising, and apply a cautery to the chest.
And if there are signs of a fracture, apply cold to prevent inflammation.
When a wound appears, you should let the swelling subside before applying a poultice to the affected area.
May you be careful to place a cushion under their legs if they are needed.
Mays es a strongman for the body, which is why he is treated in a particular way.
And if you want to avoid pain during the operation, it should be done as they do in the case of a man's pain.
Apply heat to the area of the affected limb, and apply the cushion on their legs for a sharp pain.
Then, place a cushion under their feet.
And if it is necessary to cauterize the foot, then apply the cautery on the affected area.
And if the disease returns to the foot, it will be elevated from the inside.
And then apply some type of medication to help him heal.
Then you must apply another instrument to heal the injury if the bone is broken in such a way that it requires multiple cushions for support.
When it is not possible to reduce the pain in the patient's foot, use a cautery on the affected area.
And then place a cushion under the area of the body where the pain is located.
And if the patient's bone is in its proper place, then the pain will subside.
Then apply a poultice to the wound if it's necessary to treat the illness.
Then apply splints to the bone according to the amount of damage, leaving the bone exposed where the plague is present.
Then if you are careful, the plague will not spread to other parts of the body. The sentence describes a situation where a patient's foot is being treated with cauterization for a condition involving a small, localized pain.
Then you must apply a poultice to their foot.
When you see that a patient has a boil or two, it is customary to treat it with a poultice applied directly on the affected area, as well as to apply a cushion to their body and place your hand over their leg to prevent it from swelling up.
Therefore, apply a hot compress to the affected area to reduce swelling in the legs, morning and evening, as long as the inflammation persists.
You should examine the patient for a fever, if they have a small fever, you can stop using the cauterizer. And from those injuries, those which are separate shall be extracted.
When the body is affected by pain in each part of the legs due to cold humors, the physician must use cauterization, but there are other remedies.
And so, if you have already opened the space of the patient's legs, do not be afraid if it hurts more than usual when you put a cushion on their knees.
The translation you provided for the first part of the text is incorrect.
The treatment of which we are speaking is for a condition that occurs after a fracture.
This sentence describes using cauteri to treat a condition called "fracture" in the original language, which is likely a reference to a method used by doctors in the past.
And if the patient is new to the ailment, or has recently been afflicted by it, they must be treated with a cushion and recent remedies so that the pain may be relieved.
It refers to a situation where there is a need for a cushion to be used in treating something related to a joint condition.
Mays (meaning: Maybe) if the patient has a cushion to be placed upon them, o seu (meaning: their) corpulence is already a sign that they are in bad health.
Chapter .xxi.
Then restore the bones to their proper alignment.
When a fracture is healed, and the ligament is repaired, it is not caused by anything other than what is needed for multiple reasons; or perhaps the bone is broken, and another by the reason of their being many causes for a condition to arise.
Put cushions under their arms and legs to soften the pain of gout and then apply a hot cautery to the affected areas.
Then apply a bandage over the affected area to keep the medicine in place.
Another way to treat gout in the feet by applying a hot compress.
And if it is necessary to set bones when they are broken, then you should know how to put them back together.
If the intestine or a broken bone is healed, the patient will feel pain in their legs if they are experiencing gout.
This is a bit tricky without knowing the exact context, but here's a translation:
And recently the patient has been given a poultice or medicine to soften the pain of their legs from being named gout by the doctors.
And if it is necessary to move the patient's leg to make sure all the fluids don't pool there.
And if you have already applied cauterization to the legs, use a hot cautery on the smaller parts.
The patient's condition, caused by an imbalance in their humors, requires treatment with a cautery applied to the affected areas.
This phrase appears to be from a text that uses a combination of Latin-derived words and phrases common in Italian medical practices.
Gout is a condition where a patient's joints swell up and are restricted in movement, which can cause severe pain and discomfort.
So when there is a dislocation, it needs to be addressed immediately by a doctor, as further delay can make it difficult to reduce.
And for that reason, a physician should treat the first part of the body, but avoid gout by using a cushion.
When it comes to Mays, here's how you apply a cushion for support: first to the thigh, then to the rest of the body.
And every member is cured by its corresponding remedy.
And if there's an injury to the legs below, they are treated as a sprain.
The chapter number 24 is written as follows:
Treatises on the treatment of dislocations are usually called treatments for gout.
E.g.,  "This is how it's done in the case of the lower leg," or "And if it is necessary to put a cushion on the patient's feet because they have an injury."
When there are minor dislocations of the body, the cause is often attributed to cold humors and gouty conditions, but that's not always true.
May it be that if the dislocation is complete, then it is necessary to reduce it.
And then you apply the cushion to the patient's legs, and the other one to the chest, keeping the cushion in place.
When the patient's jaw is dislocated, apply traction to help relocate it.
Therefore, if the patient's ailment is not treated, the pain will be severe.
And if the body has pain in the feet, use a cautery to treat it.
And if you want to administer the remedy, use a heating tool on their legs.
And if it is difficult to keep the two mandibles in place, then the dislocated bones will cause pain and heavy anger.
And when your body has gout, you are to treat it for ten days.
Chapter 25.
And so on, and if you have a pain in the shoulder and apply a cautery to it, it is customary for the patient to be given a cushion for the patient's arm.
The doctors will use a tool to burn away the excess.
And then he will be placed on his back, and spread their arms out to make sure they don't move. And they have a cushion under them, to constrain their pain.
Then apply your hand on their legs and another on their feet.
May the feet be cauterized and the intestines be returned to their place.
And if you are the doctor, you have already calmed the pain in the legs.
And so if there's an inflammation in the body, then it's called gout.
This is a tricky one! It looks like a combination of languages, likely a medieval Romance language.
On the reduction of a dislocated muscle.
You know that muscle is only dislocated if you know for sure that it is already in the wrong place.
And if you are treating a patient, another method used is to apply a hot poultice to the affected area.
And so they say that's what the doctors do to treat gout, but the patient has plenty of flesh on their feet, so the treatment is difficult.
When joints are inflamed or swollen, doctors say it's gout.
Then you have already been cured of the sickness by the medicine.
And so you must know that the treatment for gout depends on the location of the pain.
Then apply a bandage to the affected area.
And from this dislocation, treat it with a light reduction if the dislocation is fresh, and use a cushion for the patient's legs.
And the minister gently massages the legs, so that the patient feels relief from the pain in their legs.
If the pain in the legs subsides, but the patient has other pains elsewhere, apply heat to the affected area and use a cushion for support.
Then apply the cauterization to the affected area, using wool as a cushion to prevent the skin from burning.
Then place a cushion on their thighs to apply a poultice, and use a bandage to hold the poultice in place. Mays if si it is mild, you should know that it is not a serious illness.
And you must extend your hand to the patient's other side, so their body may be kept in balance.
And if it is difficult to reduce the swelling, you may use this method.
And so put the patient's foot in hot water to soothe the pain.
Then apply a cushion to the patient's ailment.
And if it is necessary to cauterize the arms, they should be made wider apart than the legs.
And when the packing with a bandage of wool is completed, place a cushion on the patient's chest to prevent a wound from festering.
And if it is necessary to apply cautery to the affected area, it should be applied carefully to avoid further complications.
And if there are other things to eat or drink, which are good for the body, they should be given.
If a limb has been dislocated by three other limbs, treat it according to the chapter on dislocation.
And if at that time the pain lasts for seven days, it's best to call it something else.
The text describes using a cauterizing tool on a patient's foot to address joint pain caused by gout.
And if the pain is in the intestines, it's another story altogether.
And if you apply pressure to the area to help restore the body part's natural function.
Then apply the appropriate treatment for the illness to which the patient is being subjected.
On the treatment of dislocation.
Sapias that the patient's body is affected by humors and needs cauterization in several places.
Then you must have already opened the wound to the bone, and placed cushions under the affected area for support.
This is how you would restore the patient to his usual state, if he has a cushion that can be used for such a purpose, and another on the leg, so that they are able to keep the wound open.
And if the patient has a dislocated joint or other injury, they should be treated in the same way, by applying a cautery to the affected area.
And if the dislocation doesn't reduce easily, then treat it with forceful reduction.
And apply heat to two of the ministers who have been opened, are they those who will be used for the treatment?
And if the arm is affected by the pain, a cloth folded in two should be placed upon it.
When the doctor touches the joint with a cushion (presumably to apply pressure), they are applying force to the affected area in an attempt to reduce pain.
Then treat the pain in the leg with a poultice and bandage.
Then apply a cushion to the patient's knee or ankle, as needed, to stabilize the joint.
This refers to the application of poultices on the legs for pain relief, which is done for gout.
And if you apply the treatment to the legs, they are called And another place [the affected area] on the chest [of the patient] with hot water (or other remedies). Then return the intestine of the patient's leg, for that is where the cushion lies.
And if you want to stop the pain from spreading to other parts of the body and joints, put a cushion on the patient's legs and use your hands to gently push back against the swelling and pain.
**Capitol .xxviii. Translate from Latin:
Treat the pain in the arms and legs as you would a dislocated limb.
When other parts of the body are treated with the use of a cautery, it's important to be careful that the inflammation does not spread to the rest of the body.
And so you apply a burning iron to the legs of a patient when it becomes necessary to cauterize the area where they are suffering.
When your doctor places their hands on your legs to feel for pain, they are referring to it as a condition affecting the joints, such as the ankles or knees.
And so, if it's good to return them quickly, the poultice should be applied; otherwise, leave it alone.
The passage describes how to use a tool called a "cushion" in relation to the treatment of a medical condition.
And if the intestines are affected by the illness, place another cushion on the area where it is on their legs for 5 days, then apply heat to the afflicted area again.
Then apply heat to the affected area for as long as necessary.
In the xxixth chapter.
And here comes the cure for dislocation of the fingers.
Sometimes the pain in the legs is caused by a hot iron, sometimes by something else.
And when there is pain in the foot, and if a joint is dislocated, one must place a cushion on their back.
And then place your hand on their head, and leave it for two days.
Then return the patient's leg to its proper position.
And when there is pain, put a cushion under their legs; in the daytime, the patient should be treated by a physician and given proper care for that condition; and if it is painful, they will need a second physician.
And so the patient's foot can be treated by a doctor.
And similarly, for the opening of their legs, they are to be given other cushions.
Capitol .xxx.
This refers to the treatment of dislocations in the back.
Then apply heat to the patient's spine, and place another on their legs, so as to prevent them from being cold.
And if it is necessary to keep the patient's bowels from being constricted by their position, it is customary to place a cushion on their legs.
Therefore, it is called gout.
This statement means that the doctor's advice for treating the disease in the foot.
Mays in his time of need, one would use a hot iron to cauterize the afflicted area when they are suffering from excessive pain, which is why the affected part should be treated by the methods of those who used them.
The pain in the feet is caused by the fact that humors are present in all parts of the body.
And then, use the hot iron on their face, away from the already-present cushion.
And if a doctor needs to cauterize the patient's foot, they must place a cushion on their feet.
Then the minister would need to be careful not to injure the patient's intestines when applying the cauterizer.
And to the one who has other things than the cold humors on his limbs.
And if there are cushions under the feet, the patient should be supported on both sides.
The doctor holds the patient's feet on the table, preventing them from experiencing further pain.
Mays the patient be healed by using the remedies for this ailment in the form of three things: a table, a chair, or something else. And if the patient's body needs to be treated, the physician should apply the treatment to the appropriate area.
And if you use a tool for the treatment, apply it to the patient's body; and so you have placed a bandage on their leg.
When the patient's body is treated with cushions, their legs should be kept under control.
And on the patient's hand, there are three fingers (or a finger) which are affected by the length of their fingers, et cetera.
Then place your hand on the patient's legs to prevent them from tightening up.
And here you must put a cushion under them, so that they are supported on their legs.
Then apply a poultice of bread to the patient's legs when they are experiencing pain from an ailment that causes their body to be affected by cold humors.
And if you have to apply the cautery, use a cushion to prevent the patient from feeling pain.
If pain persists after treatment, use medicine for relief.
When a joint pain occurs in the bone structure, you can be sure they are affected by a particular ailment.
Of the physicians, it is necessary for the first to be known as the person performing the treatment.
And elsewhere, it is treated as a dislocation.
The pain in the legs and feet is caused by a problem with the humors, which are out of balance.
The intestine can be affected by four different types of gout.
And if it is a serious medical condition, it is a pain in the joints of the body, which may occur elsewhere as well.
And if you have a dislocation of the cushion in the foot, you should treat it by placing the cauterization in its place.
And if you know that this disease is called gout, it is important to use the right methods.
When joint pain affects the body, it is often called malaute by doctors.
When joints dislocate, the cure for them is to put them back in place, and the other cure is to apply a poultice made from the herb alcazar on the foot.
May their be a reduction in the pain that is felt in the foot.
Mays in that which is dislocated, and recently, the patient needs four cushions.
Then prepare a strong poultice and apply it to the affected area.
And let the patient's bowels be treated by placing a cushion on them.
And he should keep the cauteries ready to treat the disease by applying them correctly.
And this type of extension is common to all four limbs.
And if the dislocation returns to its place, then you can treat it yourself.
When the patient's intestine is dislocated, it should be held in place by a cushion so they don't move during surgery.
Then another place your hand on the patient's chest to prevent the pain from spreading there, while you are using the other two for the feet.
This translates to:  When pain occurs in the joints, it is easier to cure if caused by cold humors.
When gout occurs in the legs, apply a strong cauterization to the affected area.
And let it be known that four members are burned by a cautery instrument.
And if it is necessary, place the cushion two arms' lengths away from the patient.
And so, the doctor must use his hand to hold back the intestine.
And if it is necessary to cauterize the skin, apply it below the surface of the skin as well.
And if there are two cushions on their legs, they are to be placed on the thighs, one above each other.
The doctor applies another cushion to the affected area of the patient's body according to the ailment.
And if the dislocation is in the legs, use a cushion under them and keep the foot straight to ease the pain.
E la sua ays in the case of his legs, if he has been operated on by doctors already, so that they don’t need to be operated on again, and the intestine doesn't come out.
When joint pain occurs, the doctor will apply a cushion to their legs.
Then you put your hand on a cushion and apply pressure to the patient's chest, ensuring they are not pressing on their own body during this process.
And compare the leg to the other leg.
When applying the other remedies for gout, one must be careful to use a proper cautery, and place a cushion under their legs, etc.
And if you see a cause for pain in the foot, then return it to its natural state, and leave it alone.
And if the patient has been given another cushion to help them keep their bowels in order, they should be allowed to rest for a few days.
The text appears to be in a language that resembles Italian or Spanish.
And for treating dislocations, it is necessary to use a heated cautery.
The pain is caused by the inflammation of the joints.
The sign of gout in the leg is that a poultice should be applied to it.
And if he needs to be healed, one must apply pressure to the cushion on his chest, to the right foot, and use a cautery tool for burning the two sides of the wound.
The cushion or their feet, they are for pain relief.
And if there are other things that need to be done for the intestine or legs to be treated, place the cushion on their abdomen and a bandage on the patient's body.
For a few days, the patient will be healed by walking around for a while, then put a cushion on their legs when necessary.
If a pain in the limbs arises from cold humors, it is known as gout.
And if it is necessary to treat inflammation in the joints by cauterization.
On the treatment of the dislocation of the ankle.
Then apply another cushion to their legs or use other methods to reduce the inflammation depending on the patient's condition.
And that the patient's foot is dislocated, it is customary to treat it with a hot cautery.
The treatment for the cure of the light disease called gout involves removing the bloodletting instruments.
This is a tricky one! Here's my best guess at the meaning:
And if it is necessary to put your right foot in the cavity of the thigh, then you should place a cushion on the right side and another under the patient's feet, and another holding their left foot.
Then apply a hot cushion to their legs and hold their feet.
And apply cautery to the affected area, as we have previously described.
And then you apply a bandage to the patient's legs, but use a different one for each foot separately.
And if it is necessary to repeat the procedure twice for the patient, or on the foot again according to this method, then that is good.
Mays si a tu are feeling pain in their legs, they should be treated with a poultice to keep them from being swollen and put on their body by another place.
When the doctor sees that the patient has pain in their legs, he should put a cushion under them so that the patient's body is supported during treatment.
And if a doctor can't heal the dislocation, he helps to maintain the healthiness of the parts of the body where the affliction is.
Then apply a poultice to that location, and they are healed of your pain.
And so, when joint pain is caused by the cold, it is customary to say that it is an arthritis.
Then leave it alone for two or three days.
And then apply a cushion to the patient's chest for 4 days. This appears to be a medieval Latin-like language, and the text describes the use of a cushion by the doctor.
And if the patient has an abscess, apply a poultice to the affected area.
Chapter xxxiv.
The treatment for this ailment is called by its first-guessing name, which is "gout" in Latin.
When a patient has a dislocation, treat it with care; if it is a painful one, attend to the pain directly.
And then you should use a cushion to support their body if they have a dislocation.
Then place your hand on the patient's foot to keep it from swelling further.
And if the patient needs to be treated for three days, it is necessary to place a table in front of them to ensure they are treated on all sides.
This appears to be a fragment from a medieval medical treatise. A possible translation for "Capitol .xxxv." is "Chapter 35".
The following are some ways to translate the text:
When there is a chance of injury to the patient, it is necessary to use cauterization on the foot and other areas.
A wise man will use the cushion on their chest for gout, but not for other ailments. And then you must apply a poultice to the patient's affected area.
If the intestine or leg has been properly treated, then apply the appropriate treatment for the intestines or another type of treatment for the legs.
And if a dislocation is caused by a fracture, you have separated the bones.
And apply your hands to the patient's body in accordance with the nature of their ailment. When the patient is experiencing pain in their legs, it is customary to apply cauterization. Amen.
